Burhanuddin Abdullah: Opening the path to stability, safeguarding the 
nation’s economic development 
Speech  by  Mr  Burhanuddin  Abdullah,  Governor  of  Bank  Indonesia,  at  the  2008  Annual 
Bankers’ Dinner, Jakarta, 18 January 2008. 
Assalamu’alaikum wr.wb, 
Good evening and may I wish you all a triumphant year ahead, 
 Introduction 
I. 
To open my speech here today held in such salubrious settings, I would like to invite you all 
to join me in expressing thanks and praise to God Almighty who has again blessed us with 
the chance to congregate here for the 2008 Annual Bankers’ Dinner. Taking advantage of 
such a wonderful opportunity and on behalf of the Board of Governors of Bank Indonesia, 
please allow me to wish you a very happy and prosperous year ahead in 2008. May you be 
blessed in every step that you take. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
In distinction from previous years, tonight is an exceptional one for me. Tonight marks the 
fifth time I stand here in the presence of you, distinguished ladies and gentlemen, to deliver 
my annual address. The five years has flown by. Unsuspectingly, this year is the final year of 
my tenure as the Governor of Bank Indonesia. 
Together we have traveled far on our arduous journey. We have faced numerous trials and 
tribulations  one  after  another.  Some  brought  immense  satisfaction,  while  others  yielded 
grave  disappointment.  Together  we  have  come  to  understand  that  the  wide  ranging  and 
compelling  changes  in  the  global  and  national  constellation  over  the  past  ten  years  have 
delivered new challenges in terms of managing national economic stability. Fluctuations and 
uncertainty  seem  to  be  a  constant  that  incessantly  shadows  us  along  with  the  prevailing 
shifts  and  changes.  Nevertheless,  we  should  be  grateful.  Solid  collaboration  and  close 
coordination,  based  on  common  understanding,  have  become  fundamental  elements  in 
establishing  and  maintaining  monetary,  banking  and  payment  system  stability  by  Bank 
Indonesia. 
Therefore, prior to delivering the main substance of my annual address this evening, please 
allow  me  to  express  my  sincere  appreciation  to  the  banking  community  who  has  been  so 
incredibly supportive of Bank Indonesia’s policy measures in terms of reinforcing and driving 
the  banking  industry’s  performance  in  general.  I  would  also  like  to  offer  praise  and  my 
highest  admiration  to  all  elements  of  the  Central  and  Local  Government,  the  Parliament, 
business  community,  academics,  observers,  the  media  and  all  other  parties  that  I  am, 
unfortunately, unable to acknowledge individually, who have provided technical and strategic 
support to Bank Indonesia in fulfilling its duties. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It was ten years ago when our nation started to march towards the rise of a new democratic 
community  in  Asia.  It  is  from  early  this  year  we  witness  the  rise  of  Indonesia  as  a  new 
economic  star  in  Asia.  We  thank  God  that  our  beloved  country  has  finally  closed  the  final 
chapter of the painful Asian crisis. We pray that, God willing, it is closed for good. 
We  have  now  entered  a  new  era,  one  that  will  be  better  than  the  past.  Early  on  we  are 
witness of several encouraging economic achievements. Our economy has started to gain 
speed using both its engine – its stability engine and growth engine – It is no surprise that 
BIS Review 8/2008 
 1
many  passengers  aboard  and  bystanders  outside  are  surprised  by  the  acceleration  taking 
place. For the first time since the Asian Economic Crisis, economic growth in Indonesia has 
surpassed  6%  annually.  Meanwhile,  in  the  past  five  years,  we  have  been  witness  to  bold 
macro  economic  developments  despite  the  various  encounters  of  hardships.  The  financial 
system resilience and stability are now in much better shape than that of pre-crisis. We now 
can make note that the national banking industry has withstood and even held back impacts 
of significant shocks. We are thus able to say that stronger resilience is within our national 
economy. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
The  new  Indonesia  of  the  21st  century  holds many  hopes  and  opportunities.  As such,  the 
eyes of the world are steadily focused on us as we take steps to our future. All that we have 
achieved  by  deconstructing  institutions  of  the  past,  and  constructing  new  ones,  and  doing 
this in the midst of a true democracy, is definitely not something to be given only light regard. 
We have now become a reference for countries of the third world on how democracy and 
positive  achievements  in  the  economy  go  hand  in  hand.  Our  country’s  history  and 
surrounding polity has never, until now, traveled this road before.  
The  early  years  following  the  1945  Proclamation  of  Independence  have  actually  seen 
democratic  life,  as  the  one  we  see  today.  The  period  after  the  1945  Proclamation  of 
Independence  to  the  mid  1950’s  are  penned  in  our  national  history  as  the  time  in  which 
political  openness  and  democracy  were  part  of  this  nation’s  everyday  lives.  A  multiparty 
political system was in close harmony with strong spirits of civility. Life within our nation then 
was  filled  with  dialogues,  arguments  on  the  nation’s  ideals,  and  exchange  of  thoughts 
amongst first class intellectuals which were political elites revered for their wide horizons in 
the era they were in. It was during this era that our Nation and its Founding Fathers were 
Asia’s ray of lights, which later scripted in gold as what sparked the Asia-Africa spirit. 
However,  we  must  admittedly  write  in  our  books  that  the  period  of  openness,  democracy, 
and civility did not last long as there was a lack of seriousness in planning and implementing 
economic  development  for  the  benefits  of  the  society  in  general.  Political  freedom  was 
emphasized  over  economic  development  which  resulted  into  a  free,  open,  and  democratic 
country, but one with no real improvements towards the welfare of the people. This oversight 
led us to the 1960’s which was marked by the deterioration in nation’s social, political, and 
economic life. 
It  is  during  the  next  era  that  history  writes  about  the  positive  dynamics  of  the  New  Order 
development. From the end of the 1970s, we had been able to come closer to fulfilling our 
promise of independence with the quality of life improvements and economic prosperity for 
the people. In the next decade until the mid 1990s, the world was witness to the contributions 
of  Indonesia  as  one  of  the  Tigers in  Asia’s  economic-political  arena. However,  it  was  also 
during  the  three  decades  of  the  New  Order  era  that  the  urgency  to  develop  open  and 
democratic political system was lost. This oversight eventually led us to a severe economic 
and political crisis. 
In  that  journey  through  our  labyrinth  of  collective  memory,  we  find  many  contradictions 
regarding who should take role as captain of our nation ship. “The economy as captain or 
politics  as  captain”  is  the  coffee  shop  debate  that  has  kept  us  amused  for  some  time. 
However, something very different has arisen in the last five years. In our minds and hearts, 
we perceive a fundamental change in the life in our nation-state which represents a break 
from the past.  
The difference lies in the fact that, over the last five years, there has been a consolidation of 
political  life  in  a  free  and  open  democracy  taking  place  alongside  an  increasingly  solid 
economic consolidation. On one side we are once again living in a free and open democratic 
society. We have also implemented regional autonomy and economic decentralization. We 
have  elected  the  president  and  head  of  regions  through  direct  election,  while  the  press 
enjoys  greater  freedom  and  is  maturing  at  noticeable  pace.  Alongside,  the  economy 
2 
 BIS Review 8/2008
continues  to  grow  while  economic  stability  is  maintained.  We  even  have  formulated  and 
implemented  economic  policies  without  the  guidance  and  interference  of  foreign  parties, 
such as the IMF, whose interest often lie incongruously with that of the people of Indonesia. 
The period we were in IMF’s Extended Fund Facility until the completion of the Post-Program 
Monitoring represents a trying time in our nation’s history. During that era, we were not able 
to  formulate  and  implement  adjustment  policies  with  a  scope  and  pace  which  were  in 
complete  agreement  with  the  interests  of  and  needs  of  the  Indonesian  people.  Many 
compromises were demanded and many of them did not fully benefit our nation’s interest, 
but  rather, only  the  interest  of  various  other  parties.  The hand  below  is  never  the  hand  of 
dignity.  Never  again  do  we  to  live  in  an  era  in  which  our  people  and  nation-state  were 
reduced in dignity. Democracy, openness, freedom, and the courage for sovereignty in public 
policy have made us become our true selves, with many opportunities to achieve prosperity 
for all Indonesians. This brings proof of validity to what our Founding Fathers have believed 
in all along. We must always maintain the right view and attitude in fulfilling the promise of 
freedom and independence – something for which our Founding Fathers have fought dearly. 
Admittedly,  if  we  only  look  at  the  figures,  at  this  point,  what  we  have  achieved  is far  from 
dramatic. However, behind such developments emerge a strategic shift. We have gradually 
strengthened our state institutions, which has enabled us to take continuous steps forward 
towards  more  sustainable  improvements,  and  thus  reducing  ad-hoc  actions.  Various 
institutions,  Bank  Indonesia  included,  have  taken  gradual  steps  towards  improvements, 
which will then continue to take place in all essential fields. In almost the same context with 
Muhammad Hatta’s view regarding Indonesia’s 1945 Revolution, our ability to put democracy 
parallel  with  prosperity  becomes  “a  link  of  a  long  chain  of  fundamental  and  significant 
changes” in the life of people in other developing countries in Asia and Africa in the future. 
Therefore,  we  should  be  uplifted  by  such  an  extraordinary  achievement;  one  that  was 
achieved by our own initiatives and hard work. We are also thankful to God for giving us such 
a rare opportunity. As one of only a handful of democratic developing economies and one of 
the largest republic in Asia, it is appropriate that in the future we continue to strive towards 
further identifying our strengths and abilities to autonomously determine our own choices and 
take  unerring  decisions in  the  interest  of  our  nation.  It  has been  our  belief  since the  1945 
Proclamation  of  Independence  that  the  sustainability  of  the  Republic  will  be  better 
guaranteed if democracy is upheld. Such was the case during the past five years. 
It also befalls on us to use the success thus far achieved as priceless capital to prepare our 
future steps and answer the challenges of the 21st century. Founding Fathers of this nation, 
Sutan  Sjahrir,  Soekarno  and  Muhammad  Hatta,  once  said  that  the  independence  of 
Indonesia  as  a  nation-state  in  1945  is  but  a  vehicle  to  achieve  the  independence  of  the 
people  of  Indonesia.  However,  62  years  after  the  1945  Proclamation  of  Independence,  a 
great many of the people find themselves longing for an order which allows them to gain their 
independence. Such would be from a nation-state which provides prosperity and educates 
the majority, and not minority, of the people. Such longing is our biggest challenge and is 
also a call of history to us all. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
For me personally, my journey in leading Bank Indonesia, a state institution mandated by the 
public  to  maintain  national  economic  stability,  is  an  extremely  precious  experience.  The 
experience  has  bestowed  upon  me  a  deeper  understanding  of  our  economic  dynamics, 
current and upcoming challenges and opportunities, as well as the means to accomplish the 
aspirations of the general public, namely improved welfare for all Indonesians. And of course 
as  a  citizen  of  this  great  nation  myself,  the  mandate  has  also  provided  great  honor  and 
opportunity for me to pay homage to our nation and all Indonesians. 
This evening, the time has come for me to reflect on what Bank Indonesia has achieved in 
my five years of leadership. It would not be excessive to say that I would like to make this a 
part  of  my  moral  responsibility  to  the  stakeholders  of  Bank  Indonesia.  Tonight,  I  will  also 
BIS Review 8/2008 
 3
present views regarding the economic prospects and challenges to be faced over the next 
five  years  and  their  implications  on  Bank  Indonesia.  I  genuinely  hope  that  the  future 
perspective  I  plan  to  present  here  this  evening  can  serve  as  a  contribution  for  us  all  in 
determining some common measures to achieve a better national economic future. 
The theme of my oration this evening is “Opening the Path to Stability, Safeguarding the 
Nation’s  Economic  Development”.  As  for  the  systematic  of  my  presentation,  at  the 
beginning  I would  like to  reopen  pages  of  my  work  log  and  take  you all  on  the  journey  of 
Bank  Indonesia  in  fulfilling  its  constitutional  mission  over  the  last  five  years.  Some  of  the 
questions my comments are based upon include: What policy initiatives have been adopted 
and  what  are  their  considering  factors?  How  far  has  progress  been  achieved  in  its 
implementation?  What  has  it  contributed  to  the  overall  process  of  economic  growth  in  the 
post crisis era? 
In the subsequent part, I would like to address future economic prospects and challenges, as 
well  as  measures  that  need  to  be  taken  by  Bank  Indonesia  to  ensure  that  the  institution 
remains  an  integral  part  of  the  solution  to  the  nation’s  economic  woes.  Several  of  the 
challenges  are  not  totally  new  since  they  have  persisted  for  some  time  and  continue  to 
persist  to  this  day.  In  the  future,  however,  such  challenges  could  intensify  further,  and 
therefore the urgency of our preparedness will become critical. 
Finally, prior to concluding my address here this evening, I would like to present some views 
on possible follow-up measures and policies that I believe need to be taken over the next five 
years;  giving  2008  new  momentum  for  the  establishment  of  Bank  Indonesia  that  is  more 
relevant for the prosperity of all Indonesians. 
II.  
A recap of Bank Indonesia task implementation 2003-2007 
National economic achievements 
1. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
At  the  beginning  of  2007  we  had  restored  macroeconomic  stability  following  the  global  oil 
price  hikes  towards  the  end  of  2005  and  minimized  their  effects  on  the  exchange  rate, 
inflation and interest rate up to mid 2006. Then, you may recall, on this very same occasion 
last  year,  I  likened  our  economic  condition  in  2006  to  an  airplane  flying  on  just  a  single 
engine.  On  one  side  we  had  succeeded  in  restoring  macroeconomic  conditions  back  on 
track.  However,  due  to  intricate  micro  and  structural  challenges  in  the  economy,  the  pace 
and  quality  of  economic  growth  was  still  below  expectations.  Furthermore,  productive 
business activity in the real sector was quite sluggish. 
At  the  beginning  of  2008,  we  should  all  be  grateful  for  closing  2007  behind  satisfactory 
accomplishments as evident by primary economic indicators (Table 1). As such, maintaining 
our airplane analogy, our economic airplane has started to soar with both engines running. 
Consequently,  it  should  not  be  completely  unexpected  that  many  of  its  passengers  are 
shocked by the new found acceleration. 
Allow me to briefly present several salient economic achievements up to the end of 2007. 
Regarding  economic  growth,  for  the  first  time  since  the  Asian  Economic  Crisis,  economic 
growth  in  Indonesia  has  surpassed  6%  annually,  reaching  6.3%  in  2007.  The  growth  is 
characterized  by  a  balance  between  demand  and  supply,  as  reflected  by  the  resilience  of 
consumption  expenditure  followed  by  favorable  growth  in  investment.  The  realization  of 
Gross  Fixed  Capital  Formation  (GFCF)  through  2007  increased  by  8.37%,  while  private 
investment grew 7.18% from last year’s level. Such growth caused the investment to GDP 
ratio to rise from 19.5% in 2003 to 23% in 2007. Widespread diversification is also evident in 
the  economy.  Therefore,  despite  a  manufacturing  sector  that  has  not  yet  fully  recovered, 
many  other  sectors  have  developed  and  consequently  supported  wealth  creation  in  our 
4 
 BIS Review 8/2008
economy throughout 2007. Such diversification is verified by expansion in the mining, trade, 
telecommunications,  transportation,  utilities,  construction  and  services  sectors.  All  the 
improvements gained in the real sector have provided strong initial indications that structural 
constraints stemming from the microeconomic side (supply side constraints) are improving.  
 
Table 1.
Main Economic Indicators
Indicators
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007*
Macro
GDP (% - yoy)
Inflation (% - yoy)
External
Export (Billion USD)
Import  (Billion USD)
Debt to GDP ratio (%)
Foreign Reserve (Billion USD)
Exchange Rate
4.38
10.03
4.72
5.06
5.03
6.40
5.68
17.11
5.48
6.60
6.3
6.59
59,165 64,109 70,767
35,652 39,546 50,615
65,71
53,40
32,039 36,296 36,320
8.948
8.950
8.570
57,01
86,995 103,514
73,868
69,462
35,28
45,12
34,724
42,586
9.167
9.713
118,937
86,354
31,3
56,900
9.140
Government Finance
Revenue (Billion Rp)
Spending  (Billion Rp)
Budget Deficit/Surplus (%of GDP)
298,605 341,396 403,367 495,224 637,796
322,180 376,505 427,177 509,632 670,591
-1.0
-1.0
-1.3
-1.7
-0.5
-1.1
Financial Market
Yield Global SUN  (%)**
JSX Index
6.08
425
4.72
692
3.71
1,000
4.92
1,163
5.93
1,806
5.89
2,746
Net:
* Position as of December (estimation)
**Since 2006 using global bond due in 2014
Externally,  the  Indonesian  balance  of  payments  (BoP)  has  run  a  surplus  for  four  years 
consecutively. At the end of 2007, the BoP surplus was 3.1% of GDP, giving a surplus for the 
past three years of 2.4% of GDP. Net capital inflows to the financial markets, direct capital 
investment,  net  exports,  and  the  net  remittance  from  Indonesian  migrant  workers  have  all 
contributed to positive BoP performance. In this respect we can observe that Indonesian non 
oil  and  gas  exports  remained  high  amidst  a  slowing  global  economy.  This  shows  that  the 
destination  countries  for  our  exports  have  become  more  diversified,  negating  some  of  the 
adverse  effects  of  the  economic  slowdown  in  developed  countries,  which  has  also  been 
compensated by exports to countries with high economic growth such as China and India. 
Impressive  BoP  performance  over  the  past  four  years  has  provided  room  for  us  to  fund 
development  activities, service  our  foreign  debt  without  triggering  significant  fluctuations  in 
the  foreign  exchange  market,  strengthen  our  position  through  additional  foreign  exchange 
reserves,  and  most  importantly,  through  the  contribution  of  net  remittance  inflows  from 
migrant  workers,  the  resilience  of  domestic  demand  in  the  national  economy  has  been 
maintained. Regarding foreign exchanges reserves, I would like to announce that by the end 
of 2007, our foreign exchange reserves had reached USD 56.9 billion; equal to 5.7 months of 
imports and servicing of the government’s foreign debt.  
Strong BoP performance has also provided the opportunity for us to expedite servicing the 
debt to IMF in 2006. This was taken through careful calculations in the spirit of public policy 
independence and confidence in future economic performance. Payments due over the next 
3.5 years were serviced on 12th October 2006. Consequently, Indonesia no longer has to 
comply with the programs in the IMF Letter of Intent. Although debt repayments to IMF were 
finalized,  financial  market  conditions  remain  stable  and  foreign  exchange  reserves  have 
continued to grow. 
More  balanced  economic  growth,  a  balance  of  payments  surplus,  and  a  healthy  foreign 
exchange  reserve  position  have  largely  assisted  efforts  to  preserve  rupiah  stability, 
BIS Review 8/2008 
 5
especially  over  the  mid  to  long  term.  Over  the  past  five  years,  with  the  exception  of  2005 
which  was  marked  by  severe  global  oil  price  hikes,  headline  inflation,  measured  by  the 
Consumer Price Index, and core inflation recorded 6.19% and 6.28% annually, compared to 
an annual average during the pre-crisis era of 8.21% and 9.13% respectively. 
Meanwhile, ignoring exchange rate fluctuations in 2005, the rupiah exchange rate in the past 
five years appears to have been well maintained within a range conducive to maintaining the 
internal and external balance of our macro economy. Furthermore, rupiah exchange volatility 
is currently far below that of the early years following the crisis. Overall, this provides greater 
certainty  to  business  players  in  the  real  and  the  financial  sector  regarding  the  average 
exchange rate in the long run. Therefore, I would like to state that the positive developments 
occurring in the inflation and exchange rates have subsequently supported the management 
of expectations regarding macroeconomic stability and underpinned the competitiveness of 
exports in the mid to long term . 
If we observe the progress made by banks, at least since the beginning of 2004, it would be 
a fair assessment to assert that the current growth in banking indicators is satisfactory (Table 
2). Growth in total bank assets has increased sharply by 60%, from Rp737.85 trillion (63.7%) 
to Rp1,895 trillion in November 2007. Meanwhile, credit has expanded by Rp529.6 trillion; 
more than twice its level in 2004 to Rp1,004.6 trillion at the end of last year. The expansion in 
credit extension was supported by a rise in deposits by Rp551 trillion or 62% compared to its 
level in 2004 and thereby making the level of deposits Rp1,437.5 trillion in November 2007. 
Perkembangan Indikator Utama Perbankan
Table 2.
Indicators
 Dec 2002 Dec 2003 Dec 2004 Dec 2005 Dec 2006 Nov 2007
Credit (T Rp)
Third Party Deposits (T Rp)
NPL Gross (%)
NPL Nett (%)
Interest (Work. Cap.) (%)*
Interest (Investment) (%) *
Interest (Consumption) (%)*
Number of Banks**
410.3
835.8
8.1
2.1
18.3
17.8
20.2
477.2
888.6
8.2
3.0
15.1
15.7
18.7
138.0
595.1
963.1
5.8
1.7
13.4
14.1
16.6
133.0
730.2
1,127.9
8.3
4.8
16.2
15.7
16.8
131.0
832.9
1,287.0
7.0
3.6
15.1
15.1
17.6
130.0
1.004.6
1,437.5
5.4
2.3
13.2
13.3
16.3
128.0
*) As of October 2007
**) As of the above date there are 16 banks with capital below Rp. 80 bill.
Throughout 2007, supported by a decline in the BI rate along with macroeconomic stability, 
credit grew according to the targets set by banks at the beginning of the year and recorded 
growth of 24.3%. The recent noteworthy credit growth indicates that banks have returned to 
contributing significantly to the funding of overall national development. 
One aspect that requires attention in regards to bank performance up to the end of 2007 is 
that  bank  stability  in  the  post-crisis  era  already  far  exceeds  that  of  the  pre-crisis  era. 
Nowadays,  the  majority  of  banks  maintain  their  capital  adequacy  at  a  high  level,  with  an 
average CAR in the range of 19.5%. Total assets have experienced a substantial increase of 
11.9%  to  Rp1,845  trillion.  Regarding  profitability,  bank  ROA  has  risen  from  2.6%  to  2.8%, 
which generally stems from improvements in the efficiency of operational banking activities. 
Meanwhile, bank NPL has performed satisfactorily, improving from 6.98% (gross) and 3.63% 
(net) to 5.41% and 2.29% respectively. This is primarily attributable to the implementation of 
government  legislation,  namely  PP  No.  33,  2006,  by  government-owned  banks.  Moreover, 
banks have also been able to absorb the numerous substantial fluctuations in the economy 
such as oil price hikes and their follow-through effects on the exchange rate, inflation and the 
interest rate, as well as the contagion effects of the subprime mortgage crisis in the US. This 
resilience  is  tightly  enshrined  in  our  ever  improving  bank  risk  management  capability  and 
prudential principles that are strictly enforced throughout the national banking industry. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
6 
 BIS Review 8/2008
Maintained  macroeconomic  stability  coupled  with  a  sounder  and  more  resilient  banking 
industry has restored investor confidence regarding the future prospects of the Indonesian 
economy.  This  is  strongly  reflected  by  the  improvement  in  Indonesia’s  rating  awarded  by 
international  ratings  agencies.  Currently  Indonesia  is  approaching  investment  grade  and 
closing  in  on  the  pre-crisis  level  (Graph  1).  Notwithstanding,  along  with  strong  corporate 
profits and positive future expectations, investor confidence is also high due to the resurgent 
global  excess  liquidity  inflows  to  Indonesian  financial  markets,  making  the  JSX  Composite 
one of the best performing indices in the world (Graph 2). Several sub-sectors that support 
the improvement of the JSX Composite confirm the existence of diversification in the sources 
of wealth creation in the economy.  
Graph 1.
Rating of Indonesia
Graph 2.
JSX Indices
 
The above achievements will surely come as some relief to many as they endured amidst 
many  trials  and  fluctuations  stemming  from  domestic  issues  such  as  the  natural  disasters 
that  struck  one  after  the  other,  and  globally  from  oil  price  fluctuations  and  the  subprime 
mortgage  crisis.  It  is  therefore  understandable  if  we  then  declare  that  our  national  macro 
economy is sufficiently resilient to face unpredictable fluctuations.  
Graph 3.
Fiscal Consolidation
We can also observe that such achievements represent the fruits of collaboration amongst all 
elements  of  public  policymakers  in  espousing  national  economic  recovery.  Policy  aimed 
towards  fiscal  consolidation  during  the  early  post-crisis  era  followed  by  a  more  expansive 
fiscal policy over the past two years has stimulated economic activity without triggering price 
or  exchange  rate  instability,  thus  preserving  economic  expansion.  The  fiscal  authority  has 
also  succeeded  in  periodically  trimming  the  foreign  debt  liability,  from  above  100%  at  the 
beginning of the crisis, to around 35% in 2007. This will further strengthen the prospects of 
future fiscal sustainability (Graph 3). Furthermore, with respect to fiscal resilience, the policy 
to reduce fuel subsidies in line with oil price fluctuations in 2005 represent concrete steps to 
BIS Review 8/2008 
 7
further reinforce our fiscal posture over the  mid to long term. Such policy has also helped 
reduce uncertainty in the foreign exchange market in response to oil price hikes at the end of 
2007.  
As  regards  policies  relating  to  the  improvement  of  social  indicators  and  the  investment 
climate, we have also witnessed some gratifying developments. The drop in abject poverty is 
something we can all be pleased about. The poverty rate, measured by the percentage of 
people  living  below  the  poverty  line,  dropped  from  17.75%  in  2006  to  16.6%  in  2007;  a 
decline in absolute terms of 1.88 million people. The progress of the program to end poverty 
is  supported,  in  many  aspects,  by  the  increase  in  economic  growth  and  macroeconomic 
stability. No less important are the social programs implemented to assist the underprivileged 
to survive amidst fluctuations and natural disasters. 
The  decline  in  poverty  has  improved  the  achievement  indicators  of  Indonesia’s  Millennium 
Development  Goals  (MDGs).  Of  the  eight  MDGs,  Indonesia  managed  to  record  its  most 
progress in the program to end poverty. A World Bank report (November 2007) states that 
the percentage of the population living on an income of less than US$1 per day is 8.5% lower 
than  the  2015  MDG  target,  namely  10.3%.  Other  MDG  indicators  have  also  shown 
improvements, as illustrated by the high number of students enrolled in primary education; 
the low child mortality rate of under-5 year olds; and significantly improved public access to 
clean water. In addition, the World Bank noted that in nearly all aspects, the achievement of 
MDGs in Indonesia has progressed according to appropriate targets. 
To promote investment activity incentives, the government has also strived to improve the 
investment climate through the issuance of an integrated economic policy package (Inpres 
No.  6  –  July  2007)  which  covers  the  renewal  of  three  previous  packages,  namely  the 
investment  improvement  package,  the  infrastructure  acceleration  package,  as  well  as  the 
financial  sector  reform  and  small  medium  enterprise  (SME)  sector  empowerment  policy 
package.  In  improving  investment,  the  new  policy  package  also  includes  government 
legislation concerning the implementation of capital investment and reducing the time taken 
to process investment permit applications in Indonesia. Meanwhile, in terms of infrastructure, 
banks have actively participated in providing funding access. This has been supported by a 
credit  insurance  program  and  an  investment  scheme  through  a  Public  Private  Partnership 
(PPP) mechanism. 
Relating to the domestic investment climate I have already mentioned, we have also seen 
satisfactory  achievements  towards  regional  autonomy.  Currently,  a  group  of  progressive 
regional governments have arisen whose regional development performance exceeds that of 
others.  These  success  stories  are  demonstrated  through  the  ability  of  the  bureaucracy  in 
progressive areas to unfurl the benefits to all people in the regions. A survey conducted by 
The Committee for the Monitoring of Regional Autonomy Implementation (KPPOD) indicates 
that important achievements in progressive areas are tightly related to improvements in the 
national  investment  climate,  such  as  the  rising  human  development  index,  better  service 
efficiency and quality from the regional governments, completion of infrastructure networks, 
and improved governance in the government. These all represent positive developments in 
terms of addressing the supply side constraints in our economy over the long run. We now 
have a far greater hope that in the future, given the support of all elements, a critical mass of 
progressive  regional  governments  can  be  achieved,  and  thus  resulting  in  a  faster  paced 
economic growth that is higher in quality and better balanced.  
 2.  
Contribution of the financial sector  
Strengthening the three pillars of stability  
2.1.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Numerous achievements in 2007, in relation to economic performance as a whole and the 
advancement  of  several  public  policies,  have  been  undertaken  collaboratively  by  all 
8 
 BIS Review 8/2008
to  support  economic 
policymakers.  Such  collaboration  has  also  been  actively  supported  by  the  diligence  of  all 
economic players in the business community and by the general public. I would also like to 
reiterate that we should be pleased of these achievements since many policies to catalyze 
economic  growth  over  the  past  five  years  have  been  taken  amidst  a  free  democracy  and 
policy independence. 
With the same pride and faith in national faculty to live in an autonomous polity, I would like 
to acknowledge that public policymakers in the financial sector and all business players in 
their respective industries have provided tangible contributions in encouraging public policy 
independence, and furthermore Bank Indonesia welcomes each and every current economic 
achievement. 
Like other public policy-making institutions, Bank Indonesia has its own niche in public policy 
continuum in the country. Bank Indonesia is one of the primary institutions that provide the 
three pillars of stability which support and represent the elements of continuity for sustainable 
economic development. The three pillars of stability include: (a) stability of the rupiah value; 
(b)  a  healthy  and  resilient  financial  industry  to  support  financial  system  stability;  and  (c)  a 
modern  and  efficient  payment  system 
transactions.  Mirroring 
humankind’s need for air to breathe, the presence of the three pillars of stability is in constant 
demand,  and  hence  appropriate  for  the  People  to  underline  them  as  the  constitutional 
mandate of Bank Indonesia through legislation for the central bank ratified by the Parliament. 
Looking  back  at  Bank  Indonesia’s  tumultuous  journey  over  the  past  five  years,  I  feel 
confident to announce that efforts to meet the various aspirations set forth in the mandate 
have  yielded  significant  results,  which  have  maintained  the  momentum  of  sustainable 
national  economic  development  and  improved  its  future  prospects.  The  results  have  been 
obtained in the spirit of autonomous policy making in line with the interest of our economy as 
a whole, and without interference from foreign parties. For that reason I would like to take 
this opportunity to extend my sincere appreciation to all my staff at Bank Indonesia who, over 
the  last  five  years,  have  given  their  all  and  shown  exceptional  quality  as  first-rate 
professionals,  thinking  independently  and  consistently  taking  decisions  that  prioritize  our 
nation’s interests. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
A key achievement for our economy in the past five years has been the availability of a more 
stable national financial system, compared to the pre-crisis period, that supports economic 
resilience.  The  stability  of  the  financial  system  is  evidenced  by  the  fact  that  our  financial 
system is clearly better prepared to resist and absorb the numerous shocks arising from both 
the  global  and/or  domestic  economy.  In  addition,  the  national  financial  system  has  shown 
greater  efficiency  and  effectiveness  in  allocating  funds  through  intermediation  and  risk 
management,  and  continued  to  expand  its  role  in  supporting  economic  transactions.  The 
establishment  and  maintenance  of  a  more  stable  financial  system  has  been  supported  by 
various achievements made in the three pillars of stability that have become the elements of 
continuity  in  national  economic  development.  The  most  salient  achievements  can  be 
summarized as follows: 
– 
The rise in confidence of international and domestic economic players towards the 
ability of the monetary authority to maintain macroeconomic stability and support the 
quality of national macroeconomic policy management. 
A more effective banking industry to buttress financial system stability as a whole 
and galvanize national economic growth, as well as being more prepared to face the 
challenges associated with globalization. 
A more modern payment system infrastructure that is supporting and lowering the 
costs of transaction activity throughout the nation. 
  The establishment of a more stable and useful financial system, along with the reinforcement 
of the three pillars of stability, has provided breathing space for public policymakers in other 
BIS Review 8/2008 
 9
sectors  to  implement  various  micro-structural  policies  to  precipitate  the  restoration  of  the 
post-crisis  economic  growth  dynamic  to  its  original  position.  With  more  space,  structural 
improvements  in  the  real  sector  are  better  managed  in  terms  of  complexity,  direction  and 
pace. Furthermore, structural improvements are no longer disrupted by other issues related 
to instability in the monetary system, financial system or payment system  
Strategic policy initiatives regarding the three pillars of stability  
2.2. 
The  achievements  made  for  the  three  pillars  of  stability  that  I  have  already  discussed,  in 
many  aspects  relate  to  strategic  policies  instituted  by  Bank  Indonesia  as  the  monetary, 
banking  and  national  payment  system  authority.  Permit  me  now  to  present  some  of  the 
strategic initiatives taken.  
Initiatives in the monetary sector 
2.2.1. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Regarding monetary policy, strategic initiatives taken include the implicit implementation of 
the Inflation Targeting Framework (ITF) since 2003, and the full-fledged ITF since 2005. This 
measure represents an effort to ensure monetary policy is more effective in stabilizing the 
rupiah  amid  shocks  in  global  financial  markets,  as  well  as  maintaining  stability  when 
conditions are calm. Effectiveness is very much required in the era of global financial market 
maturity,  especially  as  we  adopt  a  free  foreign  exchange  regime  with  a  free-floating 
exchange rate regime. Shocks emanating from global financial markets can quickly spread to 
our  financial  markets  even  in  the  absence  of  any  additional  shocks  stemming  from 
fundamental conditions in the domestic economy. Such contagion is rapidly reflected in the 
foreign  exchange  market  in  the  form  of  exchange  rate  shocks,  which  can  eventually 
adversely  affect  inflation  and  macroeconomic  stability.  Such  shocks  require  mitigation  as 
exchange  rate  and  inflation  instability  intensifies  the  market  risk  borne  by  our  financial 
system  as  a  whole.  Since  its  implementation,  I  can  declare  that  the  ITF  has  provided 
concrete results in the form of maintained macroeconomic stability over the last five years, 
despite significant shocks to our economy. Along with ITF implementation, headline inflation 
has remained within the inflation target set by the Government.  
Full-fledged ITF implementation since July 2005 has been marked by the use of the BI rate 
as  the  operational  target  for  monetary  policy,  replacing  previously  used  base  money.  The 
change  in  instruments  enabled  monetary  policy  implementation  to  be  well  monitored  by 
market  participants.  The  use  of  the  BI  rate  has  also  ensured  expeditious  monetary  policy 
response  to  influence  market  expectations  amidst  shocks;  therefore,  monetary  policy  has 
been more effective as a stabilization tool. Two events have epitomized this stability, namely 
the fuel price shocks in 2005 and the US subprime mortgage crisis mid 2007. 
The global oil price shock that violently shook price stability in 2005 signified a tremendous 
shock. Its direct effect was evidenced by headline inflation rising to 17.1% in 2005 and the 
exchange  rate  depreciated  significantly.  However,  a  strong  combination  of  fiscal  and 
monetary  policies  at  that  time  to  correct  negative  market  expectations  towards  fiscal 
resilience in the long run and to suppress the second-round effects of fuel price shocks and 
exchange rate depreciation on inflation through ITF, brought macroeconomic stability back 
on track in 2006. Macroeconomic stabilization subsequent to the 2005 fuel price shock has 
also yielded positive results, where amidst escalating volatility in the financial markets, our 
economy expanded by 5.5% in 2006. 
In addition, amidst the subprime mortgage crisis last year, BI rate policy in the context of ITF 
also helped maintain market expectations towards macroeconomic stability in the mid to long 
term. With further support from the fact that our banking industry was sufficiently resilient to 
confront market risk and the subprime mortgage crisis, macroeconomic and financial system 
stability was maintained despite strong contagion at the time. Taken as a whole, this helped 
us maintain sustainable economic growth in 2007; surpassing 6%. 
10 
 BIS Review 8/2008
In  the  context  of  preserving  macroeconomic  stability  over  the  mid  to  long  term,  one 
advantage  of  ITF  is  that  the  BI  rate  is  set  in  a  forward  looking  manner  and,  therefore,  is 
anticipative  towards  economic  prospects,  both  in  terms  of  price  and  economic  growth 
development.  This  helps  the  central  bank  to  periodically  build  upon  its  reputation  and 
credibility in the market regarding its commitment to maintain macroeconomic stability. With 
a strong reputation and good credibility the costs that arise in maintaining economic stability 
are reduced and policy is more effective in achieving its target.  
To  this  end,  I  would  like  to  acknowledge  that  the  macroeconomic  stability  and  boost  in 
economic  growth  we  currently  enjoy  is  a  reflection  of  the  gain  in  credibility  as  a  result  of 
stabilization policies taken in recent years. Such a gain in credibility constitutes very precious 
capital to further reinforce economic stability and increase economic resilience going forward. 
In the context of wider macroeconomic stability, although we follow a floating exchange rate 
system,  smoothing  exchange  rate  fluctuations,  including  through  supply  and  demand 
adjustments in the foreign exchange market, is still pertinent. Efforts to minimize volatility are 
not something that uniquely occur on our side, but are also a global phenomenon. Nearly all 
countries that have adopted a de jure floating exchange rate system, in practice, intervene to 
overcome  volatility  in  the  exchange  rate,  either  through  direct  intervention  in  the  foreign 
exchange market or by using open market operation instruments. Therefore, at certain times, 
Bank  Indonesia  has  always  maintained  a  presence  in  the  foreign  exchange  market, 
especially  when  conditions  could  potentially  trigger  an  imbalance.  These  measures  have 
been  able  to  suppress  volatility,  avoiding  potential  exchange  rate  instability  attributable  to 
speculative activity. 
In  order  to  further  reinforce  its  ability  to  overcome  shocks  in  the  financial  market,  Bank 
Indonesia over the past five years has strengthened the national foreign exchange reserve 
position.  This  step  is  taken  as  insurance  against  future  macroeconomic  instability  amidst 
uncertainty  with  respect  to  the  correction  of  global  imbalances  and  resurgent  cross-border 
capital flows. Although we follow a floating exchange rate system and free foreign exchange 
regime, a sufficient first line of defense is needed to help absorb shocks and thus maintain 
macroeconomic stability. In implementing such policy, we must ascertain that the increase of 
outstanding  SBIs,  which  is  the  cost  of  strengthening  foreign  reserves,  remains  at  a  level 
Bank  Indonesia’s  budget  can  accommodate.  Observation  on  various  central  banks  in  the 
region, such as the Bank of Korea, Bank of Thailand, and People’s Bank of China suggests 
which have taken similar steps suggests that outstanding central bank bills can decrease in 
due time as economic activity improves in the medium term.  
Outstanding Central Bank Bills in Select Countries
Table 3.
Bank of Thailand
Bank of Korea People Bank of China Bank Indonesia
CB Bills
593.5
Billion Baht
158,390
Billion Won
3,230
207.4
Billion Renmimbi
Trillion Rupiah
% of GDP
8%
19%
7%
6%
*) As of 2006 (except Thailand  2005)
Source: CEIC,central bank  web sites
Meanwhile, as a second line of defense, a bilateral swap arrangement with Japan, Korea, 
and  China  was  signed  by  Bank  Indonesia  under  the  ASEAN+3  Chiang  Mai  Initiatives 
framework.  Bank  Indonesia  was  given  the  responsibility  to  do  so  by  the  Indonesian 
government.  This  regional  self-help  initiative  is  a  strategic  step  taken  by  the  Ministers  of 
Finance of the ASEAN and three industrial countries in order to maintain regional economic 
and  financial  stability.  From  Indonesia’s  viewpoint,  such  arrangement  could  provide 
encouragement  to  terminate  IMF’s  Post-Program  Monitoring  and  ensure  that  autonomous 
policy-making is maintained.  
BIS Review 8/2008 
 11
Initiatives in the banking sector 
Indonesian banking architecture 
2.2.2.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Moving  on  I  would  like  to  talk  from  the  point  of  view  of  bank  policy.  As  in  other  emerging 
countries,  the  banking  sector  is  the  main  sub-system  of  the  financial  system  as  a  whole. 
Currently,  the  share  of  our  banks  within  the  financial  system  remains  above  80%  of  total 
assets  in  the  financial  system.  Therefore,  the  banks  form  a  strategic  industry  with  the 
significant  role  of  supporting  the  dynamics  of  national  economic  development  and  growth. 
Until today, the intermediation function of the banking industry remains a dominant source of 
funding for businesses in productive sectors. 
Learning from past experiences, banking system stability is a primary aspect that must be 
maintained  to  ensure  sustainable  national  economic  growth.  Volatility  in  one  bank  can 
quickly  spread  and  affect  public  confidence  in  the  banking  system  itself  and  also  the 
economic system as a whole. Therefore, it is not excessive to say that efforts to guarantee 
the maintenance of banking system stability represent a serious policy priority that requires 
consistency in its implementation. 
Generally speaking, satisfactory achievements made by the banks up to the end of 2007 are 
not independent of strategic policies summarized in the initiatives to prevent bank crises from 
reoccurring and resolution initiatives should such crises reoccur. With respect to the former, 
two  primary  strategic  policy  initiatives  include  the  implementation  of  Indonesian  Banking 
Architecture since 2004 and the preparation towards Basel II in 2008. Meanwhile, with the 
respect  the  latter,  Bank  Indonesia  along  with  the  Ministry  of  Finance  and  other  related 
institutions continues to strengthen initiatives within the national Financial System Safety Net. 
A. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
A  few  days  ago  was  the  fourth  anniversary  of  the  launch  of  the  Indonesian  Banking 
Architecture  (API)  program.  Undoubtedly  API  has  produced  numerous  tangible  benefits  in 
the  post-crisis  economy.  Our  national  banks  are  currently  a  part  of  the  solution  for  other 
national  economic  development  issues.  In  other  words,  our  national  banking  industry  that 
was  previously  a  hindrance  to  national  economic  development  has  become  obsolete. 
Strengthening banks through the API framework has aggressively bulwarked the economy 
as banks currently constitute the main safeguard of financial system stability. The Indonesian 
financial system that has, hitherto, been dominated by banks strengthens my view that the 
role  of  banks  in  crisis  prevention  as  well  as  maintaining  macroeconomic  stability  remains 
particularly apposite. 
Through  its  six  pillars,  API  has  complemented  the  banking  sector  and  its  authority  with 
instruments  expected  to  form  deep  and  strong  foundations  for  further  bank  reinforcement 
and development. From the beginning it has been clear that the constraints faced by each 
API  pillar  are  different,  however  in  general,  I  am  pleased  to  see  that  API  program 
development  has  progressed  according  to  plan  and  the  banking  industry  is  showing 
numerous signs of seriousness in supporting our reinforcement efforts. 
Let me briefly outline several of the most prominent achievements related to API. Banking 
consolidation, which began since the launch of Pillar I of API, has reached its final stage of 
preparation, the stage where some banks have determined their strategic future direction. As 
we  are  all  aware,  2008  is  the  year  when  all  commercial  banks  must  maintain  a  minimum 
capital  requirement  of  Rp80  billion  to  uphold  its  status  as  a  fully-operational  commercial 
bank. From the 128 banks in the industry, currently all of them have met the above capital 
requirement. We will follow-up twenty of these banks with an examination regarding to their 
capital addition. However, under the assumption of the banks’ good intentions, we can say 
that all banks have been able to meet the minimum capital requirement, and will also be able 
to meet the Rp100 billion capital requirement by the end of 2010. It is important for me to 
12 
 BIS Review 8/2008
acknowledge this achievement as, at least to this point, the banking industry’s resilience in 
absorbing risks in general has increased. This is basically one of the aims of Pillar I of API.  
The  year  2008  will  also  be  when  banks  determine  their  future  strategic  steps  regarding 
ownership  of  more  than  one  bank  in  Indonesia  under  the  Single  Presence  Policy. 
Consequently, I expect that the affected banks will be able to realize those steps according 
to the determined time line. The year 2010 will see a banking industry comprising of banks 
that are not only stronger in their capital structure, but also with greater focus regarding their 
direction and strategies. In this regard, I would also like to state that there are several follow-
up steps that need to be and are being taken by state-owned banks. The complexity of banks 
whose  owners  are  the  government  requires  the  government  to  make  several  strategic 
adjustments.  This  obviously  requires  time.  And  as  such,  in  accordance  to  the  issued 
regulation,  additional  time  may  be  provided  for  banks  with  issues  which  are  high  in  its 
complexity to ensure that the benefits obtained from the implementation the policy is optimal.  
Several  dynamics  and  realities  in  global  and  national  economic  condition;  the  yet  to  be 
established tax incentives for mergers; as well as cultural differences among banks should 
not  hinder  steps  to  consolidation  considering  that  this  is  for  the  greater  good  of  the 
Indonesian  banking  industry  when  confronting  future  challenges  in  the  era  of  financial 
globalization.  Bank  consolidation  will  create  banks  with  greater  capacity  and  potential  to 
operate on a larger scale to penetrate new markets that have previously been off-limits to our 
national banks, such as the foreign markets of regional Asia and farther a field. 
In addition, large, sound banks as a result of consolidation will provide greater contributions 
to the country, both in the form of dividends (for government owned banks) or tax income (for 
all  banks).  It  is  important  to  note  that  various  tax  incentives  implemented  to  promote  the 
consolidation process will be compensated many fold by the higher income derived by the 
state through taxes. Higher state income could, in turn, promote the realization of numerous 
infrastructure  projects where,  again,  Indonesian  banks  would  be  able  to  play  a  substantial 
role considering their increased capacity. 
The  purpose  of  Pillar  2  of  API  is  to  enhance  the  quality  of  bank  regulations  and  has 
succeeded  in  establishing  Regional  Banking  Research  Institutions  (LPRD)  in  a  number  of 
chosen regions. As of now, LPRD have been established in collaboration with four regional 
universities,  namely  Andalas  University  in  Padang,  Brawijaya  University  in  Malang, 
Hasanuddin  University  in  Makassar,  and  the  North  Sumatera  University  in  Medan.  The 
resultant  16  research  papers  comprise  of  studies  that  address  the  necessities  of  each 
specific region. Research topics are quite varied, covering the potential of establishing new 
banks,  customer  cover,  as  well  as  the  perception  and  the  attitude  of  the  Santri  people 
towards  sharia  banks.  Considering  the  substantial  role  of  MSMEs  in  driving  the  economy 
both  at  a  central  and  regional  level,  it  is  hardly  surprising  that  each  LPRD  has  its  own 
research topics related to the funding and development of micro and small enterprises. 
To  balance  and  anticipate  the  future  increasing  complexity  in  the  banking  world  and  to 
address  the  demands  made  by  stakeholders  regarding  enhancing  Bank  Indonesia’s 
performance  quality,  some  improvements  in  bank  oversight  have  been  undertaken.  The 
related improvement programs, incorporated in Pillar 3 of API, are aimed at creating effective 
supervision and regulation referring to international standards. 
In  order  to  enhance  the  effectiveness  of  bank  supervision  and  regulation,  Bank  Indonesia 
has taken steps to intensify coordination with other supervisory institutions, reorganizing the 
banking  sector  within  Bank  Indonesia,  refining  bank  supervision  infrastructure  support, 
refining  the  implementation  of  a  risk-based  bank  supervision  system,  and  improving  the 
effectiveness of supervision enforcement. The form of the new Bank Indonesia supervisory 
organization will further support the implementation of risk-based supervision (RBS). 
The RBS approach demands the supervisor thoroughly and comprehensively understand the 
conditions and problems faced by a bank, which is then followed by another set of actions 
and  criteria  utilizing  a  swift  and  accurate  process.  The  new  shape  of  the  Bank  Indonesia 
BIS Review 8/2008 
 13
supervisory  organization  is  also  designed  to  support  the  implementation  of  consolidated 
supervision enabling the supervisor to see a bank’s problem not only as a single entity but 
also  see  the  existing  relationships  from  that  bank’s  business  group.  Therefore,  we  have 
provisioned our supervisors with relevant knowledge through a continual education program 
for bank supervisors. 
Meanwhile,  Pillar  4  of  API  which  encompasses  improvements  to  management  quality  and 
bank operations has been implemented through a risk-management certification program for 
bankers designed to authenticate the risk-management ability of an independent institution. 
Certification  is  based  on  internationally  recognized  standards  and  is  crucial  for  Indonesian 
banks. Other than to standardize the ability of the Indonesian banking society, these efforts 
also represent one way to address the strong current of globalization. Basel II has made the 
banking  world  more  convergent  so  that  the  risk  management  of  human  resources  in 
Indonesian banks must be equal to their overseas counterparts. 
The enhancement of local bankers’ capabilities is also critical in welcoming the 2015 ASEAN 
Economic  Community.  Currently,  over  19,000  certificates  from  various  levels  have  been 
bestowed  upon  bankers  who  have  graduated  the  program.  However,  I  feel  it  important  to 
remind you  that no certificate can act as a substitute for a competence and integrity. This 
certificate  is  a  vehicle  for  a  banker  to  improve  his  or  herself  and  each  banker  must 
continuously strive to prove that they deserve their certificate. 
Under  Pillar  4  of  API,  Bank  Indonesia  has  also  set  forth  standards  for  Good  Corporate 
Governance  (GCG)  through  Bank  Indonesia  Regulation  2006.  Due  to  diverse  bank 
conditions, we have so far tolerated and given substantial leniency to banks during the early 
stages  of  policy  implementation.  However,  beginning  in  2008  it  is  expected  that  all  banks 
have fully applied GCG principles. 2008 is the new anchor year for bank transparency to the 
public.  This  year,  all  banks  are  required  to  submit  a  self-assessment  report  pertaining  to 
GCG implementation. With such transparency, it is expected that public social controls will 
be  formed.  The  public  will  have  full  access  to  a  bank’s  performance  and  GCG 
implementation, which will assist them in determining which bank to entrust their savings and 
fund  management  to.  I  hope  that  the  public  will  already  be  able  to  access  a  bank’s  GCG 
report from the respective bank’s website by the middle of this year. 
To  complete  the  existing  bank  infrastructure  and  contribute  to  improving  bank  risk 
management, Bank Indonesia is refining the Credit Information Bureau (BIK). BIK is part of 
Pillar  5  of  API.  The  Credit  Information  Bureau  was  established  to  overcome  problems  of 
asymmetric  information  that  often  hinders  the  effectiveness  and  efficiency  of  bank 
intermediation. 
From  a  creditor’s  point  of  view,  BIK  is  expected  to  expedite  the  analysis  process  and 
decision-making of credit approval, help lower the risks inherent with non-performing loans, 
and reduce the dependency of creditors on conventional collateral as creditors are able to 
assess the credit reputation of their candidate debtor. From a debtor’s point of view, BIK will 
accelerate  the  time  taken  to  obtain  credit  approval.  Information  sharing  will  address  the 
problems  of  asymmetric  information  which,  in  turn,  will  significantly  improve  the  efficiency 
and effectiveness of financial institution intermediation. 
Other  than  the  benefits  of  BIK  implementation  I  have  already  mentioned,  BIK  is  also 
expected  to  trigger  a  positive  change  in  debtor  attitude.  By  accurately  and  thoroughly 
monitoring credit exposure, debtors should be motivated to service their debt more promptly 
to avoid damaging their personal credit history.  
In the future, with greater awareness on the benefits and consequences of credit history, the 
public should become more motivated to build a good credit history in order to help them in 
case  they  wish  to  apply  for  a  loan  one  day.  This  practice  has  been  witnessed  in  many 
countries where the credit bureau infrastructure has been around for a prolonged period. 
14 
 BIS Review 8/2008
Finally,  with  regards  to  Pillar  6  of  API,  a  program  to  improve  customer  protection  and 
empowerment  has  been  implemented  since  2005.  In  improving  such  customer  protection 
and  empowerment,  regulations  have  been  promulgated  to  govern  product  information 
transparency,  the  use  of  a  customer’s  private  data,  a  mechanism  to  address  customer 
complaints,  and  provisions  for  alternative  dispute  settlement  between  a  customer  and  a 
bank. 
The three regulations were issued as a Bank Indonesia response to numerous complaints 
and problems faced by customers in utilizing bank products and services. However, it has 
always been known that the dissemination of the above three regulations would not actually 
resolve the root of the real problem, namely the low level of public understanding regarding 
the characteristics of bank products and services, especially those related to risks and costs. 
In  response  to  the  circumstances  I  have  outlined,  Bank  Indonesia  launched  a  public 
education program in banking. This activity is expected to minimize the problems faced by 
the public related to banks. We also hope that this program can contribute in enhancing the 
ability  of  the  public  to  better  plan  for  their  future  by  utilizing  bank  products  and  services 
accurately  in  the  current  financial  globalization  era.  We  would  like  public  education  in 
banking to move away from being limited by time and become a continuous national-scale 
program. 
If previously Bank Indonesia has tended to focus on establishing bank and financial system 
stability  enabling  the  public  to  conduct  business  and  receive  an  income  to  support  their 
quality of life, then the current focus will provide greater attention on how the public should 
plan and manage their finances. Public education on bank products is also in line with efforts 
of financial deepening, where the public will be faced with a growing variety of investment 
products.  Sound  public  understanding  regarding  the  characteristics,  use  and  risk  of  bank 
products and services is becoming increasingly crucial. 
With the above background, we have launched an education program called “Ayo ke Bank” 
(Let’s  Go  to  the  Bank)  which  will  continue  to  2008.  We  will  see  that  the  slogan  does  not 
become  a  meaningless  catchphrase,  but  rather,  represent  the  banking  community’s 
commitment to increase the larger community’s participation in national development through 
the understanding and utilization of various banking products. 
Preparation for Basel II implementation 
B. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Still within the context of crisis prevention, to maintain stability and improve the strength of 
the Indonesian bank system, four years ago Bank Indonesia set a strategic policy to adopt 
Basel II commencing in 2008 using the simplest approaches possible. 
In  harmony  with  the  Basel  II  implementation  roadmap,  the  completed  work  program  is 
expected to provide the foundations for effective implementation of the chosen approach in 
the calculation of bank capital adequacy according to Basel II. The work program comprises 
of  Pillar  1  regarding  the  minimum  capital  requirement,  Pillar  2  regarding  the  supervision 
review  process,  and  Pillar  3  regarding  market  discipline  under  the  framework  of  Basel  II, 
which  will  be  actualized  through  intensive  discussion  by  the  Basel  II  Working  Group, 
including communication and socialization with the banking industry.  
Some of the achievements regarding Road Map towards Basel II are as follow. Regarding 
Pillar 1, in preparing regulation towards using internal model by bank in calculating capital 
charge  for  market  risk,  regulation  has  been  issued  regarding  the  Capital  Adequacy  Ratio 
(CAR) of Commercial Banks by Calculating Market Risk.  
In  terms  of  credit  risk,  the  preparation  of  the  regulations  have  also  been  discussed  by 
stakeholders, including the government. Some crucial issues included in Basel II that require 
follow-up  coordination  between  Bank  Indonesia  and  the  government,  include:  (i)  better 
defining small and medium enterprises (SME), which can be used to define retail debtors and 
BIS Review 8/2008 
 15
small medium entities (SME); and (ii) a list of state-owned enterprise (BUMN) supported by 
the government that can be categorized as public sector entities (PSE). Still in the confines 
of credit risk, Bank Indonesia has also begun the recognition process for domestic ranking 
agencies  namely  PT  Pefindo,  PT  Moody’s  Indonesia  and  PT  Fitch  Rating  Indonesia  by 
applying several parameters that comprise of six detailed eligibility criteria according to Basel 
II. 
A similar process has also been applied for the preparation of regulations regarding capital 
charge calculations for operational risk. Further descriptions of gross income definitions and 
profit/loss items included in gross income have also been discussed by the working group. 
Pillar  2  is  more  oriented  towards  internal  Bank  Indonesia  preparation.  The  work  program 
translates  into  the  4  principles  of  Pillar  2,  namely  internal  capital  adequacy  assessment 
process (ICAAP), supervisory review evaluation and process (SREP), CAR above minimum 
and early intervention into the bank supervisory system constellation. Risk-based supervision 
is expected to support effective and efficient Pillar 2 application. In time, Bank Indonesia will 
comprehensively issue consultative papers relevant to the implementation of Pillar 2. 
The  Pillar  3  work  program  is  aimed  at  enhancing  the  framework  of  bank  publications  and 
reporting according to international standards, namely international accounting standards – 
IAS. For this purpose, Bank Indonesia has adopted IAS 32 and IAS 39 in the form of PSAK 
50  and  PSAK  55  followed  by  the  compilation  of  PAPI.  There  is  also  the  need  to  enhance 
bank reporting, namely the commercial bank monthly report (LBU), by facilitating additional 
data and information required by Basel II. 
It  is  important  to  note  that  based  on  the  quantitative  impact  study  –  QIS  on  systemically 
important banks, Bank Indonesia accepts that, generally speaking, our banks are ready to 
adopt BASEL II using the simplest approaches. However, we also see that eventually, Basel 
II  implementation  will  not  only  require  the  readiness  of  the  banking  industry  to  implement 
better risk management including improving the quality of the capital and information system, 
but also require Bank Indonesia readiness to improve the quality of regulation, supervisors, 
the information system and practices, as well as follow-up on bank supervision. 
Other than the common achievements made to date, I see that in order to reach enhance 
banks  through  Basel  II  implementation,  our  attention  often  deviates  by  the  perceptions  or 
information that are not always entirely accurate regarding Basel II implementation, which in 
turn could be detrimental. One of the common misconceptions is that Basel II implementation 
for commercial banks in Indonesia will heavily burden the banks. 
Here I feel it necessary to reiterate the achievement for Indonesian banks in adopting Basel 
II is to use the simplest approach. Therefore, other than the inclusion of operational risk in 
their  capital  calculation,  there  is  no  material  difference  with  Basel  I  as  been  practiced  for 
some time. Another common fallacy is applied to the preparation of Basel II implementation 
support infrastructure. Considering the approach that must be used is the simplest one, such 
minimal  requirements  in  terms  of  infrastructure  remain  well  within  the  reach  of  Indonesian 
banks. 
By minimizing and separating some of the current erroneousness, we will be able to see the 
actual requirements of Basel II much easier. It can be said that the spirit of Basel II is the 
effort to continuously improve quality and the effectiveness of risk management – from banks 
and supervisors alike – to strengthen the overall banking system. How to achieve this Basel 
II spirit should have received a greater attention. Generally speaking, improving bank risk-
management quality requires collaboration between banks and Bank Indonesia to improve 
the  risk-management  practiced  by  banks, 
the  effectiveness  of  risk-based 
supervision by Bank Indonesia, and improve the quality of constructive dialog between the 
two. Such cooperation will breed a thought pattern and culture which continuously minimizes 
the potential of bank failures through better risk management.  
improve 
 16 
 BIS Review 8/2008
Therefore, we should focus our energy and minds not only on achieving tangible items, such 
as  using  various  approaches  to  measure  market,  credit  or  operational  risk,  but  it  is  more 
important to achieve the intangibles, such as adopting a mindset or risk-management culture 
that supports the spirit of Basel II. Our achievements to date are reasonably satisfying; let us 
now complement these achievements by nurturing an appropriate culture and mindset to fully 
enjoy the fruits of Basel II implementation. 
Refining coordination in line with crisis resolution 
C. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Concerning crisis resolution, allow me to explain the background that led to this initiative. The 
economic crisis that struck Indonesia in 1997 was extremely expensive from a financial point 
of  view  and  in  terms  of  the  lessons  learnt.  To  this  end,  there  are  three  primary  policy 
responses  from  Bank  Indonesia,  namely  first,  efforts  to  recover  banks  and  the  economic 
system  post  crisis  through  restructuring  banks;  second,  preventing  crises  in  the  future 
through strengthening the banking system, namely through IBA and Basel II implementation; 
and third, resolution should a crisis reoccur. 
To  create  a  crisis  resolution  mechanism,  the  government  established  the  Financial  Sector 
Safety Net (FSSN) where Bank Indonesia is one key element. FSSN is a mechanism formed 
under the macro-prudential framework and has the mandate of establishing and maintaining 
financial  system  stability  as  well  as  protecting  the  interests  of  financial  services  users. 
Considering that the financial system comprises of many industries, FSSN coverage not only 
includes  banks  but  also  non-bank  financial  institutions,  the  capital  market  and  payment 
system.  For  FSSN  to  run  effectively,  tight  regulations  and  high  supervision  quality,  a 
sufficient lender-of-last-resort facility, an adequate customer deposit insurance program, and 
concise financial crisis management procedures all play critical roles. Solid regulations and 
close supervision represent the first lines of defence. 
Coordination between all institutions involved (Bank Indonesia, Ministry of Finance and the 
Deposit Insurance Corporation) is a crucial factor of FSSN. Therefore, through the Financial 
System Stability Forum (FSSK) established last year, Bank Indonesia has and will continue 
to tighten coordination with all related parties. 
Initiatives in the payment system  
2.2.3.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Within  the  national  payment  system,  Bank  Indonesia  has  implemented  various  strategic 
policies  to  develop  payment  system  infrastructure  to  become  more  reliable,  fast, accurate, 
secure  and  effective  in  supporting  all  transactions  nationwide.  Such  a  developed  payment 
system  can  contribute  significantly  to  the  maintenance  of  payment  system  stability  as  a 
whole.  Failure  to  settle  by  one  payment  system  participant  could  lead  to  serious  risk, 
however, and disrupt the smoothness of the payment system. Such failure may also trigger 
contagion  risk  and  trigger  systemic  disruption  in  the  financial  system,  including  serious 
disruptions to macroeconomic stability. 
For that reason, in managing and maintaining the smoothness of the payment system, Bank 
Indonesia has tried and will always endeavor to reduce various risks in the national payment 
system and improve its efficiency. 
In  relation  to  the  large  value  of  the  payment  system,  Bank  Indonesia  has  continuously 
improved the quality of the BI-Real Time Gross Settlement (RTGS) system; implemented at 
year end 2000. In 2007, the BI-RTGS system, which is a real-time payment and transaction 
settlement  system,  processed  an  average  of  33,000  transactions  per day  with  an  average 
daily value of Rp172 trillion Realizing the importance of the BI-RTGS system in supporting 
smooth  payment  transactions,  as  a  systemically  important  payment  system,  we  at  Bank 
Indonesia have always strived to enhance the BI-RTGS, referring to The Core Principles for 
BIS Review 8/2008 
 17
Systemically  Important  Payment  System  (CP-SIPS)  issued  by  the  Bank  for  International 
Settlements. We have also improved operational security and the reliability of the BI-RTGS 
system  by  enhancing  security  instruments  and  the  overall  information  technology  used  in 
implementation, including improving the back-up quality and instituting a business continuity 
plan in case of natural disasters. 
Subsequently, as part of the efforts to realize an efficient, fast, secure and reliable payment 
system,  Bank  Indonesia  has  improved  the  quality  of  the  clearing  process  through  the 
development of the Bank Indonesia National Clearing System (SKNBI). SKNBI, which was 
implemented in July 2005, processed an average of 318,000 transactions per day in 2007 
with an average daily value of Rp5.5 trillion Since SKNBI implementation, the use of credit 
notes  to  transfer  funds  between  banks  through  clearing,  which  was  deemed  inefficient 
particularly with regard to the printing fee and processing procedure, has become obsolete 
and  is  now  paperless.  The  implementation  of  paperless  clearing  is  national,  which  allows 
participants to transfer credit to any bank office throughout Indonesia. 
Regarding  customer  protection  principles,  Bank  Indonesia  has  set  forth  the  duties  and 
responsibilities of banks when sending transfer instructions and receiving transfers through 
BI-RTGS  and  SKNBI.  The  regulation  principally  attempts  to  protect  the  interest  of  the 
customer who sends or receives a transfer instruction, therefore the efficiency and security of 
the payment system is felt by the general public. 
The development of a non-cash payment system, especially card based payments, prompted 
Bank  Indonesia  to  issue  PBI  No.  7/52/PBI/2005  on  28th  December  2005  regarding  the 
Implementation  of  a  Card-based  Payment  System  as  well  as  several  External  Circulars 
regarding the procedures, Customer Protection and Prudential Principles, improved security, 
as well as supervision. In order to support the establishment of a healthy credit card industry, 
Bank  Indonesia  actively  encourages  the  formation  of  a  self-regulating  organization  (SRO) 
able to set the standards to be adopted in the credit card industry in Indonesia. Through the 
SRO, the standards set will be able to safeguard the security of credit card instruments and 
maintain healthy competition.  
In  the  meantime,  to  anticipate  the  public  requirement  for  non-cash  payment  instruments, 
Bank  Indonesia  continues  to  facilitate  electronic  payments  (e-money)  and  is  preparing 
relevant policy and regulations to manage the implementation of e-money ensuring efficiency 
and security. Bank Indonesia is aware of the importance of developing micro-scale non-cash 
payment instruments to complement the existing high value and low/retail value instruments. 
The  micro-payment  instrument  would  be  designed  to  serve  extremely  low  value,  high 
frequency payments in an expeditious manner. The must suitable micro-payment instrument 
to  satisfy  this  requirement  is  e-money.  E-money  is  a  micro-payment  instrument  that 
constitutes a stored value facility instrument. A benefit of E-money is its ease of use; it can 
be recharged through various facilities provided by the issuer, such that e-money is capable 
of  reaching  all  strata  of  the  public,  including  those  without  access  to  the  usual  non-cash 
payment instruments offered by banks. 
In December 2007, as the government’s cashier administrating various government income 
and  expense  accounts,  Bank  Indonesia  implemented  the  “Bank  Indonesia  Government  – 
electronic Banking (BIG-eB) System” in order to provide a better service to the Government. 
The BIG-eB system is provided by Bank Indonesia to the Department of Finance to facilitate 
information  exchange  as  well  as  to  perform  electronic  and  online  transactions  on 
Government Accounts which are administrated in Bank Indonesia. The facility is expected to 
serve the government’s treasury single account requirement and simplify the management of 
the government’s accounts. 
18 
 BIS Review 8/2008
Initiatives in the real sector 
2.2.4  
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Since  I  began  speaking  at  forums  such  as  this  evening’s  there  have  been  several 
fundamental issues that represent the primary focus of Bank Indonesia in fulfilling its duty as 
a  state  institution  and  central  bank.  One  thing  that  is  institutionally  cemented  to  nearly  all 
central  banks  in  the  world  is  the  vital  function  of  maintaining  national  macroeconomic 
stability.  This  function  provides  operational  room  for  the  central  bank  but  is  limited  by  the 
instruments it has at its disposal. A central bank cannot directly move beyond these borders 
since it lacks the necessary instruments and also because it has no intention of doing so. 
However, real sector performance remains the key focus of a central bank, especially since 
unhealthy  growth  in  the  real  sector  can  disrupt  economic  stability,  which  is  the  focus  of  a 
central  bank.  Therefore,  to  continuously  follow  the  performance  of  all  economic  sectors  in 
Indonesia is an integral part of the central bank’s duty. Furthermore, the central bank must, 
from time to time, provide appropriate signals regarding upcoming issues to be aware of, and 
also contribute to micro-structural efforts to improve real sector conditions. This is necessary 
considering that each time the central bank institutes a policy to maintain national economic 
stability all sectors are affected by that policy, either directly or indirectly. 
Thus,  it  would  be  unwise  for  the  central  bank  not  to  take  a  more  sensitive  approach  to 
ongoing economic and social developments that may trigger widespread effects on the long-
term  stability  of  our  economy.  As  such,  it  would  be  imprudent  for  the  central  bank  to  be 
mechanical and bureaucratic in its approach to developments in the economy. Consequently, 
Bank  Indonesia  has  taken  direct  steps  to  invigorate  the  real  sector  without  violating  its 
mandate as the guardian of stability, not only in advancing Bank Indonesia’s role in policy 
advisory but also facilitating role to strengthen bank’s intermediation function.  
In terms of policy advisory, in the middle of last year, Bank Indonesia launched a multi-year 
work program, namely Bank Indonesia Regional Office Reorientation. This step was taken to 
allow  Bank  Indonesia’s  regional  offices  (KBI)  to  be  more  proactive  in  observing  economic 
and social development throughout the nation, as well as building strategic partnerships with 
local governments. 
Meanwhile, as a facilitator to expedite economic development Bank Indonesia has initiated 
Small Medium Scale Enterprise (SMSE) cluster pilot project program and established a task 
force,  named  “Tim  Fasilitasi  Percepatan  Pemberdayaan  Ekonomi  Daerah”  (TFPPED),  that 
provides  technical  assistance  to  SMSE.  The  team  was  formed  to  help  expedite  regional 
“grass  root”  economic  development  by  improving  the  commercial  bank’s  intermediation 
function.  In  time,  this  Task  Force  will  unify  with  the  duties  of  Bank  Indonesia’s  regional 
offices. The team members consist of heads of local government, Bank Indonesia (central 
and  regional),  banks,  associations  and  institutions  or  other  related  institutions.  As  a  pilot 
project, TFPPED has been established in eight Bank Indonesia’ regional offices: Bandung, 
Medan, Manado, Cirebon, Pontianak, Jambi, Kupang and Purwokerto. 
Another  initiative  taken  to  facilitate  bank  intermediation  includes  the  implementation  of 
Indonesian  Business  Information  Data  (DIBI).  DIBI  has  been  introduced  to  reduce 
asymmetric  information  between  banks  and  the  real  sector,  which  we  suspect  as  one  of 
several  causes  of  the  sub-optimal  bank  intermediation  function.  The  design  of  information 
architecture developed in DIBI is expected to serve the information requirement of banks and 
MSME  economic  players  in  many  regions  of  Indonesia.  For  MSME  economic  players,  we 
expect DIBI to broaden their knowledge range not only to generate new ideas for business 
opportunities but also to serve the needs of business expansion. Whereas for banks, DIBI is 
expected to encourage creativity in credit extension. To begin, the design of the information 
architecture  in  DIBI  was  adjusted  to  the  information  resources  currently  available  in  Bank 
Indonesia, including regional economic reviews which are conducted periodically. We strive 
to ensure that the macro and micro information presented strongly correlates and is germane 
BIS Review 8/2008 
 19
with  the  needs  MSME  economic  players,  either  directly  or  indirectly.  According  to  its 
purpose, future DIBI development will be directed towards presenting more micro-business 
related data and information. 
On top of rolling out initiatives as part of its future routine duties, Bank Indonesia has also 
taken  a  comprehensive  range  of  strategic  measures  together  with  the  Government  in 
directing the activities of Bank Indonesia’s subsidiary companies that must be divested prior 
to  2009.  Through  the  Askrindo  divestment,  Bank  Indonesia’s  stake  in  the  company  has 
declined  from  55%  to  about  25%  following  a  capital  deposit  by  the  Government  of  Rp850 
billion. The capital deposit by the Government to Askrindo has substantially helped overcome 
the  constraints  associated  with  the  prevailing  high  business  risk  perceived  by  the  banking 
community. With such additional capital, Askrindo’s ability to insure credit extended by banks 
has  increased.  On  5  November  2007,  the  Government  launched  a  credit  program  for 
activities of the poor (KUR), which is distributed through banks and insured by Askrindo. 
PT Bahana Pembinaan Usaha Indonesia (BPUI) continues to contribute significantly in terms 
of  providing  financing  and  business  opportunities  to  MSMEs.  Through  its  subsidiary 
company,  PT  Bahana  Artha  Ventura  (BAV),  there  are  currently  over  90  thousand  MSME 
players  that  receive  financing  and  assistance.  Despite  the  constraints  connected  with  the 
limited  capital  currently  faced  by  BPUI  due  to  the  delay  in  converting  the  government’s 
Investment  Fund  Account  debt  into  capital,  the  latest  BAV  business  plan  includes 
arrangements to continue extending business financing to MSMEs, which is projected could 
potentially reach about 275 thousands MSMEs by 2012. This credit extension to MSMEs is 
projected to create around 2,5 million new jobs.  
III. 
Future economic challenges and prospects 
Future economic challenges 
1.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
The strategic initiatives introduced by Bank Indonesia since 2003 and up to the end of 2007, 
as I have discussed so far are far from complete. We still have much outstanding homework 
left to attend to further strengthen financial system resilience to confront the challenges of 
tomorrow. Some of the challenges I have addressed that we face imminently will continue 
over  the  next  five  years  with  higher  intensity.  In  addition,  further  challenges  loom  on  the 
horizon, which require anticipative measures to be taken post-haste. In the context of such 
challenges I would like to reiterate that we cannot and should not take for granted continues 
financial system stability into the future. Such an assumption could leave us vulnerable in a 
comfort zone that shatters our ability to adapt and anticipate problems. Therefore, allow me 
to continue this discussion by outlining my views on the challenges facing our economy and 
financial  system,  which  require  the  diligence  of  all  relevant  parties  to  anticipate  and 
subsequently  further  strengthen  financial  system  stability  and  ensure  the  continuation  of 
economic achievements into 2008 and beyond. 
Changes in the global financial market 
1.1.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
An increasingly imminent challenge which lies before us is the changes taking place in the 
world financial system. If we fail to respond to these changes by strengthening our efforts in 
maintaining financial system stability, the potential of a crisis reoccurring will increase. These 
changes have taken place since at least the 1980s but are increasing in their intensity with 
the rapid development of information technology.  
We  can  now  witness  very  rapid  changes  in  derivative  instruments  and  structured  finance 
instruments. The innovations and developments of such instruments increase the complexity 
20 
 BIS Review 8/2008
and  financial  transactional  links.  Such  changes  are  also  supported  by  increasing  levels  of 
excess  liquidity  in  the  global  financial  market  and  the  increased  demand  for  variations  in 
financial  instruments,  given  different  consumers’  risk  profiles.  Consequently,  there  is  a 
blurring of financial intermediation roles between the traditional banks and non-bank market 
players.  It  is  observed  that  the  banking  industry  tends  to  distant  itself  from  relationship 
lending  practices  and  lean  towards  asset  securitization  strategies  in  its  efforts  to  transfer 
risks by trading instruments repackaged to be traded in the secondary market.  
We also see tighter integration between international financial markets, which is reflected by 
a higher volume of cross-border financial flows. Greater integration between the markets is 
supported  by  the  emergence  of  new  players,  that  operate  across  borders  and  are  owned 
privately,  such  as  hedge  funds,  or  those  that  are  the  subsidiary  company  of  state-owned 
institutions, such as sovereign wealth funds. Other factors adding to cross-border financial 
flows  include  asset  portfolio  management  by  pension  companies  as  well  as  insurance 
companies from large nations, and the re-emergence of leveraged buy-outs by private equity 
companies. 
Changes in the global financial market have swelled global excess liquidity, exacerbated by 
more  varied  sources  of  liquidity  for  funding,  cheaper  financing  cost  as  a  result  of  a 
permanent decline in global inflation over the last decade, and the emergence of new growth 
centers that support wealth creation of the growing middle-class (“new money”) in the global 
economy, especially in emerging countries.  
With its free foreign exchange regime, changes in the global financial system and increased 
global  excess  liquidity  have  made  our  domestic  financial  system  appear  shallow,  with 
instruments limited to mainly shares, SUN and SBI. Problems then arise as, despite its lack 
of depth, our financial market in the past few years have provided yields that attract short-
term  investors.  In  the  stock  market,  such  attractive  yields  are  supported  by  increasing 
corporate  profit  prospects,  IPOs,  and  macroeconomic  stability.  Meanwhile,  differences  in 
productivity  between  developed  countries  and  us  have  created  a  spread  in  interest  rates. 
Such  spreads  tend  to  attract  portfolio  investments  into  our  financial  market  through  carry 
trades in stocks or risk free instruments, such as SUN and SBI.  
Although  short-term  capital  inflows  are  useful  to  meet  the  short-term  national  financial 
requirement, they are also very volatile and vulnerable to sudden reversal. This is because 
they  are  sensitive  to  the  changes  in  expectations  and  are  often  associated  with  irrational 
behaviour. Sensitivity to expectations is currently clearly evidenced by the sensitivity of the 
rupiah  towards  changes  in  the  risk  appetite  of  global  investors  towards  US-Dollar 
denominated debt instruments issued by developed countries, including Indonesia, through 
the global financial market. In the last two years, we have observed an improving positive 
relationship between the value of the rupiah and EMBIG spread fluctuations (Graph 4). This 
is a challenge in itself for the management of rupiah stability by Bank Indonesia. Meanwhile, 
short-term capital inflows can also send the wrong signals about the fundamental condition of 
the  rupiah.  As  a  result  the  exchange  rate  can  suffer  serious  misalignment  that  attracts 
speculation if not addressed appropriately. 
BIS Review 8/2008 
 21
Graph 4.
Rupiah Sensitivity to EMBIG Spread
It  would  seem  obvious  that  what  I  have  outlined  so  far  implies  that  maintaining 
macroeconomic  stability  is  clearly  one  of  the  supporting  pillars  of  overall  financial  system 
stability. High uncertainty has made the task of monetary policy more complex. Meanwhile, 
although preferred by speculators, exchange rate volatility could trigger adverse effects on 
inflation  expectation  through  pass-through  effects.  Excessive  exchange  rate  volatility  also 
can  affect  the  balance  sheet  of  corporations  and  financial  institutions,  especially  when 
outstanding  liabilities  in  foreign  denomination  are  not  hedged.  Furthermore,  exchange  rate 
volatility can disrupt international trade activity due to capacity limitations affecting either the 
exporter or importer when adjusting to changes in the exchange rate. Additionally, when the 
Government  also  has  foreign-denominated  liabilities,  for  example  in  Indonesia,  exchange 
rate volatility can disrupt market valuation for SUN as well as fiscal sustainability. 
Therefore, from a macroeconomic management point of view, our exchange rate policy in the 
overall  framework  of  monetary  policy  requires  special  attention.  We  at  Bank  Indonesia 
accept  that  the  measured  intervention  policies  we  take  to  smooth  exchange  rate  volatility, 
without imposing a specific level, is consistent with our focus on rupiah stability in the mid to 
long term. I would like to restate that Bank Indonesia policy for exchange rate volatility, be it 
through  a  measured  intervention  policy,  BI  rate  interest  rate  policy,  or  prudential  banking 
policy, to date remains effective. However in future, Bank Indonesia is aware of the need to 
improve  the  OMO  mechanism  and  short-term  money  market  infrastructure,  which  will 
improve the contour of the yield curve in our financial system. I will revisit this topic at the end 
of my speech this evening. 
As for the resilience of the banking system as the other pillar of financial system stability, I 
can say that extensive stress testing performed by Bank Indonesia has categorically shown 
that our banks are able to overcome market  risk related to macro instability. However, we 
need to further reinforce the resilience of the banking industry because bank overconfidence 
can easily overstretch activity. Bank Indonesia would like to avoid this in the future. 
Changes in the global commodities market 
1.2.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Another  challenge  that  will  shape  the  Indonesian  economy  of  the  future  is  more  severe 
turbulence  in  the  commodities  market,  which  also  stems  from  the  external  sector.  Three 
important  factors  require  cautious  observation,  namely  structural  changes  in  the  global 
energy  market,  international  food  prices  and  the  effects  of  global  warming.  These  three 
factors are inter-connected and, if not carefully addressed, could have an adverse impact on 
domestic economic growth. 
In  the  last  few  years,  commodity  prices,  especially  the  global  oil  price,  has  experienced  a 
significant surge. Fundamentally, oil price hikes reflect a rise in demand amidst contracted 
production. Although demand for fossil-based fuels from OECD countries, such as the US, 
Europe  and  Japan  has  tended  to  be  lower  due  to  the  warmer  winter  in  the  northern 
22 
 BIS Review 8/2008
hemisphere  as  a  result  of  global  warming,  we  have  observed  a  structural  change  in  the 
energy  market.  The  changes  have  arisen  because  of  the  significant  rise  in  demand  from 
China,  India  and  other  developing  countries,  along  with  the  rise  in  their  economic  activity. 
Conversely, global oil production has tended to stagnate. 
The global race to provide alternative energy sources has triggered soaring international food 
prices. In the first eight months of 2007, average international food prices – especially corn, 
wheat and soybean – rose by up to 10.5%. Biofuel production has been blamed as one of 
the reasons for the price hikes. Biofuel has raised the demand for corn and soybean. The 
global oil price hikes have provided the impetus for biofuel production. In emerging countries, 
the  rise  in  global  food  prices  could  have  serious  negative  impacts  and  trigger  a  direct  or 
indirect rise in the cost of living through inflation of non-food prices. The transmission of food 
price hikes to non-food prices will be more significantly felt in emerging countries than the 
developed  world  because  of  the  high  portion  the  food  basket  holds  in  the  household 
expenses of families in emerging countries. 
Moreover, the effect of extreme weather changes related to global warming is also promoting 
a  rise  in  international  food  prices.  To  illustrate  my  point,  the  2006  drought  in  Australia 
decimated wheat production by up to 60%. Experts predict that the effects of global warming 
will  not  only  place  additional  pressures  global  food  production  but  also  threaten  global 
harmony, such as by rising sea levels due to the melting polar caps, changes in sea currents 
and worsening droughts in many countries. For us in developing countries, these threats are 
extremely serious because they directly relate to the ability of underprivileged peoples to deal 
with shocks and natural disaster. We are aware that global warming is a reflection of global 
externality  where  the  negative  impacts  do  not  stem  from  current  trends  but  from  an 
accumulation of past and future events. As a result, it is our future generations that will feel 
the full brunt of the negative impacts brought about by global warming.  
Social-economic exclusion 
income  disparity,  decreasing  human  development  quality  and 
1.3.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
If we reflect back on the economic crisis we endured 10 years ago, it would be fair to claim 
that  the  crisis  caused  significant  social-economic  exclusion  for  many  Indonesians.  The 
exclusion  occurred  due  to  income  redistribution  and,  of  course,  a  sudden  redistribution  of 
economic-political  power  as  the  crisis  hit.  The  exclusion  faced  by  those  who  were  already 
poor and those who became poor as a direct result of the crisis is not theatrical but extremely 
real.  The  ultimate  effects  of  this  redistribution  still  suffocate  the  lower  strata  of  the  social-
economic pyramid to this day.  
Widening 
increasing 
informality combined with no social protection in the labor market, when compared to the pre-
crisis era, are Asian crisis excesses for which improvements we continue to strive. Therefore, 
Bank  Indonesia  gratefully  welcomes  the  current  efforts  being  undertaken  to  expedite 
improvements in all forms of public social-economic prosperity. This acceleration is indeed 
necessary. In the present economic globalization era, rapid resolution of the social exclusion 
problems  is  demanded  by  our  human  worth.  Social  exclusion  causes  asymmetry  to  both 
groups in the social economic pyramid when addressing economic shocks. Meanwhile, as I 
mentioned  earlier,  our  economy  in  the  future  will  also  face  greater  volatility  regarding  the 
exchange rate as a result of cross-border capital flows and rising food supply prices due to 
structural changes in the global economy. Vulnerability to shocks is compounding the already 
difficult  situation  the  underprivileged  find  themselves  in,  whereas  wealthier  members  of 
society are lucky to have a cushion and can therefore adjust better. This kind of gap disrupts 
our human worth. 
Such  a  contrasting  gap  eventually  has  the  potential  to  provide  negative  feed-back  on  the 
continuity of our current economic achievements. The negative feed-back may arise mainly 
due to the poverty trap and a trickle up economy. In other words, the potential exists for the 
BIS Review 8/2008 
 23
to  economic  competitiveness  should  motivate  us 
emergence of rogue elements in our economy. This would certainly restrict our process in 
continuing the many positive achievements made to the end of 2007. 
Meanwhile, a burgeoning socio-economic gap will also impede our attempts to confront the 
already  very  real  challenges  ahead,  namely  the  establishment  of  2015  ASEAN  Economic 
Society.  Lackluster  public  socio-economic  prosperity  could  trigger  adverse  follow-through 
effects for our nation in the era of economic integration. The competitiveness of our economy 
will drop below that of its peer-group due to incomparable production factor total productivity, 
a contracted domestic market and a lack of interest from the business community to expand 
production  capacity.  We  will  then  become  less  compatible  for  other  countries  to  establish 
joint collaboration, therefore, on the one side we fail to take any benefits of globalization and 
on the other side we only receive the negative effects. 
The views I am trying to put across to you all this evening imply the importance of adjusting 
the  way  we  view  our  priority  scale  to  improve  the  various  positive  achievements  already 
made. Amidst an external environment that could trigger serious challenges and a domestic 
environment  that  is  becoming  more  integrated  in  line  with  globalization,  numerous  issues 
related 
to  redouble  our  existing 
achievements.  However,  in  improving  our  economic  competitiveness,  we  must  not  neglect 
the  social  inclusion  of  all  our  nation’s  citizens.  Any  established  competitiveness  will  be 
unsustainable without such empathy, as competitiveness does not provide any meaning to 
the social contract that we base our lives upon. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
In relation to the social exclusion issue as I have mentioned, we are challenged to improve 
the social-economic condition of small farmers and laborers in the agricultural sector, which 
make up the majority of workers in our economy. The agricultural sector has not been able to 
bring  prosperity  for  the  small  farmers  and  can  bring  the  whole  economy  into  a  prolonged 
stagnation.  Meanwhile,  from  the  perspective  of  national  resilience,  the  agricultural  sector 
cannot  support  sustainability  in  food  supply  and  also  cannot  be  expected  to  absorb 
employment.  Externalities  in  the  form  of  potential  poverty  traps  and  persistent  inflation  in 
food prices are felt in rural areas as well as cities. This is a concern for Bank Indonesia. 
Aside  of  that,  we  are  faced  with  the  paradox  of  growth  phenomenon.  Such  phenomenon 
exists  as  there  is  a  tendency  of  businesses  to  utilize  more  capital  than  labor.  The 
preferences  of  these  businesses  are  rational.  National  and  global  excess  liquidity  has 
brought the cost of capital to relatively low levels while much challenge remains within the 
labor market. Taken from a global perspective, such phenomena is one of global capitalism 
and free competition which requires businesses to increase their competitiveness to capture 
market  share.  A  method  to  achieve  efficiency  is  by  exchanging  low  skilled  workers  with 
capital-intensive machinery or capital. Such technology switching will become more common 
in the future with increasingly sophisticated innovations in production technology. 
For us in an emerging country, this phenomenon requires greater attention, especially since 
growth in the manufacturing sector has slowed in the post-crisis era compared to pre crisis. 
Manufacturing  sector  growth  in  the  pre-crisis  era  was  11.7%  on  average  (1994-1997), 
whereas  post  crisis  it  has  dropped to  5.2%  (2003-2007).  A  downturn  in  the  manufacturing 
industry  has  increased  the  role  of  the  non-tradables  sector.  However,  growth  in  the  non-
tradables sector is currently supported by lower added-value activities. Despite the positive 
impact  of  such  growth  in  the  form  of  less  exchange-rate  pass-through  to  inflation,  the 
negative  impacts  include  lower  added-value  for  the  economy  as  a  whole.  The  negative 
effects  have  also  slowed  growth  in  public  income  on  average  in  the  post-crisis  era  and 
reduced private consumption growth to a level below that of the pre-crisis period. 
To  address  this  paradox  of  growth  we  need  to  ensure  that  the  emerging  added-value 
emanating  from  technological  advancement  does  not  focus  on  a  select  portion  of  the 
population.  We  will  also  have  to  be  more  sensitive  to  the  requirement  for  a  transparent, 
efficient and accurate redistributive income policy, which ensures that the benefits are shared 
24 
 BIS Review 8/2008
with those considered left behind socio-economically. Moreover, policy incentives to develop 
and strengthen the growth of labor-intensive micro, small and medium enterprise, particularly 
in the non-farm sectors in rural villages, need to be considered. This will provide a safety net 
for the public should shocks undermine the economy. 
Persistent inflation  
1.4. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Another  challenge  we  face  together  is  the  rigidity  of  our  inflation  rate,  which  seems  to 
begrudge a decline. Many reasons exist to motivate us to immediately address this challenge 
with unbroken commitment. One of them is that with permanently lower and more congruent 
inflation towards the inflation rates of trading partners, our macroeconomic fundamentals and 
balance  of  payments  will  improve.  However  for  Bank  Indonesia  the  drive  towards 
permanently  lower  inflation  is  to  dissipate  pressures  stemming  from  social  exclusion.  Low 
inflation will preserve the continuity of purchasing power, especially for the underprivileged, 
whose numbers are immense in our country, while also helping to achieve better quality of 
economic development for everybody. We know that a rise in the number of the poor can be 
attributable  to  a  rise  in  inflation  because  a  rise  in  inflation  signals  an  erosion  of  public 
purchasing power, given the low growth in nominal income. Nevertheless, high inflation will 
also  widen  the  income disparity  gap  due  to  asymmetries  between  the rich  and  poor  when 
addressing price inflation. 
Graph 5.
Inflation Indicators
 
I must add, however, that to permanently lower inflation is not a trivial task by any stretch of 
the  imagination,  especially  in  Indonesia.  Our  headline  inflation  rate  is  highly  affected  by 
volatile  food  inflation,  which  is  persistent  in  nature.  Persistent  in  this  regards  means  that 
every time  a shock occurs, inflation of this group tends to take a long time to return to its 
initial rate. As I have shown in Graph 5, it can be seen that although headline inflation has 
returned  to  “normal”  subsequent  to  the  2005  shocks,  volatile  food  inflation  remains 
persistently high. 
Many hypotheses have been proffered regarding the source of such persistence. One that is 
often put forward is that the persistence arises because of inefficiencies due to imperfections 
in  the  food  commodity  distribution  market.  Several  hypothetical  factors  have  been  offered 
that could trigger these imperfections such as the underdevelopment of markets in relation 
to:  (a)  provision  of  logistics,  transport  and  transportation  infrastructure  for  food;  (b)  the 
management  of  perishable  goods  by  the  producers;  and  (c)  the  supply  of  symmetrical 
information for the suppliers, middlemen and retailers. Another hypothesis often suggested 
are distortions triggered by policies that favour certain market players so that oligopsony and 
oligopolistic practices as well as rent-seeking activity arise in the distribution market. If we 
assume  that  these  hypotheses  are  valid,  then  the  persistence  of  food  price  inflation  is  a 
BIS Review 8/2008 
 25
microeconomic  phenomenon.  This  implicates  the  relevancy  of  monetary  policy  as  a  direct 
control instrument for food inflation, and suggests the importance of a deeper microeconomic 
review with regards the food distribution market nationwide, so as to enable us to formulate 
and implement more effective policies. We should also be motivated by the fact that over the 
last four years disparity has appeared in regional headline inflation. As illustrated in Graph 6, 
over the last four years 34 cities out of the 45 surveyed by BPS show a headline inflation rate 
above the national rate. 
Graph 6.
Regional Disparity of CPI Inflation
 
Our headline inflation rate also seems to follow a long-term trend, or  core inflation, that is 
rigid  and  difficult  to  bring  down  (sticky  inflation).  Data  shows  that  since  1990,  our  lowest 
inflation  ever  recorded  was  5%  during  a  brief  period  before  the  crisis,  namely  between 
Quarter  III/1996  and  Quarter  II/1997,  and  then  also  between  Quarter  IV/2003  and  Quarter 
I/2004.  Meanwhile,  our  research  shows  that  during  the  current  post-crisis  era  inflation  has 
remained persistently high at around 5% annually. This situation beckons the next question 
of what is the lowest inflation rate we can expect to achieve over the mid to long term? Is it 
possible to achieve permanent inflation in the rage of 2% to 3% annually such as our trading 
partner  countries?  Are  there  any  specific  characteristics  of  our  economy  that  keep  our 
inflation rate permanently higher than that of our primary trading partners? 
I believe that the steep difference between our inflation and that of our trading partners is 
closely related to the formation of public expectations that tends to look to the past at a time 
when  our  inflation  rate  never  fell  permanently  below  5%  on  average.  There  are  yet  more 
hypotheses  that  can  explain  this.  First  is  that  monetary  policy  still  has  room  to  further 
increase  its  credibility.  Since  ITF  implementation  there  have  been  signs  that  the  average 
core  inflation  rate,  whose  movement  is  highly  affected  by  monetary  policy  credibility,  has 
shown a declining average since 2003, towards a rate significantly below pre-crisis levels. A 
linear trend of core inflation since 2003 is recorded at 7% annually; meanwhile the similar 
trend from 1992-1997 is recorded at 8.50%. This means that since ITF implementation there 
has been long-term declining trend in core inflation of 1.5 percentage points. I feel certain 
that  in  future  consistent  ITF  implementation  will  improve  monetary  policy  credibility  further 
and subsequently bring down the long-term trend of core inflation permanently. 
Second, the reduction of core inflation is hindered by the abundant room for improvements in 
the  productivity  and  efficiency  of  the  economy  as  a  whole.  Improvements  will  affect 
microeconomic  aspects  that  form  the  core  inflation  rate,  especially  improvements  to 
economic  capacity  in  terms  of  product  supply  and  services.  Through  continuous  capacity 
improvements,  demand  pressure  on  products  and  services  will  be  absorbed  avoiding 
inflationary  pressures  on  the  economy.  Market  players  that  deal  with  the  supply  and 
distribution of products and services on a daily basis will rapidly observe such improvements 
26 
 BIS Review 8/2008
and apportion them in their future price adjustment plans. The resultant positive expectations 
will further help reduce core inflation to a level that is permanently lower. 
The  close  relationship  between  the  inflation  rate  and  economic  productivity  and  efficiency 
implies that a disinflation policy needs to be implemented by consistently complying with the 
principles  of  gradualism  and  balance.  Overly  tight  monetary  policy  amidst  rather  low 
economic productivity and inefficiency can lead to recession. Meanwhile, too loose monetary 
policy amidst low productivity and inefficiency can turn the economy inflationary and not pro-
poor. The subsequent inflation will erode the purchasing power of the poor, which will widen 
the socio-economic gap. 
Meanwhile, the tight correlation between the inflation rate and structural aspects implies that 
to  successfully  undertake  a  credible  disinflation  process  requires  thorough  and  integrated 
coordination between all institutions in the Government including Bank Indonesia. Generally 
speaking, such coordination can be conducted by dividing policy direction into three major 
parts.  First  is  to  continuously  maintain  internal  and  external  rupiah  stability  through  pre-
emptive and prudential monetary principles as well as policies for the money market, banks 
and  the  payment  system  that  strive  to  buttress  financial  system  stability.  This  first  policy 
direction is the responsibility of Bank Indonesia and is aimed at dissipating instability risk in 
the financial sector that can disrupt rupiah stability. Second is to maintain fiscal resiliency and 
sustainability  in  the  long  run  to  prevent  the  emergence  of  fiscal  domination  that  could 
adversely impact the expectations of SUN investors towards the prospects of future inflation. 
This 
in  maintaining 
macroeconomic stability as a whole. Third is to improve the structure and infrastructure of the 
food  distribution  market  and  increase  the  efficiency  and  productivity  of  the  economy  as  a 
whole. 
then  can  disrupt  and  hamper  monetary  policy  effectiveness 
Regional competitiveness in the era of regional autonomy and globalization  
1.5. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Yet  another  future  challenge  we  face  is  regional  competitiveness  in  the  era  of  regional 
autonomy and globalization. The World Economic Forum (WEF) reported in their 2006-2007 
“Global  Competitiveness  Report”  that  Indonesian  competitiveness  ranks  50th  out  of  125 
countries; compared to 69th out of 107 countries in the previous year. Despite the obvious 
improvement that has taken place, Indonesia is still considered among the least competitive 
countries  in  the  Asian  region.  Indonesian  competitiveness  continues  to  languish  behind 
Singapore  (ranked  5th),  Japan  (7th),  Malaysia  (26th),  Thailand  (35th)  and  India  (43rd). 
Meanwhile, based on an International Institute for Management Development (IMD) report in 
the World Competitiveness Yearbook 2007, Indonesian competitiveness was ranked among 
the  two  lowest  countries  surveyed,  namely  Indonesia  ranked  54th,  whereas  Venezuela 
ranked 55th out of the 55 countries sampled. 
As  appears  to  be  common  knowledge,  increasing  economic  globalization  has  made 
competition amongst countries even tighter. On top of this, tighter global competition directly 
affects  the  regional  economy,  especially  in  the  era  of  regional  autonomy  and  fiscal 
decentralization. Consequently, the need has arisen for each region in Indonesia to improve 
their competitiveness. Furthermore, tight competition among the regions of Indonesia forms 
the “spear head” for the improvement of national competitiveness amidst the growing desire 
to compete globally. 
This has left me wondering about the overall picture of competitiveness in each region in the 
country  today.  We  can  observe  that  based  on  overall  competitiveness,  about  65%  of 
municipalities  in  Indonesia  remain  below  the  national  average,  whereas  only  17%  have 
actually  exceeded  the  national  average.  This  indicates  a  significant  distortion  in  economic 
growth in municipalities across Indonesia. The regional economy still requires improvements 
in primary infrastructure quality, as well as business expansion to absorb excess labor and 
improve  labor  quality.  Meanwhile,  regions  struggling  with  low  competitiveness  are  often 
BIS Review 8/2008 
 27
characterized by an agricultural sector that does not relate to the region’s primary economic 
sector, as well as insignificant private sector funding. 
As a result, we currently face the challenge of improving regional economic competitiveness. 
To confront this challenge we must not neglect the escalating political-economic relevance of 
the ever emerging local governments, which tend to be highly location specific. This provides 
insight  that  the  uniform  engineering  of  economic  and  social  growth  on  a  national  scale  is 
irrelevant  at  the  local  level.  We  therefore  need  to  formulate  methods  to  solve  the  national 
problem  based  on  the  idiosyncrasies  of  local  wisdom  buried  in  heterogeneity.  This  is  a 
challenge  in  its  own  right  for  a  nation  that  has  always  thought  in  terms  of  monolithic 
uniformity. Such an objective fact sends a message to all policymakers to deconstruct and 
then reconstruct the meaning and role of overall national growth. 
Preserving cultural capital in the globalization era 
1.6.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
With regards to our efforts to adapt to globalization, we are also required to seek and build 
an appropriate cultural spirit for economic growth from the diversity of our nation. Economic 
growth is merely a reflection and consequence of the cultural spirit entrenched in a country. 
The  continuity  of  our  cultural  spirit  to  address  the  variety  and  multi-faceted  socio-cultural 
aspects of our economic regions will determine our achievements in economic growth and 
the restoration of competitiveness in the future. 
It is necessary to comprehend that development through the transformation of the economy, 
social  and  political,  in  its  entirety  is  very  much  affected  by  human  factors  and  cultural 
richness.  In  the  lesser  context  of  economic  growth,  over  two  decades  ago  Soedjatmoko 
informed  us  that  economic  growth  demands  not  merely  the  presence  of  formal  institutions 
and technocratic skills but also cultural factors such as certain norms and social capital that 
support economic development. 
However, in a wider context of development, diversity in culture plays a fundamental role in 
developing good for humankind. In every culture lies the collective memory of a nation. Upon 
entering  the  labyrinth  of  that  collective  memory  each  individual  will  remember,  forget, 
reconstruct,  redefine  his  views  and  even  build  a  new  view  for  the  continuity  of  common 
cultural  advancement.  In  that  process,  cultural  diversity  can  become  the  instrument  that 
opens the door to world-view enrichment. Such enrichment through exchange can result in 
not  only  abstract  matters  such  as  world  views  and  philosophical  speculation,  but  also 
practical matters such as the discovery of traditional medicines that have been discovered 
through local wisdom for centuries. 
This  goes  to  show  the  importance  of  cultural  work  to  ensure  our  nationality  continues  to 
possess a rich and colorful cultural mosaic. However, confronting the upcoming challenges 
will be immense, especially due to the strong undercurrent of global culture homogenization 
that tends to form a uniform world view, i.e. the world of commercial consumer based on the 
most fleeting of cultures in the west. The challenge for us becomes one that is daunting as 
the homogenization process appears seductive to our subliminal perceptions with its impacts 
to  the  local  culture  being  gradual  at  best.  Without  us  knowing,  we  have  become  part  of  a 
huge  market  comprising  of 
those  who  are  very  consumptive  and  dominated  by 
industrialization.  
Future economic prospects 
2.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
The  panoply  of  future  challenges  does  not  inherently  imply  that  our  prospective  economic 
achievements will lose their passion. I believe that the current trend of optimism, where the 
economy is running on both engines, can be maintained into the future. To me a vital reason 
for  this  optimism  is  that  our  democracy  is  already  consolidated,  therefore,  we  have 
28 
 BIS Review 8/2008
confidence  in  the  effectiveness  of  our  government  in  delivering  results.  Furthermore,  our 
bureaucratic  tools  will  be  even  more  effective  despite  us  hosting  one  of  the  largest 
democratic events in Asia next year, namely the 2009 Indonesian direct election. I have also 
witnessed myself that the ongoing efforts to address the remaining structural constraints in 
our  economy  have  been  up-scaled.  This  represents  a  rational  step  for  our  incumbent 
government since it nurtures even greater tangible benefits for the people that support a free 
and open democratic system. 
The  second  reason  for  my  optimism  is  the  availability  of  stable  economic  condition  and 
robust  macroeconomic  resilience  currently  within  our  grasp.  This  resilience  is  briefly 
illustrated  in  Table  5  and  will  become  the  trigger  of  better  and  sustainable  economic 
expansion over the next two years despite strong external challenges in the financial market 
and global commodity market in the form of oil price hikes and soaring global food prices. 
On  the  whole,  projections  of  future  economic  growth  compiled  by  Bank  Indonesia  are  as 
follows.  We  expect  economic  growth  to  continue  to  rise  through  2009  and  will  gradually 
reach 7% annually. Economic growth will primarily be supported by an increase in economic 
capacity in line with the BoP surplus, a stable exchange rate, and a reduction in inflation. 
Strong  BoP  performance  will  be  supported  by  several  factors.  From  a  current  account 
perspective,  the  performance  of  our  non  oil  and  gas  exports  will  remain  strong  due  to 
diversification  in  export  destination  countries  and  strong  global  demand  for  primary 
commodities  relating  to  alternative  energy.  In  terms  of  the  capital  account,  portfolio 
investment flows, especially for equities, will remain robust along with numerous IPOs and 
high  expectations  for  corporate  profits  in  Indonesia.  Several  prominent  facts  that  I  have 
gleaned from the global financial community also indicate a large global investor appetite for 
capital  investment  in  Asian  emerging  market  countries,  especially  due  to  prevailing  high 
global  excess  liquidity.  Regarding  the  net  remittance  from  Indonesian  migrant  laborers,  I 
expect  that  in  the  future  income  transfer  will  remain  strong  and  steady,  representing 
substantial capital inflows to Indonesia. 
BoP  performance,  taken  as  a  whole,  will  support  Bank  Indonesia  in  taking  the  necessary 
steps to maintain rupiah stability. We will continue our ongoing measured foreign exchange 
intervention policies to smooth out volatility in the exchange rate, without imposing a specific 
level.  We  are  also  aware  that  our  policy  to  maintain  adequate  foreign  exchange  reserves 
must remain consistent by maintaining macroeconomic stability in the long run. We at Bank 
Indonesia are clear that maintaining a stable exchange rate and nurturing a favorable climate 
so as to strike a balance between internal and external balance are pre-requisites to further 
reduce price sensitivity to exchange rate fluctuations. By lowering the exchange rate pass-
through effects, core inflation, which is the mid to long term trend of headline inflation, will be 
preserved at a consistent rate approaching the inflation targets. 
We see that the ex-ante inflation targets up to 2010 are not impossible to achieve, namely 5 
+1% in 2008, 4.5 +1% in 2009, and 4 +1% in 2010. This disinflation trend will further bring 
our inflation rate closer to that of our trading partners, which on average is within the range of 
2-3% annually. The achievement of inflation targets will be supported by the following policy 
mix. 
BIS Review 8/2008 
 29
On the fiscal side, the fiscal authority will continuously strive to improve fiscal sustainability 
amidst the oil price shocks and future global uncertainty. To this end, the 9 steps announced 
to safeguard the budget formulated last year will constitute the initial guidelines for market 
players regarding fiscal resilience. Meanwhile, as part of a thorough anti-inflation policy, all 
government ministries and agencies related to the control of food inflation will take measures 
to lower its rate and ease its persistence. 
Indicators of Financial System and Macroeconomic Resiliency
Table 4.
Indicators
2006
2007
Forecast: 2008
Macroeconomy
Macroeconomic condition in 2007 was more resilient than that in 2006, with CPI inflation kept in check, stable
rupiah exchange rate, increased foreign reserves, lower debt ratio and maintained fiscal sustainability
CPI Inflation
Rupiah Exchange Rate
6.6% yoy
Appreciated by 5.96%, with volatility
of 3.79%
6.6% yoy
Appreciated by 0.29%,  with volatility of
1.37%
Foreign Reserves
   Debt to GDP
   Short-term debt to
foreign reserves ratio
Primary Balance
Dec ‘06 = USD 42.6 Billion, equivalent to
4.5 months of import and government
foreign debt repayment
   35.3%
   70.1%
Dec ‘07 = USD 57 Billion, equivalent to 5.7
months of import and government foreign
debt repayment
   Oct 2007 = 33%
   52.4%
Surplus: 1.4% of GDP
Surplus: 0.7% of GDP
5% + 1%
Rupiah exchange rate slightly
depreciates as a result of rising
import in tandem with
increasing economic activities
USD 72.9 Billion
Banking Industry
Banking industry’s resiliency  strengthened, demonstrated by increase in capital, improvement in quality of credit, rise in profit a
enhancement of risk management
Main indicators of
performance
Credit growth
CAR = 20.47%, NPL Gross = 6.98%
(NPL Net = 3.63%), ROA = 2.60%
14,1% with LDR of 64.7%
CAR = 19.82%, NPL Gross = 5.63%
(NPL Net = 2.49%), ROA = 2.80%
(Oct 2007)
23.1% with LDR of 69.0% (Oct 2007)
NPL Gross : 5.11%
24% with LDR of 72.0%
Capital Market
Capital Market’s resiliency improved, as market capitalization, volume and frequency of transaction continued to grow
Liquidity in Capital Market
Market Capitalization = 45% of GDP
Avg. vol of Bond Trading = IDR 3.3
trillion a day, freq. of bond trading =
146.7 times
NAV of mutual fund = IDR 50.87 trillion
Market capitalization = 49% of GDP
Avg. vol of Bond Trading = IDR 5.8
trillion a day, freq. of bond trading =
253.4 times
NAV of mutual fund = IDR 90.4 trillion
Monetary  policy  will  contribute  significantly  through  the  preservation  of  exchange  rate 
stability,  which  is  to  become  a  key  policy.  Moreover,  through  the  BI  rate  policy  under  the 
inflation targeting framework, Bank Indonesia will continually maintain a consistent monetary 
policy stance to achieve the inflation targets set ex-ante. From time to time, we will compare 
how  far  the  BI  rate  stance  complies  with  the  forward-looking  expectations  that  we  form 
through Bank Indonesia projections and surveys of inflation expectations. We will also take 
policy steps to reinforce financial system stability in order to reduce the potential of global 
financial market shocks affecting the domestic foreign exchange market. To strengthen the 
financial  system  Bank  Indonesia  will  take  strategic  steps,  for  example  through  domestic 
financial  market  deepening,  and  further  improve  the  performance  and  resilience  of  the 
banking  industry.  I  will elaborate  on  these steps  further  in  the  final  part  of  my  speech  this 
evening. 
The  proposed  low  inflation  rate  will  help  support  the  development  of  permanent  income, 
therefore  strengthening  purchasing  power,  especially  in  the  middle  to  low  income  group. 
Supported  by  further  improvements  in  MDG  indicators,  stronger  purchasing  power  will 
become more permanent in nature and subsequently broaden the consumption base of the 
domestic  economy.  Provisions  and  improvements  to  primary  infrastructure,  bank  credit, 
adequate  energy  supply  and  wider  access  to  entrepreneurship  will  boost  domestic  market 
capacity. This will then become a catalyst for national production capacity expansion through 
FDI and domestic investment in both the corporate and MSME sectors. A rise in continuous 
investment will further push Indonesia towards investment grade status. 
30 
 BIS Review 8/2008
Strengthening stability, safeguarding development 
IV.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
All  of  the  predictions  I  have  just  outlined  are  highly  dependent  on  the  assumption  that 
financial system stability as a whole is maintained over the next two years. This assumption 
in many cases is reliant on policy initiatives instituted by Bank Indonesia relating to the three 
pillars of stability. Therefore, in the following section, allow me to present several views on 
the steps that need to be taken by Bank Indonesia to strengthen stability and subsequently 
safeguard our current economic progress. 
The realization of three robust pillars of stability in the national economy requires knowledge 
and patience in making adjustments, which in the long term will improve the effectiveness of 
various  policy  initiatives  and  programs.  Adjustments  made  in  the  short  term  sometimes 
encourage  our  stakeholders  to  question  the  credibility,  and  even  the  continuity  of  policy 
initiatives  we  introduce  ex-ante.  There  are  a  few  gloomy  moments  on  our  path  towards 
stability,  however,  there  are  also  many  bright  days  where  the  stakeholders  finally 
comprehend that ex-post adjustments do not mean a lack of commitment to achieve what we 
have announced ex-ante. 
To  characterize  Bank  Indonesia’s  policy  initiative  management  over  the  last  five  years  I 
would  use  two  keywords:  gradualism  and  balancing.  Within  the  two  keywords,  there  is  an 
understanding that the management of policy initiatives and programs cannot merely be rule-
based.  It  is  sometimes  necessary  to  be  discretionary  when  changes  in  the  strategic 
environment  and  in  the  economic  constraints  occur.  Nevertheless,  when  implementing 
discretionary policy, we do not entirely abandon the merit of being guided by some rules so 
as to ensure we stay congruent with our mandates to strengthen the three pillars of stability. 
Against  this  backdrop,  our  freedom  and  creativity  in  implementing  policy  adjustments  will 
always be a measured discretion. I feel this needs to be reiterated to banish any doubt in 
Bank Indonesia’s commitment to continually provide three pillars of stability that form the pre-
conditions and elements of continuity for sustainable economic development. 
Therefore,  in  the  short  term  we  will  continue  and  complete,  post  haste,  our  outstanding 
homework.  However,  in  anticipation  of  the  numerous  future  constraints  we  face,  there  are 
several new policy initiatives that I deem necessary to be taken in the monetary sector as 
well as banks, the payment system and the real sector. 
Initiatives in the monetary sector 
1.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
In  the  monetary  sector,  Bank  Indonesia  will  introduce  initiatives  to  mitigate  the  challenges 
thrown on us by financial globalization, while preparing monetary policy to conform to AEC 
2015.  The  initiatives  are  divided  into  three  key  groups:  initiatives  to  develop  the  domestic 
financial  market,  initiatives  to  strengthen  monetary  policy  effectiveness,  and  initiatives  to 
improve policy tools for AEC 2015. 
Domestic financial market development 
1.1.  
Currently  we  can  see  that  the  domestic  financial  market  has  developed  very  rapidly, 
particularly  the  Government  Debt  Instrument  (SUN)  market.  In  future,  the  role  of  the 
domestic  financial  market  will  become  more  significant,  in  ensuring  monetary  policy 
effectiveness as well as maintaining economic stability in a broader sense. If we look further, 
challenges related to financial globalization, as I mentioned before, have a greater potential 
to disrupt our domestic economy. This has been very discernible lately with respect to the 
global financial market crisis stemming from the collapse of the low-quality household sector, 
or subprime mortgages, in the US. Although to this point the impact on our domestic financial 
market remains contained, this crisis proves the importance of a stronger, deeper and more 
BIS Review 8/2008 
 31
in 
implementing  monetary  policy.  This 
liquid financial market so that potential disturbances emanating from external factors can be 
minimized.  
Considering  these  factors,  it  is  important  that  we  enrich  the  instruments  and  types  of 
transaction  used 
includes  reactivating  repo 
transactions with underlying SUN, reactivating longer tenure SBI (6, 9 and 12-month SBI), 
and  foreign  exchange  swap  transactions.  Reactivation  of  SUN  repo  transactions  through 
liquidity management will also improve activity and liquidity in the SUN market. As a result 
the  SUN  market  will  be  more  efficient  and  more  resilient  to  shocks.  Meanwhile,  FX  Swap 
transactions will synchronize and harmonize steps to manage liquidity and maintain rupiah 
market  stability  with  the  domestic  foreign  exchange  market.  We  expect  these  steps  to 
support  various  efforts  to  deepen  the  financial  market  as  a  whole  (financial  market 
deepening). 
Still related to our effort to expedite financial market deepening, we have also looked at the 
significance  of  expediting  the  development  of  the  sharia  financial  industry.  Developing  the 
sharia  financial  industry  will  broaden  the  types  of  instruments  available  to  the  public  in 
managing their financial assets portfolio. This will greatly assist the domestic financial market 
to  absorb  shocks.  Besides,  developing  the  sharia  financial  industry  will  also  allow  sharia 
banks  to  grow  more  rapidly.  This  mutually  beneficial  interaction  will  expand  the  share  of 
sharia banks in our national banking industry. 
The global excess liquidity phenomenon that principally stems from the middle-east leaving 
the  US  market  after  the  implementation  of  the  Patriot  Act  will  help  develop  the  sharia 
financial  industry  further.  Many  other  countries  such  as  Qatar,  United  Arab  Emirates, 
Malaysia, Japan and Singapore have also taken strategic steps and have been successful in 
attracting  the  excess  liquidity.  Malaysia  and  Singapore  have  even  used  Indonesia  as  a 
source  of  funds  through  attractive  sharia  instruments.  However,  in  the  case  of  Indonesia, 
much more needs to be done in the near future, especially when considering that Indonesia 
is  believed  to  hold  great  potential  in  the  global  sharia  financial  industry  due  to  its  large 
Moslem population; the largest Moslem population in the world.  
In the future, in line with the upcoming implementation of the AEC 2015, competition in the 
sharia  financial  industry  will  be  tougher.  Many  constraints  to  the  growth  of  the  domestic 
sharia  financial  industry,  such  as  tax  issues,  still  impede  the  common  efforts  currently 
underway.  In  addition,  the  development  and  improvement  of  the  national  sharia  financial 
industry competitiveness still requires the support of infrastructure: institutions, regulations, a 
sound  legal  framework,  human  resources  and  market  infrastructure.  To  fill  this  void  solid 
coordination  is  required  by  us  all.  In  support  of  such  coordination  Bank  Indonesia  will 
formulate  a  grand  strategy  for  national  sharia  financial  industry  development,  through 
collaboration with other related institutions. Bank Indonesia will also review various aspects 
related  to  the  strategy  and  implementation  of  monetary  policy  in  our  economy  that  uses  a 
double financial system, namely conventional and sharia. 
Strengthening monetary policy effectiveness 
1.2  
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
There have been many sections of my talk here this evening that emphasize how rapid the 
changes  are  happening  around  us.  To  survive  amidst  such  conditions  there  is  no  other 
option  but  to  adapt  by  making  the  necessary  improvements  to  mitigate  our  problems  and 
weaknesses. 
In  the  monetary  sector,  one  of  the  policy  strategies  we  consider  necessary  for  continuous 
review and  improvement is the effectiveness of ITF implementation. From the assessment 
results of ITF implementation over the past three years, the opportunities to optimize existing 
strategy  effectiveness  remain  wide  open.  This  is  primarily  due  to  liquidity  management, 
predominantly  performed  through  1-month  SBI  issuance  that  still  triggers  fluctuations  in 
32 
 BIS Review 8/2008
available liquidity in daily money market, high interest rate volatility and a steep short-term 
yield curve in the money market. 
These  factors  do  not  effectively  promote  portfolio  management  efficiency  in  financial 
institutions and further encourage them to seek profit by utilizing the difference in the short-
term  interest  rate.  High  fluctuations  in  the  money  market  interest  rate  also  exacerbate  the 
uncertainty surrounding the liquidity of financial institutions that invest their funds in longer 
term assets than the source of funds. In other words, the  cost of being temporarily illiquid 
becomes expensive. Market players tend to be short-term orientated which, in turn, distorts 
monetary  policy  transmission  and  is  also  inefficient  in  promoting  the  role  of  the  financial 
market in the economy. 
Steps to improve monetary policy effectiveness that we envisage are basically tactical move 
deemed  necessary  to  optimize  the  effectiveness  of  monetary  policy  implementation  under 
ITF. In its implementation, this tactical move will be focused on efforts to maintain interest 
rate stability in the short-term inter-bank money market (PUAB), especially the overnight rate, 
as a transmission tool of monetary policy, while also serving as a mechanism to generate a 
more reasonable short-term yield curve. 
In a wider context, the move will also aim at improving asset pricing efficiency in the financial 
market and bank products. Therefore, steps to introduce SBI issuance over a longer maturity 
period is a precondition that must also be met. This is to absorb excess structural liquidity 
through the auction mechanism. The amount of SBI issued for various time periods will be 
based on projections of the bank liquidity requirement. 
Simultaneously,  Bank  Indonesia  will  continue  to  monitor  liquidity  and  the  PUAB  O/N  daily 
interest  rate  as  well  as  responding  to  deviations  within  certain  limits,  through  Fine  Tuning 
Operations. In principle this will ensure that there will be sufficient daily liquidity to settle bank 
transactions and, therefore, the PUAB O/N interest rate will remain steady. If Bank Indonesia 
needs to add or remove liquidity temporarily then repo transactions can be introduced, either 
by issuing SBI or SUN, or FX Swap transactions. 
With a genuine short-term yield curve market players no longer focus on profit taking with a 
short horizon in the money market. This will encourage them to be more active in seeking 
profit through fund investment and management over a longer horizon. This policy initiative is 
expected to maintain the overnight PUAB interest rate at a consistent level that reflects the 
direction of Bank Indonesia monetary policy, namely the BI rate level. 
These  policies,  in  turn  will  also  promote  banks  and  other  financial  market  players  to  use 
asset  and  liabilities  management  (ALMA)  more  professionally,  including  risk  management. 
Money market interest rate stability will reduce the risk of long-term investment liquidity risk 
while also improving financial market infrastructure, therefore, it is more efficient in promoting 
quality and sustainable economic growth. 
1.3  
Strengthening analytical tools for In anticipation of ASEAN economic community 
2015 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
The  third  initiative  in  the  monetary  sector  is  strengthening  policy  analysis  related  to  AEC 
2015. The ASEAN Charter in Singapore on 20th November 2007 witnessed the introduction 
of the ASEAN economic integration program that is no longer up for negotiation. The AEC 
2015  intra  ASEAN  free-trade  agenda  is  nearly  complete  and  will  usher  in  a  significant 
change  in  the  movement  of  the  production  factor.  The  effect  of  free  movement  in  the 
production  factor  is  the  establishment  of  a  new  configuration  of  intra  ASEAN  economic 
production  distribution.  It  is  therefore  imperative  for  a  central  bank  to  understand  the 
determinants  of  this  new  configuration.  We  need  to  project  new  characteristics  and 
determinants of economic production distribution. As we are discussing something that will 
take place in the future, we do not have any data that can be interpreted through empirical 
BIS Review 8/2008 
 33
study.  Therefore,  Bank  Indonesia  will  initiate  several  theoretical  and  analytical  research 
programs.  
Also, to investigate in more detail the effects of trade constraints (tariffs and non tariffs) on 
the  export  performance  and  public  welfare  of  every  ASEAN  country,  multiyear  research  is 
necessary involving enthusiastic, competent and highly dedicated parties. To this end we will 
develop a modelling technique based on Computable General Equilibrium (CGE) using the 
database  of  the  Global  Trade  Analysis  Project  (GTAP)  and  Financial-Social  Accounting 
Matrix (FSAM). To my knowledge, to date there are few public institutions in the country that 
have conducted this very important research agenda. 
If  we  reflect  together,  future  Indonesian  success  in  AEC  is  not  independent  of  our 
competitiveness relative to the competitiveness of the other nine ASEAN member countries. I 
believe  that  competitiveness  has  three  dimensions,  namely  (1)  basic  necessities,  which 
include institutions, infrastructure, macroeconomic stability, primary education and health; (2) 
efficiency  determinants,  which  include  follow-up  education  and  workshops,  an  efficient 
products  and  services  market,  financial  market  development,  technological  readiness  and 
market  measurements;  and  (3)  innovation  and  sophistication,  which  include  advancement 
determinants  and 
the 
competitiveness of ASEAN countries and reveal where Indonesia’s competitiveness can be 
improved  is  a  vital  input,  which  should  be  followed  up  immediately  by  all  elements  of  the 
nation, including Bank Indonesia. 
Finally  we  also  need  to  understand  the  role  of  the  monetary  authority  amidst  AEC  2015 
implementation.  We  need  to  see  whether  our  prudent  monetary  policy,  which  targets  low 
inflation and macroeconomic stability, remains in our nation’s best interest. Up until now we 
have been convinced that prudent anti-inflationary monetary policy is pro-poor domestically. 
innovation.  Therefore,  research 
that  can  map 
level  of 
the 
2.  
2.1  
Banking sector initiatives 
Direction of follow-up policy in the context of restructuring the national banking 
industry 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Moving  on  I  would  like  to  discuss  my  thoughts  on  the  future  direction  of  banks.  Since 
Indonesian  Banking  Architecture  was  launched  at  the  beginning  of  2004  we  should  be 
grateful for the strength and resilience of the banking industry when confronting the various 
risks  and  shocks  that  have  increased  gradually  over  time.  Industry  performance  has  also 
improved  slowly.  Bank  profits  are  steadily  increasing  in  line  with  the  expansion  of  the 
intermediation function and efficiency improvements, as well as effective risk management. 
Although  much  has  been  accomplished,  a  lot  more  still  remains  to  do.  In  this  current 
globalization  era,  the  speed  of  change  often  impresses.  Our  achievements  today  do  not 
guarantee success tomorrow. Only the fundamentals are not prone to rapid change. 
We  have  always  utilized  this  awareness  as  the  foundation  of  IBA  formulation  for  banking 
industry policy. The achievement of six fundamentals, namely the pillars of IBA, represent, in 
essence,  a  transformation  process;  from  the  chaos  that  came  from  the  crisis,  to  a  solid 
industry resilient to shocks that can compete globally and benefit all strata of society. This 
process  requires  an  implementation  strategy  that  ensures  every  initiative  and  program 
introduced can succeed and become a fundamental strength in the future. 
Therefore, every step needs to be carefully and cautiously calculated. It is imperative that we 
remain  always  sensitive  when  addressing  the  changes  and  dynamics  of  this  process.  We 
also  have  to  be  able  to  calculate  the  implications  of  each  step  on  all  related  dimensions, 
prioritize  policy,  and  maintain  a  good  balance  in  the  implementation  to  avoid  unnecessary 
shocks. 
34 
 BIS Review 8/2008
One  endeavor  undertaken  to  achieve  the  fundamental  goals  of  API,  with  its  lengthy 
complexity,  is  the  restructuring  of  the  banking  industry  as  set  forth  in  API  Pillar  1.  This 
objective requires the fulfillment of many preconditions in the strategic environment, including 
the banking industry, and also the support and participation of all parties. Clearly, within in 
the implementation of this policy, Bank Indonesia cannot progress single-handedly. Support 
from  all  stakeholders,  particularly  the  banking  community,  Government,  and  People’s 
Representative Council, is the key to successfully achieving the ultimate goal. 
From our journey is an important note that requires attention, namely that a sound and robust 
banking industry is capable of playing its role optimally. 
Realizing this, steps to strengthen bank resilience, as part of the strategy to restructure the 
banking  industry,  do  not  always  have  to  be  taken  sequentially  with  steps  to  optimize  the 
function of the industry. Both can be performed simultaneously, filling in and complementing 
one  another  depending  upon  the  prevailing  economic  priority.  Therefore,  in  the  face  of  a 
range of problems and limitations in policy implementation, it would not be taboo to adjust 
our  strategy.  We  know  that  in  the  market  economic  system  we  currently  follow,  regulation 
can only be effective and no disrupt stability if the strategies and mechanisms adopted follow 
the guidelines and principles of the market system. 
As  I  have  previously  mentioned,  many  steps  to  support  this  process  have  already  been 
instituted. By mapping the strengths as well as the weaknesses and directing them into the 
operational  scheme  of  each  bank,  we  have  been  able  to  line  up  a  bank  consolidation 
program, a capital adequacy requirement, and a single presence policy. On the other hand, 
we must also continue reviewing the conditions and potential of the public economy through 
expanding the role of Bank Indonesia branch offices, rolling out programs that support real 
sector  growth  and  improving  information  quality  as  well  as  data,  business  and  economic 
analysis. Furthermore, we must upgrade the information system to enable banks to access 
information  more  thoroughly  and  accurately  regarding  conditions  in  the  public  economy 
throughout  Indonesia.  Such  policies  have  to  be  followed  by  consultative  and  persuasive 
steps for each bank manager to position oneself to fill every structural layer of the industry. 
Based on my thoughts, I would like to take this opportunity to outline three key strategies that 
I suggest to use as a reference when continuing banking policy over the next five years. 
First  is  follow-up  policy  direction  in  terms  of  restructuring  the  national  banking  industry. 
Within this policy scope, I have placed three initiatives aimed at solidifying the consolidation 
process according to projections of economic growth against what I consider to be a bank’s 
role in the future, namely: 
a) 
Determining the possibility of re-establishing banking policy dedicated to support the 
funding of long-term development projects. 
Broadening  operational  opportunities  for  universal  banking  by  banks  deemed 
capable and worthy of running it. 
Optimizing  the  bank’s  role  in  funding  development,  especially  for  foreign-owned 
banks. 
b) 
c) 
Second is the direction of rural bank development, which represents one pillar of the local 
economy, considering the potential of the local economy and the welfare of the public. 
Third is to catalyze the growth of Sharia Banking. 
Allow me to elaborate further on the backdrop of my thoughts and offer some initiative ideas 
we can take to materialize them. 
BIS Review 8/2008 
 35
A.  
Investigating the possibility of re-establishing a policy bank dedicated to support the 
funding of long-term development projects 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
At the 2007 bankers’ dinner, I elaborated upon supply side rigidity in response to demand, 
which hinders the smoothness of our economic growth. I also stated that one of the causes 
of such a phenomenon is low investment growth by both foreign and domestic parties as well 
as in other strategic and long-term productive business activities. In the past 10 years since 
the crisis, the accumulation and quality of capital has been slow and its proportion to GDP 
has not recovered to pre-crisis levels. 
Clearly  I  do  not  need  to  repeat  what  I  covered  last  year.  I  imagine  we  can  all  recall  and 
explain  the  many  constraints  undermining  strategic  investment  to  our  economy.  However, 
our  explanations  are  no  longer  viable  if  we  then  take  no  further  action.  What  is  far  more 
important and urgent is how we can direct our efforts, strength and hard work to immediately 
succeed in overcoming  this impasse in investment. We all know that the Government and 
other related parties have continued to strive for reform in many sectors and tried many ways 
to prevail over the numerous existing investment constraints. Nonetheless, we also know that 
such  efforts  are  problematic  because  the  issues  we  face  are  incredibly  structural  and 
complex, and often inter-related. 
From  the  abundant  investment  constraints  we  have  identified,  one  is  the  limitation  or 
absence  of  physical  infrastructure.  It  is  all  too  commonplace  to  see  or  feel  much  of  our 
physical  infrastructure  is  malfunctioning,  obsolete  or  insufficient  in  capacity.  Developing 
facilities and infrastructure such as electricity, roads, seaports, storage, manufacturing sites, 
dams, irrigation and many others is relatively still limited. Even for routine public economic 
activity, such infrastructure is no longer worthy of attracting new investment. 
In my view, this is due to at least three factors. First, in the first few years during and after the 
crisis,  our  economy  contracted.  Against  this  backdrop,  fund  sources  for  development 
purposes  became  limited  and  priority  was  allotted  to  the  payment  of  short-term  liabilities. 
Second, despite economic improvements over the past few years the majority of the state 
budget  has  gone  to  regional  areas,  for  which  the  use  of  development  funds  is  highly 
dependent  on  the  ability  of  the  local  governments.  From  existing  data  it  is  clear  that  local 
government  absorption  of  the  state  budget  remains  sub-optimal.  As  a  result,  development 
funds have mutated into short-term funds, which only circulate in the financial sector. Third, 
infrastructure projects of national interest require substantial budget allocation that cannot be 
fully covered by the state budget. Other commercial sources of funding are required, such as 
from banks or the capital market. Unfortunately, bank funding is still dominated by short-term 
fund sources; therefore, the funding of long-term infrastructure projects is relatively limited. 
We cannot allow this to persist. Appropriate infrastructure is dearly needed if we want our 
economy  to  expand  further  in  a  more  balanced  and  prosperous  way.  Regarding  the 
challenge of persistent inflation that I mentioned earlier, improvements and the expansion of 
infrastructure  nationwide  is  crucial.  Good  quality  infrastructure  will  counter  product  supply 
distribution constraints and lower costs on the supply side, thus making the economy more 
efficient. Consequently, better efficiency will enable the supply side to be more responsive to 
demand, alleviating the susceptibility of our economy to inflation. In the longer term, better 
infrastructure will also support economic productivity, which will provide the opportunity for 
more permanent disinflation. 
We must thoroughly address these three development constraints collectively. This evening I 
am advocating an idea that is actually not totally new to us but is now extremely pertinent 
and  urgent.  The  idea  is  the  re-establishment  of  a  special  bank  policy  to  fund  long-term 
development projects. 
This Policy Bank, in essence, is an extension of the Government’s desire to seek long-term 
funding  through  numerous  methods  and  mechanisms.  Other  than  direct  public  funding, 
36 
 BIS Review 8/2008
banks must focus on long-term funding from the financial market by issuing bonds, and seek 
overseas  loans  from  multilateral  institutions.  Funds  gathered  through  this  bank  policy  are 
subsequently  distributed  to  long-term  projects  and  development  programs,  particularly 
infrastructure, to complement development funding allocated through the state budget. 
Operational activity will be focused as an investment bank to provide support and facilitate 
the Government, including regional development banks (BPD), in issuing bonds in the capital 
market,  both  conventional  banks  and  sharia.  In  the  context  of  strategic  policy  and  growth 
management, the bank policy represents the primary motor and drive for the Government to 
build  a  collaborative  framework  for  effective  and  efficient  funding  of  public  and  private 
partnerships.  To  facilitate  this  policy  direction,  Bank  Indonesia  will  continue  to  undertake 
numerous reviews and preparation policy steps, including the initiative to expand universal 
banking which I would like to expand upon shortly. 
After  in-depth  reviews  and  detailed  preparations,  the  Government  could  establish  such  a 
bank through the consolidation of banks or financial institutions that have this bank policy, or 
by  establishing  a  brand  new  bank.  The  ownership  of  such  a  bank  can  subsequently  be 
diversified  to  many  parties,  such  as  the  general  public,  other  state-owned  banks,  state-
owned enterprises, foreign private parties or domestic international institutions, provided that 
the Government remains the majority shareholder and controller. 
It is important to note the implications of establishing a government bank to administrate this 
special  duty.  With  the  existence  of  this  bank,  other  government  banks  will  be  required  to 
adjust  their  role,  function  and  strategy  to  avoid  any  unnecessary  competition.  Each 
government-owned bank will have its own function and role to support the growth process by 
optimally providing services to the public according to its own market share. 
With the adjustment in focus and business strategy of the government banks, I expect each 
government-owned to compete with other banks according to their vision and mission as well 
as  their  competitive  strengths.  For  Bank  Indonesia,  this  policy  measure  will  generate 
significant results in terms of reinforcing the bank consolidation program, while also serving 
as an integral part of national bank restructuring as a whole. 
Expanding operational opportunities concerning universal banking for suitable banks 
B.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Recently, Bank Indonesia presented a plan to the public regarding the possibility of adopting 
universal banking to substitute our current commercial banking approach. We have adjusted 
legislation to serve as a legal foundation for our banks. Action to adopt this universal system 
is basically a response to our position amidst financial sector globalization that is becoming 
more real in our daily lives. In practice, to improve the banks’ function and role in mobilizing 
public  funds,  current  global  bank  development  direction  is  innovative.  This  enables  the 
integrated packaging of a bank’s products with other financial industry products. 
In  terms  of  the  banking  industry,  this  is  undertaken  to  achieve  several  objectives 
simultaneously, more specifically to hasten fund flows managed by banks, as well as expand 
the  operational  base  to  be  capable  of  increasing  the  income  margin  and  reducing  risk 
exposure. From a public policy management standpoint, the adoption of universal banking 
into the Indonesian banking system will also support financial market deepening, which will 
eventually contribute to financial stability and economic growth. Broader bank product variety 
may  also  be  instrumental  in  maintaining  financial  stability  as  it  provides  investment 
diversification for the public. Without concentrating placements in only one or several types 
of  product,  it  is  expected  that  the  economy  will  become  more  resilient  when  confronting 
shocks.  In  this  case,  a  deeper  financial  market  is  often  identified  as  a  more  resilient  and 
stable financial market. Financial intermediation that is required to drive an economy will also 
be assisted by the growing number of available financial products. 
BIS Review 8/2008 
 37
Integration of bank activities and products in the form of asset securitization, mutual funds, 
and derivative transactions will obviously increase risk exposure, not only for the institutions 
involved,  but  also  the  financial  system  as  a  whole.  Consequently,  we  will  have  to  be 
prepared to meet the various supporting conditions to continuously maintain stability. Banks 
involved in universal banking are required to have capable human resources, solid financial 
and operational power, as well as the ability to manage risk effectively before commencing 
such activity. 
In fact, it is clear that our banks currently have indeed undertaken de facto universal banking 
activities  through  collaboration  with  other  financial  institutions  or  subsidiary  companies.  To 
avoid  any  unwelcome  surprises  that  may  lead  to  fluctuations,  the  relevant  authorities  will 
inevitably  have  to  announce  their  determination  in  observing  the  overall  operational 
dimension  so  far  undertaken  by  banks.  It  is  imperative  that  management  of  the  banking 
financial  industry  is  complementary  and  compatible  by  clearly  detailing  each  stakeholder’s 
responsibility  and  authority.  This  has  to  be  followed  up  by  close  collaboration  and 
coordination among the relevant authorities to protect overall system stability. 
To  this  end,  consolidated  risk-based  supervision  implemented  by  Bank  Indonesia  will  be 
improved by observing the relationships between banks and other financial companies. Once 
we  have  finished  formulating  the  management  of  universal  banking,  we  will  offer  several 
options to banks permitted to operate in this sector: 
1. 
2. 
Merge with their subsidiary company, especially those that operate in securities. 
Maintain the subsidiary company in the financial sector but declare all of its activities 
within the business activity of the principle bank. In this context, we will collaborate 
with the applicable authorities to compile prudential principles and a set of uniform 
operational data and information standards for each product or activity categorized 
as a universal product. 
Choose  to  execute  a  vision,  mission  and  business  activity  strategy  focused  on 
investment activity (investment bank). 
As a consequence of the options on offer, Bank Indonesia will determine the portion 
of  activity  related  to  universal  banking  within  differing  definitive  limits.  The 
differences relate to the three options I just outlined and are based on the results of 
Bank  Indonesia  research  regarding  the  ability  of  each  bank  in  undertaking  this 
activity. 
3. 
4. 
From the viewpoint of Bank Indonesia, universal banking embodies a hope that our banks 
can position themselves internationally within our banking industry structure. Such banks will 
have to be adequately equipped to compete globally. If consensus can be reached on this 
matter then we must scramble to prepare ourselves immediately. The demands of the global 
financial market render it impossible for us to freely and leisurely set our own schedule. AEC 
2015  is  just  around  the  corner  with  its  various  implications  on  various  socio-economic 
aspects of our nation. 
The main key to begin stepping towards our destined place is already in our hands. As we 
realize that the adoption of the universal banking pattern will entail much preparation, we can 
see that the many aspects of the banking industry enhanced by API are starting points from 
which  we  start.  The  banking  consolidation  program,  enhancements  in  bank’s financial  and 
operational aspects such as capital, risk management, and efforts in consumer education are 
programs which we must complete according to the set schedule. As we move forward, the 
enhancements  conducted  by  API  are  increasingly  showing  its  merits.  The  adoption  of 
universal banking is only one possibility made possible by API. As such, we would be amiss 
to think that the final structure of API will be completed in 2010; that year is only the starting 
point for the industry’s further enhancements. 
38 
 BIS Review 8/2008
C.  
Optimising the role of banks in development funding, especially foreign-owned 
banks 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
From Bank Indonesia’s point of view, the process of reinforcing the banking industry, which 
we  began  shortly  after  the  Asian  Crisis,  has  yielded  essential  changes  in  the  banking 
industry  constellation  in  Indonesia.  Currently,  there  are  49  commercial  banks  that  are 
majority  owned  by  foreign  parties,  totalling  46%  of  total  national  bank  industry  assets. 
Providing  we  can  maintain  financial  system  stability  and  policy  direction,  Bank  Indonesia 
estimates  that  the  acquisition  process  of  domestic  private  banks  by  foreign  parties  will 
continue. 
From  the  point  of  view  as  an  authority,  the  change  in  industry  constellation  is  multi-
dimensional and must be followed and monitored in terms of the function and role of banks in 
the economy in future. I often ask myself what implications will arise as a result of the change 
in  structure.  In  addition,  I  regularly  discuss  this  matter  with  a  variety  of  stakeholders,  both 
domestic and foreign, who can assist me with the answers to my questions. 
Obviously, there are many countries in the world where their banking industry is dominated 
by  foreign  stakeholders.  However,  Indonesia  is  different.  The  change  in  constellation  has 
prompted  many  questions,  such  as  will  we  as  a  nation  be  able  to  reap  the  benefits  of  a 
banking industry dominated by foreign parties? What policy response must Bank Indonesia 
take  to  address  this,  primarily  in  order  for  Indonesian  banks  to  contribute  optimally  to  the 
growth process? 
From  my  investigation,  I  have  come  to  a  temporary  conclusion  that  such  questions  are 
perennial and will continue to shadow us all, especially us at Bank Indonesia. The answers 
will  very  much  depend  on  numerous  factors  concerning  the  banking  industry  itself.  We  all 
know that one crucial factor that can affect the optimization of the function and role of foreign 
banks in Indonesian economic growth lies in the response and policy direction taken by the 
authorities. 
Realizing this, I feel the need to propose some basic principles to determine the direction of 
Indonesian banking policy to address our concerns as a nation in overcoming and benefiting 
from the change in ownership constellation. I would like to bring our thoughts and views in 
line  to  see  the  opportunities  available  for  banks  to  be  the  motor  and  director  of  economic 
activity. This principle is known as “banks leading the development.” This basic principle is 
contrary to the general principle commonly used as the cornerstone of banking activity in an 
economy, namely “banks follow the trade”. 
How  have  I  come  to  the  conclusion  that  banks  should  be  the  motor  and  director  of  the 
economy?  The  answer  returns  me  to  the  future  economic  challenges  I  have  already 
discussed  here  this  evening.  The  challenges  implicate  the  importance  of  the  contribution 
made  by  the  banking  sector  in  joint  efforts  to  address  the  challenges  of  social  exclusion. 
Therefore,  we  require  banks  to  utilize  the  public  economy  (a  socially  inclusive  banking 
sector) and open access to assets at the grass-root level to improve the quality of economic 
growth and support domestic market growth. 
We  are  all  aware  that  bank  activity  is  commercial,  which  obviously  is  mandated  with 
maximizing  profit.  There  is  nothing  wrong  with  this;  however,  it  is  important  to  understand 
that sustainable banks in the long term also demand a developing domestic market. Fund 
mobilization  that  is  not  followed  by  growth  in  productive  assets  at  the  grass-root  level  to 
augment the permanent purchasing power of middle to working-class citizens that represent 
the majority of producers and consumers in the country, will slowly bring banks into a race to 
the bottom.  
Therefore,  I  would  like  to  encourage  foreign  banks  in  Indonesia  to  jointly  empower  and 
expand  their  customer  base  because  this  is  where  the  future  expected  returns  lie.  The 
efficiency you have gained, which shows your professionalism as bankers, is capital to build 
BIS Review 8/2008 
 39
your customer base to further ensure your business resilience in the future. I fully understand 
that  in  many  ways  what  you  are  experiencing  in  terms  of  your  competitive  environment  is 
similar  to  what  is  known  as  a  prisoner’s  dilemma.  Individually,  the  benefits  you  enjoy  as 
initiators of a more prosperous customer base are not necessarily followed by a constructive 
tit-for-tat  strategy  by  all  participants.  The  absence  of  this  coordination  mechanism  has 
become our concern because such circumstances could eventually trigger “stagnation” that 
disrupts  the  expediency  of  all  participants  in  the  banking  industry.  Consequently,  Bank 
Indonesia will provide equal incentives for all and will be a fair mediator to ensure that no one 
plays outside of the rules commonly made and agreed upon. 
In  line  with  this,  I  would  like  to  propose  three  policy  programs  to  constitute  guidelines  in 
optimizing the role of banks in addressing the numerous economic challenges we currently 
face.  These  policy  programs  are  primarily  targeted  at  foreign-owned  commercial  banks, 
which continue to direct most of their credit extension to the consumptive sector. However, 
implementation  does  not  imply  that  other  domestic  banks  are  exempt  from  enjoying  the 
benefits of this policy. Bank Indonesia will institute this affirmative policy for the greater good 
of all banks; differentiating the weight of liability according to the portfolio conditions of each 
bank. 
First  is  the  responsibility  of  every  bank  to  nurture  entrepreneurs  of  productive  ventures  in 
certain regions or sectors who have always had potential but never been properly developed. 
This nurturing process is in line with the extension of business loans, in the form of working 
or  investment  capital,  the  amount  of  which  is  tailored  to  the  prospects  and  ability  of  the 
business.  The  ratio  or  portion  of  total  credit  to  each  debtor  in  meeting  this  liability  will  be 
calculated  referring  to  several  indicators.  One  crucial  indicator  to  be  used  is  the  relative 
comparison  of  the  amount  of  existing  consumption  credit  on  a  bank’s  portfolio.  The  costs 
involved  in  this  process  to  be  borne  by  the  banks  can  be  calculated  as  the  cost  of  funds 
acceptable to the debtor, or as part of the operational (overheads) costs of a bank. 
Second is the obligation to extend credit to the productive MSME sector at a given ratio or 
portion of total credit distributed by each bank. This policy is not completely new. Before the 
crisis,  Bank  Indonesia  once  implemented  this  policy  in  the  national  banking  industry  to 
promote  MSME  growth.  By  taking  into  account  past  experiences,  a  refined  version  of  this 
policy is being considered for implementation. 
Third is the duty to implement a Corporate Social Responsibility program in every bank at a 
ratio  to  be commonly  agreed  upon.  I  take  the view  that  a bank’s  CSR  program  should  be 
directed towards the strategic efforts to shape our nation’s future. One of the strategic fields 
in  this  respect  is  education.  I  hope  that  banks  can  substantially  contribute  to  education 
through innovation and creativity to provide better opportunities for our children to achieve 
their dream of a brighter future.  
Fourth  are  Bank  Indonesia  measures  to  immediately  finalize  reviewing  the  possibility  of 
reducing the calculation for risk-weighted assets (ATMR) on credit for activities of the poor 
(KUR). Based on a thorough review, the opportunity has arisen to reduce the ATMR of such 
credit, considering that it has been re-insured by Askrindo, which is a state-owned enterprise 
itself.  In  practice,  the  current  portion  of  KUR  distribution  not  covered  by  Askrindo  and 
therefore the responsibility of banks is 30%. Taking into account current ATMR calculation 
regulations, where credits insured by state-owned enterprises have a risk weighting of 50%, 
then we project that we will immediately adjust the ATMR calculation for KUR to around 30 to 
40%. Hopefully in the near future we can promulgate new regulations pertaining to this credit. 
There  is  also  the  possibility  of  a  new  ATMR  calculation  for  MSME  credit  guaranteed  by 
insurance companies other than Askrindo, as long as the respective insurance company can 
meet a set of conditions to be determined. 
As usual we will fully cooperate with all of you in the formulation process to discuss the best 
measures we can achieve jointly together. I believe that the three policy steps I have outline 
can  act  as  the  trigger  to  establishing  strategic  national  assets  for  our  future,  including  the 
40 
 BIS Review 8/2008
banking industry. Good communication needs to be maintained and improved in quality. The 
banking community does not have to hesitate in presenting the many concerns that require 
an  appropriate  response  from  Bank  Indonesia,  but  should  do  so  without  creating 
unnecessary noise in the public domain. We must agree that the future of this nation does 
not only lie in the big cities dominated by non-tradable sector activity. This nation should rely 
on the potential and power of its resources, which remain overlooked in many rural areas. 
Therefore, if we in the banking community wish to survive and continue generating profit in 
the  long  run,  the  existing  potential  must  be  developed  and  realized  in  order  to  achieve 
growth. 
Development direction of rural banks as a support of local economic strength  
2.2.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I  would  like  to  now  turn  my  thoughts  to  rural  banks.  As  I  mentioned  in  my  guidelines  last 
year, rural banks need to be redefined in the context of serving the range of dynamics in the 
lives of the underprivileged. When we see many rural banks in suburbs or even the city, it 
beckons the question of whether it is a true rural bank that is actually serving the Poor. What 
is so wrong with our villages that rural banks hesitate to go there? Or maybe we approach 
this from the opposite point of view, what is wrong with the rural banks that they choose to 
enter the cities? 
Finding  answers  to  these  questions  is  hardly  a  difficult  task.  We  have  to  admit  that  the 
economic condition of many people in the villages is still a concern. On the other hand, by 
following the current trend of approaching the matter as a commercial business venture, rural 
banks  take  short  cuts  by  operating  as  commercial  banks  seeking  to  generate  a  profit. 
However,  the  original  concept  based  the  placement  of  rural  banks  in  the  national  banking 
industry  to  operate  specifically  to  serve  a  particular  public  segment,  which  require  special 
treatment. 
From our standpoint as the monetary authority, rural banks are not banks that issue checks, 
debit cards and wire transfers or electronic money; therefore, from the outset we have not 
placed  rural  banks  under  monetary  policy  transmission.  This  exclusiveness  is  intended  to 
allow  rural  banks  to  be  more  flexible  when  penetrating  rural  areas  in  order  to  serve 
underprivileged  people,  which  is  indeed  the  purpose  of  their  existence.  Having  almost  10 
times  more  premises  than  commercial  banks,  rural  banks  should  be  able  to  spread 
throughout the country without having to concentrate on entering the large cities or operating 
like commercial banks. From the point of view of the banking authority, rural banks do not 
have systemic impact in the case of a problem. However, if many rural banks fail to compete 
with  commercial  banks  due  to  their  inability  to  utilize  their  exclusivity,  the  breakdown  will 
significantly burden the banking system.  
Against this backdrop, it is normal for Bank Indonesia to deem a review of existing policy and 
a subsequent response necessary, according to the basic concept and principles we jointly 
agreed upon. I would like to reiterate that rural banks are required to become more efficient 
in performing their role and function to serve the public in rural areas. Rural banks must to 
return to their mandate of supporting the local economies, which are the target and focus of 
their business activity. Economic localities which grow and stem from local people’s socio-
culture values should form the backbone of rural banks. The fundamental difference between 
rural banks and commercial banks is the ability of rural banks to enter and become part of 
norms  and  dynamics  of  their  surrounding  community.  Thus,  the  approach  and  operational 
activity  of  rural  banks  must  reflect  the  habits,  traditions  and  culture  of  the  public  being 
served, 
the  respective  rural  bank. 
Consequently, the operational structure of rural banks must be customized according to its 
target market. 
Realizing the need to redefine and redirect the policy direction of rural banks in the future, I 
would like to highlight several initiatives we can take over the next five years. 
feel  comfortable  and  safe  with 
therefore, 
they 
BIS Review 8/2008 
 41
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
Thoroughly  conduct  research  studies  and  reviews  concerning  local  economic 
strengths that would be more relevantly served by rural banks instead of commercial 
banks. From the results of the study, rural banks should be able to formulate and 
prepare  an  operational  structure  suitable  to  local  conditions,  and  therefore  exploit 
the niche opportunities to generate profit. 
As a starting point, Bank Indonesia is currently preparing the internal establishment 
of the Centre for Micro Finance Study. This study centre will be established together 
with many parties; including international institutions with extensive experience and 
deep knowledge on micro funding like GTZ, Swisscontact and IFC. The study centre 
is expected to sharpen numerous efforts taken by the Government and other parties 
to support the development and utilization of poor public economies in various rural 
areas and villages. 
Compile  a  blueprint  for  future  rural  bank  policy  direction  involving  various 
stakeholders,  particularly  the  local  government,  in  order  to  synergize  the  function 
and  role  of  rural  banks  in  supporting  the  provision  of  region/village  development 
funding, together with other micro financial institutions that currently exist. Under this 
initiative,  numerous  policy  options  will  be  reviewed  to  reorganize  the  rural  bank 
industry according to the socio-economic potential of the local cultures where rural 
banks are deemed to have strong development possibilities. 
Discover the most suitable form of supervision and management to be adopted by 
rural banks. In line with the variety present in the operational structure of rural banks 
Bank Indonesia’s role as the authority must also adjust to maintain the health and 
strength  of  rural  banks  without  constraining  the  operational  structure  of  each 
individual  rural  bank.  Under  such  circumstances,  a  one-size-fits-all  principle  is  no 
longer relevant. Therefore, the opportunity has presented itself, in the management 
and supervision of rural banks, that Bank Indonesia will include other stakeholders 
that  genuinely  understand  rural  bank  conditions  in  each  region,  such  as  the  local 
government,  LSM,  consultants  and  other  stakeholders.  The  function  and  role  of 
Bank Indonesia in future will focus more on providing guidelines, prudential signs as 
well as illustrating the overall industry conditions and dynamics. 
 Measures to expedite sharia banking expansion 
2.3. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
My final thought for the banking sector concerns sharia banking. In an effort to support sharia 
industry growth, this year, we have targeted 5% of overall bank assets to be owned by sharia 
banking. Furthermore, up to 2015, we expect this share to increase to 15%. This is certainly 
an  ambitious  target  but  definitely  attainable.  We  need  to  garner  all  banking  industry 
stakeholders and other related parties to work harder and be more innovative to achieve this 
target.  Based  on  our  observations  and  by  monitoring  the  performance  of  sharia  banking 
worldwide, we believe that the potential strength and competitiveness of sharia banking in 
Indonesia  will  grow  and  develop  substantially.  We  will  also  see  that  sharia  banking  is  a 
financial  product  and  service  whose  universal  values  are  fair,  beneficial  and  practical  for 
everybody served. 
Referring to current conditions, the target of 5% of total bank assets may still be considered a 
huge challenge for sharia banking. Therefore, besides efforts from the sharia industry itself, 
common  goals  and  close  collaboration  between  industry  players,  Bank  Indonesia,  the 
Government,  as  well  as  other  related  parties  are  needed.  Moreover,  the  development  of 
sharia banking has to be shifted from being an issue of Bank Indonesia and other related 
parties to a national issue. Each stakeholder has their own role to perform optimally, referring 
to the mutually agreed upon agenda to realize their objectives. As a national agenda, sharia 
banking development can be achieved through the following steps: 
i. 
Offer incentives, simplicity and facilities to attract new investors. 
42 
 BIS Review 8/2008
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
Conduct  intensive  sharia  banking  socialization  to  provide  knowledge  and  also 
encourage  the  public  at  all  groups/segments/strata  to  use  financial  services  / 
products offered by sharia banking. 
Foster  MSEs  and  create  an  Account  Officer  for  Sharia  Banks  to  improve  the  real 
sector  which  is  expected  to  strengthen  sharia  banking  funding  from  the  demand 
side. 
Expand the involvement of sharia banking in government projects. 
Complete  the  promulgation  or  amendment  of  several  favorable  laws  to  catalyze 
sharia  banking  development.  For  example,  amend  taxation  laws,  complete  the 
sharia banking law, and Sukuk Law. 
Meanwhile,  over  the  next  few  years,  Bank  Indonesia  will  continue  to  apportion  greater 
attention to three key matters to support sharia banking growth. First is capital. Strong capital 
is  important  to  maintain  rapid  and  prudential  sharia  banking  growth.  Bank  expansion  and 
rapid deposit growth need to be balanced against capital; therefore, growth in sharia banks 
will remain sustainable and prudential.  
Second  is  human  resources.  As  a  budding  industry,  the  quality  of  sharia  banking  human 
resources  is  a  critical  element  in  its  success  to  serve  the  sharia  needs  of  the  Indonesian 
public.  Professional  and  competent  human  resources  are  required,  at  least  on  a  par  with 
those in conventional banking. This will provide evidence to the public that sharia banking is 
a highly professional industry that can offer many benefits and has strong potential. 
Third  is  service  coverage.  Expansion  of  service  coverage  through  “office  channeling”  has 
helped  the  public  to  place  their  savings  in  proven  sharia  banks.  Strong  interest  from  the 
public  will  subsequently  broaden  office  channeling  coverage  to  serve  not  only  the  public 
requirement to place funds, but also serve the public’s needs related to financing. We have 
also noticed that demand for exemplary service quality has enabled sharia banking to absorb 
the very best employees available in banking. 
Initiatives in the national payment system 
3.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
In terms of the payment system, some future measures that I personally consider important 
to support financial system stability include making the national payment system more useful 
for the public as well as complying further with international best practices. Implementation of 
the Bank Indonesia Government – Electronic Banking system (BIG-eB), which was officially 
launched  at  the  end  of  last  year,  will  be  improved  in  quality  and  service  coverage.  Better 
service  quality  and  coverage  is  expected  to  boost  the  effectiveness  and  efficiency  of 
monitoring and national government financial transactions, and thus support overall efforts to 
stimulate  national  economic  growth.  I  also  acknowledge  the  importance  of  improving  the 
efficiency of the BI-RTGS system. The plan to launch BI-RTGS Version 2.0 is an important 
step in our efforts to build a more reliable national payment system. 
In  the  coming  five  years,  Bank  Indonesia  will  continue  to  maintain  the  adequacy  of  good 
quality  bank  notes  and  to  improve  the  efficiency  of  its  distribution  to  Indonesia’s  border 
regions.  The  provision  of  sufficient  amounts  of  high  quality  bank  notes  is  a  means  of 
strengthening the presence of our state’s symbols in those remote areas, and thereby the 
territorial integrity of the Unitary State of the Republic of Indonesia.  
Initiatives in real sector  
4. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Beginning  this  21st  century,  we  are  still  faced  with  the  issue  of  social  exclusion  that  I 
mentioned earlier this evening. When a group in society is systematically overlooked socio-
BIS Review 8/2008 
 43
economically they feel a great desire to improve their rights and welfare, or what Amartya 
Sen coined social deprivation. Then, at that point poverty exists as an ontological entity. 
Amidst unlimited supply of labor, social exclusion is shaking the very meaning of the social 
contract in our country. Those confined to the lower echelons of the socio-economic pyramid 
feel  that  their  world  is  not  protected  by  the  social  contract  they  are  engaged  in.  A  sort  of 
insecurity and existential concern exist in their mind. The most logical explanation about their 
situation  is  limited  access  to  upward  social  mobility  and  such  limitations  create  a  thirst  for 
more opened doors. 
In  response  to  that  challenge  the  KBI  Reorientation  Program,  launched  mid  2007,  will  be 
intensified  in  its  implementation.  The  role  of  Bank  Indonesia  branch  offices  in  stimulating 
economic  growth  in  rural  areas  will  be  strengthened,  so  as  to  ensure  a  more  socially-
inclusive  Indonesia  that  is  also  better  prepared  to  join  the  AEC  2015.  Included  in  this 
program is the establishment of branch offices in regions with progressive achievements in 
all  sectors  of  growth  –  political,  economic,  social  and  cultural  –  and  have  the  potential  to 
become new growth centers in Indonesia. As part of the first phase, we will soon be opening 
branch  offices  in  Banten  and  Gorontalo  Province,  and  reopen  branch  offices  in  Tegal  and 
Pematang Siantar. 
I would now quickly like to present several salient points of the work program in future, which 
we will be implemented gradually, as follows: 
First is to improve the coverage and quality of regional economic statistical data owned by 
KBI  and  integrate  the  reporting  of  regional  economic  statistics,  so  as  to  improve  the 
effectiveness of KBI’s policy advisory role. The information is to be compiled in DIBI, which 
can be accessed by all elements of the nation who require it. 
Second is to conduct strategic regional economic research concerning the opportunities and 
potential  of 
in  welcoming  AEC  2015,  MDG 
achievements, the effect of climate change on the economy and the welfare of the people, 
the production and distribution network, the structure-conduct-performance of industries, as 
well as the development of cultural and social capital. 
Third is to improve the facilitation role in KBI regarding banking intermediation to the micro-
small-medium enterprise group using DIBI and information held by BIK. 
Fourth is to analyze thoroughly the sources of regional inflation, develop an early detection 
system for regional inflation, coordinate with the local governments regarding the stabilization 
of  regional  inflation,  and  facilitate  the  establishment  of  a  Regional  Inflation  Stabilization 
Team. 
Fifth  is  to  improve  the  quality  and  utilization  of  the  libraries  in  KBI  as  well  as  making  the 
library a learning & cultural centre for the public of the respective region. As part of its role as 
a  learning  centre,  the  KBI  libraries  will  provide  reference  sources  for  entrepreneurs  and 
potential entrepreneurs in the regional areas. The availability of an adequate business library 
in this globalization era, in addition to widening the public’s skills in adapting to this era, can 
also open opportunities for those who are creative, innovative and independent to look for 
their own solution and therefore mobilize upwards. With its function as a cultural centre, KBI 
libraries  will  become  a  place  where  cultural  diversity  and  local  wisdom  is  read,  stored, 
studied and celebrated. 
the  regional  economy,  preparedness 
Conclusion 
V.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
This has been what I could present to you here this evening regarding the strategic initiatives 
to be taken by Bank Indonesia this year. Allow me to conclude, if you will, by delivering some 
footnotes as follows. 
44 
 BIS Review 8/2008
The  past  five  years  in  the  journey  of  post-crisis  economic  growth  has  been  a  transitional 
period from the clutches of a multidimensional crisis to reconsolidation of economic growth 
that strengthens the key foundations of our economy. The results of this reconsolidation are 
beginning to appear and now, therefore, comes the time for us to move away from policies 
focused on initially centring efforts towards economic recovery and restoring the social fabric 
of  a  society  decimated  by  a  serious  emergency,  towards  solidifying  this  social  fabric. 
Therefore, in the upcoming periods the time has come to gradually reduce our attention on 
rescue  operations  and  refocus  on  restructuring  efforts  that  provide  long-term  fundamental 
improvements. In the future, we want the establishment of an economic life that can compete 
globally, increase the prosperity of the public and adapt to the best practices in the world. 
Establishment  of  such  an  economic  life  requires  consistence,  patience  and  persistence  in 
taking  appropriate  improvement  measures  whenever  the  chance  presents  itself,  no  matter 
how small that step is. Even the longest journey begins with the first step… 
In line with the process to become more anticipative, a new aspect will affect us all in the 
near future that requires all of our attention, namely the commitment among governments of 
ASEAN countries to implement economic integration in the ASEAN region in 2015. Formally, 
this  commitment,  written  into  a  binding  agreement,  will  open  up  the economies of  ASEAN 
countries in the form of a free trade area. Irrespective of the final form, national economic 
policy will need to be adjusted to fit with this new trend. Thoughts and anticipative measure 
have to be prepared as soon as possible because formally the market opening process has 
been  agreed  to  be  in  effect  by  2015.  With  such  wide-reaching  developments  the  banking 
community is also required to prepare a number of changes and improvements institutionally, 
procedurally, technically, technologically and in terms of human resources development and 
capital. We have run tread this path together periodically and continue to apply international 
best practices, which have already been implemented around the world. 
The widespread growth I have mentioned also has internal implications for Bank Indonesia 
as one of the state institutions that plays a special role in the life of Indonesia. Many internal 
adjustments  also  need  to  be  taken  considering  the  upcoming  challenges.  This  includes 
paying attention to the operational and organizational implications on Bank Indonesia branch 
offices around the country. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
In  the  last  five  years  we  have  faced  many  fundamental  changes  in  the  dynamics  of  the 
economy, which in many aspects are the results of the great tide of economic globalization. 
In  terms  of  progress  as  a  civilization,  there  is  not  a  single  country  in  the  world  that  could 
resist  and  close  itself  away  from  globalization,  let  alone  reverse  such  a  process.  It  seems 
that the global economy is undergoing a rapid transition to become one large market, which 
will produce excess. 
The excess we have already felt is global warming due to a waste of production activity that 
is  growing  too  fast  compared  to  the  Earth’s  capacity  to  absorb  it.  The  effects  of  such  an 
excess  for  us  in  a  developing  country  cannot  be  ignored.  Global  warming  has  triggered 
climate change that has recently disrupted our efforts to expedite economic growth. We must 
surely  take  this  matter  seriously  since  for  the  majority  of  our  people  the  effect  of  climate 
change is the dimmed hope of a better life, which subsequently causes existential concerns. 
We also need to ensure that as a country and part of humankind, we do not fail to take care 
of the environment that is part of the crucial solution to climate change. 
Transition  of  the  global  economy  into  a  global  market  also  yields  a  wide  effect  on  human 
behavior as “homo economicus”. We have experienced changes in preference and vision of 
economic players on the life that they are living. In an analytic structure, these changes seem 
to be shaking the validity of casualty relationships between economic factors. A number of 
theories  we  previously  took  for  granted,  that  policymakers  could  base  their  important 
decisions  on,  are  gradually  changing  into  myths.  This  phenomenon  may  cause  confusion 
even  for  those  with  vast  experience  in  public  policy,  especially  since  addressing  this 
BIS Review 8/2008 
 45
the  policymaker 
to  continuously  deconstruct  and  reconstruct 
phenomenon  requires 
assumptions they base their analysis tools upon. Such an exercise possesses many risks, 
particularly  as  the  decision  of  public  policy  does  not  allow  the  luxury  of  repeatable 
experiments. Therefore, any mistakes in choosing which assumptions are the most accurate 
when formulating policy can have wide-reaching effects on the public’s welfare. In the end, 
public policy is an art form in grouping assumptions with policy considerations, for which the 
process requires wisdom, maturity and most importantly: guts and intuition. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Globalization has also alerted us to the importance of continuously ensuring that Indonesia is 
possibility  that  is  not  absurd.  When  this  republic  was  established  we  knew  that  there  was 
only a handful of people that did not question the possibility of Indonesia as an “imagined 
community”.  We  have  realized,  and  our  nation’s  forefathers  also  knew,  that  not  many 
countries  have  an  objective  chance  to  remain  intact  as  a  modern,  democratic  and  open 
country  amidst  the  mosaic  of  diversity  and  contrast.  Therefore,  to  borrow  from  an 
Indonesianist  at  Cornell  University,  Indonesia  as  an  imagined  community  is  a  common 
project that we need to strive for with positive achievements in all aspects of life. Ten years 
following the crisis is a perfect time for us to strengthen the viability of this great country that 
is  endowed  with  many  vital  foundations  for  the  advancement  of  humankind.  The  advice 
offered by Muhammad Hatta over 60 years ago remains pertinent to us at the beginning of 
the 21st century: 
“With struggle comes progress!   
 We should take advantage of the current transition we are facing to plant 
good seeds for the future of our country. This is a crucial moment that will 
determine our fate as a nation for centuries.” 
Finally, before I conclude, please allow me to offer my sincerest appreciation to my senior, 
who represents the generation before me, namely Mr. Rachmat Saleh, former Governor of 
Bank  Indonesia,  who  because  of  his  visionary  leadership  built  Bank  Indonesia  and  the 
Indonesian  banking  industry  as  crucial  economic  institutions.  Mr.  Rachmat  Saleh  was  the 
Governor of Bank Indonesia who purposefully promoted efforts to strengthen the institution 
and provide opportunities for Bank Indonesia staff to improve their professional knowledge 
and expertise. A successful leader is one who has created as many successors as possible, 
and that is exactly what Mr. Rachmat Saleh did. He also frequently reminded us to always 
maintain  the  unity  of  Bank  Indonesia,  as  a  strategic  institution  that  plays  a  decisive  public 
role  in  our  republic,  and  to  always  make  our  institution  better  in  fulfilling  its  function  as  a 
public  servant.  I  would  like  to  offer  our  most  heartfelt  gratitude  and  respect  from  all  Bank 
Indonesia  staff,  including  the  leadership,  to  Mr.  Rachmat  Saleh.  If  you  still  remember  15 
years back when I was talking with you at Bethesda-Maryland, I told you that you are ”the 
living legend”. Tonight I would like to reiterate my statement that you will always be ”the living 
legend” in Bank Indonesia’s history. May you be blessed with good health and continue to 
contribute to the progress of Bank Indonesia and our economy. 
Finally, Happy New Year 2008. Let us all keep working hard together. We believe that God 
will always be with us to bless and enlighten our path towards a better future. 
Thank you. Wassalamu’alaikum wr. Wb. 
46 
 BIS Review 8/2008
