Durmuş Yılmaz: Access to finance and capital markets development 
Speech by Mr Durmuş Yılmaz, Governor of the Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey, at 
the  XIIth  Euro-Mediterranean  Conference  on  Economic  Transition,  Bruxelles, 
20 February 2008. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen,  
Over  the  last  two  decades,  we  have  witnessed  a  dramatic  shift  towards  internationally 
integrated financial markets. In today’s world, asset prices and domestic interest rates have 
become increasingly determined by international developments rather than domestic factors. 
A  sharp  expansion  in  the  scale  of  capital  flows  is  one  manifestation  of  this  integration. 
Another indicator is the pace of financial innovation and corresponding surge in new financial 
instruments and markets. This rapid growth in financial markets has been accompanied by 
massive  economic  and  financial  deregulation,  which  has  enabled  financial  institutions  to 
move beyond national borders, making the conduct of monetary policy more complicated. 
In this rapidly changing financial environment, the position of a central bank in the financial 
system has become an important issue to address.  
It is generally accepted by many central bankers that the primary objective of the monetary 
policy should be to achieve and maintain price stability. Here, what is meant by price stability 
is low and stable inflation. 
Most central banks also acknowledge that they have a significant responsibility for ensuring a 
stable  financial  environment  in  which  both  financial  and  non-financial  institutions  operate. 
Unlike the primary mandate (price stability), the precise meaning of the second mandate is 
more  elusive.  Moreover,  central  banks  are  not  usually  alone  in  fulfilling  this  mandate.  In 
many countries central banks are in close cooperation with independent regulatory agencies. 
These  agencies  have  the  authority  of  regulation,  supervision  and  oversight  of  financial 
markets  and  institutions.  In  the  context  of  Turkish  financial  system,  we  have  two  such 
agencies: Banking Regulation and Supervision Agency and Capital Markets Board.  
At  this  point,  I  should  emphasize  that  price  stability  and  financial  stability  objectives  are 
complementary  in  nature.  Disruptions  in  financial  markets  would  eventually  affect  the  real 
economy through their impact on interest rates, exchange rates or asset prices. Thus, it is 
not far fetched to regard them as two sides of the same coin. 
Dear Guests, 
Financial  stability  lies  at  the  core  of  a  well-developed  financial  system.  And  the  smooth 
operation of payment and settlement systems is a prerequisite for financial stability.  
The  Bank  for  International  Settlements  defines  the  oversight  of  payment  and  settlement 
systems as a task left primarily to central banks with the objective of promoting the smooth 
functioning  of  payment  systems  and  protecting  the  financial  system  from  the  possible 
“domino  effects”  which  may  occur  when  one  or  more  participants  in  the  payment  system 
experience credit or liquidity problems. 
Central  Bank  of  Turkey  has  played  a  leadership  role  in  the  development  of  payment  and 
settlement  services  in  Turkey.  Today,  the  payment  system  is  fully  complied  with  the 
provisions of the CPSS (Committee on Payment and Settlement Systems) Core Principles 
for Systemically Important Payments Systems. 
Interbank funds and securities transfer are performed via the Interbank Clearing – Real Time 
Gross Settlement System that is supervised and operated by the Central Bank. This system 
commenced  operation  in  April  1992.  In  2000,  the  second  generation  Electronic  Fund 
Transfer System replaced its predecessor. Today, Electronic Fund Transfer System is a real-
BIS Review 21/2008 
 1
time  gross  settlement  system  in  line  with  best  international  practice.  Payments  are  settled 
individually  on  the  accounts  and  transferred  to  receiver  immediately.  Thanks  to  the 
infrastructure provided by Electronic Fund Transfer System, institutions and individuals can 
make  any  kind  of  payments  in  real  time  through  telephone  banking  or  internet  banking 
services free of charge or with minimum cost. A noteworthy feature of the payment system is 
that it was designed to process both large value and low value transactions. 
The  Central  Bank  of  Turkey  also  established  Interbank  Clearing  –  Electronic  Security 
Transfer  and  Settlement  System  for  real  time  electronic  transfer  and  settlement  of 
government bills and bonds. The system has been taken into operation in 2000 under the 
supervision  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Turkey.  It  is  fully  integrated  with  the  Electronic  Fund 
Transfer System and operates under delivery versus payment principal. 
The third pillar of the payment system in Turkish economy is the Interbank Cheque Clearing 
Houses Center. The Clearing House is a private legal entity that carries out the clearing and 
settlement of cheques under the supervision of the Central Bank. 
Today,  we  can  easily  say  that  payment  and  settlement  system  in  Turkey  is  at  par  with  its 
counterparts  in  developed  countries  promoting  the  efficiency  and  effectiveness  of  the 
financial system. 
Distinguished Guests,  
Removing market imperfections is essential for the smooth operation of financial system. In 
this  context  many  central  banks  have  been  involved  in  addressing  information  problems 
experienced in credit markets. At this point I will draw your attention for a few minutes to the 
asymmetric information problem, which can lead to credit rationing.  
It  is  known  that  obtaining  credit  information  to  ensure  sound-lending  activities  is  a  costly 
procedure requiring an efficient monitoring process. The lack of adequate information about 
a borrower’s credit solvency and the viability of a project may raise screening and monitoring 
costs  for  banks.  This  situation  sometimes  leads  banks  to  cut  credit  supply  or  make  them 
reluctant to supply loans. Of course, collateral based lending could ease banks’ reluctance 
as it partially reduces the risk involved in lending. However, collateral may play a limited role 
in  the  case  of  small  and  medium  size  enterprises  since  they  are  less  likely  to  possess 
appropriate collateral.  
In  order  to  improve  exchange  of  information  on  credit  history  of  a  borrower,  regulators  of 
many  countries  have  actively  involved  in  setting  up  public  credit  bureaus.  In  Turkey,  the 
Central Bank took the lead in setting up the Risk Center of Turkey in 1951. The Risk Center 
has  been  operating  within  the  Central  Bank  since  then.  This  database  enables  to  prevent 
extension of credit to a person or legal entity exceeding its payment capacity. Applications 
are based on data exchange on loan limit and risk information on bank customers, protested 
bills  information,  identity  information  of  the  customers  subject  to  non-performing  consumer 
loan  and  credit  card,  and  loan  limit  and  risk  information  on  customers  of  financial  leasing 
companies and factoring companies. Currently we are at the process of transferring the Risk 
Center Unit to the Banks Association of Turkey.  
A separate and private company was also set up by private banks in 1995 as Credit Bureau 
to  respond  to  the  demands  of  the  financial  community.  The  Credit  Bureau  promotes  the 
exchange  of  information  among  financial  institutions  about  the  credit  history  of  potential 
customers. 
I should also emphasize the importance of the new capital accord, the Basel-II. Along with 
the  implementation  of  Basel-II,  the  access  of  small  and  medium  size  enterprises  to  bank 
credit  will  depend  heavily  on  their  financial  and  organizational  structures.  According  to  the 
new  accord,  those  enterprises  that  adhere  to  sound  corporate  governance  principles  will 
have an advantage in access to cheaper finance through banking sector. They will also have 
better  access  to  finance  if  they  improve  their  financial  disclosure  standards.  Hence,  it  is 
2 
 BIS Review 21/2008
imperative for small and medium size enterprises to take the necessary steps and prepare 
themselves for the requirements of the Basel-II without any delay. 
At  this  point,  I  would  like  to  briefly  touch  another  obstacle  that  hinders  access  to  capital: 
Fiscal  dominance.  Due  to  high  level  of  public  sector  borrowing  requirements  in  many 
emerging  market  countries,  fiscal  policy  ultimately  governs  price  determination  in  financial 
markets. Fiscal dominance reduces the amount of loanable funds available to private sector 
and disrupts effective credit allocation in the economy. Turkey can be seen as a case study. 
Years of high real interest rates and budget deficits in the 1990s forced the Turkish banking 
sector  to  credit  rationing.  Banks  were  not  able  to  perform  their  intermediary  function 
effectively.  Instead,  they  mostly  financed  public  sector  deficits.  Fiscal  dominance  has 
gradually  eased  following  the  reform  program  enacted  after  the  2001  crisis.  The  declining 
public  debt  burden  and  the  diminishing  fiscal  dominance  in  Turkey  put  an  end  to  the 
crowding-out  of  the  real  sector.  That  boosted  the  supply  of  loanable  funds.  Banks  have 
returned  to  their  traditional  role  of  financial  intermediation  instead  of  financing  government 
expenditures. Share of  public securities in Turkish banking sector assets declined by one-
third to 28% in the last 5 years; while share of credits to private sector more than doubled 
and reached to 49% during the same period. The credits extended to the small and medium 
enterprises by Turkish banking sector have also increased significantly to USD 95 billion as 
of  2007.  This  corresponded  to  almost  20%  of  the  GDP.  As  a  further  note,  32%  of  these 
credits  were  in  the  category  of  credits  extended  to  micro  enterprises.  The  ratio  of  private 
sector credit used by households and firms to GDP has also rapidly increased, though it is 
still low in international standards.  
Of course, raising the share of private credits in the financial system does not necessarily 
mean that each and every segment of the population would gain access to financial services. 
The low-income segment of the society, in particular, may not have access to capital and that 
would have two principal adverse effects. First, they may not be able to raise the expected 
value  of  their  income  and  therefore  of  consumption  and  future  investment  and  asset 
accumulation. Second, due to lack of access to credit, the poor would face high variation in 
their  income  and  consumption,  and  the  downward  risk  on  income  threatens  their  ability  to 
satisfy basic consumption needs.  
Increasing the funds available for entrepreneurs that have micro-scale business plans but do 
not  have  access  to  credit,  have  merits  such  as  contributing  to  the  production  level  and 
unemployment ratio while also strengthening the social structure of a country. Of course, it 
should be noted here that while the benefits from financing these activities are more or less 
common,  selection  of  main  business  areas  where  these  funds  should  be  used  obviously 
depends on country specific circumstances and needs. 
Dear Guests,  
In  the  last  part  of  my  speech,  I  would  like  to  share  with  you  my  thoughts  on  the  external 
sources of “access to finance”.  
As I touched upon initially, financial innovation and financial integration have led to explosive 
growth in the international movement of capital. These flows serve as an important catalyst 
for domestic financial market development, as reflected both in the size of the banking sector 
and equity markets, as well as the quality of institutions for supervision and regulation.  
In recent years, attention has been given on how macroeconomic policies should respond to 
the unexpectedly big wave of capital flows to many emerging market economies. Regardless 
of the form or way of these inflows, they create important challenges for policymakers due to 
their potential to cause overheating of economies. 
Emerging market countries have responded to address these concerns in a variety of ways, 
such as exchange rate alignments, efforts to neutralize the monetary impact of interventions 
through  sterilization,  and  controls  on  capital  flows.  At  this  point,  I  should  note  that 
coordinated  fiscal  and monetary  policies  are  necessary  to  attract  high  quality  capital  flows 
BIS Review 21/2008 
 3
to 
investors 
the  extent  of  government’s  commitment 
and  to  manage  flows  efficiently  regardless  of  their  type.  Low  inflation  and  prudent  fiscal 
polices  signal 
to  achieve 
macroeconomic stability and adds to the credibility of the government.  On the other hand, 
efforts in the field of financial supervision and regulation, together with policies such as labor 
and  product  market  reforms  are  important  for  the  stability  and  soundness  of  financial 
systems in handling capital inflows. Regulatory and supervisory authorities should strengthen 
prudential  and  other  financial  market  regulations  in  order  to  deepen  financial  markets  and 
improve investment climate, whereas central banks should focus more on greater currency 
flexibility and price stability. 
In  conclusion,  as  a  central  banker,  I  would  like  to  highlight  three  key  messages  from  the 
thoughts I have shared with you.  
First,  to  achieve  price  stability,  central  banks  need  to  ensure  efficiency  of  financial 
infrastructure and maintain smooth operation of financial services. An efficient and effective 
payment and settlement system is at the core of financial infrastructure.  
Second,  removing  market  imperfections  is  essential  for  the  smooth  operation  of  financial 
systems.  Establishment  of  credit  bureaus  to  improve  exchange  of  information  on  credit 
history  of  economic  agents  and  reducing  fiscal  dominance  are  important  steps  to  ensure 
sound-lending activities. In this context, the role of micro finance in promoting the access of 
the low-income segment of the society to credit should be supported and encouraged. 
Third,  the  overall  level  of  external  financing  and  its  composition  is  important  for  domestic 
access to finance. The benefits of capital inflows to economic growth would be higher with a 
developed  financial  sector.  Central  banks  could  best  support  this  process  through  their 
contribution to macroeconomic stability.  
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS Review 21/2008
