Nout Wellink: Wim Duisenberg's legacy as President of the Netherlands 
Bank  
Speech by Dr Nout Wellink, President of the Netherlands Bank and Chairman of the Basel 
Committee  on  Banking  Supervision,  at  the  inaugural  event  for  the  Willem  F  Duisenberg 
Fellowship, Amsterdam, 28 February 2008. 
 the  wage  share  of  national 
I am honoured to be here today, at the inauguration of the Willem F. Duisenberg fellowship, 
and to have the opportunity to introduce to you Professor Tito Boeri, who will give the first 
Duisenberg lecture. DNB encourages the initiative to continue this successful fellowship, and 
we  are  privileged  that  it  has  been  given  the  name  of  DNB’s  former  president  Wim 
Duisenberg. I have many lively memories of Wim Duisenberg, some dating back more than 
30 years.  
Today I would like to take a closer look at the period when Duisenberg was president of the 
Nederlandsche  Bank,  the  years  between  1982  and  1997.  Viewing  back,  from  the  current 
period of financial turmoil, those years may seem remote and relatively quiet. However, there 
was some turmoil at that time as well, and I think that our experience of that time remains 
relevant today.  
When Duisenberg became president of DNB in the early 1980s, the world economy was in a 
bad shape. The Bretton Woods system of fixed exchange rates had collapsed and the world 
had  been  shocked  by  two  oil  crises.  The  advanced  economies  were  entering  a  deep 
recession. In the Netherlands, the economy suffered from what became known as the “Dutch 
disease”. Essentially, it meant that we were living beyond our means, financed by the income 
from natural gas. As a consequence, the public sector expanded rapidly, including the social 
security  system.  Moreover, 
income  exploded,  and 
competitiveness  of  the  Dutch  business  sector  deteriorated.  To  top  off  all  this,  in  1982, 
inflation  was  very  high,  around  6%,  the  budget  deficit  was  9%  of  national  income,  and 
unemployment rate was almost 8%, more than doubled from two years earlier. Altogether, 
the economic situation was rather depressing, at the start of Duisenberg’s presidency.  
After  the  collapse  of  the  Bretton  Woods  system  in  1971,  Dutch  monetary  policy  remained 
directed  at  the  exchange  rate  of  the  guilder.  A  strong  currency  was  regarded  as  the  best 
guarantee against imported inflation. Since Germany had a strong anti-inflation record, Dutch 
exchange  rate  policy  amounted  to  keeping  a  stable  exchange  rate  against  the  DM.  The 
Netherlands was the first country to adopt this policy, and Duisenberg had already defended 
it strongly when he was Minister of Finance (73-77).  
During  Duisenberg's  entire  presidency,  the  Netherlands  was  a  participant  in  the  ERM,  the 
exchange rate mechanism of the European Union, that had started in 1979. Throughout the 
first turbulent phase of the ERM, until 1983, the guilder remained the strongest currency in 
the  ERM.  In  1983  the  guilder  was  devalued  for  the  second  time,  and  last  time  ever.  The 
devaluation  in  1983  was  against  the  advice  of  Duisenberg,  and  for  years  the  loss  of 
confidence  by  the  financial  markets  was  felt  through  higher  interest  rates.  In  the  end,  this 
episode  strengthened  Duisenberg  in  his  resolve  to  defend  the  exchange  rate,  even  if 
significant  interest  hikes  were  required.  By  acting  like  that,  Duisenberg  quickly  restored 
credibility  in  the  markets,  and  in  the  course  of  that  proved  that  credibility  is  achieved  by 
action, not by words.  
Still,  politicians  were  not  always  convinced  that  the  exchange  rate  had  priority  over  the 
interest rate. In 1992, for example, another Minister of finance (Kok, in 1992) indicated that 
an  interest  rate  increase  was  undesirable.  Duisenberg  took  the  unusual  step  not  to  follow 
Germany 
important  rate 
(beleningsrente).  It  was  accompanied  by  a  press  communiqué,  indicating  the  Bank's 
the  headline  rate,  but 
instead  raised  a 
in  raising 
less 
BIS Review 24/2008 
 1
dedication  to  fight  inflation  through  a  strong  guilder.  This  illustrated  Duisenberg's  ability  to 
avoid a public conflict about interest rates, a conflict that certainly had negatively affected the 
exchange rate.  
A major test of the ERM and the Dutch exchange rate policy, came in 1992 and 93, when 
speculative  attacks  caused  several  crises.  In  this  phase  the  guilder-DM  rate  was  the  only 
exchange  rate  that  was  not  under  attack.  The  guilder-DM  peg  appeared  to  be  the  most 
credible and tightest bilateral exchange rate within the ERM. Looking back, this can only be 
explained by the credibility of Dutch exchange rate policy in the previous years.  
The process towards Economic and Monetary Union, which started in the 1970s, was in full 
progress  during  Duisenberg's  presidency.  In  the  1980s  capital  markets  gradually  became 
less restricted, culminating in 1990, with the start of stage I of the EMU. On many occasions, 
Duisenberg explained that free capital flows were in the interest of The Netherlands. As a 
small, open economy, the Netherlands could only benefit from international cooperation, free 
trade  and  free  capital  markets.  Duisenberg  advocated  the  opinion  that  integration  of 
monetary policy was the inevitable reply to this liberalization of European money and capital 
markets.  
Returning again to the start of Duisenberg's presidency, the high inflation and interest rates 
in  that  period  had  a  serious  effect  on  the  real  estate  market.  In  the  early  1980s  several 
mortgage  banks  ran  into  trouble.  In  1983  one  of  them,  the  Tilburgsche  Hypotheekbank, 
became  insolvent.  This  mortgage  bank  crisis  was  a  serious  test  for  the  new  prudential 
supervision  regime  of  DNB,  the  Wtk  of  1978.  Duisenberg  indicated  firmly  that  supervision 
could only minimize the probability of failures, not exclude them. He showed that this tough 
policy line could be complemented by careful steering towards a private sector solution. Two 
of  the  mortgage  banks  could  be  rescued  by  other  institutions,  which  benefited  all 
stakeholders, including the creditors. Ultimately, 95% of the liabilities of the failed Tilburgsche 
Hypotheekbank could be paid off.  
Duisenberg took a clear stand with respect to budgetary policy. Starting with his first annual 
report,  Duisenberg  has  always  maintained  that  DNB  would  not  support  an  expansionary 
budgetary  policy  that  would  result  in  unsustainable  deficits.  A  view  like  that  was  not  at  all 
obvious  in  the  1970s  and  80s.  Between  the  second  world  war  and  the  1970s,  Dutch 
economic  policy  had  been  of  a  Keynesian  nature,  with  scope  for  activist,  counter-cyclical 
budgetary  stimulus.  Early  1980s,  the  consensus  view  changed  gradually  towards  a  more 
restrictive  budgetary  policy.  With  patience  and  perseverance,  Duisenberg  continued  to 
explain  the  adverse  economic  consequences  of  a  high  budget  deficit.  His  main  argument 
was  the  upward  effect  on  interest  rates,  which  reduced  private  investment  and  economic 
growth. Also, Duisenberg had the view that the Dutch welfare state could not be supported in 
the  long  run  if  budgetary  policy  would  not  change  its  course.  Finally,  Duisenberg  argued, 
international  coordination  of  economic  policy  required  a  budgetary  situation  that  is  under 
control and on a sustainable path. In a sense, he gave early arguments for the Stability and 
Growth Pact, that was signed in 1997.  
Duisenberg's  view  on  economic  policy  was  completed  by  respecting  the  crucial  role  of 
employers and employees in setting wages and labour costs. Next to stable exchange rates, 
low  inflation  and  low  capital  market  rates,  wage  moderation  was  central  to  improve  the 
financial  health  of  the  private  sector.  That  would  lay  the  foundations  for  an  improved 
investment  climate,  supporting  labour  demand.  Here,  the  central  bank  had  little  more 
instruments  than  to  use  its  weight  and  try  to  influence  the  private  sector.  The  famous 
Wassenaar  agreement  of  1982,  was  supported  by  DNB,  because  it  offered  scope  for 
restoring profitability of the business sector.  
At the end of Duisenberg's presidency, some concluded, rather optimistically, that a Dutch 
miracle had replaced the Dutch disease. The Dutch economy had experienced a successful 
recovery that can be ascribed to many factors: monetary and budgetary stability, as well as 
wage moderation and structural changes in labour and product markets. It is safe to say that 
2 
 BIS Review 24/2008
Duisenberg contributed to all of these factors. When one would try to summarize the legacy 
of  Duisenberg's  DNB  presidency,  I  think  the  first  central  theme  is  his  aim  for  stability.  He 
achieved that stability by a persistent policy and staying the course. Frequently, he had to 
defend this kind of policy line, for example regarding interest rate adjustments in view of the 
exchange rate. In Dutch he described this kind of policy as “stug”, translated as stiff or tough. 
“Stug” has the subtle connotation that he did not expect much initial cooperation in his policy 
line towards stability.  
Another central theme for Duisenberg was his relentless focus on the benefit of the Dutch 
society.  This  may  sound  self-evident  for  a  policymaker,  but  Duisenberg  interpreted  this 
differently from a politician. He demonstrated that a central banker should look at the long 
term costs and benefits. To give an example, at the time when politicians were celebrating 
the proceeds of natural gas production – 6% of GDP in 1981 – Duisenberg stressed that this 
was  only  temporary  and  warned  that  painful  adjustments  would  be  necessary  in  the  long 
term.  
The  last  central  theme  that  characterizes  Duisenberg's  presidency  is  his  European  focus. 
With  respect  to  economic  policy,  Duisenberg  continuously  stressed  that  an  “Alleingang” 
would be catastrophic for the economic well-being of nations. An integrating world, with all its 
complexities and risks, required international cooperation and coordination. Duisenberg was 
aware  as  well,  that  a  single  monetary  policy  would  not  always  match  with  local 
developments.  His  message  is  that  the  remaining  channels  to  adapt  to  country-specific 
shocks  should  be  safeguarded  and  strengthened.  That  is  the  main  reason  for  his  strong 
support  for  sustainable  public  finances  and  flexible  labour  markets.  Duisenberg's  strong 
support  for  international  coordination,  combined  with  his  global  view,  earned  him  much 
support,  and  were  highly  valued  when  he  was  the  first  president  of  the  European  Central 
Bank.  
Let  me  now  conclude,  by  introducing  the  speaker  of  today’s  main  lecture,  Professor  Tito 
Boeri. Professor Boeri has been appointed three months ago as the first Duisenberg Fellow. 
He  is  currently  at  Bocconi  University  in  Milan,  where  he  also  acts  as  Director  of  the 
Fondazione  Rodolfo  Debenedetti.  Professor  Boeri  is  a  research  fellow  at  two  outstanding 
international  institutes  for  applied  economic  research:  the  Centre  for  Economic  Policy 
Research (CEPR) in London and the IZA (Institut zur Zukunft der Arbeit) in Bonn. His main 
research topic is the labour market, but he has also published on immigration, social security, 
pension  systems  and  transition  economics.  Professor  Boeri  has  published  in  top-rated 
economic journals, while also having worked with organizations like the OECD, the European 
Commission,  the  International  Monetary  Fund,  and  the  Italian  Government.  This  indicates 
that Professor Boeri has the rare, but, in my opinion, invaluable mix of being both skilled in 
academic  research  and  in  applied,  policy  oriented  activities.  Today,  we  will  have  the 
opportunity to benefit from this, as he will speak, in the first Willem F. Duisenberg lecture, 
about “The disappearance of mass unemployment in Europe”. 
BIS Review 24/2008 
 3
