Jean-Claude Trichet: The entry of Slovakia into the euro area 
Speech by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, at the “Slovakia 
Euro Changeover Conference”, Bratislava, 22 September 2008. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
It is a great pleasure to be with you here, in Bratislava, at this conference taking place a few 
weeks before Slovakia joins the euro area in January 2009. Let me first congratulate all the 
parties who have been involved in the preparation and implementation of the euro adoption 
strategy since 2004. Today, we are looking forward to the launch of the single currency in 
Slovakia next January. This country will become the 16th member of the euro area.  
Slovakia’s economic achievements on its way to the euro 
1.  
I would like to stress that the transition to the euro of any national economy is a challenge 
that needs to be prepared for carefully. Slovakia, after some early difficulties, has proved to 
be  a  real  success  story  in  recent  years,  enjoying  strong  economic  growth  and  a  marked 
increase  in  employment.  Average  annual  real  GDP  growth  reached  a  remarkable  8.5% 
between 2005 and 2007, and average annual employment growth was close to 3% in that 
period. 
Slovakia  has  made  notable  progress  in  both  nominal  and  real  convergence.  In  respect  of 
nominal convergence, inflation was rather volatile in the first half of this decade. But recently, 
the economy has seen a gradual decline in HICP inflation, reaching 1.9% in 2007, although 
in  the  first  half  of  2008  it  rose  to  3.7%.  As  the  ECB  has  always  stressed,  low-inflation 
environment  attained  in  the  recent  past  will  need  to  be  confirmed  and  sustained  over  the 
years to come. The convergence of long-term interest rates has been even more dynamic, 
as they are now at around 5%, more than a third less than they were earlier this decade. It’s 
a change that reflects the confidence of financial markets participants in the policies pursued 
by the authorities. 
Some progress has also been achieved with regard to the consolidation of public finances. 
However, the ECOFIN Council brought the excessive deficit procedure for Slovakia to an end 
as  recently  as  June  this  year.  Looking  ahead,  an  ambitious  additional  consolidation  effort 
appears necessary if Slovakia is to reach its medium-term objective for the structural deficit 
of 0.8% of GDP in 2010.  
The vitality of the country’s economy can be seen by comparing its real GDP growth with that 
of the euro area. Between 2000 and 2007 average economic growth in Slovakia was 5.6%, 
significantly  above  the  average  economic  growth  in  the  euro  area.  This  resulted  in  real 
economic  convergence  as  the  GDP  per  inhabitant  in  purchasing  power  parity  terms  as  a 
percentage of the GDP per inhabitant of the “euro area” increased from below 44% in 2000 
to above 62% in 2007. The good times for the Slovak economy are exemplified by rising real 
incomes.  Importantly,  the  gains  in  prosperity  have  also  spread  beyond  the  country’s 
economic  heart  in  Bratislava,  even  though  considerable  disparities  between  regions  still 
exist. 
Slovakia  has  experienced  only  limited  external  economic  imbalances  in  recent  years.  The 
current  account  deficit  remained  relatively  contained  in  the  past  few  years  and,  due  to 
increasing export capacities, it has in fact been shrinking lately. Unit labour costs have until 
recently favoured the competitiveness of Slovak producers.  
The koruna has participated in the exchange rate mechanism II since November 2005. The 
underlying  strong  macroeconomic  performance  has  led  to  a  gradual  appreciation  of  the 
BIS Review 114/2008 
 1
nominal  exchange  rate  against  the  euro,  without  impairing  the  competitiveness  of  Slovak 
exporters.  Reflecting  strong  macroeconomic  fundamentals,  the  central  parity  of  the  Slovak 
koruna against the euro was revalued by 8.5% and 17.65% in March 2007 and May 2008, 
respectively.  
Economic  progress  in  Slovakia  has  been  based  on  a  series  of  structural  reforms.  The 
substantial reforms of taxes and social benefits together with a greater flexibility in product 
and labour markets have brought Slovakia to the attention of foreign investors. The ensuing 
inflow of foreign direct investment has boosted the economy and promoted rapid real GDP 
growth.  
And these days, more than ever, the pace of reforms from earlier years has to be maintained 
in order to reap all the benefits of euro adoption.  
Sustainable convergence is key  
2.  
Euro  adoption  by  Slovakia  implies  that  the  benefits  of  the  Single  Market  will  be  further 
enhanced by the single currency. The euro offers a credible framework for price stability as it 
removes  exchange  rate  uncertainty  within  the  euro  area.  Slovakia  will  benefit  from  the 
stability-oriented  policy  of  the  ECB,  which  will  help  to  anchor  inflation  expectations. 
Furthermore, euro adoption may help to shield Slovakia, a small and highly open economy, 
against  the  effects  of  international  financial  turbulence,  which  often  has  disproportionate 
effects on smaller economies.  
However, for the euro to remain a success story in Slovakia, the national authorities will need 
to be very alert and pursue ambitious economic policies on all fronts. Our main concern is 
that Slovakia, being a catching-up economy, is likely to face inflationary pressures that could 
derail  the  economy  from  a  sustainable  convergence  path  after  euro  adoption.  Top  priority 
must  therefore  be  given  to  the  sustainable  economic  convergence  of  the  Slovak  economy 
towards  the  more  mature  countries  of  the  euro  area.  This  certainly  cannot  be  seen  as  an 
automatic outcome of joining the euro area – indeed, it will require major efforts in the years 
to come from all parties concerned.  
We  appreciate  the  fact  that  the  Slovak  authorities  have  firmly  committed  themselves  to 
pursuing  appropriate  supportive  policies  –  ones  which  aim  in  particular  to  maintain 
sustainable  convergence,  underpin  external  competitiveness  and  strengthen  economic 
resilience. Fulfilling these commitments is vital for the Slovak economy to function smoothly 
within the euro area.  
Let me stress three areas that we consider crucial for preserving sustainable convergence in 
Slovakia.  
Firstly, after euro adoption, when monetary policy is no longer autonomous, a rigorous and 
credible  implementation  of  fiscal  policy  in  line  with  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact 
commitments is essential to contain inflationary pressures in the economy. To this purpose, 
the  fiscal  adjustment  in  structural  terms  must  be  at  least  0.5%  of  GDP  per  year  until  the 
medium-term objective is reached in 2010.  
Secondly, the functioning of Slovakia’s labour market must be further improved and the high 
structural unemployment reduced. While the reform of the educational system might help to 
reduce unemployment in the medium term, making labour legislation more flexible as well as 
eliminating  existing  wage  rigidities  would  help  to  alleviate  pressures  in  the  labour  market 
more  rapidly.  Any  temptation  to  introduce  wage  indexation  schemes  should  be  resisted; 
social partners should focus on labour productivity growth and competitiveness as the main 
factors in any wage adjustments. Refraining from any kind of mechanical wage indexation is 
particularly important today to avoid any spillovers from the recent more elevated levels of 
inflation to wages and salaries.  
2 
 BIS Review 114/2008
Thirdly,  the  authorities  must  also  focus  on  further  improving  the  business  environment  in 
Slovakia in order to enhance productivity growth and continue to attract foreign capital. The 
strengthening of the competitive environment should be seen as a prerequisite for any further 
initiatives.  
Commitment  by  all  policy  actors  is  key.  Only  a  decisive  approach  by  the  government  and 
social  partners  in  these  areas  would,  in  our  view,  help  to  keep  Slovakia’s  inflation  on  a 
sustainable track in the future.  
The Slovak authorities must be ambitious in pursuing sound economic policies that, jointly 
with  the  stability-oriented  policy  of  the  ECB,  will  bring  sustainable  economic  growth,  job 
creation and social cohesion for the people of Slovakia.  
Preparations for the changeover 
3.  
The ECB values the fruitful cooperation that has developed with Národná banka Slovenska 
over  the  last  couple  of  years.  The  Governor  of  the  National  Bank  of  Slovakia  has  been  a 
member of the General Council of the ECB since May 2004 and an observer at the meetings 
of the Governing Council of the ECB since mid-July 2008.  
On 1 January 2009 the euro will become legal tender in Slovakia. Great efforts have already 
been made, and even greater ones will be made, to ensure that the people of Slovakia are 
well-informed about euro coins and euro banknotes, and in particular their security features. 
The  European  Central  Bank  and  the  Eurosystem  have  helped  in  the  preparations  for  the 
introduction of the euro in Slovakia.  
188  million  euro  banknotes  will  initially  be  needed,  and  these  will  be  taken  from  the 
Eurosystem stocks. The Oesterreichische Nationalbank, as the closest euro area neighbour, 
will be arranging the delivery of the cash, on behalf of the Eurosystem.  
While euro cash is already being used to some extent in Slovakia due to its proximity to the 
euro  area,  the  pre-launch  distribution  of  euro  cash  to  banks  –  the  “frontloading”  –  and  its 
subsequent “sub-frontloading” to retailers and other businesses remains important in order to 
make banknotes and coins widely available as quickly as possible. The frontloading has just 
begun. In addition, 1.2 million coin mini kits will be sold to the public as from 1 December. 
The  Eurosystem  will  continue  to  support  the  campaign  informing  people  about  their  new 
currency  and  its  introduction.  As  part  of  this  joint  campaign,  many  seminars  and  training 
sessions have been held, and over seven million copies of various publications – that’s more 
than the country’s population – have been produced by the ECB. Over two million leaflets 
and  four  million  conversion  cards,  which  show  the  most  important  security  features  of  the 
€20 banknote, will shortly be sent to all households in the country by the National Bank of 
Slovakia. The bank wants to be certain that everyone is well prepared for the changeover.  
One symbol of the excellent partnership between Národná banka Slovenska and the ECB is 
the Euro Exhibition, which I had the honour to open yesterday. It will give the public a chance 
to  learn  more  about  their  new  currency.  It’s  one  of  many  joint  efforts  that  will  lead  to  the 
successful launch of the euro in Slovakia. I’m confident of this.  
Ladies and gentlemen, let me again congratulate you all on your achievements during the 
run-up  to  the  euro  in  Slovakia.  I’d  also  like  to  take  this  opportunity  to  urge  the  Slovak 
authorities to continue with their prudent economic policies. In other words, to remain on the 
path of fiscal consolidation so as to improve the sustainability of public finances and also to 
keep working on structural reforms. These policies should address the real challenges that 
lie ahead.  
Even  though  it  is  a  little  while  until  the  euro  becomes  a  reality  in  people’s  wallets,  I  am 
looking forward to welcoming Národná banka Slovenska to the Eurosystem, and Slovakia to 
the euro area. Vitaj Slovensko! Welcome, Slovakia! 
BIS Review 114/2008 
 3
