European Central Bank: Press conference – introductory statement 
Introductory statement by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank 
and Mr Lucas Papademos, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, Frankfurt am Main, 
4 September 2008. 
 Ladies  and  gentlemen,  the  Vice-President  and  I  are  very  pleased  to  welcome  you  to  our 
press conference. We will now report on the outcome of today’s meeting of the Governing 
Council, which was also attended by Commissioner Almunia. 
On the basis of our regular economic and monetary analyses, at today’s meeting we decided 
to leave the key ECB interest rates unchanged. The information that has become available 
since  the  last  meeting  has  confirmed  that  annual  inflation  rates  are  likely  to  remain  well 
above  levels  consistent  with  price  stability  for  a  protracted  period  of  time  and  that  upside 
risks to price stability over the medium term prevail. While the growth of broad money and 
credit aggregates is now showing some signs of moderation, the still strong underlying pace 
of  monetary  expansion  points  to  continued  upside  risks  to  price  stability  over  the  medium 
term. The latest economic data also confirm the weakening of real GDP growth in mid-2008. 
This  reflects  partly  an  expected  technical  reaction  to  the  strong  growth  seen  in  the  first 
quarter as well as dampening effects from global and domestic factors, including direct and 
indirect  effects  from  high  commodity  prices.  In  this  environment,  it  remains  imperative  to 
avoid  broad-based  second-round  effects  in  price  and  wage-setting.  In  full  accordance  with 
our mandate, we emphasise that maintaining price stability in the medium term is our primary 
objective  and  that  we  are  resolute  in  our  determination  to  keep  medium  and  long-term 
inflation expectations firmly anchored in line with price stability. This will preserve purchasing 
power in the medium term and support sustainable growth and employment. On the basis of 
our assessment, the current monetary policy stance will contribute to achieving our objective. 
We will continue to monitor very closely all developments over the period ahead.  
Allow me to explain our assessment in greater detail, starting with the economic analysis.  
According  to  Eurostat’s  first  estimate,  following  strong  quarterly  growth  of  0.7%  in  the  first 
quarter, euro area real GDP contracted by 0.2% in the second quarter of 2008. In terms of 
quarter-on-quarter  growth,  private  consumption  declined  by  0.2%  and  there  was  a 
perceptible weakness in investment, which fell by 1.2%.  Growth in both euro area imports 
and exports declined by 0.4%. 
Taking  into  account  all  available  information,  the  euro  area  economy  is  currently 
experiencing an episode of weak activity characterised by high commodity prices weighing 
on  consumer  confidence  and  demand,  as  well  as  by  dampened  investment  growth.  We 
expect this episode to be followed by a gradual recovery. In particular, if persistent, the fall in 
oil prices from their peak in July will help strengthen real disposable income, with the level of 
employment  remaining  high  and  the  unemployment  rate  low  by  historical  standards. 
Moreover, growth in the world economy is expected to remain relatively resilient, benefiting 
mainly from sustained growth in emerging economies. This should support external demand 
for euro area goods and services and thereby investment.  
This outlook is also reflected in the September 2008 ECB staff macroeconomic projections 
for the euro area. The exercise projects average annual real GDP growth in a range between 
1.1% and 1.7% in 2008, and between 0.6% and 1.8% in 2009. In comparison with the June 
Eurosystem staff projections, real GDP growth figures for 2008 and 2009 are lower.  
In the view of the Governing Council, the uncertainty surrounding this outlook for economic 
activity  is  particularly  high  at  the  current  juncture  and,  generally,  downside  risks  prevail. 
Risks  stem  particularly  from  renewed  increases  in  energy  and  food  prices,  which  could 
dampen  consumption  and  investment.  Moreover,  downside  risks  continue  to  relate  to  the 
BIS Review 105/2008 
 1
potential  for  the  financial  market  tensions  to  affect  the  real  economy  more  adversely  than 
currently  foreseen.  The  possibility  of  disorderly  developments  owing  to  global  imbalances 
also implies downside risks to the outlook for economic activity, as do concerns about rising 
protectionist pressures. 
With regard to price developments, annual HICP inflation has remained considerably above 
the  level  consistent  with  price  stability  since  last  autumn,  standing  at  3.8%  in  August 
according to Eurostat’s flash estimate, after 4.0% in June and July 2008. This worrying level 
of inflation is largely the result of both the direct and indirect effects of past surges in energy 
and  food  prices  at  the  global  level. Moreover,  wage  growth  has  been  picking up in  recent 
quarters,  at  a  time  when  labour  productivity  growth  has  decelerated,  resulting  in  sharp 
increases in unit labour costs.  
Looking ahead, on the basis of current commodity futures prices, the annual HICP inflation 
rate is likely to remain well above levels consistent with price stability for quite some time, 
moderating  only  gradually  during  the  course  of  2009.  Consistent  with  this  view,  the 
September  ECB  staff  projections  foresee  average  annual  HICP  inflation  at  between  3.4% 
and 3.6% in 2008, and between 2.3% and 2.9% in 2009. The higher inflation projections for 
2008 and 2009 mainly reflect higher energy prices and, to a lesser extent, higher food and 
services prices than assumed previously.  
In  this  context,  it  is  important  to  recall  the  conditional  nature  of  the  ECB  staff  projections. 
They  are  based  on  a  number  of  assumptions  that  are  of  a  purely  technical  nature  and 
unrelated to policy intentions. In particular, the technical assumptions for short-term interest 
rates  reflect  market  expectations  as  at  mid-August.  Moreover,  it  should  be  noted  that  the 
projections  are  based  on  the  assumption  that  oil  and  non-oil  commodity  prices,  while 
remaining at elevated levels, will exhibit greater stability over the projection horizon than has 
been the case in recent months, in line with prevailing futures prices.  
It is the Governing Council’s view that, at the policy-relevant medium-term horizon, there are 
upside  risks  to  the  outlook  for  price  developments.  These  risks  include  the  possibility  of 
renewed  increases  in  commodity  prices  and  of  previous  rises  having  further  and  stronger 
indirect  effects  on  consumer  prices.  There  is  particularly  a  very  strong  concern  that  the 
emergence of broad-based second-round effects in price and wage-setting behaviour could 
add significantly to inflationary pressures. Moreover, the upside risks to price stability could 
be aggravated by unexpected rises in indirect taxes and administered prices.  
Against  this  background,  it  is  imperative  to  ensure  that  medium  to  longer-term  inflation 
expectations remain firmly anchored at levels in line with price stability. Broad-based second-
round effects stemming from the impact of higher energy and food prices on price and wage-
setting  behaviour  must  be  avoided.  The  Governing  Council  is  monitoring  price-setting 
behaviour  and  wage  negotiations  in  the  euro  area  with  particular  attention.  All  parties 
concerned – in both the private and the public sectors – must meet their responsibilities in 
this  regard.  The  Governing  Council  has  repeatedly  expressed  its  concern  about  the 
existence  of  schemes  in  which  nominal  wages  are  indexed  to  consumer  prices.  Such 
schemes involve the risk of upward shocks in inflation leading to a wage-price spiral, which 
would  be  detrimental  to  employment  and  competitiveness  in  the  countries  concerned.  The 
Governing Council calls for these schemes to be abolished. 
The monetary analysis confirms the prevailing upside risks to price stability at medium to 
longer-term  horizons.  In  line  with  our  monetary  policy  strategy,  we  take  the  view  that  the 
sustained  underlying  strength  of  monetary  and  credit  expansion  in  the  euro  area  over  the 
past few years has created upside risks to price stability. Over recent quarters, these risks 
appear to have become manifest as inflation has trended upwards. 
Not  least  in  the  face  of  the  ongoing  tensions  in  financial  markets,  the  monetary  analysis 
helps  to  support  the  necessary  medium-term  orientation  of  monetary  policy  by  focusing 
attention on the upside risks to price stability prevailing at medium to longer horizons. While 
the growth of broad money and credit aggregates is now showing some signs of moderation, 
2 
 BIS Review 105/2008
reflecting the policy measures taken since 2005 to address risks to price stability, the strong 
underlying pace of monetary expansion points to continued upside risks to price stability over 
the medium term.  
The currently flat yield curve has given rise to a substitution from longer maturity assets into 
monetary  instruments,  which  offer  similar  remuneration  but  greater  liquidity  and  less  risk. 
This substitution has led the current headline rate of M3 growth to overstate the underlying 
pace  of  monetary  expansion.  At  the  same  time,  shifts  out  of  overnight  deposits  drove  the 
annual  growth  rate  of  M1  down  further  in  July.  These  effects,  as  well  as  other  temporary 
factors,  must  be  taken  into  account  when  assessing  monetary  developments  and  their 
implications.  A  broad-based  analysis  of  the  data,  taking  the  appropriate  medium-term 
perspective and allowing for these considerations, confirms the underlying strength of money 
growth.  
In particular, the pace, maturity and sectoral composition of borrowing from banks suggest 
that, at the level of the euro area as a whole, the availability of bank credit has, as yet, not 
been significantly affected by the ongoing financial tensions. This notwithstanding, growth in 
loans now shows signs of moderation, as previously anticipated, with corporate demand for 
credit slowing. At the same time, the growth of loans to households continues to follow the 
downward trend observed over the past few years, as a result of higher short-term interest 
rates and housing market weakness in several parts of the euro area.  
To  sum  up,  a  cross-check  of  the  outcome  of  the  economic  analysis  with  that  of  the 
monetary analysis clearly confirms the assessment of upside risks to price stability over the 
medium  term.  The  information  that  has  become  available  since  the  last  meeting  of  the 
Governing Council has confirmed that annual inflation rates are likely to remain well above 
levels  consistent  with  price  stability  for  a  protracted  period  of  time.  The  growth  of  broad 
money and credit aggregates is now showing some signs of moderation, but the still strong 
underlying pace of monetary expansion points to continued risks to price stability over the 
medium term. The latest economic data also confirm the weakening of real GDP growth in 
mid-2008. This reflects partly an expected technical reaction to the strong growth seen in the 
first quarter as well as dampening effects from global and domestic factors, including direct 
and  indirect  effects  from  high  commodity  prices.  Against  this  background,  it  remains 
imperative  to  avoid  broad-based  second-round  effects  in  wage  and  price-setting.  In  full 
accordance with our mandate, we emphasise that maintaining price stability in the medium 
term is our primary objective and that we are resolute in our determination to keep medium 
and  long-term  inflation  expectations  firmly  anchored  in  line  with  price  stability,  thereby 
preserving  purchasing  power  in  the  medium  term  and  supporting  sustainable  growth  and 
employment in the euro area. On the basis of our assessment, the current monetary policy 
stance will contribute to achieving our objective. We will continue to monitor very closely all 
developments over the period ahead.  
Regarding  fiscal  policy,  budget  plans  for  2009  should  fully  reflect  existing  policy 
commitments. This implies that euro area countries with relatively large fiscal deficits need to 
specify  much  more  ambitious  and  concrete  consolidation  measures,  especially  on  the 
expenditure  side.  Countries  that  have  already  achieved  their  medium-term  budgetary 
objectives need to ensure that they maintain sound structural fiscal positions. At the current 
juncture,  the  steady  pursuit  of  stability-oriented  fiscal  policies  would  help  to  contain 
inflationary  pressures  and  provide  the  required  budgetary  room  for  manoeuvre  to  allow 
automatic stabilisers to contribute to smoothing the business cycle. 
Turning  to  structural  policies,  measures  that  reduce  adjustment  costs  and  promote 
moderate  unit  labour  cost  growth  are  of  the  utmost  importance  in  the  current  economic 
circumstances.  While  this  is  crucial  in  all  euro  area  countries,  it  is  particularly  pressing  in 
those that have experienced a significant loss of cost and price competitiveness over recent 
years and where unemployment has already started to rise. Moreover, fostering productivity 
BIS Review 105/2008 
 3
through enhanced investment in innovation and education enlarges the scope for increases 
in real incomes in the longer run.  
We are now at your disposal for questions. 
4 
 BIS Review 105/2008
