Gertrude Tumpel-Gugerell: What is the role of central banks for banking 
supervision? 
Introductory  remarks  by  Ms  Gertrude  Tumpel-Gugerell,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of 
the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the  panel  discussion  at  the  ZEIT  Konferenz  “Finanzplatz: 
Menschen und Entscheidungen”, Frankfurt am Main, 8 September 2008. 
 The ECB has already expressed its position on the possible role of central bank in financial 
supervision in 2001. This was triggered in the context in which some countries were in the 
process  of  transferring  the  supervisory  function  from  the  central  bank  to  independent 
authorities.  
The  main  position  at  that  time,  which  remains  valid  today,  is  that  there  is  no  optimal 
arrangement  for  the  organisation  of  supervision  at  the  national  level.  All  organisational 
models – sectoral supervision, supervision by objectives, supervision in a single authority – 
can  in  principle  work  well  or  fail  depending  on  circumstances.  However,  regardless  of  the 
model, it is important that there exists a very close and smooth interplay between the central 
banking and the supervisory function.  
Does the experience of the turmoil bring new elements in this domain? This is certainly the 
case.  In  general  the  turmoil  has  clearly  confirmed  the  importance  of  a  strong  interaction 
between  central  banks  and  banking  supervisors  as  also  confirmed  by  the  specific 
recommendation of the Financial Stability Forum in this field. As a new element the turmoil 
has somewhat contributed to specifying the relevant areas in which this interplay should be 
reinforced. 
First,  in  the  area  of  monitoring  and  assessing risks  to  financial stability,  central  banks  can 
benefit  from  extended  access  to  supervisory  information  and  intelligence  to  better 
understand risks and vulnerabilities for the financial system as a whole. At the same, there is 
clearly the issue, of how to translate the outcome of the financial stability assessment into 
supervisory  action.  In  principle  one  cannot  but  agree  that  there  should  be  a  way  through 
which,  if  the  central  bank  identifies  serious  risks  to  financial  stability,  the  competent 
supervisor should be able to act. Therefore, communication needs to go both ways: from the 
central bank to supervisors and vice versa within the respective legal framework. 
Second, in the area of liquidity, there is clearly room for a closer interplay between the two 
authorities.  Central  banks  would  benefit  from  enhanced  access  to  supervisory  information 
and  intelligence  for  its  role  of  maintaining  stable  money  markets.  To  that  end  for  instance 
access to information on banks’ liquidity contingency planning funds would be useful. At the 
same time, supervisors would benefit from information available at central banks stemming 
from their role in the money markets. 
Third, in the area of crisis management and resolution, depending on the nature and feature 
of the crisis, there is a need for close interaction between the two authorities. Provision of 
Emergency  Liquidity  Assistance  is  a  clear  point  in  case  where  central  banks  need 
supervisory  information  for  decision-making.  In  this  field,  I  believe  that  an  important  step 
forward is represented by the recent MoU on financial stability arrangement signed by the EU 
central banks, supervisors and ministries of finance in June 2008.  
Finally, referring more to the supervisory domain but still linked to the central bank interest, 
the  turmoil  has  evidenced  the  need  for  strengthening  the  macro-prudential  dimension  of 
regulation and supervision. This means the regulatory and supervisory requirements should 
be  able  to ensure  adequate  capital  and  liquidity  buffers throughout  the  economic  cycle.  In 
this regard, the actual impact of the new capital adequacy regime under of Basel II will have 
to be monitored very closely. 
BIS Review 106/2008 
 1
