Ranee Jayamaha: New opportunities in retail payments 
Speech by Dr Ranee Jayamaha, Deputy Governor of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka, at the 
IBA-Finsight Payment Systems Summit 2008, Mumbai, 16 May 2008. 
 Background and present status 
1. 
1.1 
The  rapid  advancement  of  innovative  payment  systems  we  experience  today  is  a 
part  of  the  financial  system  infrastructure  in  most  countries.  In  both  wholesale  and  retail 
areas, new technologies, participants and alliances have emerged, transforming the payment 
systems landscape. This transformation has blurred the distinction between large value and 
retail transactions, and also the payment instruments used for such transactions. Often, we 
find  that  large  value  payments  are  made  through  cheques,  while  electronic  payments  are 
used  for  small  value  retail  transactions.  Although  banks  have  been  in  the  forefront  of 
promoting some payment instruments, such as credit cards and electronic payments, and the 
related infrastructure, by and large, the wider payment reforms have been initiated by central 
banks.  
The  retail  payment  mechanisms,  some  of  which  are  also  systemically  important, 
1.2 
have been evolving over the past few decades. However, the progress has been slow. Given 
the demand for integration of retail payments with high value payments, domestic as well as 
international,  pressures  are  building  up  to  reform  the  retail  payment  systems.  Accordingly, 
the  increased  availability  of  convenient  retail  payment  instruments  at  reasonable  and 
competitive  prices  has  changed  the  individual  payments  behaviour  and  patterns.  Although 
the  gradual  move  out  of  cash  has  made  paper-based  instruments  such  as  money  orders, 
postal  orders,  bank  drafts  etc.,  popular  for  several  decades,  their  market  sizes  have 
continued  to  decline,  largely  due  to  inherited  inefficiencies  and  cumbersome  processes  in 
effecting and settling payments. Some of these retail payment instruments and systems have 
now  been  replaced  by  electronic  payment  instruments  and  cards,  and  the  tendency  is  to 
move towards electronic credit and debit transfers. According to the statistical reports of the 
Bank for International Settlements, some interesting movements in the use of retail payments 
in selected countries can be seen. In volume terms, France, Germany, Italy and the UK have 
reduced cheque use from a range of 3-38 percent of total non-cash payments, respectively, 
in  2000  to  a  range  of  1-26  percent  in  2006,  while  there  are  no  cheques  at  all  in  the 
Netherlands.  In  Brazil  too,  cheques  have  decreased  from  57  to  25  percent  or  less  in  the 
same period. Credit and debit transfers and cards, on the other hand, have risen significantly 
in these countries. This picture is different to that of India, where cheque use has reduced at 
a  slow  pace  from  84%  in  2004  to  73%  in  2007  and  in  Sri Lanka  from  75%  to  65%  in  the 
same  period,  indicating  the  dominance  of  cheques.  I  believe  the  situation  is  the  same  for 
other countries in the SAARC region. 
1.3 
In  spite  of  these  changes,  a  notable  difference  between  high  value  and  retail 
payment systems is that the high value payments have become customer-centric, while the 
retail  payment  systems  have  had  limited  success  in  securing  customer  centricity.  Cross-
border  retail  payment  systems  are  also  fragmented.  Compared  to  high  value  payment 
systems, retail payment development is evolutionary and not revolutionary.  
In  general,  users  expect  the  payment  system  to  possess  three  fundamental 
1.4 
characteristics.  First,  it  must  have  integrity,  i.e.  transactions  must  be  safe,  reliable  and 
secure. Second, it must be competitive and efficient, i.e. the cost of making payments should 
be  as  low  as  possible.  Third,  it  must  be  accessible  and  inclusive,  i.e.  available  to  all  and 
include all.  
1.5 
As long as people see one or two of the above characteristics and accessibility, in 
particular,  they  are  comfortable  and  do  not  clamour  for  major  changes.  This  complacent 
BIS Review 61/2008 
 1
attitude is a common challenge in retail payment reforms. People are also not too worried 
about the systemic risks or payment system crashes and their impacts on the wider financial 
system. Hence, there is no pressure for change from users although, from the policy makers’ 
point  of  view,  there  are  many  risks.  In  this  context,  while  preserving  public  preference  for 
accessibility,  the  regulators  and  policy  makers  need  to  provide  the  policy  and  regulatory 
framework, while the private sector should capture critical mass by introducing new payment 
methods and instruments; promoting widespread access to such instruments; and removing 
any impediments to accessibility. This is a clear entry point and a good opportunity for both 
public and private sectors to coordinate their efforts. 
1.6 
Despite  their  inherent  weaknesses,  automated  teller  machines,  debit  cards, 
automated clearing house networks and credit cards have reached critical mass. However, 
smart  cards  and  some  e-cash  systems,  electronic  bill  payments  and  person-to-person 
internet payment methods are yet to catch up. Accessibility, but at a high price, can also put 
off people from opting to use such payment methods or instruments. Similarly, if there are no 
service providers to facilitate transactions, card usage cannot be made popular and people 
may continue to use cash, as they are uncertain whether the substitute or new instrument is 
as  accessible  as  the  old  ones.  Despite  inherent  inefficiencies  of  cheques,  they  are  still 
popular due to easy accessibility, although the regulators keep worrying about the systemic 
risks  involved  in  cheques.  That’s  why,  in  the  recent  past,  India,  Sri  Lanka,  Singapore  and 
many others have introduced cheque imaging or fully automated cheque clearing processes. 
Given  the  reduced  time  from  t+5-7  to  t+1-2  and  facilities  at  regional  level,  in  Sri  Lanka, 
people now tend to use more cheques compared to cards or electronic payments, which is a 
worry. The public policy objectives of payment system development thus demands that we 
allay the fear of non-accessibility and, where possible, offer appropriate incentives to users to 
move out of paper-based inefficient instruments. 
1.7 
Preserving  the  public  policy  goals  is  easier  where  the  regulator  is  also  the  retail 
payments  service  provider.  However,  where  the  service  provider  is  not  the  regulator,  it  is 
hard to coordinate and preserve the character of accessibility. The UK regulators have taken 
bold  steps to  outsource  the  service  provider’s  role  and  concentrate  on the  regulatory  role, 
while  USA,  Sri  Lanka  and  India  are  still  trying  to  strike  a  balance  between  the  dual  roles, 
which we have inherited for decades. 
Retail payments outlook and prospects 
2. 
Retail banking is still the main force in banking, and is likely to stay that way for the 
2.1 
foreseeable future, despite the relentless growth of investment banking, corporate banking 
and other forms of services. In 2006, retail banking business accounted for euro 1,220 bn in 
revenue, or about 57% of the global banking revenue pool of euro 2,150 bn. The world over, 
banks  continue  to  open  branches  and  attempt  to  make  their  branches  more  attractive  for 
retail  payments.  Sri  Lanka,  India,  Bangladesh  and  many  of  the  SAARC  countries  are 
members of the South Asia Free Trade Agreement (SAFTA), Asia-Pacific Trade Agreements 
(APTA), The Bay of Bengal Initiative for Multi-Sectoral Technical and Economic Cooperation 
(BIMSTEC),  Comprehensive  Economic  Partnership  Agreement  (CEPA)  and  several  other 
trade  agreements.  During  2002-2006,  exports  in  the  SAARC  region  as  a  ratio  of  world 
exports rose from 1.09 to 1.29 percent, of which India accounted for more than 75 percent. 
Although firm numbers are not available for 2007, exports are estimated to have increased at 
a  significant  rate  followed  by  higher  cross-border  payments.  Prospects  and  outlook, 
therefore, for Asian region trade, and consequently retail payments, are good. 
Transforming challenges to new opportunities 
3 
3.1 
Challenges and complexities: Retail payments development is very challenging due 
to  numerous  complexities  and  is  much  more  difficult  to  modernize  than  large  value 
2 
 BIS Review 61/2008
payments. In order to complete even a small payment, it is necessary to have appropriate 
and acceptable payment instruments, an institutional set up, an enabling legal environment, 
infrastructure,  processing  procedures  and  money/fund  transfer  mechanisms.  There  are 
enough opportunities to change this situation, if all stakeholders are committed to introducing 
innovations, with appropriate safeguards. We need to look at some of the practical ways of 
starting this transformation.  
3.2 
Discourage  cash  and  paper-based  instruments:  Progress  in  the  use  of  electronic 
payments has been slow in our region due to numerous reasons. Cash is the most popular 
mode of face-to-face payments for retail transactions. Cash does not require the user to go 
to specific places, use computers or special equipment to originate or settle a transaction. 
Moreover,  the  payment  is  final.  Given  the  user  preference  and  convenience,  cash  and 
cheques  still  dominate  as  payment  instruments  in  many  countries.  Businesses  also  prefer 
cheques because of inherited cash management processes, legacy of accounting systems or 
reluctance by their governments to transact in electronic payment instruments. If there are 
cheque clearing delays or frequent cheque returns, small businesses have no choice but to 
borrow  for  short  periods,  perhaps  at  exorbitant  interest  rates,  from  informal  sources.  They 
also prefer cheques as they can make late payments through post-dated cheques and other 
deferred instruments. A payment through a cheque is not final and the availability of funds to 
the  payee  takes  days.  Cheques  carry  considerable  credit  risk  and  the  payment  can  be 
assured  only  with  a  cheque  guarantee  scheme.  Although  cheque  returns  is  considered  a 
criminal offence, banks in many countries are reluctant to take appropriate steps to deal with 
cheque returns, due to fear of recovery of loans and advances from customers. 
3.3 
Automation of cheque clearing: The cheque clearing process and its modernization 
have  been  taking  place  in  many  countries.  Asia,  Singapore,  India  and  Sri  Lanka  have 
changed their existing laws and introduced cheque imaging and truncation systems, which 
have  changed  the  whole  process  of  cheque  clearing  and  reduced  processing  time  and 
transportation  costs.  The  Sri  Lankan  experience  shows  that  banks  modernized  their  back-
office systems to accept electronically presented cheque information and link branches to the 
central cheque clearing center at LankaClear to provide end-to-end cheque processing, by 
crediting  the  proceeds  to  customers’  accounts  on  t+1  or  t+2.  This  has  had  a  significant 
impact in the rural and outstation areas in Sri Lanka, where businesses waited for 7 days or 
more to get cheques cleared. The system has also helped to reduce geographical barriers 
between regions and districts. Small businesses have begun to roll over finances better and 
faster. However, although it is advantageous to customers, the inefficiencies inbuilt in paper-
based instruments continue to remain. Where possible, therefore, the use of cheques should 
be discouraged. 
3.4 
Promote electronic retail payments and telecommunication systems: The first step 
towards  promoting  electronic  retail  payment  systems  is  to  provide  low  cost  current  and 
savings  accounts  that  can  be  accessed  with  a  cash  dispenser  card.  The  use  of  non-cash 
payment instruments, in particular, mobile and telephone banking can be promoted together 
with  the  use  of  high  security  standards,  which  would  ensure  reliability  of  the  payment 
instrument. Although the payment options for e-commerce or e-money are catching up, there 
still remains a significant demand for increased efficiency in the delivery channels of these 
instruments. The ATM machines have now extended their scope to provide a wide range of 
services. Singapore has introduced an e-Giro system, which enables participating banks to 
effect transactions using browser-based PCs at their offices, while in other countries, rural 
and  small  businesses  access  through  the  use  of  telecommunication  facilities  is  fast 
developing.  
3.5 
Introduce  Common  Payment  Switches  (CPSs):  The  CPSs  can  be  used  for 
managing  the  clearing  of  retail  fund  transfers  initially  among  banks,  but  they  are  common 
platforms for local retail transactions, online real time fund transfers and for miscellaneous 
retail  payments  across  banks.  Through  CPSs,  both  operators  and  customers  will  enjoy 
benefits  of  service  outside  banking  hours,  reduction  of  administration  work  and  paper 
BIS Review 61/2008 
 3
retail  payment 
handling,  on-line  availability  of  information,  ability  to  integrate  future  services,  reduction  of 
settlement risks on retail transactions, etc. Accordingly, the participating banks will be able to 
effect  customer/bank  initiated  transactions  relating  to:  third  party  transfers  (account-to-
account  transfers),  bank  transfers,  bill  payments,  inward  remittances,  statutory  payments 
such as taxes, local government rates, inter-bank transactions, direct debits and local credit 
card transactions. Above all, CPSs, will help reduce bank charges on financial transactions 
and pass on benefits to customers. Korea and Thailand have facilitated real time settlement 
of retail payments from person to person (P2P) or business to business (B2B) through CPSs, 
which  is  considered  to  be  an  affordable  and  an  effective  method  of  facilitating  retail 
payments. 
3.6 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  it  is  for  us  to  convert  these  challenges  to  opportunities.  I 
believe that if policy makers, regulators, bankers and service providers work in a coordinated 
manner with a commitment to improve the retail payments in the region, we will be able to 
reap the benefits in the near future. I would like to mention a few areas that require urgent 
attention.  
3.7 
Improve  inter-operability  and  facilitate  supply  chain  transactions:  Many  financial 
products  are  not  linked  to  financing  the  supply  chain  transactions,  such  as  purchases, 
transportation,  marketing  of  produce  of  farmers’  small  businesses,  SMEs  and  micro 
enterprises,  because  many 
instruments  and  mechanisms  are  not 
interoperable  or  flexible  enough  to  facilitate  supply  chain  transactions.  Farmers  and  small 
businesses use more cash at harvest times and both cash and cheques during post harvest 
periods. It is time to make a move to provide supply chain transactions with cards or direct 
credits and debits by providing electronic infrastructure or money transfer facilities through 
telecommunication  technology.  Adopting  new  technology  or  upgrading  IT  networks  and 
infrastructure  of  retail  payment  systems is required to improve safety  and efficiency gains. 
Service providers should look for volumes and turnover, rather than highly priced payment 
instruments. The users must feel that the payment instrument is secure and that the level of 
technology permits savings on operational costs. The issuance of cards with ATM, point of 
sales  and  e-money  functions  would  help  the  user  to  use  the  same  card  for  a  variety  of 
purposes. 
Enhance awareness and transparency: Limited awareness of the available payment 
3.8 
instruments, their advantages and disadvantages, and a lack of transparency have deterred 
the  use  of  retail  payment  instruments  by  the  general  public.  A  review  conducted  by  the 
Reserve Bank of India for the year ended March 31, 2007 reveals that the level of awareness 
and familiarity with payment services offered by banks were at varying degrees. This, in fact, 
has been one of the major inhibiting factors for migration from one retail payment instrument 
to another. Banks need to promote merchants in small cities to enhance the acceptance of 
cards  at  merchant  locations  and  make  users  aware  of  the  facilities.  Another  important 
feedback in India’s survey was that there is a clear need for transparency in service charges 
on credit and debit cards. 
3.9 
Attract  retail  remittances  through  innovative  methods:  The  denial  of  access  to  the 
retail payment system was also seen in small-scale cross border transfers. Bank and non-
bank  financial  institutions  and  money  transfer  agents  use  their  own  costly  and  proprietary 
instruments for remittance transfers. The inability or inaccessibility to use the full potential of 
the  formal  remittance  infrastructure  has  resulted  in  the  mushrooming  of  popular  informal 
systems, such as “Hawala” and “Undial”, with a significant loss of foreign exchange to the 
banking system and perhaps to the entire country, indicating the loss of opportunities due to 
the inheritance of ad hoc retail payment systems. Penetrating successfully into this critical 
area of business is a challenge, but there are plenty of opportunities for banks. The “Padala” 
system  in  the  Philippines  and  the  agency  banking  system  through  mobile  telephones 
introduced recently in Sri Lanka are examples of success stories. In the Philippines, telecom 
companies offer remittance services through mobile phones and e-money, i.e. stored value. 
The sender pays cash to one of the service providers, who sends a secure text message to 
4 
 BIS Review 61/2008
the  mobile  phone  of  the  receiver  in  the  country.  The  “last  mile”  of  service  is  provided  by 
banks  and  financial  institutions,  the  postal  network  or  their  agents  or  representatives.  If 
remittances can be channeled through a single low-value bulk payment mechanism, the cost 
per transaction could be reduced. Once domestic connectivities are upgraded, they can be 
extended to cross border retail payment systems by ensuring safe and efficient remittance 
transfers.  Similarly,  the  domestic  postal  systems  can  be  connected  to  the  global  postal 
network and the Giro payment mechanism used for cross-border remittance transfers.  
Framework for retail payment development 
4. 
4.1 
How do we seize the existing or emerging opportunities or create new ones? I hope 
many suggestions and initiatives may come up during the rest of the day. Let me mention a 
few  of  the  major  steps.  The  framework  suggested  here  is  by  no  means  a  well-designed 
blueprint  for  retail  payment  development  in  the  region.  It  is  only  an  effort  made  to  put 
together  a  few  thoughts.  The  key  elements  are  not  in  any  particular  order  either,  but  for 
convenience, I have categorised the key elements into policy and operational aspects. 
4.2 
In  order  to  enable  retail  payments  to  play  a  critical  role  in  financial  inclusion,  it  is 
necessary to develop a comprehensive, medium-term framework that facilitates the reform 
process.  Once  a  framework  is  prepared,  all  stakeholders  need  to  operate  within  the 
framework designed to achieve common goals. Although the culture and patterns vary from 
country to country, it is clear that retail payment system reforms require the involvement of 
both the public and the private sector. In the public sector, the central bank’s or monetary 
authority’s involvement is essential, because they are responsible for monetary policy and for 
the preservation of public confidence in money. The private sector is equally important, as it 
has the most relevant information on the payment preferences of the people and is directly 
involved  in  providing  payments  services.  The  optimal  mix  depends  on  the  level  of 
development  of  the  financial  market,  but  a  more  active  role  has  to  be  played  by  the 
authorities to achieve the public policy objectives of retail payment reforms.  
Policy elements 
4.3 
4.3.1  Central banks to play a catalytic role: Central banks should be at the centre, take the 
leadership  and  coordinate  the  development  process  as  other  stakeholders  tend  to  have 
vested interests. While it is important to enhance oversight and supervisory functions by the 
central  banks  and  ensure  that  governance  arrangements  for  infrastructure  and  service 
providers are in place, it is also necessary to ensure that such arrangements do not lead to 
unnecessary restrictions on competition and innovation. 
4.3.2 
Stakeholder  participation:  It  is  essential  that  central  banks  engage  in  effective 
participation and secure cooperation from all stakeholders in the payment systems, through 
establishing  National  Payment  Councils  (NPC)  or  National  Payment  Committees/Advisory 
Councils  etc.  India,  Sri  Lanka,  Pakistan  and  some  others  have  already  established  NPCs 
and they are the highest level policy making authorities for development of national payment 
systems. Banks have a good opportunity to give their inputs at these meetings, especially on 
operational matters. 
4.3.3   Declare  public  policy  objectives  of  retail  payment  system  development:  The 
undeclared  and  unsaid  public  policy  objectives  have  been  a  contributory  factor  for  ad  hoc 
retail payment system developments in the past. We need to avoid this lacuna by getting the 
policy  authorities  to  announce  the  public  policy  objectives,  such  as  providing  safe  and 
efficient retail payment services, enhancing access to finance and financial inclusion, offering 
payment services at affordable prices, preserving customer and user rights, providing a legal 
and  regulatory  framework  and  supporting  the  development  of  effective  standards  and 
infrastructure arrangements. 
BIS Review 61/2008 
 5
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
4.3.4  Customer-centric strategy and fair treatment to customers: Retail payment reforms 
should go beyond the current requirements and be able to cater to future requirements, given 
the rapidly expanding trade and financial transactions in the region – primarily in India and 
some  other  countries.  The  strategy  should  include  guidelines  to  move  towards  open  and 
standardized  customer-centric  systems.  The  retail  payment  system  operators  and  service 
providers should attempt to achieve the following outcomes to ensure that the customer is 
treated fairly: 
i. 
To begin with, relevant initiatives should be embedded in the corporate culture of the 
organization. This requires leadership at senior management level; 
Products and services marketed and sold in the retail payments market should be 
designed to meet the needs of identified customer groups and targeted accordingly. 
Customers in different groups should be advised appropriately. This would help to 
reduce  misleading  advertisements,  which  often  use  various  gimmicks  to  attract 
customers; 
Customers  should  be  provided  with  clear  information  and  kept  appropriately 
informed  before,  during  and  after  the  point  of  sale.  Products  should  maintain 
acceptable standards and meet customer expectations. This involves transparency 
on the part of service providers; and 
Customers  should  not  be  faced  with  unreasonable  post  sale  barriers  imposed  by 
banks  and  financial  institutions  or  service  providers,  forcing  them  to  purchase 
supplementary products and services. 
4.3.5 
Ensure fair treatment to customers: Treating customers fairly throughout the life of a 
payment product, as well as at service points, is an essential theme that should be focused 
on by all stakeholders. In this regard, it is necessary to establish principles-based regulations 
on  payment  related  activities  rather  than  compliance  or  rules-based  regulations.  The 
regulations should relate to the payments mode or the payments product life cycle and the 
payments  culture  in  each  country.  The  principles  and  related  reviews  should  seek  to 
accomplish the provision of solutions to significant and persistent problems in the distribution 
of products in the retail segment of the payment services, and to build financial capability, i.e. 
equipping customers with the skills and knowledge needed to achieve a fair deal. 
4.3.6 
Established  customer  protection  and  rights,  and  legal  framework:  The  retail 
customers  and  their  rights  should  be  protected  in  the  legislation.  Several  countries  have 
passed  separate  laws  to  achieve  this.  In  the  Payments  and  Settlements  Act,  the  Central 
Bank  of  Sri  Lanka  has  included  a  separate  section  on  customer  protection.  In  2005,  the 
Reserve  Bank  of  India  established  regulation  and  supervision  within  its  Payment  and 
Settlement  Act.  It  is  imperative  that  customer  rights  are  looked  after  as  many  financial 
institutions and service providers have been accused of customer exploitation. In addition to 
protecting  customer  rights,  the  legal  and  regulatory  framework  should  keep  pace  with 
changing  circumstances  and  promote  innovation  and  integration  to  suit  customer  needs. 
There  should  also  be  regulatory  provisions  to remove  any  restrictions  to  market  entry  and 
product development, especially for those who try to link retail payment instruments with the 
high value payment systems. 
4.3.7 
Setup  standards  and  governance  structure:  International  standards  and  practices 
have  been  established  for  credit  and  debit  cards.  The  joint  efforts  for  introducing  micro 
processing  chip  or  tamper  proof  cards  and  security  solutions  in  the  credit  and  debit  cards 
should be encouraged to foster Internet payments. Setting standards by the authorities would 
promote  developing  off  the  shelf  software  solutions  to  automate  systems  and  integrate 
different  systems.  The  general  guidelines  for  retail  payments  development  issued  by  the 
Bank for International Settlements in 2005 sets out guidelines, but they are basically policy or 
regulatory related matters. The information technology industry needs to take an initiative in 
preparing guidelines and governance structures to meet standards on a self-regulatory basis.  
6 
 BIS Review 61/2008
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
4.3.8  Operational elements: The framework should set out operational responsibilities for 
the other stakeholders. The most important of these are  
i. 
Explore new technological capabilities: Policy makers and regulators should attempt 
to  discourage  preference  by  vendors,  system  operators,  financial  institutions, 
service  providers  and  users  in  defending  inefficient  and  old  systems,  which  have 
hidden  benefits  or  other  comforts.  Priority  should  be  given  to  use  up-to-date 
technology  for  transactions  routing  mechanisms,  security  systems  and  codes  for 
inter bank clearing and settlement mechanisms. 
Efficiency and risk control: Many developing countries, in general, and South Asia in 
particular,  are  characterized  by  a  heavy  use  of  cheques,  which  indicates  that  the 
retail  sector  is  far  from  being  optimal  from  the  point  of  view  of  efficiency  and  risk 
control. Central banks and all stakeholders in the retail payments arena need to take 
early  action  to  reduce  the  cheques  and  design  a  strategy  to  incentivise  users  to 
move towards other electronic payment instruments. It is also important to correct 
the wrong impression that cheque processing through Automated Clearing Houses 
(ACH)  is  cheaper  than  investment  in  electronic  payment  systems  and  on  line 
processing.  The  view  that  outstation  and  rural  customers  are  reluctant  to  use 
electronic cheques or credit and debit cards is no longer true.  
Involve governments: Government involvement in the development of retail payment 
system is a key, although it has become one of the difficult tasks. Many government 
transactions  are  in  cash  or  by  cheque,  and  governments  are  not  keen  to  acquire 
modern  payment  infrastructure  or  recognize  the  benefits  of  using  newer  payment 
instruments. One obvious reason for this is the ready access governments have to 
state banks’ cash items in process of collection, which enables immediate credit to 
governments.  Efforts  are  now  being  made  by  some  countries  such  as  the 
Philippines  and  Eastern  European  countries  to  involve  governments  in  retail 
payment development by diverting revenue receipts from income tax, custom duties 
and other income sources through modern retail payment instruments. 
Establish confidence in payments media: Either the service providers, the regulators 
or  consumer  protection  authorities,  or  all  of  them  jointly,  should  ensure  that  new 
products  are  safe  and  efficient  and  that  they  have  public  confidence  in  them. 
Pushing  efficiency  too  far  could  adversely  affect  public  confidence  in  payment 
instruments.  For  example,  moving  aggressively  into  credit  cards,  which  are 
considered  to  be  efficient  and  safe  payment  instruments,  has  also  resulted  in 
numerous frauds and risks, and this has begun to scare people. New technologies 
break  physical  distance  barriers  enabling  efficient  real  time  transactions,  but  the 
critical  factor  is  network  security,  which  should  ensure  access  only  to  a  person’s 
own funds. New delivery channels for retail payments such as the Internet, on-line 
personal payments, electronic bill presentments, telephone, e-cheques or e-invoices 
are  becoming  popular,  although  they  do  not  always  assure  the  same  level  of 
security as some of the other products. Tamperproof cards are generally considered 
to be safeguard against credit card frauds, but the relevant software appears to be 
expensive. Financial intermediaries are not keen to invest in such safeguards. Even 
if they do, they will pass on the costs to customers, which will defeat the affordability 
purpose. Vendors and service providers need to be flexible to pass on the benefits 
of  technological  advances  to  a  larger  group  of  users.  Demand  driven  innovations 
should also be promoted and vendors should look for volumes and turnover, rather 
than high-priced software sales. 
Agenda for SAARC region payment systems development  
5. 
5.1 
The  banking  community  in  India  as  well  as  in  other  SAARC  countries  need  not 
reinvent the wheel. There is good news. Following a request made by the SAARC country 
BIS Review 61/2008 
 7
Governors,  a  SAARC  Payments  Initiative  has  been  set  up  to  take  forward  the  payment 
reforms in the region. Within this Initiative, a SAARC Payments Council (SPC) has been set 
up,  consisting  of  high  level  officials  from  SAARC  central  banks  who  are  also  the 
Chairpersons or senior members of their national payment councils. SPC will be the policy 
making  authority  for  both  high  value  and  retail  payments.  The  organisational  structure  is 
considered a very practical one, because of the involvement of all national stakeholders in 
the national payments councils, which will provide a good forum for the banking community 
and all service providers to give their inputs for retail payments developments in their own 
countries, as well as in the region. Currently, Sri Lanka chairs the SPC and a Secretariat has 
been set up in Colombo to facilitate operational processes. SPC has already prepared a road 
map for the first year and a rolling plan for the medium term.  
Conclusion 
6. 
6.1 
In  concluding,  let  me  re-emphasize  that  technological  advances  and  changing 
industry  structures  are  two  key  forces  that  impact  on  payment  system  developments,  of 
which  retail  payments  is  a  critical  component.  However,  attention  to  public  priorities,  i.e. 
integrity,  accessibility,  efficiency  and  the  safety  of  new  retail  payment  methods,  has  been 
low. There is, therefore, an urgent need for coordination between policy makers/regulators 
and the private sector to ensure that they cater to the general public.  
6.2 
There is a clear role for banks, service providers and technical solution providers in 
the  SAARC  countries  to  take  forward  the  region’s  retail  payments  development.  First,  we 
need to understand the environment in which we work by estimating gaps in the systems. 
The SPC has already begun the preliminary work in this regard. Banks in the SAARC region 
will have to coordinate with their respective central banks and national payment councils in 
taking forward the SAARC payment initiative.  
6.3 
Development of the retail payment system is crucial for the development of financial 
markets  in  South  Asia,  particularly  at  a  time  at  which  faster  growth  requires  supportive 
financial services. It is necessary for all stakeholders to be involved in the area of payment 
system development in preparing a realistic agenda within the national jurisdiction, as well as 
taking into consideration cross country legislation. In doing so, it is essential to understand 
the  critical  issues  in  the  retail  payments  area  and  try  to  minimize  the  inefficiencies  and 
improve safety issues involved in some of the popular payment modes.  
6.4 
The  NPCs  and  the  regulatory  bodies  should  make  all  attempts  to  persuade  retail 
payment service providers to use common national and inter-regional and infrastructure and 
fostering  the  standardization  and  harmonization  of  retail  payment  systems.  The  high  cost 
involved in retail payment systems processes is not necessarily due to the large volumes or 
the wide array of payment instruments, but due to the use of a large number of proprietary 
infrastructure systems by service providers and the passing on of these high costs to users. 
While  introducing  customer-centric  products,  it  is  important  to  ensure  that  customers  are 
protected and their rights are preserved. I hope some of the opportunities mentioned above 
and many others that will be highlighted during the rest of this Summit will be taken up by the 
banking community and service providers and that they will work closely with the SPC to take 
the region’s payment system development process forward. 
Thank you. 
8 
 BIS Review 61/2008
