Christian Noyer: Bank of France – Bank of Japan: converging views 
Opening  speech  by  Mr  Christian  Noyer,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  France,  at  a  joint 
symposium of the Bank of France and the Bank of Japan, Paris, 8 January 2008. 
 Mr Ambassador, Governors, Chairpersons, Professors, ladies and gentlemen, dear friends, 
I am delighted to welcome you today to the Banque de France together with the Governor of 
the  Bank  of  Japan,  Toshihiko  Fukui.  Yokosso  Ilashaïmase  !  Some  of  you  have  come  as 
neighbours, and others have made the trip from Tokyo to attend this symposium, for which I 
would like to thank you wholeheartedly. 
And, as 2008 has just begun, I would like to wish you a very happy New Year: the year of the 
rat  in  the  Japanese  calendar,  “Akemashite  omedeto  gozaïmasu  nesumi  doshi”.  I  recently 
read  the  following  prediction  concerning  this  year:  “It  will  be  particularly  favourable  for  all 
forms of investments and savings (we all know that rodents hoard their food)”. The prediction 
went on to say (every word is true) “The influence of the rat curbs inflation”. As a euro area 
central banker, I welcome this omen. 
But  coming  back  to  what  gathers  us  here  today,  2008  is  the  year  of  friendship  between 
France  and  Japan,  celebrating  the  150th  anniversary  of  Franco-Japanese  diplomatic  and 
economic relations. Ambassador Iimura has agreed – and I thank him profusely for this – to 
make  the  introductory  speech  to  remind  us  of  the  importance  of  this  anniversary  and  the 
celebrations that will take place throughout the year. 
In order to celebrate this historic anniversary, we decided to organise this symposium in a 
place that itself has a very rich history: the Golden Gallery of the Hôtel de Toulouse. I will 
mention in passing that 200 years ago this year the Banque de France chose the Hôtel de 
Toulouse for its head office. I will not, this morning, go into great depth about the history of 
this  place.  Nevertheless,  on  a  day  like  this,  given  over  to  History,  I  will  just  say  that  this 
gallery was designed in the early 17th century by François Mansart for M. de La Vrillière, a 
minister of Louis XIII, and was then renovated in the style of the day at the beginning of the 
following  century  by  Robert  de  Cotte,  the  First  Architect  of  Louis  XIV,  for  the  Count  of 
Toulouse (the legitimated son of the Sun King), its new owner. 
Although this symposium is being held in Paris in the most prestigious part of the Banque de 
France,  it  is,  nonetheless,  a  joint  symposium  of  the  Banque  de  France  and  the  Bank  of 
Japan.  Indeed,  without  the  remarkable  efforts  of  the  Representative  Office  of  the  Bank  of 
Japan  in  Paris,  which  has  played  a  leading  role  in  its  organisation,  this  symposium  would 
never have seen the day. This Office has also acted as the go-between with the head office 
of the Bank of Japan in Tokyo, for which I thank it sincerely. 
While the Banque de France has been seconding a representative to the French Embassy in 
Tokyo since 1976, the Representative Office of the Bank of Japan was set up in Paris over 
50  years  ago.  This  Office  is  an  extremely  strong  and  precious  link  between  our  two 
institutions, which enjoy exceptionally good long-standing relations. The Banque de France is 
very attached to the presence of this Office in Paris and strives to provide it with assistance 
and information. This Office is also, I believe, for the Bank of Japan, a prime vantage point 
for  observing  the  French  economy  and  the  Paris  Financial  Centre,  naturally,  as  well  as  a 
particular vantage point for the euro area, which is highly complementary with that provided 
by  its  Office  in  Frankfurt.  For  these  reasons  the  Bank  of  Japan  has  retained  this 
representation in Paris, and we are extremely pleased that it has. 
In addition to this very strong institutional foundation of the relationship between the Banque 
de  France  and  the  Bank  of  Japan,  you,  Governor  Fukui,  bring  an  important  personal 
dimension in the form of your personal attachment to our country. It should be pointed out 
that, in the early 1970s, you yourself worked in the Bank of Japan’s office in Paris. During 
BIS Review 1/2008 
 1
this “French period” of your career, you acquired an extraordinary knowledge of our country, 
its  language  and  culture.  Since  then,  you  have  always  shown  deep  and  unswerving 
friendship towards France. You have many French friends, some of whom are with us today. 
The  French  Government  recognised  your  exceptional  contribution  to  Franco-Japanese 
friendship by awarding you the “Commander of the Legion of Honour” – the highest of our 
national honours. Let me say how happy and moved I was to be present, in Tokyo on 25 
November  2005,  at  the  ceremony  where  you  received  this  decoration  from  France’s 
Ambassador in Japan. 
I would add that I myself am fascinated by Japan and its culture. For over 25 years I have 
been to your country almost every year. I also have dear friends there, some of whom have 
been kind enough to join us today. 
This mutual attraction for one another’s cultures has helped us, Governor Fukui, to build a 
strong personal relationship over the course of our meetings at the international institutions, 
in Basel and Washington in particular. This doubtless explains why we agreed straightaway, 
when  invited  by  the  diplomatic  authorities  in  our  respective  countries,  to  involve  our 
institutions in the celebrations of this 150th anniversary. 
If you look, on the website of the Japanese Embassy in France, at the schedule of events 
celebrating this occasion – some of which will be quite exceptional – we see that the arts and 
culture  have  pride  of  place.  This  is  no  surprise  given  the  rich  cultural heritage  in  both  our 
countries. 
It  seemed  to  us,  however,  that  as  central  banks  we  should  devote  today’s  symposium  to 
economic history and analysis. 
Japanese  philosophy  teaches  us  that  “visiting  the  past  teaches  us  new  things"  (“fuluki  wo 
tazume atalashiki wo shilu”). 
I’m pretty confident that the historical approach of our morning session will shed light on the 
more recent economic developments that will be our focus this afternoon. 
Modern central banks emerged with the advent of industrial economies in order to facilitate 
trade and centralise the regalian function of issuing currency. While being strictly national, 
the issuing banks of 150 years ago quickly became used to keeping pace with globalisation. 
From the nineteenth century onwards, the appearance of central banks and the emergence 
of their role allowed them to meet the needs of economies that were already global, with an 
integrated production function in the wake of the industrial revolution. Lenders of last resort in 
critical  moments  and  ultimate  guarantors  of  their  currencies,  central  banks  extended  their 
role  in  the  twentieth  century  to  include  the  construction  and  monitoring  of  business  cycle 
indicators by drawing on highly-specialised knowledge of the credit sector, built up both in 
France and Japan through their branch networks. As well as producing statistical data and 
remaining vigilant with regard to internal stability in a more open and flexible environment, 
our central banks also became responsible for the external value of money in this period, and 
played an active role in international bodies. Having become independent in the 1990s, both 
the  Banque  de  France  and  the  Bank  of  Japan  maintained  price  stability  in  the  face  of 
adverse pressures, whether inflationary or deflationary, making use of a range of appropriate 
instruments. 
Participating in the community of central banks that has gradually been built up, the Banque 
de France and the Bank of Japan, in parallel, have been regional pivots of the central bank 
function. After the Second World War in particular, our two institutions favoured co-operation 
with the central banks of economic regions undergoing reconstruction and newly emerging 
markets.  Finally,  during  the  twentieth  century,  we  carved  out  a  place  for  ourselves  in  the 
world  by  adapting  to  the  new  international  functions:  the  more  dynamic  the  international 
markets  were,  like  in  the  1920s  and  in  stages from  the  1960s  onwards,  the  more  our  two 
banks’ international functions developed. 
2 
 BIS Review 1/2008
This morning’s session, concerning the history of our economies and institutions, will enable 
us to shed light on all these aspects. 
The afternoon’s session will focus on developments in our economies and institutions in an 
increasingly globalised world. Globalisation is not a new phenomenon. The past 150 years of 
diplomatic and economic relations between our two countries are proof of this. However, the 
scope  and  the  speed  of  the  current  stage  of  globalisation  have  far  outstripped  anything 
experienced in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries. In a globalised world, the French and 
Japanese economies have found themselves in very different environments, with France and 
Germany  leading  a  very  structured  regional  institutional  construction  with  the  European 
Union, first in terms of trade, then at an economic and monetary level, while Japan has been 
the economic leader of a de facto integrated area, with remarkable dynamism thanks to its 
productive, capacity and technological investment. 
Growth of international capital flows has resulted from domestic policies and global factors, 
such  as  the  increasing  interdependence  of  economies.  The  French  and  Japanese 
economies have benefited from this while experiencing an unprecedented boom in technical 
progress  and  productivity  growth,  mainly  as  a  result  of  considerable  investment  in 
information and communication technologies. 
Thanks  to  technological  progress  and  financial  globalisation,  the  efficiency  of  financial 
markets has strengthened over the decades. Cross-border links between markets are closer 
than  ever,  yet  the  current  crisis  is  revealing  the  persistent  nature  of  the  risks  to  financial 
stability.  Thus,  the  existence  of  trust-based  relationships  built  on  long-standing  mutual 
experience  is  a  particularly  strong  asset  for  central  banks  to  help  them  respond  to 
uncertainty. Their network can enable them to find ad hoc solutions such as those adopted in 
a  concerted  and  co-ordinated  manner  in  December  to  facilitate  market  liquidity  during  a 
period of great uncertainty. Relations between the Banque de France and the Bank of Japan 
are particularly valuable in the analysis, comparison and understanding of differences in of 
our regions’ economic cycles. 
Although our financial systems have undoubtedly become more efficient thanks to innovation 
and globalisation, it remains to be seen as to whether progress has been made in terms of 
resilience. The central banks’ role of keeping pace with these developments and assisting in 
periods of increased volatility highlights the importance of our co-operation and the resulting 
capital  of  trust.  In  this  respect,  I  wholeheartedly  thank  all  of  the  speakers  and  moderators 
here today, as they are further contributing towards strengthening this capital. 
According to a Japanese proverb, “with a friend at your side, no road seems too long” (« tabi 
ha  michidure  »).  Governor  Fukui,  I  would  venture  to  say  that  today’s  celebration  of  the 
friendship  between  our  two  nations  and  more  specifically  between  our  two  institutions  will 
soon seem to us like a fleeting moment. However, I am also convinced that our institutions 
will continue the road together with constantly renewed pleasure derived from our productive 
and  friendly  exchanges.  It  is  now  with  great  pleasure  that  I  give  you  the  floor,  Governor 
Fukui. 
BIS Review 1/2008 
 3
