Tarisa Watanagase: Japan-Thailand – partnership in prosperity 
Dinner  talk by  Dr  Tarisa  Watanagase,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Thailand,  to  the  Japanese 
Chamber of Commerce, Bangkok, 25 March 2008. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
I would like to thank the Japanese Chamber of Commerce for the invitation to speak before 
you tonight. It has been a year since I gave a talk at a similar function held by the Chamber. I 
remember we had a lively exchange of ideas then, and I am glad you keep in touch.  
With  long  presence  in  Thailand,  the  Japanese  Chamber  has  played  an  active  role  in 
promoting  common  understanding  between  Thai  government  agencies  and  the  Japanese 
business community here. Japan-Thailand economic relationship is both special in breadth 
and depth. Even a casual observer cannot fail to notice this prosperous partnership. Trade 
between our nations has doubled in value over the past 5 years; that’s roughly 14 per cent 
increase per year. On the investment front, Japan’s annual direct investment in Thailand has 
been  steady  at  close  to  3  billion  US  dollars  over  the  past  few  years,  considerable 
uncertainties notwithstanding. Japanese financial service providers are lively participants in 
the Thai financial system.  
Ladies and gentlemen,  
Much has happened since we last met. The story of financial disruption is playing out in the 
US and reverberating across the world. Oil prices have increased by more than 50 per cent. 
Businesses  and  governments  are  looking  for  best  response  strategies  to  ensure  smooth 
expansion of their enterprises and the economy in general. 
Tonight, I would like to focus on 3 related and timely subjects. I will begin with my view on the 
outlook of the Thai economy and the risks surrounding its prospects. Then, I would like to 
outline what I think is necessary for monetary and exchange rate policy going forward. And 
lastly,  I  would  like  to talk  about  how  we  can  foster  private  investment  and  what  Japanese 
businesses can do, in your role as investors and employers, to help make Thailand an even 
better place to invest.  
Ladies and gentlemen, 
As you well know, the Thai economy had to weather through a host of challenges over the 
past 2 years. To my mind, and from the view of the Monetary Policy Committee, domestic 
political uncertainty, high and rising energy prices and sharp US dollar decline were at the 
top of our concern. Indeed, political uncertainty, coupled with rising retail oil prices, took a toll 
on  private  sector  confidence  and  consumers’  purchasing  power.  These  negative 
developments dented domestic demand during the first 9 months of 2007.  
The fall of the US dollar, while widely anticipated, had been a major risk that could disrupt 
Thailand’s robust export activities. In fact, the risk was even greater after the extent of the US 
financial crisis became clearer during the second half of 2007. The US sub-prime mortgage 
market,  while  small  compared  to  the  entire  global  financial  system,  could  deliver  a  large 
impact  on  the  back  of  US  housing  concerns,  credit  crunch  and  global  liquidity  squeeze.  It 
made for a bad prognosis especially as last year’s growth momentum relied heavily on net 
exports.  
When all is said and done, however, the Thai economy managed to grow at the rate of 5.7 
per cent for the fourth quarter and 4.8 per cent for the whole year. Government pump-priming 
contributed  to  this  favorable  growth  outcome.  But  most  importantly,  it  turned  out  that  net 
exports contributed to almost 60 per cent of the overall GDP growth. Indeed, exports grew at 
a remarkable rate of 18 per cent in US dollar terms in 2007. The robust expansion was due 
BIS Review 33/2008 
 1
to the ability of exporters to adjust through quality improvement and search of new markets. 
But  exceptional  export  performance  was  due  no  less  to  healthy  global  growth,  which 
translated  into  strong  trading  partners’  demand.  Another  factor  that  contributed  to  the 
success  of  exports  was  our  ability  to  preserve  overall  price  competitiveness  in  the  face  of 
sharp dollar decline. I will come back to this point in a few minutes.  
I  would  like  to  turn  briefly  now  to  economic  stability.  Monetary  policy  has  been 
accommodative  to  growth  since  the  beginning  of  2007  with  an  aim  to  shore  up  domestic 
demand  while  keeping  inflation  in  check.  The  outcome  on  this  front  is  quite  favorable,  as 
headline and core inflation were well contained at 2.3 and 1.1 percent, respectively, by end-
2007. Despite the unusual global situation, the Thai financial markets also remained resilient 
through  2007  with  only  moderate  fluctuations.  And  while  credit  and  deposit  grew  slowly, 
profitability of banks and financial institutions remained at a satisfactory level. Overall NPLs 
in the banking system remained moderate, as low income households’ ability to service debt 
started to decline mostly on account of slow income expansion. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
These  growth  and  stability  outcomes  under  significant  downside  risks  paint  a  picture  of  a 
resilient economy.  
As far as the outlook for the Thai economy in 2008 is concerned, I would like to address first 
the  growth  momentum  and  then  talk  about  the  risks  and  uncertainties  confronting  the 
economy this year.  
Preliminary  data  indicate  that  private  consumption  and  investment  are  firming  up  after 
recovering during the fourth quarter last year. This is good news, as private consumption and 
investment constitute almost 70 per cent of total demand. Clearer political landscape post-
election  and  continued  spending  by  the  government  has  helped  revive  private  demand. 
Reflecting that, we have started to see strong pickup in imports in January. February data 
also confirmed the strength of imports. Moreover, plans for further fiscal stimulus as well as 
accelerated  budget  disbursement  should  ensure  that  domestic  demand  revival  is  firmly  in 
place.  
On  the  external  side,  even  though  export  growth  in  January  is  especially  robust  at  33  per 
cent, the likelihood of seeing a repeat of spectacular export performance is slimmer this year, 
as global growth is projected to slow down considerably. In fact, export growth in February 
has already decelerated to 16 percent. 
Going forward, the risk factors that can weigh on the ability of the Thai economy to expand 
will likely come from the US recession and high oil and commodity prices.  
In an increasingly integrated world, the slowdown in US demand can impact on Thailand’s 
export prospects. Despite the Fed’s aggressive interest rate cuts and innovative measures to 
forestall  the  rise  in  mortgage  interest  rates,  substantial  downside  risk  remains.  Most  US 
watchers  agree  that  the  US  economy  may  not  be  able  to  avoid  a  recession;  indeed, 
employment,  house  price  and  business  confidence  data  all  point  to  a  possibility  that  it  is 
already in a recession. It’s only a matter of how deep and how long this process will last. 
But  while  the  US  economy  weakens  substantially  with  worsening  prospects,  global  price 
pressure is not letting off. Crude oil prices continue to rise as world oil demand strengthens in 
the face of limited global production capacity. In this tight demand-supply situation, adverse 
geopolitical  events,  unfavorable  weather  condition  or  further  dollar  slide  can  spike  up  oil 
prices.  This  phenomenon  is  not  new.  In  fact,  continued  demand  pressure  coupled  with 
supply constraint and other uncertainties have led countries to find substitutes to fossil fuel. 
So far they have found them in bio-fuels, which in turn put pressure on agriculture commodity 
prices.  
Signs of mounting cost-push pressure from oil and commodity prices can be observed in the 
recent acceleration of domestic headline inflation, which rose above 5 per cent in February. 
2 
 BIS Review 33/2008
Such increase, if continued, can pose risk to the incipient recovery in private consumption as 
it lowers households’ purchasing power. Rising production and construction costs can also 
dampen  business  profit,  especially  in  the  face  of  tight  control  on  final  goods  prices. 
Dampened prospects for profits in turn may lead to delays of planned investment. While this 
downside  risk  is  substantial,  there  is  also  an  upside.  Higher  commodity  prices  strengthen 
farm income, which tends to benefit a large section of the Thai workforce.  
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
The risks to global growth and global inflation have both increased in the near-term. At this 
point, we cannot be sure how the slowdown of global growth will affect global inflation this 
year. And even though, from an asset price perspective, there is a positive probability for a 
correction  in  oil  and  commodity  prices  going  forward,  we  cannot  be  certain  that  such 
correction will be substantial enough to bring the inflation risk down.  
One  thing  is  more  or  less  certain,  however:  Global  financial  interconnectedness almost  all 
but  ensures  that  we  should  expect  higher  financial  volatility  in  the  near  term,  as  market 
players alternate between yield-seeking and risk-aversion investment strategies. The Bank of 
Thailand is closely monitoring the situation and assessing the impact on Thailand’s financial 
and economic stability.  
Given the pickup in domestic growth momentum and various risks the Thai economy is likely 
to confront, the Monetary Policy Committee expected Thailand’s GDP to expand by 4.5-6 per 
cent this year while inflation excluding raw food and energy should remain within target of 
0-3.5 per cent for the next 8 quarters. In the face of rising food and energy prices, headline 
inflation is expected to hover between 2.8-4 per cent in 2008, but is expected to come down 
next year. I want to note however that the Monetary Policy Committee’s new forecast will be 
given in April along with the latest Inflation Report.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I have talked at length about the economic outlook and risks going forward. What then is the 
appropriate course for monetary and exchange rate policy that I think can help cushion the 
economy along the bumpy road ahead?  
Monetary  policy  is  aimed  to  ensure  price  stability  so  that  the  economy  can  continue  to 
expand at its full potential. The definition of price stability that the Monetary Policy Committee 
uses is in alignment with that of the public; that is, we want to see low and stable inflation 
over time. At the moment, when our policy interest rate is the lowest in the region, monetary 
policy  continues  to  be  supportive  of  domestic  demand  growth.  In  the  periods  ahead,  the 
challenge to monetary policy is likely to come from increased price pressure.  
With regard to our exchange rate policy, the Bank of Thailand has used the managed floating 
approach  for  some  time  now.  Our  principle  is  to  let  the  exchange  rate  reflect  the 
fundamentals of the economy relative to our trading partners and competitors.  
In the short run, international price competitiveness depends on 2 things: 1. the appreciation 
of the Thai baht vis-à-vis a basket of currencies of our trading partners and competitors; and 
2. the increase in production cost of a Thai company relative to that of our trading partners 
and  competitors.  For  example,  given  the  same  appreciation  path  of  two  competing 
currencies vis-à-vis the US dollar, if production cost of a Thai company rises beyond that of 
its foreign competitors, then it loses price competitiveness. Generally, production cost rises 
with  inflation.  And  so,  keeping  inflation  low  helps  to  lower  relative  cost  increase  for  Thai 
exporters  and  boosts  their  price  competitiveness.  The  exchange  rate  that  the  Bank  of 
Thailand  manages  is  that  which  represents  price  competitiveness;  it  is  called  the  real 
effective exchange rate.  
Let me give you a specific example: It is well known that even though the baht has gained 
against  the  US  dollar,  it  has  been  appreciating  in  line  with  regional  currencies.  From  the 
beginning  of  2007  to  early  March  2008,  the  real  effective  exchange  rate  of  China  has 
BIS Review 33/2008 
 3
appreciated by roughly 8 per cent while India has gained by 5.4 per cent. During the same 
period, the Thai baht real effective exchange rate has appreciated by only 1.8 per cent. So 
taking into account higher inflation in China and India, an average Thailand-based exporter 
has not lost price competitiveness against those based in these two countries.  
Viewed in this light, the export boom should not come as a big surprise.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
To gain the most from exchange rate flexibility, the Bank of Thailand has always sought to 
limit the volatility of the Thai baht-US dollar exchange rate. We do this because businesses 
use US dollar as invoice currency. To this end, the baht has been the least volatile currency 
in the region over the past year. Going forward, we will continue to take care of the short-
term volatility when we deem it to be too disruptive to export or import price-setting. 
Over the next 12 months, as the global financial environment becomes even more volatile, it 
is likely that a few regional currencies will become more flexible. Those of you who follow the 
foreign exchange market regularly should know that markets are beginning to take different 
views about regional currencies after the US dollar has lost sufficient ground. No one knows 
for  sure  which  way  a  currency  will  move,  but  with  increasing  likelihood  we  will  see  more 
2-way movements in regional currencies. So the key message here to all parties concerned 
is  that  they  should  not  assume  a  one-way  movement  in  any  currency  over  the  next  12 
months.  Instead,  they  should  make  it  a  normal  practice  to  hedge  against  undesirable 
outcomes.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Monetary  and  exchange  rate  policy  can  at  best  help  safeguard  economic  stability  and 
smooth out short-term fluctuations and bumps here and there. Price competitiveness may be 
important, but it is only one side of the story. The other side of competitiveness is product 
improvement  and  efficient  production  techniques.  Japanese  companies  are  no  stranger  to 
this dimension of competitiveness. After the Plaza Accord in the mid-1980s, when the yen 
gained roughly 50 per cent in one year against the US dollar, Japanese businesses found 
ways to improve. Those that succeeded became more resourceful as a result.  
For the Thai economy to compete and grow robustly into the 21st century, we need to foster 
investment in infrastructure, physical and institutional, as well as in human resource. This is 
the  only  way  to  improve  our  productivity  while  enabling  the  majority  of  the  Thai  people  to 
share the gains from economic growth and global integration.  
What’s especially important to continued prosperity is the clarity and the implementation of 
planned public investment over the next 5 years. These plans, as they are, will address the 
entire  spectrum  of  infrastructure  deficiency  our  economy  faces.  The  public  sector’s 
commitment to invest heavily  where it matters most should help boost business sentiment 
and with it private investment, an important growth engine that had been held back over the 
past  few  years.  Moreover,  the  modernization  of  public  transportation,  housing  and  water 
resource management, as well as health and education spending should translate into better 
private sector return from cost reduction and productivity increase. Better outlook for returns 
should enhance the charm of Thailand as an investment destination.  
We also need to focus on service as well as manufacturing sectors. In fact, the service sector 
is  larger  than  manufacturing  in  employment  terms.  The  Bank  of  Thailand  can  help  in  this 
endeavor  by  continuing  to  strengthen  our  financial  infrastructure.  Aside  from  broadening 
people’s  access  to  financial  services,  we  also  aim  to  promote  competition  in  the  financial 
sector. Competition, while being mindful of the risks involved, will enhance efficiency as well 
as knowledge building and transfer. With good prudential supervision in the background, the 
pressure of competition will help ensure that our financial institutions can perform well in the 
globally competitiveness environment. To this end, better accounting standard, for example, 
the  adoption  of  IAS  39,  is  expected  to  strengthen  financial  sector’s  resiliency  to  adverse 
shocks and will bring forward better investment climate.  
4 
 BIS Review 33/2008
Going hand in hand with modern infrastructure has to be skilled human resource. Studies on 
labor  market  condition  and  my  dialogues  with  entrepreneurs,  Thai  and  foreign,  have 
confirmed that labor quality shortage is the key problem here as well as everywhere else in 
the  world.  To  be  sure,  formal  schooling  is  an  important  source  of  skill  and  quality 
development, but experience in the workplace contributes no less. In Thailand, there is an 
acute problem of skill mismatch; that is, skills produced through formal schooling are found to 
be different from those which firms find useful.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Japan’s direct investment here has contributed to skill improvement for Thai businesses and 
workforce,  mostly  through  learning  by  doing,  training  and  other  knowledge  transfers.  But 
beyond  that,  to  reduce  mismatch  in  demand  and  production  of  skills,  Japanese  firms  can 
play a direct and beneficial role. The solution is to break down the barrier between work and 
school early on. Firms can get involved in training vocational students while potential workers 
can get a glimpse of what’s really needed out there in the real world. If done well, I think it 
gives  incentive  for  firms  to  invest  in  training  these  students  because  it  gives  them  the 
opportunity to identify and select the best workers before they enter the workforce. To the 
students, there are potential gains as an incentive as well. With the opportunity to be trained 
by  the  best  and  getting  to  know  its  corporate  culture  first-hand,  student  trainees  are  more 
likely to compete for limited hires by improving their performance. This sort of apprenticeship 
program has long been practiced in Germany, and has been shown to reduce skill mismatch 
in the workplace as well as improve firms’ profitability. Practiced here, it could also reinforce 
mutual understanding between Thai workers and the ways Japanese firms do business. 
That said, human capital development takes vast and continuous effort over a long period of 
time. In the near term, I think your experience from adjusting to the yen’s sharp appreciation 
should  be  particularly  helpful  to  your  local  partners.  Japanese  companies  are  capable  of 
lending  a  helping  hand  to  your  local  suppliers  as  they  try  to  upgrade  their  productive 
efficiency. That would help smooth their adjustment process during these rough and tumble 
times.  
Ladies and gentlemen,  
I hope I have contributed to your understanding of the economic conditions and outlook for 
Thailand. The Thai economy has shown that it is resilient to adverse shocks. I am confident 
that our fundamentals are strong. Public investment in basic infrastructure and the Bank of 
Thailand’s  commitment  to  maintain  economic  and  financial  stability  should  translate  into 
moderate long-term cost of investment financing.  
With the awareness of what’s in store for us and the right macroeconomic policy mix going 
forward, we should see the economy expand favorably and in a sustainable fashion. I need 
not  mention  how  crucial  it  is  to  both  Thailand  and  Japan  in  ensuring  that  our  trade  and 
investment partnership prosper in the years to come. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 33/2008 
 5
