Frederic S Mishkin: Comfort zones, shmumfort zones 
Speech  by  Mr  Frederic  S  Mishkin,  Member  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  US  Federal 
Reserve System, at the Sandridge Lecture of the Virginia Association of Economists and the 
H  Parker  Willis  Lecture  of  Washington  and  Lee  University,  Lexington,  Virginia, 
27 March 2008. 
The original speech, which contains various links to the documents mentioned, can be found on the US Federal 
Reserve System’s website.  
 It's a genuine pleasure to address the Virginia Association of Economists here at Washington 
and Lee University on an important issue in monetary policy. Some of you may be wondering 
about the meaning of my speech title – "Comfort Zones, Shmumfort Zones." Well, putting the 
"shm" before a word is a way to cast a bit of skepticism on it. Thus, if your friend tells you that 
you  are  "fancy,  shmancy,"  then  you  might  be  overdressed  for  the  occasion.  And  if  you 
exclaim, "Email, shmemail!" then you've just found your inbox overloaded. Of course, there's 
also a significant distinction between the expressions "shlemiel" and "shlimazel," but that's 
more-advanced material that I will defer until another speech.  
Although this speech has a somewhat humorous title, my remarks will address a serious and 
important  topic,  namely,  how  central  banks  promote  the  stability  of  prices  and  economic 
activity and how this policy framework is communicated to the public. More specifically, I will 
consider whether central banks should describe price stability in terms of a desired range of 
inflation  outcomes  –  often  referred  to  as  a  "comfort  zone"  for  inflation  –  or  in  terms  of  a 
specific  numerical  value  at  which  the  inflation  rate  is  expected  to  settle  down  over  some 
reasonable time horizon.  
After  a  brief  review  of  the  academic  literature  regarding  the  level  of  inflation  that  best 
promotes  longer-run  economic  growth  and  employment,  I  will  discuss  several  conceptual 
issues regarding the pitfalls of comfort zones and the benefits of specifying a point objective 
for inflation. Finally, I will move from theory to practice and consider the experiences of other 
major industrial countries.  
As usual, my remarks reflect only my own views and are not intended to reflect those of the 
Federal  Open  Market  Committee  (FOMC)  or  of  anyone  else  associated  with  the  Federal 
Reserve System.1
What is the optimal level of the inflation rate? 
Research  in  monetary  economics  usually  specifies  monetary  policy  objectives  in  terms  of 
stabilizing  both  inflation  and  economic  activity.2  Those  two  goals  are  related:  Maintaining 
price stability promotes stronger economic activity in the long run. 
What  do  we  mean  by  price  stability?  A  widely  cited  definition  is  that  the  inflation  rate  is 
sufficiently low so that households and businesses do not need to take inflation into account 
                                                 
1  
I'd like to thank Etienne Gagnon, Steven Kamin, Linda Kole, Andrew Levin, and David Lopez-Salido for helpful 
comments and assistance with this speech. 
Indeed, this specification of monetary policy objectives is exactly what is suggested by the dual mandate that 
the  Congress  has  given  to  the  Federal  Reserve  to  promote  both  price  stability  and  maximum  employment 
(Mishkin, 2007a, 2008). 
2  
BIS Review 35/2008 
 1
in making everyday decisions.3 Broadly speaking, I believe this definition of price stability is a 
reasonable one, and in practice, central banks around the world have chosen average levels 
of inflation between 0 and 3 percent as consistent with this criterion. However, this range can 
be narrowed a bit further by considering the implications of economic theory and empirical 
evidence  about  the  average  inflation  rate  that  produces  the  best  economic  outcomes.  In 
particular, the literature on the optimal inflation rate not only bolsters the case for low inflation 
but also highlights the risks of maintaining an excessively low inflation rate. 
The case for low inflation 
All  economists  agree  that  hyperinflations,  such  as  the  one  in  Germany  in  the  1920s,  are 
particularly damaging due to the resulting distortion of economic incentives and the waste of 
valuable  resources.  Even  rates  of  inflation  far  short  of  hyperinflation  appear  detrimental  to 
economic  performance,  as  evidenced  by  the  double-digit  inflation  rates  of  the  1970s.  And 
over  the  past  decade  or  so,  central  bankers  and  academic  economists  have  reached  a 
remarkable degree of consensus about the desirability of low and stable inflation – and as 
you know, arriving at a consensus is quite rare for economists.  
The average rate of inflation distorts the efficient allocation of resources through three main 
channels. First, because some firms face costs in changing their prices, a rise in the general 
price level tends to generate undesirable movements in relative prices, thereby leading to an 
inefficient allocation of resources. This relative price dispersion increases with inflation, and 
the desirability of minimizing these relative price distortions provides a key rationale for price 
stability.4  
Second, inflation is an implicit tax on capital. In an imperfectly indexed tax system, inflation 
seriously distorts saving and investment because investment income is taxed on the basis of 
its nominal rather than inflation-adjusted or real value. In those circumstances, price stability 
may considerably improve the efficiency of the economy.5 Third, a higher average inflation 
rate  tends  to  generate  distortions  by  raising  the  cost  of  holding  currency  and  other  non-
interest-bearing assets.6  
Can inflation be too low? 
While the benefits of low inflation are now widely recognized, somewhat less attention has 
been given to the pitfalls of maintaining inflation rates very close to zero, so I will now discuss 
                                                 
3   For  example,  former  Federal  Reserve  Chairman  Alan  Greenspan  (2002)  stated  that  "price  stability  is  best 
thought of as an environment in which inflation is so low and stable over time that it does not materially enter 
into the decisions of households and firms." 
4   Over the past couple of decades, an extensive literature has analyzed the benefits of low average inflation in a 
so-called New Keynesian framework. These studies generally start from a neoclassical model and incorporate 
two key features: monopolistic competition and costly price adjustment. Refer, for instance, to Goodfriend and 
King (1997) and Woodford (2003). 
Interestingly, the larger the burden coming from the interaction of inflation and the capital income tax, the more 
government  tax  revenues  will  fall  when  inflation  is  reduced.  Feldstein  (1997,  1999)  provides  a  quantitative 
assessment of the benefits of price stability based on the interaction of inflation and the tax system, showing 
that a lower average inflation rate stimulates investment by reducing the effective tax on capital income. 
5  
6   Because real  money  balances bear  no interest, the opportunity cost of holding them  is the nominal rate  of 
interest. Higher inflation then leads to higher nominal interest rates, and hence lowers real balances, which 
causes  a  welfare  loss  because  the  social  cost  of  producing  real  balances  has  remained  substantially 
unaffected. In the absence of other frictions in the economy, inflation is viewed in this class of models as a tax 
on  real  balances  (Bailey,  1956;  Friedman  1969).  However,  the  costs  from  higher  holdings  of  real  money 
balances  has  arguably  become  much  less  relevant  as  our  economy  has  become  more  financially 
sophisticated. Households hold only modest amounts of cash, so these "shoe leather" costs are likely to be 
fairly trivial. 
2 
 BIS Review 35/2008
this issue in somewhat greater detail. Specifically, if the average inflation rate is too low, then 
the  economy  faces  a  greater  risk  that  a  given  adverse  shock  could  distort  labor  markets, 
induce  debt  deflation,  or  cause  monetary  policy  to  become  constrained  by  the  zero  lower 
bound  on  nominal  interest  rates.  These  risks  imply  that  undershooting  a  zero  inflation 
objective is potentially more costly than overshooting that objective by the same amount, and 
that setting the inflation objective at a rate a bit above zero provides some insurance against 
these risks.  
Downward nominal wage rigidities. Inflation at rates close to zero might create nonnegligible 
costs to the economy because firms may be relatively reluctant to cut nominal wages.7 Sticky 
nominal wages can prevent labor markets from reaching the optimal equilibrium. However, 
empirical evidence from Switzerland and Japan indicates that in an environment of deflation 
or very low inflation, downward nominal wage rigidities become less prevalent.8
Debt deflation. Keeping the average inflation rate close to zero increases the likelihood that 
the economy will experience occasional episodes of deflation. Deflation can be particularly 
dangerous for an advanced economy, in which debt contracts often have long maturities. As 
described by Irving Fisher (1933), an episode of deflation can lead to "debt deflation," that is, 
a  substantial  rise  in  the  real  indebtedness  of  households  and  firms,  because  the  nominal 
values  of  debt  obligations  are  largely  predetermined  whereas  the  nominal  values  of 
household  income  and  business  revenue  are  falling  together  with  the  general  price  level.9 
Indeed, the deterioration of the balance sheets of households and firms can result in financial 
turmoil that contributes to further deflation and greater macroeconomic instability.  
The zero lower bound. With a very low average inflation rate, monetary policy is also more 
likely to encounter circumstances in which short-term interest rates are constrained by the 
so-called  zero  lower  bound  on  nominal  interest  rates.10  Specifically,  investors  will  never 
choose  to  lend  money  at  a  negative  nominal  interest  rate  because  they  always  have  the 
option of simply holding cash at a zero interest rate; thus, nominal interest rates cannot fall 
below zero.  
A number of researchers in the Federal Reserve System and elsewhere have analyzed the 
implications of the zero lower bound in estimated dynamic rational expectations models.11 If 
the economy faces a large contractionary shock, the optimal monetary policy response is to 
                                                 
7   Akerlof,  Dickens,  and  Perry  (2000).  The  main  idea  can  be  described  as  follows:  During  periods  of  low 
productivity growth and no inflation, firms that need to cut their relative wages can do so only by cutting money 
wages.  In  the  presence  of  downward  nominal  wage  rigidities,  firms  will  keep  relative  wages  too  high  and 
employment too low. Hence, very low rates of inflation might prevent real wages from adjusting downward in 
response  to  declining  labor  demand  in  certain  industries  or  regions,  thereby  leading  to  increased 
unemployment and hindering the re-allocation of labor from declining sectors to expanding sectors. Research 
by staff at the Federal Reserve Board has found evidence that downward nominal wage rigidities exist in the 
United States (Estevao and Wilson, 1998; Lebow, Saks, and Wilson, 2003). However, the evidence for the 
mechanism through which low inflation raises the natural rate of unemployment is not at all clear cut. Inflation 
not only can "grease" the labor market and thus allow downward shifts in real wages in response to a decline 
in  demand  along,  but  it  can  also  put  friction  in  the  system  ("sand")  by  increasing  the  noise  in  relative  real 
wages  (Groshen  and  Schweitzer,  1999).  The  noise  reduces  the  information  content  of  nominal  wages  and 
hence the efficiency of the process by which workers are allocated across occupations and industries. 
8   See  Kuroda  and  Yamamoto  (2003)  for  analysis  of  the  Japanese  experience,  Fehr  and  Goette  (2005)  for 
analysis  of  the  Swiss  experience,  and  Kim  and  Ruge-Murcia  (2007)  for  macroeconometric  analysis  of  the 
implications of downward nominal wage rigidity for the United States. 
9   The fact that the deflation is anticipated does not completely rule out a negative effect on balance sheets: If 
the debt is sufficiently long-lived, there still is some redistribution from debtors to creditors. 
10   Although these considerations are important for the design of monetary policy, a central bank can make use of 
other policy tools if the policy rate does become constrained by the zero lower bound (Bernanke, 2002). 
11   See Reifschneider and Williams (2000), Eggertsson and Woodford (2003, 2004), Coenen, Orphanides, and 
Wieland (2004), Wolman (2005), and the citations therein. 
BIS Review 35/2008 
 3
push  the  short-term  nominal  interest  rate  below  the  level  of  expected  inflation,  thereby 
reducing real interest rates enough to mitigate the impact of the shock. But if the central bank 
has  an  inflation  objective  very  close  to  zero,  the  zero  lower  bound  can  prevent  the  full 
implementation of this policy response, and hence the economy will tend to exhibit greater 
volatility of economic activity and inflation. 
In contrast, given shocks like those seen over the past several decades, an average inflation 
rate higher than about 1 percent substantially reduces the frequency with which the economy 
hits  the  zero  lower  bound.  An  inflation  objective  of  about  2  percent  implies  that  monetary 
policy  is  rarely  constrained  by  the  zero  lower  bound  and  thereby  minimizes  the  adverse 
consequences for macroeconomic stability. 
Why comfort zones? 
These  considerations  provide  the  foundations  for  a  broad  consensus  among  academic 
economists and monetary policymakers around the world that the optimal inflation rate is in 
the range of about 1 to 3 percent; that is, an average inflation rate outside this range would 
be detrimental to longer-run health of the economy. In light of that consensus, it might seem 
natural  to  specify  price  stability  in  terms  of  a  range  of  acceptable  outcomes  for  inflation. 
Indeed, several present and past FOMC participants have used the term "comfort zone" and 
specified a 1 to 2 percent range, thereby providing valuable information regarding their views 
about what levels of inflation are consistent with the Federal Reserve's dual mandate.12
The analytical case for a point objective 
Nevertheless,  while  a  "comfort  zone"  approach  may  seem  appealing,  analytical 
considerations  reveal  some  disadvantages  of  that  approach  as  well  as  some  significant 
benefits of specifying and maintaining a point objective for inflation. 
The pitfalls of comfort zones 
In particular, I would like to highlight three specific pitfalls associated with the "comfort zone" 
approach. 
Confusion about objectives. First, when the price stability objective is formulated in terms of 
an acceptable range of inflation outcomes, the policy implications may be difficult to interpret. 
For example, if the comfort zone spans a range from 1 to 2 percent, does that mean that 
policymakers  are  equally  comfortable  with  inflation  rates  of  1.1  percent  and  1.9  percent? 
Furthermore,  confusion  about  inflation  objectives  might  make  it  harder  for  a  committee  of 
policymakers  to  decide  on  the  appropriate  course  of  monetary  policy.  When  one  member 
advocates  a  more  accommodative  policy  stance  than  other  members,  it  may  not  be  clear 
whether  that  reflects  a  more  negative  outlook  for  the  economy  or  a  greater  willingness  to 
allow  inflation  to  settle  in  or  near  the  top  of  the  comfort  zone.  Thus,  the  comfort  zone 
approach might lead to greater confusion in policy deliberations and hence produce a less 
effective decisionmaking process. 
Perverse expectations dynamics. Second, framing price stability in terms of a comfort zone 
could  lead  to  perverse  expectations  dynamics  and  thereby  generate  larger  fluctuations  in 
economic activity, especially if policymakers maintain a neutral stance regardless of where 
the inflation rate falls within the comfort zone.  
                                                 
12   The term "comfort zone" appeared in the headline of a September 2002 New York Times interview with former 
Federal Reserve Governor Laurence Meyer (Stevenson, 2002) and has subsequently been used by Federal 
Reserve  officials  on  numerous  occasions,  including  prominent  speeches  by  Bernanke  (2005)  and  Yellen 
(2006). 
4 
 BIS Review 35/2008
For instance, a negative shock to aggregate demand that brought inflation near the bottom 
end of the range might cause long-run expected inflation to fall, which would raise the real 
interest  rate  if  the  nominal  interest rate  remained  unchanged.  This  rise  in  the  real  interest 
rate  would  exert  a  further  drag  that  could  exacerbate  the  adverse  impact  of  the  original 
negative shock on the economy. Similarly, a positive shock to aggregate demand that raised 
inflation to the upper end of the range might cause a rise in expected inflation and thus a 
decline in the real interest rate, which would provide further stimulus to the economy. The 
result would then be more pronounced swings in economic activity. 
Nonlinearities and macroeconomic stability. Third, if a central bank places a high degree of 
emphasis  on  the  boundaries  of  the  comfort  zone,  then  these  threshold  effects  imply 
nonlinearities  in  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy  that  are  likely  to  produce  less  desirable 
economic  outcomes  (Orphanides  and  Wieland,  2000).  For  example,  the  stance  of  policy 
would remain roughly neutral in response to a shock that leaves inflation just below the upper 
end of the comfort zone, whereas a slightly larger shock that pushes inflation just above that 
boundary would cause an abrupt shift to a contractionary policy stance. Such a "stop-start" 
approach is likely to cause greater uncertainty in financial markets and would also tend to 
generate greater volatility of the macroeconomy. 
The benefits of maintaining a point objective 
In  contrast  to  the  various  pitfalls  associated  with  comfort  zones,  there  are  a  number  of 
significant benefits to maintaining a point objective for inflation. 
Clarity  in  communication.  First,  as  I  have  emphasized  in  several  previous  speeches, 
communication plays a crucial role in the success of monetary policy (Mishkin, 2007b and 
2007c). And in this regard, it seems virtually self-evident that communicating about a single 
numerical value for the inflation objective is more straightforward than communicating about 
an  interval  or  range  of  numbers.  Of  course,  regardless  of  whether  the  central  bank  has  a 
point  objective  or  a  comfort  zone,  it  is  inevitable  that  the  inflation  rate  will  fluctuate  in 
response  to  various  shocks;  that's  why  it  is  also  crucial  for  policymakers  to  communicate 
clearly  about  the  outlook  for  the  macroeconomy  and  about  the  central  bank's  strategy  for 
promoting the stability of prices and economic activity.  
Anchoring  inflation  expectations.  An  explicit  point  objective  anchors  inflation  expectations 
more  effectively  than  a  comfort  zone.  If  the  comfort  zone  is  considered  to  be  a  zone  of 
indifference, then the inflation rate might well exhibit highly persistent fluctuations inside the 
zone,  perhaps  even  looking  like  a  random  walk  within  that  range.  In  that  case,  if  inflation 
drifts  up  to  the  top  of  the  comfort  zone,  then  the  private  sector  could  take  the  view  that 
inflation might remain at that rate for an extended period of time, especially if policymakers 
are not taking any action to bring inflation back toward the midpoint of the range. Thus, the 
comfort  zone  might  then  generate  somewhat  larger  fluctuations  in  longer-run  inflation 
expectations, which would in turn tend to contribute to wider fluctuations in actual inflation. In 
contrast, with a transparent and credible point objective, longer-run inflation expectations will 
be firmly anchored at that rate. 
The  insurance  motive.  Even  if  policymakers  are  relatively  indifferent  about  the  level  of 
inflation within a comfort zone, research on the optimal design of monetary policy indicates 
that  they  shouldn't  be: The  central bank  should  actively  seek  to  bring  inflation  back  to  the 
midpoint of its comfort zone, thereby minimizing the probability that inflation wanders outside 
the  boundaries  of  that  zone.  In  effect,  the  optimal  policy  strategy  takes  into  account  the 
benefits of insurance, and hence the midpoint of the zone becomes the point objective for 
inflation (Mishkin and Westelius, 2006). 
BIS Review 35/2008 
 5
In  1990, 
inflation  objectives 
The empirical case for a point objective 
Now  let's  turn  to  the  international  experience.13  As  shown  in  table  1,  a  number  of  major 
industrial  economies  have  adopted  explicit 
the  newly 
independent Reserve Bank of New Zealand became the first central bank to establish such 
an objective. Many governments have followed in New Zealand's footsteps, and the inflation 
objectives  have  been  variously  expressed  in  the  form  of  a  point,  a  range  with  a  preferred 
midpoint, or a comfort zone (that is, a range of indifference). 
In some cases, the inflation objective was adopted in part as a way to lock in the benefits of 
recent  disinflation  and  to  prevent  the  return  of  adverse  inflation  outcomes.  New  Zealand, 
whose inflation performance in the 1970s and 1980s was the worst among the industrialized 
economies,  is  arguably  one  such  example.  In  other  instances,  inflation  had  already  been 
kept low and stable for some time, and the adoption of an explicit inflation objective followed 
from  extensive  research  and  debate  on  issues  such  as  the  benefits  of  low  and  stable 
inflation,  the  presence  of  biases  in  the  measurement  of  inflation,  and  the  importance  of 
central bank communications. 
Although the mix of reasons and circumstances that led to the adoption of an explicit inflation 
objective  varies  across  economies,  there  is  a  remarkable  degree  of  similarity  in  the 
characteristics  of  these  policy  frameworks,  from  which  three  broad  conclusions  can  be 
drawn. First, there is a fairly general consensus among central banks throughout the world 
that the average inflation rate should be somewhere between about 1 percent and 3 percent. 
Second,  point  objectives  have  proven  more  effective  than  ranges  in  anchoring  inflation 
expectations. Third, when the inflation objective is formulated in terms of a range, the implied 
degree  of  nonlinearity  in  the  central  bank's  policy  actions  can  be  alleviated  by  placing 
increased emphasis on the midpoint of the range.  
New Zealand 
The monetary policy objective of the Reserve Bank of New Zealand is to "keep future CPI 
inflation  outcomes  between  1  and  3  per  cent  on  average  over  the  medium  term."  The 
narrowness  of  this  range  may  seem  surprising,  especially  given  the  historical  volatility  of 
inflation  in  New  Zealand.  After  all,  New  Zealand  is  a  small  open  economy  with  a  large 
commodity-producing sector, and as a result the economy is particularly subject to external 
shocks that can have a relatively large impact on consumer prices. In this context, the use of 
a narrow comfort zone would increase the odds that inflation would fall outside the band at 
certain times. Some observers have argued that such outcomes may undermine the public's 
trust in the central bank's ability to deliver inflation outcomes in line with its stated objective, 
and  hence  that  the inflation  band  should  be  widened.14  Nevertheless,  a  wider  band  would 
hinder the anchoring of inflation expectations, which is pivotal to the successful pursuit of an 
explicit inflation objective. 
As  the  previous  discussion  has  illustrated,  expressing  an  inflation  objective  in  terms  of  a 
range makes it more difficult for a central bank to anchor inflation expectations, especially in 
the absence of any explicit emphasis on the midpoint. A related issue is that the boundaries 
of the range may be seen as "hard edges," that is, inflation outcomes inside the range may 
be seen as qualitatively different from those outside the range. The nonlinear policy reactions 
implied by this approach can lead to greater variations in interest rates, exchange rates, and 
output.  The  international  experience  indicates  that  even  when  inflation  bands  with  hard 
                                                 
13   This  section  focuses  on  the  major  industrial  economies.  Mishkin  (2000)  considers  the  experiences  of  a 
number of emerging market economies that have adopted explicit inflation objectives. 
14   Bernanke and others (1999) countered this line of reasoning by noting that "missing an entire range may be 
perceived by the public as more serious failure of policy than missing a point, or even a narrow band, (which 
happens almost inevitably), leading to a possible loss of credibility." 
6 
 BIS Review 35/2008
edges  have  been  introduced,  subsequent  changes  in  the  central  bank's  policy  framework 
and communications have tended to soften the edges of the inflation band. 
The experience of New Zealand is particularly instructive in this regard. The Reserve Bank 
Act  requires  that  price  stability  be  defined  in  a  specific  and  public  contract,  negotiated 
between the Minister of Finance and the Reserve Bank of New Zealand. Under the act, the 
Governor of the Reserve Bank is personally accountable for keeping inflation in line with the 
stated objective. (Indeed, the Governor could be fired for failing to do so.) Since 1990, price 
stability has been defined in terms of a band for the inflation rate. Over the following decade, 
the Reserve Bank treated this band as having hard edges, both in its conduct of policy and in 
its  communications  with  the  public;  indeed,  the  boundaries  of  the  inflation  band  were 
occasionally  referred  to  as  "electric  fences"  (Sherwin,  1999).  However,  it  became 
increasingly  evident  that  the  Reserve  Bank's  vigorous  attempts  to  keep  inflation  within  the 
band tended to generate destabilizing fluctuations in nominal interest rates and undesirable 
outcomes for the broader macroeconomy.  
Given  the  dissatisfaction  with  that  approach,  the  Reserve  Bank's  mandate  was  refined 
significantly in 1997, namely, in seeking to keep inflation within the band, the Reserve Bank 
should  avoid  "unnecessary  instability"  in  output,  interest  rates,  and  the  exchange  rate 
(Sherwin, 1999). This refinement allowed the Reserve Bank to lengthen the time horizon for 
achieving  the  inflation  goal,  thereby  reducing  the  need  to  respond  to  transitory  price 
fluctuations and providing greater flexibility in promoting the goal of macroeconomic stability. 
And since the edges of the inflation band have been softened, the Reserve Bank has placed 
greater emphasis on the policy actions needed to bring inflation toward the midpoint of the 
band over the forecast horizon.15
United Kingdom 
The desire to anchor inflation expectations more firmly led the United Kingdom to move from 
a  range  to  a  point  objective  for  inflation.  Three  weeks  after  the  United  Kingdom  departed 
from  the  European  Exchange  Rate  Mechanism  in  the  fall  of  1992,  the  Chancellor  of  the 
Exchequer announced an inflation objective of 1 to 4 percent, which was to be achieved by 
the middle of 1997. The use of a range for the inflation objective was interpreted by many as 
a  way  of  limiting  the  extent  of  discretionary  policy  and  of  acknowledging  the  extent  of 
imperfect control over inflation (Bernanke and others, 1999, p. 154). The initial target range 
of 1 to 4 percent was often perceived as a range of indifference, which implied that inflation 
just outside the range would be viewed as qualitatively different from inflation just inside the 
range. As a consequence, inflation tended to stay near the upper border of the range.  
Dissatisfaction with that outcome motivated the subsequent decision in mid-1997 to move to 
a  framework  with  an  explicit  point  objective  of  2-1/2  percent,  with  deviations  in  either 
direction treated symmetrically. This modification of the policy framework was well received 
by  financial  markets  and  the  general  public,  and  surveys  of  households  and  professional 
forecasters  indicated  that  inflation  expectations  converged  fairly  quickly  to  the  Bank  of 
England's point objective.16  
                                                 
15   Since the early 1990s, the Reserve Bank of Australia's objective has been to keep the average inflation rate 
within a range of 2 percent to 3 percent; thus, when the edges of New Zealand's official inflation band were 
softened,  the  Reserve  Bank  of  New  Zealand  described  the  move  as  a  transition  in  the  direction  of  an 
Australian-style "thick point" (Sherwin, 1999). 
16   From  1992  through  2003,  the  Bank  of  England's  inflation  objective  was  defined  in  terms  of  the  retail  price 
index excluding mortgage interest (RPIX). In October 2003, the U.K. government announced that the official 
inflation objective would henceforth be defined in terms of the consumer price index (CPI) and that the target 
would be set at 2 percent, a choice reflecting the fact that the recent average for CPI inflation had been about 
1/2 percentage point lower than that of RPIX inflation. 
BIS Review 35/2008 
 7
The euro area and Canada 
The importance of anchoring expectations helps explain why other central banks that initially 
adopted an inflation objective stated in terms of a range – even a narrow one – increasingly 
emphasized a single value in their communications or have replaced the range with a point 
objective.  For  example,  in  May  2003  the  European  Central  Bank  (ECB)  clarified  that  in 
implementing its mandate of price stability, monetary policy would be aimed at maintaining 
inflation "below, but close to, 2 percent in the medium term" (European Central Bank, 2003). 
That clarification was welcomed by market participants and likely made it easier for the ECB 
to anchor inflation expectations.  
As a final example, consider the evolution of the monetary policy framework in Canada. In 
the  late  1990s,  this  framework  was  well  described  as  a  range  with  relatively  hard  edges 
because  statements  by  Bank  of  Canada  officials  had  consistently  indicated  that  the 
boundaries  of  the  target  zone  (which  ranged  from  1  to  3  percent)  were  to  be  taken  more 
seriously than the midpoint (Bernanke and others, 1999). Over the past decade, however, 
the conduct of monetary policy has evolved in the direction of placing greater emphasis on 
the midpoint, while the range has been used mainly as a communication device rather than 
as an objective in itself.  
Conclusion 
I  have  argued  today  that  the  science  of  monetary  policy  provides  a  strong  rationale  for 
framing  the  inflation  goal  in  terms  of  a  specific  point  objective  rather  than  as  a  range  or 
comfort zone.17 First of all, I've argued inflation should be low but not too low. Second, I've 
provided a brief review of lessons from economic theory that can inform policymakers in their 
choice  of  inflation  objectives.  Third,  I've  outlined  what  we  can  learn  from  the  practical 
experiences  of  other  industrial  economies;  indeed,  in  recent  years,  a  number  of  foreign 
central  banks  have  moved  toward  emphasizing  the  midpoint  of  an  inflation  range  or  have 
provided a specific point objective for inflation.  
Finally,  you  may  have  noticed  that  I  haven't  said  much  about  the  United  States  in  this 
speech.  Nevertheless,  the  issues  that  I've  discussed  today  have  potentially  important 
implications for the ongoing process of refining the Federal Reserve's policy framework and 
of  enhancing  our  communications.  Indeed,  as  Chairman  Bernanke  has  recently  indicated, 
our communication strategy is "a work in progress," and the Federal Reserve "will continue to 
look  for  ways  to  improve  the  accountability  and  public  understanding  of  U.S.  monetary 
policymaking"  (Bernanke,  2007).  And  I  certainly  hope  that  my  remarks  will  be  helpful  in 
contributing to the continuation of that process. 
                                                 
17   Further discussion regarding the scientific approach to monetary policy is in Mishkin (2007b). 
8 
 BIS Review 35/2008
Table 1:  Major industrial economies with explicit inflation objectives 
Economy  
Starting date 
Current objective 
Australia 
April 1993 
2% to 3%  
Canada 
February 1991 
2%  ± 1% 
Euro Area 
January 1999 
Below but close to 2% 
New Zealand 
March 1990 
1% to 3% 
Norway 
Sweden 
March 2001 
2 1/2% 
January 1993 
2%  ±  1% 
Switzerland 
January 2000 
Above 0 and below 2% 
United Kingdom  October 1992 
2% 
References 
Akerlof, George A., William T. Dickens, and George L. Perry (2000). "Near-Rational Wage 
and Price Setting and the Long-Run Phillips Curve", Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 
vol. 2000 (no. 1), pp. 1-60. 
Bailey,  Martin  J.  (1956).  "The  Welfare  Cost  of  Inflationary  Finance",  Journal  of  Political 
Economy, vol. 64 (April), pp. 93-110. 
Bernanke,  Ben  S.  (2002).  "Deflation:  Making  Sure  “It'  Doesn't  Happen  Here",  speech 
delivered at the National Economists Club, Washington, November 21. 
_________  (2005).  "The  Economic  Outlook",  speech  delivered  at  a  Finance  Committee 
luncheon of the Executives' Club of Chicago, Chicago, March 8. 
_________  (2007).  "Federal  Reserve  Communications,"  speech  delivered  at  the  Cato 
Institute 25th Annual Monetary Conference, Washington, November 14. 
Bernanke,  Ben  S.,  Thomas  Laubach,  Frederic  S.  Mishkin,  and  Adam  S.  Posen  (1999). 
Inflation  Targeting:  Lessons  from  the  International  Experience.  Princeton:  Princeton 
University Press. 
Coenen,  Günter,  Athanasios  Orphanides,  and  Volker  Wieland  (2004).  "Price  Stability  and 
Monetary Policy Effectiveness when Nominal Interest Rates are Bounded at Zero", Advances 
in Macroeconomics, Berkeley Electronic Press, vol. 4, article 1. 
Eggertsson,  Gauti  B.,  and  Michael  Woodford  (2003).  "Zero  Bound  on  Interest  Rates  and 
Optimal Monetary Policy", Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, vol. 2003 (no. 1), pp. 139-
233. 
Eggertsson,  Gauti  B.,  and  Michael  Woodford  (2004).  "Policy  Options  in  a  Liquidity  Trap", 
American Economic Review, vol. 94 (May), pp. 76-9.  
Estevao, Marcello M., and Beth Anne Wilson (1998). "Nominal Wage Rigidity and Real Wage 
Cyclicality",  Finance  and  Economics  Discussion  Series  1998-21.  Washington:  Board  of 
Governors of the Federal Reserve System, May. 
BIS Review 35/2008 
 9
European Central Bank (2003). Background Studies for the ECB's Evaluation of its Monetary 
Policy Strategy. Frankfurt: European Central Bank. 
Fehr,  Ernst,  and  Lorenz  Goette  (2005).  "Robustness  and  Real  Consequences  of  Nominal 
Wage Rigidity", Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 52 (May), pp. 779-804. 
Feldstein,  Martin  (1997).  "The  Costs  and  Benefits  of  Going  from  Low  Inflation  to  Price 
Stability",  in  Christina  Romer  and  David  Romer,  eds.,  Reducing  Inflation:  Motivation  and 
Strategy. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 123-56. 
_________ (1999). "Capital Income Taxes and the Benefits of Price Stability", in Martin S. 
Feldstein,  ed.,  The  Costs  and  Benefits  of  Price  Stability.  Chicago:  University  of  Chicago 
Press, pp. 9-40. 
Fisher, Irving (1933). "The Debt-Deflation Theory of Great Depressions", Econometrica, vol. 
1 (October), pp. 337-57.  
Friedman,  Milton  (1969).  The  Optimum  Quantity  of  Money  and  Other  Essays.  Chicago: 
Aldine. 
Goodfriend, Marvin, and Robert G. King. (1997). "The New Neoclassical Synthesis and the 
Role  of  Monetary  Policy",  in  Ben  S.  Bernanke  and  Julio  J.  Rotemberg,  eds.,  NBER 
Macroeconomics Annual, vol. 12. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, pp. 231-83. 
Greenspan,  Alan  (2002).  "Chairman's  Remarks:  Transparency  in  Monetary  Policy  (30  KB 
PDF)", Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, Economic Review, vol. 84 (July/August), pp. 5-6. 
Groshen, Erica L., and Mark E. Schweitzer (1999). "Firms' Wage Adjustments: A Break from 
the  Past  (811  KB  PDF),"  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  St.  Louis,  Economic  Review,  vol.  81 
(May/June,  Labor  Markets  and  Macroeconomics:  Proceedings  of  the  Twenty-Third  Annual 
Economic Policy Conference of the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis), pp. 93-112. 
Kim,  Jinill,  and  Francisco  J.  Ruge-Murcia  (2007).  "How  Much  Inflation  is  Necessary  to 
Grease the Wheels?" mimeo, September. 
Kuroda, Sachiko, and Isamu Yamamoto (2003). "Are Japanese Nominal Wages Downwardly 
Rigid?  (Part  I):  Examinations  of  Nominal  Wage  Change  Distributions",  Monetary  and 
Economics Studies, Bank of Japan, vol. 21 (August). 
Kuroda, Sachiko, and Isamu Yamamoto (2003). "Are Japanese Nominal Wages Downwardly 
Rigid?  (Part  II):  Examinations  Using  a  Friction  Model",  Monetary  and  Economics  Studies, 
Bank of Japan, vol. 21 (August). 
Lebow, David E., Raven E. Saks, and Beth Anne Wilson (2003). "Downward Nominal Wage 
Rigidity:  Evidence  from  the  Employment  Cost  Index",  Advances  in  Macroeconomics, 
Berkeley Electronic Press, vol. 3, article 2. 
Mishkin,  Frederic  S.  (2000).  "Inflation  Targeting  in  Emerging-Market  Countries",  American 
Economic Review, vol. 90 (May), pp. 105-9. 
_________  (2007a).  "Monetary  Policy  and  the  Dual  Mandate",  speech  delivered  at 
Bridgewater College, Bridgewater, Va., April 10. 
_________  (2007b).  "Will  Monetary  Policy  Become  More  of  a  Science?"  Finance  and 
Economics  Discussion  Series  2007-44.  Washington:  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal 
Reserve System, September.  
_________  (2007c).  "The  Federal  Reserve's  Enhanced  Communication  Strategy  and  the 
Science of Monetary Policy", speech delivered to the Undergraduate Economics Association, 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Mass., November 29. 
_________  (2008).  "Does  Stabilizing  Inflation  Contribute  to  Stabilizing  Economic  Activity?" 
speech  delivered  at  East  Carolina  University's  Beta  Gamma  Sigma  Distinguished  Lecture 
Series, Greenville, N.C., February 25. 
10 
 BIS Review 35/2008
Mishkin, Frederic S., and Niklas J. Westelius (2006). "Inflation Band Targeting and Optimal 
Inflation  Contracts",  National  Bureau  of  Economic  Research  Working  Paper  No.  12384. 
Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, July. Forthcoming in Journal of 
Money, Credit and Banking. 
Orphanides,  Athanasios,  and  Volker  Wieland  (2000).  "Inflation  Zone  Targeting",  European 
Economic Review, vol. 44 (June), pp. 1351-87. 
Reifschneider, David, and John C. Williams (2000). "Three Lessons for Monetary Policy in a 
Low-Inflation  Era",  Journal  of  Money,  Credit  and  Banking,  vol.  34  (November,  Part  2: 
Monetary Policy in a Low-Inflation Environment), pp. 936-66. 
Sherwin,  Murray  (1999).  "Strategic  Choices  in  Inflation  Targeting:  The  New  Zealand 
Experience",  Reserve  Bank  of  New  Zealand,  Reserve  Bank  Bulletin,  vol.  62  (June), 
pp.73-88. 
Stevenson, Richard W. (2002). "The Fed's Evolving Comfort Zone", The New York Times, 
August 4. 
Wolman,  Alexander  L.  (2005).  "Real  Implications  of  the  Zero  Bound  on  Nominal  Interest 
Rates", Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, vol. 37 (April), pp. 273-96. 
Woodford, Michael (2003). Interest and Prices: Foundations of a Theory of Monetary Policy. 
Princeton: Princeton University Press. 
Yellen,  Janet  L.  (2006).  "Enhancing  Fed  Credibility",  speech  delivered  at  the  Annual 
Washington  Policy  Conference,  sponsored  by  the  National  Association  for  Business 
Economics, Washington, March 13. 
BIS Review 35/2008 
 11
