Stefan Ingves: Financial turbulence, monetary policy and inflation 
Speech  by  Mr  Stefan  Ingves,  Governor  of  the  Sveriges  Riksbank,  to  SACO,  the  Swedish 
Confederation of Professional Associations, Stockholm, 24 September 2008. 
 When storms are raging in the world around you and the course is affected, it is important to 
keep focus on where you are heading. Take in as much information as possible and steer 
back towards the target in the way that provides the best journey home. In a way, this is how 
the Riksbank tries to conduct its monetary policy. The inflation target is to provide economic 
stability, in particular when there is turbulence in the world around us. The original idea was 
that  I  would  come  here  today  to  talk  about  monetary  policy.  And  I  will  do  so.  But  the 
international  turmoil,  particularly  in  the  financial  markets,  has  escalated  in  recent  weeks.  I 
would therefore like to begin first by saying a few words about this, and about the measures 
taken by the Riksbank and others to counteract the effects of the financial crisis in the United 
States.  
The financial turbulence 
One can say that the Riksbank is active in two main areas. One is monetary policy. The other 
is  what  is  usually  known  as  financial  stability  –  promoting  a  safe  and  efficient  payment 
system, as it is written in the Sveriges Riksbank Act. To simplify, this means ensuring that 
payments in the Swedish economy can be made securely and efficiently. For instance, the 
Riksbank monitors and analyses the financial system, identifies potential risks and influences 
participants that are important to financial stability. We shall work to prevent financial crises 
from arising, but if they should nevertheless arise, it is our task to manage the situation. 
What  does  this  mean?  For  instance,  we  must  be  prepared  to  act  in  situations  where  our 
assessment  is  that  financial  stability  is  threatened.  Let  us  assume,  for  example,  that  a 
Swedish bank which is under the supervision of Finansinspektionen, the Swedish Financial 
Supervisory  Authority,  is  solvent  and  has  assets  that  are  greater  than  its  liabilities,  but 
experiences serious problems with its liquidity and thereby difficulty in meeting its payments. 
If the Riksbank’s assessment in such a situation is that the stability of the financial system is 
at stake if the bank collapses, then we can intervene with measures to aid liquidity.  
The  United  States  is  currently  in  the  midst  of  a  financial  crisis,  the  backwash  of  which  is 
sweeping  through  the  global  financial  system.  Although  financial  turbulence  has  been 
included  in  our  analyses  ever  since  last  summer,  the  way  it  has  manifested  itself  and  the 
intensity  of  the  events  has  varied  along  the  way.  And  in  recent  weeks  the  problems  have 
escalated. The most recent wave of financial turbulence is the worst so far since the original 
US mortgage crisis broke out.  
So what has happened recently? For one thing, large agents in the US financial market have 
suffered acute problems. The US central bank, the Federal Reserve, has taken measures to 
safeguard  financial  stability.  The  unease  we  see  in  the  markets  is  on  a  global  level  and 
affects us all, but the financial crisis is mainly centred on the United States.  
We are not isolated 
The Swedish financial system has functioned well and the banks have been able to finance 
themselves both in Sweden and in the international capital markets. The overnight rate, the 
shortest interest rate in the economy, has remained stable around the repo rate. In this way 
the  Riksbank’s  system  for  steering  the  interest  rate  works  well.  But  as  I  said,  up  here  in 
Scandinavia  we  are  not  isolated  from  what  is  happening  in  the  world  around  us.  Swedish 
BIS Review 115/2008 
 1
banks  are  now  affected  more  tangibly  than  before  by  the  global  financial  turbulence  even 
though they only have small exposures to the US mortgage market, which is the centre of the 
crisis.  Interest  rates  have  now  risen  substantially  here,  too,  for  instance  on  the  interbank 
market. This is the market where the banks borrow money from one another to cover their 
short-term liquidity needs. Let me stress, however, that higher interest rates are not the same 
thing as the Swedish banks experiencing problems, although it is becoming more expensive 
for them to borrow money. The Swedish banks have had a good development in profits in 
recent  years  and  they  are  financially  strong.  They  have  a  good  starting  position  to  meet 
higher costs.  
Measures to ensure the markets function efficiently 
But the markets have not functioned as efficiently as usual. For instance, interest rates in the 
interbank market have risen as a result of the increased uncertainty. There has also been a 
surge in the demand for treasury bills. The Swedish National Debt Office and the Riksbank 
have maintained a regular dialogue regarding the money and bond markets and the need to 
counteract  the  effects  of  the  US  financial  crisis.  Last  week  the  Debt  Office  decided  in 
consultation with the Riksbank to issue treasury bills at a number of additional auctions to 
meet the large increase in demand. The funds from the auctions will be invested in what is 
known as covered mortgage bonds. This improves the way the market functions right now. 
To  ensure  that  the  financial  system  functions  as  well  as  possible,  the  Riksbank  has  also 
implemented some other measures for preventive purposes. On Monday we decided, to put 
it simply, to increase the access to credit for participants in the RIX payment system. One 
can say that we are oiling the wheels of the system by making it easier for participants to 
make their payments to one another during the course of the day. They can now to a greater 
extent  use  their  own  covered  bonds,  or  those  issued  by  an  institution  with  close  links,  as 
collateral  in  the  system.  A  covered  bond  has  collateral  in  the  form  of,  for  instance,  a 
mortgage, which is provided by the credit institution that has issued the bond. This means 
that the credit granter is more protected than in the case of ordinary bonds. Covered bonds 
are therefore good collateral and many other central banks accept these bonds on a larger 
scale than the Riksbank. In our case the permitted share was raised from 25 per cent to 75 
per cent. This measure means, put in very simple terms, that participants in the RIX system 
can use more collateral to borrow against if necessary.  
Another measure is that, for instance, the Riksbank and the central banks of Denmark and 
Norway, together with the US Federal Reserve, have reached an agreement for the purpose 
of increasing access to dollars in the Scandinavian financial markets, if necessary. For the 
Riksbank this involves the possibility to obtain access to US dollars in addition to the foreign 
currency  reserve.  This  is  what  is  known  as  a  swap  facility  and  amounts  to  a  total  sum 
corresponding to USD 10 billion. Our assessment is that it will probably not be necessary to 
use the money. It is nevertheless important to demonstrate that we are prepared to act if it 
should prove necessary. The agreement can be quickly put into operation if it should actually 
become necessary.  
Financial stability is satisfactory 
What is happening now has not come as a bolt from the blue. And it is not a question of the 
central banks sitting with their arms folded ignoring the risks taken by the commercial banks. 
In Sweden, the Riksbank has regularly highlighted many of the risks in the financial system. 
We did so most recently in our Financial Stability Report. There we pointed out, for instance, 
that  the  financial  turbulence  might  worsen  and  that  the  banks'  access  to  funding  could 
deteriorate. At the same time, we have all along made the assessment that financial stability 
in  Sweden  has  been  satisfactory.  We  make  the  same  assessment  now,  and  the  Swedish 
banks are financially strong. 
2 
 BIS Review 115/2008
As we have seen, a lot has happened on the financial markets recently. We are following 
developments closely, constantly updating our analyses and we are prepared to take action if 
necessary. We have regular contacts with banks, market participants and other government 
agencies, as well as our central bank colleagues in other countries. 
There is a generally high level of uncertainty in the world economy at present and this will 
probably  persist  for  a  good  while  to  come.  I  would  therefore  like  to  return  now  to  what  I 
mentioned at the beginning – the inflation target and the stability it offers to the economy, 
particularly when storms are raging all around us. 
Monetary policy – focus on the inflation target 
The objective of monetary policy is to maintain price stability and this has been established 
by law since 1999. To be more precise, inflation measured in terms of the consumer price 
index, CPI, is to be held at 2 per cent, with a tolerance interval of +/- 1 percentage point. This 
is how the Riksbank formulated the inflation target when it was announced in 1993. One can 
say that the task of ensuring that prices remain stable has been delegated by the Swedish 
people through the Riksdag (Swedish parliament) to the Riksbank. And this is actually not 
merely an objective, it is also a means. By keeping inflation low and stable, monetary policy 
is to help to create the best possible conditions for good and sustainable economic growth. 
Delegating monetary policy to the central bank in the way the Riksdag has done in Sweden 
also  reduces  the  risk  of  political  pressures,  short-sighted  actions  and  rapid  changes  in 
monetary policy. 
Our  focus  –  what  governs  our  interest  rate  decisions  –  is  on  attaining  the  inflation  target 
within  a  couple  of  years  in  a  way  that  provides  the  most  balanced  development  of  the 
economy  possible.  This  was  also  the  case  at  our  most  recent  monetary  policy  meeting  in 
September,  when  the  repo  rate  was  raised  to  4.75  per  cent.  It  was  a  difficult  situation  in 
which to make a decision, with high inflation both in Sweden and abroad at the outset and a 
very  uncertain  world  economy.  Although  we  Executive  Board  members  agreed  on  many 
things, our assessments differed with regard to the interest rate path needed to bring inflation 
back on target at a suitable pace.  
Although  the  differences  in  our  assessments  were  actually  fairly  modest,  it  is  extremely 
important  to  be  clear  about  both  the  common  and  individual  motives  behind  the  stances 
taken  at  the  meeting.  I  am  therefore  now  looking  forward  to  first  talking  about  what  has 
recently affected interest rate policy on a more fundamental level and then about the factors 
behind the decision taken in September.  
High inflation and rising interest rates 
The  Riksbank  is  to  ensure  that  we  keep  inflation  in  Sweden  at  a  low  and  stable  rate.  We 
have indeed experienced a long period with a fairly low rate of price increase, approximately 
1.6 per cent on average since the inflation target was announced. However, over the past 
year inflation has been higher. In August the rate of increase in consumer prices was 4.3 per 
cent.  This  is  the  highest  inflation  rate  in  almost  15  years.  Given  this,  it  is  perhaps  not 
surprising that expected inflation has also risen in the short term. But expectations of inflation 
several  years  ahead  are  now  also  clearly  above  the  Riksbank's  target  of  2  per  cent.  It  is 
therefore not surprising that many people are concerned. 
As inflation has risen, the Riksbank has raised its interest on loans to the banks, the repo 
rate. This is now 4.75 per cent. The banks’ lending rates to companies and households are 
higher and have also risen. They have risen more than the Riksbank’s rate increases. This is 
in  turn  linked  to  the  uncertainty  in  the  financial  markets,  which  has  increased  the  banks’ 
borrowing  costs  around  the  world.  At  the  same  time,  the  economic  activity  in  the  world  in 
general has weakened, which leads to a decline in exports for Swedish companies. We have 
BIS Review 115/2008 
 3
experienced many years of extremely good economic growth and low inflation. Now we must 
be prepared for high inflation, higher interest rates and lower employment possibly leading to 
a  deterioration  of  the  finances  of  many  Swedish  households  over  a  couple  of  years. 
Monetary policy often comes into focus in this type of situation.  
The recent debate – is the Riksbank chasing inflation spectres? 
The Riksbank’s interest rate increases have been much discussed recently. It has been said 
that the Bank is chasing a non-existent inflation spectre, that the inflation target should be 
scrapped  or  reformulated,  and  that  the  Riksbank  should  take  more  notice  of  economic 
activity than inflation. 
To begin with, inflation is a real problem for many households. Inflation means that everyone 
gets  less  for  their  money.  Oil,  electricity  and  food  prices  have  risen  substantially.  These 
goods are an important part of household consumption. Together food and energy comprise 
approximately one quarter of the CPI. The fact that, for instance, oil and food prices have 
risen so much here in Sweden is largely because these goods have become more expensive 
in the world market. 
Should the inflation target be reformulated? 
Some of the recent criticism has concerned whether the inflation target should apply to some 
other  measure  than  the  CPI.  The  idea  is  that  monetary  policy  should  stabilise  around  a 
measure of inflation that excludes import prices. The Riksbank is in any case unable to affect 
prices in the world market. However, this is not a convincing argument. Swedish conditions 
also affect the prices of the goods we import. The world market price of a product is not the 
price that Swedish households see in the shops. The value of the krona in relation to other 
currencies for example plays a part. Demand and factors such as transport, mark-ups in the 
wholesale and retail channels are also significant.  
What  the  Riksbank  can  do  is  to  conduct  well-balanced  monetary  policy  so  that  consumer 
prices  on  average  rise  by  2  per  cent  a  year.  When  the  Riksbank  raises  the  repo  rate, 
demand  is  dampened,  which  reduces  the  scope  for  price  increases  in  all  areas,  including 
energy and food. It is important that monetary policy is aimed at keeping down the general 
price increases and that the inflation target is not redefined merely because some prices are 
rising  more  than  others.  Households’  total  purchasing  power  is  affected  when  prices  of 
imported goods change, and this would be the case even if we had an inflation target that 
excluded these prices. When, for instance, the price of oil rises over a longer period of time 
there is a risk that price increases will spread to other areas of the economy. This risk would 
hardly decline if the inflation target was formulated differently.  
Of  course  one  must  be  open  to  change  that  could  improve  the  current  monetary  policy 
regime. But it is important to think things over very carefully. And we shouldn't fix something 
that isn't broken. If we look back over the period with the current inflation target, it is difficult 
to describe it as anything other than successful. The inflation target for monetary policy has 
without a doubt contributed to providing a stability in economic policy that was lacking in the 
Swedish economy during the 1970s and 1980s.  
Temporary effects – with the right monetary policy 
What the Riksbank needs to keep in check is the general price increases. Monetary policy 
neither can nor should try to counteract the fact that prices of some goods increase more 
than others. So, if it is mainly a few products that have led to consumer prices increasing so 
much, why is the Riksbank tightening monetary policy? The argument put forward by some 
critics  is  that  the  increases  in  oil  and  food  prices  only  affect  inflation  temporarily.  The 
4 
 BIS Review 115/2008
Riksbank should not do anything about this. Such a view assumes that the increases in oil 
and food prices will not spread to other prices, to demands for wage compensation and to 
even  higher  inflation.  But  this  is  not  something  one  can  automatically  assume.  There  are 
many examples over the years. Those of you who were around during the oil crisis of the 
1970s will perhaps remember how the substantial rise in oil prices had an impact on the rest 
of the economy. The inflation rate reached two figures. Wise from this experience, I believe 
we should handle things differently now. It is our task to ensure that the temporary effects 
remain temporary and do not become entrenched. 
Do we only focus on inflation?  
Another question that has arisen in the recent debate is to what extent the Riksbank should 
take production and employment into consideration. Let me first say that when it comes to 
the  relation  between  low  and  stable  inflation  and  good  growth,  one  does  not  exclude  the 
other.  The  actual  purpose  of  the  inflation  target  is  to  provide  the  conditions  for  good 
economic growth that is sustainable in the long term. 
Furthermore, the Riksbank shall also give some consideration to developments in production 
and employment in the individual interest rate decisions, as long as it appears possible to 
attain  the  inflation  target.  Monetary  policy  is  flexible.  We  are  no  “inflation  nutters”  as  my 
British colleague Mervyn King has put it. The Riksbank cannot stabilise inflation at 2 per cent 
all of the time. Sudden increases in oil, food, clothing or any other kind of prices can push up 
inflation. Our interest rate policy is then designed so that inflation can be expected to be back 
on target within a couple of years, not next week. The fact that it may take some time before 
inflation  is  back  at  2  per  cent  provides  some  scope  to  take  into  account  production  and 
employment. 
The  Riksbank  thus  has  some  scope  to  give  consideration  to  developments  in  economic 
activity. This is something we actually do. Over the past year, for instance, the interest rate 
has  not  been  raised  dramatically,  but  at  a  more  gradual  pace,  despite  a  rapid  increase  in 
inflation.  The  Riksbank’s  assessment  is  that  a  cautious  increase  in  the  interest  rate  is 
sufficient  to  bring  inflation  back  around  the  target  of  2  per  cent  a  couple  of  years  ahead. 
However,  the  Riksbank’s  task  is  to  maintain  price  stability.  This  sets  a  limit  as  to  how 
restrictive  one  can  be  with  the  interest  rate  weapon.  Without  the  interest  rate  increase 
inflation could have soared similar to the way it did in the 1970s and 1980s. At that time the 
economic policy did not prevent inflation from becoming entrenched. The inflation target has 
been  set  to  create  conditions  for  good  growth  that  is  sustainable  in  the  long  term.  An 
expansionary monetary policy which perhaps contributes to more favourable developments 
in  economic  activity  in  the  short  term  can  provide  major  problems  for  production  and 
employment in the long term.  
The most recent decision  
When  the  most  recent  interest  rate  decision was  made,  we  six  members  of  the  Executive 
Board held differing opinions. I and two of my colleagues voted to raise the interest rate to 
4.75 per cent. There have not been many cases where the voting is a “draw” and the casting 
vote determines the decision; this has happened only four times since the Executive Board 
was formed almost ten years ago. The result is not particularly strange or surprising given 
the situation when the decision was made. We are six different individuals on the Executive 
Board. We have different backgrounds and different perspectives. Sometimes this leads to 
our  assessments  differing,  even  if  we  work  towards  the  same  objective.  It  applies  in 
particular to very uncertain situations like the present one. But the whole idea of having an 
Executive Board is that disagreement is permitted. Different approaches and opinions enrich 
the discussions and hopefully lead to better decisions.  
BIS Review 115/2008 
 5
My own assessment 
So  how  did  I  reason  at  the  most  recent  meeting,  when  I  voted  for  another  increase  of  a 
quarter percentage point? Well, to begin with it is important to put an individual decision in 
the right perspective. Monetary policy acts with a time lag and what affects inflation a couple 
of  years  ahead  is  a  series  of  interest  rate  decisions  rather  than  an  individual  interest  rate 
increase, or cut, for that matter. My decision in September was therefore closely connected 
to both the interest rate policy we have conducted over the past few years and the interest 
rate path I expected to see in the future.  
A new phase 
We  have  experienced  a  long  period  of  low  inflation  and  high  growth  from  a  global 
perspective, but we have now entered a new phase. In developed economies like the United 
States and the euro area growth is falling, while it remains high in emerging economies such 
as  China,  India  and  Brazil.  The  effects  of  the  high  demand  for  certain  commodities  from 
rapidly-growing economies are something that central banks around the world must manage 
in the future. Another example is the imbalances in the global economy. Access to credit was 
too high for a long time in many countries and contributed to an unsustainable development. 
The imbalances that were built up are being corrected, but it is still uncertain how long the 
adjustment will take. 
What we see now is a world less stable than we have been seeing in recent years. Sweden 
is a small open economy and the Riksbank conducts an independent monetary policy. We 
have an inflation target which we endeavour to attain. An inflation target becomes an even 
more  important  anchor  for  monetary  policy  in  a  situation  like  the  present  one.  If  financial 
imbalances  and  large  fluctuations  in  commodity  prices  create  global  shocks  over  a  long 
period of time, the inflation target can in itself have a calming effect on our own economy. It 
therefore feels particularly important to maintain our focus on the inflation target right now. 
The interest rate decision 
In connection with the Executive Board’s monetary policy meeting on 3 September, we saw 
signs that inflation is falling in various parts of the world. But this fall in inflation is from a very 
high level and as yet no clear decline is visible in the statistics. Swedish inflation is still at its 
highest  level  since  the  mid-1990s.  At  the  same  time,  growth  has  been  weaker  than 
anticipated. Productivity has also been weak and this has led to rising production costs. The 
weak  productivity  appears  to  be  persisting  and  leads  to  continued  high  cost  pressures. 
Resource utilisation measured in terms of the number of hours worked is still slightly higher 
than normal. However, we expect it to decline.  
Expectations of inflation have been high, both in the short and long term. At the time of the 
September meeting they were still above the inflation target. Expectations are an indication 
of  confidence  in  monetary  policy.  Both  interest  rate  increases  and  falling  energy  and  food 
prices may have contributed to the slight fall. But it is important to remember that inflation 
expectations are still too high. There is considerable uncertainty regarding commodity prices 
and global developments and as I see it we cannot sound the all clear yet.  
To meet the inflation target it is important to conduct a monetary policy that contributes to 
long-term inflation expectations being close to 2 per cent. My assessment was that a further 
increase was required to achieve this. When I looked ahead I considered that both inflation 
and inflation expectations must be closer to the target before expansionary monetary policy 
can be reconciled with bringing inflation back to 2 per cent within a couple of years. Weaker 
economic activity is no guarantee that inflation will “automatically” fall. This is connected to, 
for instance, the risk of contagion effects and the fact that inflation can become entrenched, 
6 
 BIS Review 115/2008
as  I  mentioned  earlier.  Both  in  Sweden  and  abroad  there  are  many  examples  of  inflation 
remaining high when growth slows down or falls. 
Compared with the assessment we made in July, we made a downward adjustment in our 
forecast  for  the  future  repo  rate.  New  statistics  indicated  that  both  global  and  Swedish 
economic activity had weakened sooner than expected and we therefore revised down our 
forecasts for growth. Given this, I considered that we have now completed our interest rate 
increases.  I  expected  that  the  next  stage  will  be  a  cut  and  that  monetary  policy  will  ease 
slightly during 2009.  
I think it is difficult to claim that the interest rate path we presented in September is too strict. 
The  interest  rates  are  not  particularly  high,  either  from  an  historical  perspective  or  in 
comparison with many other countries with a floating exchange rate. Resource utilisation, the 
good public sector finances and the surplus on the current account provide us with a good 
starting point. The Swedish economy has the necessary requirements to meet both a limited 
downturn in economic activity and growth around the long-term average towards the end of 
our forecast horizon, at the same time as attaining the inflation target. In addition, the current 
interest rate provides some support for the exchange rate. This has some value with regard 
to meeting the inflation target. 
A few final words 
Let  me  just  very  briefly  summarise  what  I  have  talked  about  today.  The  Riksbank  strives 
constantly both to attain the inflation target and to manage its task of safeguarding financial 
stability  in  the  best  possible  way.  If  we  succeed,  we  provide  stability  in  the  Swedish 
economy, particularly in times when there is international turmoil. 
We will probably have to live with the financial market turbulence and the crisis in the United 
States for a good while to come. It is too early yet to be able to foresee when this will all be 
over. However, what we can say is that it will take time. The next occasion when we will be 
weighing 
these 
developments  affect  the  prospects  for  growth  and  inflation  is  at  our  next  monetary  policy 
meeting at the end of October. Until then we will of course continue to follow developments 
very  closely  and  to  have  regular  contacts  with  banks,  market  participants  and  other 
government  agencies.  We  are  constantly  trying  to  include  all  important  information  in  our 
analyses.  This  is  the  way  we  always  work,  and  it  applies  to  both  financial  stability  and 
monetary policy. Let me conclude with what must be the most important thing for Sweden 
right  now  –  the  observation  that  financial  stability  here  at  home  is  satisfactory  and  that 
Sweden is well-equipped to meet the global economic downturn on this occasion. 
information  received  and  assessing  how 
together  all  of 
the  new 
BIS Review 115/2008 
 7
