Radovan Jelašić: Development of the payment cards business in Serbia 
Speech  by  Mr  Radovan  Jelašić,  Governor  of  the  National Bank  of  Serbia,  at  the Payment 
Cards Conference in the Serbian Chamber of Commerce, Belgrade, 6 June 2008. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
Allow me to greet you on behalf of the National Bank of Serbia on the occasion of the annual 
meeting  on  payment  cards  organized  by  the  Serbian  Chamber  of  Commerce.  This  now-
traditional meeting has had a key role in bringing together the most important elements of the 
card  business  chain  –  card  systems,  banks,  merchants  and  regulators,  the  cooperation 
among which is vital for resolving the key issues facing the card payment systems: 
• 
• 
• 
NBS achievements in these three key aspects over the past 12 months: 
Quality of services  
Security of payment  
Efficiency  
Quality of services 
1.  
As  many  of  you  know,  during  the  past  year  the  DinaCard  system  introduced  new 
m-Commerce services. Namely, in addition to the service of pre-paid cell-phone top-up by 
SMS, it is now also possible to pay post-paid bills of Telekom Srbija or to pay for the ordering 
of  birth/marriage  certificates  by  mobile  telephone.  The  introduction  of  on-line  DinaCard 
transactions, in cooperation with the national airline company JAT, is expected in the near 
future.  Since  January,  the  DinaCard  system  also  offers  the  possibility  of  remitting  money 
from  a  foreign  country  to  the  DinaCard  account  in  Serbia  at  a  very  low  cost  –  EUR  5  for 
transfers of under EUR 200, with the transfer effected in a single day. 
Security of payment 
2.  
This year, the National Payment Card centre will complete several major projects: 
a) 
b) 
c) 
Setting up a disaster recovery location 
Setting up a new PCI-DSS standard in the central switch 
Defining  a  schedule  for  the  introduction  of  the  new  PCI-DSS  standard  for  all 
DinaCard system participants 
Technical specification of the DinaCard chip, i.e. EMV standard 
d) 
Efficiency of the payment system 
3.  
On  1  September  2007,  the  NBS  introduced  the  so-called  interchange  into  the  DinaCard 
system. For the majority of merchants, interchange in the DinaCard system equals 0.7% of 
the  purchase  value  (0.25%  for  petrol,  0.4%  for  utilities).  This  measure  is  deemed  only 
temporary. The NBS has completed a study on interchange in Serbia and the EU countries 
and  is  cooperating  closely  with  international  card  systems  (such  as  VISA)  and  European 
institutions  in  order  for  Serbia  to  come  closer  to  the  European  level  of  interchange  for  all 
banking  cards  issued  in  the  country.  As  always,  we  believe  that  the  Serbian  Chamber  of 
Commerce provides an optimal framework for the discussion between banks and merchants 
on this highly topical issue in Europe and worldwide. 
BIS Review 75/2008 
 1
The performances of the payment cards market (31 May 2008) are as follows: 
• 
Number of transactions performed in Serbia over the past 12 months – close to 90 
million  
Number of POS terminals – 60,000 thousand  
Number of ATMs – over 2,200  
Number of payments by mobile phone in the DinaCard system in May –100,000  
• 
• 
• 
However, we will not let these results lull us into satisfaction; to the contrary, they will only 
serve to encourage us to work more, with increased efficiency, in the following key directions: 
Payment card charges: It will not be an overstatement to say that payment card charges are 
excessive  and  out  of  proportion  to  the  actual  operational  costs.  I  am  sure  than  many 
merchants would use payment cards much more readily if this form of payment did not lower 
their  turnover  by  up  to  3%.  And  I  hope  we  all  know  what  3%  means  in  the  21st  century! 
Payment cards, rather than being an objective in themselves, represent a means to having a 
more efficient banking/payment/tax (money laundering, declaration of income) system. The 
present level of margins, however, does not promote the achievement of this objective over 
the medium and still less over the long run. And so we arrive at the typical dilemma for banks 
and  card  systems:  to  keep  the  margins  at  their  current  level  and  only  slowly  increase  the 
volume  of  transactions;  or  to  slash  margins,  inducing  a  super-proportional  increase  in 
turnover, which would eventually bring even higher profits than in the first scenario. The NBS 
will work on promoting the latter alternative as the most beneficial for all participants – and 
we cannot spare any more time.  
Mobile  telephony  has  come  to  play  an  increasingly  important  role  in  the  payment  system, 
both when it comes to local payments and to foreign remittances. By mid-2008, there were 
around 9 million mobile phones registered in Serbia, each of which is a potential “payment 
card”. Let me remind you that the sole objective of the NBS regarding the payment system is 
clearly defined by the Law: “The NBS shall regulate and upgrade the payment system of the 
country, supervise the performance of payment transactions in banks, etc.” The role of the 
NBS, therefore, is not to promote profits, but efficiency of the payment system. In the future, 
the NBS will continue to actively cooperate with mobile telephony operators, and will support 
them in the development of new services, including payment system services!  
I wish you all success in your future work in the hope that today’s meeting will contribute to a 
still faster development of the card business in Serbia! 
2 
 BIS Review 75/2008
