Nout Wellink: Recent market turmoil – implications for supervisors and 
risk managers 
Remarks by Dr Nout Wellink, President of the Netherlands Bank and Chairman of the Basel 
Committee  on  Banking  Supervision,  at  the  GARP  2008  9th  Annual  Risk  Management 
Convention & Exhibition, New York, 27 February 2008. 
 Introduction 
I  am  pleased  to  join  you  today  to  speak  about  the  recent  financial  market  turmoil  and  the 
concrete  responses  of  the  Basel  Committee.  The  mission  of  the  Basel  Committee  is  to 
improve  the  quality  of  banking  supervision  worldwide  and  to  promote  strong  risk 
management  practices  at  banks.  This  morning  I  would  like  to  discuss  some  of  our  recent 
initiatives with you. 
Issues and lessons for risk managers and bank supervisors 
Let  me  begin  by  first  focusing  on  some  of  the  key  issues  that  were  identified  during  this 
recent turmoil and the lessons – in some cases painful ones – experienced by risk managers 
and  supervisors.  Quite  frankly,  some  of  the  lessons  learnt  from  the  turmoil  point  to  the 
importance  of  risk  management  fundamentals.  While  the  triggers  and  transmission  of  risk 
always  take  on  new  faces,  it  is  the  basics  that  remain  the  same  –  complex  structured 
products provide a stark example of this. 
From  the  perspective  of  bank  supervisors,  I  believe  there  were  three  fundamental 
shortcomings that contributed to and amplified the turmoil. These fundamentals can be found 
in all parts of the credit intermediation process. The first of these relates to the origination of 
credits.  Here,  the  industry  failed  to  consistently  employ  sound  underwriting  standards.  In 
many cases, firms also neglected to define prudent firm-wide risk limits on these exposures. 
Second,  risk  management  and  measurement  capabilities  did  not  keep  pace  with  rapid 
financial  innovation  and  the  evolution  to  market-based  credit  intermediation.  Third,  certain 
aspects of regulation, supervision and market transparency failed to reflect financial market 
developments and therefore contributed to weak practices at banks. These are areas where 
future practical improvements must be made. 
Underwriting standards 
As you know, the trigger for the turbulence was subprime mortgage lending, much of which 
took place outside the regulated banking sector. A large part of this lending was based on 
weak  underwriting  standards.  Weak  underwriting  has  long  been  the  bane  of  banks  and 
banking  systems;  the  difference  in  this  case  was  the  rapid  and  global  transmission  of  risk 
through the use of securitisation. Problems at banks are all too often caused by the failure to 
adhere  to  basic  risk  management  principles,  especially  when  new  products  and  markets 
come into play. In many cases, this is due to the pressures that firms face to increase market 
share, combined with unrealistic expectations about growth and performance prospects. But 
no matter how much risk exposures get sliced, diced and distributed among financial market 
participants,  financial  innovation  cannot  mask  poor  underwriting.  At  the  same  time,  the 
additional complexity, opacity and leverage resulting from certain structured products and off-
balance  sheet  vehicles  further  magnified  the  problem,  as  it  has  not  been  sufficiently  clear 
where the ultimate risk lies. This brings me to my second point.  
BIS Review 21/2008 
 1
Risk management infrastructure and financial innovation 
Indeed, the second fundamental shortcoming is the wide disparity between the rapid pace of 
financial  innovation  and  the  risk  management  infrastructure  on  which  this  innovation  was 
built. When I spoke at last year’s GARP conference, I noted that the linkages between the 
various  segments  of  the  credit  markets  and  financial  institutions  had  been  fundamentally 
altered. This is mainly due to increased market-based credit intermediation, or the originate-
to-distribute model. 
Historic  or  statistical  measures  of  risk  and  exposure,  such  as  value-at-risk,  past  loss 
experiences and name concentration in the traditional banking book have proved inadequate 
when assessing relationships in the originate-to-distribute model and how they may perform 
under  stress.  In  fact,  the  use  of  these  and  other  historic  measures  resulted  in  a  massive 
understatement of stressed losses, which were far below the actual losses experienced to 
date.  
As I suggested at last year’s conference, the greater reliance on securitisation and other risk 
transfer  mechanisms  means  that  banks  are  more  vulnerable  to  exposures  building  up  or 
returning to the balance sheet when market liquidity seizes up. In addition, increased reliance 
on  market  liquidity  means  that  problems  in  financial  markets  can  adversely  –  and  very 
quickly  –  affect  banks’  funding  liquidity.  However,  for  those  institutions  that  stress  test 
funding capabilities, many only assumed a firm-specific event.  
The problems arising from poor underwriting were compounded by failures to manage firm-
wide  concentrations.  Many  firms  were  unaware  of  their  overall  exposure  to  subprime 
mortgages  and  related  structured  products,  such  as  CDOs,  whose  repayment  depend  on 
such mortgages. These concentrations went far beyond traditional loan portfolio exposures 
and  included  CDOs  and  mortgage-backed  securities  held  in  the  trading  book;  liquidity 
facilities extended to conduits; reputational exposures to sponsored SIVs; and counterparty 
exposures  to  the  monoline  sector.  In  addition  to  failing  to  understand  their  firm-wide 
concentrations,  many  institutions  could  not  readily  nor  easily  aggregate  their  subprime 
exposure sector when the crisis arose. This points to the need for greater investment in firm 
wide risk management and measurement capabilities.  
Sound regulation, supervision and transparency 
Finally,  there  were  shortcomings  in  regulation,  supervision  and  market  transparency.  It  is 
important to point out that this crisis has played out under Basel I, which was instrumental in 
raising  the  level  of  bank  capital  in  the  late  1980s  and  through  the  90s.  However,  the 
framework became outdated and could not adequately capture the types of risks that banks 
face in today’s increasingly market-based credit intermediation environment. As a result, off-
balance  sheet  exposures  as  well  as  operational,  legal  and  reputational  risks  were  not 
appropriately  identified  and  measured.  Moreover,  liquidity  supervision  and  regulation  have 
failed to keep up with banks’ changing risk profiles and growing vulnerability to market-based 
shocks.  All  in  all,  these  issues  underscore  the  need  for  Basel  II  and  the  necessity  to 
continuously improve the framework.  
Recent  difficulties  also  highlighted  the  lack  of  transparency  due  to  insufficient  disclosure. 
CDOs  of  asset-backed securities  are  a  particularly  striking  example.  I  must  add,  however, 
the turmoil also made clear that investors did not make full use of available information and 
placed  excessive  reliance  on  external  ratings.  Taken  together,  these  factors  resulted  in 
banks  and  investors  assuming  excessive  risk  and  concentration  to  the  subprime  sector  – 
either directly or indirectly through structured products based on subprime mortgages.  
2 
 BIS Review 21/2008
Work programme of the Basel Committee 
From  the  Basel  Committee’s  perspective,  the  previous  analysis  points  to  a  number  of 
concrete measures that banks and supervisors must take. These measures should improve 
firms’  resilience  to  market-based  shocks  and  help  strengthen  confidence  in  core  financial 
institutions.  I  will  address  three  of  these  initiatives  the  Committee  is  working  to  complete, 
which are: 
1) 
2) 
3) 
implementation of and further improvements to Basel II; 
enhancing global standards for liquidity risk management and supervision; and 
strengthening  other  risk  management  practices,  particularly  with  respect  to  stress 
testing and valuations.  
Basel II 
1)  
Let me now say a few words about each of these initiatives, and I will start by underscoring 
the importance of Basel II. In developing the Framework, the Committee sought to provide 
better incentives for banks to capture exposures to structured credit activities, both on- and 
off-balance  sheet,  including  ABCP  conduits.  The  three  pillars  of  the  framework  were 
designed  to  better  reflect  banks’  evolving  risk  profiles,  while  building  in  cushions  for 
uncertainty and forward looking risks. The implementation of the Basel II framework hence 
remains a high priority. 
At  the  same  time  however,  we  have  identified  some  areas  within  the  improved  Basel  II 
framework that need to be strengthened to reflect the lessons of recent events. These relate 
to the Pillar 1 capital treatment of certain securitisations of complex products where the vast 
majority of losses in the banking sector have occurred. In Pillar 2 of the framework, we need 
to  make  sure  that  banks  perform  adequate  stress  tests  and  hold  capital  for  uncertainties 
related  to  exposures  coming  back  to  the  balance  sheet  for  legal,  reputational  or  liquidity 
reasons. And we need to build on the Pillar 3 disclosure requirements of the framework to 
strengthen  banks’  transparency  around  exposures  to  structured  credit  products  and 
securitised assets, including banks’ involvement as sponsors.  
I also want to emphasise the importance of strong capital supporting trading book exposures. 
For the largest global banks, balance sheet assets have more than doubled between 2000 
and 2006. Much of this growth relates to trading assets. Indeed, the vast majority of bank 
losses  have  been  on  retained  trading  exposures,  particularly  highly  rated  CDOs  and 
leveraged lending. As supervisors, we need to make sure that the capital underpinning the 
trading book is commensurate with the risks that firms face. We therefore are supplementing 
the current VAR-based framework with a capital charge for credit default risk in the trading 
book. Moreover, to address the shortcomings of VAR, it is critical that banks have rigorous 
stress  testing  and  scenario  analysis  that  translate  into  prudent  risk  taking  and  limits  along 
with strong capital.  
Liquidity risk 
2)  
Our  second  initiative  relates  to  liquidity  risk  management  and  liquidity  risk  supervision.  It 
goes  without  saying  that  over  the  past  months,  national  supervisors  have  been  closely 
monitoring the liquidity situation of their banking sectors and individual banking institutions to 
ensure  that  they  enhance  their  resiliency  to  stress.  The  Committee  is  engaged  in  a  major 
effort to strengthen global standards for liquidity risk management and supervision. We have 
identified  a  range  of  common  weaknesses  in  liquidity  risk  management,  including  stress 
testing,  contingency  funding  plans,  disclosure  and  the  management  of  off-balance  sheet 
exposures. We are working to translate these lessons into robust global standards for risk 
management and supervision. Practically, this involves a fundamental review of the Sound 
practices for managing liquidity in banking organisations, which the Committee developed in 
BIS Review 21/2008 
 3
2000.  We  plan  to  issue  the  enhanced  sound  practices  for  public  comment  this  summer. 
Issuing sound guidance and standards is only the first step; implementation and follow-up is 
the second. After the Committee issues the updated sound practices later this year, it will be 
incumbent upon banks to properly implement them and for supervisors to follow up to ensure 
proper implementation and adherence.  
Strengthening other risk management practices 
3)  
The  third  area  to  which  the  Basel Committee  attaches  high  priority  is the  strengthening  of 
other risk management practises. As I have indicated, there is a need to strengthen various 
aspects  of  firm-wide  risk  governance  and  management  practices.  Let  me  mention  two 
specific areas, namely valuations and stress testing. 
Valuation  practices  for  complex  trading  assets  have  been  a  destabilising  factor  over  the 
course  of  the  crisis.  When  markets  for  financial  instruments  do  not  function  properly,  it  is 
difficult  to  determine  a  fair  value.  Also,  market  participants  have  had  a  notable  lack  of 
confidence  in  firms’  disclosure  of  exposures  to  structured  products,  processes  for  valuing 
positions,  and  the  timely  and  accurate  recognition  of  losses.  This  translated  in  a  marked 
decline in financial firms’ share prices. Recent financial disclosures are helping improve the 
situation but more needs to be done. With close cooperation from risk managers and other 
professionals, the Committee is carefully analysing how to help put valuation practices on a 
sounder long term footing. This is a topic the Committee is deeply concerned with, given the 
growing share of exposures that have been subject to mark-to-market valuations and which 
then flow through to earnings and capital. Disciplined fair valuation practices and clear sound 
practices can help make firms more resilient to stress. But poor practices can create major 
vulnerabilities for individual banks and for the financial system. 
Furthermore, it also is critical that banks improve their firm wide stress testing practices. The 
turbulence  has  made  clear  that  firms  need  to  aggregate  all  exposures  to  a  particular  risk 
driver or related drivers and subject them to stress, also taking into account second round 
effects  and  the  response  of  other  market  participants.  This  is  particularly  relevant  since 
funding  and  market  liquidity  are  increasingly  linked.  In  addition,  additional  forward  looking 
measures  of  risk  must  be  applied  when  we  see  rapid  growth  in  new  products  or  markets, 
which  have  not  been  subject  to  an  economic  or  financial  market  downturn.  Firms  must 
develop  the  governance  and  infrastructure  to  carry  out  rigorous  stress  tests  that  identify 
where  the  major  vulnerabilities  and  firm-wide  concentrations  lie.  And  there  needs  to  be  a 
clear  impact  on  risk  taking  and  appetite.  The  Committee  will  be  taking a  close  look  at  the 
lessons of the turmoil, how the current range of bank stress testing practices stacks up, and 
where we can strengthen the supervision around stress testing going forward.  
Conclusion 
In conclusion, the Basel Committee is focusing on practical and concrete efforts that will help 
strengthen  risk  management,  regulation,  supervision,  market  transparency  for  banking 
institutions.  We  have  embarked  on  a  focused  and  ambitious  work  agenda  with  clear 
deliverables. We also are contributing to the broader initiative of the Financial Stability Forum 
to address the issues resulting from the recent turmoil. Some of the Committee’s efforts will 
take time, but having a clear road map should improve market confidence even in the shorter 
term. 
The banking sector needs to have sufficient capital and liquidity buffers to absorb financial 
shocks  and  the  uncertainties  around  how  such  shocks  could  play  out  in  the  future  as  the 
process of financial innovation continues. Risk managers need to continuously translate the 
basics  of  sound  risk  governance  and  management  to  rapidly  changing  environments.  And 
importantly,  regulators  need  to  make  sure  that  the  infrastructure  of  supervision,  regulation 
and transparency keeps pace with innovation and promotes appropriate incentives for sound 
4 
 BIS Review 21/2008
risk management. There are no simple, quick fix measures that will prevent the next crisis. 
But I believe that the steps I have outlined will make the banking sector more resilient to the 
next set of shocks, whatever their source. Thank you. 
BIS Review 21/2008 
 5
