David Longworth: Credit markets, financial stability and monetary policy 
Remarks  by  Mr  David  Longworth,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  to  the  Global 
Investment Conference, Lake Louise, Alberta, 10 April 2008. 
 Good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen. It's good to be here in my home province of Alberta 
to  discuss with  you  some  interesting  topics  at  a  very  interesting  time.  I  remember  back  in 
January thinking that the previous five months had been the busiest of my career at the Bank 
of Canada. However, I believe I can now say that the past eight months have definitely been 
the most active – and most interesting – in my Bank of Canada career. 
Today, I'd like to discuss some of the crucial issues that we have been dealing with during 
this period. I'll begin with a brief overview of some key events that have led to the turbulence 
that continues to upset financial markets and that greatly contributed to the remarkably wide 
credit spreads that we now witness. I'll discuss some of the ongoing analysis of these credit 
spreads that we are conducting at the Bank of Canada. I will then turn to the policy issues 
around financial stability that the turbulence has highlighted and describe some of the work 
that we are doing to promote financial stability throughout this period of uncertainty. Finally, 
I'll  describe  how  we  take  financial  market  developments  into  account  as  we  conduct 
monetary  policy  and  the  important  role  that  this  policy  plays  in  promoting  economic  and 
financial stability for Canadians. 
How did this happen? 
What were some of the root causes of the current market turbulence? We know that for a 
number  of  years,  desired  world  savings  exceeded  desired  world  investment.  As  a  result, 
long-term  real  interest  rates  decreased  around  the  world.  This  led  investors  to  search  for 
yield, and they became willing to take on risk at lower premiums than they had demanded in 
the past. Part of this search for yield led to rapid growth in the demand for, and development 
of,  more  complex  structured  financial  products,  such  as  collateralized  debt  obligations 
(CDOs) backed by asset-backed securities or by other CDOs, and asset-backed commercial 
paper (ABCP) backed by CDOs, some of which (after 2000) were based on U.S. subprime 
mortgages.1  
These complex instruments were rated by credit-rating agencies using the same scale that 
they  had  used  in  the  past  for  plain-vanilla  corporate  debt.  Some  sellers  of  these  complex 
financial instruments emphasized that these products were highly rated – many were AAA – 
but  placed  little  emphasis  on  their  other  features.  A  number  of  investors  failed  to  perform 
their  own  research  or  due  diligence  and  instead  relied  too  much  on  credit  ratings  as  a 
measure  of  the  ultimate  risk  in  holding  these  complex  debt  instruments.  In  doing  so,  they 
failed  to  take  into  account  other  risks  such  as  liquidity  risk.  The  complexity  of  these 
instruments  frequently  made  them  opaque,  and  too  often  investors  put  their  money  and 
confidence into investments that they did not fully understand. 
At the same time, U.S. policy interest rates rose, and the basic loan quality of U.S. subprime 
mortgages  worsened  through  2005  and  2006,  although  this  worsening  did  not  become 
broadly apparent until the first half of 2007. The belated realization by the rating agencies of 
the poor quality of these loans resulted in downgrades of structured products with exposure 
to subprime mortgages, often by multiple notches. These instruments were held by a variety 
                                                 
1   For a further discussion of these financial market events, please see the most recent issue of the Financial 
System Review (Ottawa: Bank of Canada, December 2007). 
BIS Review 42/2008 
 1
of  investment  funds,  including  many  sponsored  by  banks.  Indeed,  some  products  were 
directly  held  by  banks  themselves.  Investors  in  Canada,  as  well  as  those  in  the  United 
States,  soon  came  to  realize  that  highly  rated  structured  debt  instruments  could  fall 
substantially  in  value  and  were  subject  to  severe  downgrades.  As  a  result,  they  began  to 
shun almost any type of structured product, partly because the complexity of such products 
made it difficult for many market participants to understand these instruments and, therefore, 
to accurately price the risk that these products posed to financial institutions. In Canada, this 
included  instruments  such  as  ABCP.  Almost  immediately,  non-bank-sponsored  ABCP 
stopped rolling over in Canada, which led to the standstill under the Montreal Accord. 
As market players observed the downgrades of structured products based on U.S. subprime 
mortgages  and  the  drying  up  of  ABCP  markets,  two  additional  concerns  emerged.  First, 
there was a concern about the financial health of counterparties, particularly banks. Second, 
there  was  a  concern  that  securitization  would  proceed  at  a  much  slower  pace  than  in  the 
past,  thus  requiring  re-intermediation  that  would  result  in  a  more  rapid  expansion  of  bank 
balance sheets and an associated need for capital. These two concerns led to a significant 
increase in the interest rate spreads of bank debt over government benchmarks. 
Widening of credit spreads 
As time has passed, it has not been only bank credit spreads that have widened. We know 
from  past  experience  that  variations  in  credit  spreads  can  be  driven  by  several  different 
factors. One basic component of credit spreads is expected loss from default, while a second 
relates to risk premiums, of which there are two main types: a credit-risk premium and an 
illiquidity  premium.2  The  credit-risk  premium  is  related  to  the  variability  of  underlying 
expected loss, and both this premium and the expected loss from default itself are affected 
by  changes  in  macroeconomic  activity.  The  illiquidity  premium  relates  to  a  lack  of  general 
market liquidity. The credit and illiquidity premiums, like other risk premiums, can vary with 
any change in the risk appetite of investors.  
Now,  let  me  look  specifically  at  the  Canadian  situation.  From  early  2004  to  mid-2007, 
spreads  on  Canadian  corporate  investment-grade  and  high-yield  bonds  were  fairly  stable 
and narrow relative to historical norms, as were those in most other industrialized countries. 
(This can be seen in Chart 1.) But these spreads began to widen last summer as the crisis in 
the subprime-mortgage market started to take hold. Some of this widening can be explained 
by rising concerns about Canada's economic outlook due to the impact here of a possible 
recession in the United States. However, credit spreads – while not all at historic peaks – are 
now  far  wider  than  one  would  have  predicted,  based  on  past  experience  with  economic 
downturns, and given the fact that Canada's economy is in a healthier position than the U.S. 
economy.  (Chart  2  shows  spreads  on  investment-grade  bonds  in  both  Canada  and  the 
United States.) 
                                                 
2   T. Gravelle and A. Garcia, "Decomposing Canadian Corporate Spreads: What Are the Drivers of the Current 
Widening?" Financial System Review (Ottawa: Bank of Canada, forthcoming, June 2008). 
2 
 BIS Review 42/2008
  One partial explanation for the current wide credit spreads – globally, not just in Canada – 
relates to an unusual rise in factors not related to credit risk, such as the systemic drying up 
of market liquidity for debt issued by corporations, particularly for debt issued by investment-
grade companies like financial institutions. Another partial explanation is that the current wide 
credit spreads are being driven by what appears to be excessive pessimism about expected 
default rates. We can see evidence of this in the very high cost of default protection in many 
markets, despite some improvement recently.3 (Chart 3 shows the evolution of credit default 
spreads  in  North  America  and  Europe,  for  both  investment-grade  and  "crossover" 
companies,  that  is,  those  with  lower-quality  but  still  investment-grade  ratings  or  slightly 
below.) 
                                                 
3   For  example,  in  recent  weeks,  the  default  rates  implied  by  the  levels  of  the  ITRAXX  crossover  index  have 
reached almost twice the cumulative default rate experienced by comparably rated companies during the last 
two recessions. 
BIS Review 42/2008 
 3
 
As we work to better understand the forces behind these particularly wide credit spreads, we 
do realize that as difficult as it can be to price risk, the current situation demonstrates how 
much  more  difficult  it  is  to  price  uncertainty.4  Market  participants  are  facing  issues  and 
questions  that  are  unfamiliar  and  that  cannot  be  easily  answered,  which  is  creating  this 
uncertainty. The first source of this uncertainty is the unique nature of the U.S. experience 
with the kind of housing crisis that the U.S. economy is facing. This is the first time in more 
than a half-century that we have seen such a fall in nominal U.S. house prices. 
A  second  source  of  uncertainty  in  markets  relates  to  questions  about  the  solvency  of 
financial institutions. When market participants lose confidence in their ability to assess the 
solvency  of  their  counterparties,  which  are  often  other  financial  institutions,  they  become 
reluctant to lend to one another. In the current example, when firms did agree to loan to each 
other, they often demanded unusually high short-term interest rates, which contributed to the 
wide  credit  spreads  that  we  have  been  witnessing.  Most  recently,  we've  seen  a  powerful 
example of this uncertainty playing out in the situation involving Bear Stearns. The positive 
news  is  that  financial  institutions  have  revealed  more  of  their  losses  and  exposures,  and 
have taken steps to rebuild capital. These actions have tended to settle markets. As I alluded 
to earlier, market uncertainty has been global in nature. Most industrialized countries have 
seen  sharp  and  often  unprecedented  widening  in  the  spreads  between  rates  in  short-term 
credit markets, such as the 3-month London Interbank Offered Rate (LIBOR) or  Canadian 
Dollar  Offered  Rate  (CDOR),  and  expected  overnight  interest  rates.  (Chart  4  shows  how 
short-term spreads have widened significantly since last August. Canadian spreads are now 
significantly below their peaks, but remain elevated relative to historical norms.) 
                                                 
4   The uncertainty we speak of is the so-called Knightian uncertainty, in which probabilities cannot be attached to 
individual events and, as such, risk (or the variance) cannot be measured. 
4 
 BIS Review 42/2008
 A third source of market uncertainty relates to the degree of de-leveraging of hedge funds, 
proprietary  desks,  and  other  highly  leveraged  institutions.  With  some  prime  brokers  facing 
capital  constraints  and  with  the  volatility  of  asset  prices  having  risen,  certain  institutions  – 
including  hedge  funds  –  are  seeing  their  lines  of  credit  cut  and  their  margin  requirements 
raised.  This  typically  forces  them  to  sell  assets,  which  has  exacerbated  the  illiquidity  in 
markets,  making  it  extremely  difficult  for  market  participants  to  price  these  assets  or,  at 
times,  to  find  a  market  for  them.  One  might  assume  that  this  situation  could  create  an 
excellent  buying  opportunity  for  sizable,  unleveraged  institutional  investors,  the  so-called 
"real money funds." Yet most have remained largely on the sidelines. They may be held back 
by  the  continued  uncertainty,  perhaps  waiting  to  see  if  the  market  has  further  to  fall,  thus 
creating  even  better  buying  opportunities.  Again,  the  increased  provision  of  information  by 
financial  institutions  on  their  losses  and  exposures  should  be  very  helpful  in  easing 
uncertainties. 
Financial stability policies 
Now,  let  me  turn  to  issues  regarding  financial stability  policies  that  have  arisen  out  of  this 
period of turbulence. I will touch briefly on three issues: first, polices related to transparency 
and information; second, policies regarding the regulation of financial institutions; and third, 
central bank financial stability policies.5  
We know that markets work best when relevant information is available to all. One result of 
the recent turmoil is that concerns have been raised regarding the transparency of complex 
financial  instruments  and  the  role  of  the  information  supplied  by  credit-rating  agencies.  In 
Canada, issues regarding the transparency of instruments have been most pronounced with 
respect  to  ABCP  –  particularly  the  non-bank-sponsored  ABCP  covered  by  the  Montreal 
Accord. There has already been some movement towards greater transparency in the bank-
sponsored segments of this market.6 But greater transparency of financial instruments isn't 
                                                 
5   A  more  detailed  discussion  of  these  and  other  issues  can  be  found  in  M.  Carney,  "Addressing  Financial 
Turbulence" (speech to the Toronto Board of Trade, Toronto, ON, 13 March 2008). 
6   For example, we have seen the adoption of global-style liquidity facilities; institutions seeking more than one 
credit  rating;  and  the  Bank  of  Canada  announcing  it  will  accept  ABCP  securities  that  meet  certain  criteria, 
including transparency criteria. The latter point is discussed later in this speech. 
BIS Review 42/2008 
 5
enough – investors also need to know how to interpret the information. Although credit-rating 
agencies have helped with interpretation in the past, they have recently come under scrutiny 
for  their  role  in  the  financial  market  turbulence.  However,  because  rating  agencies  rely  on 
their  reputations,  they  have  strong  incentives  to  improve  the  information  content  of  their 
ratings for complex financial instruments, to ensure that all material facts are disclosed in a 
concise  and  timely  manner,  and  to  address  inherent  conflicts  of  interest  in  the  ratings 
process. They have shown an ability and willingness to learn from their mistakes, and they 
are regularly refining their rating processes.7 This does not mean, though, that investors can 
rely exclusively on the judgment of others. In the end, investors must accept responsibility for 
understanding and managing the credit risk in their portfolios. 
I'll turn now to some issues regarding financial institutions and their regulation. I'll focus on a 
few issues related to the models of operations in these institutions, the management of risks, 
and  the  management  and  regulation  of  liquidity.  We  can  now  see  that  one  of  the  key 
problems with securitized U.S. subprime mortgages rested with the so-called "originate and 
distribute"  model  in  which  mortgage  originators,  many  of  whom  did  not  face  the  same 
regulations as  banks,  entered  into  mortgage  contracts  with  homeowners,  and  then  laid  off 
these  assets  as  they  were  securitized.  In  principle,  there  is  nothing  wrong  with  having  a 
model  based  on  "originate  and  distribute,"  but  in  practice,  a  number  of  major  things  went 
wrong, as we saw in the recent U.S. example. For example, some originators did not have 
sufficient incentives to conduct appropriate credit checks on clients. This model is now being 
closely examined by regulators in the United States and around the world, to ensure that the 
right incentives for originators and distributors are in place and are appropriately aligned. 
Risk management within banks themselves is also facing scrutiny. In many cases, their risk-
management practices did not prepare banks for the recent market turbulence, and so these 
market practices need to be addressed. 
While the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision has devoted most of its time over the 
past several years to completing its work on capital adequacy, it is now devoting more time 
and resources to the analysis of risk-management processes in banks and to the principles 
of liquidity management for banks.8  
Let  me  turn  now  to  the  financial  stability  policies  of  central  banks.  When  there  is  a  clear 
market  failure  and  a  major  disruption  to  financial  stability,  a  central  bank  –  depending  on 
circumstances – may wish to relieve liquidity pressures on the financial system by doing one 
or more of the following. It may choose to extend the maturity of its market operations; it may 
coordinate closely with other central banks when there is an international dimension to the 
problem;  it  may  choose  to  widen  the  range  of  securities  in  its  market  operations  or  loan 
facilities; or, it may choose to increase the frequency of its market operations.9  
We opted for the first three of these with the term purchase and resale operations announced 
on  12  December  and  11  March.  Although  we  typically  carry  out  purchase  and  resale 
operations  with  an  overnight  maturity,  the  two  operations  announced  in  March  were  for  a 
much  longer  maturity  (the  two  March  operations  were  both  for  28  days).  Both  of  these 
announcements  were  coordinated  with  the  actions  of  four  other  central  banks  and  were 
supported  by  two  other  central  banks.  In  all  of  these  operations,  the  range  of  eligible 
securities was essentially the widest allowed under the Bank of Canada Act. 
                                                 
7   For  a  full  discussion,  see  M.  Zelmer,  "Reforming  the  Credit-Rating  Process,"  Financial  System  Review 
(Ottawa: Bank of Canada, December 2007): 51-57. 
8   For a full discussion, see Liquidity Risk: Management and Supervisory Challenges, (Basel: Basel Committee 
on Banking Supervision, February 2008). 
9   A central bank may also choose to increase the range of participants in its operations and facilities. 
6 
 BIS Review 42/2008
Recently  announced  amendments,  which  will  modernize  the  Act,  would  allow  for  a  further 
widening  in  eligible  instruments  for  such  operations.  As  required  by  these  proposed 
amendments, the Bank will publish its policy governing the use of these powers.10 The Bank 
will carefully consider the circumstances under which these powers would be used. 
In terms of its lending operations, the Bank of Canada is not legally constrained by its Act in 
the type of financial instruments that it can accept as collateral under its Standing Liquidity 
Facility (SLF), a facility that can be used in both normal and in turbulent times. On 31 March, 
we announced that, in the future, we will take ABCP securities that meet certain criteria – 
including  transparency  criteria  –  as  collateral  under  our  SLF.  We  had  two  broad  policy 
objectives in making this announcement: first, that the eligibility criteria should mitigate any 
risks to the Bank that might be associated with accepting ABCP securities as collateral for 
the SLF. And second, we stated that the eligibility criteria should facilitate the development of 
a  well-functioning  market  for  ABCP  by  promoting  more  transparency  for  investors  and  by 
encouraging an active secondary market for these securities. The Bank has also announced 
that it will take U.S. Treasuries as collateral under the SLF by mid-year. 
In addition to the above, the Bank continues to work on examining policies related to the use 
of term operations and term lending facilities at times of major disruption to financial stability. 
This work is benefiting from the experiences and analysis of other central banks. 
Monetary policy in times of financial turbulence 
Earlier, I mentioned that when there is a major disruption to financial stability, a central bank 
may have to increase the frequency of its operations. Well, for monetary policy reasons – to 
keep  our  key  overnight  interest  rate  close  to  its  target  –  we  have  often  had  to  carry  out 
special purchase and resale agreements (at times, more than once per day).11  
That leads naturally into the topic of monetary policy in times of financial turbulence. It's very 
clear that at a time of great uncertainty, it is more important than ever that monetary policy 
act as a stabilizing force. This underscores the importance of keeping inflation low, stable, 
and predictable and requires us at the Bank to continue to watch developments in the real 
economy for their impact on inflation. We are certainly aware of the continuing developments 
in the financial sector. But from a monetary policy perspective, these are important only to 
the  extent  that  they  are  expected  to  influence  developments  in  the  real  economy  and, 
therefore, inflation. I do not mean to downplay the current financial turbulence – it has clearly 
been  a  factor  affecting  the  real  economy  in  the  United  States  and,  to  a  lesser  extent,  in 
Canada  as  well.  At  the  Bank  of  Canada,  we  will  continue  to  monitor  these  effects,  while 
aiming neither to favour particular market segments nor to insulate market participants from 
the consequences of their decisions. 
In terms of the financial turbulence, credit spreads in particular – and the credit conditions 
faced  by  businesses  and  households  more  generally  –  have  an  influence  on  aggregate 
demand  and  thus,  potentially,  on  inflation.  This  needs  to  be  taken  into  account  in  setting 
policy interest rates. (Chart 5 and 6 give an indication of the cost, in level terms, of short- and 
longer-term borrowing, respectively.) In our October Monetary Policy Report, we estimated 
that  the  tightening  of  credit  conditions  was  worth  about  25  basis  points  relative  to  our 
overnight interest rate target. Then, in the January Update to the Report, we noted that the 
tightening  in  credit  conditions  could  be  greater  and  more  protracted  than  previously 
                                                 
10   This  policy  would  allow  the  Bank  to  widen  the  range  of  eligible  instruments  for  its  market  operations. 
Furthermore,  this  widening  could  occur  without  necessarily  invoking  the  pre-existing  power  to  do  so  in 
circumstances where the Governor declares a situation of severe and unusual stress on a financial market or 
financial system. 
11   At times, the Bank also carried out sale and repurchase agreements. 
BIS Review 42/2008 
 7
assumed.  As  well,  we  stated  that  there  could  be  a  more  prolonged  slowdown  in  the  U.S. 
economy. Given the situation, we lowered our policy rate by 25 basis points. In our 4 March 
policy  rate  announcement,  we  indicated  that  deterioration  in  economic  and  financial 
conditions in the United States could be expected to have significant spillover effects on the 
global economy. We also said that those developments suggested that important downside 
risks  to  Canada's  economic  outlook,  which  were  identified  in  the  January  Update,  were 
materializing and, in some respects, intensifying. In response, we lowered our policy rate by 
50  basis  points  to  3.50  per  cent,  and  said  that  further  monetary  stimulus  is  likely  to  be 
required in the near term to keep aggregate supply and demand in balance and to achieve 
the 2 per cent inflation target over the medium term. 
   Conclusion 
I've talked about some of the causes of, and the lessons learned from, the recent financial 
market turbulence. In particular, as I mentioned at the outset of my remarks, we at the Bank 
8 
 BIS Review 42/2008
of Canada are continuing our analysis of the unusually wide credit spreads that we've been 
seeing and what these mean for the stability of the financial system and, potentially, for the 
economy, inflation, and monetary policy. It's very clear that these unusual spreads, and the 
financial market upheaval that exacerbated these spreads, will continue to have an impact 
for  some  time  to  come.  We  do  not  know  just  when  or  how  this  turmoil  will  ultimately  be 
resolved. You can be confident, however, that our focus at the Bank of Canada will remain 
on  our  core  functions  of  supporting  financial  stability,  and  maintaining  consumer  price 
inflation at our 2 per cent target. In this way, we will continue to maintain an anchor for the 
economy through what will continue to be very interesting times. 
Thank you very much for your attention, and now I'll be happy to take your questions. 
BIS Review 42/2008 
 9
