Mohamed S Fofana: Bank of Sierra Leone Charity Trust Fund 
Keynote address by Mr Mohamed S Fofana, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Sierra Leone, 
at  the  Scholarship  Award  Ceremony  of  the  Bank  of  Sierra  Leone  Charity  Trust  Fund, 
Freetown, 25 January 2008.  
 Mr Chairman  
Members of the Board of Trustees of the Bank of Sierra Leone Charity Trust Fund  
Board of Directors and Management of the Bank of Sierra Leone  
Officials of the Ministry of Education  
Heads of Commercial Banks and other Financial Institutions  
Members of the Fourth Estate  
Distinguished Guests, including the Awardees  
Students and pupils  
It is my honour and privilege to warmly welcome you all to the Scholarship Award Ceremony 
of the Bank of Sierra Leone Charity Trust Fund.  
The idea of a Charity Trust Fund was conceived by the Bank of Sierra Leone in the wake of 
the  devastation  caused  by  the  decade  old  civil  conflict  in  every  sector  of  our  society,  the 
education  sector,  being  key. We  were convinced  that the future  for  a better  Sierra  Leone 
and  a  decisive  turnaround  in  the  state  of  the  economy,  lie  largely  in  education  taking  its 
rightful place in the development plan.  
As the nation’s Central Bank, we have a pivotal role to play in the development aspirations 
of the country. That is why as a corporate body, we have recognised our responsibility in the 
discharge of our duties to honour our corporate social responsibility.  
We are therefore doing all in our power to compliment the efforts of the Government and 
other well meaning partners to help foster economic and social development. To this end, 
our corporate social responsibility is focused on providing a stimulus that will help promote 
excellence in every aspect of our development, but more so in EDUCATION.  
By supporting the education sector, our aim is to achieve the following:  
• 
contribute towards the development of the human resource base required to drive 
economic activities in the country.  
In this regard, our objective is to open doors leading to abounding opportunities for future 
generations in our own small way.  
We hope that by providing for those who have the ability to achieve academic excellence 
but cannot do so for lack of financial support, we can help restore the academic prowess for 
which Sierra Leone was known in the continent.  
We  would  therefore  assure  everyone,  not  only  those  in  secondary  schools,  but  also 
institutions  and  individuals  who  have  the  talent  and  the  commitment  to  demonstrate 
outstanding performance, that you will get our attention and support, if you are deserving.  
Mr Chairman, Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen, it is only recently that the Bank 
of  Sierra  Leone  has  taken  up  the  responsibility  of  helping  in  the  pursuit  of  excellence 
especially  in  education,  as  a  vehicle  of  development  in  Sierra  Leone.  The  successes  we 
have  scored  so  far  in  this  area  will  not  have  been  possible  without  the  support  and 
contribution we have received from the Board of Trustees of this Charity. On behalf of the 
Board of Directors, Management and Staff of the Bank of Sierra Leone, I will like to thank 
them for their dedication and hard work.  
Within a short period of time the Board of Trustees comprising six members have worked 
tirelessly and assiduously to actualise the objectives of the Bank, and in the process attract 
BIS Review 32/2008 
 1
the  attention  and  admiration  of  the  public.  As  a  result,  the  Charity  has  started  receiving 
contributions from individual members of the International Community.  
I therefore want to take the opportunity to single out the laudable gesture of Mr Paul Wilson 
and  Mr  Glyn  Williams  of  De  La  Rue  in  England  who  in  their  personal  capacities  donated 
generously towards the Trust. As recent as this morning, the Trust has received contribution 
from Mrs Sheila Lee, mother of Mr Tom Lee. Their initiative is worthy of commendation. I 
therefore wish to thank them profusely through Mr Tom Lee who also is a member of the De 
La  Rue  family  and  who  has  been  an  effective  Ambassador  of  the  Trust,  for  their 
humanitarian  gesture.  This  I  believe  should  serve  as  an  inspiration  for  our  local 
collaborators to follow suit.  
Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen, at this point I particularly want to recognise 
the contributions of Dr S B Nicol-Cole who was the first Chairman of the Board of Trustees, 
and who only took leave of us last year. 
His contributions during the very critical teething period for the Trust was truly valued and 
we want to thank him for his services and wish him well in all his future endeavours.  
Let me also recognise the pioneering efforts of Dr J D Rogers, erstwhile Governor of the 
Bank, who recently retired from the services of the Bank of Sierra Leone. I want to assure 
him that his efforts in this area will not go in vein.  
In that same vein, I want also to congratulate Prof. Aiah A Gbakima, the new Chairman of 
the Board of Trustees, who was elected Chairman by his colleague members of the Board, 
after acting in the capacity for one year. I have no doubt that with Professor Gbakima’s drive 
and commitment, the Charity will continue to grow from strength to strength.  
I will be remiss in my duty, if I did not recognise also our development partners who have 
made valuable contributions towards realising the Trust’ Aims and Objectives.  
On  behalf  of  the  Board,  Management  and  Staff  of  the  Bank  of  Sierra  Leone,  I  wish  to 
register  our  profound  appreciation  for  their  collaborative  efforts  and  financial  support 
towards  the  Charity.  It  is  worthy  at  this  point  to  mention  our  partners  that  have  been 
supportive of our efforts as follows:  
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Our thanks and appreciation go to all of them and we appeal that they continue to support 
the Charity on a sustainable basis.  
Let me however emphasise that there are daunting challenges ahead of us and if we are to 
progress as a nation we should have the capacity to provide trained and skilled manpower 
on a sustainable basis. I should therefore like to appeal to our development partners that 
have not yet come on board, to do so, so that together we can build a better Sierra Leone, 
one that can compete in the global market.  
De La Rue of the United Kingdom  
Sierra Leone Commercial Bank  
Standard Chartered Bank  
Rokel Commercial Bank  
Union Trust Bank  
Guaranty Trust Bank  
International Commercial Bank  
First International Bank  
Trustee in the name of Mr Tom Lee,  
and finally Pobjoy of the U.K. 
2 
 BIS Review 32/2008
To the awardees, I extend to you hearty congratulations on behalf of the Board of Directors, 
Management and Staff of the Bank of Sierra Leone. You have been chosen out of many as 
a  result  of  your  outstanding  performance.  You  therefore  have  a  great  responsibility  to 
maintain those standards and even surpass them in the cause of your study. You should be 
the flag bearers of Excellence and a source of inspiration to your colleagues.  
In  addition  to  congratulating  you  the  awardees,  I  want  to  congratulate  the  parents  and 
schools that have contributed to the excellent results which qualified our awardees for the 
awards  today.  I  speak  especially  about  the  parents  of  Ms.  Rashidatu  Caulker  and  Mr. 
Bobson  Sesay  and  the  Annie  Walsh  Memorial  Secondary  School,  and  the  St.  Augustine 
Secondary School Lungi, the proud producers of our awardees.  
To all the students present here this afternoon, , we implore you to have confidence in your 
abilities,  and  know  that  what  Rashidatu  and  Bobson  have  achieved  today  you  can  also 
achieve. Please note that the Bank of Sierra Leone Charity Trust Fund was established to 
support any of you who can demonstrate proven ability.  
Let this therefore be a challenge to all of you to excel in your studies. Who knows, you might 
one day be a proud beneficiary!!  
Mr  Chairman,  Distinguished  Ladies,  Gentlemen  and  students,  let  me  assure  you  that  the 
Bank  of  Sierra  Leone  has  a  long  term  commitment  to  providing  support,  especially  in 
building capacity nation-wide through education.  
Be assured that we will continue to uphold the objectives and tenets of the Bank of Sierra 
Leone Charity Trust Fund on a sustainable basis. All we ask for is your continued support.  
I thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 32/2008 
 3
