Glenn Stevens: Challenges for economic policy 
Address  by  Mr  Glenn  Stevens,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Australia,  to  the  Anika 
Foundation  Luncheon,  supported  by  the  Australian  Business  Economists  and  Macquarie 
Bank, Sydney, 16 July 2008. 
 Thank you all for coming along again to support the Anika Foundation at the third of these 
annual lunches. The Foundation is doing great work in supporting research and treatment of 
adolescent depression.1 Your being here today will do a lot to help. 
Economic policies face no shortage of challenges at present. Internationally, with economic 
growth slowing in the major developed economies, and the problems in international credit 
markets  still  serious,  but  inflation  rates  rising  in  many  countries,  the  task  for  monetary 
policies  in  the  old  industrialised  world  is  as  delicate  as  any  seen  in  many  years.  But 
developing country policy-makers face some big questions too, which are rightly getting more 
attention. How they respond to those questions will be important for the global economy. 
At home, inflation has been too high after a period of very strong demand, but demand is 
now slowing. At the same time, the Australian economy is experiencing a gain in the terms of 
trade the like of which we have seldom seen before. So we have plenty of challenges of our 
own, and in ways that are distinctive when compared with those of the major countries. 
I begin with some remarks about the international scene. 
International challenges 
To  date,  the  US  economy  has  been  more  resilient  than  many  observers  had  feared.  Real 
GDP has expanded, albeit very slowly, in the first and probably the second quarters of 2008. 
Yet the cyclical episode is far from over, as housing activity continues to contract, housing 
prices  fall  and  the  labour  market  softens.  Businesses  and  households  now  also  have  to 
absorb  a  recent  sharp  further  increase  in  energy  prices.  That  rise  is  made  worse  by  the 
depreciation of the US dollar (in contrast to the case for Australians, who at least have had 
the  benefit  of  a  high  Australian  dollar  in  dampening  the  rise  in  oil  prices).  Credit  market 
conditions are still very difficult in the aftermath of the events of the last year, and pressure 
remains on key institutions – as shown clearly over the past week. 
First quarter GDP growth in the euro area surprised by its strength. The Japanese economy 
also performed better than some had expected. But the run of other indicators suggests that 
growth is slowing in those economies. 
Meanwhile, CPI inflation has picked up noticeably in most of the major countries. Measures 
excluding food and energy have thus far remained fairly low. But, compared with last year, 
there  is  more  concern  about  inflation  prospects.  Some  of  the  price  rises  for  Australia’s 
important commodities, for example, signal international pressure on steel prices and non-oil 
energy costs, and therefore a range of other prices. 
Monetary policy in the major industrialised countries taken as a group remains reasonably 
accommodative.  There  has,  accordingly,  been  some  discussion  about  how  this  sits  with 
concerns that inflation might prove to be more persistent than earlier expected. But overall 
financial conditions are arguably a good deal more restrictive than suggested by policy rates, 
especially in the United States, where the interest rates paid by many borrowers have not 
                                                 
1   For more detail, see http://www.anikafoundation.com. 
BIS Review 90/2008 
 1
declined much, if at all, and lenders have toughened their standards considerably. The same 
is true for the United Kingdom. 
The bigger concerns about inflation, in any event, are in the emerging world. These concerns 
are twofold. 
First,  food  and  energy  are  a  bigger  part  of  CPI  baskets  in  these  countries  than  in  the 
developed economies, so the impact there of the rises in commodity prices is larger. For the 
same reason, the risk of second-round effects must also be higher. 
Second, monetary policy has generally been fairly easy in many of these countries, because 
of the link – explicit or implicit – that they have to the US dollar. In some of the oil-producing 
Gulf states, where there are explicit dollar pegs, demand growth is very strong and inflation 
has increased. Around much of Asia, interest rates are below inflation rates, and in several 
cases even below inflation measured excluding food and energy. That is to say, real interest 
rates are negative, whereas “natural” real rates are likely to be high, reflecting the potential 
growth opportunities in Asia.  
De facto,  many  of  these  countries  have  had  monetary  policy  settings  that  have  been 
influenced  to  a  significant  extent  by  US  monetary  policy,  but  they  themselves  are  not 
experiencing  US  economic  conditions.  To  be  sure,  slower  US  growth  is  affecting  trade 
patterns,  but  to  date  growth  has  remained  pretty  solid  in  many  cases,  helped  by  firmer 
exports to places other than the United States and strong domestic demand. Moreover, the 
financial  headwinds  being  experienced  by  the  United  States  have  not  blown  to  the  same 
extent in Asia. 
The danger for the countries in question is quite clear. Inflation outside of food and energy is 
already rising in many cases and accommodative policy settings heighten the likelihood of it 
remaining high on a persistent basis. 
But  there  is  also  a  danger  for  the  global  economy.  The  bulk  of  the  growth  in  demand  for 
energy  and  natural  resources  is  coming  from  the  emerging  world.  Continuation  of  such 
expansionary  policy  settings  in  emerging  countries,  apart  from  continuing  the  recent 
tendency to overheating in those countries, would presumably foster ongoing rapid growth in 
demand for natural resources. That would continue to hold up CPI inflation everywhere, but 
also weaken growth in many industrialised countries. Policy-makers in many of the advanced 
countries,  already  facing  a  short-term  relationship  between  growth  and  inflation  that  has 
turned  much  less  favourable,  could  face  some  very  difficult  choices  in  framing  their 
responses to the circumstances they face individually. 
What  is  needed  is  for  emerging  countries  to  adjust  their  policies  according  to  their 
circumstances. Without that, we risk a new manifestation of the “global imbalances”, in which 
too  much  of  the  burden  of  controlling  inflation  would  be  placed  on  the  major  advanced 
countries, where growth is already slowing. 
Put  another  way,  this  is  in  some  respects  a  problem  of  international  policy  co-ordination. 
Global  monetary  policy  has  been  too  easy  in  recent  years  and  that  is  why  we  have  seen 
such a major run-up in a wide range of industrial commodity prices. Any individual country 
might  wish  to  treat  those  increases  as  exogenous,  but  they  cannot  be  exogenous  for  the 
world as a whole if they are driven mainly by demand, which by and large they have been to 
date.  So,  as  a  number  of  commentators  have  been  saying  recently,  global  monetary 
conditions need to be tighter. But the adjustments needed really should take place more in 
the emerging world than in the United States or Europe or Japan. 
It  is  odd  that,  in  such  a  circumstance,  inflation  targeting  should  be  attracting  some  of  the 
criticisms that have recently been seen, because were it used more widely it would tend to 
alleviate this co-ordination problem. Imagine a world in which all countries of significance had 
been  following  a  medium-term,  flexible  target  for  CPI  inflation,  coupled  with  appropriate 
exchange  rate  settings.  Most  of  them  would  have  been  tightening  policy  in  a  measured 
fashion  in  response  to  rises  in  headline  inflation  over  the  past  couple  of  years.  The  result 
2 
 BIS Review 90/2008
would  surely  have  been  that  resource  and  energy  prices,  and  CPI  inflation  everywhere, 
would now be lower than they are. Even now, the current situation could be handled quite 
well by widespread use of a flexible inflation-targeting approach. 
Regardless of the precise details of any particular framework, though, what is most important 
is for broadly good macroeconomic policy to be followed. At the moment, surely that involves 
emerging  market  countries  playing  their  part  in  balancing  global  demand  and  supply,  by 
responding  to  their  own  circumstances,  so  as  to  avoid  prolonged  and  costly  inflation. 
Compared with past episodes, this part is a larger one now – and that is surely a portent for 
the future. 
This  is  not  an  original  observation –  a  number  of  commentators  have  made  these  same 
points over recent months. And policy-makers in a number of emerging countries are now 
adjusting policy settings in the required direction. In fact, the list of developing countries that 
have recently tightened monetary policy is now growing quite long, and includes some of the 
big  ones –  like  China,  India,  Brazil  and  Indonesia.  Perhaps  more  tightening  will  follow. 
Inevitably,  growth  will  slow  in  the  regions  concerned  as  a  result.  But  a  period  of  more 
moderate growth would be a better outcome than either allowing inflation to go unchecked or 
expecting the major economies to do all the heavy lifting. 
Challenges for Australia 
These  international  challenges  are  considerable  and,  like  all  other  countries  in  an  inter-
dependent world, Australia has a significant interest in how they are met. We have, in the 
meantime, pretty significant challenges of our own that we must meet. 
Even  before  the  price  rises  for  oil  and  other  commodities  seen  this  year,  Australia  had 
experienced  a  significant  pick-up  in  inflation,  in  the  mature  phase  of  a  long  period  of 
economic expansion. The rise in inflation in 2007 and into the early part of this year was not 
confined to food and energy, even though higher energy costs certainly were at work. Nor 
could it be put down mainly to “imported inflation”. In fact, the evidence is that a wide range 
of prices picked up speed. Acceleration in the group of prices generally classified as “non-
traded” was quite pronounced. The background environment was one  in which demand in 
Australia – which grew by over 5½ per cent in 2007 – outstripped, by a significant margin, 
any plausible estimate of growth in potential supply.  
There  certainly  were  international  forces  at  work,  but  the  key  one  was  the  expansionary 
effect of the rise in the terms of trade. It is perhaps worth spending a few minutes on the 
basic analytics of this issue. 
For  the  “average”  industrial  country  that  imports  much  of  its  energy  and  raw  materials,  a 
persistent rise in commodity prices is a negative shock to aggregate supply. This will reduce 
output and push up prices. Since the higher resource prices are paid to suppliers elsewhere 
in the world, this also acts somewhat like a tax on spending, hence aggregate demand falls. 
So while CPI inflation is likely to rise initially, the net effect of these forces on the ongoing 
rate  of  inflation  in  the  medium  term  is  unclear,  though  the  effect  on  output  will  be 
unambiguously negative. In this “average” industrial country case, monetary policy may need 
to be tightened to control medium-term inflation, or it may not. Much will depend on inflation 
expectations. 
Australia  has  some  additional  dimensions,  because  it  is  not  the  “average”  country  in  this 
episode.  As  a  commodity  producer,  our  terms  of  trade  have  risen.  Whereas  for  a  net 
commodity importer a rise in commodity prices acts like a tax paid to foreigners, Australian 
entities  are  net  receivers  of  such  payments.  That  impact  is  expansionary.  Just  how 
expansionary depends on the response of the recipients of those income flows, who include 
local  and  foreign  shareholders,  employees  and  governments.  But  other  things  equal, 
aggregate demand will, compared with the “average” case, be stronger, and it is more likely 
that there will be a problem of inflation in the non-traded sector. Accordingly, it is likely that 
BIS Review 90/2008 
 3
monetary  policy  in  a  country  like  Australia  would  need  to  be  tighter  than  in  the  “average” 
case. 
That  is  the  analytical  background.  We  can  then  observe  that  Australia  stands  out  among 
developed  countries  in  terms  both  of  the  extent  of  the  rise  in  our  terms  of  trade,  and  the 
strength of growth of domestic demand over the past few years. It is understandable, then, 
that  pressure  on  underlying  inflation,  particularly  from  domestic  sources,  has  also  been 
somewhat greater. Monetary policy had to respond to that. 
The challenge of judging how much response was necessary has been complicated by the 
global credit turmoil, which has had the effect of pushing up actual borrowing costs relative to 
the cash rate the Reserve Bank sets. In addition, banks are more careful in their lending (and 
businesses  and  households  are  now  more  cautious  in  general  than  they  were  six  months 
ago).  Overall,  as  the  statements  after  the  past  five  Board  meetings  have  made  clear,  the 
sequence of changes to the cash rate, other adjustments by lenders in response to the rise 
in term funding costs since mid 2007 and tighter credit standards have combined to produce 
financial conditions that are tight. They have tightened a bit further in the past month. 
The effects of that will be working against the expansionary forces from the terms of trade 
and the broader pressures on inflation from high resource utilisation. Inevitably, there is a lot 
of uncertainty about how these opposing forces will net out. But the forecast we released in 
our May 2008 Statement on Monetary Policy was that the net result would be a significant 
slowing in demand and output growth this year. The evidence is pretty clear that some key 
components of private demand are now on a slower track. As always with such episodes, the 
extent of that slowing, and its duration, are uncertain. But to this point, something not unlike 
what was envisaged in the May outlook appears to be occurring. 
Moreover, it looks more likely now than it did a couple of months ago that this more moderate 
track  for  demand  will  continue.  If  it  does,  it  will,  in  due  course,  begin  to  exert  downward 
pressure on those elements of inflation that had picked up in response to strong demand. 
That will probably take some time and it may be too soon yet to see much of that influence 
on  the  CPI  figure  due  next  week.  Indeed,  on  a  year-ended  basis,  CPI  inflation  might  rise 
further before it starts to come down, particularly given the recent further surge in global oil 
prices beyond what was assumed in our May projections. By the way, this surge in oil prices 
does not, in itself, amount to a rise in Australia’s terms of trade. As such, it is likely to be 
exerting some further restraint on non-oil demand, which would, all other things equal, tend 
to dampen pressure on non-energy-related prices over time. On the information available at 
present,  we  still  expect  inflation  to  fall  back  to  3 per  cent  by  mid  2010,  and  to  continue 
declining gradually thereafter.  
We  will,  of  course,  conduct  a  thorough  review  of  the  outlook  after  receiving  the  next  CPI 
figure, which the Board will have available for the August meeting. The Bank will publish its 
outlook  in  the  next  Statement  on  Monetary  Policy,  due  for  release  on  11 August.  But  for 
today’s discussion, I want to use the May projections as the basis for some remarks about 
the nature of the inflation target. 
As you know, since 1993 the Bank has been framing its monetary policy around a medium-
term  target  for  inflation  of  2-3 per  cent,  on  average,  “over  the  cycle”.  The  Reserve  Bank 
remains  committed  to  achieving  that  target.  Apart  from  being  consistent  with  the  Bank’s 
statutory  obligations,  it  is  what  has  been  envisaged  in  successive  formal  agreements 
between two Treasurers and two Governors stretching back now over a dozen years. 
This  framework  has  worked  well.  One  of  the  reasons  it  has  worked  well  is  that  it  has  two 
essential  ingredients.  The  first  is  the  commitment  to  the  mean  inflation  rate  being  at  the 
target.  That  has  been  achieved,  with  medium-term  CPI  inflation  rates  averaging  close  to 
2½ per  cent.  The  second  ingredient  is  a  sensible  approach  to  variance  of  inflation  around 
that mean. The framework was designed to have the necessary flexibility to cope with the 
business  cycle,  shocks that  may  occur,  the inevitable  errors  in forecasting  and lags  in the 
effects of policy decisions. The framework does not assume that inflation can be fine-tuned 
4 
 BIS Review 90/2008
over  short  periods,  nor  does  it  require  us  to  attempt  rapidly  to  correct  deviations  from  the 
2-3 per cent range, which have occurred several times over the period since 1993. 
This flexibility was envisaged from the beginning in our approach to inflation targeting. The 
Reserve Bank quite deliberately eschewed the narrowly defined targets with “electric fences” 
that  were  initially  favoured  in  some  other  countries  and  that  were  at  one  stage  proposed 
here. We have made use of that flexibility repeatedly, and are doing so again now. 
The  inflation  outlook  I  have  just  sketched  out  would  be  a  pretty  long  period  of  divergence 
from the target. It is important to recall, though, that we have experienced reasonably lengthy 
deviations  before.  Annual  CPI  inflation  was  below  2 per  cent  for  10 quarters  between  the 
middle of 1997 and the end of 1999.2 If the May 2008 forecasts turn out to be right, then the 
current episode would entail nine quarters with year-ended inflation above 3 per cent. If we 
can  achieve  something  like  that  outcome,  that  would  still  be  consistent  in  every  essential 
respect with the experience under inflation targeting since it began 15 years or so ago. 
As  always,  the  challenge  is  to  combine  the  right  degree  of  flexibility  in  approach  with 
sufficient confidence that the inflation rate will be on a declining path over time as to keep 
expectations anchored. This challenge is not trivial on this occasion. We are, of course, fully 
aware of the possibility that people may fear that this temporary period of high inflation could, 
in  fact,  turn  out  to  be  persistent.  Expectations  of  high  inflation  can  be  self-fulfilling  if 
individuals and businesses behave accordingly. 
One possible channel people have mentioned is that of higher wage claims, pursued as a 
result of the pick-up in CPI inflation, which then add to costs and prices, and so on. But I 
think it should be stated that while there are some signs of that around the edges, growth in 
overall wages has thus far remained contained, even though the labour market has clearly 
been at its tightest for a generation. Relative wages are showing noticeable variation across 
industries and regions, as would be expected given the events in the economy. But overall 
growth of wages, as measured by all the formal statistics at least, has to date been pretty 
well  controlled.  Furthermore,  if  the  recent  signs  of  moderation  in  the  demand  for  labour 
continue, which could be expected if overall demand remains on a slower track, that should 
help to contain any over-exuberance in wage setting. 
So  I  think  that  our  chances  of  keeping  inflation  low  over  the  medium  term  are  good.  This 
outlook does involve a period of significantly slower growth in demand in Australia than we 
have seen over the period up to the end of 2007. The Bank has been candid about that. But 
controlling inflation has always involved being prepared to slow demand, for a while, when 
needed. 
Not taking adequate steps to that end would have costs. One is that were we to see inflation 
become  established  permanently  at  higher  levels,  then  over  time  the  whole  structure  of 
nominal interest rates would reflect that new reality. The mean interest rate would rise. In that 
world,  the  interest  rates  we  see  now  would  not  look  unusually  high.  They,  or  even  higher 
rates, would look pretty common. That is what happened in the 1980s, as a result of the fact 
that  we  did  not  control  inflation  in  the  1970s  and  early  1980s  as  well  as  we  should  have. 
Needless to say, it is that world that we are seeking to avoid.  
By the same token, there will be a continued pay-off to control of inflation. A stable currency 
is  one  of  the  foundations  on  which  a  well-functioning  modern  economy  rests.  It  is  a 
prerequisite  for  sustaining  growth  in  living  standards.  On  the  interest  rate  front,  moreover, 
containing and reducing inflation over time will mean that we should be able, at some point, 
to look back to the current period as one of higher-than-normal interest rates. Interest rates, 
                                                 
2   CPI inflation excluding interest charges prior to the September quarter 1998 and adjusted for the tax changes 
of 1999-2000. 
BIS Review 90/2008 
 5
unlike  many  other  prices  in  the  economy,  do  not  always  rise.  Provided  inflation  is 
successfully controlled, interest rates go up and down around a fairly stable mean. 
Conclusion 
I have dwelt today on challenges facing macroeconomic policies and particularly monetary 
policies, both abroad and at home. These challenges look more difficult than they have been 
for a while. 
Of course, the challenges are not limited to monetary policy. There is the question of how 
resource allocation in the Australian economy should evolve in response to the increases in 
the prices of minerals in recent years, if these turn out to be persistent. Monetary policy has 
only a modest role to play there – other policies will be much more important, and they will be 
tested. There is also the question of how all that adjustment will dovetail with policies towards 
climate  change,  which  are  in  the  formative  stages  at  present.  Those  charged  with 
constructing such policies are dealing with hitherto unimagined degrees of uncertainty and 
the challenges seem to be of an order of magnitude bigger than the ones faced by monetary 
policy. 
It is also important to keep in perspective the  very real problems that beset our society in 
other respects, including adolescent depression and the terrible cost it can extract on young 
lives, on families and on all of us. Good macroeconomic policies can, we trust, make some 
difference at the margin by creating a stable environment in which others can carry out the 
important work to understand and address these real problems. But their work needs to be 
resourced, which is what the Anika Foundation is all about. 
So,  once  again,  thank  you  for  coming  here  today.  Thank  you  to  Macquarie  Bank  and  the 
ABE  for  your  support  of  this  function,  and  thank  you  for  your  support  of  the  Anika 
Foundation. 
6 
 BIS Review 90/2008
