Jürgen Stark: Knowns and unknowns about the creation of economic 
wealth in the euro area 
Speech by Mr Jürgen Stark, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
at the joint European Central Bank, Bank of France and The Conference Board Conference 
on “The Creation of Economic and Corporate Wealth in a Dynamic Economy”, Frankfurt am 
Main, 16 January 2008. 
 It  is  a  pleasure  for  me  to  welcome  you  today.  I  would  like  to  start  by  thanking  you  all  for 
coming to Frankfurt to participate in this conference. We are happy to have a good mix of 
people from academia, industry and European policy institutions in this room. I am sure that 
sharing your experiences and insights with each other will prove fruitful. 
Understanding the sources of economic and corporate wealth in the euro area is challenging, 
and in my view there remain many unanswered questions. I am hopeful that you will shed 
some light on them.  
Allow  me  to  start  by  reviewing  labour  productivity  developments  in  the  euro  area,  and  in 
doing so highlighting the knowns and the unknowns. 
In the sixteenth century the French mathematician Viète, building on the arithmetical work 
done by others before, proposed the use of literal notation for knowns and unknowns, and 
subsequently introduced the language of formulas into mathematics.  
His  initial  proposal  of  using  consonants  for  knowns  and  vowels  for  unknowns  was 
subsequently modified by Descartes to what is now common practice, namely the use of the 
final letters of the alphabet for unknowns (x, y, z) and the first letters for knowns (a, b, c). 
Viète’s  seminal,  work  on  symbolic  algebra  contributed  to  improving  the  productivity  of 
mathematicians by allowing them to write a mathematical statement in just a few lines rather 
than in several pages.  
In the same spirit, I will try to keep my introductory remarks short and thus contribute to the 
productivity of our meeting. But, rest assured, I will not go as far as to reduce my speech to a 
few lines of symbols.  
Demographic developments and growth 
As the title of this conference indicates, the euro area finds itself in a very dynamic economic 
environment  characterised  by  rapid  technological  developments  and  the  progressive 
integration  of  regional  economies,  not  simply  through  trade  but  also  in  increasingly 
modularised  supply  chains.  In  addition  to  these  dynamic  forces,  and  in  contrast  to  other 
regional  economies,  the  euro  area  is  facing  now,  and  even  more  so  in  the  future,  the 
prospect  of  an  ageing  population.  In  the  euro  area,  a  broad  decreasing  trend  in  the 
contribution to growth from demographic factors has been observed since 1990. This reflects 
of  both  a  decline  in  population  growth  and  the  ageing  of  the  population.  Over  this  same 
period, the contribution from labour productivity growth has also decreased gradually. As a 
result, real GDP growth has fallen from 3.6% to 2.0%. Demographic factors contributed 0.3 
percentage point to this decline. 
Future demographic trends in the euro area are likely to be driven by lower fertility rates and 
rising life expectancy. Available projections suggest that the population of the euro area will 
start to shrink in absolute terms after 2020, and that one out of three will be older than 65.  
BIS Review 6/2008 
 1
unchanged labour productivity growth rates, of 
an unchanged percentage of people of working age in employment, and of 
an unchanged number of average weekly hours worked,  
Simulations of the impact of demographic projections on real GDP and real GDP per capita 
growth do not offer a reassuring picture.1 Under the assumption of  
a) 
b) 
c) 
the projected demographic trends imply a decline in average real GDP growth between 2020 
and  2050  to  1%.  Importantly,  the  deterioration  in  GDP  growth  per  capita  would  also  be 
noticeable. 
One could argue that demographic projections are highly unreliable. One could also argue 
that  the  adverse  demographic  developments  on  growth  could  be  offset  by  increasing  the 
average  number  of  hours  worked  and  the  percentage  of  people  of  working  age  in 
employment,  and  also  by  raising  the  retirement  age.  However,  individual  measures  for 
raising  labour  utilisation  face  natural  limits.  Therefore,  the  inevitable  implication  of  such 
demographic  developments  is  that  the  key  to  a  prosperous  future  lies  in  raising  labour 
productivity growth. Indeed, without higher productivity growth, the euro area is destined to 
see its growth potential remaining low or declining significantly over the next few decades. 
Allow me next to briefly review a few known facts about labour productivity developments in 
the euro area in recent decades. 
Labour productivity developments in the euro area 
Labour productivity growth in the euro area has been declining since the early 1960s. This 
slowdown in labour productivity mainly reflects less innovation and other efficiency gains (as 
proxied by the concept of total factor productivity, TFP). Over more recent decades, lower 
growth in capital used per unit of labour has also contributed to the decline. However, the 
reduction in the growth rate of capital deepening can probably be seen as the flip side of the 
employment-rich  growth  which  the  euro  area  has  experienced  over  recent  years.  This 
reflects an environment of wage moderation and progress with labour market reforms which 
may  have  partly  reversed  the  earlier  trend  to  substitute  labour,  which  had  become  more 
expensive  due  to  wage  increases  outpacing  productivity  gains,  in  favour  of  capital,  in  the 
1980s and early 1990s. 
The flagging of labour productivity in the euro area contrasts sharply with the very positive 
developments in other major economies, most noticeably the United States. Up until the mid-
1990s,  labour  productivity  growth  was  lower  in  the  US  than  in  continental  Europe.  The 
second half of the 1990s saw, however, a period of sharp acceleration in labour productivity 
in the US, at that time seen by observers as permanent. In the eyes of many, this was driven 
primarily by innovations in the information and communication technology (ICT) sector. The 
rate of growth of GDP in the euro area in the second half of the 1990s was significantly lower 
than  in  the  US.  Nonetheless,  advocates  of  the  new  economy,  i.e.  believers  in  the  radical 
implications  that  the  new  technologies  have  for  potential  growth,  expected  that  similar 
developments would take place on this side of the Atlantic.  
The contributions from ICT to labour productivity growth come from three main sources:  
a) 
b) 
a direct impact from the production of ICT capital,  
an additional direct contribution from the use of ICT capital in the production of other 
goods and services, and  
                                                 
1   See  Maddaloni,  A.;  A.  Musso,  P.  Rother;  M.  Ward-Warmedinger  and  T.  Westermann:  “Macroeconomic 
implications of demographic developments in the euro area”, ECB Occasional Paper No 51, August 2006). 
2 
 BIS Review 6/2008
possible indirect “spillover” effects from the use of ICT capital.  
c) 
These  spillover  effects  stem  among  other  things,  from  the  introduction  of  more  advanced 
management techniques in production processes. When comparing the euro area with other 
major industrialised economies, we see that the direct contribution from ICT capital increased 
everywhere between 1980 and 1995 and between 1995 and 2005, but remained at a higher 
level in the United States than in the euro area. In this respect, it is commonly acknowledged 
that the higher TFP growth, in particular in the US, reflects at least partly the spillovers from 
the  development  and  adoption  of  ICT  technologies  as  a  so-called  “general  purpose 
technology” that affects the entire production sector.2  
When  looking  at  euro  area  productivity  at  sectoral  level,  we  do  not  find  any  immediate 
evidence for such spillover effects in the non-high-tech ICT producing sectors.  
First,  the  performance  of  traditional  non-high-tech  manufacturing  industries  deteriorated 
significantly. They are responsible for most of the labour productivity slowdown in the euro 
area.  
Second,  the  performance  of  non-high-tech  services  remained  weak.  Certainly,  their 
contribution in relative terms is not as sizeable as that of traditional manufacturing industries.  
However, this should be little consolation, as in absolute terms, labour productivity in these 
services industries has remained subdued. 
The question is then: why have there been no gains from the more intensive use of ICT in 
the  euro  area?  However,  there  is  another  twist  to  this  question.  Recent  data  and  analysis 
conducted for the US may suggest that the large gains in labour productivity growth during 
the second half of the 1990s and the early years of the new century are evidence of a one-off 
event rather than of sustainable labour productivity growth. It is important to know if this was 
indeed the case. 
Economic policies to foster sustainable growth 
It is probably uncontroversial to say that any increase in our economic and corporate wealth 
over  the  long  run  depends  on  innovation.  Following  Schumpeter’s  definition,  innovation 
refers mainly to the introduction of new goods, new methods of production, the opening of 
new  markets,  the  procurement  of  new  sources  of  supply  and  the  introduction  of  new 
organisational  schemes  and  management  practices.3  Putting  aside  the  opening  of  new 
markets and, to a certain extent, the procurement of new supplies, innovation goes hand in 
hand with new ideas.  
History  has  taught  us  that  Archimedes  devised  his  famous  principle  while  in  the  bath.  His 
“Eureka!” moment is commonly used as an example by those who suggest that inspiration 
plays  the  key  role  in  the  development  of  new  ideas.  Many  others,  however,  disagree  and 
regard scientific discoveries as the outcome of the combined effort of large communities of 
scientists. It is my view that in Europe today we are not waiting for people to come up with 
good ideas while in the bath, but instead we expect governments to create an environment in 
which innovation thrives. I think this requires governments to draw up policies that support 
economic  freedom  and  a  vibrant,  growth-creating  private  sector.  This  requires  an 
acknowledgement  that  undermining  economic  incentives  and  freedom  is  detrimental  to 
entrepreneurial  activity.  Allow  me  next  to  elaborate  further  on  what  should  constitute  a 
growth-friendly economic environment. 
                                                 
2   See Stiroh, K. J. (2002): ‘Are ICT Spillovers Driving the New Economy?’ Review of Income and Wealth, Series 
48, No 1, March. 
3   See Schumpeter, J.A. (1934), The Theory of Economic Development: An Inquiry into Profits, Capital, Credit, 
Interest and the Business Cycle, Cambridge Mass., Harvard University Press. 
BIS Review 6/2008 
 3
The role played by education and research and development is key for innovation. This is a 
known  fact.  A  highly  educated  labour  force  improves  the  prospects  for  innovation  and 
facilitates  the  adoption  of  new  technologies  from  abroad.4  However,  in  translating  this 
principle into policy, some puzzles emerge. Recent research shows that there is no clear link 
between spending on education and the performance of pupils in the EU. This issue needs to 
be  explored  further  as  it  may  suggest  that  there  might  be  scope  for  efficiency  gains  in 
education or, in other words, it is the quality of education spending which matters.5  
The key role of R&D in promoting growth is also a known fact. It is also fairly uncontroversial 
to suggest that promoting R&D investment includes a better use of public procurement, more 
innovation-friendly  regulation  and  stepping  up  the  provision  of  targeted  fiscal  incentives  to 
the private sector. The level of R&D funding by the private sector in Europe lags that in other 
modern  economies,  most  notably  the  US.  Finland  is  currently  the  only  country  in  the  euro 
area which has achieved the Lisbon target of 3% spending on R&D. Adequate systems to 
support R&D are of course not only a quantitative issue; increasing the efficiency of research 
at  the  same  time  is  essential.  Further  policy  measures  to correct  this situation  need  to  be 
found. 
Another key ingredient of a growth-friendly economic environment is well-functioning product 
and labour markets.  
Flexible labour markets benefit both firms and workers. Contractual flexibility is essential in a 
world of technological change and globalisation where workers can no longer count on job 
security.  It  means  greater  opportunities  to  move  into  new  positions  and  it  leads  to  higher 
employment  security.  Education  and  training  systems  need  to  help  workers  master 
transitions  between  jobs  and  keep  up  with  technological  developments.  Flexible  labour 
markets  and  efficient  active  labour  market  policies  contribute  to  shorter  periods  of 
unemployment. Longer periods could lead to a decline in a worker’s skills and productivity. 
Lack  of  flexibility  in  labour  markets  also  discourages  innovation.  The  combined  effect  of 
hiring and firing costs and the type of industrial relations regime have an impact on in-house 
training  incentives.6  Labour  market  regulations  may  also  have  an  impact  on  participation 
rates, a fact which should not be overlooked. 
An  environment  where  competitive  forces  reduce  price  margins  will  in  turn  encourage 
entrepreneurs  to  allocate  their  resources  in  the  most  efficient  way.  Numerous  economic 
studies have documented the positive link between competition and innovation.7 However, 
the  nature  of  this  link  is  not  simple  and  we  should  deepen  our  knowledge  of  a  number  of 
issues here.  
First,  recent  empirical  evidence  on  the  impact  of  mergers  on  productivity  growth  suggests 
that they may induce welfare-improving efficiency gains, which may conflict with regulators’ 
concerns about their negative impact on competition.8  
                                                 
4   See  J.  Temple  (2001):  “Growth  effects  of  education  and  social  capital  in  the  OECD  countries”.  OECD 
Economic Studies, No 33, pp. 57-101. See also B. P. Bosworth and S. M. Collins (2003): “The Empirics of 
Growth: An Update.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, No 2. 
5   See The EU economy review: moving Europe’s productivity frontier. European Commission 2007. 
6   OECD (2003): The Sources of Economic Growth in OECD Countries. OECD, Paris. 
7   For  a  further  extension  of  this  topic,  see  European  Commission  (2004),  “The  link  between  product  market 
reforms and productivity: direct and indirect impacts”, the EU Economy: 2004 Review. Further evidence is also 
to  be  found  in  Griffith,  R.,  R.  Harrison  and  H.  Simpson  (2006):  “The  link  between  product  market  reform, 
innovation and EU macroeconomic performance”, DG-ECFIN Economic Papers No 243, February 2006. 
8   See  M.  D.  Giandrea  (2006):  “Industry  Competition  and  Total  Factor  Productivity  Growth”,  Bureau  of  Labor 
Statistics Working Paper No 399, September 2006. 
4 
 BIS Review 6/2008
Second,  there  is  evidence  that  for  some  countries  there  might  be  an  inverted  U-shaped 
relationship between competition and incentives to invest in innovation. This means that high 
as  well  as  low  levels  of  competition  may  discourage  innovation.9  This,  in  my  view,  may 
simply  be  a  sign  of  the  international  reallocation  of  capital.  Studies  that  have  indicated  an 
inverted  U-shaped  relationship  usually  employ  price  cost  margins  as  a  measure  of 
competitiveness.  In  traditional  industries,  such  as  textiles,  these  have  been  trending 
downwards  as  a  result  of  the  increasing  competition  from  developing  economies.  The 
pressures exerted by developing economies on traditional industries in developed countries 
are mounting, suggesting that it may be also advisable to promote economic policies which 
encourage the development of high-tech industries. 
Another  key  ingredient  of  a  growth-friendly  economic  environment  is,  of  course,  a  sound 
macroeconomic policy setting. In particular, recent studies have emphasised the benefits of 
maintaining price stability. Economic research has shown that higher average inflation has a 
negative impact on growth and welfare, while higher inflation volatility has a negative impact 
on welfare and, most likely, a negative effect on growth.10 Maintaining price stability is the 
best contribution the ECB can make to promoting growth in the euro area.  
Conclusions 
Let  me  conclude  by  saying  that  Europe  is  reforming  its  economy  so  as  to  adapt  to  the 
challenges  of  globalisation,  technological  change  and  ageing.  Considerable  progress  has 
been achieved, as reflected in the significant rise in employment growth. Monetary Union has 
been  effective  –  and  very  successful  –  in  supporting  growth  through  a  credible  monetary 
policy which creates a stable macroeconomic environment. It has lowered financing costs for 
a number of euro area countries by reducing risk premia. The challenge now is to raise the 
level of productivity growth in all euro area countries. 
I am very grateful to the Banque de France and The Conference Board for joining forces with 
us  to  convene  this  conference.  We  share  a  common  interest  in  learning  more  about  the 
mechanisms that promote the creation of economic and corporate wealth in Europe, and we 
all hope to learn a lot from this event. I wish you all a fruitful discussion. 
                                                 
9   See P. Aghion, R. Blundell, R. Griffith, P. Howitt and S. Prantl: “The effects of entry on incumbent innovation 
and productivity”, NBER Working Paper No 12027, February 2006. See also P. Aghion, N. Bloom, R. Blundell, 
R.  Griffith  and  P.  Howitt:  “Competition  and  Innovation:  An  Inverted-U  Relationship”,  Quarterly  Journal  of 
Economics, May 2005. 
10   See  Camba-Mendez,  G.;  J.  A.  Garcia  and  D.  Rodriguez-Palenzuela  (2003):  "Relevant  economic  issues 
concerning the optimal rate of inflation". In O. Issing (ed.) Background Studies for the ECB's Evaluation of its 
Monetary Policy Strategy, European Central Bank, Frankfurt am Main, 2003. 
BIS Review 6/2008 
 5
