Jean-Pierre Roth: Real estate crisis in the United States – similar risks in 
Switzerland? 
Summary  of  a  speech  by  Mr  Jean-Pierre  Roth,  Chairman  of  the  Governing  Board  of  the 
Swiss  National  Bank  and  Chairman  of  the  Board  of  Directors  of  the  Bank  for  International 
Settlements, at the Banque Cantonale Vaudoise, Lausanne, 9 June 2008. 
The complete speech can be found in French on the Swiss National Bank’s website (www.snb.ch). 
 In  the  past  few  months,  developments  in  the  mortgage  and  real  estate  markets  have 
attracted  increasing  attention.  Europe,  and  Switzerland  in  particular,  have  been  indirectly 
affected as a result of commercial bank activities in US mortgage markets. Over the past few 
quarters, the European real estate market has also been affected, with a number of countries 
experiencing  a  downturn  in  prices  similar  to  that  in  the  United  States.  By  contrast,  other 
countries, such as Switzerland, have seen real estate prices rising at a steady pace. 
In some respects, what the United States went through is a classical property crisis of the 
type  that  Switzerland  experienced  in  the  early  1990s.  However,  the  US  real  estate  crisis 
spilled over to encompass the international financial markets, endangering their stability and 
prompting the intervention of several central banks. These events confirm the importance of 
sound real estate market developments for the economy.  
It  is  important  to  recognise  that  the  Swiss  mortgage  and  real  estate  markets  are  very 
different from their US counterparts. Developments in the Swiss housing market have been 
relatively  steady,  despite  the  strong  demand  pressures  discernible  in  certain  regions.  At 
present we do not detect any obvious signs of a speculative bubble that might culminate in a 
sudden fall in prices. The main explanations for the rise in real estate prices in the past few 
years have been higher expectations and good financing conditions. Around Lake Geneva 
the pressures on the limited available space and the fast growth in the residential population 
have  acted  as  special  stimulants.  Thus  there  have  been  no  speculative  developments  as 
witnessed at the end of the 1980s. Now that the business cycle has peaked in Switzerland, it 
is very likely that we will move into a phase of more moderate price increases. 
BIS Review 73/2008 
 1
