Thomas M Hoenig: Central banks: changing markets – changing 
mandates 
Speech  by  Mr  Thomas  M  Hoenig,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve Bank of Kansas City, at the Central Bank of Argentina 2008 Money and  Banking 
Conference “Financial turbulence – impact on developed and emerging economies”, Buenos 
Aires, 1 September 2008. 
 It  is  a  pleasure  to  be  in  Buenos  Aires  today  to  participate  in  this  high-level  conference 
sponsored  by  the  Central  Bank  of  Argentina.  Revolutionary  changes  in  financial  markets, 
combined with events such as the market disruptions associated with the subprime lending 
debacle, have raised anew questions about the role of central banks in maintaining financial 
stability.  Though  central  banks  have  traditionally  had  some  responsibility  for  financial 
stability, such responsibility has typically not been placed on par with more explicit mandates 
for price stability and economic performance, in part perhaps, because of the episodic nature 
of financial crises. Yet, recent market disruptions in the United States make it very clear that 
the financial markets, the general public and political authorities will look first and foremost to 
the Federal Reserve to respond to any significant threats to financial stability. 
In this context, it may be useful to take a closer look at a central bank’s mandate for financial 
stability. Today, the Federal Reserve plays a role in “crisis prevention” through its regulation 
and  prudential  supervision  of  banks  and  bank  holding  companies.  It  also  plays  a  role  in 
“crisis  management”  by  providing  liquidity  to  stem  financial  disruptions  and  by  using 
monetary policy to reduce the impact of financial disturbances on economic activity. In the 
current crisis, the Federal Reserve has taken unprecedented steps to manage and contain 
the crisis. As we examine lessons learned from these events, we will have to decide whether 
financial  stability  can  be  best  maintained  in  the  future,  as  some  have  suggested,  by 
extending the Federal Reserve’s supervisory and lending authority to a broader part of the 
financial system. In doing so, we need to examine both the intended and possible unintended 
consequences of such a decision. Alternatively, if we do not envision a broader role for the 
Federal Reserve, we need to articulate what other institutional reforms might be needed to 
avoid a repeat of the recent crisis and to reduce the crisis management burden on central 
banks going forward. 
 A second issue worthy of further discussion is how a central bank’s mandate for financial 
stability  can  be  balanced  with  its  other  macroeconomic  responsibilities.  For  the  Federal 
Reserve, adding a more explicit financial stability mandate to its existing dual mandate for 
price  stability  and  economic  growth  raises  important  and  difficult  questions  about  the 
compatibility  of  these  responsibilities  and  the  problems  that  might  arise  in  attempting  to 
achieve them all simultaneously. 
Let  me  begin  my  remarks  by  examining  more  closely  what is  meant  by  “financial  stability” 
and the Federal Reserve’s current role in maintaining financial stability. Then I will look at the 
changing structure of the financial system, how the Federal Reserve has responded to the 
current  crisis  and  the  issues  surrounding  the  possible  extension  of  the  Federal  Reserve’s 
responsibilities.  Finally,  I  will  address  some  of  the  possible  implications  of  a  broadened 
financial stability mandate for the Federal Reserve’s other macroeconomic responsibilities. 
Financial stability and systemic risk 
As we are all aware, a stable financial system is essential to a growing economy, particularly 
in  terms  of  providing  a  sound  payments  mechanism  and  efficient,  sustainable  credit 
intermediation.  Since  disruptions  to  this  payments  system  or  credit  intermediation  process 
BIS Review 109/2008 
 1
will  directly  and  adversely  affect  real  economic  activity,  I  believe  that  public  policy  has  an 
important role to play in mitigating these market breakdowns. 
One  aspect  of  public  policy  is  to  provide  a  resilient  and  rational  framework  within  which 
financial  institutions  and  markets  can  operate.  History,  however,  suggests  that  some 
breakdowns  will  inevitably  occur  within  any  dynamic  financial  system  and  economy. 
Consequently, maintaining financial stability from a public policy perspective does not mean 
preventing  all  financial  disruptions,  but  rather  mitigating  those  market  and  institutional 
breakdowns  that  could  have  a  significant  impact  on  aggregate  economic  activity.  A  key 
implication  from  this  perspective  is  that  financial  losses  or  the  failure  of  an  individual  firm, 
even a large one, does not warrant governmental intervention unless the outcome poses a 
substantial threat to the economy. 
This public policy role is most clearly warranted in addressing systemic risks to the financial 
system.  Systemic  risk  can  be  broadly  defined  as  the  risk  that  problems  at  an  individual 
institution or segment of the market would spread to a wider set of institutions and markets 
and pose a major threat to economic activity. This type of contagion could occur because of 
the  array  of  linkages  that  may  exist  among  institutions  and  markets  through  counterparty, 
payments and other risk exposures. While counterparty exposures at large institutions have 
constituted the traditional view of systemic risk, I would also extend the definition of systemic 
risk to include instances where many institutions – and not just the largest – are exposed to a 
common  set  of  adverse  factors,  such  as  during  the  real  estate,  energy  and  agricultural 
collapses in the United States during the 1980s and early 1990s.  
Commercial  banks  have  long  had  a  unique  role  in  supporting  the  economy  through  their 
credit intermediation activities and in connecting individuals and businesses to the payments 
system. These activities have placed banks at the center of policy concerns over systemic 
risk.  However,  given  the  growing  role  of  capital  markets  and  nonbank  institutions  in  the 
intermediation  process,  we  should  begin  to  ask  ourselves  whether  these  broader  market 
segments pose systemic concerns that are independent from those already arising from their 
linkages to the banking system. 
The  importance  of  maintaining  financial  stability  and  addressing  systemic  threats  to  the 
economy justifies the federal safety net and the need for prudential supervision. We have a 
long history of using prudential or safety and soundness supervision of the banking system to 
limit the potential risks to this safety net. The premise behind this approach is that the health 
of the financial system can be solidified by monitoring and controlling the risks assumed by 
individual banks and by requiring appropriate levels of capital and liquidity to support their 
operations. To the extent these supervisory objectives can be met, the risk of serious failures 
and  safety  net  losses  can  be  reduced.  Our  changing  financial  markets,  though,  are  now 
prompting  us  to  examine  how  far  this  framework  of  prudential  supervision  and  safety  net 
protection can and should be extended. 
The Federal Reserve’s current role 
As the central bank for the United States, the Federal Reserve has been assigned a critical 
role in promoting financial stability and responding to financial crises. This role is inherent in 
many  of  its  powers  including:  banking  supervision,  the  provision  of  liquidity  through  the 
discount window and open market operations, and payments system oversight. 
The Federal Reserve’s responsibilities for banking regulation and prudential supervision are 
largely aimed at preventing financial crises and protecting the federal safety net. Accordingly, 
these  efforts  encompass  capital  adequacy  standards  for  state  member  banks  and  holding 
companies, consolidated oversight of the risk exposures and risk management practices of 
these  institutions,  and  corrective  enforcement  actions  to  deal  with  serious  problems.  The 
System’s  responsibilities  for  supervising  holding  companies  and  state  member  banks  also 
provide  valuable  insights  on  the  operation  of  individual  institutions  and  banking  markets. 
2 
 BIS Review 109/2008
Moreover, with regard to crisis management, this supervisory experience and the information 
obtained  in  the  supervisory  process  have  been  increasingly  important  in  designing 
appropriate responses to financial disruptions. 
To deal with or manage potential crises, the Federal Reserve also relies on its authority to 
inject  liquidity  into  the  financial  system.  Although  other  regulatory  agencies  also  bear 
responsibility  for  helping  to  ensure  financial  stability,  the  Federal  Reserve’s  authority  to 
supply  liquidity  gives  it  a  unique  role  during  a  financial  crisis.  This  role  represents  a 
fundamental  purpose  behind  the  creation  of  the  Federal  Reserve  System  and  the  reason 
why the Federal Reserve is expected to take the leading role in maintaining financial stability 
and mitigating breakdowns in the financial markets. 
The Federal Reserve may inject liquidity through open market operations. To provide liquidity 
in a more targeted manner, the Federal Reserve may lend through the discount window to 
any depository institution and may also lend to any individual, partnership or corporation in 
“unusual  and  exigent  circumstances.”  These  different  ways  to  inject  liquidity  thus  give  the 
Federal  Reserve  a  choice  in  how  it  will  supply  liquidity  to  institutions  and  the  overall 
economy.  
The new financial structure and the broadening mandate for central banks 
Traditionally,  the  Federal  Reserve’s  supervisory  responsibilities  and  its  financial  stability 
concerns have centered on commercial banks. This approach reflects the multifaceted role of 
banks including: their responsibilities in the payments system, their participation in the credit 
intermediation process, and their role as a source of liquidity and acting as a counterparty in 
financial transactions. 
I think we would all agree, though, that the current market turmoil points out how much the 
financial system has changed over  the past several decades. Recent events illustrate that 
financial disruptions can arise from outside of the traditional banking channels, while taking 
on new dimensions and features. As an example, many of the recent problems arose from 
mortgage-backed securitization activities that not only involved U.S. banking organizations, 
but also brought in a complex mixture of other firms. Such firms have included investment 
banks,  mortgage  originators,  credit  rating  agencies,  mortgage  servicers,  securities issuers, 
asset managers, investors and financial institutions across many different countries. 
This experience clearly indicates that more of the credit process is now taking place outside 
of the banking system and within a much broader global financial marketplace. Investment 
banks,  in  particular,  are  an  important  segment  in  this  expanding  marketplace  as  they  go 
beyond  their  traditional  focus  on  underwriting  and  distribution  of  securities  and  private 
placement activities. Today, we can see that investment banks derive an increasing portion 
of their business from more sophisticated securities and derivatives activities, mortgage and 
commercial lending, and the operation of thrift and industrial loan company subsidiaries. 
The current financial crisis also shows the extensive and complex set of counterparty risks to 
which  major  institutions  are  now  exposed  and  the  difficulties  such  risks  may  pose  in 
maintaining market confidence and addressing problems at individual institutions. In fact, the 
collapse  of  Bear  Stearns  provides  a  striking  example  of  how  the  ramifications  of  a  single 
nonbank  firm’s  troubles  can  extend  throughout  the  financial  system,  threatening  public 
confidence and complicating any resolution efforts. 
These developments thus raise a number of issues for managing financial crises. The sheer 
size  of  the  financial  markets,  the  many  different  counterparties  and  the  interdependencies 
among participants suggest that significant disruptions from any portion of the market – bank 
or nonbank – could “freeze” financial transactions and activities and consequently harm the 
real economy. Most notably, the growing role that capital markets and nonbank institutions 
play  in  the  financial  intermediation  process  suggests  that  systemic  concerns  can  arise 
BIS Review 109/2008 
 3
independently  or  in  conjunction  with  the  linkages  that  already  exist  through  the  banking 
system. 
To deal with the financial breakdowns that have occurred in this expanded financial system, 
the  Federal  Reserve  has  taken  several  steps  that  are  of  a  nearly  unprecedented  nature. 
These  include  opening the  discount  window  to primary  dealers,  taking in  a  wider  range  of 
collateral on loans, lending $30 billion to support the takeover of Bear Stearns, and pledging 
backup support to Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac. I would note that such steps are taking the 
Federal Reserve well beyond its traditional policy boundaries and are broadening its financial 
stability mandate to encompass much more than the banking system and its usual links to 
the financial marketplace and the overall economy. 
An apt analogy would be to say that the recent market turmoil has taken us to the other side 
of the river from where we have traditionally operated. Consequently, we must ask ourselves 
if  we  should  stop  and  stay  where  we  are  today,  continue  and  go  even  farther  into  this 
uncharted territory, or try to find a way to go back across the river to our previous and well-
known position. 
More  specifically,  should  the  Federal  Reserve,  as  well  as  other  central  banks  facing  the 
same pressures, seek to formalize this broader role in financial stabilization? If so, a logical 
step  in  this  process  would  be  for  central  banks  to  take  on  whatever  supervisory  authority 
would seem necessary for overseeing the entities operating in this expanding marketplace 
and  for  protecting  a  much  wider  safety  net.  Or,  alternatively  and  after  the  current  crisis 
abates,  we  could  select  a  path  that  would  take  us  back  to  our  traditional  role  and  a  more 
carefully defined and contained safety net? Under this approach, many would take steps to 
strengthen  or  provide  more  inherent  resiliency  to  those  areas  that  have  suffered  the  most 
from recent market breakdowns, which would reflect the positive side of market discipline. 
What  course  we  choose  is  of  critical  importance  to  the  future  role  of central  banks  and  to 
their  ability  to  maintain  independence  in  formulating  policy.  I  would  like  to  explore  these 
questions next in terms of two issues: the appropriate use of the federal safety net and the 
implications for monetary policy under a broadening mandate. 
Safety net issues and moral hazard concerns 
The  public  policy  actions  directed  toward  Bear  Stearns,  primary  dealers,  and  Fannie  Mae 
and Freddie Mac have resulted in a significant expansion of the safety net and the Federal 
Reserve’s lending practices. Now that more financial activities have gravitated outside of the 
banking  system,  more  financial  stability  concerns  seem  destined  to  arise.  Our  lending  to 
support the takeover of Bear Stearns and to provide liquidity to primary dealers, for example, 
has  taken  the  Federal  Reserve  well  beyond  its  traditional  approach  of  injecting  discount 
window funds through the commercial banking system.  
This new financial framework, consequently, leaves us with several distinct choices. Some, 
for  instance,  have  suggested  that  we  should  extend  more  of  a  bank-like  supervisory  and 
regulatory framework over the major players in this broader financial marketplace in return 
for their having access to the discount window and other possible forms of public assistance. 
Others,  though,  believe  that  such  oversight  and  safety  net  responsibilities  could  lead  to  a 
range  of  problems  and  an  even  more  fragile  marketplace  by  compounding  moral  hazard 
problems  and  by  reducing  the  role  that  market  discipline  could  play  in  strengthening  our 
financial markets and fostering innovation. 
In  general,  most  recognize  that  we  must  think  carefully  about  permanently  extending  the 
financial  safety  net  and  the  Federal  Reserve’s  lending  responsibilities.  Using  the  Federal 
Reserve’s  resources  to  address  breakdowns  within  a  broader  financial  marketplace  will 
necessarily benefit the assisted institutions, and the particular market segments or financial 
instruments  associated  with  the  problems.  Also  it  is  important  to  keep  in  mind  that  many 
other  market  participants  who  have  made  more  prudent  decisions  will  be  left  at  a 
4 
 BIS Review 109/2008
disadvantage  by  having  to  compete  without  such  special  favors.  For  the  Federal  Reserve 
and other public authorities, such a role would thus involve a host of difficult decisions during 
a financial crisis and would potentially put the Federal Reserve in the position of having to 
pick  the  winners  and  losers  from  a  broad  range  of  financial  institutions  and  investors. 
Moreover, as the Bear Stearns experience shows, these decisions may have to be made in a 
hurry and with limited information in many cases, and any actions will likely raise questions 
about  why  some  segments  of  the  economy  are  protected  while  others  are  not.  This  is  a 
difficult position to find ourselves in and its consequences must be carefully weighed before 
we choose such a course of action. 
In  providing  liquidity  or  other  assistance  to  market  participants  who  have  made  unwise 
decisions, we risk magnifying the moral hazard problems in financial markets. These moral 
hazard problems will arise as any substantial public assistance works to undermine market 
outcomes and thereby reduce the incentives that institutions and investors have to manage 
risk and make sound choices. One need only look to the GSEs Freddie Mac and Fannie Mae 
to witness the effects such favored treatment has in the marketplace. 
Perhaps  the  most  prominent  example  of  moral  hazard  risks  is  the  “too-big-to-fail”  problem 
associated with large commercial banks. As I have noted in prior speeches, this has proven 
to be a very intractable issue for banking regulators. We all recognize that extending public 
safety  nets,  discount  window  lending  and  bank-like  supervision  to  a  much  broader 
marketplace  risks  creating  a  financial  system  of  less  inherent  stability  and  an  ever  larger 
class  of  “too-big-to-fail”  institutions.  Over  time  it  would  involve  making  difficult  decisions 
regarding  what  segments  of  the  broader  financial  system  should  be  supervised,  how 
extensively  they  should  be  supervised,  and  whether  this  supervision  would  adequately 
protect the safety net in this new environment.  
When we consider these consequences it becomes more apparent, to me at least, that we 
must strive to limit public safety nets and minimize their associated moral hazard problems. 
There are a number of policy steps we should consider to help markets function in a more 
orderly fashion and become more resilient to financial crises. To return to my analogy, this 
means doubling back across the river to a more historical central banking role, and making 
clear  a  future  crossing  would  be  rare.  And  we  must  accept  that  the  credibility  of  such  an 
assertion will depend critically on how future crises are handled. 
If we choose to double back, then we must also direct more supervisory focus to the market 
interdependencies  among  commercial  banks,  and  we  must  institute  better  mechanisms  to 
unwind  failing  nonbank  financial  institutions  and  their  counterparty  exposures.  We  should 
continue  to  pursue  initiatives  with  the  private  sector  to  increase  market  transparency, 
enhance  corporate  governance  mechanisms  and  market  incentives,  and  strengthen 
settlement systems and trading and securitization markets. And it should be clear that major 
nonbank  financial  institutions  that  seek  discount  window  assistance  will  immediately  come 
under Federal Reserve oversight. This oversight would be directed toward ascertaining the 
viability and exposures of such institutions and controlling potential safety net losses.  
Implications of a broadening mandate for central banks 
Finally, let me now turn my remarks toward a discussion of the macroeconomic implications 
of broadening the Federal Reserve’s traditional dual mandate for price stability and maximum 
employment to include more explicit responsibilities for financial stability. The events of the 
past  year  have  been  especially  useful  in  articulating  the  challenges  that  may  arise  in 
implementing  a  tripartite  mandate.  I  would  like  to  focus  on  the  following  four  questions  as 
particularly important to our understanding of how financial stability fits into a central bank’s 
portfolio of responsibilities. 
First,  can  we  define  a  set  of  principles  to  guide  a  central  bank’s  mandate  for  financial 
stability? This is a key issue for a central bank in determining when it needs to take actions to 
BIS Review 109/2008 
 5
preserve financial stability or, conversely, when it should refrain from doing so, particularly in 
situations  when  political  and  industry  pressures  may  be  calling  for  a  policy  response.  It  is 
also essential if a central bank is to know when to unwind and remove policy accommodation 
or special liquidity measures. Defining the principles guiding our financial stability mandate is 
also  important  for  central  banks  in  communicating  with  the  public  and  for  formulating 
meaningful debates within the central bank. 
Second, does a central bank have the ability to effectively pursue a tripartite mandate? That 
is, does it have enough policy tools, and will these tools be effective in a financial crisis? I 
think  it  is  fair  to  say  that,  at  the  outset  of  the  current  crisis,  central  banks  did  not  have 
practiced  mechanisms  in  place  to  provide  liquidity  to  the  institutions  and  markets  most  in 
need  of  liquidity.  Over  the  past  year,  the  Federal  Reserve  and  other  central  banks  have 
shown  considerable  flexibility  and  ingenuity  in  addressing  these  needs.  It  remains  to  be 
seen, of course, whether some of these facilities will be made a more permanent part of the 
central bank’s policy toolkit.  
At the same time, it is sometimes the case that the stimulus provided by lowering the policy 
rate is less effective in a financial crisis because important parts of the policy transmission 
mechanism are dysfunctional. This difficulty was highlighted in the current crisis where the 
financial  difficulties  centered  on  housing,  which  is  typically  a  key  component  of  the 
transmission  mechanism.  And,  it  was  even  more  dramatically  illustrated  in  the  Japanese 
banking crisis a few years ago where monetary policy was pushed to its limits with very little 
effect. As I have indicated on other occasions, care must be taken not to ask too much of 
monetary policy or we risk adding significant inflationary pressures into an economy. 
Third,  how  does  a  central  bank  trade  off  potentially  conflicting  objectives  under  a  tripartite 
mandate? Central banks, for instance, may have more to deal with than a financial crisis. In 
the current situation, we have experienced a severe financial shock coupled with a surge in 
global inflation. In the face of accelerating inflation, it is important that we not calibrate policy 
principally  to  deal  with  the  financial  crisis  if  it  involves  compromising  to  an  unreasonable 
extent our ability to achieve our mandate for price stability. In the United States, core PCE 
inflation  has  been  above  most  definitions  of  price  stability  for  the  past  four  years  and  is 
poised  to  move  even  higher  over  the  near  term.  The  current  stance  of  policy,  while 
understandably calibrated for responding to the immediate financial crisis, will make it difficult 
to achieve our mandate for price stability over the longer term. 
Finally, how can a central bank implement a financial stability mandate while maintaining the 
independence needed to actively pursue its other mandates? As I noted earlier, in the midst 
of a financial crisis, a central bank will likely be encouraged to take actions that are fiscal in 
nature  or  that  directly  affect  the  allocation  of  credit  by  targeting  assistance  or  liquidity  to 
specific  institutions,  markets  or  financial  instruments.  These  actions  necessarily  affect 
expectations for similar actions in the future and bring forward political pressures that confirm 
such expectations for the future. In these circumstances, a central bank must be particularly 
aware  of  the  difficult  trade-offs  between  its  financial  stability  and  price  stability  mandate, 
especially where, like the United States, the central bank does not have a formal objective for 
price stability. 
Concluding thoughts 
Let me conclude by emphasizing the broader applicability of the issues that I have discussed 
today. Although I have focused my remarks mainly on the Federal Reserve, I believe many 
of  the  issues  raised  by  this  period  of  financial  stress  have  important  implications  for  other 
central banks as financial market liberalization and development proceed around the world. 
Maintaining  financial  stability  in  a  changing  financial  system  is  a  difficult  task  and, 
realistically, financial crises will occur in the future despite our best efforts to prevent them. 
Addressing these issues requires a delicate balance between markets and policy intervention 
and  requires  recognition  of  the  important  macroeconomic  implications  for  central  banks. 
6 
 BIS Review 109/2008
While  there  can  be  little  doubt  that  central  banks  will  continue  to  have  responsibility  for 
financial  stability  going  forward,  recent  events  raise  important  questions  about  how  this 
mandate should be implemented. 
Finally, for a market economy to work best, it must to the maximum extent possible find a 
balance between financial stability and a stable price environment and in doing so must be 
able  to  allow  individual  institutions  to  fail.  The  “Too  Big  to  Fail”  issue  will  only  grow  in 
importance  as  the  consolidation  of  the  financial  industry  grows  in  both  size  and  scope  in 
future decades. 
BIS Review 109/2008 
 7
