David Dodge: Summary of the latest Monetary Policy Report Update 
Opening  statement  by  Mr  David  Dodge,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  at  a  press 
conference 
the  Monetary  Policy  Report  Update,  Ottawa, 
24 January 2008. 
the  release  of 
following 
 Good  morning.  I'm  pleased  to  be  here  with  you  today,  for  my  final  press  conference  as 
Governor of the Bank of Canada, to discuss our January Monetary Policy Report Update.  
The  Canadian  economy  continues  to  operate  above  its  production  capacity,  despite  some 
slowing  in  growth  and  inflation  in  the  fourth  quarter  of  2007.  Financial  conditions  have 
deteriorated  since  October,  leading  to  tighter  credit  conditions  in  industrialized  countries. 
Given this, and a deeper and more prolonged decline in the U.S. housing sector, the outlook 
for  the  U.S.  economy  in  2008  is  now  significantly  weaker  than  at  the  time  of  the  October 
MPR.  
The  weaker  U.S.  economy  will  lead  to  additional  downward  pressure  on  Canada's  export 
growth. Despite tighter credit conditions, domestic demand in Canada is expected to remain 
strong,  supported  by  continued  income  growth  associated  with  the  increase  in  commodity 
prices seen since October. Overall, the Bank now projects that the Canadian economy will 
expand by 1.8 per cent in 2008 and 2.8 per cent in 2009. This growth profile implies that the 
economy will move into excess supply in the second quarter of this year, and then return to 
balance in early 2010. 
Inflation is projected to fall below 1 1/2 per cent by the middle of this year before returning to 
2  per  cent  by  the  end  of  2009.  This  reflects  a  price-level  adjustment  related  to  increased 
competitive pressures in the retail sector stemming from the level of the Canadian dollar, as 
well as the recent reduction in the GST. Excluding the impact of the GST reduction, total CPI 
inflation is projected to average close to the 2 per cent target throughout 2008 and 2009. 
Of  course,  there  are  a  number  of  upside  and  downside  risks  to  the  Bank's  base-case 
projection for inflation. But overall, we judge these risks to be roughly balanced.  
On 4 December and on 22 January, the Bank lowered its target for the overnight rate by one-
quarter of one percentage point, bringing it to 4 per cent. Further monetary stimulus is likely 
to  be  required  in  the  near  term  to  keep  aggregate  supply  and  demand  in  balance,  and  to 
return inflation to target over the medium term. 
BIS Review 9/2008 
 1
