Eddie Yue: Hong Kong’s possible role in Islamic finance 
Welcome  address  by  Mr  Eddie  Yue,  Deputy  Chief  Executive  of  the  Hong  Kong  Monetary 
Authority and Executive Board Chairman of the Treasury Markets Association, at the Hong 
Kong Showcase on Islamic Finance, Dubai and Amman, 11-12 May 2008. 
 Ladies and gentleman, 
It  is  with  great  pleasure  that  I  welcome  you  all  to  the  Hong  Kong  Showcase  on  Islamic 
Finance, presented by members of the financial services industry in Hong Kong, and jointly 
organised  by  the  Hong  Kong  Monetary  Authority,  the  Hong  Kong  Treasury  Markets 
Association and Hong Kong Trade Development Council, which is being held over two days 
in Dubai, UAE and Amman, Jordan.  
I would first like to thank Her Majesty Queen Rania Al-Abdullah of Jordan, who is hosting the 
Islamic  Financial  Services  Board’s  Annual  Summit,  the  Central  Bank  of  Jordan,  and  of 
course the IFSB itself, for graciously agreeing to allow us to organise this event under the 
auspices of the Annual Summit.  
This  forum  is  indeed  an  excellent  opportunity  for  the  regulators,  industry  practitioners  and 
investors  in  the  Gulf  region  and  Hong  Kong  to  share  new  perspectives  in  the  rapidly 
expanding area of Islamic finance, which transcends national borders and is fast penetrating 
global  financial  markets.  Today  we  will  be  focusing  on  what  Hong  Kong  has  to  offer  and 
where it fits into this changing global financial landscape. 
What I would like to do in the next ten minutes or so is to give you an overview of the current 
landscape of Islamic finance in Hong Kong from the perspective of both a financial regulator 
and a market facilitator, and tell you about how we could help promote this initiative from the 
Hong Kong Monetary Authority (HKMA) point of view. 
Why does Hong Kong wish to develop Islamic finance? 
First, allow me to share with you some thoughts in how we see the relevance of Hong Kong 
to the development of Islamic finance in Asia. From its early phase of development in the 
1980’s,  Islamic  finance  has  grown  tremendously  and  undergone  a  rapid  transformation  in 
less  than  two  decades.  Today,  it  has  gained  widespread  recognition,  not  just  among 
investors of the Muslim faith, but also among other investors who see Islamic finance as a 
new  investment  alternative.  Islamic  finance  is  therefore  no  longer  characterised  by  its 
uniqueness, but rather seen as an integral part of the international financial system. 
This brings remarkable opportunities for Hong Kong, as a frontrunner in international finance, 
which possesses key strengths in financial intermediation on an international scale to bring 
together investors and fund raisers from different parts of the world. With that we see great 
potential for Hong Kong to take on the intermediary role for Islamic financial products, just as 
it currently does for conventional products to a high degree of sophistication across all asset 
classes. 
Our contacts with investors and financial institutions in the Gulf region have also reinforced 
our  belief  in  promoting  the  development  of  Islamic  finance  in  Hong  Kong.  This  has  in  fact 
been articulated as a key policy initiative set out by the Chief Executive of the Hong Kong 
Special Administration Region in his 2007 Policy Address. In other words, it is now official 
Government policy to develop Islamic finance in Hong Kong and our commitment to this is 
beyond doubt. 
Being a major international financial centre in Asia, Hong Kong should seek to become an 
important player in the booming Islamic finance arena by providing a platform for Middle East 
BIS Review 59/2008 
 1
investors to access investment opportunities in the Asia Pacific region. Hong Kong can also 
leverage on its experience, innovation and market diversification to serve as a capital-raising 
centre for Middle Eastern issuers to tap the funds made available by the high savings rate in 
Mainland China.  
Some people have expressed scepticism about how Hong Kong could play a role in these 
segments of the market. But market players in Hong Kong have answered this scepticism by 
quickly introducing our first Shariah-compliant product. In late 2007, we witnessed the first 
Islamic  fund  introduced by  a  local  bank  in  Hong  Kong.  The  fund  is  an  index-tracking  fund 
which  tracks  the  performance  of  the  Dow  Jones  Islamic  Market  China/Hong  Kong  Titans 
Index. In December last year, the Hong Kong Mortgage Corporation signed a joint venture 
agreement with Cagamas Berhad, Malaysia’s national mortgage corporation, to establish a 
company to develop mortgage guarantee business in Malaysia and other parts of the world. 
Earlier this month, a new Dow Jones Islamic Market Index came to the marketplace to track 
China-related equities listed in the Hong Kong stock exchange, further enriching the Islamic 
index  infrastructure  in  Hong  Kong.  These  initiatives  clearly  demonstrate  the  dynamism  of 
Hong Kong’s financial systems in responding to an emerging market opportunity. 
Is the timing right? 
Some observers have questioned whether it is a bit late for Hong Kong to develop Islamic 
finance, when some other financial centres in the region have already made a head start. It 
may be true that Hong Kong has started the development only recently, but so long as the 
demand is there, it’s never too late for Hong Kong to contribute to this vibrant and growing 
sector. The Islamic financial sector we believe has huge headroom for growth.  
Hong Kong can also learn from the experience of other established centres, and co-operate 
with them to grow the market. Indeed, there is no better time than now to contribute to the 
development of Islamic finance. This region is in possession of a significant part of the global 
oil reserves and has topped the world in the accumulation of wealth. The abundance of oil-
driven liquidity generates a huge appetite for investments that cannot now be satisfied within 
the  Gulf  area  alone.  Such  investments  can  be  found  in  the  emerging  markets  of  Asia, 
especially in China. 
Although  the  dynamics  are  somewhat  different  in  China,  its  tale  of  economic  growth  is  as 
legendary as that of the Middle East. China has experienced a huge inflow of funds in search 
of growth opportunities and at the same time the Mainland authorities have been gradually 
opening up the country’s outward investment. As a Special Administrative Region of China, 
Hong Kong plays a pivotal role as the IFC of China in the course of financial liberalisation. 
Not only has it acted as a conduit for Mainland companies accessing international markets 
through IPOs, but also one of the largest sources of foreign direct investments for Mainland 
China. With the continuing financial liberalisation on the Mainland, Hong Kong is positioned 
as the most attractive destination both for investing into China and tapping China's funds. 
What are the challenges for us? 
Opportunities  aside,  we  are  of  course  aware  that  Hong  Kong  also  faces  challenges  in 
developing Islamic finance. It is a fact that Hong Kong’s Islamic community is not big, but we 
are confident that the development of Shariah-compliant financial markets can take off even 
in environments in which the domestic Islamic community is relatively small, simply for the 
fact  that  investors  nowadays  are  looking  beyond  domestic  boundaries  and  traditional 
finances  as  financial  activities  gravitate  towards  the  Middle  East  and  China.  Indeed  Hong 
Kong’s relatively small population does not seem to undermine in any way our performance 
in the conventional financial and capital markets. Therefore we are not positioning ourselves 
as a market that can match the supply and demand of Islamic products from domestic angle. 
2 
 BIS Review 59/2008
Our objective is to make Hong Kong a platform for international intermediation activities for 
Islamic finance.  
What can we offer to the Islamic investors? 
Hong Kong’s advantages lie in its strategic location, highly developed financial markets and 
infrastructure, and a business-friendly free-market environment. We are strategically located 
at  the  heart  of  Asia  with  a  broad  hinterland  that  gives  investors  unique  access  to  virtually 
every market in the Asia Pacific time zone. Almost all Asian countries are within reach by a 
three-hour flight from Hong Kong.  
What makes Hong Kong a natural destination for Islamic funds is our deep and highly liquid 
capital markets. Almost all of the most actively traded financial instruments are available for 
exchange in Hong Kong, and this gives Islamic investors a much wider choice of where to 
place their funds.  
More importantly, when it comes to investing in China, Hong Kong is about the only natural 
choice.  Hong  Kong  has  the  largest  and  deepest  Chinese equity  and  debt  markets  outside 
Mainland China. We are the first and remain the only major international financial centre that 
has banking business and financial products related to the renminbi. The development of a 
local  renminbi  bond  market  which  started  in  the  middle  of  last  year  has  firmly  positioned 
Hong Kong as a pilot market for China’s continuing financial market liberalisation. Hong Kong 
is  the  ideal  gateway  for  Middle  Eastern  investors  who  are  keen  to  capitalise  on  the 
Mainland’s rapid economic growth. 
International  investors  can  gain  exposures  to  different  sectors  of  China  through  the  Hong 
Kong platform. For example, for investors wanting to access China’s property market, they 
can  make  use  of  the  Real  Estate  Investment  Trusts  listed  in  Hong  Kong  with  underlying 
exposures to properties in Mainland China. There has also been encouraging innovation in 
combining  sukuk  with  China  equity  exposures  –  what  I  refer  to  was  the  launch  of  an 
exchangeable sukuk linked to the underlying shares of a Mainland China company listed in 
the  stock  exchange  of  Hong  Kong.  The  exchangeable  sukuk,  which  is  listed  on  our  stock 
exchange as well, attracted a high subscription from Middle Eastern investors and reaffirmed 
the keen demand for investment opportunities with China growth prospect through the Hong 
Kong platform. 
In  terms  of  infrastructural  support,  many  leading  international  banks  have  geared  up  for 
Islamic finance products and many of them have a very strong presence in Hong Kong. Our 
market players are therefore well-equipped to leverage on the expertise in other parts of the 
world  in  structuring  Shariah-compliant  products  and  meeting  the  needs  of  even  the  most 
demanding Islamic financier. Hong Kong’s success factors lie not only in our premier location 
and versatility, but also in possessing the talent and infrastructure to become the conduit to 
facilitate the capital flows between the Middle East and Asia. 
What more should be done? 
Notwithstanding the strong fundamentals of our financial markets and infrastructure, we are 
conscious of the need for greater efforts to be made to establish a level playing field in the 
conduct of Islamic finance business vis-à-vis conventional activities. This includes a review of 
tax laws in Hong Kong. The HKSAR Government is now conducting a review of tax laws to 
ensure that Islamic financial transactions will not be disadvantaged simply because of their 
special structure to cater for compliance with the Shariah law. 
Apart from that, we are also focusing our efforts in three major areas. 
The  first  involves  efforts  to  connect  the  Hong  Kong  platform  with  financial  institutions  and 
investors interested in Islamic finance. That involves the need to raise the international profile 
BIS Review 59/2008 
 3
of Hong Kong’s platform for Islamic finance. The presentation of this flagship Showcase in 
both  Dubai  and  Jordan  is  an  important  milestone  in  advancing  the  city’s  profile  and 
heightening  awareness.  Of  equal  importance  is  that,  through  this  forum,  we  can  establish 
complementary and mutually beneficial relationships for players in our financial markets. 
The  second  area  is  our  efforts  to  deepen  market  knowledge  in  Hong  Kong  about  Islamic 
finance products. In this regard, the Treasury Markets Association can play a significant role 
in providing an avenue for open and useful discussions and the sharing of experiences from 
experts in this field, thereby enhancing the knowledge of our local market players. 
Third,  we  are  working  hard  to  forge  closer  international  links  through  co-operation  with 
Islamic  finance  centres  and  organisations.  Establishing  business  links  is  particularly 
important  in  face  of  the  challenges  brought  by  the  integration  of  Islamic  finance  with  the 
international financial system. In this regard, I am pleased to mention that Hong Kong has 
formed a working group with the Dubai International Financial Centre Authority to promote 
the mutual development of Islamic finance and financial market infrastructure. 
Closing remarks 
In  closing,  I  would  like  to  point  you  to  an  analogy  often  made  between  the  rise  of  Islamic 
finance  and  the  renaissance  of  the  Silk  Road.  Let’s  remember  the  Silk  Road,  in  ancient 
times, was China’s link to the outside world and a route for trade and exchange of art, music, 
culture and religion. Today, Hong Kong is right at the heart of the New Silk Road, standing 
astride East and the West, and providing a gateway to business and financial opportunities. 
We have already painted a picture of how the financial regulators and industry associations 
will strive to promote the development of Islamic finance in Hong Kong, and we hope very 
much that the enormous forces of the market will make the New Silk Road as prosperous 
and significant as the old one. 
Thank you very much.  
4 
 BIS Review 59/2008
