Ewart S Williams: Trinidad and Tobago’s secondary market for 
government securities 
Opening  remarks  by  Mr  Ewart  S  Williams,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Trinidad  and 
Tobago,  at  the  Launch  of  Secondary  Market  for  Government  Securities,  Port-of-Spain, 
28 January 2008. 
 is  an 
indispensable  requirement 
An important aspect of the mandate of any Central Bank and particularly a Central Bank of a 
developing  country  is  the  development  of  an  active  capital  market.  Why?  Because  an 
efficient  capital  market 
for  sustainable  economic 
transformation. 
The reasons for this are well-known to you, I am sure, but let me simply re-iterate a few of 
them. An efficient capital market: 
• 
the  mobilization  of  domestic  savings  by  providing 
Supports 
alternatives for investment and risk diversification. 
Permits companies and governments to raise long term resources at lower cost. 
Promotes efficiency and competition in the financial system. 
Creates  an  avenue  for  the  population  to  participate  in  the  corporate  sector  and 
share in its wealth. 
investors  with 
 There is a more or less widely recognized sequencing for capital market development and it 
goes like this: 
• 
It usually starts with treasury bill issues, to fund government’s short term financing 
needs and the formation of some kind of money market in which there is the trading 
of short term funds – a good example is the inter-bank money market. 
The  second  stage  is  usually  a  primary  government  securities  market  where 
government  issues  bonds  to  help  finance  capital  projects.  In  the  early  stages, 
government securities may be issued to a captive market – for instance to pension 
funds and insurance companies to help them meet statutory requirements. During 
this  stage,  the  distribution  process  tends  to  be  non-transparent  and,  in  a  seller’s 
market, at below-market interest rates. 
As the economic transformation process evolves, governments seek to promote a 
third stage – that is the development of a rudimentary equities market. 
  With  these  basic  structures  in  place  efforts  are  focused  on  refining  and  improving  the 
infrastructure  related  to  the  government  securities  and  equities  market  …  until,  there  is  a 
move to the third stage, that is: 
• 
the development of a secondary market in government securities and a bit later, a 
market for corporate securities and a derivatives market. 
These stages very often overlap and small developing countries seldom move beyond the 
state of primary government bond issuance and illiquid equity markets. We in Trinidad and 
Tobago are trying to move beyond the limitations dictated by small size to create a diversified 
capital market to facilitate the process of economic transformation and to set the stage for 
our emergence as an international financial center. 
In Trinidad and Tobago, the Government and the Central Bank have made a series of critical 
interventions,  during  the  second  stage,  to  spur  capital  market  development  along  market-
based lines. 
BIS Review 12/2008 
 1
For  example,  in  2004  the  mechanism  for  primary  market  issuance  evolved  from  an 
“underwriting” system, which helped minimise placement risk and ensured allocation, to an 
auction  mechanism,  which  served  to  increase  transparency,  stimulate  competition  and 
improve the process of price determination. 
In  the  context  of  this  auction  mechanism,  the  Bank  designated  a  number  of  financial 
institutions  as  government  securities  intermediaries  (GSIs),  licensed  to  participate  in 
government bond auctions either on their own account or on behalf of the public. 
To  facilitate  clearance  and  settlement  of  purchases  through  the  auction  system,  the 
electronic  government  securities  system  (GSS)  originally  established  for  treasury  bills 
and  treasury  notes,  was  expanded  to  accommodate  government  bonds.  The  GSS 
incorporates  both  an  on-line  auction  system  and  an  integrated  securities  depository.  The 
GSS  is  currently  integrated  into  the  Real  Time  Gross  Settlement  system  (the  RTGS)  to 
facilitate the settlement of government securities transactions and simultaneous recording of 
the ownership of securities in the depository. 
Ladies and gentlemen these various interventions; the auction system, the GSIs, the on-line 
system  and  the  central  depository  system,  all  set  the  stage  for  the  introduction  of  the 
secondary market for government securities, which we are pleased to launch today. 
How  does  the  primary  market  differ  from  the  secondary  market  for  government 
securities?  Simply  put,  the  primary  market  for  a  security  is  the  place  where  an  issuer 
creates the security and sells it into the market; it involves the creation of new securities with 
the government as seller. The secondary market covers trading of securities after issuance 
and before redemption. 
It is our conviction that the secondary market can offer tremendous benefits to the economy 
of Trinidad and Tobago. It will firstly foster further capital market development and facilitate 
the achievement of the various objectives listed above and secondly, the secondary market 
could bring significant benefits to investors. 
What are the systemic benefits of a secondary market in government securities: 
• 
First, market trading provides a mechanism for government securities to move from 
investors in the primary market to a wider range of end-investors such as pension 
funds, insurance companies and retail investors. 
Second, by providing opportunities for more frequent trading, the secondary market 
improves the pricing process for government securities. 
Third,  the  development  of  a  well-functioning  secondary  market  in  government 
securities may also act as a primer for other fixed-income securities markets. As a 
market  virtually  free  of  credit  risk,  its  yield  curve  provides  a  benchmark  for  the 
pricing of other fixed-income securities such as corporate bonds. 
  And as I said, there are also benefits for investors: all classes of investors – the institutional 
investors like the pension funds and the insurance companies; the fast-rising mutual funds 
industry; the corporate sector; and even retail investors. 
The  secondary  market  could  offer  corporate  treasurers  new  opportunities  for  liquidity 
management. 
Since secondary market trading will, for the first time, facilitate market pricing of securities, it 
will  allow  pension  funds  and  mutual  funds  to  value  their  fixed  income  portfolios  on  an  on-
going basis. One would expect that a more accurate assessment of their portfolio will help 
pension funds better plan their investment strategies. 
Another  important  advantage  is  that  the  secondary  market  will  extend  the  menu  of 
investment instruments; no longer will the investor be compelled to hold on to his five-year 
bond; rather, the pension fund can sell its five-year bond and invest in bonds of longer or 
shorter maturities according to interest rate expectations. 
2 
 BIS Review 12/2008
As  regards  the  retail  market,  recent  initiatives  in  the  primary  bond  auctions  have  made 
investment in government bonds more accessible to the individual investors. You may recall, 
the last three bond auctions allowed individuals to purchase bonds in amounts as small as 
$1,000. With the secondary market, the small investor can now approach any Government 
Securities Intermediary (GSI) to buy and sell bonds, at any time, and have confidence in the 
transparency of the pricing process. 
Our mandate to foster the development of a secondary market in government securities will 
also include efforts to develop the use of these securities in repurchase agreements (repos). 
The  repo  market  permits  borrowing  and  lending  among  market  participants,  including 
financial institutions and corporates, to take place on a safe and secure basis while reducing 
both credit risks and transaction costs. The SEC is now in the process of devising a set of 
rules and a standard “repo” agreement to underpin the “repo” market. 
Let me concede that the promotion of a vibrant secondary market for government securities 
has proven to be a major challenge for developing and emerging market economies. Newly 
developed secondary markets are usually very thin and illiquid, with few people willing to sell 
and many willing buyers. There is no doubt that success depends on the active participation 
of  a  whole  host  of  stakeholders  –  the  Government,  the  Central  Bank,  as  well  as  all  the 
market participants. If the secondary market is to work: 
• 
Institutional investors will need to look for opportunities for profitable trading and not 
simply accept the traditional “buy and hold” culture. 
Banks  and  other  financial  institutions,  who  are  the  main  holders  of  government 
paper,  will  need  to  see  the  profit-making  opportunities  in  promoting  the  sale  of 
government securities to end-investors. 
The  Central  Bank  has  the  responsibility  for  fostering  credibility  in  the  auction 
process,  and  maintaining  efficient  clearing  and  settlement  systems.  Currently  only 
the securities issued in auctions since 2004, are currently included in the depository 
managed by the Central Bank and listed on the Stock Exchange. The Bank needs to 
be  appointed  Registrar  for  government  bonds  issued  before  2004  and  is  working 
with  trustees  to  effect  this.  When  this  exercise  is  completed,  bondholders  will  be 
asked to deposit their bond certificates with the Bank in exchange for an electronic 
deposit  record  of  their  bond  holdings.  This  process  will  increase  the  volume  of 
bonds available for trading on the stock exchange. 
Government, for its part, must guarantee a regular and predictable supply of primary 
issuance  so  that  institutions  could  be  assured  of  replenishing  their  positions  after 
selling securities from their portfolios. One way of ensuring supply, is to bring public 
entities  into  the  auction  mechanism  instead  of  relying  on  bank  financing  or  the 
underwriting process. 
The  SEC  has  the  mandate  for  preparing  and  enforcing  the  rules  and  regulations 
pertaining  to  the  secondary  market.  These  include  regulation  of  the  market 
intermediaries,  market  surveillance  and  transparency  and  reporting  requirements 
and  market conduct  regulation;  the latter  includes  trading  rules  and  arrangements 
aimed  at  preventing  improper  trading  practices  such  as  market  manipulation  and 
insider trading practices. 
    So the launch today is just the beginning. We all have our work cut out for us and we all need 
to  work  closely  together,  if  we  are  to  create  a  liquid  and  vibrant  secondary  market  for 
government  securities.  I  told  you  earlier  that  most  developing  countries  shun  this  step 
because it involves the creation of new institutions as well as important behavioural changes. 
But,  if  we  want  to  have  a  developed  capital  market;  and  if  we  want  to  be  an  international 
financial center we need to make a quantum leap from occasional primary issuance and a 
BIS Review 12/2008 
 3
few  isolated  “over  the  counter”  trades  to  a  formal  secondary  market  that  gains  credibility 
among local as well as international investors. 
As this is the Carnival Season, it is perhaps fitting to take Stalin’s advice “we can make it if 
we try”. 
4 
 BIS Review 12/2008
