Ben S Bernanke: Regulatory restructuring 
Testimony of Mr Ben S Bernanke, Chairman of the Board of Governors of the US Federal 
Reserve  System,  before 
the  Committee  on  Financial  Services,  US  House  of 
Representatives, Washington DC, 10 July 2008. 
The original speech, which contains various links to the documents mentioned, can be found on the US Federal 
Reserve System’s website. 
 Chairman  Frank,  Ranking  Member  Bachus,  and  other  members  of  the  Committee,  I  am 
pleased to be here today to discuss financial regulation and financial stability.  
The financial turmoil that began last summer has impeded the ability of the financial system 
to perform its normal functions and adversely affected the broader economy. This experience 
indicates a clear need for careful attention to financial regulation and financial stability by the 
Congress and other policymakers. 
Regulatory  authorities  have  been  actively  considering  the  implications  of  the  turmoil  for 
regulatory policy and for private-sector practices. In March, the President's Working Group 
on  Financial  Markets  (PWG)  issued  a  report  and  recommendations  for  addressing  the 
weaknesses  revealed  by  recent  events.1  At  the  international  level,  the  Financial  Stability 
Forum  has  also  issued  a  report  and  recommendations.2  Between  them,  the  two  reports 
focused  on  a  number  of  specific  problem  areas,  including  mortgage  lending  practices  and 
their  oversight,  risk  measurement  and  management  at  large  financial  institutions,  the 
performance of credit rating agencies, accounting and valuation issues, and issues relating 
to  the  clearing  and  settlement  of  financial  transactions.  Many  of  the  recommendations  of 
these  reports  were  directed  at  regulators  and  the  private  sector  and  are  already  being 
implemented.  These  reports  complement  the  blueprint  for  regulatory  reform  issued  by  the 
Treasury in March, which focused on broader questions of regulatory architecture.3 
Work  is  also  ongoing  to  strengthen  the  framework  for  prudential  oversight  of  financial 
institutions. Notably, recent events have led the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision to 
consider higher capital charges for such items as certain complex structured credit products, 
assets  in  banks'  trading  books,  and  liquidity  guarantees  provided  to  off-balance  sheet 
vehicles. New guidelines for banks' liquidity management are also being issued. Regarding 
implementation, the recent reports have stressed the need for supervisors to insist on strong 
risk-measurement and risk-management practices that allow managers to assess the risks 
they face on a firmwide basis. 
In  the  remainder  of  my  remarks  I  will  comment  briefly  on  three  issues:  the  supervisory 
oversight of primary dealers, including the major investment banks; the need to strengthen 
the  financial  infrastructure;  and  the  possible  need  for  new  tools  for  facilitating  the  orderly 
liquidation of a systemically important securities firm.4 
                                                 
1   President's  Working  Group  on  Financial  Markets  (2008),  "Policy  Statement  on  Financial  Market 
Developments", March 13. 
2   The membership of the Financial Stability Forum consists of central bankers, regulators, and finance ministers 
from many countries, including the United States. Their report is available at: Financial Stability Forum (2008), 
"Report of the Financial Stability Forum on Enhancing Market and Institutional Resilience", April 7. 
3   The Treasury blueprint is available at: U.S. Department of the Treasury (2008), "Blueprint for a Modernized 
Financial Regulatory Structure", March 31. 
4   Primary  dealers  are  banks  and  securities  broker-dealers  that  trade  in  U.S.  government  securities  with  the 
Federal Reserve Bank of  New  York. On  behalf  of the Federal  Reserve  System, the New York Fed's Open 
Market Desk engages in the trades to implement monetary policy. 
BIS Review 89/2008 
 1
Prudential supervision of investment banks 
Since the near-collapse of The Bear Stearns Companies, Inc., in March, the Federal Reserve 
has been working closely with the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), which is the 
functional supervisor of each of the primary dealers and the consolidated supervisor of the 
four  large  investment  banks,  to  help  ensure  that  those  firms  have  the  financial  strength 
needed to withstand conditions of extreme market stress. To formalize our effective working 
relationship,  the  SEC  and  the  Federal  Reserve  this  week  agreed  to  a  memorandum  of 
understanding.5  
Cooperation  between  the  Fed  and  the  SEC  is  taking  place  within  the  existing  statutory 
framework  with  the  objective  of  addressing  the  near-term  situation.  In  the  longer  term, 
however, legislation may be needed to provide a more robust framework for the prudential 
supervision  of  investment  banks  and  other  large  securities  dealers.  In  particular,  under 
current arrangements, the SEC's oversight of the holding companies of the major investment 
banks is based on a voluntary agreement between the SEC and those firms. Strong holding 
company oversight is essential, and thus, in my view, the Congress should consider requiring 
consolidated  supervision  of  those  firms  and  providing  the  regulator  the  authority  to  set 
standards for capital, liquidity holdings, and risk management.6 At the same time, reforms in 
the  oversight  of  these  firms  must  recognize  the  distinctive  features  of  investment  banking 
and  take  care  neither  to  unduly  inhibit  innovation  nor  to  induce  a  migration  of  risk-taking 
activities to less-regulated or offshore institutions. 
Strengthening the financial infrastructure 
The  potential  vulnerability  of  the  financial  system  to  the  collapse  of  Bear  Stearns  was 
exacerbated by weaknesses in the infrastructure of financial markets, notably in the markets 
for over-the-counter (OTC) derivatives and in short-term funding markets. 
The Federal Reserve, together with other regulators and the private sector, is engaged in a 
broad effort to strengthen the financial infrastructure. For example, since September 2005, 
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York has been leading a major joint initiative by both the 
public  and  private  sectors  to  improve  arrangements  for  clearing  and  settling  credit  default 
swaps  and  other  OTC  derivatives.  The  Federal  Reserve  and  other  authorities  also  are 
focusing on enhancing the resilience of the markets for tri-party repurchase agreements, in 
which  the  primary  dealers  and  other  large  banks  and  broker-dealers  obtain  very  large 
amounts of secured financing from money funds and other short-term, risk-averse investors. 
In these efforts, we aim not only to make the financial system better able to withstand future 
shocks but also to mitigate moral hazard and the problem of "too big to fail," by reducing the 
range  of  circumstances  in  which  systemic  stability  concerns  might  prompt  government 
intervention. 
More  generally,  the  stability  of  the  broader  financial  system  requires  key  payment  and 
settlement systems to operate smoothly under stress and to effectively manage counterparty 
risk. Currently, the Federal Reserve relies on a patchwork of authorities, largely derived from 
                                                 
5   Under the memorandum of understanding, the SEC and the Fed  will freely share information and analyses 
pertaining to the financial conditions of primary dealers. The two agencies have also agreed to  work jointly 
with the firms to support their continued efforts to strengthen their balance sheets, their liquidity, and their risk-
management  practices.  See:  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal  Reserve  System  and  Securities  and 
Exchange Commission (2008), "Federal Reserve and SEC Issue Memorandum of Understanding to Deepen 
Information Sharing and Cooperation", press release, July 7. 
6   Bank-affiliated  primary  dealers  are  already  subject  to  mandatory  consolidated  supervision,  but  the  focus  of 
that  supervision  has  been  on  limiting  risks  to  the  banks  and  other  insured  depository  institutions  within  the 
holding company. Existing provisions may need to be modified to provide regulatory authority to assess and 
limit risks to all functionally regulated entities, including securities subsidiaries. 
2 
 BIS Review 89/2008
our role as a banking supervisor, as well as on moral suasion to help ensure that the various 
payment  and  settlement  systems  have  the  necessary  procedures  and  controls  in  place  to 
manage the risks they face. By contrast, many major central banks around the world have an 
explicit  statutory  basis  for  their  oversight  of  payment  and  settlement  systems.  Because 
robust payment and settlement systems are vital for financial stability, the Congress should 
consider granting the Federal Reserve explicit oversight authority for systemically important 
payment and settlement systems.  
Preventing or mitigating future crises 
The  financial  turmoil  is  ongoing,  and  our  efforts  today  are  concentrated  on  helping  the 
financial system return to more normal functioning. It is not too soon, however, to think about 
steps that might be taken to reduce the incidence and severity of future crises. 
In  particular,  in  light  of  the  Bear  Stearns  episode,  the  Congress  may  wish  to  consider 
whether new tools are needed for ensuring an orderly liquidation of a systemically important 
securities  firm  that  is  on  the  verge  of  bankruptcy,  together  with  a  more  formal  process  for 
deciding  when  to  use  those  tools.  Because  the  resolution  of  a  failing  securities  firm  might 
have fiscal implications, it would be appropriate for the Treasury to take a leading role in any 
such process, in consultation with the firm's regulator and other authorities. 
The  details  of  any  such  tools  and  of  the  associated  decisionmaking  process  require  more 
study.  One  possible  model  is  the  process  currently  in  place  under  the  Federal  Deposit 
Insurance  Corporation  Improvement  Act  (FDICIA)  for  dealing  with  insolvent  commercial 
banks. The FDICIA procedures give the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation the authority 
to act as a receiver for an insolvent bank and to set up a bridge bank to facilitate an orderly 
liquidation of the firm. The FDICIA law also requires that failing banks be resolved in a way 
that imposes the least cost to the government, except when the authorities, through a well-
defined  procedure,  determine  that  following  the  least-cost  route  would  entail  significant 
systemic risk. To be sure, securities firms differ significantly from commercial banks in their 
financing,  business  models,  and  in  other  ways,  so  the  FDICIA  rules  are  not  directly 
applicable to these firms. Although designing a resolution regime appropriate for securities 
firms would be a complex undertaking, I believe it would be worth the effort. In particular, by 
setting  a  high  bar  for  such  actions,  the  adverse  effects  on  market  discipline  could  be 
minimized. 
Thank you. I would be pleased to take your questions. 
BIS Review 89/2008 
 3
