Amando M Tetangco, Jr: The Central Bank of the Philippines in 2008 – 
one dynamic team 
New Year’s message by Mr Amando M Tetangco, Jr, Governor of the Central Bank of the 
Philippines  (Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas),  to  BSPers,  at  the  BSP  Flag  Raising  Ceremony, 
BSP Complex, Malate, Manila, 7 January 2008. 
 Magandang umaga at maligayang bagong taon sa inyong lahat!  
Fellow  central  bankers.  I  am  very  pleased  that  I  am  the  first  speaker  this  year  for  our 
traditional weekly flag-raising ceremony.  
Alam po ninyo, gusto ko pong magpasalamat muli sa inyong lahat dahil talagang maganda 
ang naging resulta ng 2007 para sa atin sa Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas. We were able to 
keep inflation at low and stable rates, our banking system is stronger, we have record high 
international  reserves,  record  high  balance  of  payments  surplus,  and  our  peso  is  the  best 
performing  currency  in  Asia.  For  this,  let  us  give  ourselves  a  well-deserved  round  of 
applause!  
If  you  recall,  the  Monetary  Board  improved  our  salary  scheme  and  incentives  program  in 
2007 in recognition of our good performance. Kaya ba nating ulitin ito?!!! Kaya!!!  
I agree with you; especially if we resolve individually and collectively to find even better ways 
of doing things in our respective sectors. While we have been performing well in terms of our 
mandate, you and I know there is always room for improving our performance.  
It can be as simple as using recycled paper for our draft reports, completing our assignments 
well ahead of time, conserving water and electricity, finding more cost-effective ways of doing 
our  work,  setting  higher  standards  for  the  quality  of  work  we  do,  and  contributing  to  the 
overall  effort  to  transform  the  Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas  into  a  world-class  monetary 
authority.  
Fellow BSPers. The months and years ahead hold a lot of challenges that demand new and 
better  ways  of  doing  things.  Our  operating  environment  continues  to  evolve  and  change. 
Therefore,  it  is  not  feasible  to  remain  static  and  continue  to  depend  on  old  systems  and 
procedures.  
Thus,  while  we  have  become  good  inflation  targeters,  we  still  continue  to  seek  third  party 
expert evaluation of the tools we use to craft and implement responsive monetary policies. 
The  Monetary  Stability  Sector  will  also  implement  more  streamlined  cash  management 
operations system this year, among others.  
At the same time, we are reorganizing our Supervision and Examination Sector to adopt to a 
rapidly  changing  environment  and  implement  reforms  that  will  make  our  banking  system 
stronger,  more  efficient,  at  par  with  international  standards,  and  more  responsive  to  the 
needs of our economy and our people.  
The Resource Management Sector, on the other hand, will ensure that BSPers are properly 
equipped  with  the  appropriate  skills  and  expertise  required  by  our  institution.  2008  also 
marks our shift to a more meaningful appraisal system in accordance with our merit system 
for salary adjustments and promotions.  
Even  the  way  we  estimate  and  produce  our  currency  requirements  at  the  Security  Plant 
Complex is undergoing review to make it more efficient and responsive to the needs of the 
economy.  
BIS Review 3/2008 
 1
Indeed,  change  is  happening  around  us.  Now,  more  than  ever,  we  need  to  be  open  to 
change, to be flexible to be dynamic to achieve the goals we have set under our Medium 
Term Development Program.  
Nevertheless, even as we welcome change, we should, at all times, remain faithful to the five 
core  values  of  our  institution,  which  are:  patriotism,  integrity,  excellence,  dynamism  and 
solidarity.  
These  core  values  should  serve  as  our  enduring  and  lasting  guides  as  we  deal  with  the 
opportunities and challenges ahead of us.  
Ladies and gentlemen of the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas. By tradition, this is the time of year 
when we commit to do better through what we call New Year’s resolution.  
As our joint New Year’s resolution therefore, let us commit to be guided by our core values, 
at all times, wherever we may be.  
Muli  sa  ngalan  po  ng  ating  Monetary  Board  at  nang  aking  pamilya  kasama  na  ang  aking 
maybahay  na  si  Elma  at  tatlong  anak,  ako  po  ay  nagpapasalamat  sa  inyong  lahat  at 
humihiling na sana ay maging masaya, malusog, masagana, at matagumpay ang 2008 para 
sa ating lahat, at sa ating mga kababayan!  
Mabuhay ang Bangko Sentral! Mabuhay ang Pilipinas! 
2 
 BIS Review 3/2008
