Svante Öberg: Monetary policy and productivity  
Speech  by  Mr  Svante  Öberg,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Sveriges  Riksbank,  at  a  meeting 
arranged by Danske Bank, Stockholm, 29 January 2008. 
 Productivity  is  an  important  part  of  the  equation  when  analysing  the  economy.  In  the  long 
run, productivity determines most of a country's GDP growth and welfare. In the short term it 
is an important factor for how inflation develops. It is therefore important for the Riksbank to 
assess how productivity will develop in future. To create a better picture of productivity and 
its driving forces the Bank regularly works on further developing and deepening our analysis. 
For instance, we arranged two conferences on the theme of productivity last year, where the 
most recent analysis and research in the field was discussed. I intend to take up some of the 
insights from the conferences in my speech today.  
Productivity has gone from surprisingly strong to surprisingly weak 
Over the past 10-15 years inflation has been lower and more stable than before. This is a 
pattern  that  can  be  seen  around  the  world  and  probably  has  several  explanations.  One 
explanation is that monetary policy has gained greater credibility. Inflation expectations have 
thus stabilised at a low level, which in turn has contributed to keeping down inflation. Another 
explanation  is  that  globalisation,  that  is,  increased  trade  and  economic  integration,  has 
subdued inflation.  
In  Sweden,  strong  productivity  growth  and  an  increased  share  of  imports  from  low-cost 
countries  in  recent  years  have  contributed  to  low  inflation  (see  Figure  1).  This  made  it 
possible  for  the  Riksbank  to  cut  its  interest  rate  and  hold  it  down  in  a  situation  where  the 
economy was expanding rapidly.  
Now  these  factors  are  pushing  in  the  other  direction.  Rising  global  demand  is  pushing  up 
prices on energy, commodities and grain. This has forced up world market prices. The strong 
economic activity in recent years has meant that resource utilisation in the Swedish economy 
is  now  at  a  high  level  and  that  cost  pressures  have  therefore  risen.  Judging  by  the  wage 
statistics, wages so far have increased at a moderate rate, but the earlier strong productivity 
growth has ground to a halt and productivity even declined last year.  
In the same way as the strength in the rate of productivity surprised the Riksbank and many 
other  forecasters  earlier,  last  year  we  were  surprised  by  the  strength  of  the  downturn.  An 
important task for forecasters will be to estimate to what extent the most recent decline is 
temporary or to what extent it involves more of a trend decline in growth. 
Let  me  clarify  a  little  before  I  continue.  When  I  talk  about  productivity  today  I  mean 
productivity measured as production per hour worked, that is, labour productivity. 
Upswing in productivity growth since the beginning of the 1990s 
How has productivity developed in recent decades? There was a sharp break in the trend in 
the mid-1970s (see Figure 2). From a rate of increase for the business sector of around 6 per 
cent a year during the 1960s, the trend increase fell to around 2 per cent a year during the 
second half of the 1970s and in the 1980s. 
After the economic crisis at the beginning of the 1990s, productivity growth increased again. 
Growth rose to around 3 per cent a year during the period 1995-2007 and was at its highest 
during the years 2002-2006, when it increased on average by 4.4 per cent a year. It was a 
broad upturn, covering almost all sectors. 
BIS Review 12/2008 
 1
But in 2007 productivity slowed down considerably. It fell by 0.5 per cent during the first three 
quarters, compared with the previous year. I will return to the decline later on.  
Productivity is affected by economic activity 
What explains the fact that productivity has shown an increase trend? At the beginning of the 
1990s part of the increasing productivity growth was probably linked to the rapid exclusion of 
companies and labour with low productivity during the crisis years. When the crisis was over, 
companies had plenty of spare capacity and could therefore increase production. In addition, 
the  substantial  weakening  of  the  krona  in  autumn  1992  contributed  to  a  rapid  increase  in 
exports. When production and resource utilisation rose, this led to an upswing in productivity. 
A  commonly  recurring  cyclical  pattern  is  that  productivity  increases  more  quickly  at  the 
beginning of an economic upswing. Companies then normally have the capacity to increase 
their production with the existing resources. The need for resources then gradually increases 
and the companies begin to recruit new staff. Productivity growth usually falls then. When the 
economic cycle enters a downturn phase, productivity develops even more slowly. Another 
way  of  describing  this  cyclical  pattern  is  to  assume  that  the  economy  is  exposed  to 
technological  shocks.  This  is  how  productivity  is  modelled  in  so-called  real  business  cycle 
models.  This  is  the  case  in  Ramses,  for  instance,  which  is  the  general  equilibrium  model 
used by the Riksbank.  
But also by factors such as globalisation and new technology 
However,  productivity  growth  did  not  fall  back,  but  remained  high  in  the  latter  half  of  the 
1990s. There was only a marked reduction in connection with the bursting of the IT bubble in 
2000 and in the following year productivity did not increase at all.  
Since then productivity has increased rapidly during the 2000s up to last year (see Figure 3). 
During the economic upturn in recent years it took longer before employment accelerated. 
Most  indications  are  therefore  that  the  strong  productivity  growth  in  recent  years  was  not 
solely  a cyclical  phenomenon  –  it was  also  due  to  structural  factors  such  as  globalisation, 
use of information technology (IT), deregulation of product markets and innovations. 
Globalisation  sharpens  competition  and  pushes  up  productivity  growth  through  a  higher 
degree of specialisation and use of comparative advantages. Sweden’s membership of the 
EU  from  1995,  the  EU’s  enlargement  and  the  gradual  intensifying  of  the  EU’s  common 
market have been significant factors here. New, large markets, such as China, India and the 
earlier  planned  economies  in  eastern  Europe  are  being  rapidly  integrated  into  the  world 
economy.  Trade  barriers  and  customs  duties  between  countries  have  declined. 
Technological  developments  make  it  easier  for  companies  to  build  up  global  trade  and 
production networks. This has resulted in a strong increase in world trade. In Sweden, this is 
reflected in the fact that exports have increased from around 30 per cent of GDP in 1990 to 
around 50 per cent in 2006. 
Another tendency that is related to globalisation is that integration of companies over national 
borders has increased. Studies by the OECD indicate that a country's productivity increases 
if  companies  in  the  country  have  a  large  degree  of  foreign  ownership.1  Quite  simply,  a 
multinational  company  must  be  better  than  the  local  competitors  in  order  to  outweigh  the 
handicap  of  operating  in  a  foreign  country.  Compared  with  other  European  countries, 
Sweden has a high percentage of foreign-owned companies. This percentage has increased 
substantially since the mid-1990s. In the manufacturing industry around 40 per cent of the 
                                                 
1   Criscuolo (2005). 
2 
 BIS Review 12/2008
employed  are  now  working  in  foreign-owned  companies.  The  corresponding  figure  in  the 
services sector is 55 per cent.2  
IT is another factor that has probably contributed to the rapid rate of increase in productivity 
over the past 10-15 years. The significance of IT is visible in two ways; in production and 
use. If we look at the production of IT, we can observe that the telecom industry's share of 
total industry is relatively large in Sweden compared with many other countries. This means 
that  the  rapid  development  in  productivity  that  has  occurred  in  the  telecom  sector  has 
contributed to pushing up productivity growth in the business sector as a whole.  
If we instead look at use of IT, Sweden has a relatively large share of IT capital in the total 
capital stock, compared with other countries. Sweden is in this respect more like the United 
States than continental Europe. The use of IT means that one can simplify and automate the 
work so that those who work can carry out more tasks in a shorter time, that is, productivity 
increases. The financial sector is very skilled at making use of IT to increase productivity. Its 
customers  currently  carry  out  many  simple  tasks  from  home  in  front  of  their  computers 
instead of going to a bank office. 
During  the  second  half  of  the  1990s,  major  investments  were  made  in  IT  capital.  These 
investments accounted for approximately half of the growth in productivity during the period 
1996-2000  (see  Figure  4).  The  investment  upturn  was  broken  in  connection  with  the  IT 
bubble bursting at the beginning of the 2000s. After that the contribution from IT capital to 
productivity growth has declined substantially. Instead it is technological and organisational 
advances,  together  with  innovations,  that  have  largely  been  the  driving  forces  behind 
productivity.  
During  the  1990s  a  number  of  markets  in  Sweden  were  opened  up  to  competition.  This 
included  the  markets  for  electricity,  telecommunications,  post  and  a  large  part  of  the 
transport  sector.  At  the  same  time,  there  was  a  general  reinforcement  of  the  competition 
policy through the establishment of the Swedish Competition Authority and the introduction in 
Sweden  of  a  new,  stricter  law  on  competition.  When  competition  stiffens,  companies  are 
forced  to  become  more  efficient  and  cost-conscious,  which  leads  to  an  increase  in 
productivity.  Studies  by  the  OECD  indicate  a  clear  relationship  between  deregulation  of 
product markets and productivity growth.3 This factor has probably been significant for the 
relatively rapid increase in productivity during the past 10-15 years.  
One  important  aspect  in  today’s  globalised  knowledge-based  society  is  that  competition 
promotes  innovation  and  thereby  productivity.4  To  avoid  being  driven  out  of  the  market 
companies  are  forced  to  constantly  improve  existing  products  and  processes  and  also  to 
develop new ones. Sweden is at the forefront in Europe and pointed out as an innovation 
leader alongside Denmark and Finland, for instance.5
Another explanation for the growth in productivity in Sweden, as in many other countries, has 
been  that  the  percentage  of  highly  educated  persons  in  the  labour  force  has  shown  an 
increase  trend,  partly  as  a  result  of  technological  developments.  A  study  of  Swedish  data 
shows that such changes have raised productivity growth by 0.2 percentage points a year 
during the second half of the 1990s.6
ITPS (2007). 
                                                 
2  
3   Conway, Nicoletti, de Rosa and Steiner (2006). 
4   See, for instance, Crépon, Duguet and Mairesse (1998). 
5   Esser, Villalba and Tarantola (2007). 
6   Forsling & Lindström (2004). 
BIS Review 12/2008 
 3
Organisation important for productivity growth 
IT  is  available  all  around  the  world  at  roughly  the  same  price,  but  the  differences  are 
substantial with regard to how different countries and sectors use this technology to make 
their  production  more  efficient  (see  Figure  5).  The  United  States  and  Europe  have 
experienced  a  similar  productivity  growth  in  the  IT-producing  sectors,  but  the  Americans 
have had stronger growth in sectors with intensive use of IT. This includes, for instance, the 
wholesale and retail trade sectors and financial services.  
Studies  indicate  that  one  of  the  explanations  for  the  United  States’  relative  productivity 
advantage over Europe is that the US companies have been quicker and better at adapting 
their organisations to the new technology.7 One factor that might contribute to this difference 
is that the stricter regulations in the labour market in Europe mean that it takes longer time 
and costs more money to reorganise. Sweden is an exception in this context. We have seen 
a  strong  growth  in  productivity  in  the  sectors  using  IT  at  the  same  time  as  we  have  a 
relatively regulated labour market.  
Given this, the Riksbank has initiated a research project to obtain more information on how 
investment  and  use  of  IT  as  well  as  reorganisation  affects  productivity  growth  in  Sweden. 
The project is in two parts. The first sub-project is a micro  study which examines whether 
companies that have reorganised and invested in IT will have higher productivity growth. The 
second part of the project is based on an own survey study in collaboration with Statistics 
Sweden, which covers the years 1997-2005. 
The first, preliminary results of this study were presented at a conference organised by the 
Riksbank  at  the  end  of  last  year  on  the  theme  of  productivity.8  They  indicate  that  the 
companies that made organisational changes at the same time as investing more in IT than 
the average company experienced a substantial increase in productivity growth.9 The study 
also shows that it was not possible to find any significant effects on productivity growth from 
IT investments in the companies that had not reorganised. It is therefore important to take 
into  account  investments  in  "organisational  capital”  when  analysing  productivity  growth. 
Other  investments  in  knowledge  capital  such  as  staff  training  and  R&D  should  also  be 
important to productivity. This is also confirmed by studies using US data.10  
This type of measure is not reported as an investment in the official statistics. This is despite 
the fact that they can be regarded as intangible investments. Instead they are calculated as a 
cost to companies. On the one hand it is difficult to measure these intangible assets, but on 
the other hand one disregards a large part of the companies’ investments if one does not 
take them into account. US and European studies show that investment in intangible assets 
comprises around 10 per cent of GDP.11  
The most recent productivity growth and forecasts 
Let me now comment on the development of productivity last year and during the period to 
come.  
                                                 
7   Bloom, Sadun and Van Reenen (2007). 
8   Håkanson (2007). 
9   By productivity is meant total factor productivity, TFP. In the study the comparison has been made with the 
median company. 
10   Brynjolfsson and Hitt (2003). 
11   See, for instance, Corrado, Hulten and Sichel (2005), (2006), Hao, Manole and van Ark (2007), Haskel and 
Marrano (2007). 
4 
 BIS Review 12/2008
Productivity  growth  in  the  business sector  has been  4.4  per  cent  a  year  during  the  period 
2002-2006. In the increasingly mature phase of the economic cycle where the economy is 
now,  it  is  normal  for  productivity  growth  to  slow  down  in  connection  with  an  increase  in 
employment. This is also something the Riksbank has been expecting. 
However,  the  downturn  in  the  rate  of  increase  in  productivity  last  year  was  stronger  than 
motivated by the prevailing economic situation and the Riksbank, like many other analysts, 
was surprised by the strength of the downturn. The National Accounts show that productivity 
on average fell by 0.5 per cent in the first three quarters, compared with the same period in 
the previous year. The downturn was broad and covered almost all sectors. The Riksbank 
was therefore forced during the course of last year to revise down its short-term productivity 
forecast. 
One important explanation for the slowdown in the productivity increase is linked to cyclical 
developments. When the economic cycle has peaked, productivity usually slows down. The 
Riksbank assumed in the third and the year’s final Inflation Report in October 2006 that GDP 
would increase by 3.1 per cent in 2007 and that employment would increase by 1.1 per cent 
in 2007. In the most recent Monetary Policy Update published in December 2007 the GDP 
increase was calculated at 2.6 per cent and the increase in employment was calculated at 
2.5  per  cent  for  the  whole  year  2007  (see  Figure  6).  Employment  has  thus  continued  to 
increase more quickly than we had estimated, while GDP growth has slowed down. The fact 
that employment is increasing can thus be regarded as natural in this phase of the economic 
cycle, but the increase has been unexpectedly rapid, which is possibly a reaction to the weak 
growth in employment during the first years of the 2000s.  
There are also other factors that may have contributed to the severe slowdown. The number 
of  hours  worked  per  employed  person  has  increased  in  2007,  which  further  subdues 
productivity, on condition that the increased hours are not fully counterbalanced by increased 
production. A reduction in absence due to sickness could be one explanation for this, but sick 
leave  has  declined  steadily  ever  since  2003.  Our  own  company  survey  indicates  that  one 
reason for the downturn could be that newly-engaged staff initially have a lower productivity 
level than their more experienced colleagues. In addition, administration and other auxiliary 
services increase in connection with companies expanding, which temporarily brings down 
the growth rate for productivity.12
Another explanation is the composition of production, that is, that sectors with a low level of 
productivity  are  growing  more  quickly  than  those  with  a  high  level.  For  example,  the 
manufacturing industry has gone from previously accounting for 1/3 of productivity growth in 
industry  during  the  period  2000-2006  to  instead  providing  a  negative  contribution  of  0.5 
percentage points during the first three quarters of 2007 (see Figure 7). 
It  is  important  to  remember  in  this  context  that  productivity  statistics  are  often  revised 
afterwards.  A  study  of  the  revisions  made  in  the  National  Accounts  showed  that  the  first 
preliminary  outcomes  on  average  underestimate  GDP  growth  by  around  0.3  percentage 
points,  and  thereby  also  underestimate  productivity  growth.13  The  underestimation  of 
productivity growth appears to be particularly great during economic booms (see Figure 8). 
Given  past  events,  my  feeling  is,  although  I  have  no  firm  facts  to  base  it  on,  that  the  low 
productivity  outcome  for  2007  will  be  revised  upwards  somewhat  as  the  statistical  base 
improves.  But  this  will  not  alter  the  picture  of  2007  as  a  year  of  very  weak  productivity 
growth. We will not know the definite outcome for a couple of years yet. 
In  the  Monetary  Policy  Update  published  in  December  last  year  we  could  observe  that 
productivity growth had been weaker than we estimated in our October Report (see Figure 
                                                 
12   Sveriges Riksbank (2007). 
13   Öller (2007). 
BIS Review 12/2008 
 5
3). We therefore revised down our forecast slightly in the short term. In 2008 we envisaged a 
gradual recover in productivity. After that, our assessment was that productivity growth would 
develop roughly in line with the trend rate of increase. 
Several  factors  indicate  that  the  long-term  rate  of  increase  in  productivity  will  remain 
relatively  high,  although  it  will  not  be  as  high  as  during  the  years  at  the  beginning  of  the 
2000s. 
Globalisation  is  one  such  factor,  and  will  probably  continue  to  be  a  driving  force  behind 
productivity for a long time to come. Integration within the EU is deepening. The countries in 
eastern  and  central  Europe  who  have  moved  away  from  planned  economies  have  many 
years of rapid development ahead of them before they catch up with western Europe. The 
international  competition  in  the  product  and  labour  markets  and  the  financial  integration 
process will thus continue to increase during the foreseeable future. 
The deregulation implemented in Sweden in the 1990s in the communication and transport 
sector has probably already had its main impact on productivity. There is of course still scope 
for reforms to increase competition further and thereby also productivity.14 But without such 
new initiatives the deregulation will probably not contribute as much to future growth. 
Investments in IT will probably fuel productivity for a long time. Earlier experiences show that 
major  development  phases,  such  as  electricity  and  the  combustion  engine,  affected 
productivity  growth  over  several  decades.15  As  yet  we  know  very  little  about  the  delayed 
effects  on  productivity  from  earlier  IT  investments  and  reorganisations.  Hopefully,  the 
productivity project I mentioned earlier will increase this knowledge.  
All in all, the indications are that long-term productivity growth will be slightly lower than in the 
past  10-15  years.  The  Riksbank’s  assessment  is  that  the  long-term  rate  of  increase  in 
productivity  in  the  economy  as  a  whole  has  fallen  slightly  to  2.25  per  cent  a  year.  This  is 
lower than during the period 1995-2006, when productivity growth was on average 2.6 per 
cent a year, but slightly higher than the level of around 2 per cent a year that applies if the 
1980s are included. The Riksbank’s assessment is well in line with what, for instance, the 
National  Institute  of  Economic  Research  has  assumed  regarding  long-term  productivity 
growth in the economy.16  
In  conclusion,  let  me  briefly  summarise  my  main  message  today.  The  rapid  increase  in 
productivity growth is an important explanation for the earlier low inflation. Over the past year 
there has been a decline in productivity growth. This is assessed to be temporary. A recovery 
is foreseen in the coming years, but at a slightly slower rate of increase than before.  
References 
Bloom,  N.,  Sadun,  R.  and  van  Reenen,  J.  (2007),  ”Americans  Do  I.T.  Better:  US 
Multinationals and the Productivity Miracle”, CEP Discussion Paper, no 788. 
Brynjolfsson,  E.  and  Hitt,  L.  (2003),  "Computing  Productivity:  Firm-Level  Evidence",  MIT 
Sloan Working Paper, no 4210-01. 
Conway, P., de Rosa, D., Nicoletti, G. and Steiner, F. (2006), ”Regulation, Competition and 
Productivity Convergence”, OECD Working paper, no 509. 
Criscuolo, C. (2005), “The Contribution of Foreign Affiliates to Productivity Growth: Evidence 
from OECD Countries”, Yearbook on Productivity 2005, Statistics Sweden. 
                                                 
14   Lundgren, Edquist and Wallgren (2007). 
15   David (1990). 
16   National Institute of Economic Research (2005, 2007). 
6 
 BIS Review 12/2008
Corrado,  C.,  Hulten,  C.  and  Sichel,  D.  (2005),  ”Measuring  Capital  and  Technology:  An 
Expanded  Framework”,  i  Corrado,  C.,  Haltiwanger,  J.  and  Sichel,  D.  (red.),  Measuring 
Capital in the New Economy, Studies in Income and Wealth, vol. 65., Chicago, University of 
Chicago Press. 
Corrado,  C.,  Hulten,  C.  and  Sichel,  D.  (2006),  ”Intangible  Capital  and  Economic  Growth”; 
National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper, 11948, Cambridge, MA. 
Crépon, B., Duguet, E. and Mairesse, J. (1998), Research, Innovation and Productivity: An 
Econometric  Analysis  at  the  Firm  Level,  National  Bureau  of  Economic  Research  Working 
Paper, 6696, Cambridge, MA. 
David, P., (1990), ”The Dynamo and the Computer: An Historical Perspective on the Modern 
Productivity Paradox”, American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 80, 355-361. 
Esser,  F.,  Villalba,  E.  and  Tarantola,  S.  (2007),  “The  Lisbon  Strategy  and  Development  of 
Metrics to Measure Innovation in Europe”, Yearbook on Productivity 2007, Statistics Sweden. 
Forsling, G. och Lindström, T. (2004), ”Labour Quality and Productivity: Does Talent Make 
Capital  Dance?”,  Background  Facts  on  Economic  Statistics,  2004:07,  Economic  Statistics 
Department, Statistics Sweden. 
Hao,  J.,  Manole,  V.  and  van  Ark,  B.,  (2007),  ”Intangible  Capital  and  Growth  –  An 
International Comparison of France, Germany, Netherlands, United Kingdom and the United 
States, The Conference Board, to be published. 
Haskel, J. and Marrano, M G. ,(2007), ”How Much Does the UK Invest in Intangible Assets?”, 
CEPR Discussion Papers, DP6287. 
Håkanson,  C.  (2007),  “Effects  of  Organizational  Change  on  Firm  Productivity”,  essay 
presented at Sveriges Riksbank’s conference on “Understanding and Predicting Productivity 
Growth”, Stockholm, 30 November - 1 December, 2007. 
ITPS, (2007), “Foreign companies 2006”, Report series S2007:005. 
National  Institute  of  Economic  Research,  (2005),  “Productivity  and  wages  up  to  2015”, 
Special Study no 6, May 2005. 
National Institute of Economic Research, (2007), Wage formation report 2007.  
Lundberg,  L.  and  Karpaty,  P.  (2004),  ”Foreign  direct  investment  and  productivity  in  the 
Swedish  manufacturing  industry  1990-2000”,  in  ”The  internationalisation  of  the  business 
sector – effects on employment, productivity and R&D”, ITPS report series A2004:014. 
Lundgren, S. (ed.), Edquist, H. and Wallgren, A. (2007), Tillväxt i otakt (Growth out of time), 
SNS Förlag. 
Sveriges Riksbank, (2007), Box: ”The Riksbank’s company survey”, Monetary Policy Report 
2007:3. 
Öller,  L-E.,  (2007),  “Revisions  of  Production  Data  in  the  Swedish  National  Accounts”, 
Background  Facts  on  Economic  Statistics,  2007:2,  Economic  Statistics  Department, 
Statistics Sweden.  
BIS Review 12/2008 
 7
    8 
 BIS Review 12/2008
    9
BIS Review 12/2008 
     10 
 BIS Review 12/2008
  BIS Review 12/2008 
   11
