Marion Williams: Governing the global financial system1
Paper by Dr Marion Williams, Governor of the Central Bank of Barbados, for the Initiative for 
Policy  Dialogue  Task  Force  on  Financial  Market  Regulation,  coordinated  by  Columbia 
University, Manchester University, UK, 1-2 July 2008. 
 The  paper  is  set  against  a  background  in  which  the  regulatory  world  is  grappling  with  the 
realization  that  its  regulatory  regimes  have  been  less  than  adequate  to  cope  with  the  fast 
changing  pace  of  financial  innovation,  sophisticated  securitization  and  unfettered  financial 
liberalization. It discusses the current global financial architecture, analyzes its strengths and 
weaknesses,  the  developments  which  have  led  to  questions  about  its  adequacy  and 
suggests possible ways in which it can be improved and made more effective. 
There is no single international oversight body in the financial world. The earliest institution 
closest  to  being  described  as  a  global  oversight  body  was  the  Bank  for  International 
Settlements  (BIS).  It  retains  however,  mostly  a  developed  country  focus,  principally 
European.  
Within  the  BIS  the  most  influential  group  is  possibly  the  Basel  Committee  on  Bank 
Supervision  (BCBS),  a  Committee  which  provides  a  forum  for  cooperation  on  banking 
supervisory  matters.  It  is  this  Committee  which  develops  guidelines  and  supervisory 
standards.  Other  supervisory  groups  have  developed  to  cater  to  geographical  needs.  The 
Caribbean Group of Bank Supervisors performs this function for the Caribbean. 
The  International  Monetary  Fund  was  set  up  after  the  BIS.  An  important  role  for  the 
International  Monetary  Fund  is  to  provide  lender  of  last  resort  facilities  to  many  countries 
both developing and developed. In addition to lender of last resort functions, it also provides 
an important economic and financial monitoring function through its Article IV consultations 
and in more recent years, Financial Sector Adjustment Programmes (FSAPs). 
The  International  Organization  of  Securities  Commissions  (IOSCO)  is  an  organization  of 
regulators of the securities industry whose objective is to cooperate together to promote high 
standards  of  regulation,  to  exchange  information  and  to  provide  mutual  assistance  and 
generally protect the integrity of the securities markets. 
Other  International  regulatory  organizations  include  the  International  Financial  Reporting 
Standards  (IFRS)  body  which  issues  standards  adopted  by  the  International  Accounting 
Standards Board (IASB).  
The Financial Stability Forum (FSF) is of much more recent vintage. It was convened in 1999 
to promote international financial stability. Its first major initiatives related to offshore centres. 
It does not include developing countries among its members, but makes recommendations 
and calls for their implementation relating to financial centres in both emerging markets and 
in developing countries. The FSF comprises 12 countries (G7 plus Hong Kong, Switzerland 
and Netherlands, Australia and Singapore including related institutions in those countries and 
9 international standard setting organizations). The FSF is housed in the BIS. 
                                                 
1   Prepared  for  the  Initiative  for  policy  Dialogue  (IPD)  (housed  at  Columbia  University)  which  hold  its  second 
meeting of it Task Force on Financial Market Regulation On July1-2 (Sponsored by and held at Brooks World 
Poverty Institute at the University of Manchester). It will analyse a) the transparency and regulatory challenges 
and  discussions  emerging  from  the  current  crisis,  b)  the  implications  of  both  the  crisis  and  regulatory 
discussions  for  developing  and  developed  countries  and  c0  reforms  in  the  global  financial  architecture  that 
might make the global financial system more stable and more equitable. 
BIS Review 114/2008 
 1
The Financial Action Task Force (FATF) is an intergovernmental body whose purpose is the 
development  and  promotion  of  national  and  international  policies  to  combat  money 
laundering and terrorist financing. They comprise principally European and North American 
countries with subsequent additions of Japan, Mexico, Singapore and South Africa. Several 
International Organizations have observer status. 
These  groups  sometimes  coordinate  with  each  other  both  through  formal  and  informal 
channels. The group with the most representative membership is however the International 
Monetary Fund which is comprised of 185 members. However up until recently, the IMF had 
not  concentrated  its  resources  on  regulation  of  banks  or  on  monitoring  or  evaluating  the 
innovations in the financial system and exploring its implications. 
The  FSF,  if  it  widened  its  mandate  to  continual  monitoring  rather  than  issue-based 
approaches could come closest to the kind of entity which has the track record needed to 
coordinate  regulatory  and  oversight  functions  of  bank  regulation,  securities,  insurance 
accounting rules and payment system issues and monetary and financial stability issues. 
that 
innovative 
integration  of 
liberalisation  and 
financial  markets 
The impact of innovation and the challenge for regulators 
It is against the background of this regulatory framework and in the context of a philosophy of 
financial 
financial 
technologies  took  off.  Financial  technologies  however  rapidly  outpaced  the  regulatory 
framework and it is now fairly well acknowledged that regulatory frameworks have not kept 
pace with financial innovation.  
Financial  innovation  has  manifested  itself  in  various  ways,  the  most  prominent  being  the 
growing importance of new and complex financial instruments, new business models which 
focus  on  multiple  financial  activities  facilitated  by  financial  liberalisation,  and  significant 
developments in the area of securitisation and disintermediation. To this can be added the 
rising importance of relatively new, largely unregulated players, such as hedge funds, private 
equity firms, conduits and structured investment vehicles – SIVs, the constraints to financial 
innovation seemed limitless and regulators were left behind in the process. 
By  the  first  half  of  2007,  financial  market  activity  had  expanded  at  a  tremendous  pace. 
However, dependence on capital markets and on sustained market liquidity also increased, 
as  banks  and  other  intermediaries  placed  greater  reliance  on  their  ability  to  “originate  and 
distribute” loans and other financial products. They also depended on the market to manage 
their  risk  positions  dynamically.  The  coincidence  of  greater  levels  of  deregulation  and 
integration  of  capital  markets  implied  that  if  a  major  problem  arose  it  was  more  likely  to 
spread  quickly  across  borders.  This  environment  encouraged  an  increase  in  risk-taking  as 
many players “hunted for yield. Interestingly, the composition of investors also changed. 
Measuring risk where credit can be sliced and diced 
The widespread use of structured credits effectively lowered the compensation for bearing 
credit  risk  and  market  risk  to  historically  low  levels.  It  is  during  this  time  that  a  market  for 
bearing  risk  through  complex  structures  of  credit  derivatives  flourished.  There  were  a  few 
warning signals particularly about hedge funds, but not many warnings about securitisation. 
Regulators were caught napping and the rating agencies did not spot the weaknesses.  
There are two aspects to this problem, one is the absence of oversight bodies which were 
monitoring and more importantly, which had authority to forestall this problem and the other 
was  the  absence  of  rules  or  processes  which would  help to  prevent  its  occurrence.  There 
was also clearly a need for internal corporate ground rules at the operational level. However, 
securitization is here to stay as it is a critical factor in achieving financial flexibility in a world 
of global flows. However, it is important that credit originators bear greater responsibility for 
the credit worthiness of the credits they originate. Because of the difficulty of tracking risks in 
2 
 BIS Review 114/2008
securitised  loans  which  have  been  leveraged  several  times,  loan  originators  need  to  be 
required to take more responsibility and to suffer some penalty for failure of the loans they 
originate. A solution to this problem will require greater study by derivative experts, but it is 
important that is addressed. 
Concentration and risk management 
Developing  guidelines  for  risk  management  and  requiring  compliance  to  them  are  a  core 
remedy for this situation and adequate internal risk management measures and processes at 
the level of the firm are very important. Portfolio concentration seems also to be an important 
area which calls for attention. Sectoral concentration and instrument concentration are both 
risk areas for which guidelines need to be developed. 
Regulatory slips 
In addition to national oversight level, something went wrong also with global regulatory and 
oversight  systems.  The  IMF  did  not  see  itself  as  having  specific  responsibility  for  these 
developments and the BIS, while it did see itself as an entity with some responsibility for the 
stability  of  the  financial  system,  was  a  European  dominated  organisation,  and  most  of  its 
clients  were  not  experiencing  these  problems  at  home  to  the  same  degree  as  they  were 
occurring in the US. They did draw attention to the development, largely in the area of hedge 
funds  but  did  not  appear  to  display  alarm  and  were  perhaps  too  hesitant  in  requesting 
remedial  measures  from  US  regulators,  in  which  jurisdiction  the  problem  was  escalating 
most. 
The initiatives which had been taken in the late nineties as offshore centres flourished, and 
which gave rise to the Financial Stability Forum and the FATF did not replicate themselves 
with the same aggression and with concerted action as in the case of the offshore centres 
issue, nor did these entities evaluate the nature of the problem sufficiently quickly. 
As  cracks  in  the  financial  architecture  surfaced  and  new  vulnerabilities  were  exposed,  it 
became  increasingly  important  that  both  market  participants  and  policy  markers  improved 
their  understanding  and  assessment  of  threats  to  financial stability,  and  take  steps,  where 
appropriate, to contain and reduce them.  
The  Financial  Stability  Forum  (FSF);  the  International  Monetary  Fund  (IMF)  with  their 
emphasis  on  macro  prudential  indicators  and  early  warning  systems  have  recently  been 
active  in  the  development  of  models  to  identify  and  assess  potential  sources  of  major 
vulnerability  to  the  financial  system.  This  involves  great  degrees  of  dialogue  by  regulators 
with  practitioners,  to  understand  better  current  approaches  to  measuring  risks  and  to 
encourage improvements and the sharing of best practices in stress testing techniques. The 
former group lacks the network for so doing and the authority. The latter has that network but 
presently lacks the track record of analysing financial markets, instruments, structures and 
flows with a view to improving quickly on risk management techniques.  
Size, market share and mega-financial institutions 
The extent to which mega-financial institutions are at risk has not been highlighted a great 
deal  but  may  be  a  sleeping  giant  problem.  Indeed,  in  the  UK  and  in  US  the  financial 
institutions which failed were small financial institutions and not mega institutions. However, 
when we look at the write-downs of debt the largest debt write-downs in North America have 
been  by  the  largest  banks.  If  these  have  been  larger  relative  to  their  size,  then  we  would 
have  a  greater  problem.  Indeed,  preliminary  indications  are  that  there  is  a  need  to  focus 
more  on  size,  governability,  adequacy  of  internal  controls  and  internal  information  flow  as 
increasingly important aspects of financial governance by oversight bodies of mega-banks. 
BIS Review 114/2008 
 3
Indeed  many  large  banks  have  been  increasing  their  capital  by  going  to  market,  some 
tapping into liquidity outside of their jurisdictions, even when regulators have not demanded 
it. There may be some issues here of too light a regulatory hand and over confidence in the 
role of the market. Responsibility rests with the CEOs as was evident in the firing of three 
CEOs of three large financial institutions in the US recently. It emphasises that Information 
flow,  internal  oversight  systems,  distributed  decision  making  and  incentive  systems  which 
support good governance need to be an integral part of review by regulators, particularly so 
in mega-financial institutions where distance from the operation can be a problem. 
Innovation, financial market development and monetary policy 
The role for central banks in influencing macroeconomic outcomes has also changed as a 
result of the inter-connectedness of capital markets and the internationalisation of financial 
flows. The development of deeper, more complete and more competitive financial markets 
have strengthened the pass-through effect of central bank interest rates to market interest 
rates  and  has  led  to  a  closer  relationship  between  market  and  bank  interest  rates. 
Consequently,  the  deepening  of  financial  markets  has  served  to  amplify  the  effects  of 
monetary policy on bank interest rates, and ceteris paribus other variables such as inflation. 
However  a  countervailing  truth  has  also  been  evident.  The  major  monetary  policy 
transmission channel through bank lending has become less important, yet new regulations 
are still focusing on the quality of bank credit.  
Widespread use of credit derivatives has meant that banks could respond more  flexibly to 
changes in financial market conditions, and may therefore not pass through each and every 
change in the central bank’s official short-term interest rate. Moreover, financial development 
has not only broadened banks’ options in terms of responding to interest rate changes; they 
have also broadened borrowers’ financing opportunities, reducing their dependency on bank 
loans. 
These developments have meant that there is a more urgent need for adequate amounts of 
data which would provide policymakers with sufficient ammunition to try to maintain financial 
stability.  Indeed,  in  some  jurisdictions  investment  banks,  the  key  institutions  in  this 
securitization boom fell outside the prudential purview of key financial regulators 
Measuring stability 
Initiatives  to  build  robust  financial  stability  indices  have  thus  far  not  been  good  enough  or 
easily understandable by the market. Moreover interpreting them with sufficient precision in 
order to home in on remedial areas in need, has been a fuzzy exercise. 
The  concept  of  financial  stability  involves  various  financial  intermediaries,  financial  market 
segments and infrastructure, for which a whole host of different quantitative and qualitative 
indicators  can  be  used.  As  a  consequence,  determining  the  degree  of  financial  stability 
remains  a  highly  integrated  complex  task.  It  therefore  means  that  the  governance  system 
which  has  responsibility  for  ensuring  financial  stability  must  be  able  to  monitor  information 
and analyse developments in several financial sectors and not just in commercial banks. 
Recognition  of  the  multi-faceted  nature  of  ensuring  financial  stability  contributed  to  the 
concept  of  a  single  regulator  as  evidenced  in  the  establishment  of  Financial  Services 
authorities  in  some  jurisdictions  and  was  intended  to  help  to  deal  with  the  problem  of  the 
widening  scope  of  financial  transactions  and interconnectedness.  It is  beginning  to appear 
that it is becoming increasingly difficult for a single regulatory authority to fully grasp all the 
intricacies  of  securities  regulation,  insurance,  banking  and  derivatives  use  and  all  other 
financial institutional arrangements simultaneously. It seems therefore that what is required is 
not only greater depth of understanding by regulators in each specific financial area but also 
4 
 BIS Review 114/2008
greater collaboration among regulators in these areas with a view to collaborating to ensure 
greater stability in the systems as a whole. 
The role of calculating the feedback effects between financial system behaviour and the real 
economy has traditionally been conducted by central banks on a national scale and by the 
IMF on a global scale, and the latter still remains a very important role. The IMF may be well 
positioned  to  evaluate  these  effects,  but  it  is  not  clear  that  it  is  best  positioned  to  set 
regulatory criteria. 
There therefore seemed to be a role for an oversight monitoring body with multiple oversight 
responsibilities,  but  with  the  ability  to  access  a  wide  range  of  inputs  from  various  single 
regulatory  bodies  with  single  regulatory  responsibilities.  The  bodies  which  come closest  to 
this are the BIS and FSF, despite the drawback that they are not truly global institutions. It is 
useful to note here that the BIS is the engine room of the FSF. 
Given that feedback effects play a crucial role in assessing a financial system’s vulnerability 
to contagion and systemic-wide stress this is an area that some international oversight body 
needs  to  concentrate  on  more  intensively.  Since  this  requires  continuous  monitoring  and 
interactive  dialogue  and  risk  management  skills,  a  joint  FSF/IMF  collaboration  may  be 
necessary. 
Data availability and relevant data identification 
With the exception of market prices and regulatory information, only a limited set of data is 
available in a timely and manner and in a manner that facilitates international comparison. 
For  instance,  financial  intermediaries’  financial  reporting  contains  little  information  on  risk 
transfer mechanisms, and the use of off-balance sheet financial derivatives.  
Methods have to be found also for handling the shifting demand for data in an environment in 
which financial markets are constantly undergoing change. This is the regulators challenge. 
At  present,  stability  forecasting  is  often  scattered  with  respect  to  risk  categories,  financial 
market segments and structural or regulatory issues. While every national regulator should 
be involved in this process, global recognition of this problem may be needed at the global 
level.  This  must  not  be  confused  with  any  doubts  about  the  skills  and  knowledge  of  such 
special geographic groupings. 
Central bank as regulator or financial services authority? 
Having set guidelines, the issue of compliance is important. Over the years there has been a 
simultaneous shift from a direct and administered system to market-determined and marked-
based  systems  of  determining  interest  rates,  exchange  rates  and  other  key  financial 
variables.  However,  the  regulator  or  policymaker  must  still  remain  vigilant  at  all  times  to 
ensure  that  private  owners  and  management  of  financial  intermediaries  operate  within 
defined risk parameters, observe the standards, guidelines and codes diligently, comply with 
prudential regulations and norms, and follow the best corporate governance practices. The 
regulator who has responsibility for compliance may not necessarily be the regulatory which 
sets the guidelines as guidelines can span regulatory authorities. The need for coordination 
is therefore essential. 
Even  the  role  of  governments  in  the  process  of  underwriting  balance  sheets  has  been  an 
issue. In the UK it was Government which gave verbal undertakings to depositors about the 
safety of their funds. In the US, the question also arose around the issue of central banks 
bailing out financial institutions (which were not banks) and whether the use of funds which 
would  otherwise  be  available  to  the  treasury,  was  appropriate.  This  issue  of  bailing  out 
financial institutions which central banks do not regulate also has implications for reporting 
obligations  and  raises  the  spectre  of  the  wisdom  and  practicality  of  a  single  regulatory 
authority and the moral hazard of an institution which regulates but does not provide financial 
BIS Review 114/2008 
 5
support, and the information and regulatory needs of the authority which does. It is noted that 
Northern Rock was regulated by the FSA and bailed out by the Bank of England. 
Importance of real time information 
The use of technology to produce an updated management information system on real-time 
basis  and  the  re-engineering  of  business  processes  and  systems  are  the  tools  which  can 
help regulators to remain on the top of the potential problems. Also, in many instances, the 
ability  to  regulate  effectively  is  also  dependent  on  the  robustness  of  governing  legislation, 
rules and regulations, as well as the ability of legislators to act quickly in changing such laws 
and regulations. 
Very often financial regulators and legislators take years to enact laws and regulations while 
financial activity is changing rapidly. In this situation, the regulatory system can be irrelevant 
in the face of fast paced financial developments. 
In this context, the content, characteristics, embedded risks and the accounting of the ever 
growing  array  of  financial  instruments  particularly  derivatives,  hedge  products  and  other 
similar products have to be fully understood so that guidelines governing them may need to 
be revised and made relevant, and quickly. However, while some of these rules may be set 
by  securities  regulators,  it  is  banks  which  use  securities,  and  the  absence  of  appropriate 
rules by securities regulators is affecting the stability of banks and near-banks who answer to 
different regulators and who may need in extremity to be bailed out by a third regulator – the 
central bank. 
Common standards and disclosure requirements 
Regulators have also to insist that there are common standards for valuation of assets and 
liabilities  and  there  are  common  yardsticks  for  measurement.  It  is  not  clear  that  these 
standards  should  necessarily  be  accounting  standards.  Transparency  and  disclosure 
standards  have  to  be  kept  under  constant  watch  and  suitably  upgraded  so  that  the 
innovators  are  obligated  to  provide  the  full  range  of  information  required  to  evaluate  risks. 
While the regulators should not stifle financial innovation, they should have the capacity to 
understand the risks involved and disseminate them to the market participants.  
The traditional approach of regulation, that is, mainly compliance-oriented with emphasis on 
review of portfolios rather than evaluation of processes has diminished effectiveness in the 
present dynamic landscape. The imperatives of market innovation demand a departure from 
the current predominant approach towards a more proactive approach that forces banks to 
recognise  issues  when  they  occur  or,  preferably,  even  ensure  that  the  probability  of  their 
occurrence is contained. This approach puts more emphasis on examining the bank’s risk 
measurement and management processes instead of simply reviewing its assets portfolio. It 
demands  that  a  bank’s  risk  management  processes  should  be  scaled  up  to  reflect  risk 
appetite  and  the  complexity  of  operations.  Specifically,  the  bank  which  engages  in  more 
complex  nature  of  businesses  should  be  expected  to  have  in  place  credible  internal  risk 
measurement models and should assess and maintain economic capital, adequate to cover 
the underlying business risks.  
Capital adequacy 
The emphasis on adequate capital has helped a great deal in the past but cannot in itself 
ensure  solvency  and  stability  of  the  financial  system  in  all  situations.  However,  there  are 
some  inherent  rigidities  which  fail  to  cover  many  of  the  risks  that  banks  assume  in  their 
business operations. That’s why capital adequacy concepts have been becoming less rigid 
though it has been undermined through the use of regulatory capital arbitrage. The current 
6 
 BIS Review 114/2008
sub-prime crisis in the US is testimony to the effects of regulatory arbitrage and the impact of 
regulatory loopholes, which can occur in even the most developed financial system. 
While the BIS has been the most pro-active in trying to stay on top of these aspects of risk 
measurement in the industry, it too has fallen behind. This could principally be because the 
BIS  has  been  concentrating  principally  on  commercial  banks,  whereas  the  weaknesses  in 
the financial systems had moved to the securities markets. 
Measuring fair value 
Accounting  guidelines  and  bank  regulation  guidelines  do  not  always  coincide.  Recent 
accounting mark-to-market rules of the IFRS are a case in point. Indeed, the role that mark-
to-market accounting may have played in the evaluation of assets of financial institutions in 
recent  months  and  in  hampering  the  ability  of  creditor  financial  institutions  to  organize 
workouts  of  debt  with  their  customers  has  been  a  matter  of  some  discussion.  Accounting 
rules  tend  to  make  the  decision  to  reschedule  or  reorganize  debt  workouts  a  matter  for 
greater provisioning by the financial institution, thus discouraging workouts and the long term 
prospect of recovery. 
In the recent US case, earlier in the year, Government intervened and mandated that some 
customers must be given time to reorganise their debts. However, accounting rules do not 
predispose  to  making  arrangements  with  ones  creditors.  The  verdict  is  out  on  how  the 
Spanish solution of dynamic provisioning has solved the problem. The counter-argument is 
that  these  system  prolong  the  period  over  which  debt  is  collectible  and  in  the  meanwhile 
might  be  misrepresenting  the  value  of  the  asset.  Discussion  and  dialogue  with  the 
accounting associations seem to be critical to resolving this problem which has the potential 
for preventing recovery of debt over the longer term.  
Review of Basel II Accord 
The  new  Basel  II  Accord  is  expected  to  eliminate  some  of  those  anomalies,  but  it  is  not 
perfect.  Still,  Basel  II  covers  more  comprehensive  range  of  risks,  better  align  regulatory 
capital to underlying risks, integrates capital requirement to a larger framework and provides 
for the role of supervisors in evaluating risk and market discipline. Since it provides options to 
banks,  it  appears  to  encourage  improvements  in  the  risk  management  processes.  Policy 
makers  have  already  realised  the  importance  of  this  new  accord,  and  presently  it  is  in 
different  stages  of  implementation  across  the  globe.  However,  the  implementation  in  itself 
demands  even  more  concentrated  efforts  and  capacity  building  both  with  regulators  and 
concerned stakeholders. However, following the sub-prime crisis in the US there are growing 
concerns  about  the  advanced  internal  based  approach  which  gives  banks  flexibility  to 
develop  their  own  risk  assessment  systems,  in  light  of  what  happened  in  the  investment 
banking community when these institutions had total autonomy to do so and did not. 
The  role  of  market  needs  to  be  enhanced  to  discipline  businesses  indulging  in  excessive 
risk-taking. But this is not going to be an easy task, especially in the economies that have 
built-in safety nets which translate to negative incentives and which hamper market discipline 
on one hand and in turn encourage excessive risk taking by banks on the other.  
Moral hazard and market discipline 
The  usefulness  of  market  discipline  in  augmenting  the  supervisory  roles  cannot  be 
overlooked, but has to be reworked. While some of these safety nets are indispensable, we 
should  seek  ways  to  reduce  associated  moral  hazard,  and  perfect  the  market  discipline 
framework  to  complement  supervisory  practices.  The  extent  to  which  markets  discipline 
BIS Review 114/2008 
 7
themselves  is  however  being  questioned  and  it  is  becoming  clearer  that  there  must  be 
penalties for inappropriate and risky behaviour which threaten system stability. 
Improved  disclosure  about  risk  profile,  risk  management  practices  and  performances  and 
related  matters  facilitates  market  discipline  by  enabling  the  market  participants  as  well  as 
supervisors  to  assess  the  soundness  of  a  bank  given  the  level  of  risks  it  assumes.  The 
market assessment of the bank’s soundness as reflected in the pricing of its products by the 
market could be used as an indicator for devising effective policy responses. 
A great deal of effort has been put into the introduction of Basel II by the BIS and in most 
organizations  there  is  a  tendency  to  protect  one’s  creation.  However,  it  is  important  that 
given the questions that have been raised about certain aspects of Basel II in the contest of 
the sub-prime crisis and the moral hazard of self assessment, that the architects of Basel II 
revisit some of the major tenets of the new proposed regulatory framework, especially the 
advanced approach. 
The role of ratings 
In a Basel II-regulated world, and in a world where market discipline matters greatly, ratings 
will become even more important. Ratings should reflect risk and prompt more responsible 
behaviour by financial institutions who value their ratings. This too has its challenges since in 
many instances pricing is based on a risk rating, itself the product of analysis of information 
that has been provided to the ratings agency by the specific issuer. Following the sub-prime 
fallout, the validity of ratings, rating agency modeling, methodology and their compensation 
has been called into question. Therefore, any enhanced programme aimed at improving the 
governance  of  the  global  financial  system  may  require  some  changes  to  the  ratings 
infrastructure  and  the  extent  to  which  ratings  reflect  risk  and  are  not  overly  influenced  by 
massive  corporate  profits  of  high-risk  institutions.  Indeed  a  special  rating  for  risk  may  be 
appropriate – that is both for risk in the firm and transferred risk – i.e. risk transferred by the 
firm to the system.  
There  needs  to  be  a  series  of  major  changes  to  plug  the  loopholes  in  the  system  and 
regulators need to ensure that they are as proactive as possible. 
Global liquidity management 
Over the past several years the liberalization of the financial system has created the need for 
liquidity  to  be  provided,  not  to  governments  through  the  IMF  as  was  the  case  in  the  past 
through stabilisation programmes but directly to financial institutions. The internationalisation 
of  finance  and  the  existence  of  mega  –banks  emphasises  the  need  for  liquidity  support 
across large financial institutions. This may very well be beyond the capability of monetary 
authorities. There is a need to identify how this problem can be solved and how that liquidity 
can  be  provided  before  the  problems  occur.  What  is  more  serious  is  that  where  these 
problems are systemic and are not restricted to any individual bank, then access to liquidity 
could be very problematic. This eventuality needs to be considered before it occurs. 
Towards a revised global governance structure 
The  question  of  developing  a  multi-pronged  over-arching  monitoring  body  is  an  important 
factor in a revised governance system. The nucleus of this exists in the BIS and the FSF and 
the  IMF.  The  BIS  already  has  in  place,  in  addition  to  the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking 
Supervision, several useful sub-committees, for example, the work on  Policy Development 
Group  which  has  a  number  of  sub  committees  –  on  Risk  Management  and  Modelling, 
Liquidity,  Definition  of  Capital,  on  Trading  Book  matters,  and  on  Cross-border  Bank 
resolution. The down-side of this arrangement is the degree of possible tunnel vision since 
8 
 BIS Review 114/2008
most of the sub-committees arose out of Basel II Accord, which now appears needs some 
modification in light of recent events. 
One issue is global acceptability. Most of these groups, even the International Liaison Group 
–  that  with  the  widest  representation  –  falls  short  of  international  representation,  of  an 
organisation like the IMF with 185 members. The question is, how much is lost in terms of 
global stability by the exclusion of these countries? Is their inclusion in the IMF – albeit even 
there  in  a  notional  way  –  enough,  or  are  they  destined  to  continue  to  be  excluded  on  the 
grounds that they are not systemically important? 
The  Financial  Stability  Forum  attempts  to  function  as  a  critical  issues  forum  with 
representation  beyond  banking.  This  Forum,  despite  its  G7  focus  includes  a  number  of 
international financial regulatory organisations. It trys to project that it is not an arm of the 
BIS, but is housed in BIS. This comes closest to being a multipurpose oversight body, but 
lacks global representation, something which probably needs to be remedied if it wants to be 
considered a global body with the ability to speak to other countries with authority. This group 
therefore, by reporting to the IMF is able to give itself some legitimacy. The report of the FSF 
of April 2008 on enhancing market and institutional resilience is an example of its work; a 
good analysis with general recommendations with specific recommendations promised later. 
Who, however will determine whether and how the recommendations are implemented is the 
key question? The IMF? 
Summary 
This paper attempted to analyse the international financial governance system, its strengths 
and weaknesses and in the course of the paper a number of issues were ventilated and a 
number of recommendations made. 
They include: 
- 
The  need  for  clear  rules  and  processes  for  securitisation  and  an  oversight  body 
whose authority is observed in this regard. 
The  need  to  better  understand  current  approaches  to  measuring  risk  and  to  track 
risks  in  securitised  loans  and  to  improve  the  internal  reporting  systems  in  mega-
banks. 
The need to revise incentive systems so they do not reward those who transfer risks 
to others. 
Focus on financial risk generally and not on bank risks in particular. 
Concretise measures of financial stability and develop international comparability. 
Conduct more in depth studies on financial system vulnerability to inflation. 
Develop  a  clearly  defined  role  for  a  body  with  multiple  financial  oversight 
responsibilities and determine whether this is the FSF and if so deal with its global 
legitimacy. 
Develop more information on risk transfer mechanisms. 
Develop systems of forecasting liquidity needs which result from globalisation. 
Determine  the  split  of  responsibilities  between  the  regulator  which  set  the 
guidelines, the regulator which ensures compliance and the authority which finances 
bail-outs. 
Clarify the role of governments and guard against moral hazard of saving financial 
institutions at all costs. 
Ensure that accounting guidelines do not frustrate debt recovery arrangements. 
      BIS Review 114/2008 
 9
 Re-visit the self-assessment guidelines in the advanced approach of Basel II. 
Educate investors to rely less on ratings and to use independent judgement. 
Increase  the  levels  of  capital  adequacy  and  support  this  with  flexibility  for 
supervisors to call for increased capital based on risk assessments.  
This paper does not call for a total revamp of the financial governance structure but rather for 
a number of key improvements; among them dealing with the issue of legitimacy and also 
importantly, since some of these issues had been identified prior to the difficulties early in the 
year,  ensuring  that  systems  and  regulated  entities  accelerate  their  responses  to  the 
recommendations. 
10 
 BIS Review 114/2008
