Christian Noyer: France’s banking industry in 2007 – key trends 
Speech by Mr Christian Noyer, Governor of the Bank of France and Chairman of the French 
Banking Commission, at the presentation of the 2007 Annual Report of the French Banking 
Commission, Paris, 26 June 2008. 
 Welcome to the working breakfast organised for the press on the occasion of the publication 
of the Commission Bancaire’s 2007 Annual Report today. I would like to take this opportunity 
to speak to you about the major trends seen in the banking industry in 2007. Naturally, the 
main  development  last  year  was  the  subprime  crisis.  I  will  also  speak  about  the  lessons 
learned from the crisis for the future. 
Even  though  the  French  banking  system’s  overall  exposure  to  the  risks  revealed  by  the 
subprime crisis turned out to be less severe than in other G10 countries, our banking system 
was still affected, as can be seen in the decline in profitability. On a more encouraging note, 
however,  French  banks  managed  to  maintain  satisfactory  solvency  ratios,  testifying  to  the 
system’s  resilience  and  its  ability  to  cope  with  a  very  large-scale  and  complex  crisis. 
However,  in  addition  to  the  impact  on  business  conditions,  the  financial  crisis  calls  for  an 
examination  of  the  robustness  of  some  of  the  banking  activities  that  developed  so  rapidly 
over  the  last  ten  years.  These  activities  have  complicated  the  task  of  risk  management  in 
major banking groups. 
The  materialisation  of  certain  risks,  the  return  of  volatility  on  financial  markets  and 
uncertainty about the economic outlook have meant that major banks need to make a special 
effort in three key areas: i) maintaining adequate capital ratios to cushion them from further 
shocks,  which  may  still  occur,  ii)  strengthening  their  risk  management  systems  and 
processes,  and  iii)  pricing  credit  and  liquidity  risks  appropriately.  To  explain  these 
developments, I would like to speak to you briefly about the following points. 
1. 
First of all, the French banking system provided proof of its resilience in the 
face of financial turmoil in 2007. 
The  current  economic  situation  calls  for  vigilance  nonetheless,  since  banks 
must be ready to cope with new risks that may occur at any time. 
Finally, as crisis conditions persist, I should like to talk about the main thrusts 
of the supervisory authorities’ actions. 
The French banking system provided proof of its resilience in the face of 
financial turmoil in 2007 
After posting good performances since 2003, the French banking system was hit by the 
fall-out from the subprime crisis starting in mid 2007, as were the banking systems in 
the  other  leading  developed  countries.  This  led  to  an  extended  period  of  strong 
turbulence.  The  impact  of  the  crisis  on  banks’  earnings  first  shows  up  in  the  third  quarter 
financial statements and then more clearly in the fourth-quarter statements. French banks 
were affected through several channels: 
• 
First,  through  their  direct  exposures  to  American  households  in  the  subprime 
category  or 
financial 
instruments,  such  as  residential  mortgage  backed  securities  (RMBS)  and 
collateralised debt obligations (CDOs) that are in turn exposed to subprime risks. As 
was  the  case  for  the  rest  of  the  banking  system  in  Europe,  indirect  exposures 
accounted  for  much  greater  amounts  than  direct  exposures  and  therefore  for  the 
in  portfolios  of  structured 
indirect  exposures 
through 
BIS Review 82/2008 
 1
2. 
3. 
1.  
bulk  of  the  losses;  the  lessons  that  this  situation  holds  for  more  refined  risk 
management need to be learned quickly. 
Secondly,  through  exposures  to  securitisation  vehicles  (conduits  or  structured 
investment  vehicles)  and  particularly  through  liquidity  lines,  which  need  to  be 
managed more rigorously going forward. 
Thirdly,  through  exposures  to  assets  taken  back  from  securitisation  vehicles,  or 
even  collective  investment  schemes,  that  ran  into  liquidity  problems;  this  type  of 
reintermediation  needs  to  be  given  more  consideration  in  terms  of  capital 
requirements. 
Fourthly,  through  their  exposures  to  monoline  insurers,  which  insured  some 
products and were themselves hard-hit by the crisis and thus epitomise “wrong-way” 
counterparty risks, which need to be assessed more carefully. 
Finally,  though  exposures  to  leveraged  buy-outs,  or  more  generally  by  credit-risk-
related costs on the most vulnerable companies, which are starting to rise. 
    Consequently,  French  banks  have  not  escaped  the  overall  slowdown  in  net  banking 
income growth affecting major international banking groups. The net banking income of the 
three leading groups using IFRS grew by only 3.8 per cent in 2007, after rising by 18 per cent 
in 2006. However, the aggregate net profit under French accounting standards for the French 
banking system in 2007 reached nearly €27 billion, making it possible to generate income 
that is used in part to strengthen the institutions’ financial foundations, thereby contributing to 
the financial stability of the Paris market. 
The diversification of French banking groups’ activities has proven to be a strength. 
Several business lines are showing positive trends, with further gains in retail banking, which 
posted growth of 9.1 per cent (particularly in foreign operations, with an increase of 22 per 
cent  compared  to  2006),  and  project  financing.  Retail  banking  is  still  a  core  business  for 
French banks and it played a critical role in stabilising income sources since the beginning of 
the financial crisis. Origination of new loans for non-financial agents remained high. Proper 
pricing  of  risks  according  to  the  credit  quality  of  borrowers  is  therefore  a  key  issue  in 
France’s highly competitive lending market. 
By contrast, corporate and investment banking activities had a broadly negative impact on 
earnings, due to the combined effects of asset impairment and falling profits. Losses from 
asset management vary more significantly from one institution to another. 
What can we learn from the major banks’ first quarter earnings in 2008? Earnings are 
obviously following the same trend as in 2007 and reflect the persistent effects of the risks 
associated with the subprime crisis, with valuation losses on assets and higher risk-related 
costs. A compound indicator, such as ROE shows a decline in profitability, but it still stands 
at an average of 14 per cent, compared to 18.9 per cent for the three largest banking groups 
in the first quarter of 2007. On this point, I would like to put this decline into context. It follows 
several years of exceptional profits, which raised questions about their sustainability. 
Despite declining income, the French banking system is still financially sound: the Tier 
1 solvency ratio based on original own funds stood at an average of 7.1 per cent for the three 
largest banking groups at the end of 2007, much higher than the minimum ratio of 4 per cent 
set  under  Pillar  1  of  the  Basel  II  Accord.  Banks  increased  their  solvency  ratios  in  the  first 
quarter  of  2008  and  the  Commission  Bancaire  attaches  a  great  deal  of  importance  to  this 
effort. 
The benefits of business diversification, the effectiveness of the measures taken to limit risk 
exposures and the satisfactory capital levels have also enabled the major banking groups 
to remain highly rated by the leading international agencies. 
2 
 BIS Review 82/2008
2. 
The current economic situation calls for vigilance nonetheless, since banks 
must be ready to cope with new risks that may occur at any time. 
The  sources  of  risks  related  to  the  crisis  are  being  closely  monitored,  but  the  French 
banking  system,  like  any  other,  cannot  be  fully  protected  against  new  negative 
developments stemming from the crisis. In today’s globalised financial markets, the 
contagion of financial turmoil can spread through many channels. Therefore, extreme 
vigilance is called for. 
For  example,  let  me  say  a  few  words  about  hedge  fund  risks,  since  an  increase  in 
counterparty  risk  exposure  to  these  unregulated  entities  may  still  occur,  and  it  could  be 
combined with “commodities” risk. In this respect, I would like to stress that it is critical for 
banks to ensure that their hedge fund exposures are adequately collateralised at all times. I 
am aware that hedge funds are attractive customers that no credit institution can afford to 
ignore  today,  and  that  prime  brokerage  activities  are  a  path  to  growth  for  many  of  our 
institutions. Similarly, no bank can afford to ignore the growth of the financial markets linked 
to commodities and energy. However, it must not be forgotten that hedge funds are also very 
active in these highly volatile markets. It is therefore critical to avoid risk concentration and a 
combination of vulnerabilities stemming from these two rapidly growing sectors. 
Even though we have not taken a second-round shock to the real economy stemming from 
the financial crisis as our central scenario for the euro area, a high degree of uncertainty is 
still  the  distinguishing  characteristic  of  the  banking  business  in  2008.  Banks  are 
obviously faced with solving a complex equation: i) maintaining a positive contribution to 
net income from financial services and retail banking as risk-related costs rise, ii) controlling 
the  risk  profile  of  corporate  and  investment  banking  activities,  while  maintaining  a  good 
profitability level, iii) coping with the impact of the aftershocks of the crisis on banks’ balance 
sheets.  In  this  regard,  let  me  stress  liquidity  management,  as  market  conditions  remain 
tense,  with  the  attendant  consequences  for  management  of  hedging  transactions  more 
generally. 
On this last point, I should add that their diversified business model means that French banks 
are  not  among  the  most  dependent  on  market  financing.  Therefore,  the  leading  French 
banking groups were able to manage their liquidity needs effectively, even during the 
periods of greatest tension on the markets. Yet, the tightening-up of access to liquidity in the 
wake of the crisis did show how critical risk management has become. 
3.  
As crisis conditions persist, I should like to talk about the main thrusts of the 
supervisory authorities’ actions. 
We have always maintained that the practical implementation of the new Basel II solvency 
ratio would primarily ensure that banks measure their risks more accurately both in ordinary 
times as well as during crises. 
The new Basel II framework has been a reality in France since the beginning of the 
year.  It  is  noteworthy  that  a  large  proportion  of  French  banks  use  “internal-ratings  based” 
approaches  to  credit  risk.  Such  approaches  were  used  for  more  than  80  per  cent  of  the 
relevant banking assets at 1 January 2008. 
I  would  also  like  to  point  out  that  the  impact  of  Basel  II  on  credit  institutions’  capital  goes 
beyond the capital requirement calculation stipulated in Pillar 1 (even though it provides more 
comprehensive  coverage  than  Basel  I  of  new  risks,  such  as  securitisation  activities). 
Regarding  Pillar  2,  the  new  regulations  call  for  major  additional  arrangements  to  refine 
banks’ risk management and planning for capital cushions. This could lead to additional 
capital requirements, or other appropriate measures to enhance bank stability by considering 
risks that are not dealt with or are inadequately dealt with under Pillar 1. By the end of the 
year, this approach should lead to individual ratios for each institution that the Commission 
Bancaire sets on the basis of structured dialogue with each institution. 
BIS Review 82/2008 
 3
We  have  also  undertaken  a  series  of  major  actions  that  are  directly  in  line  with  the 
general  framework  of  the  recommendations  made  by  the  Financial  Stability  Forum. 
Many spheres of action have been defined, but I would like to speak about three that I think 
are  priorities,  starting  with  transparency  and  valuation,  followed  by  adapting  the  capital 
requirements set by Basel II for certain instruments, and finally, liquidity risk. 
First of all, enhancing transparency and financial disclosure was quickly identified as one 
of the key requirements for ending the crisis. We have urged French banks, in conjunction 
with the national institute of statutory auditors, the CNCC, to provide detailed disclosures of 
their  subprime  exposures.  A  joint  working  group  made  up  of  staff  from  the  Commission 
Bancaire,  the  Autorité  des  Marchés  Financiers  and  the  French  Banking  Federation  has 
defined  best  practices  in  this  area.  Institutions  have  started  implementing  them  in  a 
satisfactory manner and practices should be further improved in the financial statements for 
first-half  2008.  In  2009,  the  Basel  Committee  is  planning  to  publish  recommendations  on 
information  to  be  disseminated  under  the  requirements  of  Pillar  3  of  Basel  II.  In-depth 
discussions with banks led to a convergence of practices for asset valuation, including 
the priority on relying on prices and directly observable market data. Where banks have had 
to  use  valuation  models  because  liquid  prices  disappeared  in  some  markets,  the 
recommendations  deal  with  consideration  of  all  risks  –  including  liquidity  risk  and 
counterparty risk – and the rigorousness of the process for determining such prices. 
With regard to adapting the Basel II requirements, we are also playing a very active role 
in  the  various  international  working  groups  led  by  the  Basel  Committee  to  give  greater 
consideration, where necessary, to the capital requirements related to some liquidity lines or 
to the securitisation rules. 
Finally,  the  crisis  has  highlighted  the  need  for  banks  to  improve  their  analysis, 
measurement and management of liquidity risk. A review of how refinancing risk could 
arise across all of a bank’s business lines is a priority; as is an analysis of how refinancing 
risk interacts with market risk, credit risk and concentration risk. The Committee of European 
Banking Supervisors and the Basel Committee, at the global level, are currently reviewing 
the principles governing liquidity risk management. 
On  a  final  note,  I  would  like  to  add  that  the  crisis  has  highlighted  the  need  to  enhance 
internal  control  systems  and  to  improve  the  circulation  of  information  about  risks, 
especially for senior managers. The exceptional case of fraud affecting Société Générale 
has strengthened our resolve in this matter. In France, this should lead to the amendment 
of Regulation 97.02 on internal control, with provisions on managing operating risk, along 
with  specific  efforts  to  fight  fraud.  This  reform  is  connected  to  moves  to  ensure  greater 
involvement of banks’ highest governance bodies in monitoring their internal control systems. 
All  these  initiatives  draw  on  the  lessons  learned  from  the  past,  but  they  are  also 
forward-looking.  Their  purpose  is  to  establish  the  principles  of  risk  management.  These 
principles  do  not  eliminate  all  risks,  but  they  enhance  the  resilience  of  the  system  when 
tensions do emerge. This is the objective of the reforms, which I am sure will contribute to 
greater financial stability in the long run. 
 The  Commission  Bancaire  therefore  intends  to  continue  its  action  to  enhance 
management and control of these risks, not only within France but at the international 
level  as  well,  naturally,  within  a  European  banking  supervision  structure  that 
emphasises real convergence in supervisory practices. The practical implementation 
of  supervisory  colleges  needs  to  be  stepped  up  in  order  to  achieve  this  objective. 
Supervisory  colleges  are  the  keystone  for  the  supervision  of  large  cross-border  groups  in 
Europe.  The  resolutely  European  thrust  of  our  action,  which  is  naturally  in  line  with  the 
international development of banking activities and of the sources of vulnerability for financial 
4 
 BIS Review 82/2008
stability,  will  lead  to  the  incorporation  of  a  European  convergence  objective  into  the 
mandates  of  domestic  supervisors.  From  my  point  of  view,  this  objective  will  be  a  major 
motivation for the supervisory community as a whole. 
BIS Review 82/2008 
 5
