Gertrude Tumpel-Gugerell: SEPA goes live 
Speech by Ms Gertrude Tumpel-Gugerell, Member of the Executive Board of the European 
Central Bank, at the Launch event organised by the European Commission, the European 
Central Bank and the European Payments Council, Brussels, 28 January 2008. 
 The countdown is over! Today, 28 January 2008, SEPA goes live!  
I am pleased to welcome you all to the launch of SEPA. First and foremost, I would like to 
take this opportunity to thank the European Commission for hosting today’s event and for its 
cooperation over the last few years, the fruit of which can been seen today as SEPA comes 
to life.  
Those who have made SEPA a reality, the banks and the service providers are here tonight 
and I would like to congratulate them all. Let me also mention the work of the Council and the 
European Parliament that has contributed to making SEPA a reality.  
Nine  years  ago  we  introduced  the  single  currency.  Today,  we  launch  SEPA  –  another 
important  step  in  European  integration.  But  let  me  assure  you:  today  is  only  just  the 
beginning! 
SEPA is all about integration, harmonisation and modernisation. It is a natural consequence 
of the single currency and a major step in the creation of the Single Market. That is why the 
ECB  has  supported  the  project  closely  over  the  past  six  years.  Today’s  launch  is  the  first 
visible result. 
A  single currency  –  with  a  single  set  of  payment  instruments  –  in  a  single  euro  payments 
area. With SEPA, this becomes a reality. And we, as euro area citizens, will be able to make 
euro  payments  as  cheaply,  as  easily  and  as  safely  as  we  do  national  payments.  All  euro 
payments will be “domestic”; finally, there will be no difference between sending a payment 
from Rome to Dublin or from Brussels to Antwerp. We can now make payments not only with 
euro  notes  and  coins,  but  harmonised  electronic  payments  by  European  credit  transfer, 
direct debit and payment card as well.  
An important milestone has been reached today with the launch of “SEPA Credit Transfer”. 
We are now able to send euro payments quickly, and in the same way, to any beneficiary in 
Europe.  
This will be followed by “SEPA Direct Debit” before the end of 2009. As a result, we will be 
able to make direct debit payments across Europe, as if no borders existed.  
With  the  “SEPA  Cards  Framework”,  extensive  changes  await  the  European  cards  market. 
The  ECB  expects  a  new  European  card  scheme  to  emerge,  harmonising  card  payments 
across  Europe.  That  said,  efficient  national  card  schemes  should  not  vanish,  leaving  the 
cards  market  entirely  to  international  card  schemes.  Let’s  work  together  and  use  the 
experience of the national schemes to devise a new European card scheme.  
Together, these three payment instruments make up SEPA, our key to a door behind which 
many opportunities lie. Once the door is open we will still have a mountain to climb. But if we 
are willing to take up the challenge and use SEPA with innovative thinking, we can reap the 
full benefit.  
Let me stress: we do not envision opening the door only to sit back and admire the great 
many  opportunities  on  the  other  side.  Let’s  climb  the  mountain,  discover  the  opportunities 
and progress onwards and upwards. Let’s complement the SEPA instruments with innovative 
services, such as online and mobile payment initiation, e-invoicing and e-reconciliation. By 
combining  these  services  with  SEPA  instruments,  we  eliminate  paper  and  the  payment 
BIS Review 11/2008 
 1
process becomes fully electronic. End-users will spend less time on payments – and, as we 
all know, time means money.  
But how will you benefit from SEPA? 
Corporates  –  make  fast  European  transactions,  simplify  your  payment  handling  and 
consolidate your liquidity management.  
SEPA’s harmonised services can optimise your payment process. So, request these services 
from your banks and service providers. 
Public administrations – you will experience the same benefits as corporates. But that’s not 
all.  SEPA  can  help  drive  e-Government  and  e-procurement,  thereby  promoting  efficient 
public services. By adopting SEPA at an early stage, you will extend its benefits to society at 
large. 
Consumers – one bank account and one set of payment instruments is all you need. As with 
euro notes and coins, there will finally be no difference between payments across Europe – 
all euro payments will be ”domestic”. 
And banks – you have developed and will form the basis of SEPA. And SEPA can help you 
expand your business, as integration and harmonisation will encourage competition. It is now 
up to you to use the opportunities SEPA brings. 
The launch of SEPA today is a major step in creating the Single Market and represents a 
significant contribution to the Lisbon agenda and a more competitive Europe. It has not been 
easy  to  arrive  at  where  we  are  today  –  SEPA  has  been  a  formidable  challenge,  but 
formidable challenges make us stronger. It is not time to sit back in admiration; it is time to 
use SEPA. 
So,  let’s  rise  to  the  challenge;  let’s  use  SEPA,  our  key;  and  let’s  discover  the  great  many 
opportunities that lie on the other side of that door. 
2 
 BIS Review 11/2008
