Amando M Tetangco, Jr: The Central Bank of the Philippines’ 
expectations for business and the economy 
Speech  by  Mr  Amando  M  Tetangco,  Jr,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  the  Philippines 
(Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas),  at  a  breakfast  meeting  for  the  Tuesday  Club,  Manila, 
8 January 2008. 
 the  past  year,  which  ended  with 
the  economy  experiencing  one  of 
I  would  like  to  greet  everyone  at  this  breakfast  meeting  a  happy,  though  perhaps  a  more 
challenging, new year!  
As we move over to this new year, let me take a general stock of our positive achievements 
in 
the  best 
macroeconomic fundamentals in two decades.  
We  achieved  the  ideal  convergence  of  high  growth  and  low  inflation:  GDP  growth  rate  of 
7.1% in the first three quarters last year, the highest in 30 years, while inflation rate remained 
at low levels (3.2% as of November 2007), comparable to those in developed economies.  
The Philippine peso continued to rise against the US dollar, thereby shielding the economy 
from  the  inflationary  impact  of  record  high  oil  prices  and  generating  significant  savings  for 
government in terms of debt service.  
We also had a healthy external position with GIR at an unprecedented high level of $33.7 
billion as of December 2007, as well as the highest recorded BOP surplus at $7.8 billion for 
January to November 2007. Interest rates remained on a generally downward trend, with the 
91-day T-Bill full-year average rate at its lowest ever.  
Equally important, our banking system continued to be sound with record high resources and 
deposits.  
What  do  we  foresee  for  2008?  We  anticipate  some  headwinds,  but  they  are  likely  to  be 
manageable. Given the current relative strength of our economy, the primary risks emanate 
from  external  developments  including  1)  the  ongoing  sub-prime  related  financial  market 
turbulence; 2) the continued surge in foreign capital inflows; and 3), the elevated prices of 
world crude oil and other non-oil commodities. 
Let  me  quickly  go  through  each  of  these.  The  global  financial  markets  appear  to  have 
stabilized  from  their  gyrations  in  the  third  quarter  last  year.  Still,  the  full  impact  of  the  US 
subprime mortgage market woes on the real sector has yet to be felt. This could affect us in 
two ways: 1) on the trade side: as the US economy, which still accounts for about 18 percent 
of  our  total  foreign  trade,  slows  down,  and;  2)  on  movements  in  economic  prices,  e.g., 
exchange and interest rates: as the response of the US and other major central banks to the 
expected global economic slowdown unfolds. The latter could result in further risk aversion 
against emerging markets, including the Philippines.  
The  second  challenge  emanates  from  continued  strong  capital  inflows  to  the  country  as  a 
result  of  an  important  pull  factor:  the  Philippines’  favorable  macroeconomic  performance. 
You may have heard me refer to this as the problem of plenty. I would like to emphasize that 
while  these  inflows  provide  an  opportunity  to  boost  long-term  growth,  they  also  pose 
substantial short-term macroeconomic challenges. It is the lag between the inflow of foreign 
exchange  and  corresponding  domestic  liquidity  infusion  and  its  eventual  utilization  that  is 
critical. How that lag is managed could spell the difference between an inflationary situation 
and a manageable one. A further challenge is finding the appropriate mix of measures so this 
liquidity is channeled to more productive investments, particularly into infrastructure.  
Lastly, the high and volatile international prices of oil, particularly if they remain high for a 
protracted period of time, continue to be a challenge. 
BIS Review 4/2008 
 1
Given  the  headwinds  in  the  global  arena,  the  challenge  for  policymakers  is  to  craft  sound 
macroeconomic policies that will further strengthen the domestic economy.  
On the part of the BSP, our policy thrusts in 2008 are to maintain a stable macroeconomic 
environment that is supportive of a growing economy, and to build a more resilient financial 
system that is flexible in the face of growing global competition and innovation.  
Managing risks to inflation and inflation expectations remains a key policy priority of the BSP.  
On  the  external  front,  our  policies  will  be  geared  toward:  (1)  ensuring  sustainability  of  the 
country’s external debt; (2) maintaining an essentially market-determined exchange rate with 
scope for occasional official action to smoothen sharp movements in the rate; (3) maintaining 
a comfortable level of reserves; and (4) further improving the foreign exchange environment 
through FX deregulation. 
Reforms in the financial sector will be geared toward maintaining a strong banking system 
and  a  vibrant  capital  market.  The  BSP  remains  committed  to  strengthening  the  banking 
system  through  continued  structural  reforms  and  speedier  disposition  of  non-performing 
assets. The asset clean-up of banks should help spur credit and investments, and contribute 
in providing the basis for more sustainable economic activity in the medium term. 
To further develop the domestic capital market, the BSP will continue to work actively with 
other  government  agencies  and  the  private  sector  for  the  completion  of  critical  market 
infrastructure to enhance system integrity and overall market confidence. We will continue to 
push  for  the  passage  of  key  legislations  intended  to  accelerate  the  development  of  the 
domestic capital market. In particular, we shall push for the implementation of a centralized 
credit information bureau to improve the availability and the quality of financial information to 
investors, expand private sector access to credit, and minimize exposure to risks of financial 
intermediaries.  
On  the  basis  of  these  policy  directions,  and  looking  ahead,  the  outlook  for  the  monetary, 
external and banking sectors continues to be favorable.  
Average inflation fell below the target of 4-5 percent in 2007. It is expected to settle within the 
target in 2008 of 4 percent ± 1 percentage point. The external payments position is expected 
to  remain  a  source  of  strength  for  the  economy  over  the  near  term.  Dollar  inflows  from 
remittances  and  foreign  investments  are  expected  to  remain  robust  and  will  continue  to 
provide  support  for  the  peso.  This  should  enable  us  to  further  build  up  our  cushion  of 
international reserves.  
On  the  banking  system,  we  expect  to  see  a  further  expansion  of  bank  assets  and 
capitalization, as well as a further improvement in bank asset quality.  
These are the broad strokes of the economic picture of the year just past and for 2008. I am 
now ready for a discussion of specific questions and issues of interest to you. 
2 
 BIS Review 4/2008
