Victor Mbewe: Committee of SADC Stock Exchanges 
Speech by Mr Victor Mbewe, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Malawi, at the opening of the 
Committee  of  SADC  Stock  Exchanges 
(COSSE)  2008  First  Meeting,  Lilongwe, 
31 January 2008. 
 The Chairman of the Committee of SADC Stock Exchanges;  
Delegates to the Meeting;  
Distinguished Ladies and Gentlemen.  
I welcome all participants to this meeting, aware that some of you are visiting Malawi, the 
warm heart of Africa for the first time. I wish you all a pleasant stay.  
Allow me to start by mentioning that we are privileged to host this meeting as it helps us all to 
take  stock  of  how  far  we  have  recently  moved  towards  creating  a  common  market  in 
Southern Africa.  
Progress toward integration of capital markets on a regional basis will help spur accelerated 
economic  integration  goals  in  other  areas.  The  harmonization  of  stock  market  regulations 
and trading practices that would accompany any regionalization of exchanges could deepen 
regional  integration  more  broadly  in  policy  areas  such  as  foreign  exchange,  taxation, 
accounting standards, corporate governance and legal practices.  
I am aware that SADC exchanges have been working toward adopting a common framework 
for clearing and settlement. Among other options under consideration are the establishment 
of a linked network of individual Central Depository Systems tailored to the specific needs of 
member exchanges.  
I hope that the Committee of SADC Stock Exchanges is also drawing up common standards 
for all stockbrokers operating in the SADC region. This would enable brokers based in one 
SADC member state to establish a presence in any other member state.  
Regulation and surveillance of national exchanges ultimately will be carried out on a regional 
level. I hope that national exchanges will formalise the practice of regular reporting on your 
national surveillance and regulations. The exchange of information on national surveillance 
policies  and  practices  will  be  used  to  devise  a  harmonised  system  of  surveillance  and 
regulation for the SADC region.  
The Committee of SADC Stock Exchanges should also aim to develop the region’s bond as 
well as other securities markets, and you must continue encouraging national authorities to 
actively issue government securities on the region’s exchanges.  
There is broad agreement that foreign exchange control, regulatory and tax frameworks must 
also  be  harmonized  before  financial  markets  can  actually  link  up.  More  specifically,  this 
would  involve  harmonizing  not  only  stock  market  regulations,  listing  requirements,  and 
trading,  clearing,  and  settlement  procedures,  but  also  transaction  fees,  accounting 
standards, corporate governance standards, disclosure requirements, common standards for 
stockbrokers,  and  national  rules  for  capital  gains  and  withholding  taxes.  More  importantly, 
there should be a liberalised framework of capital flows across national borders within SADC.  
In  order  to  carry  out  and  clear  cross  border  securities  trade  efficiently,  electronic  trading, 
clearing, and settlement systems must be synchronized. Technology in use on the national 
exchanges seeking to integrate operations must be harmonized as the systems used across 
the exchanges are not identical, they must at least allow for an efficient, uninterrupted flow of 
information  across  borders.  This  requires  an  upgrade  of  technology  used  by  smaller 
exchanges in particular.  
BIS Review 15/2008 
 1
You  will  contribute  to  regional  financial  stability  by  fostering  market  discipline,  resulting  in 
sound  and  safe  markets.  We  expect  the  Committee  of  SADC  Stock  Exchanges  to  work 
creatively,  proactively  and  effectively  in  assessing  and  addressing  risk  to  the  securities 
markets, the public and other market participants.  
The older and more mature markets should share their experiences and resources with the 
emerging partners in a spirit of equality and common destiny.  
The  Committee  of  SADC  Stock  Exchanges  should  also  specifically  advocate  a  regulatory 
framework for the region’s financial markets that conforms to international best practices.  
In ending, I thank you for your attention and wish you fruitful deliberations.  
I declare the 2008 first meeting of the Committee of SADC Stock Exchanges open. 
2 
 BIS Review 15/2008
