Nout Wellink: Responding to uncertainty 
Remarks by Dr Nout Wellink, President of the Netherlands Bank and Chairman of the Basel 
Committee on Banking Supervision, at the International Conference of Banking Supervisors 
2008, Brussels, 24 September 2008. 
 Introduction 
Good morning and welcome to Brussels for this fifteenth International Conference of Banking 
Supervisors. I would like to begin by thanking Governor Guy Quaden of the National Bank of 
Belgian  and  Chairman  Jean-Paul  Servais  of  Belgium’s  Banking,  Finance  and  Insurance 
Commission  for  graciously  hosting  this  conference.  The  organisation  of  this  conference 
began  shortly  after  the  ICBS  in  Mexico  ended.  Despite  the  extensive  preparation  of  our 
Belgian hosts, I do not think any kind of planning could have prepared us for what we are 
now experiencing in the financial markets. 
The  events  we  have  witnessed  in  the  past  two  weeks  are  nothing  short  of  extraordinary. 
Some  of  the  world’s  largest  financial  institutions  have  declared  bankruptcy,  have  been 
purchased or have been thrown a government lifeline. Considerable uncertainty and market 
volatility persist and will likely continue for some time to come. The official sector, including 
the  supervisory  community,  are  working  to  promote  a  deleveraging  process  that  limits  as 
much as possible the spillover from the financial to the real economy. 
As supervisors, central bankers and policy makers – what are we to make of all of this? Just 
as we caution bankers during the good times to prepare for the rough times that inevitably lie 
ahead, we too must use this opportunity to assess the lessons learned to better prepare for 
the future. 
This morning I would like to share with you some of my views on the lessons the crisis has 
taught us and, more importantly, how we can use this experience to better prepare for the 
future. Clearly, we are still in the midst of this process and more lessons are likely to arise. 
As you know, both Belgium and my home country, the Netherlands, are on the shore of the 
North Sea, which can be extremely stormy at times. In the past, people were at the mercy of 
these storms. For instance, in 1570 more then 20,000 people died during one of the worst 
storms  in  history.  So  how  did  people  react?  They  built  dikes  to  protect  against  the 
floodwaters. Despite these buffers, a bit more than 50 years ago, the Netherlands as well as 
Belgium, the UK and Germany were caught again by an enormous flood, which flowed over 
the dikes – the buffers – that had been built up during the good years. 
I believe this story is a good metaphor for what has recently happened to the global financial 
system. From time to time we witness financial storms. As supervisors we learn from these 
experiences  and  build  dikes,  or  buffers,  to  protect  against  future  floods.  Nevertheless,  the 
land beneath the dikes – our financial system and economies – can erode due to the passing 
of time or the battering from a tremendous storm. As the builders of the dikes, it is our role to 
continually monitor the strength and condition of the dikes; to assess the damage caused by 
each  storm  and  try  to  anticipate  the  next  storm.  Bankers  too  have  an  important  role  in 
preserving  the  soundness  of  the  dike  –  supervisors  by  themselves  can  not  have  sole 
responsibility. 
Origins of the storm 
As with almost any financial crisis, leverage and risk concentrations have played a central 
role in the current situation. I will be quick to add, however, that leverage in and of itself was 
not the problem. Indeed, risk taking and leverage are essential elements in banking. Instead, 
what I will focus on is the manner in which these elements are managed and controlled. As in 
BIS Review 115/2008 
 1
other  financial  storms,  it  is  poor  execution  of  the  basics  that  are  at  the  root  of  today’s 
problems.  
Complacency – on the part of bankers and supervisors – certainly played a role. The banking 
industry  is  exceedingly  optimistic  during  times  of  benign  economic  conditions  –  when  the 
seas are calm. It is difficult to keep a proper perspective and to exercise prudent judgment 
when  all  of  your  competitors  are  generating  huge  volumes  of  business.  As  one  banker 
famously said last year “As long as the music is playing, you’ve got to get up and dance”. 
Well, if it is the role of the central banker to take away the punch bowl just as the party gets 
going, perhaps the role of the supervisor is to silence the band so the bankers stop dancing.  
Supervisors – for our part – tend to focus on bank-specific issues. But, as we have learned, 
we  must  also  pay  attention  to  the  broader  aspects  of  financial  stability.  For  example, 
excessive  leverage,  risk  concentrations  and  maturity  mismatches  –  whether  on-  or  off-
balance sheet – are examples of destructive forces that, especially in combination, can have 
severe consequences for entire sectors and economies. One of the main lessons from this 
turmoil is clear: bankers and supervisors need to remain focused on the big picture and the 
longer term horizon. 
Risk management and oversight 
Let  me  give  you  a  few  examples  of  some  fundamental  aspects  of  risk management and 
oversight that were violated by many. As supervisors, we have seen time and time again 
that  financial  crises  are  characterised  by  the  failure  to  adhere  to  basic  risk  management 
principles, especially during times of financial innovation. 
This crisis is no different. Weakness in fundamental underwriting principles, among other 
factors,  was  a  key  contributor  to  asset  quality  problems.  So  was  poor  risk  management, 
which at some firms allowed the build-up of massive risk concentrations across the firm 
that further compounded already shaky asset quality. Some banks were caught completely 
unaware by concentrations to subprime loans that they had in their loan portfolios. Others did 
not  fully  understand  their  full  exposure  to  subprime  mortgages,  particularly  when  they 
purchased an exposure that contained dozens of other exposures – I am of course referring 
here  to  CDOs  of  ABS.  Poor  asset  quality  and  risk  concentrations  are  at  the  heart  of  the 
turmoil  involving  subprime  mortgages  which  has  led  to  the  exceptional  uncertainty  and 
volatility that we see today. These problems have been further compounded by uncertainties 
relating to valuation practices. 
What should we take away from this? That banks – and supervisors – must redouble their 
efforts to ensure that sound underwriting standards are in place and that there are adequate, 
systematic procedures for identifying firm-wide risk concentrations. 
Originate-to-distribute business model 
What  other  factors  –  aside  from  complacency  –  have  hindered  adoption  of  such  basic 
principles?  Perhaps  one  of  the  stumbling  blocks  has  been  the  expanded  use  of  the 
originate-to-distribute  model.  Managing  this  model’s  associated  risks  poses  significant 
challenges and, in some cases, has led to large risk exposures and concentrations that firms’ 
senior management failed to detect.  
The  recent  problem  with  the  originate-to-distribute  model  has  been  one  of  incentives. 
Instead of the traditional focus on a borrower’s ability to repay a loan, many banks focused 
instead on generating a high volume of loans, and booking as income the fees received to 
originate the mortgages. Many firms chose not to invest the necessary time and resources in 
thorough  credit  analysis  and  underwriting  since  someone  else  would  be  purchasing  the 
mortgage. 
2 
 BIS Review 115/2008
Investors did not perform their own due diligence. Instead, they relied on the due diligence of 
originators  and  packagers,  who  lacked  interest  in  exercising  this  due  diligence.  They  also 
placed  undue  reliance  on  the  judgments  of  the  credit  rating  agencies,  and  the  capacity  of 
modern technology and diversification to manage financial risks.  
What can we draw from this? The combination of excess lending with an obvious failure to 
adhere to fundamental and sound risk management standards not only produced significant 
losses  in  mortgage  portfolios;  it  also  tainted  an  asset  type  that  was  key  in  the  broader 
securitisation and credit distribution process. The reckless use of the originate-to-distribute 
model  increased  uncertainty  regarding  credit  quality,  where  risk  resides  and  the  impact  of 
deterioration. This heightened uncertainty suggests that in maintaining their capital buffers 
– the dikes – banks need to do a better job capturing the risks related to this business model. 
We  have  to  build  higher  dikes  but  must  not  forget  the  importance  of  building  on  a  sound 
foundation,  which  is  high  quality  capital.  Basel  II  provides  the  necessary  framework  within 
which to achieve these enhancements. I will return to the capital issue in a moment. 
Liquidity 
Liquidity was another victim of the current storm and its demise holds valuable lessons for 
supervisors.  Increasing  banks'  liquidity  cushions  and  improving  liquidity  risk  management 
and supervision has been an area of sharp focus for the Committee. We have seen massive 
illiquidity  in  certain  market  segments  (especially  complex  structured  products)  for  a  much 
longer  period  than  any  market  participant  would  have  predicted.  Complex  and  illiquid 
investor-specific instruments, such as resecuritisations, have experienced significant market-
value  losses,  which  has  led  to  the  loss  of  confidence  in  their  financial  worthiness  and  the 
drying up of liquidity in the short-term interbank market.  
The recent turmoil has shown that banks must strengthen their liquidity buffers. One way to 
do  this  is  to  increase  their  holdings  of  high  quality  liquid  securities  –  in  particular,  liquid 
central  government  securities.  The  Committee’s  guidance  on  sound 
liquidity  risk 
management  and  supervision  and  vigorous  supervisory  follow-up  will  help  raise  the  bar  in 
this  area.  We  will  continue  to  examine  the  topic  of  liquidity  with  a  focus  on  cross-border 
aspects of liquidity supervision. 
While liquidity risk cannot be mitigated with capital, capital is itself a form of liquidity since, 
unlike  other  liabilities,  it  does  not  have  to  be  repaid.  Furthermore,  a  strong  capital  buffer 
enhances  a  bank’s  creditworthiness  and,  from  the  market’s  perspective,  reduces  its 
counterparty risk. This helps to ensure continued access to funding.  
Capital adequacy 
And this brings me to the issue of capital adequacy. After several years of high profits, often 
record profits, we know that the level of risk was grossly underestimated by many financial 
institutions. 
This latest storm has therefore revealed cracks in the dikes and the supervisory community 
is  in  the  process  of  patching  up  those  cracks.  High  losses  have  put  pressure  on  capital 
cushions  and  many  banks  have  been  forced  to  go  to  the  market  to  replenish  their  capital 
base.  This  is  critical  if  a  contraction  in  lending  and  credit  are  to  be  avoided.  Of  greater 
importance, though, are the cracks in the dike that are not yet evident. While we do not know 
the  nature  and  strength  of  the  next  storm,  we  can  take  measures  today  to  strengthen  the 
dike so it could withstand the battering. One of those measures is to significantly strengthen 
banks’ capital buffers. In addition to moving ahead aggressively with Basel II, the Committee 
has issued a proposal to strengthen the capital treatment for risks not captured under Basel 
II’s existing trading book regime.  
In  this  context,  the  Committee  is  also  carefully  considering  the  topic  of  procyclicality, 
especially as it is influenced by bank capital issues. There are many dimensions here, such 
BIS Review 115/2008 
 3
as the level and quality of capital; provisioning, capital buffers and the ability of banks to dip 
into those buffers. We will continue to review these and other issues related to procyclicality 
and  are  in  the  process  of  developing  a  work  programme  to  address  both  near  term  and 
longer-term issues.  
The Committee is also developing enhanced guidance under Pillar 2, the supervisory review 
process. Here, our focus is on improving risk management practices, such as stress testing 
and the management of risks arising from complex instruments, among other things. We are 
also  developing  proposals  to  strengthen  Pillar  3  disclosures,  especially  for  securitisation 
activities. 
Conclusion 
We have learned much from the severe storm that is currently raging. I have outlined some 
of the measures that banks and supervisors must take to better prepare for the next storm. 
But  what  is  becoming  increasingly  clear  is  that,  over  time,  the  banking  system  needs  to 
strengthen  capital  and  liquidity  buffers  to  withstand  prolonged  periods  of  stress  in  the 
financial  system  and  the  broader  economy.  This  will  be  done  in  a  manner  that  does  not 
aggravate the current stress in the system. Enhancements to risk management and market 
transparency will help, but we must enhance banks’ buffers to reflect the increased degree of 
uncertainty in the system. The need for increased margins to protect against uncertainty will 
also  become  apparent  as  rapid  financial  innovation  continues  and  uncertainty  increases 
about how new products, valuations, markets and the real economy will interact in times of 
stress.  This  will  better  reflect  the  risks  that  already  are  inherent  –  but  perhaps  not  easily 
recognised – in banks' portfolios, either in regulatory or internal metrics. Finally, enforcement 
by  banks  and  supervisors  of  the  basics  of  sound  risk  management  and  underwriting 
practices are key to promoting a return to financial stability. 
4 
 BIS Review 115/2008
