Paul Jenkins: Impact of exchange rate movements on the Canadian 
economy 
Opening statement by Mr Paul Jenkins, Senior Deputy Governor of the Bank of Canada, to 
the House of Commons Standing Committee on Industry, Science and Technology, Ottawa, 
30 January 2008.  
 Thanks very much, Mr. Chairman. I'm pleased to be here with you today and hope to help 
your  committee  as  it  examines  the  impact  of  exchange  rate  movements  on  the  Canadian 
economy. With me is John Murray, who was recently appointed as a deputy governor and 
member of the Bank of Canada's Governing Council.  
To begin, as a little background I would like to quickly review the framework within which we 
conduct  Canada's  monetary  policy.  The  Bank  of  Canada  Act  calls  on  us  to  mitigate 
"fluctuations in the general level of production, trade, prices and employment, so far as may 
be possible within the scope of monetary action, and generally to promote the economic and 
financial  welfare  of  Canada."  Over  time,  we  have  learned  that  the  best  way  to  fulfill  this 
mandate is to keep inflation low, stable, and predictable. Specifically, that means we aim to 
keep the annual rate of inflation, as measured by the consumer price index, at 2 per cent. To 
keep inflation on target, we aim for a balance between total demand and total supply in the 
economy.  By  maintaining  low  and  stable  inflation,  our  monetary  policy  helps  to  keep  the 
economy operating at full capacity and promotes greater stability in economic output. This is 
crucial in helping the economy to adjust to changing economic circumstances.  
Now, what does all of this have to do with the exchange rate? Well, the exchange rate of the 
Canadian  dollar  is  a  key  element  of  our  monetary  policy  framework.  Without  a  floating 
exchange  rate,  we  would  not  have  the  ability  to  conduct  an  independent  monetary  policy 
appropriate  to  our  domestic  situation.  This  means  that  we  do  not  have  a  target  for  the 
Canadian dollar. But the exchange rate is an important relative price in our economy and we 
pay  very  close  attention  to  its  movements.  Movements  in  the  exchange  rate  influence  the 
levels of imports and exports, which can help to keep total demand and supply in balance, 
and  have  a  direct  influence  on  price  levels  in  our  economy.  Further,  exchange  rate 
movements act as a signal to shift resources into sectors where demand is strongest. Our 
floating  exchange  rate  helps  to  facilitate  that  process.  That  said,  we  recognize  that  these 
types  of  adjustment  can  be,  and  have  been,  difficult  for  some  sectors  and  regions  of  the 
country. 
When  the  Canadian  dollar  rises  or  falls,  we  try  to  determine  the  degree  to  which  those 
movements are due to changes in world demand for our goods and services, and how much 
is due to other, unrelated factors. It is important that we understand the causes of exchange 
rate movements, because the implications for the economy – and the appropriate monetary 
policy  response  –  depend  on  the  reasons  for  the  change.  We  must  then  incorporate  this 
information with  our  assessments of  other  data,  and  set a  course  for  monetary  policy  that 
works to keep total demand and supply in balance, and inflation on target.  
Exchange rate movements can also be, as we have seen recently, quite volatile. That has 
sometimes led to calls, for example, for Canada to fix its currency to the U.S. dollar. That 
would  be  a  mistake.  The  United  States  is  certainly  our  closest  neighbour  and  by  far,  our 
largest  trading  partner.  But  the  structures  of  our  two  economies  are  very  different.  This 
means that each of us often requires different adjustments and different policies in reaction 
to  shocks.  Canada's  floating  exchange  rate  helps  in  this  process  by  acting  as  a  shock 
absorber.  
We cannot avoid adjustment; the question is how we can best adjust to changing global and 
domestic economic forces. With a fixed exchange rate, the adjustments would have to come 
BIS Review 13/2008 
 1
through  movements  in  overall  output  and  in  all  wages  and  prices.  History  has  shown  that 
those adjustments are more protracted and more difficult when the nominal exchange rate is 
not  allowed  to  move.  Again,  however,  I  stress  that  this  does  not  mean  that  the  Bank  is 
indifferent to movements in the exchange rate. 
Now, let me conclude with a few summary comments on our latest Monetary Policy Report 
Update released last week. Copies are available for committee members. In this, we said the 
Canadian  economy  continues  to  operate  above  its  production  capacity,  despite  some 
slowing in growth in the fourth quarter of 2007. The Bank projects that economic growth in 
2008 will be weaker than was expected in October, averaging a little over 1 per cent in the 
first half of this year and a little over 2 per cent in the second half. On an average annual 
basis, the economy is projected to expand by 1.8 per cent in 2008 and 2.8 per cent in 2009. 
Both core and total CPI inflation are projected to fall below 1 1/2 per cent by the middle of 
this  year  before  returning  to  2  per  cent  by  the  end  of  2009.  On  4  December  and  on  22 
January, the Bank lowered its target for the overnight rate by one-quarter of one percentage 
point, bringing it to 4 per cent. In line with the Bank's outlook, further monetary stimulus is 
likely to be required in the near term to keep aggregate supply and demand in balance, and 
to return inflation to target over the medium term. 
With that, Mr. Chairman, John and I would now be happy to take your questions. 
2 
 BIS Review 13/2008
