Radovan Jelašić: Promoting achievements, inventiveness and 
commitment in Serbia 
Speech by Mr Radovan Jelašić, Governor of the National Bank of Serbia, at the promotion of 
the  TV  Serial  “Big  Small  Business”,  directed  by  Olivera  Miloš  Todorović,  Belgrade, 
30 January 2008.  
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I  warmly  welcome  the  idea  of  a  TV  serial  promoting  achievements  of  small  businesses  in 
Serbia, and still more so, promoting what seems to be the key to success – determination to 
take life into one’s own hands, inventiveness, commitment and unrelenting effort to improve 
yourself and achieve more day after day. I am sure that the stories of those who mustered 
the courage to quit their jobs in state enterprises and venture out into the world of private 
business will encourage many people in Serbia to do away with the deep rooted belief that 
the state is bound to provide each and every person with a well-paid job, and that all you 
have to do is wait long enough for the employment bureau to call you. I hope these stories 
will encourage them to have confidence in themselves, to trust their intelligence, ability and 
creativity, just as the protagonists of this TV serial did and, finally, made it. 
It is a particular pleasure for me that the author, ShockArt Production and television Studio B, 
supported  by  the  European  Agency  for  Reconstruction,  decided  to  show  that  there  are 
positive  processes  in  our  society  that  lead  to  change  and  better  life.  In  this  respect,  the 
media have a special role, both in terms of education and social responsibility. Unfortunately, 
nowadays we are flooded with examples of the worst things in our society, as if there were 
nothing else in Serbia apart from political intrigues, financial affairs or deaths and accidents. 
It is clear that most of the media focusing on these topics are only looking for higher rating or 
circulation figures. It practically boils down to the following: the more you slander, often even 
by publishing the most disgraceful lies, the easier it is to beat your competition.  
I am convinced that much of our people’s discontent – regarding both the speed of change in 
the society and one's perception of chances of success in the process of transition – is media 
shaped. In such an environment, TV serial “Big Small Business” seems more valuable as it 
shows  that  right  here,  although  not  shown  in  the  media,  there  is  quite  a  different  Serbia, 
represented by individuals who are daring and know how to work, create, better their lives 
and hence, contribute to the progress of society at large. 
For  the  purpose  of  encouraging  development  of  small  and  medium-sized  enterprises,  the 
government has so far provided private entrepreneurs with access under favourable terms to 
two APEX global loans of the European Investment Bank in the amount of EUR 65 million, 
two credit lines worth EUR 63.25 million from the Government of the Republic of Italy, and 
the EAR Revolving Credit Fund in the amount EUR 15 million. Everything else, from coming 
up  with  a  good  idea,  developing  a  good  project  to  successful  business  realization,  the 
entrepreneurs have had to do by themselves. It is encouraging that an increasing number of 
people is willing to take the leap into the waters of big small business and that the media is 
willing to provide coverage. 
BIS Review 15/2008 
 1
