Mark Carney: Principles for liquid markets 
Remarks by Mr Mark Carney, Governor of the Bank of Canada, to the New York Association 
for Business Economics, New York, 22 May 2008. 
 Over  the  past  year,  both  private  sector  financial  market  participants  and  public  sector 
authorities have been preoccupied with the topic of liquidity as never before. Throughout the 
financial  market  turbulence,  private  liquidity  management  has  become  tremendously 
important. In parallel, policy-makers have re-examined their roles and responsibilities for the 
provision of liquidity, as well as the methods they employ in doing so. 
The  Bank  of  Canada  is  certainly  no  exception.  Recent  events  in  financial  markets  have 
prompted  us  to  think  about  why,  how,  and  to  whom  we  provide  liquidity.  Historically, 
discussions involving central banks and liquidity have revolved around the traditional role of 
the central bank as lender of last resort – providing sufficient liquidity to still-solvent deposit-
taking financial institutions so they can continue to function. However, as recent events have 
made abundantly clear, policy-makers also have an interest in seeing that key markets have 
sufficient  liquidity.  Over  the  course  of  my  remarks  today,  I  will  share  some  of  the  Bank  of 
Canada's thinking on the principles for liquid markets.1  
What is liquidity and why do central banks care? 
To begin, it would be useful to set out a definition of liquidity for the purposes of this speech. 
Liquidity takes on different guises within the financial system. Central bankers worry about 
aggregate  system  or  macro  liquidity,  because  of  its  connection  with  interest  rates,  credit 
conditions, and future inflationary pressures. Investors are preoccupied with market liquidity, 
which refers to how readily they can buy or sell a financial asset without causing a significant 
movement in its price. Financial institutions are concerned with balance sheet liquidity, which 
refers broadly to the cash-like assets on balance sheets that can be used to settle payment 
obligations  at  short  notice.  Further,  they  care  about  funding  liquidity,  which  refers  to  their 
ability to raise funds in money markets at reasonable premia. 
There is a common element to these concepts. In all cases, liquidity refers to the ability to 
transact  in  specific  assets  at  a  predictable  price.2  For  example,  a  broker-dealer  wants  to 
know that it can transact in securities at a price approximating that on the screen. For our 
purposes  today,  we  can  say  that  when  this  condition  is  satisfied,  there  is  an  appropriate 
amount of market liquidity. 
This  is  important  because  liquid  markets  support  economic  efficiency.  In  most  economies, 
financial markets are the channel through which scarce economic capital is allocated to the 
most  productive  uses  and  risk  is  distributed  among  those  most  willing  to  assume  it.  An 
efficient financial system is required for investors to receive the highest risk-adjusted returns 
on  their  investments,  and  for  borrowers  to  minimize  the  costs  of  raising  capital.  Since  the 
efficiency of the system suffers when markets function poorly, policy-makers have an interest 
in promoting well-functioning markets. 
                                                 
1   For a more detailed discussion of some of the issues raised in this speech, see W. Engert, J. Selody, and C. 
Wilkins, "Financial Market Turmoil and Central Bank Intervention", Financial System Review (Ottawa: Bank of 
Canada, forthcoming). 
In the case of macro liquidity, "predictable price" is analogous with price stability as defined by the inflation 
target. In the Bank of Canada's case, this means a 2 per cent annual increase for the total consumer price 
index. 
2  
BIS Review 66/2008 
 1
A central bank further desires well-functioning, liquid financial markets because they assist in 
the transmission of monetary policy. Movements in our policy interest rate set off a chain of 
events,  beginning  with  movements  in  a  series  of  prices  in  financial  markets.  Improperly 
functioning markets can make it more difficult to predict the effects of our monetary policy 
actions, thus complicating our task. It is important to keep in mind that central bank activities 
to support liquidity in specific markets or in specific institutions do not represent a change in 
the stance of monetary policy, which relates to macro liquidity. Rather, they are undertaken 
to address concerns about financial instability.  
I  want  to  pause  on  this  point  for  emphasis.  When  the  Bank  of  Canada  conducts  liquidity 
operations (such as term repos, or "purchase and resale agreements" (PRAs) as they are 
called in Canada), we are merely changing the distribution of liquidity in the financial system 
by changing the composition of our balance sheet. When we do term repos, we aim to hold 
fewer government treasury bills,3 which means that the private sector would hold more.4 We 
are injecting liquidity where the system had generated it before, essentially by exchanging 
less-liquid assets for more liquid ones. Moreover, when we roll over previous operations, as 
the Bank of Canada has done recently, the scale of the liquidity injection is held constant. 
The  overall  level  of  liquidity  in  financial  markets  is  determined  primarily  by  market 
participants  themselves.  Under  normal  conditions,  private  agents  supply  sufficient  liquidity 
such  that  injections  of  central  bank  liquidity  are  not  needed.  Financial  institutions  create 
liquidity by buying and selling assets to make the markets in which financial institutions fund 
themselves.  The  financial  system  is  liquid  because  institutions  regularly  borrow  from  each 
other,  and  because  they  regularly  buy  and  sell  each  others'  short-term  paper.  There  are 
times, however, when liquidity dries up as confidence erodes in the ability of private agents 
to remain in markets. When the regular process of lending and transacting slows down or 
stops, the lack of liquidity means that institutions are unable to transact assets at predictable 
prices at minimal cost, and financial markets become stressed. At such times, a central bank 
can  help  restore  liquidity  by  directly  or  indirectly  providing  liquid  assets  in  exchange  for 
illiquid  assets,  thus  helping  to  restore  confidence  in  the  ability  of  the  private  sector  to 
generate liquidity. 
What has happened to market liquidity since August? 
A review of recent events helps to clarify the principles of liquidity provision. 
The current situation in securitization markets serves as a good example of how information 
problems are at the root of market failure and how liquidity, or a liquidity shock, can cascade 
through markets. 
The  events  of  last  summer  represented  a  severe  shock  to  markets.  In  particular,  the 
realization  of  the  potential  scale  of  subprime  losses  and  the  associated  loss  of  faith  in 
structured  products  and  rating  agencies  collectively  created  uncertainty  about  –  and  an 
associated  loss  of  confidence  in  –  counterparty  credit  quality.  This  uncertainty  persisted 
because of the extreme asymmetric information among market participants, which impaired 
market makers' ability to transact with confidence and, therefore, to supply liquidity.  
At the same time as the supply of  liquidity was shrinking, demand for liquidity by financial 
institutions  was  rising  dramatically  –  for  two  reasons.  First,  the  reintermediation  of  off-
                                                 
3   This occurs either by not replacing maturing treasury bills, or by selling them outright. 
4   The other way in which term PRAs can be financed is by having more government deposits on our balance 
sheet. This means that there would be fewer government deposits on private sector balance sheets, and thus 
fewer liquid assets as well. Although the total size of the Bank of Canada's balance sheet increases in this 
scenario, the liabilities of the Bank to the private sector (currency plus private sector deposits) do not, so there 
is no monetary stimulus involved in this type of operation. 
2 
 BIS Review 66/2008
balance-sheet assets and contingent claims expanded, and continues to expand, along with 
bank  balance  sheets.  Second,  the  banks'  preference  for  liquidity  increased  because  of 
uncertainty  about  these  types  of  securities.  In  addition,  the  number  of  potential  market 
participants for these securities has fallen as key investors have either disappeared – such 
as asset-backed commercial paper (ABCP) and structured investment vehicle conduits – or 
fled to safer havens – such as money market funds. The result has been a liquidity shock 
leaving interbank interest rate spreads over expected overnight levels substantially higher (at 
times,  up  to  90  basis  points  in  some  currencies)  and  considerably  more  volatile  than 
historical norms. This widening in spreads reflects both a rise in the default-risk premium – 
largely related to a rise in actual and perceived counterparty risks – and a rise in the liquidity-
risk premium – largely related to increased demand for liquidity by banks related to the rise in 
the amount of assets being reintermediated, and a contraction in the supply of bank-funding 
liquidity.  The  scale  of  the  reintermediation  process  may  matter.  For  example,  in  Canada, 
where  it  is  less  acute,  interbank  spreads  have  risen  considerably  less  than  in  other 
jurisdictions. 
Since  our  current  system  relies  on  transactions  among  an  interconnected  web  of  financial 
institutions, a liquidity shock can cascade quickly through  the system. Concerns about the 
solvency  of  one  institution  can  lead  to  liquidity  hoarding  and  dysfunctional  markets.  This 
reduces  the  number  of  potential  participants  willing  to  transact  in  a  market,  which 
undermines price discovery. As a result, it becomes less likely that markets will price assets 
at their fundamental values, and the efficient allocation of resources and the distribution of 
risk are thus threatened, at potentially great cost to the economy. In such circumstances, the 
role  of  the  central  bank  was  accurately  described  more  than  a  century  ago  by  Walter 
Bagehot  in  Lombard  Street:  "Theory  suggests,  and  experience  proves,  that  in  a  panic  the 
holders of the ultimate Bank reserve … should lend to all that bring good securities quickly, 
freely,  and  readily."5  Note  that  Bagehot  did  not  differentiate  between  deposit-taking 
institutions and market makers, stipulating only that the lending should be collateralized with 
"good securities." However, the idea that central banks should support the functioning of a 
broader range of markets through direct liquidity support is relatively new. Previously, it was 
believed that central banks could adequately support markets by allocating liquidity through 
banks,  by  altering  liquidity  in  payments  systems,  or  by  changing  the  stance  of  monetary 
policy, and that this liquidity would flow unimpeded through the financial system. 
The  events  of  last  summer  have  challenged  this  consensus.  The  financial  system  will  be 
more stable, and the effects of monetary policy actions more predictable, if the central bank 
directly supports liquidity in a wider range of markets when appropriate. Such support, which 
would be expected to occur only during extraordinary circumstances, could entail expanding 
the range of terms, collateral, and counterparties for central bank operations beyond what is 
required for routine monetary policy operations.6
Considerations around a central bank decision to intervene 
Let me elaborate on two of the words I just said: "when appropriate." How can a central bank 
determine,  with  any  level  of  confidence,  when  actions  to  support  market  liquidity  are 
appropriate? At the Bank of Canada, we have been thinking about the principles that would 
govern any facilities that we might offer.  
                                                 
5   W. Bagehot, Lombard Street: a Description of the Money Market (New York: Wiley, 1999) p. 173. 
6  
In the Bank of Canada's case, some of its legal authorities would need to be modernized in order to be able to 
carry out interventions to the same degree as other institutions. Amendments to the Bank of Canada Act that 
would address this issue are currently before Parliament. 
BIS Review 66/2008 
 3
A  central  bank  may  want  to  make  several  judgments  before  deciding  to  lend  to  market 
makers. In particular, it should ask itself four questions: First, is the impairment of the market 
temporary  or  permanent?  Second,  will  the  instruments  at  its  disposal  be  effective?  Third, 
what net benefits could come from intervention? Fourth, what are the likely costs? 
In  the  heat  of  financial  market  turbulence,  it  is  difficult  to  determine  whether  a  situation  of 
illiquidity (a market impairment) is temporary or permanent. To make this determination, it is 
useful to recall the Arrow-Debreu theorem of complete markets.7 In reality, complete markets 
do  not  exist  because  of  information  costs  and  because  not  all  agents  participate  in  all 
markets.  A  central  bank  must  decide  whether  its  provision  of  liquidity  is  a  bridge  –  while 
information asymmetries are resolved and potential market participants return to the market 
–  or  whether  it  is  a  pier  because  there  is  a  permanent  impairment.  To  underscore  the 
distinction, consider again three aspects of recent events. 
First, before the current market turmoil, many investors relied on rating agencies for credit 
analysis about structured products, and this information was relatively inexpensive to obtain. 
The  process  of  financial  turbulence  demonstrated  that  rating-agency  judgments  were  not 
always reliable. Consequently, market participants are now relying more on their own credit 
analysis, thereby increasing the costs for investing in structured products considerably. It will 
take some time for rating agencies to re-establish their credibility.  
Second,  investors  have  discovered  that  there  are  considerable  costs  of  accumulating 
independent  information  on  non-standardized  products  in  order  to  perform,  at  a  minimum, 
risk-based  analysis  to  check  the  opinions  of  credit-rating  agencies.  This  is  a  case  where 
markets themselves should be able to establish standards to minimize information costs. In 
the interim, the central bank or a regulatory body may help to reduce the costs of information. 
The Bank of Canada has adopted high disclosure standards for ABCP that it will accept as 
collateral in its Standing Liquidity Facility. This may encourage market participants to raise 
their own standards. Whether they do in the end will be their decision. 
Third,  recent  problems  raised  concerns  over  the  health  of  counterparties  –  initially  tied  to 
uncertainty about exposure to U.S. subprime mortgages and later to structured products in 
general. These concerns, while material, should prove temporary before being resolved by 
time  and  disclosure.  This  is  why  it  is  so  important  to  implement  immediately  the  best 
practices for disclosure endorsed last month by the G-7 finance ministers and central bank 
governors. This is a priority in Canada. 
A central bank can supply liquidity to financial institutions and markets. However, it cannot 
create markets where there is no private desire for them, nor can it change the fundamental 
value  of  a  security.  Thus,  when  confronted  with  a  market  failure,  a  central  bank  should 
identify the basic nature of the failure and act when it judges that a shock has distorted the 
liquidity-risk premium embedded in the price of a security.  
The most important potential cost of intervention is moral hazard – the risk that central bank 
actions might ratify or encourage behaviours that would increase the likelihood or severity of 
a future crisis. In today's circumstances, one might worry that market participants could alter 
their  behaviour  owing  to  a  mistaken  belief  that  central  banks  would  never  allow  any 
counterparty  to  fail.  Another  concern  is  that  in  the  future,  banks  would  worry  less  about 
market liquidity and assume that central banks would always act to provide liquidity in any or 
all markets, even in cases of a very minor disruption. There could also be costs related to 
                                                 
7   The Arrow-Debreu theorem of complete markets states that there is a competitive equilibrium of prices so that 
aggregate supplies will equal aggregate demands for every commodity in the economy, and that there will be 
a price for every commodity, a market for every time period, and a forward price for every commodity at all 
time  periods.  The  theorem  is  based  on  two  important  assumptions:  participation  of  every  agent  in  every 
market  and  complete  information.  See  G.  Debreu,  Theory  of  Value:  An  Axiomatic  Analysis  of  Economic 
Equilibrium (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1959). 
4 
 BIS Review 66/2008
distortions in markets caused by lending, or costs associated with the crowding out of private 
sector counterparties. The Financial Stability Forum recommendation that central banks have 
access to financial institutions' liquidity-management contingency plans has the potential to 
partially  limit  this  aspect  of  moral  hazard.  Other  mitigants  can  be  found  in  the  principles 
behind the conduct of these operations, which I will discuss in a moment. 
First,  one  final  consideration:  How  does  a  central  bank  know  when  intervention  has  been 
sufficiently successful for it to exit? Success should not necessarily be judged on the basis of 
spreads  returning  to  predetermined  levels,  since  fundamentals  are  likely  to  have  changed 
during  and  because  of  the  shock  that  caused  the  turmoil.  Rather,  judgments  about  the 
effectiveness  of  intervention  should  be  based  on  evidence  of  better-functioning  markets, 
such as higher volumes, narrowing bid-ask spreads, and reduced liquidity-risk premia even, 
potentially, if total risk premia do not fall. The absence of spread volatility at the end of each 
quarter would be another welcome sign of improving markets. In Canada, spreads indicative 
of  bank  funding  costs  (such  as  the  spread  between  3-month  CDOR  and  the  expected 
overnight rate as measured by 3-month overnight indexed swaps) have fallen markedly over 
the last few weeks, and are substantially below equivalent spreads in some other currencies. 
The  results  of  the  term  PRA  auctions  held  by  the  Bank  of  Canada  have  broadly  shown  a 
narrowing  of  the  spread  between  the  average  yield  and  the  expected  overnight  rate.  In 
addition,  the  range  of  the  collateral  being  pledged  shows  no  sign  of  intensifying  liquidity 
pressures. 
Principles to guide intervention 
Let  me  now  elaborate  on  the  five  principles  that  we  believe  should  guide  interventions  to 
support liquidity in markets.  
First,  lending  to  support  market  liquidity  should  mitigate  moral  hazard.  Such  measures 
include limited, selective intervention and the promotion of the sound supervision of liquidity-
risk management. 
Second,  interventions  should  be  graduated.  The  strength  of  the  intervention  should  be 
calibrated  to  the  severity  of  the  problem,  so  as  to  guard  against  overreactions  that  could 
unnecessarily raise the costs of the intervention and potentially crowd out private agents.  
Third, interventions should be targeted. A central bank should attempt to mitigate only those 
market failures that it is best placed to rectify. Specifically, central banks should concentrate 
on liquidity disruptions which, by their nature, are not permanent. 
Fourth, intervention tools should be well-designed for the job at hand; that is, lending at a 
penalty rate to particular institutions is appropriate for institution-specific liquidity problems. 
Market-specific  liquidity  problems  should  be  addressed  with  market  transactions  at 
competitive  prices.  Finally,  when  there  are  shortages  of  collateral,  market  transactions 
should be conducted in that collateral.8  
In  these  regards,  along  with  traditional  central  bank  tools,  such  as  lender-of-last-resort 
arrangements,  a  range  of  facilities  is  likely  necessary.  Each  of  these  has  distinct 
characteristics suitable for different circumstances. Term purchase and resale agreements 
could be offered to any financial market participant with marketable securities as the basis for 
the transaction. This type of transaction would be most useful when liquidity premia in money 
markets  were  distorted  and  associated  with  widespread  liquidity  problems  in  a  particular 
asset class or maturity. Term securities lending would increase the supply of high-quality 
securities that could be used for collateral at times when such collateral was in short supply. 
                                                 
8   The  Bank  of  Canada  is  currently  constrained  in  its  ability  to  ease  collateral  shortages,  however,  legislation 
currently before Parliament would address this issue. 
BIS Review 66/2008 
 5
It could also allow for a direct exchange of less-liquid securities for those that are more liquid, 
thus  reducing  the  incentive  to  hoard  precautionary  liquidity.  Term  loan  facilities  could  be 
most useful when liquidity premia in money markets were distorted because several financial 
institutions were facing liquidity shortages. 
Fifth, and finally, interventions should not create further market distortions. Transactions 
should, to the extent possible, take place at market-determined prices and under conditions 
that are aligned with those in the market. This limits the possibility that the central bank will 
crowd out the return of markets. This is an important point, on which I will expand.  
Under most circumstances, central bank provision of liquidity should be priced at an auction, 
where prices are set competitively, so that funding markets for the assets involved would not 
normally be distorted. A well-designed auction process can help institutions avoid any stigma 
associated with the receipt of central bank liquidity and minimize the possibility of confusion 
about  lending  at  rates  that  differ  from  the  key  monetary  policy  interest  rate.  As  well,  an 
auction can provide a central bank with the flexibility needed to tailor the provision of liquidity 
to  the  specific  need.  Auctions  can  also  provide  the  central  bank  with  valuable  information 
about the health of a particular market or participant. Finally, they can help to restart markets 
that have stopped by providing a multi-party mechanism to determine asset prices.9  
The search for symmetry 
Before  closing,  I  would  like  to  raise  one  final  issue.  Much  of  the  discussion  about  central 
banks and liquidity in markets has been motivated by current circumstances, in which banks 
and market makers are unable to create a sufficient level of liquidity themselves. This is a 
one-sided approach to the issue. One of the reasons that the Bank of Canada's monetary 
policy  has  been  successful  in  anchoring  inflation  expectations  is  that  we  implement  policy 
symmetrically. Our actions are motivated as much by inflation threatening to fall below our 
target as by inflation threatening to rise above it. Indeed, our recent decisions to lower our 
key policy rate were motivated by a concern that future inflation was poised to remain below 
our 2 per cent target. 
Is  a  symmetrical  approach  to  liquidity  also  appropriate?  As  I  mentioned  earlier,  a  lack  of 
liquidity  can  hamper  the  efficient  allocation  of  resources  and  distribution  of  risk,  and 
complicate  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy.  It  is  equally  true  that  an  overabundance  of 
liquidity – or, more precisely, easy financing conditions for financial assets themselves – can 
have  similar  effects.  Logically,  if  a central  bank  were  concerned  enough  to  lend  to  market 
makers  in  a  time  of  scarce  liquidity,  would  it  not  also  want  to  borrow  from  the  same 
institutions  in  periods  of  excess  liquidity,  again  assuming  that  such  periods  could  be 
determined with confidence?  
Unfortunately, liquidity instruments such as those I have described today are poorly suited to 
this task. Central banks are the stores of liquidity in our economy, and can readily supply it 
by agreeing to take less-liquid assets from counterparties in exchange. Generally speaking, 
central banks are not set up to operate in reverse; that is, they do not have on their balance 
sheets a ready supply of illiquid assets that can be used to absorb excess liquidity held by 
banks or market makers. Moreover, during an asset boom, they may have limited influence 
over the confidence of financial market participants. 
The principle, however, remains. Central banks and other authorities should be as concerned 
about  the  distortions  and  inefficiencies  created  by  overly  easy  financing  conditions,  rapid 
credit growth, and excess confidence about future market liquidity as those created by a lack 
                                                 
9   To  be  clear,  in  these  auctions,  the  price  being  determined  is  the  price  for  borrowing  central  bank  money 
against  a  given  set  of  collateral.  It  is  not  the  price  to  buy  and  sell  the  collateral  outright  or  to  lend  cash 
unsecured. 
6 
 BIS Review 66/2008
of liquidity. So how can we achieve symmetry in our approach? In my opinion, it is worthwhile 
for policy-makers to consider the promotion of macro-prudential regulations that could serve 
to restrain pro-cyclical liquidity creation among banks and market makers when appropriate. 
To be clear, the same tests should apply in terms of "when appropriate." There would also be 
the added complication of determining where to house this regulatory authority, and how it 
would  be  coordinated  across  jurisdictions.  Despite  these  issues,  this  is  a  serious  concern 
that warrants closer attention. 
Conclusion 
The market turbulence that began last summer has eased in recent weeks. That progress, 
and perhaps the coincident start of the baseball season, has prompted some to muse about 
whether we are in the seventh, eighth, or ninth inning. I will not venture to be that precise, but 
I would note that baseball games frequently go into extra innings, and in any event, there is 
always  another  game  and  another  season.  It  is  important  that  we  not  let  a  sense  of 
complacency distract us from learning the appropriate lessons, and acting accordingly, once 
the game begins again.  
BIS Review 66/2008 
 7
