Nils Bernstein: Actions taken over Roskilde Bank 
Introductory statement by Mr Nils Bernstein, Governor of the National Bank of Denmark, at 
the press conference about Roskilde Bank, Copenhagen, 27 August 2008. 
 On  10  July  2008,  Danmarks  Nationalbank  decided  to  provide  the  necessary  liquidity  to 
Roskilde Bank, following Roskilde Bank's realisation that it would have to make considerably 
larger write-downs than initially assumed – kr. 1 billion. 
At  the  time,  the  management  of  Roskilde  Bank  assessed  that  the  bank  was  still  in 
compliance with the statutory solvency requirement and the bank's capital need as stated. 
The Danish Financial Supervisory Authority found no reason to reject the bank's assessment. 
A  condition  of  Danmarks  Nationalbank's  liquidity  guarantee  was  that  the  management  of 
Roskilde Bank would continue its efforts to divest all or parts of Roskilde Bank. 
Against this background, from 15 July 2008 to the deadline on 22 August, Danske Markets 
was  in  charge  of  a  sales  process  during  which  a  number  of  interested  banks  scrutinised 
Roskilde Bank and its exposures very closely. 
At the expiry of the deadline the unfortunate outcome was that no banks would submit an 
offer for either all or parts of Roskilde Bank. According to Danske Markets, one explanation 
was that the potential buyers had discovered that the quality of the bank's credit exposures 
was  subject  to  great  uncertainty.  As  a  result,  no  one  ventured  to  give  an  estimate  of  the 
value of Roskilde Bank's assets. 
At  the  same  time,  in  connection  with  preparation  of  the  interim  report,  Roskilde  Bank's 
auditors  discovered  write-downs  of  at  least  kr.  1  billion  more  than  the  amount  notified  to 
Danmarks  Nationalbank  on  10  July.  Consequently,  the  bank  no  longer  complied  with  the 
statutory solvency requirement. Also on Friday, 22 August, the auditors notified the Danish 
Financial Supervisory Authority accordingly. 
On 24 August, the Danish Financial Supervisory Authority set a deadline for Roskilde Bank – 
29 August 2008 at 4:00 pm – for returning to compliance with the solvency requirement and 
the bank's individual capital need. 
This is a rough sketch of the situation we faced in the late afternoon on Friday, 22 August. 
Danmarks Nationalbank regards this situation as very serious. 
We find that the circumstances of Roskilde Bank now pose a considerable threat to financial 
stability in Denmark. An important factor in this context is that several other Danish banks are 
also relying on the international capital markets as a source of financing. Consequently, any 
losses  on  loans  to  Roskilde  Bank  may  have  an  adverse  knock-on  effect  on  other  Danish 
banks. 
Since  Friday  evening,  we  have  negotiated  with  the  parties  concerned  –  Roskilde  Bank's 
management  and  board  of  directors,  the  Danish  financial  sector,  the  Danish  Financial 
Supervisory Authority and the government – in order to reach a solution for Roskilde Bank 
that would mitigate the adverse effects. 
Today, I am pleased to announce that we have found a solution that has met with full support 
from all parties. 
Danmarks Nationalbank and "Det Private Beredskab" have entered into an agreement with 
the board of directors of Roskilde Bank on taking over all assets and liabilities of Roskilde 
Bank,  except  subordinated  loan  capital,  hybrid  core  capital  and  an  encapsulated  savings 
bank fund. 
BIS Review 102/2008 
 1
The  operations  of  Roskilde  Bank  will  continue  in  a  new  bank  to  which  Danmarks 
Nationalbank  and  "Det  Private  Beredskab"  are  expected  to  contribute  kr.  4.5  billion.  The 
purpose of the new bank is to continue banking business in order to maximise the proceeds 
from the discontinuation of the business taken over from Roskilde Bank. 
Managing Director Søren Kaare-Andersen will be managing director of the new bank, also 
called  Roskilde  Bank.  Together  with  "Det  Private  Beredskab",  we  are  in  the  process  of 
composing a well-qualified board of directors for the new bank. 
At  the  same  time,  Danmarks  Nationalbank  has  agreed  with  three  Danish  banks  –  Danske 
Bank, Nykredit and Nordea – that they are to make a number of experienced credit experts 
available to the new Roskilde Bank. They are to help improve the general credit culture and 
participate in a full-scale review of existing credit exposures with a view to gaining an overall 
picture. 
Unfortunately,  under  the  current  circumstances,  this  takeover  agreement  means  that  the 
shareholders and depositors of supplementary capital and hybrid core capital have probably 
lost their money. 
However, the agreed structure implies that on completion of the discontinuation process, any 
funds left after remuneration of the contributed share capital will be allocated to the owners of 
subordinated loan capital and the old shareholders of Roskilde Bank in that order. 
Danmarks  Nationalbank  and  "Det  Private  Beredskab"  aim  to  ensure  transparency  in  the 
discontinuation of Roskilde Bank's operations. Representatives of any association or similar 
organisation that may be established by old shareholders in Roskilde Bank to safeguard a 
significant  part  of  their  interests  would  be  welcome  to  participate  in  regular  meetings  to 
discuss the activities of the new bank and the discontinuation process in general. 
I  would  like  to  emphasise  that  this  is  indeed  an  extraordinary  situation.  Roskilde  Bank 
suffered from very substantial exposure to the property market, unfavourably combined with 
a lenient credit culture. As a result, the bank was unable to survive on its own, and we had to 
step in to ensure responsible discontinuation. 
2 
 BIS Review 102/2008
