Jean-Claude Trichet: Monetary policy in challenging times 
Speech  by  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the  2008 
International Monetary Conference, Barcelona, 3 June 2008. 
 First of all, let me say that I am in  the purdah period, so that nothing I will say should be 
interpreted in any respect as signalling intentions of the Governing Council as regards the 
monetary policy stance. 
Economic policymakers are currently grappling to understand the root, duration sand impact 
of a number of significant and sizeable shocks affecting the world economy, including rising 
commodity  prices  –  of  which  sharp  increases  in  world  food  and  oil  prices  have  been 
prominent components – as well as a period of prolonged financial turbulences associated 
with  an  adjustment  in  financial  market  perceptions  of  risk.  Understanding  those  economic 
shocks and how they affect the economy is plainly a vital challenge for policymakers. In my 
remarks today, I would like to stress that, rather than a single deep correction with a single 
source, the global economy in which we live is facing a multiplicity of interdependent shocks 
in key areas. A proper understanding of the nature of these shocks and their interrelations is 
a  precondition  to  examine  the  required  reaction  of  economic  and,  in  particular,  monetary 
policies. 
Whilst I consider the achievements of science and the acceleration of technological progress 
key to decipher the present world developments, the range of other factors at stake are well 
illustrated by considering the drivers behind the recent sharp increases in global agricultural 
commodity  prices.  Underlying  some  of  those  factors  is  what  we  might  characterise  as  a 
change  in  our  operating  environment.  From  a  world  of  seemingly  unlimited  resources, 
mankind is gradually accustoming itself to the earth as limited, crowded and finite space – 
with limited resources for extraction and a narrowing capacity for waste disposal or pollution. 
The  economics  of  that  world,  one  that  is  increasingly  pushing  at  the  boundaries  of 
development, requires an adjustment in our outlook and recognition of the complexities of the 
interactions in the global system.  
Focusing specifically on developments in commodity prices, continued population growth and 
improving living standards have put pressure on global food supply capacity. In particular a 
move towards a more protein-rich diet – for example, China’s per capita meat consumption 
has doubled since 1990 – has also raised the demand for livestock feed, further magnifying 
the demand for food commodities. Growth in those economies has at the same time pushed 
up  the  demand  for  energy,  most  obviously  manifest  in  rising  oil  prices.  At  the  same  time 
growing  concerns  about  consequences  of  emissions  from  burning  fossil  fuels  for  climate 
change, have stoked demand for alternative, potentially cleaner, energy sources such as bio 
fuels,  prompting  production  to  switch  from  food  to  fuel  crops  and  further  adding  to  the 
pressure on food prices. 
Other factors are also playing a role in driving global commodity price developments – supply 
disruptions  owing  to  unfavourable  weather  conditions  have  also  made  the  food  shortfalls 
more  acute.  Differing  competitive  conditions  in  the  retail  and  distribution  sectors  have 
contributed to diverging patterns in price changes across countries. That aside, the example 
serves to illustrate that the current collection of shocks facing the world economy cannot be 
viewed in isolation and that the interactions are varied and numerous.  
The  pressure  on  global  commodity  prices  is,  of  course,  just  one  facet  of  the  globalisation 
process  affecting  economic  developments.  We  cannot  provide  a  comprehensive  picture  of 
the  impact  of  the  globalisation  without  also  acknowledging  the  dis-inflationary  effects 
associated  with  the  attenuation  in  prices  of  imported  manufactured  goods  in  recent  years. 
Increased trade with low costs countries and the growing share of these countries in the rest 
BIS Review 70/2008 
 1
of  the  world’s  imports  has  in  particular  put  downward  pressure  on  developed  economies’ 
manufacturing import prices over the past decade. The net effect of these two forces – the 
attenuation  in  imported  manufacturing  goods’  prices  and  the  accentuated  increases  in 
commodity  and  food  prices  –  is  difficult  to  judge;  the  effects  also  differ  across  countries. 
However,  a  tentative  consensus  seems  to  have  emerged  amongst  economists  and 
academics  that  in  the  recent  past  the  overall  effect  of  globalisation  has  been  a  small  net 
dampening of euro area inflation. The outlook is perhaps more uncertain: indeed, there have 
been  recently  signals  that  the  dis-inflationary  impact  of  low-cost  countries  on  euro  area 
import  prices  may  be  weakening.  Inevitably,  the  process  of  unpicking  and  understanding 
shocks and complex interactions affecting the economy is an ongoing task. 
And that raises the challenging question of how the monetary policymaker should respond to 
this changing environment. Clearly we need to be sure that the analysis underpinning policy 
decisions  incorporates  an  appropriate  understanding  of  the  complexities  of  our  global 
system.  The  success  of  monetary  policy  at  the  ECB  depends  on  our  ability  to  take  into 
account – in our economic and monetary analysis – this rapidly changing environment.  
But while our analytical processes have new challenges to cope with, the responsibilities are 
unchanged.  Challenging  as  the  present  global  economy  may  be,  the  rules  for  monetary 
policy-making  are  not  altered.  Also  in  our  globalised  world,  inflation  is  a  monetary 
phenomenon in the long term and price stability is the essential responsibility of the monetary 
authorities. The task is complicated by interaction with the other factors – for example, by the 
impact of global resource constraints or the growing concerns about climate change – but 
monetary policy stays firmly focused on delivering price stability, which is important for the 
efficient  working  of  the  market  system  and  the  optimal  allocation  of  resources.  By 
maintaining price stability over the medium term, which means pinning down trend inflation 
and ensuring that inflation expectations are firmly anchored, central banks contribute to the 
smooth functioning of the economy, to sustainable growth and to job creation. The ECB with 
its mandate for price stability is firmly focused on this policy goal. 
As  one  dimension  of  the  complexity  of  the  present  global economy  is  the  financial  market 
turbulences, let me elaborate a little bit on the actions taken by the ECB. At the Eurosystem 
we  made  a  clear  distinction  between  setting  the  monetary  policy  stance  to  maintain  price 
stability over the medium term and its liquidity decisions taken in the course of implementing 
this stance. This distinction serves to isolate signals of the monetary policy stance from the 
noise  introduced  by  liquidity  movements  and  volatility  in  very  short  term  rates.  Since  the 
onset of financial tensions in August 2007, the actions of the ECB have fully respected this 
principle. 
In  both  “normal”  and  “turbulent”  times,  the  primary  objective  of  Eurosystem’s  open  market 
operations  is  to  keep  the  overnight  rate  as  close  as  possible  to  the  minimum  bid  rate. 
However,  during  the  recent  period  of  turbulence  open  market  operations  aimed  also  at 
ensuring  the  continued  access  of  solvent  banks  to  liquidity  notably  by  contributing  to 
smoothening the impaired functioning of the money market. 
From the very first day of the financial market turmoil, in an environment of increased liquidity 
risk  and  in  response  to  banks’  changed  liquidity  demand  pattern,  the  ECB  has  achieved 
these objectives through relatively minor, technical changes to the way in which it supplies 
liquidity in normal times, while at the same time utilizing the latitude given by its framework 
for monetary policy implementation.  
First, the Eurosystem has adjusted the distribution of liquidity supplied over the course of the 
maintenance period, by frontloading the supply of liquidity at the beginning of the period and 
reducing  it  later,  so  that  the  total  amount  of  liquidity  over  an  entire  maintenance  period  is 
unchanged.  
Second, during the turmoil the Eurosystem has applied different open market procedures for 
supplying liquidity to the banking system. More specifically,  
2 
 BIS Review 70/2008
1. 
2. 
The  use  of  fine-tuning  operations  has  been  more  frequent  than  in  “normal  times” 
because of the unpredictability of the liquidity demand. 
The amount of refinancing provided via longer-term refinancing operations (LTROs) 
has been increased significantly with a view to smooth conditions in the term money 
market.  The  amount  of  refinancing  provided  via  the  one-week  main  refinancing 
operations  (MROs)  was  reduced  correspondingly,  so  that  the  total  amount  of 
outstanding refinancing has remained unchanged.  
As a result, the average level of EONIA has remained close to the minimum bid rate even if 
its volatility has at times been higher than normal and our assessment is that our operations 
have had a positive impact – in particular in diminishing volatility – on term money market 
conditions.  
The Eurosystem did not have to change its collateral framework at the time of the financial 
turbulences because, since its inception, it accepted relatively broad ranges of collateral and 
it granted a large number of counterparties access to rather large refinancing operations. We 
consider  that  the  operational  framework  of  the  Eurosystem  has  in  itself  provided  notable 
stability during the turmoil.  
It  is  important  to  recall  that,  as  the  turmoil  went  on,  central  banks  strengthened  their 
cooperation,  first  through  enhanced  information  exchange  and  collective  monitoring  of 
market developments and later on by coordinated steps to provide liquidity. Since December 
2007, the ECB has, in cooperation with the US Federal Reserve and together with the Swiss 
National Bank, been conducting several term auction facilities – so-called TAF-operations – 
in  which  it  provides  USD  liquidity,  on  behalf  of  the  US  Fed,  to  euro  area  banks.  These 
liquidity-providing operations do not have a direct effect on euro liquidity conditions, but are 
conducted to address the availability of US dollar funding for euro area banks and aimed at 
improving global funding conditions. 
I  would  sum  up  by  noting  again  the  challenging  environment  within  which  economic 
policymakers  are  currently  operating.  The  global  economy  is  undergoing  a  range  of 
interdependent  shocks  across  various  facets  of  the  global  system.  In  part,  they  are 
associated with a change in our operating environment in which resources constraints are 
more  pertinent;  technological  progress  is  accelerating;  and  interactions  are  more  complex. 
Understanding the shocks and their interrelations in this system is vital and ongoing part of 
our economic analysis and decision-making.  
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 70/2008 
 3
