Ben S Bernanke: US financial markets 
Testimony of Mr Ben S Bernanke, Chairman of the Board of Governors of the US Federal 
Reserve System, before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, US Senate, 
Washington DC, 23 September 2008. 
 Chairman  Dodd,  Senator  Shelby,  and  members  of  the  Committee,  I  appreciate  this 
opportunity to discuss recent developments in  financial markets and the economy. As you 
know, the U.S. economy continues to confront substantial challenges, including a weakening 
labor  market  and  elevated  inflation.  Notably,  stresses  in  financial  markets  have  been  high 
and  have  recently  intensified  significantly.  If  financial  conditions  fail  to  improve  for  a 
protracted period, the implications for the broader economy could be quite adverse.  
The  downturn  in  the  housing  market  has  been  a  key  factor  underlying  both  the  strained 
condition  of  financial  markets  and  the  slowdown  of  the  broader  economy.  In  the  financial 
sphere, falling home prices and rising mortgage delinquencies have led to major losses at 
many  financial  institutions,  losses  only  partially  replaced  by  the  raising  of  new  capital. 
Investor  concerns  about  financial  institutions  increased  over  the  summer,  as  mortgage-
related assets deteriorated further and economic activity weakened. Among the firms under 
the  greatest  pressure  were  Fannie  Mae  and  Freddie  Mac,  Lehman  Brothers,  and,  more 
recently,  American  International  Group  (AIG).  As  investors  lost  confidence  in  them,  these 
companies saw their access to liquidity and capital markets increasingly impaired and their 
stock prices drop sharply.  
The Federal Reserve believes that, whenever possible, such difficulties should be addressed 
through  private-sector  arrangements  –  for  example,  by  raising  new  equity  capital,  by 
negotiations  leading  to  a  merger  or  acquisition,  or  by  an  orderly  wind-down.  Government 
assistance should be given with the greatest of reluctance and only when the stability of the 
financial  system,  and,  consequently,  the  health  of  the  broader  economy,  is  at  risk.  In  the 
cases of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, however, capital raises of sufficient size appeared 
infeasible and the size and government-sponsored status of the two companies precluded a 
merger with or acquisition by another company. To avoid unacceptably large dislocations in 
the financial sector, the housing market, and the economy as a whole, the Federal Housing 
Finance Agency (FHFA) placed Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac into conservatorship, and the 
Treasury  used  its  authority,  granted  by  the  Congress  in  July,  to  make  available  financial 
support  to  the  two  firms.  The  Federal  Reserve,  with  which  FHFA  consulted  on  the 
conservatorship  decision  as  specified  in  the  July  legislation,  supported  these  steps  as 
necessary  and  appropriate.  We  have  seen  benefits  of  this  action  in  the  form  of  lower 
mortgage rates, which should help the housing market. 
The  Federal  Reserve  and  the  Treasury  attempted  to  identify  private-sector  approaches  to 
avoid the imminent failures of AIG and Lehman Brothers, but none was forthcoming. In the 
case of AIG, the Federal Reserve, with the support of the Treasury, provided an emergency 
credit line to facilitate an orderly resolution. The Federal Reserve took this action because it 
judged that, in light of the prevailing market conditions and the size and composition of AIG's 
obligations,  a  disorderly  failure  of  AIG  would  have  severely  threatened  global  financial 
stability and, consequently, the performance of the U.S. economy. To mitigate concerns that 
this  action  would  exacerbate  moral  hazard  and  encourage  inappropriate  risk-taking  in  the 
future, the Federal Reserve ensured that the terms of the credit extended to AIG imposed 
significant  costs  and  constraints  on  the  firm's  owners,  managers,  and  creditors.  The  chief 
executive officer has been replaced. The collateral for the loan is the company itself, together 
BIS Review 114/2008 
 1
with its subsidiaries.1 (Insurance policyholders and holders of AIG investment products are, 
however, fully protected.) Interest will accrue on the outstanding balance of the loan at a rate 
of three-month Libor plus 850 basis points, implying a current interest rate over 11 percent. 
In  addition,  the  U.S.  government  will  receive  equity  participation  rights  corresponding  to  a 
79.9  percent  equity  interest  in  AIG  and  has  the  right  to  veto  the  payment  of  dividends  to 
common and preferred shareholders, among other things.  
In  the  case  of  Lehman  Brothers,  a  major  investment  bank,  the  Federal  Reserve  and  the 
Treasury  declined  to  commit  public  funds  to  support  the  institution.  The  failure  of  Lehman 
posed risks. But the troubles at Lehman had been well known for some time, and investors 
clearly recognized – as evidenced, for example, by the high cost of insuring Lehman's debt in 
the market for credit default swaps – that the failure of the firm was a significant possibility. 
Thus,  we  judged  that  investors  and  counterparties  had  had  time  to  take  precautionary 
measures. 
While perhaps manageable in itself, Lehman's default was combined with the unexpectedly 
rapid  collapse  of  AIG,  which  together  contributed  to  the  development  last  week  of 
extraordinarily  turbulent  conditions  in  global  financial  markets.  These  conditions  caused 
equity prices to fall sharply, the cost of short-term credit – where available – to spike upward, 
and liquidity to dry up in many markets. Losses at a large money market mutual fund sparked 
extensive withdrawals from a number of such funds. A marked increase in the demand for 
safe assets – a flight to quality – sent the yield on Treasury bills down to a few hundredths of 
a  percent.  By  further  reducing  asset  values  and  potentially  restricting  the  flow  of  credit  to 
households and businesses, these developments pose a direct threat to economic growth. 
The  Federal  Reserve  took  a  number  of  actions  to  increase  liquidity  and  stabilize  markets. 
Notably,  to  address  dollar  funding  pressures  worldwide,  we  announced  a  significant 
expansion  of  reciprocal  currency  arrangements  with  foreign  central  banks,  including  an 
approximate  doubling  of  the  existing  swap  lines  with  the  European  Central  Bank  and  the 
Swiss National Bank and the authorization of new swap facilities with the Bank of Japan, the 
Bank of England, and the Bank of Canada. We will continue to work closely with colleagues 
at  other  central  banks  to  address  ongoing  liquidity  pressures.  The  Federal  Reserve  also 
announced initiatives to assist money market mutual funds facing heavy redemptions and to 
increase liquidity in short-term credit markets.  
Despite the efforts of the Federal Reserve, the Treasury, and other agencies, global financial 
markets  remain  under  extraordinary  stress.  Action  by  the  Congress  is  urgently  required  to 
stabilize the situation and avert what otherwise could be very serious consequences for our 
financial  markets  and  for  our  economy.  In  this  regard,  the  Federal  Reserve  supports  the 
Treasury's  proposal  to  buy  illiquid  assets  from  financial  institutions.  Purchasing  impaired 
assets will create liquidity and promote price discovery in the markets for these assets, while 
reducing investor uncertainty about the current value and prospects of financial institutions. 
More generally, removing these assets from institutions’ balance sheets will help to restore 
confidence in our financial markets and enable banks and other institutions to raise capital 
and to expand credit to support economic growth.  
At this juncture, in light of the fast-moving developments in financial markets, it is essential to 
deal  with  the  crisis  at  hand.  Certainly,  the  shortcomings  and  weaknesses  of  our  financial 
markets and regulatory system must be addressed if we are to avoid a repetition of what has 
transpired  in  our  financial  markets  over  the  past  year.  However,  the  development  of  a 
comprehensive proposal for reform would require careful and extensive analysis that would 
be difficult to compress into a short legislative timeframe now available. Looking forward, the 
Federal Reserve is committed to working closely with the Congress, the Administration, other 
                                                 
1   Specifically,  the  loan  is  collateralized  by  all  of  the  assets  of  the  company  and  its  primary  non-regulated 
subsidiaries. These assets include the equity of substantially all of AIG's regulated subsidiaries. 
2 
 BIS Review 114/2008
federal regulators, and other stakeholders in developing a stronger, more resilient, and better 
regulated financial system. 
BIS Review 114/2008 
 3
