Jean-Claude Trichet: The successful entry of Malta into the euro area 
Keynote address by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, at the 
Euro Celebrations, Valletta, 12 January 2008. 
 Mr President, 
Prime Ministers,  
Excellencies, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Dear Governors and fellow Governors, 
It  is  a  great  pleasure  to  talk  to  you  here,  in  Valletta,  at  this  conference  celebrating  the 
adoption  of  the  euro.  Let  me  first  and  foremost  congratulate  all  parties  involved  in  the 
successful cash changeover twelve days ago. Not only did Malta perform exceptionally well 
in its convergence process to the euro area, but also the cash changeover was exemplary so 
far. I should like to stress that by recognising at an early stage the necessity to reach a high 
degree of sustainable convergence, and by working towards this objective, the Central Bank 
of Malta in particular has contributed greatly to the success we are celebrating today. 
Successful economic achievements of Malta towards the euro adoption1  
1.  
The  adoption  of  the  euro  that  we  are  celebrating  is  the  result  of  the  successful 
macroeconomic policies that the authorities of Malta have pursued in the last years. Malta 
has  made  significant  progress  in  nominal  convergence  over  recent  years,  owing  to  well-
managed  monetary  and  exchange  rate  policies  and  a  range  of  structural  reforms.  HICP 
inflation in Malta has been relatively stable. Both short-term and long-term interest rates have 
followed a declining trend in recent years to levels that are now in line with those of the euro 
area  as  a  whole.  This  reflects  market  confidence  in  the  macroeconomic  and  fiscal 
developments in Malta. 
Malta  has  progressed  on  a  sustainable  convergence  path  without  experiencing  major 
imbalances: Price and cost competitiveness developments have been favourable since 2004, 
although the Maltese current account position has shown some weaknesses in recent years. 
Another  element  of  Malta’s  successful  convergence  experience  was  its  participation  in  the 
Exchange Rate Mechanism II (ERM II). The lira-euro exchange rate remained at its central 
rate for the entire period of ERM II participation that started in May 2005. The EU Council 
decided that the central rate should also become the final conversion rate of the lira to the 
euro. 
Now, twelve days after the successful introduction of the new currency, I would like to stress 
that,  in  the  short  term,  the  conversion  of  prices  into  euros  should  not  be  used  as  an 
opportunity to raise prices in an unjustified manner. This is especially important in a situation 
where food and energy prices are already exerting upward pressures on inflation.  
Co-operation between the Central Bank of Malta and the ECB 
2.  
The ECB has very much appreciated the fruitful cooperation with the Central Bank of Malta in 
the preparations for Malta’s entry in the euro area, be it at the technical level or through the 
                                                 
1  
I should like to thank Fabrice Orlandi and  Olivier Radelet for their  input into this speech, as  well  as  Martin 
Bijsterbosch, Hans-Joachim Klöckers and Nick Vidalis for their helpful comments. 
BIS Review 5/2008 
 1
participation of Governor Bonello in the General Council since May 2004, and more recently, 
as an observer in the Governing Council since last July. Practical preparations of the cash 
changeover  were  remarkably  well  organised  and  the  euro  campaign  organised  by  the 
Maltese  authorities  has  very  well  prepared  the  Maltese  population  to  allow  a  smooth 
changeover. 
3.  
How to ensure the sustainability of convergence once the euro has been 
adopted 
For  the  proper  functioning  of  the  single  monetary  policy  in  the  euro  area  all  participating 
countries are required to exhibit a high degree of convergence and, importantly, to do this on 
a  sustainable  basis.  For  all  enlargement  decisions  for  the  euro  area,  we  refer  to  clearly 
defined convergence criteria and apply them in a strict manner. Sustainability is key in this 
respect. Once the euro is adopted, there is no return. Sustainability has been key in our past 
convergence assessments and will remain so in the future. 
The  entry  of  Malta  in  the  euro  area  implies  that  the  benefits  of  the  Single  Market  will  be 
further  enhanced  by  the  single  currency.  The  euro  offers  a  credible  framework  for  price 
stability in an environment characterised by the absence of exchange rate uncertainty within 
the euro area. Malta will also benefit from the stability oriented policy of the ECB, which will 
help anchor inflation expectations. Furthermore, as Malta is a small open economy, adopting 
the euro provides protection against international financial disturbances, which often have a 
disproportional effect on smaller economies. 
I should underline, however, that these benefits do not come automatically. They depend to 
an important degree on the economic policies pursued by euro area countries themselves. 
For Malta, it is particularly important to continue on a sustainable and credible path of fiscal 
consolidation and to improve its fiscal performance by tangibly reducing its high debt ratio. It 
will be important, in both the public and the private sector, to maintain moderate labour costs 
developments that take into account labour productivity growth, labour market conditions and 
developments in competitor countries. It is particularly crucial for the competitiveness of the 
Maltese  economy  that  the  current  one-off  shocks  to  inflation  do  not  lead  to  second  round 
effect  in  prices  and  wage  settings.  Attention  must  also  focus  on  overcoming  the  structural 
constraints  on  economic  growth  and  job  creation,  notably  by  fostering  labour  participation. 
The strengthening of competition in product markets and improvements in the functioning of 
the labour market are key elements in this regard.  
Ladies and gentlemen, let me again congratulate you for all the achievements of the process 
of  euro  adoption  and  give  my  warmest  welcome  to  the  new  member  in  the  family  of  the 
Eurosystem. Welcome Malta! 
2 
 BIS Review 5/2008
