Durmuş Yılmaz: Global challenges and local response – monetary policy 
in Turkey  
Address by Mr Durmuş Yılmaz, Governor of the Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey, at a 
congress  organised  by  the  Turkish  Economic  Association  and  the  International  Economic 
Association, Istanbul, 25 June 2008. 
 Dear Guests, 
First of all, I would like to welcome you all to Turkey. I am delighted to be here to address 
such  a  distinguished  audience  in  Istanbul.  I  would  like  to  thank  the  Turkish  Economic 
Association and the International Economic Association for organizing this Congress. 
Let me start my talk with the words of Josiah Charles Stamp, one of the former governors of 
the Bank of England in 1920s: 
“It  is  easy  to  dodge  our  responsibilities,  but  we  cannot  dodge  the 
consequences of dodging our responsibilities.” 
This quote will also be the theme of my speech today. 
Distinguished Guests, 
Although  globalization  had  started  in  the  second  half  of  1980’s,  it  has  not  yet  reached  its 
peak and we are still witnessing its evolution. As Thomas Friedman’s once said, globalization 
is making the world flatter. We witnessed record high growth rates around the world in that 
period;  although  there  was  also  notable  variation  in  the  growth  performances  across 
countries. It will not be wrong to argue that globalization could be a powerful tool that may 
contribute to sustained development if it is combined with compatible policies. 
However, we should also keep in mind that globalization also presents some challenges and 
thus, it has made the job of policy-makers more difficult. 
Firstly,  I  would  like  to  underline  the  concept  of  financial  globalization.  Thanks  to  financial 
liberalization and improvements in information and communication technologies, significant 
amount of capital has been flowing into developing countries, especially to those that offer 
high growth potential – helping these countries achieve relatively high growth levels. In the 
post-war period when globalization was not a popular buzzword, high growth rates were also 
observed in a number of countries, usually in the South Asia. However, these countries had 
something in common, which was high rates of savings. In countries like Turkey, where more 
than  half  of  the  population  is  30  years  old  or  younger  and  where  savings  rates  are 
comparatively low; foreign savings, and therefore capital inflows are needed to maintain high 
levels of growth. In this respect, financial globalization has contributed to the convergence 
process among countries. 
Financial  liberalization  has  also  led  to  amplification  of  new  and  more  complex  financial 
products. As a side effect, these financial products have introduced new risks and fragilities 
to the financial markets. As financial markets  have gradually become more integrated, the 
concept  of  financial  stability  has  started  to  receive  more  attention  and  become  one  of  the 
priorities  of  central  banks.  Therefore,  it  is  not  surprising  that  the  systemic  problems  that 
emerged in the US sub-prime housing loans in the second half of 2007 and gradually spilled 
over to other credit markets have given enormous anxiety to policy makers. In this context, 
central banks have engaged in closer cooperation and information sharing with each other to 
address these challenges. 
The recent crisis in financial markets is likely to have significant repercussions over the real 
economy  and  the  most  obvious  victim  is  the  economic  growth.  A  marked  slowdown  in 
BIS Review 82/2008 
 1
developed countries is expected. Part of the current debate is whether developing countries 
could escape from a sharp slowdown in the industrialized world. Some argue that they can, 
thanks to progress in macroeconomic stability and structural reforms in recent years. We still 
do not know whether they are right. 
Another aspect of globalization is the huge volume of international trade, which has led to 
considerable  convergence  in  business  cycles  across  countries.  Integration  of  previously-
closed economies, like China, India and Eastern European, to international markets has led 
to an economic boom in the world economy, which was mostly anti-inflationary – until most 
recently. Needless to say, record increases in commodity prices in the last two years have 
created doubts in our minds about the sustainability of this anti-inflationist growth process in 
the near future. 
Dear Guests, 
We are currently facing significant inflationary pressures on a global scale due to record high 
increases in commodity prices. The surge in inflation rates has become a major challenge 
that threatens price stability in many countries. I would like to give you a few examples. 
Between 2006 and 2008, eighteen developing countries have implemented inflation-targeting 
regime.  In  2006,  the  end-year  inflation  was  within  the  target  band  in  twelve  of  these 
countries. In 2007, this number dropped to five. By May 2008 only one of these 18 countries 
(Brazil) has succeeded to keep inflation within the target band. In the remaining 17 countries, 
including  Turkey,  inflation  is  outside  the  target  band.  Developed  countries  are  also 
experiencing a similar problem. By May 2008, only in one of the eight developed countries 
the inflation rate is still within the band – and that country is Canada, by the way. Average 
inflation  throughout  the  world  has  increased  one-fold  to  seven  percent  over  the  last  12 
months.  Inflation  in  developed  countries  has  reached  its  highest  level  of  the  last  eighteen 
years. For the first time in many years, inflation figures of the developing countries are in two 
digit levels. 
In  this  period  central  banks  have  adopted  different  approaches  for  fighting  inflation.  One 
reason  of  this  divergence  is  the  difference  between  the  objectives  of  central  banks.  For 
example,  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  the  United  States,  with  ultimate  goals  of  price 
stability,  financial  stability  and  full  employment,  lowered  interest  rates  by  325  basis  points 
between  September  2007  and  June  2008  due  to  severe  problems  in  the  financial  system. 
The European Central Bank, on the other hand, has followed a more hawkish attitude and 
focused on attaining its primary objective, which is price stability. 
The  disparity  between  the  consumption  patterns  is  another  factor  causing  divergence  in 
monetary policies. In comparison to the industrialized world, food expenditures in developing 
countries constitute a larger share in the basket of consumer prices. That is why increases in 
food  prices  typically  lead  to  higher  increases  in  the  inflation  rates  of  developing  countries. 
This is one of the reasons why central banks of developing countries focus more on price 
stability and display a tighter monetary policy stance in recent months. To put it in figures, 
since  mid-2007,  policy  rates  in  sixteen  major  developing  countries  have  increased  by  110 
basis points on average – in contrast to developed countries where policy rates have been 
cut by 98 basis points on average. 
The exchange rate regime also affects the conduct of monetary policy. As you may all know, 
many developing countries peg their currencies against the US dollar or the Euro. As the US 
dollar has lost value against many currencies in recent years, this has led to sharp increases 
in the inflation rates of those economies whose currencies are pegged to the US dollar. In 
the period of January 2006 to May 2008, inflation rates of countries whose currencies are 
pegged to the US dollar have increased three-fold to 15.1 percent from 3.9 percent. Inflation 
rates of countries whose currencies are pegged to the Euro rose to 10.2 percent from 4.4 
percent. In this period, countries that avoid the nominal appreciation of their currencies have 
only exacerbated the inflationary effects of supply shocks. The necessary adjustments in real 
exchange rates have taken place through the rise general price level. 
2 
 BIS Review 82/2008
Until  recently,  the  common  view  among  central  banks  of  developed  countries  was  to  give 
priority to problems in financial markets in absence of inflationary pressures. However, they 
have slowly acknowledged the fact that the increase in inflation has reached critical levels. 
Accordingly, with uncertainties in financial markets diminishing, the FED and the ECB have 
hinted  that  they  may  resort  to  monetary  tightening  in  the  near  future  in  the  face  of  rising 
inflation. 
What should be the best reaction of monetary policy under these circumstances? Although 
the factors causing higher inflation are presumed to be exogenous and beyond the control of 
central banks, there is a lot of controversy on this issue. 
But before going into detail, let me question the validity of this debate first, because to what 
extent  the  increase  in  commodity  prices  is  supply-driven  is  questionable  in  the  first  place. 
Certainly, there are structural reasons behind the recent run-up in food and energy prices. 
However,  it  is  also  undeniable  that  there  are  significant  demand-driven  pressures  over 
commodities.  Loose  monetary  policies  adopted  in  early  2000s  certainly  played  a  key  role, 
together  with  excess  liquidity  in  the  financial  system.  Another  culprit  is  high  subsidies 
provided  by  many  governments  in  the  developing  world  to  at  least  partially  protect 
consumers  from  the  cost  of  high  food  and  energy  prices.  Fast-forwarding  to  the  recent 
period, the observation that the central banks of developed countries still keep real interest 
rates negative in the face of financial risks may hamper a correction in commodity prices. 
On the other hand, many developing countries, mainly China, India, Malaysia, Indonesia, and 
Egypt have decided to gradually reduce subsidizing energy prices and pass the true cost to 
consumers.  This  is  a  favorable  development  that  will  eventually  help  to  control  demand 
pressures on commodities. 
Dear Guests, 
As  you  may  all  know,  the  commonly  accepted  practice  in  inflation  targeting  regime  is  that 
monetary policy should not react to supply-driven shocks that are temporary in nature and 
should  allow  temporary  increases  in  inflation  in  the  short-term,  unless  they  create 
deterioration  in  inflation  expectations.  Otherwise,  undesired  fluctuations  might  arise  in 
economic activity and relative prices. The increase in commodity prices would trigger a self-
correcting mechanism. By changing the relative prices, it would provide valuable information 
on  how  the  resources  of  the  economy  should  be  distributed.  While  high  food  and  energy 
prices  curb  consumption  on  these  products,  they  would  also  encourage  investment  and 
increase  supply  in  the  long-term.  In  short,  the  common  view  is  that  central  banks  have 
nothing to do but wait for the supply-driven shocks to work out their natural course. 
However,  in  the  current  environment  where  persistent  and  rapid  increases  in  food  and 
energy prices have been observed for a considerable period, the prevalence of this view has 
become questionable – especially in the light of current projections that foresee even higher 
prices in the near future. As a matter of fact, many countries under inflation targeting regime 
now project that inflation will converge to the target at end-2009 or in 2010, at the earliest. 
Going  through  a  long  period  of  high  inflation  is  a  serious  risk  for  price  stability.  First,  the 
general  price  level  may  shift  upwards  at  a  faster  rate,  as  producers  and  workers  in  other 
sectors  ask  for  higher  prices  and  wages  in  response  to  the  loss  of  their  real  purchasing 
power. The fall in real interest rates due to deterioration in inflation expectations is another 
risk, since lower real rates will lead to a faster pace of credit expansion. The common factor 
of these two risks is that persistent supply shocks may turn into demand shocks after a while. 
Thus, at some point, central banks have to decide to what extent they can tolerate the rise in 
inflation. 
As the famous philosopher Karl Popper put it while defining the demarcation problem, “if we 
do  not  demarcate  a  scientific  hypothesis,  we  will  be  leaving  out  one  of  the  key  steps  in 
verifying the correctness of that hypothesis”. Any theory should be formulated in a way to 
allow  falsification;  the  circumstances  under  which  the  theory  fails  should  be  identified. 
BIS Review 82/2008 
 3
Advocators of a “wait-and-see” approach in the face of supply shocks are not clear on the 
question of when the supply shock ends and when demand-driven price increases take its 
place, in an environment where inflation keeps rising. If this issue is not clarified, any above-
target inflation figure or any upward revision in inflation forecasts can easily be attributed to 
supply-side factors. Clear lines should be drawn as to which economic data would refute this 
discourse and what would constitute a limit to supply shocks from a central banker’s point of 
view. 
Dear Guests, 
In  this  part  of  my  speech,  I  would  like  to  discuss  recent  developments  in  the  Turkish 
economy  and  the  monetary  policy  implemented  in  this  period.  I  believe  that  starting  this 
evaluation  with  the  developments  in  2006  will  be  more  useful  in  providing  a  better 
understanding of the current monetary policy stance. 
As  you  may  know,  in  May  2006  risk  perceptions  for  developing  countries  changed 
significantly owing to the deterioration in global liquidity conditions. In the period where the 
supply-side shocks started to take their toll on inflation, the rapid depreciation of Turkish lira 
led to a significant deterioration in medium and long-term inflation expectations – giving rise 
to  the  risk  of  potential  second-round  impacts.  The  Central  Bank  of  Turkey  responded  to 
these  developments  with  a  rapid  and  strong  monetary  tightening.  This  strong  monetary 
tightening  was  a  necessary  policy  stance  for  keeping  inflation  expectations  in  check  and 
making inflation converge to the target in the medium term. Thus, policy rates were raised by 
a total of 425 basis points in June and July 2006. At the same time, the excessive liquidity in 
the overnight market was cut down via open market operations and foreign exchange sales. 
These  measures  soon  proved  to  be  effective.  The  acceleration  of  inflation  stopped  in  the 
third quarter of 2006, followed by a marked decline in inflation rate starting from the second 
quarter  of  2007.  Favorable  developments  in  the  services  sector,  which  had  recorded 
significant price rigidities in the past, were particularly noticeable. As you may know, bringing 
down services inflation takes longer compared to goods inflation, owing to structural factors 
such as lack of competitive pressures, high share of labor costs in the production function, 
and  backward-looking  pricing  behavior.  Against 
favorable 
development  that  services  inflation  declined  to  single  digit  levels  for  the  first  time  in  mid-
2007, after hovering around 14 percent even in the 2004-2005 period where consumer price 
inflation came down to single-digit figures. 
The year 2007 was a time when the effects of unfavorable developments in food and energy 
prices  became  visible.  Nevertheless,  uncertainties  over  the  persistence  of  supply-side 
shocks in the future and the marked slowdown in core inflation indicators created a favorable 
environment for a gradual ease in monetary tightening. In this framework, the Central Bank 
initiated a measured rate-cut cycle in September 2007 and cut interest rates by a total of 225 
basis  points  within  a  six-month  period.  By  end-2007,  consumer  inflation  had  reached  8.4 
percent, exceeding the 4-percent target. However, the fall of core inflation (which excludes 
items  beyond  the  control  of  monetary  policy  such  as  food  and  energy)  to  4.8  percent 
confirmed  that  the  monetary  tightening  implemented  in  2006  was  the  right  policy  choice. 
During this period, domestic demand and capacity conditions also continued to support the 
disinflation process. 
In early 2008 the supply side shocks in food and energy prices started to exert significant 
inflationary  pressures,  as 
levels  above  and  beyond 
expectations. For instance, October 2007 Inflation Report, based on forecasts of international 
agencies, had foreseen oil prices around USD 70 per barrel in 2008 and a gradual correction 
in food prices. In other words, it was assumed that supply side shocks would be temporary 
and  that  they  would  lose  impact  after  a  while.  These  forecasts  were  in  line  with  pricing  in 
forward and futures markets. However, these expectations did not materialize. Both crude oil 
prices  and  agricultural commodity  prices  continued  to  rise.  The  adverse  impacts  of  supply 
shocks reached unprecedented levels during the first half of 2008. 
they  reached  unprecedented 
this  background, 
is  a 
it 
4 
 BIS Review 82/2008
Under  normal  circumstances,  supply  shocks  are  expected  to  have  a  temporary  impact  on 
relative  prices,  not  changing  the  course  of  medium-term  inflation.  Nevertheless,  the 
emergence  of  multiple  shocks  at  the  same  time  and  their  persistence  for  a  considerable 
period  aggravated  the  risks  on  pricing  behavior.  In  fact,  the  research  conducted  by  the 
Central Bank staff indicates that economic agents increasingly focus on past inflation while 
forming their inflation expectations. 
After  evaluating  the  said  developments,  the  Central  Bank  concluded  that  the  increases  in 
food and energy prices in recent years reflect a structural change stemming from the global 
economic environment. In other words, these shocks are likely to prevail for a longer time 
period, contrary to previous forecasts. There is no clear evidence at this point that this trend 
will reverse in the short term. Moreover, our revised projections suggest that even with the 
maintenance of a cautious policy stance for the foreseeable future, reaching the 4 percent 
target is going to take an extended period of time. 
Dear Guests, 
Under these circumstances, the Central Bank of Turkey had two options. The first one was to 
stick to the inflation targets, as many central banks do today, but to avoid implementing a 
monetary policy that is consistent with these targets. In other words, the Central Bank would 
accept a priori that inflation would surpass the target in the foreseeable future. The absence 
of any policy response would be justified by the presence of supply side shocks. The central 
banks that adopt this approach are bound to lose their credibility gradually, as long as the 
inflation continues to remain above the targets. 
The second option involves revising inflation targets to an attainable level and implementing 
a monetary policy that is in line with the new targets without compromise. That would help 
control economic uncertainties and create a new anchor to be used by economic agents in 
their decisions. 
Dear Guests, 
In  light  of  these  evaluations,  the  Central  Bank  of  Turkey  announced  the  framework  of  its 
monetary policy for the upcoming period in the April 2008 Inflation Report and in the letter on 
inflation targets that was sent to the Government on June 3, 2008. 
The first pillar of the monetary policy framework is the target revision. The main purpose of 
the target revision is to create an achievable disinflation path that can be taken as reference 
by  economic  agents  and  that  would  take  us  to  our  price  stability  objective  in  the  medium 
term, which is an inflation rate of 4 percent. As you may know, Turkey has not witnessed low 
single-digit  inflation  figures  for  nearly  half  a  century.  This  has  adversely  affected  the 
expectations  for  attaining  the  4  percent  inflation  target.  Furthermore,  overshooting  the 
inflation  targets  in  2006  and  2007,  and  recent  supply  shocks  have  elevated  expectations 
even further. Hence, the new targets announced on June 3, 2008 aim to create a new anchor 
for economic agents, that is attainable. 
At this point, I would like to emphasize that the nature of these new targets differ remarkably 
from  those  set  for  the  2006-2008  period.  The  Central  Bank  will  treat  the  revised  targets 
asymmetrically.  In  this  framework,  in  the  upcoming  period,  the  Central  Bank  will  prefer  an 
inflation  that  stays  below  targets  rather  than  otherwise.  Accordingly,  better  than  expected 
outcomes  in  food  and  energy  prices  or  in  other  global  factors  will  be  perceived  as  an 
opportunity  to  bring  down  inflation  faster  than  that  is  implied  by  the  revised  target  path. 
Should the upside risks materialize; monetary policy will be conducted so as to minimize any 
upside deviation of inflation from the revised targets. 
Target revision is the solution that is provided by our Bank to the aforementioned “problem of 
demarcation”,  which  is  faced  by  almost  all  central  banks  today.  However,  the  revision  will 
work  only  if  necessary  policy  stance  is  adopted.  For  this  reason,  the  second  pillar  of 
monetary  policy  comprises  the  implementation  of  a  monetary  tightening  that  is  consistent 
with  the  new  inflation  targets.  Newly  set  targets  are  references  that  would  help  decision 
BIS Review 82/2008 
 5
makers in the economy understand the reasoning behind the policy stance, i.e. the factors 
that  have  led  to  monetary  tightening  and  the  extent  of  monetary  tightening  if  and  when 
necessary. In other words, the Central Bank has announced, via the target revision, the limits 
of its tolerance to the first round impacts of supply side shocks. 
Dear Guests, 
In this part of my speech, I would like to cover the Central Bank’s reasons for implementing a 
measured course of monetary policy tightening, in further detail. 
Obviously, interest rate decisions are not taken in order to curbe hikes in food and energy 
prices. It is not possible to control direct effects of supply side shocks with monetary policy 
tools.  The  Central  Bank  has  been  implementing  a  monetary  tightening  to  offset  the 
secondary effects of supply shocks. Since domestic demand is growing at a moderate pace 
at the moment, it has been curbing the pass through from cost-push factors. As a matter of 
fact, the prices of products that do not use food or energy as main inputs have been rather 
well behaved compared to the prices of products that have food or energy as inputs. 
However,  the  fact  that  first  round  effects  of  the  supply  side  shocks  have  reached 
unprecedented  levels  has  been  affecting  inflation  expectations  adversely.  Monetary  policy 
cannot remain indifferent in case of a deterioration in the overall pricing behavior. If supply 
side shocks last long, their effects will spill over to the other sectors in the economy. A tighter 
stance is a must in order to control the expectations and to prevent the mutation of supply 
side  shocks  into  demand  shocks.  If  monetary  policy  does  not  react  to  the  disruption  in 
inflation dynamics, supply side price hikes may, after a certain point, easily evolve into a self-
feeding vicious circle. 
Dear Guests, 
Why  did  the  Central  Bank  not  repeat  the  strong  monetary  tightening  policy  that  it  had 
implemented  in  2006,  but  instead  opted  for  a  measured  and  gradual  increase  in  interest 
rates in 2008? 
The  current  conditions  differ  from  the  May  2006  fluctuation.  Prominent  reasons  for  the 
disruption in inflation dynamics in May 2006 were the significant depreciation of the Turkish 
lira due to the deterioration of risk perceptions in an environment where domestic demand 
was strong and the impact of the exchange rate pass-through on prices as well as increases 
in  non-processed  food  prices  were  high.  The  Central  Bank’s  response  was  a  rapid  and 
strong monetary tightening aimed to overcome the deterioration in inflation expectations in 
that period – so that economic units would continue to take the inflation target as a reference 
in their decisions. 
Today, the primary cause of the lasting deterioration in inflation outlook is the presence of 
significant  supply  side  shocks  .As  I  have  mentioned  previously,  the  Central  Bank’s 
projections suggest that it will not be possible to bring inflation back to 4 percent in the short-
term even with a sustained maintenance of the tight monetary policy stance. In this case, a 
strong  reaction  by  monetary  policy,  as  was  the  case  in  2006,  would  not  ensure  the 
convergence  of  inflation  to  4-percent  target  in  the  short-term,  but  would  create  undesired 
fluctuations in economic activity and relative prices. 
It should be kept in mind, however, that the inflation expectations will deteriorate further in 
the absence of a reaction by the Central Bank. The current path of core inflation indicators 
demonstrates that the sharp increases in food and energy prices have started to adversely 
effect pricing behavior. The core inflation indicator that excludes food and energy prices rose 
to  6.3  percent  as  of  May.  Put  differently,  there  is  the  risk  that  the  deterioration  in  pricing 
behavior  might  spread  to  other  sectors  of  the  economy.  This  situation  necessitates  a 
measured, gradual and predictable phase of monetary tightening. The measured and gradual 
nature of monetary tightening is important in face of an already moderating economic growth 
while  having  a  monetary  tightening  that  is  predictable  is  important  to  prevent  undesired 
fluctuations in financial markets. 
6 
 BIS Review 82/2008
Dear Guests, 
I  would  like  to  stress  once  more.  Macro-economic  stability  is  one  of  the  key  inputs  of 
sustainable  economic  growth.  Macro-economic  stability  cannot  co-exist  with  high  inflation. 
Countries that concede higher inflation for the pursuit of economic growth in the short-term 
are  bound  to  be  deprived  of  both  in  the  medium-term.  Policies  to  attain  price  stability  will 
entail a cost in the short-term. We need to pay this cost to achieve price stability and ensure 
sustainable  and  high  growth  rates.  If  we  hesitate  today  and  step  back  from  our  ultimate 
target of price stability, we will still face similar problems in the near future, but possibly in 
worse circumstances. 
In  conclusion,  disinflation  in  Turkey  is  an  on-going  process.  The  disinflation  process  was 
disrupted over the past two years due to the extraordinary effects of supply side shocks and 
inflation targets were overshot considerably. In this environment, the Central Bank of Turkey 
has  made  necessary  assessments  and  reacted  accordingly.  Within  the  framework  of  the 
monetary policy adopted recently, the target has been revised. This is our response to the 
question  of  to  what  extent  the  Central  Bank  of  Turkey  may  allow  for  supply  side  shocks. 
Monetary tightening consistent with the target constitutes the second pillar of this policy. If we 
foresee any deviation of inflation outlook from the target, the necessary policy action will be 
taken without any hesitation or delay. 
As you remember, I started my speech with the words of Charles Stamp, former Governor of 
the Bank of England: 
“It  is  easy  to  dodge  our  responsibilities,  but  we  cannot  dodge  the 
consequences of dodging our responsibilities.” 
The  Central  Bank  of  the  Republic  of  Turkey  will  not  dodge  its  responsibilities.  In  this 
environment  of  massive  global  challenges,  we  perceive  the  new  inflation  targets  as 
attainable. All the existing monetary policy tools in hand will be utilized decisively and without 
any hesitation in order to attain these targets. 
While  concluding  my  speech,  I  would  like  to  extend  my  thanks  to  the  Turkish  Economic 
Association  and  the  International  Economic  Association,  and  all  other  institutions  and 
individuals who contributed to the organization of this significant event. 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 82/2008 
 7
