Frederic S Mishkin: How should we respond to asset price bubbles?  
Speech  by  Mr  Frederic  S  Mishkin,  Member  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  US  Federal 
Reserve System, at the Wharton Financial Institutions Center and Oliver Wyman Institute's 
Annual Financial Risk Roundtable, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, 15 May 2008. 
The original speech, which contains various links to the documents mentioned, can be found on the US Federal 
Reserve System’s website (www.federalreserve.gov) 
 Over  the  centuries,  economies  have  periodically  been  subject  to  asset  price  bubbles  – 
pronounced  increases  in  asset  prices  that  depart  from  fundamental  values  and  eventually 
crash resoundingly. Because economies often fare very poorly after a bubble bursts, central 
bankers  need  to  think  hard  about  how  they  should  address  such  bubbles.  This  issue  has 
become  especially  topical  of  late  because  of  the  rapid  rise  and  subsequent  decline  in 
residential  housing  prices  this  decade.  The  recent  drop  in  house  prices  in  many  markets 
around the country has been accompanied by increasing rates of defaults on mortgage loans 
and home foreclosures. These developments have created hardship for the families who are 
forced to leave their homes and have disrupted communities; in addition, the developments 
have  contributed  to  a  major  shock  to  the  financial  system,  with  sharp  increases  in  credit 
spreads and large losses to financial institutions. As many have pointed out, the damage to 
households' credit and the financial disruption have been a drag on the U.S. economy, which 
has led to a slowing of economic growth and a recent decline in employment.  
In my remarks today, I would like to return to the issue of how we should respond to possible 
asset price bubbles.1 I will first focus on the conceptual framework I use to evaluate these 
issues, based on a core set of scientific principles for monetary policy.2 My framing of the 
issues highlights the following three questions:  
• 
• 
• 
My  discussion  of  these  conceptual  issues  is  followed  by  a  summary  of  several  historical 
examples  that  illustrate  the  importance  of  focusing  on  the  principles  I  have  outlined.  As 
usual, these remarks reflect only my own views and are not intended to reflect those of the 
Federal  Open  Market  Committee  or  of  anyone  else  associated  with  the  Federal  Reserve 
System.  
Are some asset price bubbles more problematic than others?  
How should monetary policy respond to asset price bubbles? and  
What other types of policy responses are appropriate? 
Are some asset price bubbles more problematic than others? 
In order to consider how monetary and other policies should address asset price bubbles, we 
must  first  examine  how  asset  prices  influence  inflation  and  aggregate  economic  activity. 
These  influences  act  through  several  channels;  in  particular,  asset  prices  provide  signals 
regarding profitable investments, affect the wealth of households, and influence the cost of 
capital  to  firms  and  households.  For  example,  higher  equity  prices,  whether  driven  by 
fundamentals  such  as  lower  interest  rates  or  faster  productivity  growth  or  by  bubble-type 
factors like "irrational exuberance," boost business investment by lowering the cost of capital 
                                                 
1  
I  would  like  to  thank  Michael  Kiley,  Sylvain  Leduc,  Andrew  Levin,  Jon  Greenlee,  Robin  Lumsdaine,  David 
Palmer, and William Treacy of the Board's staff for their excellent assistance in preparing these remarks. 
I discuss these principles in detail in Mishkin (2007b, 2007f). 
2  
BIS Review 61/2008 
 1
and  raise  household  demand  by  generating  increased  wealth.  Other  fluctuations  in  asset 
prices  act  similarly.  The  resulting  fluctuations  in  resource  utilization  lead  to  changes  in 
inflation.3
The influences of asset prices on demand and inflation through traditional wealth and cost-of-
capital  channels  fall  directly  within  the  traditional  concerns  of  monetary  policy,  a  point  to 
which I will return shortly. However, not all asset price bubbles are alike, and some bubbles 
raise issues outside the direct responsibility of monetary policy but within the policy concerns 
of the broader regulatory framework governing our financial system. In particular, some asset 
price bubbles can have more-significant economic effects, and thus raise additional concerns 
for  economic  policymakers,  by  contributing  to  financial  instability.  Financial  history  reveals 
the  following  typical  chain  of  events:  Because  of  either  exuberant  expectations  about 
economic  prospects  or  structural  changes  in  financial  markets,  a  credit  boom  begins, 
increasing the demand for some assets and thereby raising their prices.4 The rise in asset 
values,  in  turn,  encourages  further  lending  against  these  assets,  increasing  demand,  and 
hence their prices, even more. This feedback loop can generate a bubble, and the bubble 
can cause credit standards to ease as lenders become less concerned about the ability of 
the borrowers to repay loans and instead rely on further appreciation of the asset to shield 
themselves from losses. 
At  some  point,  however,  the  bubble  bursts.  The  collapse  in  asset  prices  then  leads  to  a 
reversal of the feedback loop in which loans go sour, lenders cut back on credit supply, the 
demand for the assets declines further, and prices drop even more. The resulting loan losses 
and  declines  in  asset  prices  erode  the  balance  sheets  at  financial  institutions,  further 
diminishing  credit  and  investment  across  a  broad  range  of  assets.  The  decline  in  lending 
depresses  business  and  household  spending,  which  weakens  economic  activity  and 
increases  macroeconomic  risk  in  credit  markets.5  In  the  extreme,  the  interaction  between 
asset prices and the health of financial institutions following the collapse of an asset price 
bubble can endanger the operation of the financial system as a whole.6
To  be  clear,  not  all  asset  price  bubbles  create  these  risks  to  the  financial  system.  For 
example,  the  bubble  in  technology  stocks  in  the  late  1990s  was  not  fueled  by  a  feedback 
loop between bank lending and rising equity values; indeed, the bursting of the tech-stock 
bubble was not accompanied by a marked deterioration in bank balance sheets. But potential 
for some asset price bubbles to create larger difficulties for the financial system than others 
implies that our regulatory framework should be designed to address the potential challenges 
to the financial system created by these bubbles. 
How should monetary policy respond to asset price bubbles? 
In order to think about how central banks should respond to asset prices, we need to first 
remember the objectives of monetary policy. The ultimate purpose of a central bank should 
be to promote the public good through policies that foster economic prosperity. Research in 
                                                 
3   Of course, asset price bubbles have additional implications for economic efficiency. Departures of asset prices 
from  levels  implied  by  economic  fundamentals  can  lead  to  inappropriate  investments  that  decrease  the 
efficiency of the economy by diverting resources toward economic activities that are supported by the bubble 
(for example, see Dupor, 2005). For example, during the bubble in tech stocks in the late 1990s, there was 
overinvestment  in  some  types  of  high-tech  infrastructure.  Similarly,  the  bubble  in  housing  prices  led  to  too 
many houses being built. These distortions to activity across sectors of the economy are a drag on efficiency 
and hence are a matter of concern above and beyond fluctuations in overall economic activity and inflation. 
4   See, for example, Mishkin (1991) and Kindleberger (2000). 
5  
I  have  previously  discussed  the  interaction  of  financial  markets  and  macroeconomic  risk  (for  example, 
Mishkin, 2007d, 2007e). 
6   See my earlier remarks on the subject (Mishkin, 2007c). 
2 
 BIS Review 61/2008
monetary  economics  describes  this  objective  in  terms  of  stabilizing  both  inflation  and 
economic activity. Indeed, these objectives are exactly what is embodied in the dual mandate 
that the Congress has given the Federal Reserve.7
Because of their effects on prices and employment, macroeconomic fluctuations due to asset 
price movements are a concern for monetary policy makers. However, the macroeconomic 
consequences  of  asset  price  fluctuations  are  unlikely  to  have  long-lasting  and  severe 
consequences for the economy as long as monetary policy responds appropriately. Whether 
an  asset  price  bubble  is  occurring  or  not,  as  asset  prices  rise  and  boost  the  outlook  for 
economic  activity  and  inflation,  monetary  policy  should  respond  by  moving  to  a  more 
restrictive  stance.  After  a  bubble  bursts  and  the  outlook  for  economic  activity  deteriorates, 
policy should become more accommodative.8 As I pointed out in a paper that I presented at 
the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Kansas  City's  Jackson  Hole  conference  in  September,  if 
monetary  policy  responds  immediately  to  the  decline  in  asset  prices,  the  negative  effects 
from a bursting asset price bubble to economic activity arising from the decline in wealth and 
increase in the cost of capital to firms and households are likely to be small.9 More generally, 
monetary policy should react to asset price bubbles by looking to the effects of such bubbles 
on  employment  and  inflation,  then  adjusting  policy  as  required  to  achieve  maximum 
sustainable employment and price stability. 
To be clear, I think that in most cases, monetary policy should not respond to asset prices 
per se, but rather to changes in the outlook for inflation and aggregate demand resulting from 
asset price movements. This point of view implies that actions, such as attempting to "prick" 
an asset price bubble, should be avoided.  
I take this view for (at least) three important reasons.10 First, asset price bubbles can be hard 
to  identify.  As  a  result,  tightening  monetary  policy  to  restrain  a  bubble  that  has  been 
misidentified can lead to weaker economic growth than is warranted. In addition, central bank 
actions to influence asset prices when the central bank is uncertain about the presence or 
extent of a bubble can interfere with the role of asset prices in allocating resources.11
Second, even if asset price bubbles could be identified, the effect of interest rates on asset 
price  bubbles  is  highly  uncertain.  Although  some  theoretical  models  suggest  that  raising 
interest rates can diminish the acceleration of asset prices, raising interest rates may be very 
ineffective in restraining the bubble, because market participants expect such high rates of 
return from buying bubble-driven assets.12 Other research and historical examples (which I 
will  discuss  later)  have  suggested  that  raising  interest  rates  may  cause  a  bubble  to  burst 
more severely, thereby increasing the damage to the economy.13 Another way of saying this 
is that bubbles are departures from normal behavior, and it is unrealistic to expect that the 
                                                 
7   The  Federal  Reserve's  congressional  mandate  is  actually  couched  in  terms  of  three  goals:  maximum 
employment,  stable  prices,  and  moderate  long-term  interest  rates.  However,  as  I  have  discussed  (Mishkin, 
2007a),  the  mandate  is  more  appropriately  interpreted  in  terms  of  the  dual  goals  of  price  stability  and 
maximum sustainable employment, and this formulation is what is consistent with stabilizing both inflation and 
economic activity. Mishkin (2008) discusses how the pursuit of price stability can foster maximum sustainable 
employment. 
8   Vice Chairman Kohn (2006) presented similar views on the response of monetary policy to asset prices. 
9   See Mishkin (2007g). 
10   An  additional  reason  is  that  many  crashes  of  asset  prices  which  have  become  associated  with  asset  price 
bubbles have had very limited affects on the economy. In a paper I wrote with Eugene White (Mishkin and 
White, 2003), we studied 15 stock market crashes that occurred in the United States from 1900 to 2001 and 
found that in most cases they were not followed by episodes of financial instability. 
11   Chairman Bernanke (2002) has discussed this potential problem. 
12   For example, see the discussion in Greenspan (2002). 
13   For example, see Gruen, Plumb, and Stone (2005). 
BIS Review 61/2008 
 3
usual tools of monetary policy will be effective in abnormal conditions. The bottom line is that 
we do not know the effects of monetary policy actions on asset price bubbles. 
Third, there are many asset prices, and at any one time a bubble may be present in only a 
fraction  of  assets.  Monetary  policy  actions  are  a  very  blunt  instrument  in  such  a  case,  as 
such actions would be likely to affect asset prices in general, rather than solely those in a 
bubble. 
All told, research suggests that monetary policy that does not try to prick bubbles, but instead 
responds  solely  to  the  inflation  and  aggregate  demand  outlook,  is  likely  to  lead  to  better 
outcomes even when bubbles might arise.14  
Are other types of policy responses appropriate? 
I would now like to return to the effect of asset price bubbles on the stability of the financial 
system. As I highlighted earlier, some, but clearly not all, asset price bubbles create risks to 
the  financial  system  that  could  have  large  negative  effects  on  the  macroeconomy.  As  a 
result, it is important to examine the potential for government policies to address the type of 
bubble in which there is feedback between asset prices and financial stability. I would like to 
emphasize  the  importance  of  regulatory  policy.  Monetary  policy  –  that  is,  the  setting  of 
overnight interest rates – is already challenged by the task of managing both price stability 
and  maximum  sustainable  employment.  As  a  result,  it  falls  to  regulatory  policies  and 
supervisory practices to help strengthen the financial system and reduce its vulnerability to 
both booms and busts in asset prices. 
Of course, some aspects of such policies are simply the usual elements of a well-functioning 
prudential regulatory and supervisory system. These elements include adequate disclosure 
and capital requirements, prompt corrective action, careful monitoring of an institution's risk-
management  procedures,  close  supervision  of  financial  institutions  to  enforce  compliance 
with regulations, and sufficient resources and accountability for supervisors. 
More generally, our approach to regulation should favor policies that will help prevent future 
feedback loops between asset price bubbles and credit supply. A few broad principles are 
helpful  in  thinking  about  what  such  policies  should  look  like.  First,  regulations  should  be 
designed with an eye toward fixing market failures. Second, regulations should be designed 
so as not to exacerbate the interaction between asset price bubbles and credit provision. For 
example, research has shown that the rise in asset values that accompanies a boom results 
in higher capital buffers at financial institutions, supporting further lending in the context of an 
unchanging benchmark for capital adequacy; in the bust, the value of this capital can drop 
precipitously,  possibly  even  necessitating  a  cut  in  lending.15  It  is  important  for  research  to 
continue  to  analyze  the  role  of  bank  capital  requirements  in  promoting  financial  stability, 
including  whether  capital  requirements  should  be  adjusted  over  the  business  cycle  or 
whether other changes in our regulatory structure are necessary to ensure macroeconomic 
efficiency.16  Finally,  in  general,  regulatory  policies  are  appropriately  focused  on  the 
soundness of individual institutions. However, during certain periods, risks across institutions 
become highly correlated, and we need to consider whether such policies might need to take 
account  of  these  higher-stress  environments  in  assessing  the  resilience  of  both  individual 
institutions and the financial system as a whole in the face of potential external shocks. 
                                                 
14   Research supporting this view includes Bernanke, Gertler, and Gilchrist (1999); Bernanke and Gertler (2001); 
and Gruen, Plumb, and Stone (2005). 
15   For example, see Kashyap and Stein (2004) and Goodhart (2008). 
16   Research  to  date  has  not  reached  unambiguous  conclusions.  See  Goodhart,  Hofmann,  and  Segoviano 
(2005); Kashyap and Stein (2004); and Gordy and Howells (2006) for a more thorough discussion of related 
issues. 
4 
 BIS Review 61/2008
Some  policies  to  address  the  risks  to  financial  stability  from  asset  price  bubbles  could  be 
made  a  standard  part  of  the  regulatory  system  and  would  be  operational  at  all  times  – 
whether a bubble was in progress or not. However, because specific or new types of market 
failures  might  be  driving  a  particular  asset  price  bubble,  some  future  bubbles  will  almost 
certainly create unanticipated difficulties, and, as a result, adjustments to our policy stance to 
limit  the  market  failure  contributing  to  a  bubble  could  be  very  beneficial  if  identified  and 
implemented at the appropriate time. 
Earlier, I pointed out that a bubble could be hard to identify. Indeed, I think this is especially 
true  of  bubbles  in  the  stock  market.  Central  banks  or  government  officials  are  unlikely  to 
have  an  informational  advantage  over  market  participants.  If  a  central  bank  were  able  to 
identify bubbles in the stock market, wouldn't market participants be able to do so as well? If 
so, then a bubble would be unlikely to develop, because market participants would know that 
prices were getting out of line with fundamentals.  
However, although I believe that stock market bubbles might be hard to identify because they 
are typically not driven by credit booms (which also makes them less harmful because their 
collapse is less likely to lead to financial instability), when asset prices are rising rapidly at 
the same time that credit is booming, there may be a greater likelihood that asset prices are 
deviating  from  fundamentals,  because  laxer  credit  standards  may  be  driving  asset  prices 
upward.17 In this case, financial regulators at central banks and other institutions may have a 
greater  likelihood  of  identifying  that  a  bubble  is  in  progress;  for  example,  they  might  have 
information  that  lenders  have  weakened  their  underwriting  standards  and  that  credit 
extension is rising at abnormally high rates. 
The reasoning here suggests that a rapid rise in asset prices accompanied by a credit boom 
provides a signal that should lead central bankers and other financial supervisors to carefully 
scrutinize  financial  developments  to  see  if  market  failures  might  be  driving  the  asset  price 
boom.  The  resulting  analysis  of  financial  developments  might  then  lead  policymakers  to 
consider implementing policies to address the imperfections behind the market failures and 
thereby help reduce the magnitude of the bubble. 
Some historical examples 
I would like to now turn to a few examples from U.S. history and international experience that 
highlight  the  interaction  between  asset  price  bubbles,  financial  stability,  and  the  policy 
framework. 
The stock market boom of the 1920s 
The Roaring Twenties and the onset of the Great Depression present a particularly drastic 
example.  The  U.S.  economy  thrived  during  the  1920s  as  new  technologies,  financial 
innovations, and improved business practices were introduced and contributed to a general 
sense of optimism. As you all know, the stock market experienced a dramatic rise during that 
decade until it burst during the Great Crash of 1929.  
A popular account of that period attributes the stock market boom to easy credit and rising 
speculation; the period ended with panic selling on Wall Street and triggered the beginning of 
the Great Depression.18 According to this view, the Federal Reserve was incorrect in letting 
                                                 
17   Stock market bubbles can do more harm if stocks are held by financial institutions and these institutions are 
allowed  to  include  the  market  value  of  stocks  in  their  capital  base.  As  described  later  in  this  speech,  this 
practice  was  a feature  of the Japanese bank regulatory  system and is  one reason  why the collapse  of the 
stock market bubble in Japan helped lead to fragility of the banking system and, as a result, was much more 
damaging to the economy. 
18   See, among others, Galbraith (1954) and Kindleberger (2000). 
BIS Review 61/2008 
 5
the rise in equity prices develop and should have raised interest rates to stem stock market 
speculation. You will guess from my proposed set of principles for monetary policy that I view 
this approach as mistaken. 
It  is  first  very  difficult  to  assess  the  extent  to  which  the  stock  market  was  driven  by 
nonfundamental forces at the time; by some accounts, the stock market bubble started only 
in March 1928.19 Nonetheless, the rise in equity prices took a more prominent place during 
policy discussions at the Fed beginning in 1927, with Board member Adolph Miller pressing 
fervently for an increase in interest rates to stop the speculative use of credit. This approach 
was opposed by Benjamin Strong, the influential Governor of the Federal Reserve Bank of 
New York who feared a negative impact on the economy: "…any effort through higher rates 
directed especially at stock speculation would have an unfavorable effect upon business…"20 
However,  Strong's  death  in  1928  opened  the  door  for  a  more  restrictive  monetary  policy 
aimed  at  curbing  excesses  in  the  stock  market,  even  as  signs  of  economic  weakness 
became visible. 
The tightening cycle that ended in August 1929 weakened an already deteriorating economy 
and paved the way for the collapse of the stock market in October. The Federal Reserve's 
mistake in attempting to burst the bubble directly was made worse by its refusal to change 
course rapidly after the market collapsed and the banking system got into trouble, thereby 
allowing  deflation  to  set  in,  which  raised  real  interest  rates  to  extremely  high  levels  and 
further depressed growth. 
Japan's asset price boom and the lost decade 
An asset price bubble also confronted the Bank of Japan (BOJ) with tough decisions starting 
in the mid- to late 1980s. The extent of the asset price boom in Japan in the late 1980s can 
be gauged by the fact that the land surrounding the Imperial Palace in Tokyo was estimated 
to be worth more than the whole of California at that time. Without a doubt, the 1980s was a 
prosperous  decade  in  Japan  with  high  growth,  low  unemployment,  little  inflation,  and  an 
envied business model. During that decade, equity prices rose more than 600 percent and 
land prices boomed more than 400 percent. 
Soaring equity and land prices during the 1980s, combined with relatively low interest rates, 
eased  financing  conditions  for  investment  substantially.21  The  ratio  of  bank  loans  to  gross 
domestic  product  surged,  and  investment  spending  became  the  main  driver  of  economic 
activity. Because of financial deregulation, banks' risk-taking behavior also increased as they 
channeled more funds to real-estate-related sectors and to small firms, accepting property as 
collateral.22 Trusting in a rising real estate market, some banks went as far as lending more 
than 100 percent of a property's appraisal value.  
As at the Fed during the Roaring Twenties, the BOJ was concerned about the rapid rise in 
asset prices in the mid-1980s and the possibility that a bubble was in progress. In 1989, as 
asset prices continued to soar and inflation moved upward, the BOJ decided to start raising 
rates. The stock market collapsed at the beginning of 1990, but land prices continued to rise, 
and  the  BOJ  kept  tightening  policy.  Monetary  policy  only  gradually  reversed  course  in  the 
                                                 
19   See, for instance, Galbraith (1954) and White (1990). 
20   See Meltzer (2003, p. 225). 
21   The stance of monetary policy was relatively easy during the mid-1980s as the BOJ attempted to contain the 
rapid appreciation of the yen following the Plaza Accord of 1985 and stimulated domestic demand to correct 
external imbalances. 
22   Corporate restrictions on funding in the securities market were lifted in the 1980s, which reduced large firms' 
reliance on banks' loans. Moreover, interest rate ceilings on bank deposits were also gradually removed. See 
Okina, Shirakawa, and Shiratsuka (2001). 
6 
 BIS Review 61/2008
summer of 1991 as growth declined and inflation and land prices started to move down. The 
subsequent  decade  has  been  termed  "the  lost  decade."  During  that  time,  Japan  suffered 
from anemic growth and repeated bouts of very low inflation and deflation. 
Japan's  experience  re-emphasizes  the  importance  of  regulatory  policies  that  may  prevent 
feedback loops between asset price bubbles and credit provision. Indeed, during the boom, 
Japanese regulations that allowed banks to count as capital unrealized gains from equities 
may have contributed to banks' appetite for equities during the stock market run-up and to 
financial  instability  as  the  stock  market  collapsed.  After  the  bursting  of  the  bubble, 
policymakers  did  not  quickly  resolve  the  fragility  of  the  banking  sector,  thereby  allowing 
conditions to worsen as banks kept lending to inefficient, debt-ridden, so-called zombie firms. 
On the other hand, Japan's experience does not support the need for preemptive monetary 
policy actions to deflate a bubble, as some commentators have suggested.23 The tightening 
of monetary policy during the bubble period does not appear to have led to better economic 
outcomes.  Moreover,  the  BOJ  did  not  reverse  course  sufficiently  or  rapidly  enough  in  the 
aftermath of the crisis.24 Research suggests that it was the slow response of monetary policy 
to the deterioration in the economic outlook and fall in inflation following the bursting of the 
bubble that contributed to the onset of deflation.25  
through  structured 
investment  products 
The recent U.S. experience 
As  highlighted  in  my  introduction,  the  issues  I have  discussed  today  are  especially  salient 
because of the recent experience with house prices in the United States. It is too early to 
draw firm conclusions regarding all of the factors that have contributed to the rise and decline 
of  house  prices  and  the  impact  of  these  developments  on  our  financial  system  and  the 
macroeconomy.  But  the  Federal  Reserve  and  other  government  agencies  have  already 
begun to address some weaknesses that emerged during this period. For example, problems 
arose in recent years in the chain linking the origination of mortgages to their distribution to 
investors 
like  mortgage-backed  securities. 
Underwriting  standards  became  increasingly  compromised  at  origination.  In  retrospect,  the 
breakdown  in  underwriting  can  be  linked  to  the  incentives  that  the  originate-to-distribute 
model,  as  implemented  in  this  case,  created  for  the  originators.  Notably,  the  incentive 
structures often tied originator revenue to loan volume rather than to the quality of the loans 
being passed up the chain. This problem was exacerbated by the bubble in house prices: 
Lenders began to ease standards as further appreciation in house prices was expected to 
ensure  that  risk  was  low,  and  investors  failed  to  perform  the  research  necessary  to  fully 
appreciate the risks in their investments, instead relying on further house price appreciation 
to  prevent  losses.  The interaction  between  lenders'  and investors'  views  and  house  prices 
illustrates the pernicious feedback loop I highlighted earlier. 
These  problems  became  apparent  only  in  retrospect,  in  part,  because  the  growth  of  the 
originate-to-distribute model for mortgages was an ongoing innovation in financial markets; 
as  a  result,  neither  the  market  nor  regulators  had  sufficient  information  for  evaluating  the 
nature of the risks involved. Looking forward, efforts to improve scrutiny of the processes that 
originators  use  and  the  incentives  they  face,  better  information  for  consumers,  improved 
performance  of  the  credit  rating  agencies,  and  a  number  of  other  reforms  that  have  been 
recommended by the President's Working Group on Financial Markets will be important in 
                                                 
23   Posen  (2003)  provides  an  extended  discussion  of  the  reasons  why  such  a  reading  of  the  Japanese 
experience is mistaken. 
24   For example, see Ahearne and others (2002) and Posen (2003). 
25   See  Ito  and  Mishkin  (2006).  The  slowness  with  which  the  imbalances  in  Japan's  banking  sector  were 
addressed was another important factor leading to the deterioration in the economic outlook and deflation after 
the bubble burst. 
BIS Review 61/2008 
 7
preventing  a  future  bubble  like  that  in  the  most  recent  experience  –  steps  highlighted  by 
Chairman Bernanke in remarks earlier this year.26
Conclusion 
Let me conclude by reiterating the main points of the analysis here. First, not all asset price 
bubbles  are  alike.  Asset  price  bubbles  that  are  associated  with  credit  booms  present 
particular challenges, because their bursting can lead to episodes of financial instability that 
have damaging effects on the economy.  
Second, monetary policy should not try to prick possible asset price bubbles, even when they 
are  of  the  variety  that  can  contribute  to  financial  instability.  Just  as  doctors  take  the 
Hippocratic  oath  to  do  no  harm,  central  banks  should  recognize  that  trying  to  prick  asset 
price bubbles using monetary policy is likely to do more harm than good. Instead, monetary 
policy  should  react  to  asset  price  bubbles  by  looking  to  the  effects  of  asset  prices  on 
employment and inflation, then adjusting policy as required to achieve maximum sustainable 
employment  and  price  stability.  This  monetary  policy  response  should  prove  sufficient  to 
prevent adverse macroeconomic effects of some types of asset price bubbles.  
Third, because asset price bubbles can arise from market failures that lead to credit booms, 
regulation  can  help  prevent  feedback  loops  between  asset  price  bubbles  and  credit 
provision. Our regulatory framework should be structured to address failures in information or 
market  incentives  that  contribute  to  credit-driven  bubbles.  Moreover,  we  should  aim  to 
monitor the health of the financial system overall and ensure that our regulatory approach 
takes  account  of  risks  across  institutions  that  are  highly  correlated  and  thus  affect  the 
strength of the financial system as a whole. 
We  have  learned  many  lessons  from  past  experience  in  the  United  States  and  in  other 
countries, and I am confident that continued research in these areas will help us address the 
new tests that will undoubtedly arise as financial innovation and the evolving structure of our 
financial markets present new challenges. 
References 
Ahearne,  Alan,  Joseph  Gagnon,  Jane  Haltimaier,  Steve  Kamin,  Christopher  Erceg,  Jon 
Faust,  Luca  Guerrieri,  Carter  Hemphill,  Linda  Kole,  Jennifer  Roush,  John  Rogers,  Nathan 
Sheets,  and  Jonathan  Wright  (2002).  "Preventing  Deflation:  Lessons 
from  Japan's 
Experience in the 1990s", International Finance Discussion Papers 2002-729. Washington: 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, June. 
Bernanke, Ben S. (2002). "Asset-Price 'Bubbles' and Monetary Policy", speech delivered at 
the  New  York  Chapter  of  the  National  Association  for  Business  Economics,  New  York, 
October 15. 
_________ (2008). "Addressing Weaknesses in the Global Financial Markets: The Report of 
the President's Working Group on Financial Markets", speech delivered at the World Affairs 
Council  of  Greater  Richmond's  Virginia  Global  Ambassador  Award  Luncheon,  Richmond, 
Va., April 10. 
Bernanke, Ben S., and Mark Gertler (2001). "Should Central Banks Respond to Movements 
in Asset Prices?", American Economic Review, vol. 91 (May), pp. 253-57. 
                                                 
26   The speech by Chairman Bernanke on April 10, 2008, provides a more detailed description of the market and 
regulatory failures during this period and the recommendations of the President's Working Group on Financial 
Markets. 
8 
 BIS Review 61/2008
Bernanke, Ben S., Mark Gertler, and Simon Gilchrist (1999). "The Financial Accelerator in a 
Quantitative Business Cycle Framework," in J. B. Taylor and M. Woodford, eds., Handbook 
of Macroeconomics, vol. 1C. New York: Elsevier Science – North Holland, pp. 1341-93. 
Dupor,  Bill  (2005).  "Stabilizing  Non-fundamental  Asset  Price  Movements  under  Discretion 
and Limited Information", Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 52 (May), pp. 727-47. 
Galbraith, John Kenneth (1954). The Great Crash 1929. Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company.  
Goodhart,  Charles,  Boris  Hofmann,  and  Miguel  Segoviano  (2005).  "Bank  Regulation  and 
Macroeconomic Fluctuations", Oxford Review of Economic Policy, vol. 20 (January), pp. 591-
615. 
Goodhart,  Charles  (2008).  "The  Regulatory  Response  to  the  Financial  Crisis",  CESifo 
Working Paper No. 2257. Munich: CESifo, March. 
Gordy, Michael B., and Bradley Howells (2006). "Procyclicality in Basel II: Can We Treat the 
Disease Without Killing the Patient?", Journal of Financial Intermediation, vol. 15 (July, Basel 
II: Accounting, Transparency and Bank Stability), pp. 395-417.  
Greenspan, Alan (2002). "Economic Volatility", speech delivered at a symposium sponsored 
by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Jackson Hole, Wyo., August 30. 
Gruen,  David,  Michael  Plumb,  and  Andrew  Stone  (2005).  "How  Should  Monetary  Policy 
Respond  to  Asset  Price  Bubbles?",  International  Journal  of  Central  Banking,  vol.  1 
(December), pp. 1-31. 
Ito, Takatoshi, and Frederic S. Mishkin (2006). "Two Decades of Japanese Monetary Policy 
and the Deflation Problem", in Takatoshi Ito and Andrew Rose, eds., “Monetary Policy Under 
Very  Low  Inflation  in  the  Pacific  Rim”,  NBER  East  Asia  Seminar  on  Economics,  vol.  15. 
Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 131-93. 
Kashyap,  Anil,  and  Jeremy  C.  Stein  (2004).  "Cyclical  Implications  of  the  Basel  II  Capital 
Standards",  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Chicago,  Economic  Perspectives,  vol.  28  (First 
Quarter), pp. 18-31. 
Kindleberger,  Charles  P.  (2000).  “Manias,  Panics,  and  Crashes:  A  History  of  Financial 
Crises”, New York: Wiley. 
Kohn, Donald L. (2006). "Monetary Policy and Asset Prices", speech delivered at "Monetary 
Policy:  A  Journey  from  Theory  to  Practice,"  a  European  Central  Bank  Colloquium  held  in 
honor of Otmar Issing, Frankfurt, Germany, March 16. 
Meltzer, Allan H. (2003). “A History of the Federal Reserve”. Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press.  
Mishkin,  Frederic  S.  (1991).  "Asymmetric  Information  and  Financial  Crises:  A  Historical 
Perspective",  in  R.  Glenn  Hubbard,  ed.,  Financial  Markets  and  Financial  Crises.  Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press, pp. 69-108. 
_________  (2007a).  "Monetary  Policy  and  the  Dual  Mandate",  speech  delivered  at 
Bridgewater College, Bridgewater, Va., April 10. 
_________  (2007b).  "Will  Monetary  Policy  Become  More  of  a  Science?"  Finance  and 
Economics  Discussion  Series  2007-44.  Washington:  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal 
Reserve System, September.  
_________  (2007c).  "Systemic  Risk  and  the  International  Lender  of  Last  Resort",  speech 
delivered at the Tenth Annual International Banking Conference, Federal Reserve Bank of 
Chicago, Chicago, September 28. 
_________ (2007d). "Financial Instability and the Federal Reserve as a Liquidity Provider," 
speech delivered at the Museum of American Finance Commemoration of the Panic of 1907, 
New York, October 26.  
BIS Review 61/2008 
 9
_________ (2007e). "Financial Instability and Monetary Policy", speech delivered at the Risk 
USA 2007 Conference, New York, November 5. 
_________  (2007f).  "The  Federal  Reserve's  Enhanced  Communication  Strategy  and  the 
Science of Monetary Policy", speech delivered to the Undergraduate Economics Association, 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Mass., November 29. 
_________  (2007g).  "Housing  and  the  Monetary  Transmission  Mechanism",  Finance  and 
Economics  Discussion  Series  2007-40.  Washington:  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal 
Reserve System, August.  
_________ (2008). "Does Stabilizing Inflation Contribute to Stabilizing Economic Activity?", 
speech  delivered  at  East  Carolina  University's  Beta  Gamma  Sigma  Distinguished  Lecture 
Series, Greenville, N.C., February 25. 
_________Mishkin, Frederic S., and Eugene N. White (2003). "U.S. Stock Market Crashes 
and  Their  Aftermath:  Implications  for  Monetary  Policy",  in  William  Curt  Hunter,  George  G. 
Kaufman,  and  Michael  Pomerleano,  eds.,  “Asset  Price  Bubbles:  The  Implications  for 
Monetary, Regulatory, and International Policies”, Cambridge, Mass: MIT Press, pp. 53-79. 
Okina, Kunio, Masaaki Shirakawa, and Shigenori Shiratsuka (2001). "The Asset Price Bubble 
and Monetary Policy: Japan's Experience in the Late 1980s and the Lessons", Monetary and 
Economic Studies, vol. 19 (February, Special Edition), pp. 53-112.  
Posen, Adam (2003). "It Takes More Than a Bubble to Become Japan," in Asset Prices and 
Monetary Policy, Reserve Bank of Australia Annual Conference. Sydney: Reserve Bank of 
Australia, pp. 203-49. 
White, Eugene N. (1990). "The Stock Market Boom and Crash of 1929 Revisited", Journal of 
Economic Perspectives, vol. 4 (Spring), pp. 67-83. 
10 
 BIS Review 61/2008
