Lorenzo Bini Smaghi: The international role of the euro and its potential 
in Latin America 
Keynote  speech  by  Mr  Lorenzo  Bini  Smaghi,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the 
European Central Bank, at the conference “The Euro: Global Implications and Relevance for 
Latin America”, São Paulo, 17-18 March 2008. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
During  our  lunch  I  would  like  to  share  with  you  some  brief  reflections  on  the  international 
dimension of Europe’s Economic and Monetary Union, or EMU. The title of my presentation 
has an additional part: “and its potential for Latin America”. I am not sure that I should be the 
one  to  assess  the  potential  for  the  euro  in  Latin  America;  I  should  perhaps  let  a  Latin 
American  audience  decide  for  itself.  As  you  know,  the  policy  of  the  ECB  is  neither  to 
encourage nor to discourage the use of the euro. 
What I would prefer to do today is to examine the main lessons that can be drawn from the 
ten years of experience with Monetary Union, lessons that may also be of interest for the rest 
of the world, in particular Latin America. I will be very concise and selective, given the time 
constraints. I will thus focus on the main issues that I think deserve some attention and will 
inevitably leave aside important aspects that may be taken up later in the discussion. 
I will focus on five main lessons that I would draw from the first ten years of the euro and 
discuss a few issues that are currently being debated in Europe and may be of relevance to 
Latin America, in particular for its policy-makers. Let me start with the lessons. 
The first lesson that can be drawn from the last ten years is the importance for an economy 
like the euro area of having its own monetary policy. This seems self-evident, but it is not 
always  the  case.  We  currently  see  around  the  world  many  important  countries  and 
economies  that  have  actually  chosen  not  to  have  their  own  monetary  policy.  Consider  for 
instance the case of China, other Asian emerging markets, the Gulf countries, or Russia. By 
making the exchange rate the main target for their policies they have de facto given up their 
monetary  policy  and  have  imported  monetary  conditions  prevailing  in  the  country  whose 
currency they are targeting, most  often the United States. Given that underlying  economic 
conditions  in  the  United  States  will  surely  be  different  from  those  prevailing  in  these  other 
countries,  the  monetary  conditions  that  the  latter  will  import  are  unlikely  to  be  the  most 
conducive to sustainable growth. Giving up the ability to conduct monetary policy is bound 
sooner or later to give rise to internal instability. Just as an illustration, an economy growing 
at 10% per year with inflation rising towards 10% cannot afford nominal interest rates of 5%, 
even less 3 or 2%. We now know the problems that low interest rates for a protracted period 
of time can produce.  
Ten  years  of  EMU  suggest  that  it  is  possible  –  it  is  actually  desirable  –  for  the  major 
economies of the world to have their own monetary policy, attuned to their internal conditions 
and targeted at domestic objectives.  
This first lesson doesn’t seem to be wholly understood by all observers. In particular, some 
financial market participants and commentators are at times led to think that central banks 
are more or less bound to act in a similar way. In fact, in the last few months the various 
central  banks  have  acted  quite  differently,  precisely  because  of  the  different  situations 
prevailing in their respective economies. Some have decreased rates, others have kept their 
rates unchanged and others have actually increased rates. The world economy is becoming 
more  integrated  but  at  the  same  time  also  more  affected  by  idiosyncratic  shocks  and 
diverging starting conditions, which may at times require different responses from the policy-
makers around the world.  
BIS Review 31/2008 
 1
The second lesson is that price stability should be the primary objective of monetary policy. 
This  is  now  enshrined  in  the  statutes  of  most  central  banks  around  the  world,  with  the 
exception  of  the  Federal  Reserve  System,  whose  mandate  goes  back  to  the  end  of  the 
1970s. 
Ten years of experience of EMU show that price stability can be ensured without sacrificing 
growth over the medium term. Comparing the last ten years with the ten years before EMU, 
we see that inflation has been lower, while growth has been broadly similar and employment 
growth,  lately,  much  stronger.  I  will  not  dwell  too  much  on  this  issue.  It  seems  to  me  that 
recent developments confirm that having a clear primary objective, which is also well-defined 
in  quantitative  terms,  is  the  best  way  to  anchor  market  expectations  and  to  ensure  a 
smoother adjustment to external shocks, of a real or financial nature. 
The third lesson is that an independent central bank is essential to ensuring that the first two 
requirements I have just mentioned are met. It strengthens the credibility of monetary policy 
aimed at price stability and therefore enables relatively lower interest rates to be maintained.  
Central bank independence has many elements; the personal and institutional aspects are 
two of the most important. If monetary policy is to be conducted with a view to the medium 
term,  rather  than  in  reaction  to  very  short-term  developments,  security  of  tenure  for  a 
relatively  long  time  –  in  the  case  of  the  ECB’s  Executive  Board,  for  instance,  the  non-
renewable  term  is  eight  years  –  is  quite  relevant.  It  helps  the  decision-makers  to  set 
monetary policy independently of the political cycle.1 
In  theory,  central  bank  independence  tends  to  be  taken  for  granted.  In  practice,  as  the 
European  experience  shows,  it  may  be  challenged  even  when  the  statutes  of  the  central 
bank  are  enshrined  in  a  constitutional  framework.  The  support  of  the  people  for  the 
independence  of  the  central  bank  and  for  the  objective  of  price  stability  is  additional 
protection against any attempt to undermine independence. In all the countries of the euro 
area, the support of public opinion for these two things is very strong. 
The fourth lesson is that clarity about the role of monetary policy also helps to clarify the role 
of other policies, in particular fiscal and structural policy.  
With respect to fiscal policy, there is now a consensus that fiscal discipline is essential, not 
only in a monetary union but also in individual countries, to ensure room for manoeuvre for 
an anticyclical budget, be it discretionary or automatic. The Stability and Growth Pact and the 
3% and 60% limits on a country’s deficit and debt in the Treaty establishing the European 
Community have now also found a broad application in macroeconomic surveillance in other 
continents.  
Experience  shows  that  countries  that  have  complied  with  the  requirements  of  the  Pact,  in 
particular by maintaining a sound budgetary position in good times, have a wider margin to 
absorb the negative effects of an economic slowdown. Those countries which instead delay 
the  adjustment  are  certain  to  face  the  next  slowdown  with  much  greater  anxiety,  with 
negative effects on consumer and investor confidence. 
The main instrument for enhancing long-term economic growth and employment is structural 
policy.  This  has  become  universally  recognised  in  the  EU.  The  Lisbon  process  enables 
structural policies and their results across countries to be compared, on the basis of a simple 
set  of  indicators.  This  has  the  advantage  of  focusing  discussions  within  the  individual 
countries on policies that are necessary for growth.  
Some  results  have  been  achieved.  For  instance,  the  structural  rate  of  unemployment  has 
decreased substantially in most countries, following labour market reforms. Overall, some 13 
                                                 
1   See L. Bini Smaghi (2008): “Central Bank Independence in the EU: From Theory to Practice”, European Law 
Journal, forthcoming. 
2 
 BIS Review 31/2008
million jobs have been created since the introduction of the euro, against less than 3 million 
in the previous decade. However, much needs to be done in the labour and product markets, 
especially in the services sector, to permanently increase productivity in the euro area. 
Overall, it can easily be seen in Europe that the countries which have implemented the most 
far  reaching  reforms  have  also  performed  better  over  the  years.  A  similar  comparison  in 
other countries or areas of the world could help to clarify the responsibilities of the various 
policies in achieving sustainable growth.  
The last lesson that I would like to draw to your attention is that EMU in Europe is much more 
than a monetary union, it’s in fact a political union. The sharing of the same currency has 
implications for citizens that go beyond what we as economists are used to considering. It 
entails  implicit  contractual  relations  which  have  a  direct  impact  on  citizens’  day-to-day 
decisions. Furthermore, policy-making structures in the euro area have become much more 
intertwined not only in relation to monetary policy but also to budgetary policy.  
This  issue  would  require  much  more  time  to  discuss  in  detail  and  is  not  always  fully 
understood, partly because the form that political union has taken in the euro area, and in the 
EU more generally, is quite unique, evolving over time in a way that does not correspond to 
other political unions around the world. To be sure, the issue has not been understood by 
those observers, in particular in the financial markets, who consider leaving the euro area a 
viable policy option. As Barry Eichengreen recently showed in a paper, the way the euro area 
has been constructed and developed means that any exit would entail not only economic but 
also  political  consequences  so  as  to  make  it  nearly  impossible.2  The  fact  that  the  United 
Kingdom,  Sweden  and  Denmark  will  enter  the  euro  area  only  when  their  people  agree  to 
such a decision is further confirmation that EMU is indeed a political union. 
The  five  lessons  that  I  have  mentioned  help  to  explain  why  the  euro  has  emerged  as  the 
second world currency in just about ten years. I will not provide you with the data illustrating 
these  developments.  They  can  be  obtained  from  the  regular  ECB  publication  on  the 
international role of the euro.3 
The developments of the last ten years provide us not only with lessons but also with issues 
that remain open and pose challenges to policy-makers. Let me illustrate three. 
A first issue concerns the impact that a new international currency has on the functioning, 
and in particular the stability, of the international financial system. This is an issue on which 
the literature has so far said very little. In theory, one could think that a world with several 
reserve  currencies  would  be  more  stable,  because  it  would  confer  more  opportunities  on 
international  investors  and  would  impose  greater  discipline  on  policy-makers.  However, 
recent events tend to confirm that relying on markets alone to discipline policy-makers and to 
allocate 
In  certain 
circumstances  markets  might  tend  to  overreact  and  overshoot  with  respect  to  underlying 
economic  fundamentals.  In  particular,  the  portfolio  adjustment  in  a  phase  of  transition 
characterised by several currencies acquiring international status might be quite disorderly. 
This  might  have  negative  effects  on  the  world  economy.  It  requires  close  monitoring  and 
coordination by monetary authorities of the major economies. 
A second issue, which is constantly discussed in the euro area but also in other countries, 
centres  on  what  the  relationship  between  an  independent  central  bank  and  other  policy-
makers should be in order to ensure a consistent overall economic policy. This issue relates 
funds  efficiently  across  borders  might  not  be  always  optimal. 
                                                 
2   See B. J. Eichengreen (2007): "The Breakup of the Euro Area", NBER Working Paper No. 13393. See also B. 
J. Eichengreen (2008): "Sui Generis EMU", NBER Working Paper No. 13740, on the unique features of EMU 
compared with past monetary unions. 
(2007):  Review  of 
June,  available  at 
3   See  ECB 
international 
the  euro, 
role  of 
the 
www.ecb.europa.eu/press/pr/date/2007/html/pr070625.en.html. 
BIS Review 31/2008 
 3
to a number of areas and policies. In Europe the problem tends to become more complicated 
because some policies, such as fiscal and structural policies, are conducted at the national 
level  while  others,  such  as  trade  or  antitrust  policy,  are  conducted  at  the  European  Union 
level, not that of the euro area alone.  
The euro area has in many respects a very strong policy framework, often underestimated. 
The  relationship  between  monetary  and  budgetary  policy  is  quite  similar  to  that  of  most 
countries with an independent central bank, where there is no ex ante coordination between 
policies. There is an exchange of information, in particular on the state of the economy, but 
no trade-offs. This is the case in most industrial countries. 
On  exchange  rate  policy  I  believe  that,  as  I  have  argued  elsewhere,  the  euro  area 
arrangements are good, as they involve both the finance ministries and the central bank.4 In 
most  other  countries  the  central  bank,  which  has  the  technical  expertise  over  financial 
markets and is in charge of interest rate policy, is not involved or tends to get involved too 
late  in  the  process,  which  may  make  things  more  complicated  and  risk  undermining  the 
credibility of any statement or action.  
In  the  area  of  external  representation,  too,  some  clarity  has  been  achieved  as  to  who  is 
responsible for representing the euro area, at least within the G7 and other groupings. Some 
confusion still remains in fora such as the G20, where it is the EU rather than the euro area 
that participates. In the IMF there is still no consolidation of the euro area members within 
one seat, something which to my mind will have to take place sooner or later.  
On financial stability, the situation of the euro area is quite unusual, as the ECB has no direct 
responsibility for banking supervision. The situation is also varies within Eurosystem: in some 
countries the central bank has direct responsibility for supervising the domestic system, while 
in others this responsibility is given to another institution. 
The recent turmoil has shown the importance of keeping central banks closely involved with 
issues  related  to  the  proper  functioning  of  financial  markets.  Furthermore,  the  increasing 
integration of the EU financial market requires close cooperation between supervisors, from 
a more harmonised implementation of regulation to an effective exchange of information on 
markets and institutions, and the creation an efficient crisis resolution framework. Work on 
these issues is ongoing in Europe and will need to be further strengthened.  
To conclude, as a last issue for discussion, we have in the euro area, as well as in other 
countries, a major challenge involving all policy-makers. It is to explain and help our citizens 
adapt to globalisation. Globalisation has produced many positive effects on our societies but 
is quite challenging for some social groups. In particular, the recent increases in food and 
energy  prices  are  biting  into  the  purchasing  power  of  households,  especially  those  at  the 
lower  end  of  the  income  distribution.  These  effects  come  on  top  of  others  that  have 
developed over the years, which have squeezed the income of those employed in sectors 
with low value added.  
I do not want to enter now into the debate of what is the best way forward. I will just mention 
that in Europe we have a further difficulty, i.e. that the euro has been introduced at the same 
time as globalisation has accelerated its effects. This has led some to confuse the effects of 
globalisation with those associated with the introduction of the euro. For instance, perceived 
inflation is in some countries higher than measured inflation, and some attribute this effect to 
the  euro,  even  though  over  six  years  have  passed  since  the  introduction  of  the  euro 
banknotes and coins.  
                                                 
4   See  L.  Bini  Smaghi  (2007):  “The  euro  as  an  international  currency:  implications  for  exchange  rate  policy”, 
remarks  at  the  conference  “50  years  after  the  Treaty  of  Rome:  strengthening  the  economic  leg  of  EMU”, 
Rome, 2-3 July 2007. 
4 
 BIS Review 31/2008
Overall, euro area citizens have had to go through a series of adjustments in the last few 
years,  which  might  have  created  a  sense  of  confusion.  This  requires  greater  unity  among 
policy-makers in the euro area, and less blaming of Europe and the euro – as has been the 
case  in  the  past  –  in  order  to  help  our  citizens  adjust  and  recover  confidence  in  the  new 
environment.  
The irony for somebody like me who travels frequently around the world is to notice that the 
benefits of the euro tend to be much more appreciated outside than within the euro area! 
Thank you for your attention. 
This BIS Review is available on the BIS website at www.bis.org. 
BIS Review 31/2008 
 5
