Kevin M Warsh: Financial market turmoil and the Federal Reserve – the 
plot thickens 
Speech  by  Mr  Kevin  M  Warsh,  Member  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  US  Federal 
Reserve System, at the New York University School of Law Global Economic Policy Forum, 
New York, 14 April 2008. 
The original speech, which contains various links to the documents mentioned, can be found on the US Federal 
Reserve System’s website.  
 What's past is prologue; what to come, in yours and my discharge.  
Shakespeare, The Tempest, Act 2, Scene 1  
Thank you to the New York University School of Law for inviting me to participate in today's 
Global Economic Policy Forum.1
Prologue 
A little more than a year ago, I began to recount a story – already long-in-the-making – of the 
transformation  of  financial  institutions  driven  by  abundant  liquidity  in  global  financial 
markets.2 In those early chapters, one could not help but worry about the inherent risks to 
financial markets and the economy when the gloss of confidence wears thin, causing me to 
wonder aloud: "What happens when liquidity falters?"3 Let me briefly try to recount this tale 
over the last few quarters before offering some rough plot lines from which the balance of the 
story can be divined. 
The sleepy complacency of a bygone era seemed rudely interrupted by a liquidity shock last 
August.4  A  global  margin  call  on  virtually  all  leveraged  positions  began.  As  you  know,  the 
Federal  Reserve  found  it  necessary  to  begin  to  exercise  its  monetary  muscles  in 
unprecedented  ways.  The  seasons  darkened,  and  the  plot  thickened.  New  structured 
products and old financial institutions evidenced increasing signs of weakness. Some central 
banks, including the Federal Reserve, helped supply liquidity to where it was most in need. 
Financial market turmoil, partly as a result, was periodically placed in abeyance. Casualties 
of the liquidity contraction nonetheless appeared; some remained in the narrative for awhile, 
others were removed with great dispatch. 
The  narrative  continued  to  morph  through  the  first  quarter  of  2008.  Central  banks,  while 
generally more comfortable remaining behind the scenes, took center stage with new tools 
and policy prescriptions. The script was rewritten so that product innovation flowed, but this 
time from the public authorities. Many private market participants receded to the shadows of 
the stage, some anxiously anticipating intermission.  
                                                 
1   The  opinions  I  express  are  my  own  and  do  not  necessarily  correspond  with  those  of  my  colleagues  in  the 
Federal  Reserve  System.  Dan  Covitz  and  Nellie  Liang,  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Board’s  staff,  provided 
valuable contributions to these remarks. 
2   Kevin  Warsh  (2007),  "Market  Liquidity:  Definitions  and  Implications,"  speech  delivered  at  the  Institute  of 
International Bankers Annual Washington Conference, Washington, March 5, 2007. 
3   Kevin  Warsh  (2007),  "Financial  Intermediation  and  Complete  Markets,"  speech  delivered  at  the  European 
Economics and Financial Centre, London, June 5, 2007. 
4   Earlier in 2007, there were already concerns about the repayment of certain types and vintages of mortgages, 
and about loans to leveraged borrowers more generally. 
BIS Review 43/2008 
 1
What  some  originally  read  as  a  short  story  punctuated  by  a  liquidity  shock  evolved  into  a 
longer narrative. Credit is threatening to displace liquidity as the primary antagonist. A credit 
crunch, particularly for small businesses and consumers, poses meaningful downside risks to 
the  real  economy.  And  market  participants  are struggling  to  assess  the  possibility  that  the 
narrative turns into a multi-act, macroeconomic drama.  
In the remainder of my remarks, let me explore three of the most trenchant and overlapping 
plot  lines,  none  of  which  seem  to  avail  themselves  readily  to  a  speedy  resolution.  First,  a 
striking  loss  of  confidence  is  affecting  financial  market  functioning.  Second,  the  business 
models  of  many  large  financial  institutions  are  in  the  process  of  significant  re-examination 
and  repair.  Third,  the  Federal  Reserve  is  exercising  its  powers  to  mitigate  the  effects  of 
financial turmoil on the real economy. This third plot line, however necessary, will not, in and 
of itself, ensure a more durable return of trust to our financial architecture. In my view, public 
liquidity is an imperfect substitute for private liquidity. That is, only when the other plot lines 
advance apace – meaning that significant, private financial actors return to their proper role 
at  center  stage  –  will  credit  market  functioning  and  support  for  economic  growth  be  fully 
restored.  And  for  that  to  happen,  as  I  am  confident  it  will,  we  will  find  that  the  financial 
markets and financial firms are outfitted quite differently. 
Plot line 1: liquidity in financial markets  
As I advanced in prior remarks, liquidity is confidence. Liquidity expands with confidence in 
the  efficacy  of  our  financial  architecture.  When  information,  securities,  markets,  and 
institutions work in a seamless fashion to intermediate the flow of funds between investors 
and  borrowers,  liquidity  flourishes.  When  the  confidence  in  the  financial  architecture  is 
meaningfully  impaired,  liquidity  flounders.  A  couple  of  examples  highlight  the  dramatic 
change in liquidity that is gripping financial markets.  
First,  consider  structured  product  markets.  Recall  the  explosive  growth  in  securitization 
markets in recent years.5 The loss in confidence in structured products was first evidenced 
last  year  in  securities  backed  by  subprime  mortgages.  Actual  and  projected  credit  losses 
began  to  mount  across  many  housing-related  assets.6  Participants  also  lost  confidence  in 
the value provided through the securitization process itself. Some highly structured products, 
such as collateralized debt obligations squared, vanished. Yields on non-agency mortgage-
backed  securities  and  commercial  mortgage-backed  securities  skyrocketed;  and,  in  some 
cases, securitization markets simply shut down. 
All in all, this decline in confidence, while painful, is understandable. Investors and financial 
institutions became complacent in their abilities – and the ability of credit rating agencies – to 
evaluate  credit  risks  of  complex  structured  products.  And  while  the  originate-to-distribute 
model  entails  legitimate  principal-agent  problems,  investors  did  not  demand  or  enforce 
safeguards. Even many large, sophisticated financial institutions chose to retain super senior 
and  AAA-rated  tranches  for  their  own  accounts.  In  so  doing,  they  systematically  erred  in 
assessing  the  assets'  risk  profile.  Moreover,  these  products  –  born  in  times  of  massive 
                                                 
5   Securitization  volumes  peaked  in  2006,  accounting  for  more  than  $1  trillion  of  net  borrowing  in  U.S.  credit 
markets, or more than one-fourth of the total. 
In the more popular version of the narrative, housing was, and is, the dominant character on the stage. In my 
view, as I have discussed previously, these housing-related losses are consequential, but they were the spark, 
not the cause, of the turmoil. Kevin Warsh (2007), "Financial Market Developments," speech delivered at the 
State  University  of  New  York  at  Albany’s  School  of  Business,  Albany,  N.Y.,  September  21,  2007.  In  the 
housing-only  version  of  the  narrative,  the  establishment  of  a  housing  bottom  is  the  sine  qua  non  of  an 
economic recovery. In my remarks today, I maintain that reestablishing effective credit intermediation is critical 
to economic recovery. 
BIS Review 43/2008
6  
2 
 liquidity – were often not well designed to ensure efficient workout arrangements should the 
abundant pools of liquidity retreat or should unexpected defaults emerge. 
Next,  consider  short-term  credit  markets.  Many  financial  products,  such  as  asset-backed 
commercial  paper  (ABCP),  auction  rate  securities  (ARS),  interbank  funding  products,  and 
repurchase agreements (RPs), were intended to be steady, supportive credit facilitators in a 
liquidity-rich  environment.  In  reality,  these  products  involved  a  good  deal  of  maturity 
mismatching  and  rollover  risk.  So,  when  liquidity  retrenched,  these  markets  experienced 
substantial disruptions. ABCP outstanding fell by a staggering $300 billion this past summer. 
Issuance of ARS – long-term bonds that reissue and reprice at very short intervals – came to 
an abrupt halt. And, the interbank funding and RP markets showed significant signs of strain.  
Credit quality concerns alone do not appear, even now, sufficiently widespread to induce the 
depth of problems witnessed in financial markets during the past several months. Some ARS 
that failed, for example, funded pools of federally guaranteed student loans. I do not mean to 
suggest  that  counterparties  themselves  are  blameless  –  many  had  been  less  than  fully 
transparent.  Unclear  disclosure  by  some  financial  institutions  with  respect  to  their  off-
balance-sheet  commitments  and  liquidity  support  accentuated  the  uncertainty  that  is 
responsible for some of the poor market functioning.  
More  fundamentally,  in  my  view,  funding  market  disruptions  reflect  a  striking  decline  in 
confidence  in  the  financial  architecture  itself.  Perhaps  an  analogue  to  banking  systems 
without deposit insurance is appropriate: Depositors withdraw funds if they believe others will 
act similarly. In short-term credit markets with minimal liquidity support, investors balk if they 
lose  confidence  in  other  investors'  willingness  to  roll  maturing  paper.  Even  when  liquidity 
support exists, it may well prove insufficient to address market-wide concerns. Many dealers 
of  ARS,  for  example,  withdrew  their  implicit  liquidity  support  when  failures  became  more 
frequent.  Even  those  ABCP  programs  purportedly  with  full  explicit  liquidity  support  were 
implicated in the turmoil. I hesitate to ascribe this loss in confidence simply to a change in 
animal  spirits  or  to  dismiss  this  occurrence  as  some  kind  of  contagion.  After  all,  a  loss  in 
confidence can be completely rational: Illiquidity forces issuers to sell assets into distressed 
markets. 
So,  I  argue,  the  functioning  of  short-term  credit  markets  is  invariably  tied  to  changes  in 
confidence of our financial architecture – on the way up and on the way down. The arc of this 
narrative, thus, necessarily began some years ago. Increasingly abundant confidence when 
things were advancing apace – unsustainably so, it turns out – gave rise to levels of liquidity 
that  engendered  complacency  among 
financial 
architecture  grew 
to  skeptics  and  dissenters,  perpetuating 
insufficient  transparency  and  under-informed  risk-taking.  It  was  commonly  believed  that 
short-term,  secured  credit  markets  would  perpetually  remain  open  to  finance  high-quality 
assets. And the notion of liquidity risk management was anachronistic, or so it seemed.  
Market participants now seem to be questioning the financial architecture itself. The fragility 
of short-term credit markets is a powerful manifestation of that loss of confidence. There are 
some encouraging, early signs of repair, but regaining the confidence that markets require 
will take time, and perhaps uncomfortably to some, patience. It may also require new forms 
of credit intermediation.  
investors  and  counterparties.  The 
increasingly 
impervious 
Plot line 2: transformation of financial institutions 
The rise and fall of liquidity is not only changing fund flows in financial markets. It may also 
be  transforming  the  business  models  of  financial  institutions  themselves  –  no  matter  their 
size, regulatory structure, peer group, funding status, or geography.  
The  period  that  preceded  the  recent  turmoil  was  marked  by  abundant  liquidity,  high 
transaction  volumes,  and  remarkably  low  volatility.  That  environment  proved  exceptionally 
hospitable to significant profits across classes of financial institutions. It also was supportive 
BIS Review 43/2008 
 3
of high leverage, and correspondingly high returns on equity for financial intermediaries. Of 
no  less  consequence,  it  drove  a  conflation  of  roles  among  commercial  banks,  investment 
banks,  and  asset  managers.  The  core  functions  of  credit  intermediation  –  creating, 
distributing, and owning risk – remained constant, but more institutions came to believe that 
there were inescapable synergies by operating across all three primary functions. From 2002 
to  mid-2007,  many  large  financial  institutions  did  just  that,  and  to  great  effect  –  creating 
products  by  aggregating  and  reconstituting  assets,  distributing  bespoke  risks  across 
institutional  and  retail  channels,  and  retaining  certain  preferred  positions  for  proprietary 
accounts. 
A  changing  paradigm  of  financial  intermediation  may  well  be  on  the  horizon.  From  the 
market's perspective, financial institutions overproduced goods and services that now have 
to be warehoused or liquidated. From the perspective of financial institutions themselves, the 
old business models may be in the process of being upended. And from the perspective of a 
dispassionate central banker, the contemporaneous changes in balance sheets and income 
statements  by  incumbent  financial  institutions  –  most  notably,  deleveraging  and  paring  of 
business lines – are likely to prove highly consequential to the near-term outlook for the real 
economy.  
Changing  forms  of  financial  intermediation  are  expected,  given  higher  volatility  and  less 
leverage, in some cases building on old-fashioned banking products. Commercial and thrift 
deposits, for example, backed by a loyal customer base, may offer greater franchise value. 
Investment  banks  may  reconfigure  capital  structures  and  core  trading  businesses  to 
maximize benefits in a higher volatility environment. Asset-gatherers, whether in the form of 
traditional  money-management  firms  or  hedge  funds,  that  survive  this  time  of  testing  may 
rely more on term funding and seek equity returns across beaten-down classes of structured 
and debt products. And dependable, recurring revenues, even at lower levels, may warrant a 
premium valuation in the public markets. 
The case for opportunistic capital is improving. Some curative steps by incumbent financial 
institutions are in the offing. Financial institutions should continue to reassess their sources 
and  uses  of  funding,  their  risk-management  systems,  risk  tolerance,  and  human  capital. 
Generally, they should not hesitate to pare their dividend and share repurchase programs. 
And, they should raise new capital to strengthen their balance sheets. These actions, in my 
view, are important signs of strength, and will ensure that financial institutions thrive in the 
emerging  financial  architecture  replete  with  new  opportunities.  These  actions  will  have 
concomitant benefits on real economic activity. 
Plot line 3: Federal Reserve's policy formulation 
The central bank's responsibility is not to individual firms but to financial markets, and only 
then, to the extent that financial market stresses affect the real economy. Given the fragility 
evidenced in financial markets, and the toll it is taking on real activity, the Federal Reserve 
agreed to take center stage. This is a role for which we did not volunteer, but one in which 
we are prepared to serve. The role has been thrust upon us by a loss of confidence in our 
existing  financial  architecture.  Hence,  we  should  remain  at  center  stage  as  long  as  is 
necessary, but no longer. 
The Fed responded aggressively to mitigate spillovers to the real economy, exercising some 
authorities  for  the  first  time  in  decades.  To  prevent  more  serious  financial  fallout,  the  Fed 
established  and  expanded  various  lending  facilities  to  depository  institutions  and  primary 
dealers.7  Some  facilities  allow  daily  access  to  variable  amounts  of  funding,  and  others 
                                                 
7   Primary  dealers  are  banks  and  securities  broker-dealers  that  trade  in  U.S.  government  securities  with  the 
Federal Reserve Bank of  New  York. On  behalf  of the Federal  Reserve  System, the New York Fed's Open 
Market Desk engages in the trades to implement monetary policy. 
4 
 BIS Review 43/2008
provide access to a fixed amount of longer-term funding at pre-announced auction dates. Still 
other facilities target action involving repurchase transactions with primary dealers. 
These recently implemented measures appear to have reduced, to some extent, strains in 
the financial situation. In particular, conditions in the RP market have improved. And, while 
Libor and commercial-paper spreads have remained elevated, they are below their year-end 
highs. In the corporate bond market, risk spreads have narrowed a bit in recent weeks and 
measures of secondary-market functioning are improved.  
While  the  adjustment  process  by  financial  intermediaries  is  showing  signs  of  promise,  the 
healing  process  is  not  likely  to  be  linear.  More  consequentially,  we  should  recognize  that 
Fed-supplied liquidity is a poor substitute for private-sector-supplied liquidity. When liquidity 
flows  among  private-sector  participants,  the  players  can  more  judiciously  assess  risk  and 
reward,  more  adroitly  learn  from  the  recent  turmoil  to  strengthen  the  resiliency  of  credit 
intermediation,  and  more  ably  allocate  capital  to  its  most  productive  uses  in  the  real 
economy. Moreover, Fed-provided liquidity should not be mistaken for capital.  
Volatility is generally a friend, not a foe, of market functioning. It should not be treated as an 
externality from which we suffer. Volatility, absent destabilizing moves, should be allowed to 
effectuate change in the financial architecture of private markets. Only then, I suspect, will a 
more robust recovery in market liquidity, investor confidence, and real economic activity be 
achieved.  
Of  course,  monetary  policy  continues  to  play  an  important  role  in  the  Federal  Reserve's 
policy  formulation.  We  have  reduced  the  policy  target  rate  by  a  cumulative  3  percentage 
points since August. These actions, together with significant actions to support liquidity, are 
intended to promote growth and mitigate downside risks to economic activity. Consistent with 
our dual mandate of promoting maximum employment and stable prices, we also need to be 
alert to risks to price stability. Increases in food and energy prices have pushed up overall 
consumer prices and are putting upward pressure on core inflation and inflation expectations. 
We will continue to monitor the inflation situation closely. And, more broadly, in my view, as 
financial intermediation channels reset, monetary policy will become still more efficacious. 
Fed policy – both with respect to liquidity tools and monetary policy – is partially offsetting the 
consequences of the liquidity and credit pullback on real activity. But we must be careful to 
not ask policy to do more than it is rightly capable of accomplishing. The problems afflicting 
our financial markets are indeed long-in-the-making. Correspondingly, the curative process is 
unlikely to be swift or smooth. Time is an oft-forgotten, yet equally essential, tool of our policy 
response. 
Epilogue 
Some believe the story of the current market turmoil began in August, and will end when the 
housing market stabilizes. But, in my view, the narrative actually began in a seemingly more 
benign  time  with  underpinnings  more  fundamental  than  the  value  of  the  housing  stock. 
Financial  institutions  and  other  market  participants  grew  increasingly  dependent  on  the 
extraordinary liquidity around them. When liquidity faltered, the weaknesses of the existing 
architecture abruptly revealed itself. A metaphor, perhaps, is instructive: Fish don't know they 
are wet. And they don't learn unless their memories are long or the water is gone. A new 
financial  architecture,  born  of  the  forces  of  creative  destruction,  is  early  in  the  process  of 
construction with the aid of the Federal Reserve and other public authorities. But for the new 
paradigmatic  architecture 
to 
predominate. To that end, I remain confident that financial institutions and financial markets 
will evolve to meet these challenges. 
to  be  enduring,  market-supplied 
liquidity  must  come 
BIS Review 43/2008 
 5
