Randall S Kroszner: Liquidity-risk management in the business of 
banking 
Speech  by  Mr  Randall  S  Kroszner,  Member  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  US  Federal 
Reserve  System,  at  the  Institute  of  International  Bankers  Annual  Washington  Conference, 
Washington DC, 3 March 2008.  
The original speech, which contains various links to the documents mentioned, can be found on the US Federal 
Reserve System’s website.  
 I am delighted to be addressing the IIB today. The organizers gave my talk the title "Major 
Challenges and Opportunities Facing the U.S. and Global Economy and Financial Markets" 
but then gave me only a half hour to discuss it! To keep within the time frame, I will focus on 
one particular aspect of this topic, namely, the key role of banks as liquidity providers in the 
financial  system  and,  hence,  the  crucial  role  of  sound  liquidity-risk  management  and 
regulation.  
Almost exactly one year ago I participated in a forum focused on liquidity.1 At that time, I did 
a  quick  search  of  LexisNexis  that  turned  up  2,795  separate  articles  in  the  preceding  six 
months that had mentioned the word "liquidity" in the context of its abundance in financial 
markets. Times have certainly changed, but the focus on liquidity has not. A similar search 
for  the  most  recent  six-month  period  turned  up  about  2,000  articles  mentioning  the  word 
"liquidity"  –  but  now  in  the  context  of  its  lack  of  abundance.  Given  how  rapidly  liquidity 
conditions  in  markets  can  change  and  how  long  it  can  take  markets  to  recover  from  of  a 
deterioration of liquidity conditions, it behooves both bankers and regulators to look carefully 
at liquidity-risk management. 
I  should  note  that  my  thoughts  on  recent  events  are  preliminary.  Since  risk-management 
challenges have affected a number of global institutions, we are working very closely with our 
supervisory counterparts in other countries to learn from recent events and to coordinate with 
financial institutions in determining what additional steps may need to be taken. As part of 
this important international effort, we should seek to align market participants' incentives with 
our own objectives; otherwise, behavior will not be altered appropriately and the proposed 
remedies will not prove durable. 
Role of banks as liquidity providers 
As global money markets have grown in size and importance and as financial instruments 
that  decouple  debt  funding  from  credit  risk  have  become  increasingly  sophisticated,  it  is 
tempting  to  think  of  traditional  banks  that  make  a  business  of  taking  deposits  and  making 
loans as anachronisms, and, indeed, much as been written about the "disintermediation" of 
banks.  For  all  the  discussion  of  disintermediation,  however,  recent  events  suggest  that 
depository institutions still play a crucial role in the global economy, particularly during times 
of turbulence. 
Economists identify two related but distinct basic functions of banks in the economy. First, 
banks  help  direct  capital  to  productive  investments  by  identifying  and  monitoring  suitable 
borrowers.  Second,  banks  provide  liquidity  to  both  borrowers  and  depositors.  Without 
minimizing the importance of the first function, I would like to focus on banks' role in creating 
liquidity. 
                                                 
1   Randall  S.  Kroszner  (2007),  "Liquidity  and  Monetary  Policy,"  speech  delivered  at  the  U.S.  Monetary  Policy 
Forum, Washington, March 9. 
BIS Review 26/2008 
 1
What is liquidity? The term means different things to different people, and it wouldn't surprise 
me  to  find  about  2,000  different  definitions  among  the  Lexis/Nexis  citations  I  mentioned 
earlier.  Today,  I'll  use  a  definition  put  forward  by  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements  in 
2000: "liquidity is the ability to fund increases in assets and meet obligations as they come 
due." As I will discuss in a moment, banks' role as liquidity providers is particularly crucial 
when markets are under stress. 
By  pooling  the  assets  of  many  depositors  and  offering  term  loans  and  credit  lines  to 
borrowers, banks effectively provide insurance against the uncertain liquidity requirements of 
households and firms.2 While the liquidity needs of an individual household or firm may be 
difficult  to  foresee,  in  normal  circumstances  some  individuals'  and  firms'  high  demands  for 
liquidity will typically be offset by others' low demands; hence, on average in normal times, 
the  liquidity  needs  of  large  groups  of  households  or  firms  are  reasonably  predictable.  So 
when the savings of many investors are pooled together, a significant share of deposits can 
be used to make productive long-term loans, while a smaller share are held back as reserves 
to  meet  depositors'  liquidity  needs.  Loan  commitments  and  lines  of  credit  serve  a  similar 
function  by  allowing  borrowers  with  uncertain  future  liquidity  requirements  to  take  on  bank 
debt as needed. 
Banks have been managing expected liquidity demands since the beginning of banking itself. 
This  is  accomplished  today  by,  for  example,  holding  some  liquid  assets  such  as  Treasury 
bills  and  possibly  by  funding  a  share  of  assets  with  long-term  debt.  A  mismatch  in  the 
duration of a bank's assets and liabilities exposes it to interest-rate risk, since an increase in 
prevailing  rates  will  cause  short-term  funding  costs  to  increase  without  a  concomitant 
increase in interest income from long-dated, fixed-rate loans. Under normal conditions, this 
risk  can  also  be  managed  relatively  easily,  for  example  by  hedging  interest-rate  changes 
using derivative instruments. Unanticipated systemwide shocks to the demand for liquidity, 
however, are far more difficult to deal with. 
During  times  of  systemwide  stress,  such  as  the  one  we  are  now  in,  significant  liquidity 
demands can come from both the asset and the liability side of a bank's balance sheet. On 
the  liability  side,  banks  can  face  challenges  in  refinancing  short-term  debt  in  the  money 
markets.  On  the  asset  side,  off-balance-sheet  exposures  can  unexpectedly  come  onto  a 
bank's  balance  sheet.  For  example,  we  have  recently  seen  how  draws  on  liquidity 
commitments to structured investment vehicles, commercial paper conduits, and others can 
lead to significant growth in bank assets. Banks can also encounter problems dealing with 
unplanned growth in on-balance-sheet assets when market liquidity dries up. For example, 
they  may  have  difficulty  selling  whole  loans,  syndicating  leveraged  loans  that  they  have 
previously committed to make, or securitizing assets, such as non-conforming mortgages, as 
planned.  During  times  of  severe  stress  different  types  of  liquidity  shocks  may  become 
correlated.  Therefore,  when  there  is  a  marketwide  scramble  for  liquidity,  a  bank  must  be 
prepared to manage funding challenges and unplanned asset expansions simultaneously.  
Banks should be prepared to deal with unanticipated and correlated liquidity shocks, both for 
their own sakes and for the sake of the broader financial system. In other words, it is critical 
to have funding sources in place if such liquidity shocks occur. In some cases, an increase in 
deposits can provide a partial funding source. In the face of significant economic uncertainty, 
historical  data  suggest  that  many  savers  may  prefer  to  shift  their  assets  to  relatively  safe 
bank deposits at the same time that cash-strapped businesses and a variety of investment 
vehicles  need  to  draw  down  credit  lines.  Thus,  because  banks  can  both  create  demand 
deposits and provide lines of credit, they act as shock absorbers during times of turbulence, 
                                                 
2   Douglas W. Diamond and Philip H. Dybvig (1983), "Bank Runs, Deposit Insurance, and Liquidity", Journal of 
Political Economy, vol. 91 (5), pp. 401–19. 
2 
 BIS Review 26/2008
providing safety to risk-weary investors and liquidity to borrowers who might not be able to 
obtain it elsewhere.3
Liquidity-risk challenges during recent market events 
Effective  liquidity-risk  management  is  especially  important  –  and  especially  challenging  – 
during  periods  of  financial  stress,  when  many  markets  can  become  less  liquid  and  when 
some  entities  may  find  it  more  difficult  to  fund  themselves.  In  recent  months,  some  of  the 
well-known challenges associated with liquidity-risk management were again revealed, to the 
surprise of some market participants. As you know, this was not limited just to markets in the 
United  States.  Indeed,  some  of  the  recent  challenges  in  liquidity-risk  management  are 
related  to  the  increased  interconnectedness  of  global  markets  and  the  speed  with  which 
market prices can change.  
Recent events have demonstrated  the important role that  banks play as liquidity providers 
and the potential for broader market turbulence when banks have difficulty performing this 
role. The experience of banks with structured investment vehicles (SIVs) provides one such 
example. Let me explain. 
As we are all aware, over the past decade there has been a proliferation of financial vehicles, 
such  as  SIVs  and  asset-backed  commercial  paper  conduits.  These  vehicles  were 
established  for  a  number  of  reasons.  In  an  effort  to  secure  higher  credit  ratings  for  these 
vehicles,  or  to  make  them  generally  more  attractive  to  investors,  the  arrangers  would 
sometimes secure a backup liquidity line from a bank. Certainly, as I said earlier, this is not a 
new  role  for  banks.  Banks  have  been  providing  letters  of  credit  and  backup  lines  on 
commercial paper programs and their ancestors for many years. In other cases, there may 
not  have  been  an  explicit  contractual  relationship  between  the  bank  and  the  vehicle,  but 
some investors may have assumed that there was. Given the bank's role in helping establish 
the vehicle in the first place, the bank's reputation was tied to the performance of the vehicle, 
which gave the bank a powerful incentive to act beyond its contractual obligations. 
If  we  look  at  the  lead-up  to  recent disruptions, two  important  aspects of  banks'  interaction 
with these vehicles over the past several years stand out. The first relates to challenges that 
banks  faced  in  fully  evaluating  the  risks  associated  with  these  vehicles.  Although  SIVs  or 
similar vehicles have existed for many years, the underlying credit risks, legal structures, and 
operations of many recent vehicles were much more complex. This complexity – and the lack 
of information about where the underlying credit, legal, and operational risks resided – made 
these products more difficult and costly to value than many originally thought.  
Stress  testing  and  scenario  analysis  can  provide  valuable  information  about  the  potential 
risks  of  complex  investment  products,  but  in  many  cases  application  of  such  tools  to 
structured  investment  vehicles  appears  to  have  been  inadequate.  For  example,  some 
bankers did not necessarily explore scenarios in which these vehicles' credit ratings could be 
downgraded. They did not necessarily consider that their assets could fall sharply in value or 
that investors might not want to continue financing these vehicles – and what impact each of 
those  possibilities  might  have  on  the  bank.  Notably,  most  of  these  vehicles  mirrored  the 
liquidity mismatch that exists at most banks in that they contained longer-term assets funded 
by shorter-term liabilities, but it is not clear that banks fully considered the potential funding-
liquidity  problems  that  these  vehicles  could  face  if  there  were  sudden  market  moves  or  if 
perceptions of credit risk changed. And they may not have fully explored scenarios in which 
                                                 
3   Evan Gatev, Til Schuermann, and Philip E. Strahan (2006), "Managing Bank Liquidity Risk: How Deposit-Loan 
Synergies  Vary  with  Market  Conditions",  NBER  Working  Paper  12234.  See  also  Evan  Gatev  and  Philip  E. 
Strahan  (2006),  "Banks'  Advantage  in  Hedging  Liquidity  Risks:  Theory  and  Evidence  from  the  Commercial 
Paper Market", Journal of Finance, vol. 61(2), pp. 867–892. 
BIS Review 26/2008 
 3
problems  with  these  vehicles  could  have  ramifications  for  the  bank,  such  as  the  need  to 
provide liquidity support to the vehicle or to incorporate some of the vehicle's assets onto the 
bank's balance sheet.  
As  I  mentioned  earlier,  during  times  of  systemwide  stress,  liquidity  shocks  can  become 
correlated so that the same factors that led to liquidity problems for the SIVs could also lead 
to high liquidity demands in other parts of the financial market, and might also put pressure 
on banks' own liquidity. Some banks may not have been fully prepared for the possibility that 
SIVs  would require  more  liquidity  from  banks  at  the  same time  that  the  banks  themselves 
would be facing increased liquidity demands elsewhere. 
The  second  major  factor  contributing  to  recent  disturbances  stemming  from  investment 
vehicles relates to the activities of investors and the role of market discipline. As I mentioned 
in  a speech  to  your  institute  last  year,4  some  investors  may  not  have  conducted  sufficient 
due  diligence  with  regard  to  complex  structured  products.  Prior  to  the  recent  market 
disruptions,  many  investors  appear  not  to  have  demanded  sufficient  information  about 
complex investment vehicles, or perhaps did not carefully evaluate that information that was 
available.  Instead,  they  simply  accepted  investment-grade  ratings  as  a  substitute  for  their 
own  risk  analysis.  Market  participants  may  also  have  assumed  that  these  vehicles  had 
sufficient funding liquidity, or would receive bank liquidity support if funding became an issue. 
In observing these cases of insufficient due diligence, I am reminded of the old adage "Trust 
but verify." Unfortunately, in this case there seems to have been a lot of trusting but not much 
verifying.  If  certain  market  participants  had  done  more  verification,  they  might  not  have 
invested  in  these  vehicles,  or  might  have  demanded  higher  returns  in  line  with  the  actual 
risks. 
Linkage between liquidity risk and capital 
It is worthwhile to examine the linkages between liquidity and capital, since their relationship 
is not necessarily straightforward. As you are well aware, several large global banks ended 
up having to deal with so-called unplanned asset expansions arising from a variety of liquidity 
stresses related to the asset side of the balance sheet noted earlier. In a few cases, these 
unexpected increases in the balance sheet created some pressures on capital ratios, even if 
the  level  of  capital  remained  stable.  Although  bank  liquidity  management  and  capital 
management  may  be  conceptually  distinct,  recent  events  illustrate  in  practice  how  liquidity 
management and capital management are intimately related, particularly in times of financial 
stress.  In  a  nutshell:  liquidity  problems  always  have  the  potential  to  affect  bank  balance 
sheets and, in doing so, bank capital adequacy.  
When  liquidity  shocks  become  correlated  during  times  of  turbulence,  an  institution  may 
experience  pressures  in  a  number  of  areas  of  its  balance  sheet  simultaneously,  thus 
underscoring the importance of an enterprise-wide assessment of a bank's risk profile when 
considering liquidity risk management and capital adequacy.5
Ideally, assessment of potential liquidity risks should be fully integrated into a bank's capital 
analysis. In some cases, banks may not necessarily generate specific capital attributions for 
liquidity risk; that is, they may not internally quantify liquidity risk in capital terms the same 
way they do for market or credit risk. For instance, to capture market-liquidity risk in capital 
adequacy assessments, banks may decide to make adjustments in other risk areas, such as 
                                                 
4   Randall  S.  Kroszner  (2007),  "Recent  Events  in  Financial  Markets,"  speech  delivered  at  the  Institute  of 
International Bankers Annual Breakfast Dialogue, Washington, October 22. 
5   Randall  S.  Kroszner  (2008),  "Improving  Risk  Management  in  Light  of  Recent  Market  Events,"  speech 
delivered at the Global Association of Risk Management Professionals Annual Risk Convention, New York, 
February 25. 
4 
 BIS Review 26/2008
by embedding market-liquidity premia or applying market-liquidity haircuts in pricing models 
and valuations, or by adjusting assumed holding periods – all of which would increase capital 
attributions in market or credit risk. As for funding-liquidity risk, it is not clear that banks have 
been  able  to  establish a  clear  link between  funding-liquidity  parameters  and  robust  capital 
attributions;  however,  through  testing  and  scenario  analysis  –  exercises  that  capture  both 
bank-specific problems and broader market disruptions – banks should still be able to assess 
the impact that problems in funding-liquidity risk can have on capital adequacy. 
International supervisory response 
International banking regulators are working together on several fronts to respond to recent 
liquidity challenges, and I would like to summarize these efforts before closing my remarks.  
First, supervisors are collaborating to understand the causes of the recent turbulence and to 
identify  steps  to  mitigate  future  problems.  Through  the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking 
Supervision,  supervisors  are  reviewing  liquidity-risk-management  practices  worldwide.  Just 
last week the committee issued a public report that builds on the Basel sound practices for 
managing liquidity risk issued in 2000.6 Among other things, this report highlighted the need 
for stress testing to evaluate the risks of marketwide disruptions, as well as the importance of 
coordination  between  institutions'  treasury  functions  and  business  lines  to  ensure  a  full 
appreciation  of  potential  contingent  liquidity  risks.  The  committee  plans  to  issue  enhanced 
sound practices for public comment in the summer of 2008. Another example of international 
collaboration among supervisors is an interim report by the Financial Stability Forum (FSF) 
Working Group on Market & Institutional Resilience, published last month.7 This report gives 
some broad policy directions for strengthening the resilience of key elements of the financial 
system,  such  as  encouraging  banks  to  maintain  more  robust  liquidity  buffers  and  develop 
better contingency funding plans. The group intends to develop specific recommendations in 
its full report, which is due for publication later this spring.  
Second,  as  I  noted,  there  are  linkages  between  liquidity  and  capital,  and  supervisors 
recognize that improvements in one area can benefit the other. I am sure those here today 
know that supervisors have spent a considerable amount of effort developing the three pillars 
of the Basel II Capital Accord to better reflect banks' evolving risk profiles and to ensure that 
banks maintain a strong capital cushion to withstand the kind of liquidity-risk challenges seen 
in today's markets. Basel II should establish a more coherent relationship between regulatory 
measures  of  capital  adequacy  and  the  day-to-day  risk-focused  supervision  of  banks, 
enabling  examiners  to  better  evaluate  whether  banks  are  holding  prudent  levels  of  capital 
given  their  risk  profiles.  As  has  long  been  the  case  with  our  regulatory  capital  rules,  we 
expect that adjustments or improvements will have to be made from time to time to address 
market developments. There is already work underway in the Basel Committee on Banking 
Supervision to consider the Basel II framework in light of recent events.  
Under Basel II's second pillar, banks are required to have an internal process for assessing 
capital adequacy, the ICAAP, to ensure that all risks are adequately captured. A bank's pillar 
2  assessment  should  cover  the  full  range  of  risks  facing  an  institution,  which  of  course 
include liquidity risks. This internal process will be subject to rigorous supervisory review. I 
believe that adequate stress and scenario testing for potential asset expansions arising from 
liquidity shocks is crucial. 
                                                 
6   Bank  for  International  Settlements  (2008),  "Liquidity  Risk:  Management  and  Supervisory  Challenges," 
February 28. 
7   Financial  Stability  Forum  (2008),  Interim  Report  to  the  G7  Finance  Ministers  and  Central  Bank  Governors, 
February 5. 
BIS Review 26/2008 
 5
The third Basel II pillar, which focuses on market disclosure, is a key mechanism for banks to 
communicate to market participants about their risk profiles. As a strong believer in the value 
of  information  for  markets,  I  believe  pillar  3  will  help  market  participants  better  evaluate 
banks' risk profiles and will enhance discussions between bankers and market participants 
about  risk-management  practices.  To  enhance  these  discussions,  it  will  be  important  to 
strengthen  transparency  about  exposures  to  structured  credit  products  and  securitized 
assets. The benefits of enhanced transparency can be even more prominent during financial 
turbulence,  when  market  participants  become  fearful  of  latent  risks  and  "surprise"  losses. 
Confidence  in  the  risk-management  practices  of  individual  firms  can  be  valuable  in 
maintaining confidence in the markets in which the firms operate.  
Finally, I would also like to mention briefly an important initiative involving more-direct central 
bank  efforts  to  improve  liquidity  in  financial  markets.  In  December,  the  Federal  Reserve 
announced the creation of a temporary term auction facility (TAF) to provide secured term 
funding  to  eligible  depository  institutions  through  an  auction  mechanism.  The  Federal 
Reserve also established swap lines with the European Central Bank and the Swiss National 
Bank, which provided dollar funds that those central banks could lend in their jurisdictions. At 
the same time, the Bank of England and the Bank of Canada announced plans to conduct 
similar  term-funding  operations  in  their  own  currencies.  The  TAF  function,  which  I  believe 
has had beneficial effects on financial markets to date, is expected to continue as long as 
necessary  to  address  elevated  pressures  in  short-term  funding  markets,  and  the  Federal 
Reserve will continue to work closely and cooperatively with other central banks to address 
market strains that could hamper the achievement of our broader economic objectives. 
Conclusion 
If recent events have taught us anything, it is that, during times of market turbulence, banks 
are essential providers of liquidity to others. To ensure that banks are well positioned to play 
this  critical  role,  banks  need  to  carefully  manage  their  own  exposure  to  liquidity  risks. 
Because  liquidity  problems  can  have  significant  effects  on  both  sides  of  bank  balance 
sheets, liquidity risks should be evaluated and addressed on an enterprise-wide basis, and 
should be tightly integrated with capital planning.  
6 
 BIS Review 26/2008
