Linah K Mohohlo: Monetary policy framework and objectives in 
Botswana 
Speech by Ms Linah K Mohohlo, Governor of the Bank of Botswana, at the mid-term review 
of the 2008 Monetary Policy Statement, Gaborone, 24 July 2008. 
 Introduction 
This  year,  the  mid-term  review  of  the  2008  Monetary  Policy  Statement  (MPS)  has  more 
significance,  given  the  changes  to  the  monetary  policy  framework  announced  earlier  this 
year  in  February.  You  will  agree  that  it  is  time  that  we  follow  up  and  provide  further 
information and explanation. 
Since  the  new  framework  was  announced,  the  worst  of  the  financial  market  crisis  that 
developed in the last months of 2007 may have passed. But aftershocks continue, and the 
current consensus is that the worst is over. However, concerns about the health of the world 
economy  have  multiplied,  as  slower  growth  in  many  economies  has  coincided  with  the 
unrelenting increase in the price of oil and food. 
The scale of these challenges and the policy choices are abundantly clear, albeit onerous in 
the short term. You are aware that many central banks have already acted decisively against 
the risks of inflation by tightening monetary policy. 
Botswana does not have any major influence on global monetary conditions. Nevertheless, 
the Bank of Botswana remains responsible for preserving monetary and financial stability in 
the country, and this requires a clear and measured response that is relevant to Botswana’s 
specific situation. 
Monetary policy framework and objectives 
The  changes  made  to  the  monetary  policy  framework  are  meant  to  enhance  policy 
formulation in support of the objective of achieving a sustainable, low and predictable level of 
inflation. Additional factors are now considered more systematically to assess the future path 
of  inflation,  indicators  of  domestic  demand  and  inflation  expectations.  This  assessment 
involves both statistical and expert analysis and, in view of improved analytical capacity, the 
Bank decided to discontinue the use of the rate of growth of commercial bank credit as an 
intermediate target. 
Furthermore, in recognition of the fact that monetary policy is inherently forward-looking, and 
can realistically be successful in the medium term, the Bank now only specifies a medium-
term inflation objective (3-6 percent) and reviews inflation projections regularly. 
Inflation in the first half of 2008 
In the first half of 2008, inflation continued the trend that commenced last October; it rose 
from  8.1  percent  in  December  2007  to  14.5  percent  in  June  2008,  which  is  far  above  the 
Bank’s medium-term inflation objective range of 3-6 percent. Both measures of core inflation 
(16 percent trimmed mean and exclusion method) also registered an upward trend. 
Rising  inflation,  both  domestically  and  elsewhere,  is  attributable  mainly  to  the  international 
price of oil-based products and food. In Botswana, inflation for the category of the consumer 
price index that includes petrol rose from 2.9 percent in September 2007 to 56.1 percent last 
month in June, accounting for about three-quarters of the total increase in headline inflation. 
Food price inflation has remained more stable but high, while for most other items inflation 
has  remained  much  lower  and  generally  within  the  medium-term  objective.  In  June,  there 
BIS Review 98/2008 
 1
was  some  indication  of  a  more  widespread  acceleration  of  prices  which  could,  in  turn, 
indicate the emergence of second-round effects. 
Pressures  from  domestic  demand  abound,  as  indicated  by  growth  rates  of  credit  and 
government  expenditure,  as  well  as  strong  output  expansion.  The  real  growth  of  GDP  in 
2006/07  is  estimated  at  6  percent,  while  more  recent  estimates  indicate  that  economic 
growth excluding mining and government accelerated further in the second half of 2007. 
Monetary policy implementation in the first half of 2008 
For the first four months of 2008, the Bank Rate, which had last been changed in June 2007, 
was at 14.5 percent. At the time, while a short-term deterioration in the outlook for inflation 
was anticipated, the medium-term projection indicated a sustained improvement. It was also 
appreciated  that  there  were  upside  risks  arising  from  the  escalating  food,  fuel  and  other 
administered prices, as well as the impact of a wage-induced increase in demand. Hence the 
Bank’s  Monetary  Policy  Committee  concluded  that  the  bias  was  towards  monetary  policy 
tightening going forward. 
Subsequently,  it  was  clear  from  the  Bank’s  analysis  that  the  outlook  for  inflation  had 
deteriorated, with revised forecasts estimating annual inflation to peak at a higher level than 
previously  indicated.  Hence  the  successive  increases  of  50  basis  points  each  in  May  and 
June brought the Bank Rate to 15.5 percent. 
It is widely believed that interest rates have only a limited influence on domestic demand in 
Botswana,  as  borrowers  appear  not  to  respond  to  interest  rate  changes.  This  is  based 
primarily  on  the  observation  that  growth  in  bank  lending  has  remained  high,  despite  high 
interest rates. This argument is weak in several respects, as it does not acknowledge factors 
such as income growth and the broadening reach of the banking sector, both of which should 
be expected to encourage more borrowing. Even if borrowing was unresponsive to interest 
rate  changes,  it  goes  without  saying  that  increased  costs  of  borrowing  must  be 
accommodated  elsewhere  in  household  budgets.  Therefore,  there  has  to  be  an  impact  in 
terms of dampening demand overall. 
Inflation outlook in the medium term (2008-2010) 
Inflation outlook in the  medium term is influenced by domestic economic activity, imported 
inflation  and  international  economic  and  financial  developments.  For  instance,  in  South 
Africa, there are upside risks to inflation due to the increase in food, oil and electricity prices 
and the forecast depreciation of the rand against international currencies. Hence inflation in 
South Africa is projected to remain above the upper end of the South African Reserve Bank’s 
3-6 percent target to the end of 2009, thus necessitating the maintenance of the current tight 
monetary policy stance. 
The  situation  in  Botswana’s  other  trading  partner  countries  (SDR  countries)  is  also 
characterised by high inflation and, in some cases, the threat of recession looms large. 
Domestically, output growth is expected to remain above the long-term trend, and this means 
that Botswana is not currently facing the dilemma that policy tightening is unduly restricting 
economic growth. The balance of risks, which the generally tight monetary conditions aim to 
moderate, is towards domestic demand adding to inflationary pressures. To the extent that 
the current monetary policy stance is maintained, inflation is expected to reach the Bank’s 
objective range by the end of 2009, all things being equal. 
The  rate  of  crawl  of  the  exchange  rate  is  not  expected  to  result  in  a  substantial  nominal 
exchange  rate  adjustment  during  2008.  This  should  not  add  significantly  to  inflationary 
pressures, especially in an environment of a relatively restrictive monetary policy. 
2 
 BIS Review 98/2008
The latest Business Expectations Survey points to a deterioration in inflation expectations, 
and this underscores the importance of staying the course in fighting inflation. 
Monetary policy stance 
Against this background, there is a need to maintain the current restrictive monetary policy 
stance  going  forward,  in  order  to  restrain  second-round  effects  and  refocus  inflation 
expectations.  Otherwise  a  vicious  circle  of  mounting  pressures  could  make  inflation 
increasingly hard to control, thus requiring more severe policy measures at a later stage. 
I hasten to add that the Bank recognises the need to balance the trade-off between the need 
to control inflationary pressures and the desire to support output expansion; to this end, the 
impact of the current policy stance on economic growth will be monitored carefully. 
It is important to stress that monetary policy is not by itself sufficient to attain price stability. 
Complementary  fiscal  policy  and  the  implementation  of  structural  reforms,  such  as  skills 
development,  that  can  yield  significant  productivity  gains,  are  also  critical,  as  they  help  to 
enhance the resilience of the economy. 
I thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 98/2008 
 3
