Gertrude Tumpel-Gugerell: Moving ahead with the SEPA direct debit 
scheme 
Speech by Ms Gertrude Tumpel-Gugerell, Member of the Executive Board of the European 
Central  Bank,  at  the  EPC  Coordination  Committee  offsite  meeting,  Château-de-Limelette, 
3 September 2008. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
It is a great pleasure to participate in the EPC’s offsite meeting. I remember the first time I 
met you all four years ago. I was impressed by the vision demonstrated by you all and I was 
enthused by the huge task ahead. 
Today, we still have this vision and I would urge you now to complete the task. Not going on 
means  falling  back,  which  means  risking  losing  what  has  already  been  achieved,  letting 
others reap the benefits of the Single Market. 
When China participated in the Olympics for the first time, which was in 1932 in Los Angeles, 
then still the “Republic of China”, the team  was small; it was made up of a single athlete. 
When  the  “Peoples’  Republic  of  China”  participated  for  the  first  time  in  the  Summer 
Olympics, once again in Los Angeles, but this time in 1984, they won 15 gold medals and 
finished fourth in the medal ranking. 
When China accepted to host the Olympics in 2008, it was with the clear intention of winning 
more medals than any other nation – and it did win more medals than any of the other teams 
that had been successful for decades. 
Are  we  ready  for  the  Olympics  with  our  SEPA  project?  Do  we  pursue  our  vision  with  the 
necessary  zeal?  The  first  results  of  intense  training  are  visible  –  the  SEPA  credit  transfer 
scheme  has  taken  off;  1%  of  transfers  five  months  after  the  start  is  not  the  critical  mass 
required yet, but new facilities for merchants and corporates are on the way. 
The SEPA direct debit scheme – clearly the member in the team with a serious handicap. 
One  hurdle  –  the  Payments  Services  Directive  (PSD)  –  has  been  overcome.  For  the  first 
time, a consistent legal framework will be applied in each country. The second hurdle – the 
questions surrounding the multilateral balancing payment (MBP) – will have to be overcome 
as soon as possible. If no solution were to be found, the momentum might be lost and the 
system could fall to pieces again, with all the negative consequences for all those involved. 
Not to mention the third hurdle – today’s cards’ business. There we are at a crossroads as 
well. Either diversity should be preserved or lack of competition could lead to high fees for 
customers. 
Let me focus on three issues today:  
1. 
2. 
3. 
Direct debit scheme; 
End-date for migration; and 
Communication. 
SEPA direct debit scheme needs to move forward 
1.  
So, which are the main problems that the SEPA coaches still face today with regard to the 
SEPA direct debit scheme?  
BIS Review 104/2008 
 1
Migration of mandates 
One is a legal issue. How can we ensure that there are no problems in the migration from the 
existing mandates to the new SEPA direct debit mandates? For creditors, it would be a great 
burden if customers had to sign new mandates when switching from the national direct debit 
schemes to the SEPA direct debit scheme. Some countries have already found answers to 
this problem; other countries are still looking for a pragmatic solution. If it were to become 
necessary  to  make  amendments  to  national  legislation,  the  transposition  of  the  PSD  into 
national  law  would  provide  a  good  opportunity  to  kill  two  birds  with  one  stone.  National 
legislators should not miss this opportunity to help the payments business to become more 
efficient, innovative and truly European.  
Reluctance of users 
Communication needs to be stepped up. This is particularly valid for the SEPA direct debit 
scheme. Direct debit users are reluctant. They have heard rumours and are afraid that it will 
not meet their needs. It is not safe, it is too safe, it is not modern, it is too modern, it is too 
different or more expensive than previous procedures; a lot of opinions were voiced before 
the  product  was  even  visible.  Perhaps,  the  coaches  were  too  busy  defining  the  training 
schedule and therefore did not have sufficient time to train the athletes?  
All users should be made aware that their special needs can be met by means of individual 
offers from their banks, by transparent additional optional services that are offered by groups 
of  banks  or  by  additional  services  that  can  be  offered  at  the  level  of  whole  banking 
communities. 
You  will  have  noticed  that  I  stressed  the  word  “transparent”  in  connection  with  additional 
optional services. Transparency is crucial, because we do not want to see fragmentation re-
introduced through the back door by additional optional services, the main aim of which is to 
protect markets and hamper competition.  
Users are also concerned about the prices. If we want the users to embrace the SEPA direct 
debit  scheme,  it  is  clear  that  prices  for  these  services  to  end-users  should  not  go  up. 
Otherwise, we will face a tough challenge “selling” SEPA to the wider public.  
You may also be aware that EU Regulation 2560 – the so-called price regulation which was 
enacted in 2001 – is currently up for review. Regulation 2560 applies to the customer-to-bank 
domain. It is the clear intention to broaden the scope of Regulation 2560 from credit transfers 
and card payments to include direct debits. So, at the end of this review process, banks will 
very likely face a situation where the prices for cross-border direct debits will not be allowed 
to  be  higher  than  the  prices  for  national  direct  debits.  This  may  have  an  additional 
dampening effect on prices. In any case, an increase in national prices, as a result of the 
review, would clearly be against the spirit of the review and severely affect banks’ reputation 
and credibility in the eyes of their customers. 
Multilateral interchange fee for direct debits 
Costs and prices are not only a matter of concern in the customer-to-bank domain, but in the 
bank-to-bank  domain  too.  The  multilateral  balancing  payment  (MBP)  –  or  “multilateral 
interchange fee” as I prefer to call it, because that is what it essentially is – has proven to be 
a thorny issue.  
Today’s practice regarding multilateral interchange fees (or “MIFs”) for national direct debits 
varies across countries. So, what should be done for the SEPA direct debit scheme? 
A European solution has to be found by the banks which is also agreeable to the European 
competition authority. But SEPA direct debits have to be rolled out in a little more than one 
year from now. This will hardly be enough time to find a comprehensive solution that meets 
all needs and answers all concerns. We face a situation where bankers run the risk of not 
2 
 BIS Review 104/2008
being able to deliver the direct debits by November 2009. This is not acceptable, because 
SEPA direct debits are a vital piece in the SEPA puzzle. It would threaten the very existence 
of a Single Euro Payments Area, run counter to the goals of the Lisbon agenda, reverse all 
the  work  and  efforts  invested  in  this  project,  and  throw  the  payments  sector  back  into  the 
“dark ages” of fragmentation along national borders.  
I would therefore like to test an idea with you. As I said before, we need a European solution, 
but we won’t have it ready in one year’s time. Defining and implementing this solution would 
probably take some more time. Coming back to the world of the Olympics, it would neither be 
a  sprint  of  100  metres,  but  certainly  no  marathon  either,  perhaps  the  best  analogy  is  a 
400-metre run, one circuit in the stadium.  
What  does  the  runner  have  to  take  into  account  before  he  or  she  starts  the  circuit?  I 
understand  that  there  may  no  longer  be  any  future  for  a  general,  transaction-based  MIF. 
Neither for the current national direct debits nor for the upcoming SEPA direct debits. 
Against this background, I would like to make a suggestion. A suggestion which respects the 
views of the competition authorities, but also takes into consideration three further aspects: 
First, the importance of getting the SEPA direct debit scheme launched by November 2009, 
second, the need to create a level playing-field between the national and the SEPA direct 
debit scheme in the short to medium term, and third the time banks still need to develop a 
possible new compensation model.  
Possible interim solution 
What we therefore need is an interim solution. This interim solution should be pragmatic and 
should be acceptable for a limited period of time to make the SEPA direct debit scheme fly. 
The objective of this interim solution is to have, right from the start, at the very least, a level 
playing-field in place for the SEPA direct debit scheme compared with the national, legacy 
direct debit schemes. Of course, the ultimate aim continues to be the total replacement of 
any national legacy direct debit scheme with the SEPA direct debit scheme.  
What is my suggestion for an interim period as from November 2009? There are currently no 
MIFs for cross-border direct debits, simply because direct debits are currently not executed 
on a cross-border basis. Directly after the roll-out, we expect that only very few cross-border 
SEPA direct debits will be carried out. We believe that allowing a properly justified MIF for 
cross-border  SEPA  direct  debits  during  an  interim  phase  would  help  to  make  SEPA 
ultimately successful.  
But what should happen with transactions at the national level carried out by either the old 
legacy direct debit schemes or the new SEPA direct debit scheme?  
During the interim phase, the existing legacy MIFs could remain in place and be applied to 
both legacy direct debits and SEPA direct debits carried out at the national level. As such, 
any changes to the legacy MIF should be applicable to the SEPA direct debit scheme too. 
This  would  ensure  the  necessary  level  playing-field  in  the  national  context  for  the  SEPA 
direct debit scheme and the national legacy direct debit schemes that I mentioned before. 
Given  that  most  direct  debits  will  initially  still  be  conducted  at  the  national  level,  the  vast 
majority of direct debits would thus be treated in the same manner. Customers, in particular 
creditors,  would  not  need  to  be  afraid  of  prices  increasing.  Banks  would  not  see  their 
business model change.  
I would like to reiterate that this is only a temporary solution, for I understand that at the end 
of  the  interim  period,  there  would  no  longer  be  any  transaction-based  MIF,  neither  at  the 
national  level  nor  at  the  cross-border  level,  neither  for  SEPA  direct  debits  nor  for  legacy 
direct debits, which would anyway have to be phased out.  
However, nothing prevents banks from devising other forms of compensation for the future. 
There  are  different  models  conceivable,  or  already  in  use,  in  order  to  cover  costs  and  to 
BIS Review 104/2008 
 3
provide incentives for those involved to offer and to use direct debits. If this compensation is 
based on a proper calculation and methodology, it should also be acceptable to competition 
authorities. Both sides are important here, demand and supply, banks should not only want 
to offer SEPA direct debits, but customers should also want to use them.  
We need a migration end-date 
2.  
What is also crucial for SEPA to be ultimately successful is to have a firm plan after when the 
SEPA instruments would replace the national payment instruments. All studies carried out on 
this  subject  in  the  past  showed  the  same  result:  It  is  inefficient,  it  is  costly,  and  it  will  not 
generate economies of scale, if two schemes continue to run in parallel for a long period of 
time. In short, it will prevent stakeholders from fully reaping the benefits of SEPA.  
Let  me  be  clear  on  this:  The  national  payment  instruments  will  have  to  be  phased  out  at 
some  point  in  time  if  we  are  really  serious  about  creating  a  Single  Euro  Payments  Area. 
Maintaining national instruments means maintaining fragmentation.  
Right now, with SEPA credit transfers already up and running, a migration end-date should 
be defined soon. There is no rationale for keeping national and SEPA credit transfers running 
in  parallel  for  an  indefinite  period  of  time.  For  the  SEPA  direct  debit  scheme,  we  are 
investigating  whether  it  would  be  more  useful  to  wait  until  they  are  rolled  out  so  that 
stakeholders  are  able  to  gain  some  practical  experience  first.  At  the  recent  stakeholders’ 
forum on direct debits, some misunderstandings and reservations were already addressed. 
However,  it  still  remains  to  be  seen  whether  the  end-date  for  SEPA  direct  debit  scheme 
should be set now or later.  
The  best  way  to  set  an  end-date  is  still  open  for  debate.  In  our  view,  there  are  various 
options  available.  One  would  be  self-regulation;  another  would  be  regulation  by  the 
legislators.  Regardless  of  who  takes  the  initiative,  regulation  could  be  done  directly  by 
determining a date for abolishing the use of national schemes, or, indirectly, for example, by 
mandating the use of IBAN or the respective ISO standard. As I said before, this debate is 
still ongoing and I would in fact be happy to receive your feedback on what you consider to 
be the best end-date and the way to achieve this.  
Communication 
3.  
We believe that some users are still uneasy about switching to SEPA because they do not 
know enough about SEPA and its advantages.  
Users need to know more about SEPA, the SEPA instruments, or the different possibilities 
that exist to add features to core schemes so that they fulfil specific needs. In short, users 
need more effective communication; SEPA needs to be “sold” to the users. First of all, there 
is a need for continuous and increased efforts to explain the changes and advantages which 
SEPA  will  bring  to  the  different  end-users.  A  second  way  to  sell  SEPA  better  is  to  offer 
attractive SEPA products and services. SEPA should be user-friendly for customers, whether 
they  are  large  corporates,  merchants,  consumers  or  SMEs.  When  it  comes  to  SEPA-
readiness, there might be a gap between being “technically ready” to send and receive SEPA 
payments and offering marketable, user-friendly SEPA products and services. For example, 
BBAN-to-IBAN  conversion  facilities,  the  use  of  IBAN  only,  easy-to-use  internet  banking 
applications are simple, but also very effective examples of these “must have” services and 
products. 
People have a natural inclination to cling on to things they know and like. Why fix something 
if it is not broken? Here, the onus is mainly on you, the banks, to provide more information to 
your customers and to convince them with concrete, marketable, and high-quality offers. You 
have the direct contact and you are best placed to inform them. Naturally, public authorities 
have to play a role in disseminating information and we will continue to do so. But what is 
4 
 BIS Review 104/2008
crucial, at this point in time, is more effective communication about SEPA from the banks to 
the  user  level.  In  my  opinion,  communication  is  a  core  task  for  the  EPC;  not  to  take  over 
national  responsibilities,  but  to  support  the  national  communication  efforts  with  clear 
messages for the different target groups. 
Cash issues 
4.  
Let me also say a few words about cash.  
The ECB welcomes the continuous dialogue between the ESCB Banknote Committee and 
the  EPC  Cash  Working  Group  and  –  more  specifically  –  the  cooperative  spirit  of  the 
discussions.  Work  is  progressing  regarding  the  implementation  of  the  “Roadmap  for  more 
convergence  of  NCB  cash  services”  and  the  development  of  the  second  series  of  euro 
banknotes is on its way. 
The European Commission has set up a special working group consisting of – inter alia – the 
EPC,  Eurosystem  representatives  and  the  Commission  to  tackle  the  issue  of  cross-border 
transport of cash on the road. No Single Euro Cash Area will exist without having solved this 
issue. 
Furthermore, we took note that the EPC raised strong concerns regarding the Commission’s 
proposal  to  amend  Regulation  1338  dated  2001.  This  regulation  deals  with  measures 
necessary for the protection of the euro against counterfeiting. Certain concerns on the part 
of the EPC are in line with the concerns raised by the ECB in its formal opinion and I would 
like to ask the Commission to take a careful look at the matter. 
Conclusion: Strong governance role of the EPC is needed 
Today, I have mentioned a number of issues that are vital in order to make SEPA a success. 
All this can only be achieved – and I would really like to underline this – if the EPC continues 
to fulfil its role as the banks’ governing body in charge of payment issues. A strong coach 
and diligent training are crucial for any athlete’s success. 
What the EPC has achieved so far should not be the end of the story. The SEPA schemes 
are  in  place  or  ready  to  be  put  in  place.  But  SEPA  needs  to  develop  further.  Further 
improvements to the Rulebooks are under way, which will help to make the core schemes 
even  more  attractive.  Another  road  to  pursue  is  the  development  of  innovative  services, 
which  will  pave  the  way  for  a  highly  efficient  euro  payments  business  in  the  future.  For 
example, we expect pan-European priority payments and e and m-payment solutions to be 
delivered, and let us not forget about e-invoicing.  
To come back to the Chinese and Olympic imagery: following the fireworks at the opening 
ceremony we are on the long march, we all feel the pains of marching on the plains.  
But I am convinced that SEPA will be a success. The example of China and the Olympics 
might help you to understand the final objective: making Europe more competitive and more 
innovative. By doing so, 100 medals for Europe will only be the beginning. 
Thank you very much for your attention. 
BIS Review 104/2008 
 5
