Ben S Bernanke: Semiannual Monetary Policy Report to the Congress 
Testimony of Mr Ben S Bernanke, Chairman of the Board of Governors of the US Federal 
Reserve  System,  before 
the  Committee  on  Financial  Services,  US  House  of 
Representatives, Washington DC, 27 February 2008. 
 Chairman  Frank,  Ranking  Member  Bachus,  and  other  members  of  the  Committee,  I  am 
pleased  to  present  the  Federal  Reserve's  Monetary  Policy  Report  to  the  Congress.  In  my 
testimony this morning I will briefly review the economic situation and outlook, beginning with 
developments in real activity and inflation, then turn to monetary policy. I will conclude with a 
quick  update  on  the  Federal  Reserve's  recent  actions  to  help  protect  consumers  in  their 
financial dealings.  
The economic situation has become distinctly less favorable since the time of our July report. 
Strains in financial markets, which first became evident late last summer, have persisted; and 
pressures on bank capital and the continued poor functioning of markets for securitized credit 
have led to tighter credit conditions for many households and businesses. The growth of real 
gross  domestic  product  (GDP)  held  up  well  through  the  third  quarter  despite  the  financial 
turmoil, but it has since slowed sharply. Labor market conditions have similarly softened, as 
job creation has slowed and the unemployment rate – at 4.9 percent in January – has moved 
up somewhat.  
Many of the challenges now facing our economy stem from the continuing contraction of the 
U.S. housing market. In 2006, after a multiyear boom in residential construction and house 
prices, the housing market reversed course. Housing starts and sales of new homes are now 
less than half of their respective peaks, and house prices have flattened or declined in most 
areas.  Changes  in  the  availability  of  mortgage  credit  amplified  the  swings  in  the  housing 
market.  During  the  housing  sector's  expansion  phase,  increasingly  lax  lending  standards, 
particularly  in  the  subprime  market,  raised  the  effective  demand  for  housing,  pushing  up 
prices  and  stimulating  construction  activity.  As  the  housing  market  began  to  turn  down, 
however,  the  slump  in  subprime  mortgage  originations,  together  with  a  more  general 
tightening of credit conditions, has served to increase the severity of the downturn. Weaker 
house prices in turn have contributed to the deterioration in the performance of mortgage-
related securities and reduced the availability of mortgage credit. 
The  housing  market  is  expected  to  continue  to  weigh  on  economic  activity  in  coming 
quarters.  Homebuilders,  still  faced  with  abnormally  high  inventories  of  unsold  homes,  are 
likely to cut the pace of their building activity further, which will subtract from overall growth 
and reduce employment in residential construction and closely related industries.  
Consumer spending continued to increase at a solid pace through much of the second half of 
2007, despite the problems in the housing market, but it appears to have slowed significantly 
toward  the  end  of  the  year.  The  jump  in  the  price  of  imported  energy,  which  eroded  real 
incomes and wages, likely contributed to the slowdown in spending, as did the declines in 
household wealth associated with the weakness in house prices and equity prices. Slowing 
job  creation  is  yet  another  potential  drag  on  household  spending,  as  gains  in  payroll 
employment averaged little more than 40,000 per month during the three months ending in 
January, compared with an average increase of almost 100,000 per month over the previous 
three months. However, the recently enacted fiscal stimulus package should provide some 
support for household spending during the second half of this year and into next year. 
The  business  sector  has  also  displayed  signs  of  being  affected  by  the  difficulties  in  the 
housing and credit markets. Reflecting a downshift in the growth of final demand and tighter 
credit  conditions  for  some  firms,  available  indicators  suggest  that  investment  in equipment 
and software will be subdued during the first half of 2008. Likewise, after growing robustly 
BIS Review 22/2008 
 1
through much of 2007, nonresidential construction is likely to decelerate sharply in coming 
quarters  as  business  activity  slows  and  funding  becomes  harder  to  obtain,  especially  for 
more  speculative  projects.  On  a  more  encouraging  note,  we  see  few  signs  of  any  serious 
imbalances  in  business  inventories  aside  from  the  overhang  of  unsold  homes.  And,  as  a 
whole,  the  nonfinancial  business  sector  remains  in  good  financial  condition,  with  strong 
profits, liquid balance sheets, and corporate leverage near historical lows.  
In addition, the vigor of the global economy has offset some of the weakening of domestic 
demand. U.S. real exports of goods and services increased at an annual rate of about 11 
percent in the second half of last year, boosted by continuing economic growth abroad and 
the  lower  foreign  exchange  value  of  the  dollar.  Strengthening  exports,  together  with 
moderating imports, have in turn led to some improvement in the U.S. current account deficit, 
which  likely  narrowed  in  2007  (on  an  annual  basis)  for  the  first  time  since  2001. Although 
recent  indicators  point  to  some  slowing  of  foreign  economic  growth,  U.S.  exports  should 
continue  to  expand  at  a  healthy  pace  in  coming  quarters,  providing  some  impetus  to 
domestic economic activity and employment. 
As I have mentioned, financial markets continue to be under considerable stress. Heightened 
investor concerns about the credit quality of mortgages, especially subprime mortgages with 
adjustable interest rates, triggered the financial turmoil. However, other factors, including a 
broader  retrenchment  in  the  willingness  of  investors  to  bear  risk,  difficulties  in  valuing 
complex  or  illiquid  financial  products,  uncertainties  about  the  exposures  of  major  financial 
institutions  to  credit  losses,  and  concerns  about  the  weaker  outlook  for  economic  growth, 
have also roiled the financial markets in recent months. To help relieve the pressures in the 
market  for  interbank  lending,  the  Federal  Reserve  –  among  other  actions  –  recently 
introduced  a  term  auction  facility  (TAF),  through  which  prespecified  amounts  of  discount 
window  credit  are  auctioned  to  eligible  borrowers,  and  we  have  been  working  with  other 
central banks to address market strains that could hamper the achievement of our broader 
economic  objectives.  These  efforts  appear  to  have  contributed  to  some  improvement  in 
short-term funding markets. We will continue to monitor financial developments closely. 
As part of its ongoing commitment to improving the accountability and public understanding 
of monetary policy making, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) recently increased 
the  frequency  and  expanded  the  content  of  the  economic  projections  made  by  Federal 
Reserve Board members and Reserve Bank presidents and released to the public. The latest 
economic  projections,  which  were  submitted  in  conjunction  with  the  FOMC  meeting  at  the 
end  of  January  and  which  are  based  on  each  participant's  assessment  of  appropriate 
monetary policy, show that real GDP was expected to grow only sluggishly in the next few 
quarters  and  that  the  unemployment  rate  was  seen  as  likely  to  increase  somewhat.  In 
particular,  the  central  tendency  of  the  projections  was  for  real  GDP  to  grow  between  1.3 
percent and 2.0 percent in 2008, down from 2-1/2 percent to 2-3/4 percent projected in our 
report  last  July.  FOMC  participants'  projections  for  the  unemployment  rate  in  the  fourth 
quarter of 2008 have a central tendency of 5.2 percent to 5.3 percent, up from the level of 
about  4-3/4  percent  projected  last  July  for  the  same  period.  The  downgrade  in  our 
projections for economic activity in 2008 since our report last July reflects the effects of the 
financial turmoil on real activity and a housing contraction that has been more severe than 
previously expected. By 2010, our most recent projections show output growth picking up to 
rates close to or a little above its longer-term trend and the unemployment rate edging lower; 
the improvement reflects the effects of policy stimulus and an anticipated moderation of the 
contraction  in  housing  and  the  strains  in  financial  and  credit  markets.  The  incoming 
information since our January meeting continues to suggest sluggish economic activity in the 
near term. 
The risks to this outlook remain to the downside. The risks include the possibilities that the 
housing market or labor market may deteriorate more than is currently anticipated and that 
credit conditions may tighten substantially further.  
2 
 BIS Review 22/2008
Consumer price inflation has increased since our previous report, in substantial part because 
of the steep run-up in the price of oil. Last year, food prices also increased significantly, and 
the dollar depreciated. Reflecting these influences, the price index for personal consumption 
expenditures  (PCE)  increased  3.4  percent  over  the  four  quarters  of  2007,  up  from  1.9 
percent in 2006. Core price inflation – that is, inflation excluding food and energy prices – 
also  firmed  toward  the  end  of  the  year.  The  higher  recent  readings  likely  reflected  some 
pass-through of energy costs to the prices of core consumer goods and services as well as 
the effect of the depreciation of the dollar on import prices. Moreover, core inflation in the first 
half of 2007 was damped by a number of transitory factors – notably, unusually soft prices for 
apparel and for financial services – which subsequently reversed. For the year as a whole, 
however, core PCE prices increased 2.1 percent, down slightly from 2006. 
The projections recently submitted by FOMC participants indicate that overall PCE inflation 
was expected to moderate significantly in 2008, to between 2.1 percent and 2.4 percent (the 
central tendency of the projections). A key assumption underlying those projections was that 
energy  and  food  prices  would  begin  to  flatten  out,  as  was  implied  by  quotes  on  futures 
markets. In addition, diminishing pressure on resources is also consistent with the projected 
slowing in inflation. The central tendency of the projections for core PCE inflation in 2008, at 
2.0 percent to 2.2 percent, was a bit higher than in our July report, largely because of some 
higher-than-expected recent readings on prices. Beyond 2008, both overall and core inflation 
were  projected  to  edge  lower,  as  participants  expected  inflation  expectations  to  remain 
reasonably  well-anchored  and  pressures  on  resource  utilization  to  be  muted.  The  inflation 
projections submitted by FOMC participants for 2010 – which ranged from 1.5 percent to 2.0 
percent  for  overall  PCE  inflation  –  were  importantly  influenced  by  participants'  judgments 
about  the  measured  rates  of  inflation  consistent  with  the  Federal  Reserve's  dual  mandate 
and about the time frame over which policy should aim to attain those rates.  
The  rate  of  inflation  that  is  actually  realized  will  of  course  depend  on  a  variety  of  factors. 
Inflation could be lower than we anticipate if slower-than-expected global growth moderates 
the pressure on the prices of energy and other commodities or if rates of domestic resource 
utilization fall more than we currently expect. Upside risks to the inflation projection are also 
present, however, including the possibilities that energy and food prices do not flatten out or 
that  the  pass-through  to  core  prices  from  higher  commodity  prices  and  from  the  weaker 
dollar may be greater than we anticipate. Indeed, the further increases in the prices of energy 
and  other  commodities  in  recent  weeks,  together  with  the  latest  data on  consumer  prices, 
suggest slightly greater upside risks to the projections of both overall and core inflation than 
we  saw  last  month.  Should  high  rates  of  overall  inflation  persist, the  possibility  also  exists 
that  inflation  expectations  could  become  less  well  anchored.  Any  tendency  of  inflation 
expectations to become unmoored or for the Fed's inflation-fighting credibility to be eroded 
could greatly complicate the task of sustaining price stability and could reduce the flexibility 
of the FOMC to counter shortfalls in growth in the future. Accordingly, in the months ahead, 
the Federal Reserve will continue to monitor closely inflation and inflation expectations.  
Let me turn now to the implications of these developments for monetary policy. The FOMC 
has responded aggressively to the weaker outlook for economic activity, having reduced its 
target for the federal funds rate by 225 basis points since last summer. As the Committee 
noted in its most recent post-meeting statement, the intent of those actions has been to help 
promote moderate growth over time and to mitigate the risks to economic activity. 
A critical task for the Federal Reserve over the course of this year will be to assess whether 
the  stance  of  monetary  policy  is  properly  calibrated  to  foster  our  mandated  objectives  of 
maximum  employment  and  price  stability  in  an  environment  of  downside  risks  to  growth, 
stressed  financial  conditions,  and  inflation  pressures.  In  particular,  the  FOMC  will  need  to 
judge whether the policy actions taken thus far are having their intended effects. Monetary 
policy  works  with  a  lag.  Therefore,  our  policy  stance  must  be  determined  in  light  of  the 
medium-term  forecast  for  real  activity  and  inflation  as  well  as  the  risks  to  that  forecast. 
Although  the  FOMC  participants'  economic  projections  envision  an  improving  economic 
BIS Review 22/2008 
 3
picture, it is important to recognize that downside risks to growth remain. The FOMC will be 
carefully evaluating incoming information bearing on the economic outlook and will act in a 
timely  manner  as  needed  to  support  growth  and  to  provide  adequate  insurance  against 
downside risks. 
Finally, I would like to say a few words about the Federal Reserve's recent actions to protect 
consumers in their financial transactions. In December, following up on a commitment I made 
at the time of our report last July, the Board issued for public comment a comprehensive set 
of new regulations to prohibit unfair or deceptive practices in the mortgage market, under the 
authority  granted  us  by  the  Home  Ownership  and  Equity  Protection  Act  of  1994.  The 
proposed rules would apply to all mortgage lenders and would establish lending standards to 
help ensure that consumers who seek mortgage credit receive loans whose terms are clearly 
disclosed  and  that  can  reasonably  be  expected  to  be  repaid.  Accordingly,  the  rules  would 
prohibit  lenders  from  engaging  in  a  pattern  or  practice  of  making  higher-priced  mortgage 
loans  without  due  regard  to  consumers'  ability  to  make  the  scheduled  payments.  In  each 
case, a lender making a higher-priced loan would have to use third-party documents to verify 
the income relied on to make the credit decision. For higher-priced loans, the proposed rules 
would require the lender to establish an escrow account for the payment of property taxes 
and  homeowners'  insurance  and  would  prevent  the  use  of  prepayment  penalties  in 
circumstances  where  they  might  trap  borrowers  in  unaffordable  loans.  In  addition,  for  all 
mortgage  loans,  our  proposal  addresses  misleading  and  deceptive  advertising  practices, 
requires borrowers and brokers to agree in advance on the maximum fee that the broker may 
receive, bans certain practices by servicers that harm borrowers, and prohibits coercion of 
appraisers by lenders. We expect substantial public comment on our proposal, and we will 
carefully  consider  all  information  and  viewpoints  while  moving  expeditiously  to  adopt  final 
rules.  
The  effectiveness  of  the  new  regulations,  however,  will  depend  critically  on  strong 
enforcement.  To  that  end,  in  conjunction  with  other  federal  and  state  agencies,  we  are 
conducting  compliance  reviews  of  a  range  of  mortgage  lenders,  including  nondepository 
lenders.  The  agencies  will  collaborate  in  determining  the  lessons  learned  and  in  seeking 
ways to better cooperate in ensuring effective and consistent examinations of, and improved 
enforcement for, all categories of mortgage lenders. 
The  Federal  Reserve  continues  to  work  with  financial  institutions,  public  officials,  and 
community  groups  around  the  country  to  help  homeowners  avoid  foreclosures.  We  have 
called  on  mortgage  lenders  and  servicers  to  pursue  prudent  loan  workouts  and  have 
supported  the  development  of  streamlined,  systematic  approaches  to  expedite  the  loan 
modification process. We also have been providing community groups, counseling agencies, 
regulators, and others with detailed analyses to help identify neighborhoods at high risk from 
foreclosures so that local outreach efforts to help troubled borrowers can be as focused and 
effective as possible. We are actively pursuing other ways to leverage the Federal Reserve's 
analytical resources, regional presence, and community connections to address this critical 
issue.  
In addition to our consumer protection efforts in the mortgage area, we are working toward 
finalizing rules under the Truth in Lending Act that will require new, more informative, and 
consumer-tested  disclosures  by  credit  card  issuers.  Separately,  we  are  actively  reviewing 
potentially  unfair  and  deceptive  practices  by  issuers  of  credit  cards.  Using  the  Board's 
authority  under  the  Federal  Trade  Commission  Act,  we  expect  to  issue  proposed  rules 
regarding these practices this spring. 
Thank you. I would be pleased to take your questions. 
4 
 BIS Review 22/2008
