Y V Reddy: Some comments on macro-stability in the Indian economy 
Address by Dr Y V Reddy, Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the release of the India 
Development Report 2008, by IGIDR, Hyderabad, 3 January 2008. 
 Professor Nachane, Professor Radhakrishna, distinguished academics and friends, 
I am thankful to Indira Gandhi Institute of Development Research (IGIDR) for granting me the 
honour of releasing the India Development Report 2008 (IDR 2008). This is the fifth in the 
series  and  I  wish  to  place  on  record  our  deep  appreciation  of  the  contribution  made  by 
Professor Kirit Parikh for the initiative and for establishing a tradition of high quality. 
I  had  the  benefit  of  studying  the  IDR  2008  with  great  interest.  It  has  the  hallmark  of 
scholarship and objectivity. It is deep in analysis and lucid in exposition. It is comprehensive 
in coverage and contemporary in focus. Above all, the most distinguishing characteristic of 
the report is its sensitivity to the issues that concern the millions of under-privileged, while not 
losing  sight  of  debates  centred  around  accelerating  development.  I  compliment  Professor 
Radhakrishna and his colleagues for an excellent empirical policy work. I commend the IDR 
2008 to scholars and lay persons alike. 
On  this  occasion,  I  will  respond  briefly  to  a  very  significant  remark  in  the  IDR  2008  in  its 
section  titled  “Overview”  since  it  relates  to  performance  and  prospects  for  the  Indian 
economy. The remark reads as follows: 
improvement 
in  macroeconomic  stability  could  be  due 
“The 
to 
macroeconomic policies. While the prospects of achieving high growth are 
good,  the  prospect  of  maintaining  macroeconomic  stability  must  be  rated 
low.  The  Indian  economy  is  likely  to  be  susceptible  to  periodic  shocks 
originating  from  the  global  economy  such  as  those  related  to  global 
financial crises and volatility in crude oil prices.” 
Of  particular  interest  is  the  comment  in  the  IDR  2008  on  the  prospects  for  maintaining 
stability,  which  have  been  rated  low  by  the  authors.  I  submit  that  this  remark  should  be 
treated as an advice to the policy-makers to continue to accord a high priority to maintaining 
stability  to  be  able  to  sustain  the  growth  momentum  in  our  country.  I  also  agree  with  the 
comment that susceptibility arises essentially from global developments and hence I will treat 
this  as  another  advice  to  us  to  be  vigilant  in  managing  the  process  of  integration  with  the 
global economy. 
The  current  turbulence  in  global  financial  markets  appears  to  be  particularly  difficult  to 
comprehend. The turbulence originated in advanced economies and among global financial 
centres,  provoking  coordinated  actions  by  several  leading  central  banks.  Liquidity  is  being 
provided  by  leading  central  banks  in  ample  measure,  at  relatively  softer  terms,  for  longer 
duration than ever before. Despite prevailing assessments regarding inflationary pressures, 
the concerned central banks are perhaps indicating softer interest-rate regimes thus inciting 
fears  of  stagflation.  The  globally  highest-rated  financial  intermediaries,  mainly  banks,  are 
releasing information on possible losses in installments giving rise to concerns of not merely 
liquidity.  There  is  an  ongoing  process  of  repositioning  of  the  world’s  leading  reserve 
currency, which is naturally complex.  
The unusual steps taken include, Government’s assurance to all bank depositors in UK and 
arranged  amalgamation  of  banks  within  what  may  be  termed  as  public  sector  banks,  in 
Germany. In USA, the proposal mooted for a Super Fund of $ 75 billion has not taken-off, 
while a proposal to freeze interest rates has not had desired impact on sentiment, so far. The 
scope for financial contagion to other economies cannot be ruled out and it is not clear how it 
will  unfold  in  the  year  2008.  The  impact  on  real  economy,  especially  in  terms  of  extent  of 
BIS Review 4/2008 
 1
decoupling of the world economy from the U.S. economy is still being explored. There is one 
certainty in these circumstances, and that is – extraordinarily uncertain times are ahead of 
us. 
It is in this background that Reserve Bank had, in its Mid-Term Review, devoted considerable 
attention to the recent global developments, their possible impact on India and the need for 
enhanced vigilance. 
The scholarly caution in the IDR 2008 in regard to the challenges of maintaining stability is 
arriving a few weeks after the U.K. based weekly Economist (dated November 17, 2007 – 
Pages 75-77) ranked India along with Turkey and Hungary as the riskiest economies among 
select leading emerging market economies. The article states, inter-alia, “Those with current-
account deficits are vulnerable to a sudden outflow of capital if global investors become more 
risk averse. Economies where inflation and credit growth are already high and budget deficits 
large,  such  as  India,  have  less  room  to  ease  monetary  or  fiscal  policy  if  the  economy 
weakens.” 
There is merit in clarifying in detail the perception of the Reserve Bank in regard to these 
related  observations.  At  a  general  level,  it  is  essential  to  recognise  that  the  central  banks 
concerned, being aware of the risks in respective jurisdictions, seek appropriate safeguards 
to ensure financial stability. India is no exception to this practice.  
The  Economist based its conclusion on the standard parameters such as current account, 
budget balance, inflation and increase in bank lending, for assessing the degree of risk and 
one cannot disagree with the relevance of these parameters in assessing risks. But, most of 
these risky elements have been a part of the functioning of the Indian economy for several 
years, almost all through the reform period, and yet the  economy exhibited macro-stability 
and impressive growth even while withstanding some significant domestic and global shocks. 
In view of this evidence, we need to explore  
a) 
b) 
the reasons for such risks not materialising in our economy so far; and  
the measures needed, in future, for insulating the economy from such risks, to the 
extent feasible.  
The reform process in India, lays emphasis on appropriate sequencing of reforms. Firstly, the 
Reserve Bank, in particular, has been treating reforms in financial and external sectors as 
means  to  broader  objectives  of  accelerated  growth  with  stability  rather  than  as  ends  in 
themselves. Secondly, reform in external sector makes a clear distinction between the costs 
and the benefits of trade liberalisation, and between the risks and rewards of capital account 
liberalisation. Thirdly, a hierarchy in capital flows is recognised and management of capital 
account is advocated on that basis. Fourthly, the pace and content of reform in financial and 
external  sectors  are  calibrated  after  taking  into  account  reforms  in  real,  fiscal  and  public 
sector as a whole. 
These  approaches  to  reform  have  had  a  salutary  impact  on  the  preparedness  of  financial 
institutions,  financial  markets,  public  policy  and  above  all,  public  opinion  to  participate 
gainfully in the reform process.  
Way  forward,  there  is  considerable  merit  in  persisting  with  these  approaches  that  have 
ensured macro-stability, while fine tuning them to the changing times and global challenges. 
Reserve  Bank  will,  in  regard  to  both  growth  and  stability,  continue  to  pursue  its  policy  of 
being enlightened by theory, educated by global experiences, and conditioned by domestic 
realities without being bound by any particular ideology. 
A major area of vulnerability for us is the high consolidated public-debt to GDP ratio of over 
seventy percent and persisting, though moderating, consolidated fiscal deficit. The policies 
and  practices  in  management  of  public-debt  in  India  are  acutely  conscious  of  these  and 
hence policies to mitigate risks on this account are carefully crafted by taking recourse to all 
the instruments at the command of the Reserve Bank in a coordinated manner. At the same 
2 
 BIS Review 4/2008
time, reforms in government securities markets have been undertaken in a systematic and 
well-sequenced  manner  by  a  judicious  combination  of  regulation  and  development  of 
markets.  Further,  sovereign  debt  is  wholly  denominated  in  domestic  currency,  except  a 
specified  small  component  open  to  Foreign  Institutional  Investors  and  multilateral/bilateral 
aid. 
Way forward, with a view to mitigate the potential risks, there is clearly a case for continuing 
with such a well nuanced and coordinated policy of management of public debt, as long as 
fiscal vulnerability persists, while at the same time, responding to changing circumstances. 
Similarly, reform of the financial sector commenced early in the reform cycle and the gradual, 
well-calibrated, consultative and cautious approach has paid rich dividends. For most part, 
the  framework  for  reform  in  these  sectors  has  been  designed  by  those  who  have 
distinguished  themselves  in  the  practice  of  central  banking  but  possessing  knowledge  of 
theory  and  having  international  experience.  No  doubt,  a  critical  component  of  reform,  in 
public-sector banking, is underway, warranting careful attention to this aspect in deciding on 
the  pace  and  content  of  further  reforms  in  this  area.  The  Reserve  Bank  has  taken  timely 
steps  to  moderate  recently  observed  high  growth  in  bank  credit  and  has  also  imposed 
enhanced  provisioning  and  risk-weights  for  select  sensitive  sector  exposures  to  assure 
desired quality in bank-lending. 
Way forward, it is recognised by us that extreme sensitivity to risks in financial institutions 
and  financial  markets  is  desirable,  both  on  account  of  domestic  factors  and  global 
uncertainties. 
The  external  sector  has,  by  and  large,  exhibited  significant  strength  and  resilience.  These 
positive features could be attributed to the framework for reform provided by Governor, Dr. 
Rangarajan, and the strategies to meet contingencies as also forex management provided by 
Governor,  Dr.  Bimal  Jalan.  In  the  recent  years,  we  have  been  building  on  these  strengths 
while carefully monitoring the movements in the current account to ensure that the current 
account deficits are within sustainable levels. No doubt, the prevailing increases in capital-
flows  and  global  uncertainties  are  posing  severe  challenges  to  the  public  policy.  Reserve 
Bank has been alive to the potential problems in this regard and I have had occasion to refer 
to these while releasing the India Development Report in January 2005. The need for active 
management  of  Capital  account  and  issues  relating  to  such  management  are  well 
recognised  now,  but  the  complexity  of  relevant  issues  in  the  implementation  of  such 
management has increased. These matters merit a separate and detailed treatment which is 
a  subject  matter  of  my  inaugural  address  at  the  Annual  Conference  of  Indian  Economic 
Society today. 
Let me conclude by appreciating the IDR 2008's emphasis on macro-stability. While there is 
no visible immediate threat to financial stability in our country, at this juncture, we recognise 
the  need  for  continued  but  heightened  vigilance.  We  believe  in  taking  timely,  prompt  and 
appropriate measures to mitigate the risks, to the extent possible, being conscious of difficult 
dilemmas. Let me also reiterate the continued commitment of the Reserve Bank to lay stress 
on  macro-economic  stability  in  a  way  that  it  enhances  the  prospects,  not  merely  for 
accelerated growth but for a genuinely more inclusive growth. The need for such a continued 
commitment  of  public  policy  is,  I  believe,  the  main  message  from  the  India  Development 
Report 2008. 
It is my honour and privilege to release the India Development Report, 2008. 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 4/2008 
 3
