Svein Gjedrem: The economic situation, global uncertainty and monetary 
policy  
Speech  by  Mr  Svein  Gjedrem,  Governor  of  Norges  Bank  (Central  Bank  of  Norway),  at  a 
conference of the Norwegian Public Service Pension Fund 2008, Sandefjord, 16 April 2008. 
The  text  below  may  differ  slightly  from  the  actual  presentation.  The  address  is  based  on  the  assessments 
presented  at  Norges  Bank’s  press  conference  following  the  Executive  Board’s  monetary  policy  meeting  on 
13 March and in Monetary Policy Report 1/08 and NBIM Annual Report 2007. 
 There  has  been  turbulence  in  global  financial  markets  since  last  summer.  What  began  as 
isolated losses in a small segment of the US housing market has gradually had substantial 
spillover effects in the global financial system. Uncertainty and the fear of further losses are 
still reflected in the markets. It has also become increasingly evident that the turbulence will 
result  in  weaker  global  growth.  Only  a  week  ago,  the  IMF  presented  forecasts  for  global 
growth that were clearly weaker than those presented just a few months earlier. 
So  far,  the  direct  consequences  of  the  turbulence  have  been  limited  in  Norway.  However, 
continued turmoil and weaker global growth will affect the Norwegian economy. I will return 
to  this  later.  Let  me  begin  with  some  brief  remarks  about  the  current  situation  in  the 
Norwegian economy. 
The economic situation 
Since the mid-1990s, inflation in Norway has been low and stable and it has been fairly close 
to, but somewhat lower than, the target of 2.5 per cent, unlike the situation in Norway in the 
1970s and 1980s when inflation was high and showed wide fluctuations.  
The Norwegian economy has on the whole also exhibited solid growth since the beginning of 
the  1990s,  despite  a  mild  downturn  in  2002  and  into  2003.  Over  the  past  four  years,  the 
mainland economy has been in a strong upturn, with average annual growth well above 4 per 
cent.  Preliminary  accounting  figures  suggest  that  growth  was  particularly  strong  in  2007. 
Information  from  Norges  Bank’s  regional  network  also  indicates  that  growth  was  strong  in 
2007, but that it slowed somewhat towards the end of last year. 
Employment has risen sharply over the past two years. In both 2006 and 2007, the number 
employed increased by over 3 per cent. The number employed increased by 93 000 between 
2006 and 2007, the highest increase for decades. Employment growth has partly been offset 
by a decline in unemployment and an increase in the labour supply, as a result of increased 
labour participation among the existing population and labour inflows. Unemployment has not 
been as low since the last half of the 1980s, and the number of vacancies is record high. The 
labour market is tight. 
The present economic expansion differs from previous upturns in that inflation has remained 
low  so  far  despite  strong  growth  and  increasing  capacity  utilisation.  There  are  several 
reasons for this. 
First, the opening of the labour market to the new EU countries has provided us with access 
to  a  reserve  of  labour.  There  has  been  a  substantial  flow  of  labour  into  Norway.  Labour 
migrates to locations where potential earnings are highest. Growing numbers of workers are 
moving to  Norway and establishing residence here. Many workers are only here on short-
term  assignments  and  will  perhaps  move  on  when  the  job  is  done  and  when  there  is  an 
economic  turnaround.  In  2007,  Norway’s  population  increased  by  about  55  000,  with  net 
inward migration coming to 35 000. This is the highest population increase ever registered. 
BIS Review 45/2008 
 1
Second, higher imports from low-cost countries and high prices for a number of our export 
goods have resulted in a considerable improvement in Norway’s terms of trade since the end 
of  the  1990s.  Prices  for  oil  and  gas,  freight,  fish,  industrial  commodities  and  engineering 
products have increased markedly. The terms of trade have improved by about 40 per cent 
since 2002. Recently, however, Norway’s terms of trade have fallen somewhat again as the 
rise in prices for some export goods has slowed. Slightly higher import prices are also having 
a negative impact. 
Third, businesses in Norway have become more efficient, lowering their production costs and 
making it profitable to expand their workforces. This applies to both companies competing on 
international  markets  and  those  supplying  goods  and  services  to  the  domestic  market. 
Compared  with  other  countries,  productivity  gains  have  been  particularly  strong  in  the 
banking industry and other service sectors. The business sector has been quick to adapt and 
change, and to make use of new technology that is available in an international market. This 
is probably due the modernisation of the functioning of the economy through the 1980s and 
1990s, which resulted in more efficient markets.  
Turbulence in financial markets 
The financial market turbulence may result in a reversal of some of the positive driving forces 
in the Norwegian economy. 
The turbulence was probably triggered by falling house prices in the US. There were reports 
of an increase in defaults on subprime mortgages from the second half of 2006. Securities 
portfolios had been developed around these mortgages. Uncertainty arose among bankers 
and  investors  who  directly  or  indirectly  were  exposed  to  losses  on  these  mortgages.  This 
resulted  in  a  sharp  decline  in  prices  for  these  securities,  which  then  spread  to  a  range  of 
mortgage-backed instruments. 
In the course of summer 2007, it became clear that the losses had spread to banks, funds 
and  financial  establishments  in  Europe,  Asia  and  the  US.  The  turbulence  also  spread  to 
other financial market segments. Few knew who was exposed to losses, and financial market 
participants started to question counterparties’ financial situation, and held on to their money. 
Many  banks  have  sustained  substantial  losses  on  their  own  investments  related  to  these 
markets, but have also had to bring back onto their books loans from companies they had 
established.  This  has  reduced  their  capacity  and  willingness  to  provide  new  loans,  and  a 
number  of  the  largest  financial  institutions  in  both  the  US  and  Europe  have  had  to  raise 
substantial new capital.  
Crises  and  turbulence  are  built  into  the  workings  of  the  market.  The  search  for  yield  and 
market shares may at times become too intense. One lesson from the turbulence so far is 
that  developments  in  the  financial  system,  with  new  financial  products  combined  with  a 
possible lag in legislation and regulation, have rendered the financial system vulnerable. The 
turbulence has also shown that in a situation of widespread uncertainty and turmoil, different 
segments  of  the  financial  market  are  interconnected,  which  is  not  evident  under  normal 
circumstances.  
An important aspect of the current turbulence is the sharp increase in the price of interbank 
liquidity.  History  shows  that  there  have  been  periods  where  the  spread  between  banks’ 
funding costs in money markets and risk-free interest rates has increased sharply, but these 
periods have been relatively short. The persistence of the wide spreads today suggests that 
banks’ confidence in other banks’ credit quality has been reduced. This would also indicate 
that  banks  prefer  to  hold  substantial  liquidity  in  order  to  limit  their  own  funding  costs.  The 
persistently  wide  spreads  is  also  an  indication  that  this  episode  of  turbulence  is  not  yet  a 
closed chapter.  
2 
 BIS Review 45/2008
Orientation of monetary policy 
Monetary policy in Norway is oriented towards annual consumer price inflation of close to 2.5 
per  cent  over  time.  Inflation  has  been  expected  to  pick  up  for  some  time.  Since  summer 
2005, the key policy rate has been raised by 3.5 percentage points to 5.25 per cent.  
Norges  Bank’s  interest  rate  setting  is  based  on  two  main  criteria  for  future  interest  rate 
developments.  First,  the  interest  rate  is  set  with  a  view  to  stabilising  inflation  close  to  the 
target in the medium term. The horizon will depend on disturbances to which the economy is 
exposed  and  their  effects  on  prospects  for  the  path  for  inflation  and  the  real  economy. 
Second, the interest rate should provide a reasonable balance between the path for inflation 
and the path for capacity utilisation. In the assessment, potential effects of property prices 
and the krone exchange rate on the prospects for output, employment and inflation are also 
taken into account. The various factors that influence interest rate prospects are now pointing 
in different directions. 
As a result of the financial market turbulence and uncertainty about developments in the US, 
market expectations concerning economic growth and central bank key rates have fallen, in 
both the short and long term. The Federal Reserve has reduced its key rate by 3 percentage 
points  since  September  2007  and  interest  rates  are  again  moving  down  in  the  US  and  a 
number of other countries. Interest rates are being cut to address weaker economic growth 
prospects. However, in view of the high level of unsold homes and properties in the US, it is 
uncertain whether the interest rate weapon will be as powerful as in the past. Thus, there is a 
risk that the US economy is entering into a downturn in spite of the interest rate cuts. Should 
weaker developments in the US lead to a broad-based pause in global growth, there may be 
a number of repercussions for the Norwegian economy. 
First, a downturn in the world economy may adversely affect activity and profitability in export 
industries and perhaps even the oil sector. It may be more difficult to sell goods in a falling 
market, and prices for domestically produced goods may fall. 
Second,  turbulence  and  weaker  growth  prospects  may  increase  uncertainty  among 
Norwegian households and businesses. As a result, new projects and investments may be 
postponed, or enterprises may be reluctant to recruit new employees.  
Third,  the  financial  market  turbulence  has  a  more  direct  impact  on  the  business  sector. 
Banks and investors now apply a higher premium and higher prices for providing capital for 
acquisitions, restructuring and investment, and highly leveraged companies have to pay high 
loan risk premiums.  
Falling external interest rates have resulted in a wider interest rate differential against other 
countries.  This  may  lead  to  a  stronger  krone,  but  there  are  also  opposing  forces  in  the 
foreign exchange market. In the long run, the krone exchange rate is determined by changes 
in the terms of trade and permanent differences between domestic and external inflation and 
productivity. But the krone exchange rate also shows monthly and yearly fluctuations. The 
krone was strong towards the end of the previous cyclical expansion, but depreciated when 
interest  rates  declined  in  2003.  Thereafter,  the  krone  appreciated  again  as  growth  in  the 
Norwegian economy recovered. Over the past two years, the krone has appreciated by close 
to 5 per cent.  
Even though the krone has appreciated, inflation has picked up and is now fairly close to 2.5 
per cent. While different measures of inflation as recently as last year were below 1½ per 
cent, the same measures are now between 2.1 and 3.3 per cent. The rise in the consumer 
price  index  (CPI)  reflects  the  increase  in  electricity  prices.  Underlying  inflation  has  also 
increased and is now assessed to be between 2 and 3¼ per cent. Prices for domestically 
produced goods and services are rising at a particularly fast pace. At the same time, prices 
for imported consumer goods are no longer falling. Higher inflation is expected one to two 
years ahead. 
BIS Review 45/2008 
 3
At the same time, growth in the Norwegian economy is strong. An ample supply of labour will 
allow growth in the Norwegian economy to hold up for a period ahead. Capacity utilisation is 
nevertheless likely to decline. Weaker growth in the world economy may have an impact on 
developments  in  the  Norwegian  export  industry,  which  may  gradually  spill  over  to  other 
business sectors in Norway. Household saving is negative and over time households must 
be expected to seek to redress their financial imbalances. Interest rate developments and a 
weaker housing market will probably have a dampening impact on demand for goods and 
services  and  push  up  saving.  On  the  upside,  we  expect  sharp  growth  in  government 
spending,  with  a  marked  increase  in  government  purchases  of  goods  and  services. 
Petroleum  investment  is  projected  to  remain  high.  Current  information  nonetheless  points 
towards somewhat slower growth further into 2008. 
In the monetary policy reports, the results of this assessment are presented in the form of 
this  chart,  which  shows  the  baseline  scenarios  for  the  interest  rate,  inflation  and  capacity 
utilisation  in  the  economy.  Monetary  Policy  Report  1/08  noted  that  the  outlook  and  the 
balance  of  risks  suggest  that  in  the  near  term  the  interest  rate  should  be  set  somewhat 
higher than projected in Monetary Policy Report 3/07. The prospect of higher price and cost 
inflation will in the short term more than outweigh the effects of weaker growth in the world 
economy. 
There is considerable uncertainty surrounding the projections. The projections for inflation, 
output,  the  interest  rate  and  other  variables  are  based  on  our  assessment  of  the  current 
economic  situation  and  our  perception  of  the  functioning  of  the  economy.  The  uncertainty 
surrounding the projections for the interest rate, inflation and capacity utilisation is illustrated 
by fan charts. The wider the fan charts are, the more uncertain the projections are.  
At the monetary policy meeting on 13 March 2008, Norges Bank’s Executive Board decided 
to keep the key policy rate unchanged at 5.25 per cent. The press release issued after the 
meeting  states  that  the  Executive  Board  considered  increasing  the  interest  rate  as  an 
alternative,  but  that  an  overall  assessment  indicated  that  it  was  appropriate  to  keep  the 
interest  rate  unchanged.  Reference  was  also  made  to  the  analyses  in  Monetary  Policy 
Report  1/08,  which  suggest  that  the  key  policy  rate  may  be  raised  further  in  the  period  to 
summer. 
The Executive Board’s strategy is that the key policy rate should be in the interval 5 – 6 per 
cent in the period to 25 June, unless the Norwegian economy is exposed to major shocks. 
The Government Pension Fund – Global 
As  I  am  addressing  pension  funds  today,  I  must  also  take  this  opportunity  to  discuss  the 
Government Pension Fund – Global. 
Heightened uncertainty concerning the financial system and global growth prospects is also 
having an impact on the Government Pension Fund’s investment markets. In recent months, 
price  volatility  in  both  equity  and  fixed-income  markets  has  increased.  The  fall  in  equity 
prices, even after several years of gains, has drawn focus on variations in the Fund’s value. 
In  such  a  situation  it  is  important  to  step  back  and  remind  ourselves  of  the  basis  for  the 
investment strategy that was chosen for the Fund. The strategy must be based on the Fund’s 
distinctive features, in particular the Fund’s long investment horizon. There is little risk that its 
owners will make substantial withdrawals from the Fund over short periods. Other funds or 
individual  investors  may  for  various  reasons  have  to  reduce  their  holdings  or  pull  out  of 
capital markets at an unfavourable time. This may be because the investments are leveraged 
or  that  a  fund  is  subject  to  regulatory  constraints  or  simply  that  a  long-term  strategy  is 
influenced by short-term assessments.  
In  addition  to  its  large  size  and  long  future  life,  the  Fund  is  not  earmarked  for  particular 
obligations unlike traditional pension funds. As a result, the Fund has a higher risk-bearing 
4 
 BIS Review 45/2008
capacity than other comparable funds. The Pension Fund can thus a larger extent invest in 
financial  instruments  that  may  vary  more  in  value,  but  provide  a  higher  expected  return, 
which  in  practice  means  investing  in  equities.  The  allocation  to  equities  will  now  increase 
from 40 to 60 per cent.  
If  returns  vary  across  different  markets  and  market  segments,  spreading  investments  can 
improve the trade-off between risk and return. This is why the Fund is expanding its portfolio, 
not  only  in  terms  of  its  geographic  exposure,  but  also  the  depth  of  its  investments  in 
individual markets.  
The Fund’s strategy results in a very broad market exposure. This limits the Fund’s exposure 
to large losses on individual investments or group of investments that are influenced by the 
same  or  closely  related  risk  factors.  Losses  on  individual  investments  or  main  groups  of 
investments  will  offset  each  other  in  a  well  diversified  portfolio.  The  investment  strategy 
should be robust both under normal market conditions and in periods of abnormal, turbulent 
market conditions. 
Twelve years have now elapsed since the initial capital transfer to the Government Pension 
Fund – Global, which was then called the Government Petroleum Fund, and the Fund has 
grown  and  developed  faster  than  envisaged.  The  Fund’s  future  is  still  substantially  longer 
than  its  short  history.  A  large  and  growing  fund  such  as  the  Government  Pension  Fund  – 
Global cannot adapt its asset positions to the momentary picture, but rather the contrary. It is 
important that the strategy remains firmly in place through turbulent periods.  
Moreover, we must expect that the shocks to which financial markets will be exposed over 
the next decades will be different from those we know from history and our own experience 
of recent decades. History will nevertheless be our most important strategy assessment tool. 
We know the past better than the future. If the Fund’s strategy is viewed from a historical 
perspective, for example the Great Depression of the 1930s and the oil crisis and stagflation 
of the early 1970s, analyses show that in the short run the Fund can survive large losses, but 
that that the value is recouped in the course of three to five years.  
Part of the Pension Fund’s strategy is to rebalance the portfolio by shifting into assets that 
show the strongest fall in value, that is the assets where the crisis is most severe, but that 
historically  have  featured  the  highest  long-term  return  potential.  The  Fund’s  own  history 
includes  a  period  that  illustrates  the  importance  of  not  changing  strategy  during  a 
downswing. After the dotcom bubble burst in 2000, the value of the Fund’s equity holdings 
fell sharply for a period. At the same time, the Fund’s fixed-income investments partly offset 
the losses on the equity side.  
Norges Bank is the operational manager of the Government Pension Fund – Global. Since 
the Fund’s establishment, we have built up an organisation that is capable of implementing 
the  strategy  laid  down  by  the  Ministry  of  Finance.  Pursuant  to  the  mandate  assigned  to 
Norges Bank, we seek to generate value added in excess of the return that follows from the 
strategic allocation.  
The  Fund  has  achieved  an  average  annual  real  return  of  4.25  per  cent  since  1997.  The 
contribution to the return from active management has averaged 0.39 per cent annually in 
the same period. Active management has thus made a contribution of about 9 per cent of the 
Fund’s  total  return.  This  result  has  been  achieved  without  changes  in  the  Fund’s  return 
variability or risk exposure. Norges Bank’s investment management has thus improved the 
risk  to  return  trade-off.  In  the  long  run,  even  a  small  percentage  increase  in  the  average 
annual rate of return will have a substantial impact on the Fund’s size.  
A stated goal of operational management is that a large number of investment decisions are 
to be taken independently of each other both at a given point in time and over time. Norges 
Bank will increasingly use the Fund’s properties in developing investment strategies ahead, 
with particular emphasis on taking advantage of the Fund’s size and long-term investment 
horizon.  
BIS Review 45/2008 
 5
Norges Bank’s mandate sets the tracking error limit at 1.5 percentage points. Given this limit, 
the  actual  portfolio  return  is  likely  to  deviate  by  less  than  1.5  percentage  points  from  the 
benchmark portfolio in two of three years, but it also implies a risk that active management 
may reduce the return by more than 1.5 percentage points every sixth year. In light of the 
size  of  the  Fund,  this  will  be  a  substantial  amount  in  krone  terms.  Losses  from  active 
management  must  be  expected  in  periods.  Losses  are  not  necessarily  an  indication  that 
active  management  is  not  conducted  professionally  or  not  using  the  right  strategies.  The 
performance  of  the  Fund’s  investment  management  must  be  evaluated  over  a  long  time 
horizon.  
Even if the contribution from active management was negative for the first time in the Fund’s 
history last year, it does not change our confidence in and conviction that our organisation 
will contribute to achieving excess returns in the longer run.  
Thank you for your attention. 
 
 
 
  6 
 BIS Review 45/2008
    BIS Review 45/2008 
 7
    8 
 BIS Review 45/2008
    BIS Review 45/2008 
 9
    10 
 BIS Review 45/2008
    BIS Review 45/2008 
 11
    12 
 BIS Review 45/2008
    BIS Review 45/2008 
 13
    14 
 BIS Review 45/2008
  BIS Review 45/2008 
 15
