Jürgen Stark: The adoption of the euro – principles, procedures and 
criteria 
Speech by Mr Jürgen Stark, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
at the Icelandic Chamber of Commerce, Reykjavik, 13 February 2008. 
 I 
Ladies and gentlemen,  
It is a great pleasure for me to attend this conference, together with distinguished guests and 
speakers. In my remarks, I would first like to set out the European Union’s approach towards 
the adoption of our single currency, the euro. I will then spell out the EU’s and the ECB’s 
stance  on  unilateral  euroisation.  I  will  conclude  my  remarks  with  a  brief  overview  of  the 
potential economic costs and benefits of unilateral euroisation.  
The EU’s approach towards the adoption of the single currency 
The creation of the single currency has been a long and truly historic process. Sixty years 
ago,  Europe  was  marred  by  political  disarray  and  economic  disorder.  With  the  Treaties  of 
Paris and Rome, Europe’s leaders started the construction of a united Europe on the ruins of 
the Second World War. Since then Europe has achieved a lot:  
• 
One of the most important achievements is the Single Market, with the free flow of 
goods, services, capital and people across national borders. Consumers in Europe 
benefit  from  the  larger  supply  of  goods  and  services.  The  European  companies 
benefit from the enlarged markets. 
Another  milestone  was  the  creation  of  the  Economic  and  Monetary  Union,  at  the 
beginning with 11, then 12 and 13 and 15 members since January this year.  
o 
 The  Treaty  establishing  the  European  Community  assigns  the  European 
System of Central Banks the primary objective of maintaining price stability. 
The  ECB  has  managed  to  gain  and  maintain  trust  of  the  public  and  of 
market  participants  by  delivering  price  stability.  Although  the  single 
monetary  policy  faced  a  number  of  significant  challenges,  the  ECB 
managed  to  stabilise  the  HICP  inflation  on  average  at  2,1  %  from  1999-
2007.  This  compares  with  an  inflation  rate  of  3  %  in  the  nine  years 
preceding the EMU.  
The inflation expectations in the euro area have been anchored in line with 
the  ECB’s  definition  of  price  stability:  below  but  close  to  2%.  This 
underlines the high reputation the ECB’s monetary policy has gained over 
time.  
o 
II 
Given the topic of my speech, the principles, procedures and criteria that govern the adoption 
of the euro, I would like to underline the key principles for joining the euro area at the very 
outset:  
1. 
A  country  must  first  be  a  member  of  the  European  Union  before  it  can  adopt  the 
euro.  The  EU  Treaty  lays  down  the  criteria  that  European  States  have  to  respect 
before they can apply for EU membership. 
BIS Review 17/2008 
 1
2. 
3. 
The roadmap and the conditions for the adoption of the euro are laid down in the EC 
Treaty. Only based on the principle of a high degree of sustainable convergence an 
EU member state can adopt the euro. 
Each and every one of the countries participating in the European monetary union 
has followed one and the same route towards the adoption of the single currency, 
based on the principle of equal treatment.  
As  regards  procedures,  the  road  to  the  euro  consists  of  two  stages.  As  I  said,  all  15 
participating countries have gone through the same stages, and have been required to fulfil 
the same criteria: 
Stage  one  is  the  accession  to  the  EU.  EU-membership  requires  the  fulfilment  of  the 
Copenhagen criteria.  
• 
Alongside a number of political criteria that require stable institutions guaranteeing 
democracy, the rule of law, human rights and the protection on minorities, as laid 
down in Art. 6 of the EU Treaty, 
candidate  countries  need  to  have  a  functioning  market  economy,  able  to 
withstand competitive pressures within the EU.  
Moreover,  the  candidate  country  has  to  fully  implement  the  EU’s  rule-book,  the 
so-called acquis communautaire.  
  The fact that a country must first join the EU before it becomes a member of the euro area is 
not a coincidence. It is a deliberate approach, which underlines the fact that the EU is more 
than  a  mere  economic  undertaking.  After  all,  a  currency  is  a  key  attribute  of  sovereignty. 
Sharing a common currency implies sharing a common political destiny. 
Stage two is euro area accession.  
A country that has joined the EU has the obligation to eventually join the euro area. However, 
it  does  not  adopt  the  euro  immediately  upon  its  accession  to  the  EU.  Instead,  it  becomes 
what is called in EU-term a “Member State with a derogation”. Countries in the derogation 
phase have a number of obligations. 
• 
Upon accession of the EU, new Member States are required to treat their exchange 
rate  policy  as  a  matter  of  common  concern  and  to  pursue  price  stability  as  the 
primary  objective  of  monetary  policy.  The  Treaty  foresees  that  at  some  point 
following accession, new Member States will join the Exchange Rate Mechanism II 
(ERM II). 
Moreover,  they  have  to  regard  their  economic  policies  as  a  matter  of  common 
concern.  The  economic  policies  of  these  Member  States  become  subject  to 
coordination and surveillance at the EU level. This is an essential preparation for the 
monetary union. Members that once adopted the single currency have to put more 
emphasis on coordinating economic policies because monetary policy is no longer 
under national responsibility.  
 III 
But policy coordination is not sufficient. To join the euro area, Member States must fulfil a 
number of legal and economic convergence criteria.  
The  legal  convergence  criteria  oblige  the  euro  area  applicant  countries  to  put  in place  the 
legal foundations for participation in the monetary union, of which central bank independence 
is a cornerstone.  
The  economic  convergence  criteria  ensure  that  the  applicant  countries  have  established 
economic  conditions  that  are  conducive  to  the  maintenance  of  price  stability  and  the 
2 
 BIS Review 17/2008
coherence of the euro area. The framework of analysis comprises developments in prices, 
fiscal balances and debt ratios, exchange rates and long-term interest rates, together with 
other factors. A number of general rules are used in the application of these criteria.  
1. 
2. 
The individual criteria are interpreted and applied in a strict manner.  
The  criteria  constitute  a  coherent  and  integrated  approach.  They  must  all  be 
satisfied.  The  Treaty  lists  the  criteria  on  an  equal  footing and  does  not  suggest a 
hierarchy. 
The criteria must be met on the basis of actual data. 
The application of the criteria should be consistent, transparent and simple.  
Convergence must be achieved on a sustainable basis and not at a given point in 
time only. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
This  approach  is  firmly  based  on  economic  arguments.  It  is  generally  recognised  that  a 
monetary union requires sustainable macro-economic convergence among the participating 
countries. Once a country joins a monetary union, it loses the possibility to use the nominal 
exchange  rate  as  an  instrument  to  correct  a  loss  in  competitiveness.  As  monetary  policy 
decisions in the EMU are taken in the light of the economic conditions prevailing in the entire 
area,  economic  convergence  is  required  to  ensure  that  a  country’s  economy  is  sufficiently 
prepared for the monetary union.  
In  other  words,  fulfilling  the  convergence  criteria  in  a  sustainable  way  ensures  that  the 
country can integrate smoothly into the monetary union, without a risk of disruption for the 
Member State itself or the euro area as a whole.  
The convergence process and the fulfillment of the criteria are therefore  
• 
• 
not used to exclude countries by putting up extra hurdles for them to pass;  
they  are  used  to  ensure  that  their  inclusion  occurs  smoothly  and  to  the  mutual 
benefit of the country in question and the euro area as a whole. 
IV 
Once a country is able to fulfil these legal and economic criteria in a sustainable manner, it 
joins the euro area. However, the adoption of the euro is not the end of the story. It is merely 
the  end  of  the  beginning.  Indeed,  joining  the  euro  is  not  in  itself  a  recipe  for  success. 
Countries  need  to  pursue  the  right  policies  in  order  to  thrive  in  the  euro  area.  Joining  the 
EMU  removes  the  national  instrument  of  nominal  exchange  rate  adjustment.  This  implies 
increased flexibility of national economies and increased responsibilities for the co-ordination 
of the national economic policies of the member states, because they have to compensate 
for the elimination of this adjustment channel.  
Against this backdrop, the institutional framework in the EC Treaty for the EMU does not only 
set a new institutional framework for monetary policy but also for the economic policies of the 
member states:  
• 
The main tool for co-ordinating the policies are the so called “Broad economic policy 
guidelines”.  They  set  the  overall  frame  for  the  economic  policies  of  the  Member 
States. 
Building on this co-ordination framework the EU leaders agreed on a wide-ranging 
program  of  structural  reforms  –  the  so-called  Lisbon  Strategy  in  2000.  The 
strategy’s aim is to gearing national policies towards macro-economic stability and 
micro-economic flexibility. 
In addition to the co-ordination of economic policies the EC Treaty has put in place a 
framework  for  stability-oriented  budgetary  policies.  The  main  element  of  this 
  BIS Review 17/2008 
 3
framework  is  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact,  which  requires  Member  States  to 
pursue  sound  fiscal  policies.  The  economic  policy  guidelines  and  the  budgetary 
rules  are  important  so  as  to  facilitate  the  adjustment  to  economic  shocks  in  the 
absence of a national monetary and exchange rate policy.  
V 
The EU’s position on unilateral euroisation 
The  EU’s  roadmap  for  euro  adoption  is  solid  and  indispensable.  Accordingly,  it  is  not 
surprising  that  the  EU  has  taken  a  negative  position  towards  unilateral  euroisation  by  a 
candidate country or a Member State with a derogation.  
In  November  2000,  the  ECOFIN  Council  –  bringing  together  the  Economics  and  Finance 
ministers of the EU Member States – formally adopted the position that unilateral euroisation 
is not compatible with the Treaty and cannot be a way to bypass the convergence process 
foreseen by the Treaty for the adoption of the euro.  
The ECB fully subscribes to this position of the EU Council. Allowing a Member State or a 
future  Member  State  to  take  a  “short-cut”  to  the  euro,  rather  than  following  the  official 
roadmap, could be detrimental to that country and possibly the euro area. Because  
1. 
a  sustainable  convergence  that  is  conducive  to  the  maintenance  of  price  stability 
and the coherence of the euro area may not have been achieved.  
It would breach the principle of equal treatment.  
It would not ensure that the country in question pursues the right policies to thrive 
under the euro.  
2. 
3. 
This  raises  the  question  of  the  approach  to  be  taken  towards  countries,  which  would  in 
principle qualify for EU membership (Art 49 TEU) but do not formally aspire to join the EU 
and  are  thus  not  candidate  countries.  This  is  the  category  of  countries  like  Iceland.  Here, 
both the rule of law and the principle of equal treatment provide answers.  
1. 
The  Treaty  does  not  provide  a  framework  for  euro  adoption  by  non-candidate 
countries. Explicit exceptions are only made for a limited number of countries which 
legally  used  a  legacy  currency  before  the  euro  was  introduced,  and  whose 
economic and financial structures were closely intertwined with a euro area Member 
State. 
From the point of view of equal treatment, it would be difficult to conceive that the 
EU  would  be  more  open  towards  euroisation  by  non-candidate  countries  than  by 
candidate  countries  or  Member  States  with  a  derogation.  This  is  also  the  line 
followed by the ECB.  
2. 
This brings me to another question: What would happen if a country nonetheless adopts the 
euro?  I  am  aware  that  unilateral  euroisation  is  being  discussed  in  Iceland  as  a  possible 
option.  
I would like to emphasise that the ECB, in line with the official position outlined above and 
consistent with our mandate, would neither encourage nor facilitate such a move. Countries 
which unilaterally introduce the euro would do so in their responsibility and at their own risk, 
without  committing  the  EU  or  the  ECB.  The  ECB  would  thus  pursue  a  policy  of  non-
engagement and non-support towards these countries.  
4 
 BIS Review 17/2008
VI 
Economic costs and benefits of unilateral euroisation 
Let me take a closer look at the economic costs and benefits of unilateral euroisation. I will 
focus  my  remarks  on  euroisation  in  general,  and  will  not  look  specifically  at  the  case  of 
Iceland.  
Admittedly, euroisation could bring some potential benefits for the country concerned.  
• 
Most notably, the country would import the ECB’s credibility, which could possibly 
lead to a lower inflation rate.  
Euroisation would also eliminate exchange rate risk. In turn, the country in question 
may benefit from lower interest rates.  
On the micro-economic side, euroisation would lead to lower transaction costs, and 
might provide a boost to trade and financial integration.  
  These benefits can, however, not be taken for granted. Most of these benefits can indeed 
only be reaped if they are supported by sound economic policies.  
• 
For  instance,  inflation  may  still  be  running  high  in  case  of  pro-cyclical  fiscal  and 
wage policies. Accordingly, euroisation cannot be a substitute for stability-oriented 
policies.  
Again, this underlines the importance of having in place a stability-oriented macro-
economic framework, such as the one established at EU level. 
  What are the possible costs and risks of euroisation?  
• 
First of all, the country in question may face an inappropriate monetary policy stance 
in case of diverging business cycles. The loss of an independent monetary policy 
and  the  exchange  rate  instrument  may  make  it  more  difficult  for  the  country  in 
question to respond to idiosyncratic shocks, or to correct a loss of competitiveness.  
The  country  in  question  could  also  run  into  logistical  difficulties,  since  it  would 
exclusively depend upon private arrangements with credit institutions for a number 
of  key  services,  such  as  banknote  handling  and  the  execution  of  high-value 
payments.  It  would  also  render  it  more  difficult  to  extend  the  lender  of  last  resort 
function to its own credit institutions.  
Finally, the country would also lose seigniorage revenues.  
• 
In short, unilateral euroisation is not a panacea. Its benefits are uncertain, whereas the costs 
are real, and the risks serious. In particular, it should be stressed that euroisation is not a 
“quick-fix”  for  structural  problems  or  external  pressures.  Admittedly,  euroisation  would 
provide some shelter against adverse winds coming from the outside.  
In a way, the euro can be likened to the armours worn by knights during the Middle Ages. Of 
course, an armour provides a shield against external hits. However, an armour can also limit 
the freedom of action and restrain flexibility. It can give a false sense of security.  
The effects of euroisation are similar. It can attenuate external pressures in the short run. But 
it does not solve the problems underlying these external pressures. If no action is taken to 
solve these problems, the pressures will be building up.  
What about a partial euroisation sponsored by the private sector, as opposed to an official 
euroisation?  I  will  not  dwell  much  on  this  issue.  Clearly,  the  potential  benefits  are  more 
limited, whereas some of the costs may be less acute. Similar experiences with dollarisation 
in some countries show, however, that such a partial euroisation entails some serious risks 
for citizens, business, banks and the government alike.  
BIS Review 17/2008 
 5
Conclusion 
Let me conclude.  
1. 
2. 
3. 
As I explained, the structured convergence process towards the adoption of the euro 
which is laid down in the Treaty provides the best guarantee for a smooth inclusion 
and  a  mutually  beneficial  life  in  the  monetary  union.  Against  this  background, 
unilateral euroisation is something which we would not support because this would 
be a way circumventing the stages foreseen by the Treaty.  
I would like to point out that the house of EMU is built upon solid foundations. The 
house of EMU is open to newcomers; it is not a “closed shop”. However, we would 
like  to  welcome  the  newcomers  through  the  front  entrance,  and  not  via  the 
backdoor.  
Since  Iceland  is  a  European  state,  it  is  of  course  entitled  to  apply  for  EU  and 
subsequently euro area membership. I was asked to provide you with some more 
information about the time frame of this latter scenario. As Iceland is a member of 
the  European  Economic  Area,  its  accession  to  the  EU  could  proceed  relatively 
smoothly.  
As for accession to the euro area, the minimum time between joining the EU and 
joining the euro area is two years. This is because the exchange rate convergence 
criterion  foresees  that  an  applicant  euro  area  country  must  participate  for  at  least 
two  years  –  without  severe  tensions  –  in  the  Exchange  Rate  Mechanism  II.  This 
should allow the applicant country to demonstrate that it can manage its economy 
without recourse to excessive currency fluctuations, thus mimicking somewhat the 
conditions under a monetary union. 
Iceland would join the euro area once it fulfils all the convergence criteria. At that 
point,  the  Central  Bank  of  Iceland  would  become  part  of  the  Eurosystem,  its 
governor  would  have  a  seat  at  the  table  of  the  ECB’s  Governing  Council,  and 
Iceland’s economy would be considered in taking monetary policy decisions for the 
enlarged euro area as a whole. 
Thank you very much for your attention. 
4. 
6 
 BIS Review 17/2008
