Randall S Kroszner: Risk management and Basel II 
Speech  by  Mr  Randall  S  Kroszner,  Member  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  US  Federal 
Reserve  System,  at  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Boston  AMA  Conference,  Boston, 
14 May 2008. 
The original speech, which contains various links to the documents mentioned, can be found on the US Federal 
Reserve System’s website. 
 I am delighted to be here today at this impressive conference. I thank my hosts, President 
Rosengren  and  his  staff  at  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Boston,  for  the  invitation.  I  also 
thank  President  Rosengren  for  providing  such  interesting  and  informative  introductory 
remarks.  
Over the next two days, you will be having a number of discussions on specific aspects of 
operational  risk  and  the  advanced  measurements  approaches  (AMA)  for  calculating  risk-
based capital requirements under Basel II. Therefore, I can probably best contribute to this 
conference  by  offering  a  broader  perspective  about  risk  management  and  Basel  II,  using 
examples from the field of operational risk management. I will discuss the implementation of 
Basel  II,  including  enhancements  to  the  framework  being  undertaken  by  the  Basel 
Committee on Banking Supervision in light of recent market events, as well as a proposal to 
implement in the United States a less complex version of the Basel II framework, known as 
the standardized approach.  
Background 
I  believe  focusing  on  risk  management  today  is  certainly  topical,  given  some  of  the  risk 
management  challenges  that  financial  institutions  have  faced  over  the  past  year.  Recent 
market events have shown that a number of institutions have not maintained satisfactory risk 
management  practices;  however,  we  also  can  point  to  many  examples  of  sound  risk 
management practices during the recent disruptions.1  
Individual institutions are responsible for maintaining sound risk management practices. But 
supervisors, of course, also have a role to play both in promoting effective risk management 
and  offering  incentives  for  bankers  to  make  improvements  to  their  practices.  There  are  a 
number of methods supervisors use to that end – some informal, some formal – including 
speeches,  one-on-one  discussions,  supervisory  guidance,  onsite  examinations,  formal 
supervisory  actions,  and  regulations.  One  substantial  initiative  that  seeks  to  improve  risk 
management practices at banking organizations is Basel II.  
Importance of Basel II 
As you all know, banking activities must be supported by both sound risk management and 
strong  capital  levels.  For  example,  even  where  robust  internal  controls  are  in  place,  the 
potential for losses from fraud can never be fully eliminated, meaning that institutions need to 
hold  sufficient  capital  to  offset  unexpected  losses.  Determining  the  right  level  of  capital  to 
hold for fraud and other elements of operational risk is not necessarily easy, as many of you 
                                                 
1   Randall S. Kroszner (2008), “The Importance of Fundamentals in Risk Management,” speech delivered at the 
American  Bankers  Association  Spring  Summit  Meeting,  Washington,  DC,  March  11.  See  also  President’s 
Working  Group  Issues  Policy  Statement  To  Improve  Future  State  of  Financial  Markets,  and  Report  of  the 
Financial Stability Forum on Enhancing Market and Institutional Resilience. 
BIS Review 59/2008 
 1
here can attest. But the AMA is designed to make that determination more risk sensitive and 
more accurate.  
In  this  manner,  Basel  II  represents  a  major  step  forward  in  banking  regulation.  While  the 
existing  Basel  I  capital  regime  was  a  significant  advance  when  introduced  in  1988,  it  has 
become outdated for large, internationally active banking organizations. Retaining Basel I for 
these institutions would have widened the gap between their regulatory capital requirements 
and their actual risk profiles. That is one reason why the Federal Reserve supports Basel II 
so strongly.  
With  regard  to  credit  risk,  the  advanced  approaches  of  Basel  II  improve  regulatory  capital 
measures by requiring banks to distinguish among the credit quality of individual borrowers. 
Generally speaking, banks holding riskier credit exposures are required to hold more capital. 
Similarly,  the  AMA  framework  requires  a  more  systematic  approach  for  assessing  the 
operational risk to which a bank is exposed and ties an explicit regulatory risk-based capital 
requirement to these exposures. Under Basel I, this charge was indirect and embedded in 
credit  and  market  risk  measures.  In  contrast,  under  the  AMA,  banks  with  higher  levels  of 
operational  risk  –  such  as  those  more  heavily  involved  than  others  in  activities  that  have 
elevated loss potential from fraud, business disruption, or systems failure – generally should 
have  higher  capital  requirements.  By  establishing  a  much  more  refined  approach  that 
requires  banks  to  hold  capital  commensurate  with  the  actual  risks  of  their  exposures  and 
activities,  Basel  II  should  lead  institutions  to  make  better  decisions  about  assuming, 
retaining, and mitigating risks. 
Not  only  does  Basel  II  establish  more  risk-sensitive  and  meaningful  regulatory  capital 
requirements,  it  also  encourages  ongoing  improvements  in  banks'  risk  management 
practices.  The  U.S.  final  rule  for  Basel  II  includes  extensive  system  and  process 
requirements  and  U.S.  supervisors  have  high  standards  for  banks  seeking  to  qualify.  One 
reason for such high standards is that the framework will only function as intended if Basel II 
banks  have  solid  risk  management  infrastructures  and  robust  quantification  methods  on 
which to base capital requirements. Another reason for such high standards is that the risk 
management improvements in Basel II offer broader safety and soundness benefits, beyond 
those associated with capital requirements. 
Risk management and the AMA 
There  are  strong  linkages  between  the  AMA  and  supervisory  expectations  for  sound 
management of operational risk. The AMA builds upon the longtime best practices of banks 
to develop techniques for identifying, measuring, and attributing capital for operational risk. I 
commend  those  of  you  here  today  who  have  made  strides  in  improving  operational  risk 
management,  and  heartily  encourage  you  to  maintain  your  efforts.  Supervisors  have  been 
working  actively  with  bankers  to  improve  operational  risk  management  and  help  bankers 
move  toward  qualification  under  AMA.  A  good  example  is  the  research  and  analysis 
conducted by my colleagues here at the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston: their useful papers 
have covered such topics as estimating operational risk loss distributions, evaluating various 
measurement techniques, and analyzing the reputational impact of operational risk losses. 
Supervisors have also conducted a series of loss-data collection exercises in which many of 
you  have  participated.  More  generally,  I  think  supervisory  attention  on  operational  risk 
management has provided support to risk managers striving to improve practices within their 
organizations. 
The  AMA  has  specific  qualification  requirements  that  are  intended  to  bring  about  risk 
management improvements. For example, institutions are required to categorize operational 
risk losses by event type, which promotes identification of the underlying risk drivers of each 
category. The AMA also requires consistent comprehensive operational risk capture, which 
promotes  an  enterprise-wide  assessment  across  all  business  units  within  an  entire 
organization.  Moreover,  qualifying  for  the  AMA  requires  strong  senior  management  and 
2 
 BIS Review 59/2008
board oversight of the entire process. In designing AMA requirements, supervisors decided 
against  creating  a  mandated,  standard  treatment  and  instead  allowed  for  considerable 
flexibility. Allowing more flexibility lets banks create an AMA reflective of their organization, 
and  it  promotes  innovation  in  AMA  approaches.  But  that  flexibility  makes  banks  more 
responsible for creating a solid and robust process rather than simply providing inputs to a 
supervisory-determined formula. Operational risk management is a relatively new field, and a 
number of challenges remain, such as collecting sufficient and relevant data and developing 
appropriate modeling techniques to capture low probability events of high severity. Naturally, 
validating  the  techniques  used  in  the  AMA  is  also  very  important,  as  with  any  quantitative 
models.  
Pillar 2 and Pillar 3 
While  Pillar  1  minimum  capital  requirements  are  very  important,  people  sometimes  forget 
that Basel II has three pillars of equal significance. Under Pillar 2, banks are required to have 
an internal capital adequacy assessment process (ICAAP), subject to rigorous supervisory 
review. The bank's ICAAP should ensure that the bank is holding enough overall capital to 
support its entire risk profile, and it should provide a cushion against the potential impact of 
periods of financial or economic stress. In its ICAAP, for example, an institution may choose 
a solvency standard for overall capital adequacy that is higher than the 99.9 percent implied 
by the AMA – for example, a solvency standard of 99.95 or 99.97 associated with a certain 
credit rating. As most of you know, estimating capital needs in the tail of a loss distribution 
becomes  more  and  more  difficult  the  farther  out  one  goes,  so  simply  "scaling"  the  AMA 
measure will likely not suffice for truly assessing capital adequacy against a higher solvency 
standard.  
More broadly, one of the supervisory expectations surrounding the ICAAP is that institutions 
should understand the limitations of models and conduct stress testing and scenario analysis 
to provide greater information about potential losses and capital needs. Even good models 
have their limits – such as incomplete data or assumptions that have not been tested across 
business  cycles  –  and  need  to  be  supported  by  more  qualitative  measures  and  sound 
judgment.  Put  another  way,  Pillar  2  is  not  just  about  using  "one  number,"  but  requires 
institutions  to  develop  a  robust  process  to  evaluate  the  full  range  of  potentially  adverse 
outcomes that could affect capital adequacy. This process certainly includes considering the 
potential  for  operational  risk  losses  becoming  correlated  with  losses  in  other  risk  areas. 
Recent  events  provide  ample  evidence  that  underestimating  the  potential  for  concurrent 
losses in multiple risk areas can put pressure on capital levels.  
Pillar  3  plays  an  important  role  in providing  greater  information  on  banks'  risk  profiles  and 
their  ability  to  manage  them.  In  addition  to  disclosing  their  capital  requirements  for 
operational  risk  under  the  AMA,  banks  will  have  to  provide  a  description  of  their  AMA 
process, including their measurement approaches and relevant internal and external factors 
considered. They will also have to provide information about the use of insurance to mitigate 
operational risk. As a strong believer in market discipline and the importance of information in 
market transactions, I believe Pillar 3 will improve bank disclosures about risk profiles and 
enhance  discussions  between  bankers  and  market  participants  about  risk-management 
practices.  
Next steps with Basel II implementation 
In the United States, Basel II has been an official regulation for just over a month. But the full 
implementation process will take time. While I believe that expeditious application of Basel II 
will  have  significant  benefits,  it  is  of  the  utmost  importance  that  the  implementation  be 
undertaken  thoughtfully  and  deliberately.  As  you  know,  following  a  successful  four-quarter 
parallel run, a banking organization would have to progress through three transitional periods 
BIS Review 59/2008 
 3
– each lasting at least one year – before being able to fully implement Basel II. A banking 
organization would need approval from its primary federal supervisor to move into each of 
the three transition periods. 
Of  course, we  recognize  the  substantial  work that  bankers  have  undertaken  over  the  past 
several years to prepare themselves for Basel II, and we think that preparation will pay off. 
Thus,  before  setting  a  parallel  run  target  start  date,  we  strongly  recommend  that  banks 
conduct a sober and frank self-appraisal of their current state as well as their ability to meet 
requirements  of  the  final  rule.  Systems  development  can  take  time,  for  example,  and  it  is 
important to make sure that these systems function appropriately. 
As  stated  in  the  final  rule,  and  as  the  U.S.  agencies  articulated  several  years  ago,  a  key 
instrument  in  the  qualification  process  is  a  bank's  implementation  plan.  This  written 
implementation plan, approved by a bank's full board of directors, is a detailed and tangible 
representation of how the bank complies, or intends to comply, with the rule's qualification 
requirements. Our hope is to provide a bit more information in the next month or so about our 
expectations for these plans, so I will only provide high-level comments here. 
One important part of a credible implementation plan is a thorough assessment of how the 
bank  intends  to  address  the  gaps  it  has  identified  between  its  existing  practices  and  the 
qualification  requirements  set  forth  in  the  rule  for  the  advanced  approaches  that  cover  all 
consolidated subsidiaries. The implementation plan also must include objective, measurable 
milestones  –  including  delivery  dates  –  and  a  target  date  when  the  bank  expects  its 
advanced approaches to be fully operational. The bank must establish and maintain a sound, 
comprehensive planning and governance process to oversee implementation efforts, and it 
must  demonstrate  to  the  full  satisfaction  of  its  supervisor  that  it  meets  the  qualification 
requirements.  Because  the  implementation  plan  (including  the  gap  analysis)  is  the  only 
requirement to enter parallel run, the agencies have high expectations for its overall quality 
and the reasonableness of the approach taken by the banks in assessing their current state. 
The large, internationally active banks subject to the final rule on a mandatory basis – the 
core banks – have until October 1st of this year to adopt an implementation plan and have it 
approved by their board of directors. This deadline for submission of plans by core banks is 
intended  to  ensure  that  the  board  of  directors  will  provide  the  necessary  resources  and 
oversight and prevent delays in implementation efforts. Of course, banks may always submit 
their plans earlier. Once they have adopted an implementation plan, banks have ample time 
to fully meet the qualification requirements, since the final rule allows a bank up to 36 months 
before it would have to exit parallel run and enter the first transition period. As with all things, 
however, waiting until the last possible moment leaves little margin for error. 
Again, as supervisors, we understand that banks face challenges in implementing Basel II, 
and we stand ready to assist bankers as they work to meet the high standards we expect. 
For one, we have already engaged in a number of discussions with bankers to address their 
questions on certain aspects of the final rule. In that effort, supervisory staffs of all the U.S. 
agencies are working together to ensure that we give consistent messages to bankers, and 
we intend to maintain such cooperation among the agencies throughout the implementation 
process. We have also been preparing our examiners to assess banks' practices during the 
qualification  process.  In  this  manner,  we  have  been  working  to  ensure  that  qualification  is 
done thoroughly, fairly, and consistently.  
Enhancements to the Basel II framework 
One  of  the  substantial  benefits  of  the  Basel  II  framework  is  its  overall  flexibility  and 
adaptability  to  new  practices,  instruments,  and  circumstances.  That  is,  Basel  II  provides  a 
robust structure within which to integrate new information and enhanced risk management 
practices as needed. As such, the Basel II framework is well suited to address some of the 
current  challenges  seen  with  the  current  Basel  I  framework.  For  example,  the  new 
4 
 BIS Review 59/2008
framework's credit risk capital charges for mortgages vary with the underlying riskiness of the 
exposures unlike Basel I. Basel II also takes into account off-balance sheet exposures much 
better than the Basel I framework.  
Just  as  lessons  learned  from  recent  events  can  help  bankers  improve  risk  management 
practices,  they  can  also  help  supervisors  further  increase  the  effectiveness  of  the  Basel  II 
framework.  Indeed,  members  of  the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision  recently 
announced  plans  to  strengthen  the  resiliency  of  the  framework  based  on  the  lessons  we 
have learned over the past year. The Basel Committee's plans to enhance aspects of Basel 
II  are  entirely  consistent  with  what  we  have  done  in  the  past  with  regulatory  capital  rules 
upon receiving new information and represent good supervisory practice. These proposals to 
enhance  the  resiliency  of  the  Basel  II  framework  are  fully  consistent  with  one  of  its  key 
objectives – improving risk management – and should in no way interfere with institutions' 
efforts to meet the process and system requirements in the U.S. final rule.  
The Basel Committee's enhancements, which it outlined in an April 16 press release,2 are 
intended to improve Basel II's ability to make the banking system more resilient to financial 
shocks.  For  one,  the  Committee  will  revise  the  framework  to  establish  higher  capital 
requirements 
for  certain  complex  structured  credit  products,  such  as  so-called 
"resecuritizations" or collateralized debt obligations (CDOs) of asset-backed securities, which 
have been the source of many losses during the recent market disturbances. There are also 
plans to strengthen the capital treatment of liquidity facilities extended by banks to support 
off-balance sheet vehicles such as asset-backed commercial paper conduits.  
Furthermore,  the  Committee  will  strengthen  the  capital  requirements  in  the  trading  book, 
given the large growth in trading-book assets and the wide range of instruments held there, 
some  of  them  quite  complex  and  less  liquid. The  current  value-at-risk  based  treatment  for 
assessing capital for trading book risk is limited in its ability to capture extraordinary events 
that can affect many complex and less liquid exposures. The Committee is working with the 
International  Organization  of  Securities  Commissions  (IOSCO)  on  an  interim  treatment  for 
certain  instruments  held  in  the  trading  book,  such  as  complex  securitizations,  and  will 
conduct further analysis to determine a suitable longer-term approach.  
The  Committee  plans  to  issue  Pillar  2  guidance  in  a  number  of  areas  to  help  strengthen 
banks' practices and help them better prepare for financial shocks that could affect capital 
adequacy.  Areas  under  consideration  include  proper  asssessment  of  the  risks  from  off-
balance sheet exposures and securitizations, as well as the need to address reputational risk 
and apply proper stress testing. These efforts relating to Pillar 2 are certainly in line with my 
earlier  comments  that  bankers  must  understand  the  limitations  of  their  more  formal  risk 
models, and think creatively to ensure that they have captured all risks and addressed them 
appropriately.  
Going forward, the Committee will monitor Basel II minimum requirements and capital buffers 
to  evaluate  their  appropriateness.  It  will  also  assess  banks'  internal  capital  management 
processes  and  associated  risk  management  practices.  This  oversight  will  be  particularly 
important  given  some  of  the  breakdowns  in  risk  management  at  institutions  over  the  past 
year  and  the  associated  pressures  on  capital  ratios.  The  Committee  is  also  working  to 
promote better disclosures by banking organizations under Pillar 3. 
Standardized approach in the United States 
As a final point, I would like to mention that U.S. agencies plan, fairly soon, to publish for 
public comment a set of proposed rules that would provide an optional capital framework – 
                                                 
2   Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision  announcement  on  strengthening 
http://www.bis.org/press/p080416.htm. 
the  banking  system, 
BIS Review 59/2008 
 5
known  as  the  standardized  approach  –  for  those  banks  not  subject  to  the  advanced 
approaches  of  Basel  II.  The  proposed  standardized  approach  would  help  increase  risk 
sensitivity and foster competitive equity. Since we have not yet formally issued the proposed 
rules for public comment, I will provide just a brief overview on aspects of the proposal that 
the agencies have already discussed publicly.  
The proposed U.S. standardized approach will be based on the approach of the same name 
in  the  international  Basel  II  framework,  modified  in  some  areas  to  suit  the  U.S.  banking 
system. The standardized approach would enhance risk sensitivity by increasing the number 
of  risk-weight  categories  to  which  a  bank  would  assign  credit  exposures.  It  also  would 
increase  capital  requirements  for  certain  off-balance  sheet  exposures,  such  as  liquidity 
commitments,  and  allow  for  broader  recognition  of  credit  risk  mitigants,  such  as  collateral 
and  guarantees.  In  addition,  the  approach  will  include  a  specific  capital  requirement  for 
operational risk.  
Banks  not  required  to  adopt  the  Basel  II  advanced  approaches  are  facing  a  choice  about 
whether to opt-in to them. Some of these banks may be sophisticated institutions that exhibit 
sound risk management, but they might not wish to undertake the extensive effort to meet 
the advanced approaches of Basel II. The agencies recognize that such institutions should 
be afforded an alternative to more-risk-sensitive capital requirements, one not as complex as 
the advanced approaches. Therefore, the proposal is being developed as an optional risk-
based  capital  framework  for  all  banking  organizations  not  required  to  adopt  the  Basel  II 
advanced  approaches.  We  plan  to  retain  our  existing  Basel  I-based  regulatory  capital 
framework for those banks that would prefer to remain under that regime.  
I encourage all interested parties to review and comment on this proposal once it has been 
issued.  We  are  keenly  aware  of  the  need  for  capital  requirements  to  make  sense  from  a 
standpoint that considers safety, soundness, and competitiveness; we recognize that a one-
size-fits-all  approach  is  probably  not  the  best  for  our  banking  system,  in  light  of  our  wide 
range of institutions. We remain sensitive to the principle that if we have multiple regulatory 
capital  frameworks  they  must  work  together  to  support  the  safety  and  soundness  of  our 
entire banking system without artificially creating competitive inequalities. 
Conclusion 
My remarks today have focused on the risk management aspects of Basel II, with particular 
emphasis  on  operational  risk.  Events  of  the  past  year  have  shown  that  institutions  should 
never let their guard down when it comes to risk management. Even though most of the high-
profile losses during the past year have – so far – stemmed from market and credit risks, one 
should  not,  therefore,  assume  that  less  attention  should  be  paid  to  operational  risk 
management.  The  Basel  II  capital  framework  is  a  positive  step  forward  through  its 
combination of more risk-sensitive capital requirements with strong incentives for improved 
risk management. In this manner, we expect Basel II to make the U.S. banking industry more 
resilient in the face of future financial turbulence and generally more safe and sound.  
6 
 BIS Review 59/2008
