Jarle Bergo: Nominal and financial stability in a new economic world 
Speech  by  Mr  Jarle  Bergo,  Deputy  Governor  of  Norges  Bank  (Central  Bank  of  Norway), 
Valutaseminaret, Sanderstølen, 1 February 2008. 
 Thank you for inviting me once again to this venerable institution - Valutaseminaret. It is a 
pleasure  to  be  here  with  you.  This  morning  I  will  discuss  with  you  some  issues  under  the 
broad heading of “Nominal and financial stability in a new economic world”. 
Introduction 
The  general  economic  environment  has  changed  dramatically  over  the  past  30-40  years. 
When I started my career as an economist in the late 1960s, a belief had evolved that the 
economy could and should be controlled and steered in considerable detail. A widespread 
view was that markets should be regulated and coordinated by authorities. Furthermore, the 
Phillips  curve  was  embraced  as  proof  that  a  long-run  trade-off  between  inflation  and 
unemployment  existed.  By  merely  accepting  somewhat  higher  inflation,  it  was  thought 
possible to reduce unemployment in the medium and long term. The economic policy of the 
1970s and 1980s, which was based on these views, led to high and variable inflation and 
wide fluctuations in the economy.  
In  the  face  of  the  disappointing  experience  from  this  period  and  advances  in  economic 
theory, put forward by among others the Nobel Prize winners Phelps, Friedman, Kydland and 
Prescott, views have now changed. We have learned that low and stable inflation is the best 
contribution monetary policy can make to high and stable growth. The absence of a nominal 
anchor was one of the main reasons behind the pronounced swings in the real economy in 
the  1970s  and  1980s.  It  was  demonstrated  that  a  long-run  trade-off  between  inflation  and 
unemployment does not exist. Today, monetary policy aimed at price stability is the norm, 
and in most countries monetary policy has been delegated to independent central banks. 
We have also learned that very high policy ambitions are not compatible with the way the 
economy  really  works.  Attempts  to  control  all  the  quirks  of  the  economy  will  eventually 
undermine the intentions. In fact, by scaling back on overly high policy ambitions the overall 
outcome will be better. Today the beneficial effects of making full use of markets in resource 
allocation are again widely recognised. State ownership and “dirigisme” have been reduced. 
Competition has increased in most markets, though lapses do occur from time to time. Trade 
barriers have generally been lifted or reduced. Well developed financial markets help move 
capital across borders and between industries.  
Today’s  economic  environment  has  in  many  respects  risen  from  the  ashes  of  failed 
paradigms. In a sense, today’s regime resembles the one we had 100 years ago. From the 
mid-19th century until the outbreak of the First World War, capital markets were integrated 
across  countries  that  had  adopted  the  gold  standard.  Markets  were  largely  deregulated. 
Cross-border financial capital movements were subject to little or no regulation. There was 
solid  confidence  in  the  gold  standard  as  a  nominal  anchor.  Inflation  was  low  and  stable, 
supporting economic growth.  
The  links  between  countries  today  are  even  stronger  and  broader  than  was  the  case  100 
years ago. The number of countries taking part in the global exchange of goods and capital 
has  soared.  China,  India,  Russia  and  many  other  emerging  markets  have  during  the  past 
twenty years opened their borders and embraced capitalist reforms. The economic world has 
become larger. What we have seen is, to use the words of Federal Reserve Chairman Ben 
BIS Review 14/2008 
 1
integration  and 
increased  economic 
“a  wave  of  worldwide  economic 
Bernanke, 
interdependence”.1  
Economic  developments  the  past  15  years  have  been  extremely  favourable.  Inflation  has 
generally  been  low  and  stable.  At  the  same  time,  compared  to  the  1970s  and  1980s 
economic growth has been higher and recessions shallower. Better monetary policy and a 
firm  nominal  anchor  are  in  my  view  vital  factors  behind  this  “great  moderation”.  But 
intensified  competition  and  increasingly  deeper  and  more  integrated  markets  for  goods, 
services, capital and labour have also contributed to containing inflationary pressures and to 
making  economies  more  resilient  to  shocks.  Even  more  importantly,  globalisation  and  a 
better economic framework have lifted hundreds of millions out of poverty, an achievement 
that far surpasses anything development aid has ever accomplished. 
In  his  book  “The  age  of  turbulence”,  former  Federal  Reserve  Chairman  Alan  Greenspan 
states that “…we are living in a new world – the world of a global capitalist economy that is 
vastly  more  flexible,  resilient,  open,  self-correcting,  and  fast-changing  than  it  was  even  a 
quarter century earlier. It’s a world that presents us with enormous new possibilities, but also 
enormous  new  challenges.”2  In  my  presentation  here  today  I  will,  not  surprisingly,  take  a 
central banker’s view and ponder the challenges this new world might raise for a central bank 
trying to achieve both financial and nominal stability.  
Financial stability 
The  last  decade  or  so,  we  have  witnessed  increased  financial  integration  and  competition 
across national borders. The unleashing of international competition in financial markets is a 
positive  development.  By  spreading  and  diversifying  risk,  financial  markets  have  become 
more efficient and stable. Deeper and more mature markets tend to be better equipped to 
deal with uncertainty and distress.  
We  have  also  witnessed  the  forging  of  new  and  ever  more  complex  financial  instruments. 
Increasing  the  set  of  available  financial  instruments  creates  more  complete  markets.  It 
enhances  the  opportunities  for  households  and  enterprises  to  decouple  consumption  and 
investment  from  current  income.  Investors  can  take  on  or  load  off  risks  in  a  more  tailored 
fashion  than  before  and  actively  manage  their  exposures  and  relocate  risks  to  those  best 
equipped to bear them.  
Yet, the flip side of increased financial integration and diversification is the potential for more 
widespread contagion if something goes wrong. Furthermore, rapid innovation and increased 
complexity can make it difficult to assess the real underlying risks of the new instruments. It 
takes  time  for  borrowers  and  lenders  to  learn  the  true  characteristics  of  new  instruments. 
This  increases  the  possibility  that  some  investors  –  and  issuers,  for  that  matter  – 
misunderstand the riskiness of an instrument. As a consequence, expected return may not 
appropriately reflect the true risk. When the true risk of an instrument starts to reveal itself, 
sharp corrections in the market may follow.  
The recent subprime crisis is one example of how new and complex instruments can give 
rise to global financial turmoil. Problems stemming from over-optimistic price expectations for 
the US housing market have spread to investors and financial institutions all over the world. 
The  wide  dispersion  of  the  financial  turmoil  took  many  of  us  by  surprise.  Not  to  mention 
where  problems  turned  up;  in  German  Landesbanken,  in  large  investment  banks  and  in 
Norwegian hydro-electricity-rich municipalities, to name but a few.  
                                                 
1   Ben  S.  Bernanke  (2006):  ”Opening  remarks”  at  ”The  new  economic  geography:  Effects  and  policy 
implications”, A symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Jackson Hole, Wyoming. 
2   Alan Greenspan (2007): ”The age of turbulence”, The Penguin Press, New York. 
2 
 BIS Review 14/2008
One  lesson  from  the  current  financial  turmoil  is  that  the  expected  advantages  of 
securitisation  have  been  somewhat  exaggerated.  Securitisation  was  believed  to  make 
markets  deeper  and  more  liquid  and  –  most  importantly  –  to  provide  continuous  pricing. 
Recent  events  have  shown  that  this  is  not  necessarily  true  for  all  markets  at  all  times.  In 
times  of  distress  and  uncertainty,  some  financial  market  segments  can  cease  to  function. 
When no trading takes place, no updated prices are quoted. This represents a challenge for 
institutions, auditors and regulators trying to mark assets and liabilities to the market. 
This has amplified the impact on the financial sector of the defaults on subprime mortgages. 
In  the  absence  of  pricing,  the  balance  sheets  of  financial  institutions  holding  such 
instruments became opaque. Uncertainty about the potential loss of other banks and about 
their  own  future  liquidity  needs  has  made  banks  reluctant  to  lend  to  each  other.  To  the 
surprise  and  dismay  of  many,  the  extremely  efficient  and  well-functioning  money  market 
ground  to  halt.  Central  banks  had  to  step  in  and  provide  liquidity  to  the  banking  system. 
When  money  markets  go  into  gridlock,  it  is  appropriate  for  central  banks  to  ease  banks’ 
liquidity problems, but they should do so at a price that maintains the incentive to restore the 
smooth functioning of the market.  
Losses and evaporating liquidity then hit the capital base of many financial institutions. So 
far,  the  most  severe  problems  have  been  local  or  national,  like  the  British  bank  Northern 
Rock and the Norwegian brokerage house Terra Securities. These problems were resolved 
by means of national remedies. But with increased integration and the emergence of cross-
border banks, sooner or later we are bound to encounter a problem in a bank or financial 
institution that may be systemically important in several countries (but not necessarily in the 
home  country).  The  existence  of  cross-border  institutions  makes  crisis  management  more 
challenging,  as  it  necessitates  close  cooperation  between  central  banks,  supervisory 
authorities and finance ministries in different countries. With one global financial market, one 
could  wish  there  were  one  supervisory  authority,  one  liquidity  provider  and  one  public 
treasury with a common script for handling crisis situations. We are far from this point. At the 
recent Davos World Economic Forum the head of the BIS, Malcolm Knight, stated that the 
“major  challenge”  for  regulators  was  “the  Balkanisation  of  regulation  –  fragmented  across 
market  segments,  across  national  jurisdictions  and  yet  we  want  to  have  a  global  financial 
system.” 3
A single financial market is one of the EU’s objectives. Against the background of growing 
integration, crisis management has been moved up on the agenda within the EU. Norway is 
participating in extensive discussions on this topic under the auspices of the EEA agreement 
and  in  separate  talks  with  the  other  Nordic  countries.  As  an  example,  the  Nordic  central 
banks have agreed on a Memorandum of Understanding on crisis management that provides 
guidelines for information sharing and gathering, coordination of decision-making and so on. 
The surprisingly wide dispersion of the subprime crisis has led to calls for an international 
overseer charged with keeping a complete account of the financial flows and pipelines that 
transfer  contagion  across  borders  in  order  to  provide  an  early  warning  system  to  identify 
emerging crises. In a speech two weeks ago, British Prime Minister Gordon Brown proposed 
a  new  role  for  the  IMF:  “…its  role  should  be  to  prevent  crises  and  not  simply  manage  or 
resolve them as in the past. And in a wider role the IMF, working with the global financial 
stability forum, should be at the heart of what we need – an early warning system involving 
regulators  and  supervisors  in  all  countries  for  financial  turbulence  affecting  the  global 
economy.”4
                                                 
3   Financial Times January 26, 2008. 
4   Speech at the Chamber of Commence in Delhi, 21 January 2008. 
BIS Review 14/2008 
 3
Obviously, there are pipelines that are not on our present maps. Also, our knowledge of what 
flows through the known ones is scarce. But would it help us if we knew? Would we be able 
to predict a looming crisis and thus prevent it? I do not have the answer to this, but I think it is 
fair to raise the question.  
We must expect turmoil in financial markets to occur from time to time. There will always be 
stupidity  and  greed,  fear  and  euphoria  (and  some  scoundrels).  Accidents  will  happen. 
Authorities should strive to establish regulatory frameworks that give the right incentives for 
prudent behaviour. It is important to avoid overregulation that severely restricts markets and 
stifles  innovation.  We  must  of  course  make  sure  that  obvious  shortcomings  in  existing 
regulations are corrected. One such loophole was the possibility for banks to provide short-
term  guarantees  without  having  to  set  aside  regulatory  capital.  The  new  capital  adequacy 
framework, Basel II, rectifies this situation. It is also important to encourage market discipline 
and counterparty surveillance, crucial elements to the well functioning of financial markets. 
Basel  II  is  enhanced  through  the  so-called  Pillar  III,  which  requires  banks  to  publish 
information on key parameters of their business profile, risk exposure and risk management. 
The recent episodes have also reminded us of the importance of vigilance and competence 
in supervision.  
In  general,  the  markets  themselves  are  the  best  regulators  as  long  as  economic  agents 
follow  the  advice  of  Sir  John  Gieve,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  England:  “Financial 
markets  …  can  only  work  well  if  investors  and  firms  expect  to  live  or  die  by  their  own 
decisions and do not come to rely on a safety net to mitigate their losses.”5 That is a good 
advice also with respect to safeguarding financial stability in a rapidly changing world. We 
might  not  be  there  quite  yet.  With  reference  to  the  banking  industry,  as  Martin  Wolf  so 
eloquently put it in the Financial Times: “No industry has a comparable talent for privatising 
gains and socialising losses. Participants in no other industry get as self-righteously angry 
when  public  officials  –  particularly,  central  bankers  –  fail  to  come  at  once  to  their  rescue 
when they get into (well-deserved) trouble.”6
Nominal stability 
Let me now turn to challenges to nominal stability.  
The entrance of new, large emerging economies into the world trading system has strongly 
influenced relative prices and the prospects for nominal stability. The potential labour supply 
available for the global economy has doubled7 and increased relative to the supply of capital. 
Wage shares have fallen and profit shares have risen, both globally and in Norway. Firms in 
high-cost countries increasingly offshore activities to low-cost countries. Imports of goods in 
industrialised  countries have  shifted  from  high-cost  to  low-cost  countries.  Furthermore,  the 
collapse of the Soviet Union and the accession of Central and East European countries to 
the European Union have played a significant role for the labour market in Europe. Labour 
migration has increased. Off-shoring and outsourcing – or merely the threat of it – may have, 
at least temporarily, reduced the bargaining power of trade unions and employees. Increased 
competition,  both  in  product  and  labour  markets,  has  probably  motivated  productivity-
enhancing measures. Productivity growth has been unusually high.  
                                                 
5   John Gieve (2006): “Practical Issues in Preparing for Cross-Border Financial Crises”, at the Financial Stability 
Forum Workshop: “Planning and Communication for Financial Crises and Business Continuity Incidents”, 13 
November. 
6   Financial Times January 16 2008. 
7   See  Richard  Freeman  (2006)  “Labour  Market  Imbalances:  Shortages,  or  Surpluses,  or  Fish  Stories?” 
presented at the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston’s Economic Conference, June. 
4 
 BIS Review 14/2008
Lower  import  prices,  intensified  competition  and  high  productivity  growth  have  been 
important disinflationary forces both in Norway and elsewhere. As a result, many countries 
have been able to bring down inflation at virtually no cost. In this respect, we can probably 
talk about some degree of endogeneity in inflation. However, it is still the non-trivial task of 
monetary policy to ensure that inflation remains low and stable on a more permanent basis. 
In a country with its own national currency, inflation is not something that just drifts in with the 
wind  from  abroad.  It  is  the  monetary  policy  choices  we  make  that  determine  price 
developments over time. As Ken Rogoff, professor of economics at Harvard University, has 
so  aptly  phrased  it:  “…any  central  bank,  no  matter  how  small  or  open  its  economy,  can 
always  stabilise  domestic  prices  at  medium-  to  long-term  horizons,  should  it  choose  to  do 
so…Globalisation may affect the parameters of central bank models, but independent central 
banks still control their own inflation destinies…”.8
For  some  years  now,  the  short-run  trade-off  between  inflation  and  economic  growth  has 
been extraordinarily favourable. Inflation has been low and economic growth high. We have 
been  hit  by  massive  and  long-lasting  positive  supply  shocks  thanks  to  the  globalisation 
process.  To  accommodate  a  higher  growth  potential  and  to  maintain  the  nominal  anchor, 
central banks worldwide for a long period held short-term interest rates well below what can 
be regarded as a normal level.  
Furthermore, long-term real interest rates have declined markedly since the 1980s and the 
beginning  of  the  1990s  and  have  been  especially  low  in  recent  years.  A  fall  would  seem 
reasonable  since  expectations  concerning  future  inflation  in  our  economy  and  the  world 
economy  have  become  far  more  stable,  thus  reducing  the  inflation  risk  premium.9  But  it 
seems unlikely that this is the whole explanation. Two theories are often invoked to explain 
the low real interest rates in recent years: The saving glut theory and the liquidity glut theory.  
The  saving  glut  theory  posits  that  some  countries  for  various  reasons  have  very  high 
propensities to save10 and lack sufficient domestic investment opportunities. Current account 
surpluses,  particularly  in  Asian  countries  and  oil-exporting  countries,  have  increased  the 
world’s  total  savings,  thereby  exerting  downward  pressure  on  long-term  interest  rates  to 
bring capital markets back into balance.11 In this case, low real interest rates globally can be 
understood  as  a  natural  response  to  the  preferences  of  welfare-maximising  economic 
agents.  For  a  given  country,  these  interest  rates  might  seem  uncomfortably  low,  but 
monetary policy-makers’ scope for influencing this is limited.  
Alternatively, or additionally, low long-term real interest rates can be seen as a consequence 
of excessive liquidity creation. Central banks may have fuelled the markets with low short-
term rates and very generous supplies of liquidity to prop up growth or to keep inflation from 
falling below target. But financial intermediaries also create liquidity.12 As financial markets in 
                                                 
8   Kenneth S. Rogoff (2006): ”Impact of globalisation on monetary policy”, A symposium sponsored by Federal 
Reserve  Bank  of  Kansas  City,  Jackson  Hole,  Wyoming.  Uncertainty  about  future  inflation  generates 
uncertainty  as  to  the  real  value  of  investments  and  investors  may  require  an  extra  compensation  –  a  risk 
premium – for this. 
9   Uncertainty about future inflation generates uncertainty as to the real value of investments and investors may 
require an extra compensation – a risk premium – for this. 
10   E.g. because of inadequate public pensions and safety nets or the desire to make inter-generational transfers 
of proceeds from non-renewable resources. 
11   The saving glut theory has been emphasised by Ben Bernanke (2005), now Chairman of the Federal Reserve, 
in the speech  ”The Global Saving Glut and the U.S. Current Account Deficit”, see www.federalreserve.gov. 
Since  then  the  list  of  references  discussing  this  issue  is  unlimited,  but  the  IMF  World  Economic  Outlook 
September 2005, “Global Imbalances: A saving and investment perspective” offers a discussion. 
12   One proponent of the liquidity glut theory is Richard Duncan “The Dollar Crisis”, John Wile & Sons, 2005. See 
also the survey of the world economy in The Economist September 16TH – 22ND 2006 (Unnatural Causes of 
Debt) for a discussion. 
BIS Review 14/2008 
 5
different countries have become more integrated and new financial instruments have been 
introduced,  liquidity  and  credit  flow  more  easily  between  borrowers  and  lenders  across 
borders.  More  than  ever  before  financial  intermediaries  are  driving  the  global  credit-  and 
liquidity  creating  process,  and  today,  financial  intermediaries  have  a  substantial  impact  on 
global  monetary  conditions.  In  a  recent  article  in  the  Financial  Times,  Mohamed  El-Erian 
observes  that:  “Central  bankers  now  operate  in  a  world  where  monetary  policy  influences 
only a small part of the fluctuations in overall liquidity in the economy. Endogenous liquidity, 
or the extent to which the market itself expands and contracts liquidity, has taken over as the 
main driver.”13
This may well be so but it is far from obvious why abundant liquidity, which is necessarily 
short-term,  and  low  short-term  interest  rates  should  keep  long-term  rates  very  low  over 
protracted  periods  of  time.  There  might  have  been  elements  of  both  a  saving  glut  and  a 
liquidity glut in recent years. It seems fair to conclude, however, that in the global economy 
there is limited scope for the individual central bank to influence long-term real interest rates. 
In a Wicksellian sense this might be awkward. In a way we can argue that the root cause of 
these challenges to monetary policy is the global macroeconomic imbalances.  
While  improved  monetary  policy  and  the  globalisation  process  have  contributed  to  lower 
inflation  and  lower  output  volatility,  asset  price  and  exchange  rate  volatility  seem  to  have 
been  unaffected.14  In  fact,  some  argue  that  with  a  credible  nominal  anchor  and  stable 
inflation expectations, low interest rates and hence higher liquidity first and foremost translate 
into higher asset prices – not higher inflation as measured in the conventional way.15 Rapidly 
rising property prices and debt over long periods can be a source of future instability in the 
real economy. This has fuelled a debate as to whether monetary policy should give weight to 
developments  in  property  and  credit  markets  beyond  their  impact  on  consumer  price 
inflation, and react in a precautionary manner to prevent an excessive surge in asset prices.  
Surely, expansionary monetary policies have contributed to the rise in property prices and 
debt accumulation. Asset prices generally will react to changes in short-term interest rates, 
but one would expect such movements to more or less even out over the cycle. But more 
fundamental forces have also been at play. First, the neutral real interest rate has probably 
fallen substantially over the past 5-10 years, maybe as much as 2 percentage points. Such a 
fall in the discount factor should have a large impact on asset prices like property and land. 
Second, Norway has recently experienced very strong, positive income shocks. For capital 
and  labour  that  flow  freely  across  borders,  prices  primarily  reflect  global  growth  and 
competitive conditions. The price of fixed capital, such as land, however, will be influenced 
by  expected  future  income  in  a  country.  In  periods  with  sharp  increases  in  income  and 
income expectations we would therefore expect land prices to rise at a faster pace than other 
prices. This is a real economic effect, which monetary policy over time cannot eliminate.  
It is very difficult to establish whether rapidly increasing asset and house prices are bubbles, 
or  whether  the  price  increases  are driven  primarily  by  economic  fundamentals.  If  we  were 
convinced  of  the  existence  of  a  bubble  and  had  the  necessary  instruments  available,  we 
should act. But it is not our conviction that monetary policy can in any meaningful way control 
asset price developments. Low and stable consumer price inflation is the operational target 
of  monetary  policy.  There  is,  however,  an  ongoing  discussion  on  how  best  to  capture  the 
cost of housing in the CPI. It might very well be that our present methods could be improved.   
                                                 
13   Financial Times January 17 2008. El-Erian is co-chief executive and co-chief investment officer of Pimco. 
14   Kenneth  S.  Rogoff  (2006,  see  footnote  8)  and  M.  Lettau,  S.  C.  Ludvigson  and  J.  A.  Wachter  (2004)  “The 
declining equity premium: What role does macroeconomic risk play?” NBER Working paper 10270. 
15   Proponents of this view are Claudio Borio and Philip Lowe in some BIS studies, se for example Working Paper 
114/2002 “Asset prices, financial and monetary stability: Exploring the nexus” and Working Paper 216/2006 
“Monetary and prudential policies at a crossroad? New challenges in the new century.” 
6 
 BIS Review 14/2008
While  monetary  policies  aimed  at  nominal  stability  have  stood  us  in  good  stead,  and  can 
continue to be pursued also in a world where markets are truly global, the sailing might very 
well be less smooth ahead. As Ken Rogoff puts it “…the greatest challenge ahead for central 
banks  is  to make  sure  that  their  institutional  mechanisms  for  preserving  low-trend  inflation 
are robust to possible setbacks in the future course of globalisation…”16
As I pointed to earlier we have been greatly helped by positive supply-side shocks in recent 
years. Fighting inflation has been almost costless. This may change in future.  
One could argue that the process of disinflation will ebb, and downward price pressures from 
cheap imported goods abate. What initiated the process of disinflation in the first place was 
the  integration  of  labour-abundant  developing  countries  into  the  world  economy.  In  the 
course of time these countries will “catch up” and achieve a production and income level per 
capita  more  similar  to  that  of  industrialised  economies.  They  will  experience  a  real 
appreciation.  This  can  happen  through  a  nominal  appreciation  of  local  currencies,  or  by 
higher wage- and price inflation. Either way, it will have inflationary consequences for the rest 
of the world.  
With  easing  disinflation  pressures,  and  if  prices  for  energy,  other  raw  materials  and  food 
remain  high,  the  positive  supply  shocks  we  have  faced  during  the  last  decade  may  fade 
away,  posing  new  challenges  to  monetary  policy.  Our  dismal  economic  history  from  the 
1970s  and  1980s  clearly  shows  that  maintaining  nominal  stability  is  of  the  utmost 
importance.  So  inflation  must  be  fought,  also  if  it  should  rear  its  head  in  periods  of  low 
growth. Real interest rates may need to be higher than what we have seen in the period of 
“great  moderation”.  The  costs  will  certainly  be  felt,  but  compared  with  the  situation  30-40 
years ago, the macroeconomic framework is now well established and central banks have 
accumulated  credibility  over  a  number  of  years  as  witnessed  by  fairly  stable  long-term 
inflation expectations. In this sense, the economy is now more robust to shocks and costs 
should be smaller.  
There  is  reason  for  us  all  to  be  braced  for  a  negative  supply  shock  of  considerable 
magnitude  in  the  years  to  come.  If  global  warming  is  a  threat  to  mankind  –  and  much 
evidence suggest it is – then carbon dioxide (and other) emissions must be reduced. That 
will entail costs, real costs. Our future consumption path will be lowered, perhaps sharply. 
But as compensation we should have improved prospects for mankind.  
We have a choice however in how we go about reducing emissions: The efficient way, taxing 
emissions (or auctioning permits) and using the markets; or the truly costly one of trying to 
subsidise away the problems with highly uncertain results. The debate and actual efforts so 
far give only moderate hope of a good outcome. But let us be optimists – at least for the time 
being.  
To  combat  climate  change,  the  relative  price  of  fossil  fuels  must  increase.  This  can  be 
regarded as a negative cost-push shock. Is there a role for monetary policy here? Yes, as in 
the case of other negative supply shocks: Keeping inflation low and stable must be the over-
riding objective. And with regard to reducing emissions, keeping inflation low and stable is 
perhaps even more important, as this will help make changes in relative prices more visible. 
Concluding remarks 
Globalisation has so far given us the best of two worlds, high growth and low inflation. But 
looking ahead there might be challenges to both nominal and financial stability.  
                                                 
16   Kenneth S. Rogoff (2006, see footnote 8). 
BIS Review 14/2008 
 7
We must preserve a nominal anchor, even when times may become more difficult. History 
has shown us that low and stable inflation is the best contribution monetary policy can make 
to  growth  and  macroeconomic  stability.  A  new,  globalised  world  does  not  change  this 
paradigm.  
Financial stability  is  enhanced  by  “smart”  regulations  that provide  the  right  incentives.  It  is 
important  to  encourage  innovation  and  to  avoid  overregulation.  We  must  expect  losses  to 
occur and the losses should be borne by investors and financial institutions themselves to 
the fullest extent possible.  
Some  might  argue  that  I  am  behind  the  curve  and  that  I  should  rather  be  discussing  the 
breakdown  of  the  global  financial  system.  George  Soros  has  argued  that  “This  is  not  a 
normal crisis, but an end of an era.”17 I do not subscribe to this view, though I admit I might 
be proven wrong. I would rather regard the present turmoil as evidence of the self-correcting 
properties of our system. Yes, corrections can be costly. Thus, we should aim at organising 
the system to be even more resilient and well-functioning. I remain convinced, however, that 
we would be wise to continue to base our economic system on open borders, competition 
and increasingly deeper and more integrated markets for goods, services, capital and labour. 
Thank you for your attention! 
                                                 
17   Financial Times, January 25, 2008 
8 
 BIS Review 14/2008
