Mario Draghi: Fact-finding preliminary to the examination of the 
Economic and Financial Planning Document for the years 2009-2013 
Testimony of Mr Mario Draghi, Governor of the Bank of Italy, at the Joint Session of the Fifth 
Committees of the Italian Senate and Chamber of Deputies, Rome, 2 July 2008. 
 The state of the public finances 
1.  
The public finances improved further in 2007. The ratio of general government net borrowing 
to  GDP  diminished  by  1.5  percentage  points  to  1.9  per  cent,  making  it  possible  for  the 
excessive  deficit  procedure  opened  against  Italy  in  2005  to  be  abrogated.  The  primary 
surplus, almost nil in 2005, exceeded 3 per cent of GDP. After rising for two years, the ratio 
of debt to GDP fell to 104 per cent. 
Almost one point of the reduction of 2.5 percentage points in the debt was due to the decline 
in  the  Treasury’s  assets  with  the  Bank  of  Italy.  The  general  government  borrowing 
requirement continued to diminish in 2007, falling from 3.7 to 2 per cent of GDP. 
As in 2006, the improvement in net borrowing was due largely to the increase in the ratio of 
tax and social security receipts to GDP, which rose back close to the peak recorded in 1997. 
Primary  current  expenditure  fell  slightly  in  relation  to  GDP,  but  still  remained  close  to  the 
postwar peak registered in 2005. 
About one point of the 1.2 point increase in the ratio of tax and social security receipts to 
GDP can be ascribed to discretionary measures, including those to widen tax bases and to 
fight tax evasion and avoidance. 
Net borrowing is expected to increase in 2008, reflecting lower GDP growth (0.5 per cent, 
against 1.5 per cent in 2007) and the budget adjustment measures introduced last autumn. 
In  the  Economic  and  Financial  Planning  Document  for  2009-13  the  deficit  on  a  current 
legislation basis is estimated at 2.5 per cent of GDP, compared with the forecast of 2.4 per 
cent  given  in  the  Combined  Report  on  the  Economy  and  Public  Finance  in  March.  The 
primary surplus is expected to fall to 2.5 per cent. 
The worsening in the expected balance for 2008 compared with the forecast in the Combined 
Report  essentially  reflects  the  reduction  in  revenue  (€1  billion  net  of  the  effects  of  Decree 
Law  93  issued  on  27  May),  in  connection  with  the  further  deterioration  in  the  outlook  for 
growth.  In  particular, the  estimate  for  indirect  tax  receipts has  been  reduced  by  almost  €5 
billion, to take account of the slowdown in VAT receipts in the first few months of the year. 
This  downward  revision  has  been  largely  offset  by  upward  revisions  for  the  other 
components of revenue. 
The new estimates on a current legislation basis also take account of the effects of Decree 
Law  93/2008,  which  was  approved  in  May  and  reduced  both  revenue  and  expenditure  by 
€2.3 billion. The decree law abolished municipal property tax on primary residences (with a 
decrease in revenue of €1.7 billion according to the official estimates), reduced the taxation 
of  overtime  earnings  and  productivity  bonuses  (€0.7  billion),  and  made  numerous  cuts  in 
spending appropriations, above all in relation to capital expenditure. 
Larger transfers from the central government will compensate municipalities for the loss of 
revenue  from  municipal  property  tax.  The  change  to  that  tax  and  the  suspension,  likewise 
provided for in Decree Law 93/2008, of the power of local government bodies to raise the 
rates  of  the  taxes  within  their  competence  entail  a  reduction  in  their  degree  of  fiscal 
autonomy. 
BIS Review 94/2008 
 1
The  abolition  of  municipal  property  tax  on  primary  residences  pursuant  to  Decree  Law 
93/2008  comes  on  top  of  the  reliefs  already  introduced  by  the  Finance  Law  for  2008. 
According to the information contained in municipalities’ outturns, about 5 per cent of their 
total budget revenue came from municipal property tax on primary residences. The impact of 
the  abolition  appears  to  be  greater  for  larger  municipalities,  for  those  located  in  ordinary-
statute regions and, among the latter, for those of the Centre and North. 
The  decree  law  provides  that  earnings  from  overtime  or  deriving  from  other  variable 
components of compensation are subject to a substitute tax of 10 per cent, up to a maximum 
of  €3,000,  and  are  not  included  in  total  income  for  purposes  of  personal  income  tax.  The 
relief  is  reserved,  at  least  initially,  to  private-sector  employees  who  in  2007  had  payroll 
earnings of not more than €30,000 and will apply to wages and salary payments received in 
the  second  half  of  2008.  In  the  second  quarter  of  2007  about  10  per  cent  of  employees 
worked overtime, for a number of man-hours equal to 2 per cent of total hours worked. The 
frequency  of  overtime  work  is  highest  among  employees  of  medium-sized  and  large 
industries  in  the  North,  males  and  workers  with  relatively  high  educational  levels  and  job 
qualifications. 
The expenditure savings derive from the cancellation of numerous appropriations for minor 
measures  (about  €1  billion,  including  €0.4  billion  of  current  expenditure),  from  the 
reassignment to the state budget of the funds that Fintecna was to have paid to Stretto di 
Messina  S.p.A.  (€0.6  billion)  and  from  cutbacks  to  INAIL’s  real-estate  investments 
(€0.7 billion). 
Further, the Planning Document’s planning framework also takes account of the decree law 
approved at the same time as the Document, which increases both revenue and expenditure, 
leaving net borrowing for 2008 essentially unchanged. 
On  the  basis  of  the  official  estimates,  the  decree  reduces  net  borrowing  in  2008  by  €0.5 
billion  as  a  result  of  additional  revenue  of  €2.2  billion  and  additional  expenditure  of  €1.7 
billion.  The  former  comes  from  bringing  forward  to  this  year  the  effects  of  the  provisions 
increasing the taxation of banks − this will affect the second payment on account of corporate 
income  tax  and  regional  tax  on  productive  activities −  and  of  some  of  the  measures  that 
increase the levy on energy companies. Banks’ electronic payment on account of stamp duty 
and the tax on insurance premiums are increased. Lastly, the decree contains measures to 
cope with the effects of the increase in the prices of oil products on the competitiveness of 
the agricultural, fishing and road transport sectors, to be applied subject to the approval of 
the European Commission and only up to the end of 2008. 
Almost  all  of  the  increase  in  expenditure  concerns  current  expenditure.  About  half  of  the 
outlays  reflect  transfers  to  the  municipality  of  Rome  (€0.5  billion)  and  the  decision  not  to 
apply  the  safeguard  clause  introduced  by  the  Finance  Law  for  2007  (€0.3  billion),  under 
which budget appropriations for transfers to public entities are to be reduced if expenditure 
savings are found to fall short of those indicated by that law. The decree also provides for 
some  transfers  to  the  State  Railways  (€0.3  billion)  and  increases  the  operating  fund  for 
schools (€0.2 billion). 
In addition, a solidarity fund is set up for the needier among the population (€0.2 billion), part 
of  which  will  go  to  finance  a  card  for  purchases  of  food  products  and  energy  services  by 
individuals  living  in  conditions  of  especially  great  economic  hardship.  It  is  important  to 
procure  further  resources  to  support  the  income  of  poor  households,  which  are  relatively 
numerous  in  Italy  by  European  standards  and  on  which  the  impact  of  the  increase  in  the 
prices of essential goods is heavier. Going forward, it is also important to identify instruments 
that systematically deliver support to persons in economic difficulty. 
In the planning framework, the ratio of primary current expenditure to GDP is set to rise by 
0.7  percentage  points,  exceeding  40  per  cent  for  the  first  time;  interest  payments  remain 
2 
 BIS Review 94/2008
stable at 5 per cent of GDP. The ratio of tax and social security receipts to GDP diminishes 
by 0.3 percentage points, to 43 per cent. 
The  change  in  the  ratio  of  fiscal  revenue  to  GDP  reflects,  on  the  one  hand,  the  reliefs 
introduced  in  2008  (regarding  municipal  property  tax  and  personal  income  tax  on  primary 
residences,  overtime  work  and  productivity  bonuses)  and  the  full  phasing  in  of  those 
established  by  the  budget  for  2007  (in  particular,  the  relief  regarding  the  regional  tax  on 
productive  activities  levied  on  labour  costs)  and,  on  the  other,  the  increase  in  revenue 
deriving from the measures contained in the June decree law (112/2008).  
According to the official estimates, structural net borrowing, calculated net of the effects of 
one-off  measures  and  cyclically  adjusted,  will  increase  by  0.6  percentage  points  of  GDP 
compared with 2007, to 2.3 per cent. 
The debt is expected to amount to 103.9 per cent of GDP, virtually the same as at the end of 
2007. 
In the first five months of the year the general government borrowing requirement amounted 
to €38.5 billion, €7.1 billion less than in the corresponding period of 2007. The improvement 
reflected the significant growth in revenue, to which some extraordinary factors contributed. 
Tax revenue recorded in the state budget grew by 6.2 per cent (€8.2 billion) in the first five 
months of 2008 compared with the year-earlier period. Excluding the effects of the abolition 
of the payment on account by tax collection agents, decided last year, the increase can be 
estimated at 3 per cent. Receipts from withholding tax on payrolls and pensions increased by 
9 per cent (€4.6 billion), reflecting some contract renewals and the associated back pay as 
well  as  the  high  elasticity  of  revenue  to  the  growth  in  the  tax  base.  The  increase  in  VAT 
receipts  was  particularly  small  (1.5  per  cent);  it  was  probably  affected  by  the  complete 
utilization  in  2008  of  the  changes  in  the  deductibility  of  VAT  on  expenses  connected  with 
company  cars,  resulting  from  the  2006  decision  of  the  European  Court  of  Justice.  Social 
security  contributions  are  rising  fast,  partly  owing  to  the  full  effects  of  the  rules  governing 
severance  pay  accrued  by  employees  who  have  not  adhered  to  supplementary  pension 
schemes. 
The available data on self-assessed tax payments in June indicate a reduction in revenue 
compared with last year, which can be ascribed only in part to changes in legislation. The 
decrease in receipts caused the state sector surplus to be significantly smaller than in June 
2007. 
2.  
The projections based on current legislation and the objectives set in the 
Planning Document for 2009-13  
The  Planning  Document  establishes  three  guidelines  for  budgetary  action:  support  for 
economic growth, stability of the public finances and promotion of social cohesion. 
The strategy announced by the Government to boost growth is based on the simplification of 
taxation  and  compliance  for  businesses,  the  strengthening  of  infrastructure  and  research, 
measures to improve the functioning of the labour market, the development of under-utilized 
areas and the modernization of the public administration. It is to be sustained by a plan of 
liberalizations, simplifications and privatizations. 
In the Planning Document net borrowing on a current legislation basis is estimated at 2.6 per 
cent of GDP in 2009, 2.1 per cent in 2010 and 2 per cent in 2011. The progressive reduction 
in  the  deficit  is  ascribable  to  the  underestimation  of  expenditure  inherent  in  the  current 
legislation  criterion,  which  does  not  take  into  account  disbursements  which,  even  if 
foreseeable or necessary, require the formal passage of legislation (outlays for the renewal 
of public employment contracts, for service contracts and for the execution of public works). 
BIS Review 94/2008 
 3
Compared with the estimates published in the Combined Report on the Economy and Public 
Finance in March, projected net borrowing on a current legislation basis is revised upwards 
by  about  half  a  percentage  point  in  each  of  the  next  three  years.  The  new  estimates,  like 
those for 2008, factor in the further worsening in the outlook for growth. 
Excluding the effects of the Decree Law 93/2008, which for 2009 give rise to a decrease in 
revenue  and  expenditure  of  respectively  €2.1  billion  and  €2.4  billion,  the  increase  in  net 
borrowing  on  a  current  legislation  basis  next  year  with  respect  to  the  forecast  in  the 
Combined Report derives essentially from an upward revision of primary current expenditure 
(0.3 percentage points of GDP, or €2.8 billion), relating mainly to social benefits in cash, and 
of  interest  payments  (0.1  points,  €2.1  billion).  The  significant  reduction  in  the  estimate  of 
indirect tax revenue (0.3 points, more than €5 billion) is almost entirely offset by the higher 
projections  for  both  direct  taxes  and  social  security  contributions.  These  changes  will  also 
have effects in the subsequent two years. 
The target for net borrowing is set at 2 per cent of GDP in 2009 (down from 2.5 per cent 
projected for 2008) and 1 per cent in 2010. For 2011 a budget position basically in balance is 
planned,  confirming  the  commitments  made  at  European  level.  Compared  with  the 
Combined Report of March, the objective for 2009 is made less stringent (by 0.2 percentage 
points) and those for the subsequent years are basically confirmed. The primary surplus is 
forecast to grow progressively, from 2.6 per cent of GDP in 2008 to 4.9 per cent in 2011. 
The  planning  framework  for  the  public  finances  is  based  on  a  macroeconomic  scenario  in 
which GDP growth is expected to be equal to 0.5 per cent this year and 0.9 per cent in 2009, 
and is then forecast to increase gradually and to stabilize at 1.5 per cent in 2012. 
After  the  deterioration  of  0.6  percentage  points  of  GDP  expected  for  the  current  year,  the 
structural budget balance should improve by about 0.6 points in 2009 and by about 1 point 
each year in 2010 and 2011 and then stabilize in the following two years. This adjustment 
path is consistent with the European guidelines for countries that have not yet attained the 
medium-term objectives. 
The public debt is expected to remain practically stable this year and to fall to less than GDP 
in 2011; in fact it is projected to fall from 103.9 per cent in 2008 to 97.2 per cent in 2011. 
However, the adjustment will be slower than was indicated in March, owing above all to the 
less favourable estimate of nominal GDP growth. 
For  the  entire  forecasting  horizon  the  Document  projects not  only  the  general  government 
accounts  on  a  current-legislation  basis  but  also  the  planning  targets.  The  last  Planning 
Document to include a detailed planning framework was that presented in June 1999. 
A sharp reduction in the ratio of primary expenditure to GDP is planned. For the three years 
2009-11 the reduction is projected at 2.2 percentage points. Primary current expenditure will 
account  for  1.4  points  of  the  decrease,  owing  chiefly  to  a  sharp  decline  in  employee 
compensation and intermediate consumption; pension expenditure, by contrast, will continue 
on an upward trend. 
Capital expenditure is forecast to be reduced by 0.8 points with respect to GDP; according to 
the Document, in 2011 it will be at its lowest level in recent decades. 
The above comparison excludes, for 2000, the proceeds from sales of UMTS licences, which 
were  entered  in  the  accounts  as  a  negative  component  of  this  aggregate.  The  planned 
reduction will involve both gross fixed investment and capital grants. The ratio of public gross 
fixed investment to GDP, which has been broadly stable at 2.4 per cent for a decade, would 
thus fall to 2.1 per cent in 2011. 
The ratio of taxes and social security contributions to GDP will remain unchanged over the 
five-year planning scenario, after the 0.3-point reduction expected for 2008 to 43 per cent. 
The increase in direct tax receipts in relation to GDP is seen as being offset by a reduction in 
social security contributions and indirect taxes. 
4 
 BIS Review 94/2008
Budgetary policy for 2009-13  
3.  
For  the  first  time,  together  with  the  Economic  and  Financial  Planning  Document  the 
Government  has  specified  budgetary  measures  that  according  to  the  official  estimates  will 
achieve the Document’s targets for the years covered. This should provide a framework of 
greater  certainty  for  economic  agents  and  allow  budgetary  policy  to  focus  on  structural 
reform and measures to stimulate economic growth. 
Until now, in the Planning Document presented each June the Government had indicated the 
public finance objectives over the planning horizon and the magnitude of the correction with 
respect to the current-legislation projection needed to achieve them. The budget was then 
presented in September, containing the measures necessary to attain the target for the first 
year. 
The  budget  measures  consist  of  four  provisions:  1)  Decree  Law  112  of  25  June  2008, 
containing measures that will already go into force in the second half of this year to stabilize 
the public finances; 2) a bill introducing rules that complete the correction needed to achieve 
the objectives by 2011; 3) a draft enabling act on fiscal federalism; and 4) a draft enabling act 
for the creation of a local government autonomy code and containing the legal arrangements 
for  Rome  as  national  capital.  The  last  two  provisions  will  be  linked  to  the  autumn  budget 
session. To date, only the first of the four has actually been submitted to Parliament. 
The  Document’s  planning  targets  indicate  the  need  for  a  correction  in  net  borrowing  with 
respect to the current-legislation projection equal to 0.6 percentage points of GDP in 2009, 
1.1 points in 2010, and 1.9 points from 2011 onwards. For 2009-11 the correction is almost 
entirely achieved by the measures contained in the June decree law. The remainder will be 
implemented with the other provisions that form part of the budget. 
The June decree law  
3.1  
The  June  decree  law  aims  to  reduce  net  borrowing  with  respect  to  the  current-legislation 
projection by €9.8 billion in 2009, €17 billion in 2010 and €30.6 billion in 2011. 
In 2009 the budget correction will consist mainly of revenue increases, which will account for 
about two thirds of the correction with respect to the figures on a current legislation basis. In 
the  two  subsequent  years  the  planned  adjustment  consists  entirely  of  reductions  in 
expenditure. 
The  revenue  measures  are  aimed  in  particular  at  certain  high-profit  industries.  On  the 
expenditure side the measures consist mainly of spending limits; the definition of the means 
for  complying  with  the  limits  is  left  to  future  provisions.  Further,  compliance  with  some  of 
them will depend crucially on measures to increase the effectiveness and efficiency of public 
structures, which the Government intends to present in a separate bill. 
The revenue measures are expected to bring additional receipts of more than €7 billion per 
year starting in 2009, part of which will be offset by the revenue reductions caused by the 
measures to curb expenditure. 
The  tax  increases  will  involve  banks,  insurance  companies,  the  energy  industry  and 
cooperatives. 
For banks and insurance companies a limit is set on the deductibility of interest payments, 
while  deductions  on  account  of  credit  writedowns,  allocations  to  risk  provisions  and 
insurance company claim reserves are revised. The entry into force of the new rules on VAT 
exemption  for  ancillary  services  provided  by  banking  groups,  which  would  have  increased 
taxes in 2008, is postponed to 2009. Energy companies are subject to a corporate income 
surtax of 5.5 per cent and to a substitute tax on the accrued capital gains on their stocks of 
petroleum  products.  Extraction  royalties  are  increased.  Turning  to  cooperatives,  the 
withholding  tax  on  interest  paid  to  members  is  increased,  as  is  the  taxable  portion  of  net 
yearly profit for consumer cooperatives. 
BIS Review 94/2008 
 5
The  favourable  treatment  of  stock  options  is  abrogated,  and  a  capital  tax  on  so-called 
“family-owned”  real  estate  investment  funds  is  introduced.  Under  certain  conditions  the 
capital gains from the sale of shares reinvested in start-up companies may be exempted. 
Tax assessments are to be stepped up, with an extraordinary audit plan and rules to combat 
VAT  fraud.  In  order  to  simplify  taxpayers’  obligations,  some  notification  requirements  are 
eliminated  and  some  of  the  rules  introduced  in  the  past  two  years  to  combat  evasion  are 
made less stringent. 
Specifically, the obligation to transmit the list of suppliers and customers is abolished, as is 
the  requirement  that  professionals  have  a  current  account  dedicated  to  their  professional 
activity and that the payments for their services be traceable. The publication of the revised 
sector  studies  is  moved  forward.  In  addition,  the  maximum  limit  for  payments  in  cash  and 
negotiable cheques is moved back up to €12,500 and the obligation to include the tax code 
of the endorser on endorsed cheques is abrogated. 
On  the  expenditure  side,  the  decree-law  calls  for  savings  of  €10.4  billion  in  2009,  €17.2 
billion in 2010 and €31.2 billion in 2001. In part, these will be offset by increased expenditure 
of €6.5 billion a year from 2009 onwards. 
About  60  per  cent  of  the  additional  spending  will  be  allocated  to  contract  renewals.  The 
resources  appropriated  for  2009  correspond  to  just  over  2  per  cent  of  total  general 
government staff costs, which implies a significant slowdown in wage increases, which have 
been particularly large in this sector in recent years. 
From 2000 to 2007 per capita earnings in the public sector rose at faster rates than in the 
private sector, bringing the wage differential between them close to the high point recorded in 
1990 (nearly 40 per cent). 
The ban on cumulating pension income with self-employment or payroll income is abolished 
(€0.4  billion).  Public  employees  with  at  least  35  years  of  contributions  may  request  to  be 
suspended from work until they reach retirement age, receiving a monthly allowance equal to 
half their salary (€0.2 billion starting in 2010). 
The  success  of  this  latter  measure  depends  on  the  ability  of  public  agencies  to  identify 
categories of workers for whom the cost to the State will be less than the benefit of faster 
personnel turnover. 
About half the savings will involve central government departments. They derive from cuts to 
appropriations  for  the  major  “missions”  into  which  the  budget  is  divided.  The  reduction  in 
outlays,  which  will  not  involve  salaries,  pensions,  interest  payments  or  other  compulsory 
expenditure, will be equal to 22 per cent in 2009 and reach 41 per cent in 2011. 
Provided the overall amount of savings on each “mission” is ensured, the individual ministries 
can choose which spending programmes to downsize, and the Ministry for the Economy and 
Finance  can  make  further  changes  during  the  year  acting  on  a  proposal  from  the  ministry 
concerned. 
Nearly a third of the expenditure savings will come from local government. The definition of 
specific measures is deferred to the revision of the Domestic Stability Pact, scheduled for the 
end of July. Savings on this count are expected to rise from €3.2 billion in 2009 to €9.2 billion 
in 2011. 
In  the  last  three  years  there  has  been  a  slowdown  in  the  primary  expenditure  of  local 
authorities  (excluding  health  spending),  reflecting  the  decrease  in  capital  spending  by 
municipalities in 2005 and 2006 and the slower growth in the regions’ current expenditure in 
2007.  In  recent  years  there  has  also  been  a  tendency  for  the  debt  of  local  authorities  to 
increase. The decree prohibits such bodies, for a maximum period of one year, from signing 
contracts in derivative financial instruments until a regulation governing the matter is issued. 
6 
 BIS Review 94/2008
According to the Document, outlays in the healthcare sector should be equal to the current-
legislation projection in 2009 and then decrease by €2 billion in 2010 and €3 billion in 2011. 
The current-legislation projections count the receipts from patient co-payments on specialist 
health services (€0.8 billion a year), which the 2008 Finance Law abolished only for this year. 
The measures to achieve the savings target for the healthcare system, without prejudice to 
the existing deficit reduction plans, are left to the regions, in the framework of an agreement 
with the central government to be signed by the end of July. In the event of failure to attain 
the objective, there is provision for an automatic rise in the regional income tax surcharge 
and IRAP rates. 
Public  employment  legislation  should  enable  savings  on  compensation  expenditure  to  rise 
from €1.5 billion in 2009 to €4 billion in 2011, financed by a sharp decline in recruitment over 
the next three years. 
The  measures  for  2009  include  limiting  recruitment  to  within  10  per  cent  of  the  previous 
year’s  terminations,  and  to  within  20  per  cent  in  the  two  subsequent  years.  The  previous 
legislation had fixed ceilings on turnover of 20 per cent in 2009, 60 per cent in 2010 and 100 
per cent in 2011. 
The allocations for the stabilization of precarious workers have been reduced with respect to 
those envisaged by the 2008 Finance Law; resources for second-level collective bargaining 
have also been cut back. The certification of contract renewals in the public sector by the 
State Audit Office has been made a necessary prerequisite for their entry into force. 
The Decree Law in question sets objectives for the pupil-teacher ratio, to be increased from 
8.9 to 9.9, and non-teaching staff, to be reduced by 17 per cent. To meet these targets the 
Ministry of Education, together with the Ministry for the Economy and Finance, will prepare a 
restructuring plan and the related implementing regulations, which among other things, will 
include  a  rationalization  of  the  study  schedules  and  timetables  –  in  particular  those  of  the 
technical and professional institutes – and of the criteria concerning the size of classes. 
The current pupil-teacher ratio (8.9) increases only slightly if the calculations exclude back-
up teachers, a feature of the Italian school system; in the other OECD countries the ratio is 
on average 16.7 for primary schools and 13.4 for secondary schools. 
There is scope for improvement in the organization of the school system and a more flexible 
utilization of the workforce, which could offset the reduction in the number of teachers without 
affecting the quality of the service. 
Some evaluations 
4.  
The reintroduction in the Planning Document, after almost a decade, of a multi-year planning 
scenario  for  the  individual  items  in  the  general  government  consolidated  accounts  greatly 
increases the information provided on budgetary policy; it means that Parliament and public 
opinion  can  better  assess  Government  policies  on  the  level  and  composition  of  public 
revenue and expenditure. 
The inclusion of the detailed planning scenario in the Stability Pact will align the information 
this contains with that provided in the Pacts of the other European countries. 
Despite  the  difficult  economic  climate,  the  Planning  Document  confirms  the  objective  of  a 
balanced budget in 2011. It is a sign of Italy’s ongoing commitment to the pledges made to 
its European partners. The achievement of balance, which is entrusted to an increase in the 
primary  surplus,  will  guarantee  a  rapid  reduction  in  the  ratio  of  debt  to  GDP,  a  crucial 
objective in light of the unfavourable demographic outlook in the coming decades. 
In 2006-07 the structural budget balance improved significantly in many euro-area countries; 
according  to  European  Commission  estimates,  the  average  improvement  across  the  euro 
BIS Review 94/2008 
 7
the  distortions 
in  economic  activities  and  enhance 
area  was  1.6  percentage  points  (2.1  points  in  Germany).  Italy  recorded  a  substantial 
improvement of 3 points, but is one of the few countries that continue to fall significantly short 
of budgetary balance. 
A significant new departure with respect to previous years is the passing, together with the 
Planning  Document,  of  a  decree  law  that  defines  what  must  be  done  to  achieve  the 
objectives set for the next three years. For many areas of expenditure, however, the Decree 
Law  postpones  the  detailed  definition  of  corrective  measures  to  future  legislative  and 
administrative measures.  
The  ratio  of  tax  and  social  security  contributions  to  GDP  envisaged  for  2011  is  basically 
unchanged  compared  with  the  level  expected  for  the  current  year,  which  is  high  by  both 
historical  and  international  standards.  It  is  important  that  the  progress  made  in  curbing 
expenditure and the fight against tax evasion be translated as soon as possible into lower tax 
rates, without compromising the budget balance objectives. If the economy were to perform 
better than expected, it would be opportune to lighten the tax burden even before 2011. In 
particular,  the  fiscal  drag  should  be  offset  in  order  to  support  the  disposable  income  of 
households. Lower tax rates for workers and firms would reinforce the interventions aimed at 
supporting  growth,  reduce 
the 
competitiveness of Italian firms. 
On  the  revenue  side,  the  most  important  interventions  aim  to  raise  the  taxation  of  firms 
operating  in  sectors  that  have  recorded  high  earnings  in  recent  years.  The  heavier  fiscal 
burden for banks could affect the conditions offered to depositors and borrowers and lead to 
less resources for the banks to allocate to own funds. 
The  fight  against  tax  evasion  is  being  pursued  above  all  by  strengthening  assessment 
activity. Significant results in this area will depend on the achievement of greater efficiency 
by the tax authorities. 
It is commendable that reducing expenditure plays a major role in the consolidation of the 
public finances. 
Most  of  the  reduction  in  the  deficit  is  expected  to  be  achieved  by  keeping  primary  current 
expenditure basically unchanged in real terms in the three years from 2009 to 2011; in the 
last decade it grew by more than 2 per cent each year. 
The reduction in capital expenditure is very large. This must not be allowed to hinder the full 
development  of  Italy’s  infrastructure,  which  is  needed  to  boost  firms’  competitiveness  and 
support economic growth. 
Over  half  of  savings  concern  central  government  expenditure.  The  planned  reduction  of 
outlays on “missions” and programmes is ambitious. In order to be effective and lasting, this 
action must be combined with a revision of expenditure centres’ operating procedures and 
objectives. 
Compensation of employees is contained through a further tightening of the restrictions on 
turnover and limits on allocations for contract renewals. Here again the interventions appear 
sustainable  only  if  accompanied  by  an  incisive  overhaul  of  public  employment  that  raises 
productivity  levels.  New  staff  assessment  systems,  merit-based  promotion  and  increased 
accountability, which the Government intends to pursue in an enabling act, all move in this 
direction. This is the biggest and most difficult challenge with a view to balancing the public 
finances and supporting economic growth. 
The  Planning  Document  does  not  include  any  measures  having  a  significant  impact  on 
pensions. After numerous interventions, this helps provide a stable reference framework for 
the decisions of workers and firms. In order to curb spending and assure future pensioners 
receive adequate pensions, the average actual retirement age should nonetheless be raised 
in  the  medium  to  long  term.  The  abolition  of  the  ban  on  the  cumulation  of  pensions  and 
earnings moves in the direction of increasing the rate of employment of persons aged 60 and 
8 
 BIS Review 94/2008
over, which in Italy is still relatively low. It is necessary to proceed with the removal of the 
obstacles and disincentives that keep a large proportion of the less young population out of 
the workplace. 
The new rules on supplementary pensions have led to large increases in the workers joining 
second  pillar  schemes.  It  is  right  to  give  the  new  legislative  framework  time  to  settle,  but 
adjustments can be considered in this sector as well in the light of the experience matured in 
recent  months.  Careful  consideration  should  be  given  to  the  possibility  of  guaranteeing, 
within specified limits, the reversibility of the choice of allocating severance pay to pension 
funds. To promote competition between funds, complete mobility of employer contributions 
could  be  introduced.  Measures  designed  to  increase  the  efficiency  of  the  life  annuities’ 
market should also be considered. Information on the state pension matured by each worker 
should  be  improved,  as  should  that  on  the  costs  and  characteristics  of  supplementary 
pension schemes. 
Municipalities, provinces and regions are also required to make a substantial contribution to 
correcting  the  budget  balance.  Any  considered  judgement  must  await  the  reform  of  the 
Domestic  Stability  Pact  and  the  bill  on  federalism,  which  the  Government  intends  to  put 
before parliament before the end of September. 
The manner of implementing fiscal federalism will be vital to ensuring the action to contain 
spending  is  sustainable  and  to  increase  the  system’s  efficiency  and  effectiveness.  A 
simplification  of  the  levels  of  government  aimed  at  exploiting  economies  of  scale  and 
avoiding useless overlaps could help. 
Decentralization  makes  it  possible  to  tailor  the  supply  of  services  to  the  needs  of  local 
communities and at the same time enables the electorate to judge with greater immediacy 
the quality of public action. To deliver these benefits, decentralization must be based on a 
system  of  clear  and  consistent  responsibilities.  The  fiscal  autonomy  of  local  governments, 
the adequacy and transparency of equalization flows and strict restrictions on borrowing are 
the key elements of this system. 
Fiscal autonomy must establish a direct link at the margin between expenditure and taxation. 
To this end it is advisable that local authorities have sufficient room for manoeuvre on tax 
rates and bases. The municipal property tax relief granted affects a tax which, owing to the 
characteristics of property wealth, is the cornerstone of local taxation in many countries. If 
permanent, the blocking of increases in decentralized taxes also weakens local authorities’ 
fiscal autonomy. 
 The  economic  slowdown  compounds  the  structural  problems  of  stagnant  productivity,  the 
public debt and Southern underdevelopment. Economic policy must now lower the debt and 
contribute to the recovery of growth, with better public services and a reduction in the fiscal 
burden. 
These results require a change in the rules governing the activity of public bodies and their 
employees. The success of the initiatives outlined in the Planning Document will be essential 
to  making  general  government  more  flexible,  effective  and  transparent,  reducing  its  costs, 
redesigning its structure and removing obstacles to economic activity. 
BIS Review 94/2008 
 9
10 
 BIS Review 94/2008
BIS Review 94/2008 
 11
12 
 BIS Review 94/2008
BIS Review 94/2008 
 13
14 
 BIS Review 94/2008
 BIS Review 94/2008 
 15
16 
 BIS Review 94/2008
BIS Review 94/2008 
 17
18 
 BIS Review 94/2008
BIS Review 94/2008 
 19
20 
 BIS Review 94/2008
BIS Review 94/2008 
 21
22 
 BIS Review 94/2008
BIS Review 94/2008 
  23
