Amando M Tetangco, Jr: The Central Bank of the Philippines @15 
Speech  by  Mr  Amando  M  Tetangco,  Jr,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  the  Philippines 
(Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas), at the BSP 15th Anniversary Dinner, Manila, 3 July 2008. 
 Senator  Angara,  Representative  Jaime  Lopez,  fellow  bankers,  co-workers  in  government, 
members of the media, special guests, good evening.  
On behalf of the Members of the Monetary Board, I welcome and thank all of you for joining 
us  in  celebrating  this  important  milestone:  the  15th  anniversary  of  the  Bangko  Sentral  ng 
Pilipinas.  
As central banks go, you may say that at age 15, we belong to Generation Y. But youthful as 
we are as an organization, we are really standing on the shoulders of our richly experienced 
forerunner that is the Central Bank of the Philippines. 
This enables us to leverage the freshness of our eyes with a vantage point progressively built 
from  accumulated  experience.  In  other  words,  we  have  the  vitality  of  youth  as  well  as  the 
stability and resiliency that come with maturity.  
This  represents  a  remarkable  combination  of  strengths  we  can  draw  from  as  we  face  the 
ever-changing and never-ending challenges that are the burdens of honor of a central bank.  
As the central bank in a developing country where millions of people still live in poverty, the 
Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas is fully cognizant of its crucial empowering role in improving lives 
of Filipinos through the formulation and implementation of responsive monetary and banking 
policies.  
As  we  can  all  sense  from  the  anxious  urgency  of  today’s  headlines,  we  will  need  all  that 
strength and agility as we once again gird for battle against an old adversary of central banks 
– INFLATION. As you are aware, its underpinnings are complex and the dimensions global. 
This is not the occasion to discuss this looming challenge in depth, however. What is clear is 
that we can ill-afford the luxury of underestimating this problem. What I will say at this time is 
that we stand ready to engage it with quiet confidence.  
We do have a track record of performance to back us up. Our first 15 years has given us the 
opportunity  to  help  strengthen  our  economic  foundation  even  as  we  build  up  institutional 
capacity, 
through  sound  policy-making  and  effective 
implementation. We will be the first to say ours is not a perfect 15 years; but we can tell you 
that the source of our collective confidence in our ability to face up to the challenges ahead.  
First,  we  have  financial  strength.  We  hold  international  reserves  of  more  than  36  billion 
dollars,  a  historic  high.  Our  capital  base  is  now  over  P150  billion  versus  the  original  P10 
billion we started out with when the Bangko Sentral was created 15 years ago. Our balance 
sheet is strong with most of our foreign debts paid up. 
We  enjoy  a  successful  track  record  of  solid  contributions  to  macroeconomic  stability  as 
evidenced  by  a  lengthening  record  of  relative  monetary  stability,  balance  of  payments 
surplus, and meaningful economic growth.  
We have nurtured the banking system back to health from the depths of the fallout from the 
Asian  financial  crisis  in  the  late  1990’s  without  the  massive  government  bailouts  that 
characterized other countries in our region. We did it by improving the quality of supervision 
and instituting far-reaching structural reforms in cooperation with the Legislative, represented 
here tonight by Sen. Angara and Cong. Lopez, and the Executive Branches of Government.  
Today,  bank  profits  are  higher,  capitalization  deeper,  and  NPA  and  NPL  ratios  down  to 
nearly  pre-1997  crisis  levels.  Banks  are  consolidating  into  stronger  institutions  even  as 
reputation,  and  credibility 
BIS Review 88/2008 
 1
branch networks and other delivery channels expand well-beyond urban centers and deep 
into the countryside and islands.  
We have also witnessed the unveiling of new financial products to meet the growing need 
and  sophistication  of  the  public  –  from  the  wide  array  of  credit  cards,  cash  cards,  to 
structured investment products, to unit investment trust funds, to tailor fitted loan products. 
Products  that  cater  to  the  top  end  of  the  market  and  all  the  way  down  to  microfinance 
customers.  
We are especially proud of our advocacy in sustainable microfinance that has energized our 
smaller banks, particularly the rural banks, to bring more people within the reach of a banking 
system not just for a working capital loan, but also for deposits and remittances. And among 
central  banks,  we  lead  in  microfinance  advocacy  and  regulation.  This  has  led  to  creative 
product innovation as well as international recognition.  
We  have  also  made  much  progress  in  broadening  the  array  of  alternatives  available  to 
overseas  Filipinos  in  sending  their  remittances  back  home  to  their  beneficiaries.  Greater 
competition has led to lower remittance cost, broader access, quicker delivery, and generally 
better  services.  It  has  also  facilitated  the  inflow  of  remittance  into  the  economy  that  now 
amount to approximately $16 billion per year and grows at double-digit growth rates.  
Our desire to develop a more inclusive financial system that caters to all sectors of society 
has also led us to yet another major advocacy – that of promoting financial learning down to 
the  grass  roots  level.  If  you  recall,  our  Tulong  Barya  Para  sa  Eskuwela  Program  was 
successful because we had the banking sector with us as partners led by the Chamber of 
Thrift  Banks,  Rural  Bankers  Association  of  the  Philippines,  the  Bankers  Association  of  the 
Philippines, as well as the Philippine Retailers Association particularly SM and Robinsons, 
ABSP-CBN and GMA7 among others.  
Many of you are here and we take this opportunity to thank you again. I also wish to invite 
you to support this program which is being launched in partnership with the Department of 
Education.  
We  also  thank  our  partner-banks  who  share  our  goal  of  teaching  our  12  million  public 
elementary students regular lessons on saving and money management. Our screen is now 
flashing the banks who are now on board with us for the integration of financial lessons in the 
elementary  curriculum.  We  are  keeping  the  doors  open  for  other  banks  and  institutions  to 
support this breakthrough project.  
For your information, the Bangko Sentral has a comprehensive financial education program 
that covers schoolchildren to college students to adults, including overseas workers and their 
dependents.  
We  are  also  setting  up  economic  &  financial  literacy  centers  in  Bangko  Sentral’s  regional 
offices  and  branches  across  the  country  because  we  believe  that  education  is  a  powerful 
empowering means for developing responsible and productive citizens.  
In this connection, we are also pleased to announce that the Bangko Sentral is expanding its 
scholarship program to include deserving students in urban centers and in the provinces for 
courses associated with economics and banking.  
Ladies and gentlemen. The last 15 years has provided us the opportunity for introspection 
and to re-invent ourselves as well as our institution for the challenges that lie ahead.  
You who are here tonight have been with us in our journey. We thank you for this. It is in this 
spirit that the Monetary Board approved the scrapping of certain fees of the Bangko Sentral’s 
real time gross settlement system – the PhilPass. You may get more details about this from 
Deputy Governor Andy Suratos who is here with us.  
2 
 BIS Review 88/2008
I  also  take  this  opportunity  to  remind  you  that  we  at  the  Bangko  Sentral  stand  ready  to 
continue  our  dialogue  with  you  so  that  we  can  identify  more  areas  of  concern,  formulate 
solutions, and thereby move forward together.  
Ladies  and  gentlemen.  The  Bangko  Sentral  is  a  work-in-progress.  And,  as  always,  much 
remains to be done. The journey ahead is bound to be challenging, and inspiring. As we gear 
up for this, let us continue to nurture the ties that bind us in our common search for a better 
future for our people, our economy, and our country.  
Mabuhay ang Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas! Mabuhay ang mahal nating bansang Pilipinas!  
Thank you all for accepting our invitation. Enjoy the rest of the evening. 
BIS Review 88/2008 
 3
