Donald L Kohn: Risk management and its implications for systemic risk 
Testimony of Mr Donald L Kohn, Vice Chairman of the Board of Governors of the US Federal 
Reserve  System,  before  the  Subcommittee  on  Securities,  Insurance,  and  Investment, 
Committee  on  Banking,  Housing,  and  Urban  Affairs,  US  Senate,  Washington  DC, 
19 June 2008. 
The  original  speech,  which  contains  various  links  to  the  documents  mentioned,  can  be  found  on  the  US  Federal  Reserve 
System’s website.  
 Chairman  Reed,  Ranking  Member  Allard  and  members  of  the  Subcommittee,  it  is  my 
pleasure  to  appear  today  to  discuss  several  issues  related  to  the  oversight  of  financial 
institutions.  First,  I  will  discuss  the  circumstances  leading  to  the  establishment  of  our 
temporary  facility  for  lending  to  primary  securities  dealers  and  our  arrangements  for 
monitoring their financial condition. Then, I will describe Federal Reserve activities related to 
the banking institutions we supervise, including concrete steps to address identified issues 
and  to  help  these  institutions  improve  risk  management  practices.  Finally,  I  will  briefly 
summarize  planned  enhancements  to  our  consolidated  supervision  of  bank  and  financial 
holding companies.  
Federal Reserve monitoring activities related to the Primary Dealer Credit Facility 
Three  months  ago,  the  Board  approved  the  establishment  of  the  Primary  Dealer  Credit 
Facility (PDCF). This action was taken pursuant to Section 13(3) of the Federal Reserve Act, 
which empowers the Board of Governors to authorize a Federal Reserve Bank to lend to a 
corporation,  including  a  securities  firm,  in  "unusual  and  exigent"  circumstances  when  the 
corporation cannot "secure adequate credit accommodations from other banking institutions." 
In  doing  so,  the  Board  of  Governors  made  the  necessary  statutory  finding  that  market 
circumstances were indeed unusual and exigent. We judged that without increased access to 
Federal Reserve liquidity by major securities firms, overall financial market conditions would 
have deteriorated further and would have had a substantially adverse effect on the economy. 
We  fully  recognized  that  the  use  of  this  legal  authority  was  an  extraordinary  step,  but 
considered it necessary given the circumstances. To quickly design and implement a facility 
to provide this liquidity, we made use of existing business relationships with a group of 20 
securities firms, known as primary dealers. The Open Market Desk of the Federal Reserve 
Bank  of  New  York  trades  U.S.  government  securities  with  primary  dealers  to  implement 
monetary  policy  on  behalf  of  the  Federal  Reserve  System.  The  PDCF  makes  available 
overnight funding to sound primary dealers in the form of loans secured by collateral eligible 
to be pledged in open market operations, plus investment-grade corporate, municipal, and 
mortgage-backed  and  asset-backed  securities.  The  PDCF  was  authorized  for  a  minimum 
period of six months.  
Most of the primary dealers are owned by either U.S. or foreign banking organizations that 
have  been  approved  as  U.S.  financial  holding  companies.  The  U.S.  financial  holding 
companies  owning  primary  dealers  are  subject  to  consolidated  supervision  by  the  Federal 
Reserve, but for the primary dealers within financial holding companies we rely extensively 
on the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) as functional regulator. The SEC, rather 
than the Federal Reserve, serves as consolidated supervisor for the major U.S. investment 
banks with primary dealers. In connection with the establishment of the PDCF, we created a 
program to monitor the financial and funding positions of primary dealers, focusing on those 
primary  dealers  not  owned  by  financial  holding  companies.  From  the  beginning,  we  have 
coordinated closely with the SEC, and we are currently working on an agreement with that 
BIS Review 80/2008 
 1
agency  to  enhance  information  sharing  both  for  primary  dealers  that  are  part  of  financial 
holding companies and for those that are not.  
The  objectives  of  our  PDCF  monitoring  program  are:  (1)  to  establish  the  basis  for  an 
informed judgment by the Federal Reserve of the liquidity and capital positions of the primary 
dealers  accessing  the  PDCF;  and  (2)  to  minimize  the  risk  that  the  availability  of  financing 
under the PDCF undermines the incentives for the consolidated entity to manage capital and 
liquidity to levels appropriate for a sustained period of market disruption.  
The  Federal  Reserve's  monitoring  program  for  primary  dealers  includes  a  limited  on-site 
presence at the four largest investment banks and has a narrower focus than our broader 
supervision and examination of state member banks, bank holding companies, and the U.S. 
operations  of  foreign  banking  organizations.  Specifically,  the  Federal  Reserve  is  not 
supervising  investment  firms  comprehensively  to  assess  risk  management.  Rather,  our 
purpose is specifically to assess the adequacy of liquidity and capital.  
To support our monitoring efforts, which are closely coordinated with the SEC, we receive 
internal information from the firms on a daily basis that enables us to identify changes in the 
level and composition of the firms' holdings of cash and unencumbered, highly liquid assets. 
We  also  receive  qualitative  information  regarding  the  posture  of  counterparties  and  clients 
toward the firms, including the extent, if any, to which the firms are encountering difficulty in 
rolling  over  secured  and  unsecured  funding.  In  addition,  along  with  the  SEC,  we  are 
assessing the firms' current and planned capital positions in light of their near-term earnings 
prospects. In both of these areas – liquidity and capital – we are evaluating the firms' efforts 
and, with the SEC, providing feedback to their senior management teams. 
Broadly  speaking,  we  believe  that  primary  dealers  are  strengthening  liquidity  and  capital 
positions  to  better  protect  themselves  against  extreme  events.  We  also  believe  their 
management  has  learned  some  valuable  lessons  from  the  events  of  the  recent  financial 
turmoil that should translate into better risk management. We continue to monitor the effect 
of the PDCF and are studying a range of options going forward.  
Federal Reserve supervisory activities 
I  would  now  like  to  discuss  the  Federal  Reserve's  recent  activities  relating  to  banking 
institutions we supervise. As I noted in testimony before the full Committee on June 5, recent 
events  have  highlighted  a  number  of  risk  management  lessons  for  banking  organizations, 
many of which have been documented in recent public reports.1 In that testimony, I outlined 
the Federal Reserve's broad supervisory responses to recent events, which include requiring 
banking institutions to improve risk management, augmenting existing supervisory guidance, 
and where necessary, enhancing our own supervisory processes.  
Naturally,  the  risk  management  lessons  from  recent  events  vary  by  institution,  since  the 
types  of  deficiencies  differed  and  some  institutions  fared  better  than  others.  Thus,  in  our 
supervisory efforts, we are taking these broad lessons and applying them to each institution 
as  needed.  But  we  can  point  to  some  general  areas  where  we  are  focusing  supervisory 
attention  and  encouraging  better  risk  management  at  banking  institutions.  For  one, 
supervisors are reinforcing and strengthening their assessments and testing of fundamental 
                                                 
1   President's  Working  Group  on  Financial  Markets  (2008),  "Policy  Statement  on  Financial  Market 
Developments", March 13; 
Financial  Stability  Forum  (2008),  "Report  of  the  Financial  Stability  Forum  on  Enhancing  Market  and 
Institutional Resilience", April 7; 
   Senior  Supervisors  Group  (2008).  "Observations  on  Risk  Management  Practices  during  the  Recent  Market 
Turbulence", March 6.  
2 
 BIS Review 80/2008
risk  management  processes,  requiring  vigorous  corrective  action  when  weaknesses  are 
identified. We are ensuring that institutions take a more comprehensive and forward-looking 
approach  to  risk  management  across  the  entire  firm,  and  are  more  intensely  verifying 
assertions  made  by  bank  management  about  the  robustness  of  their  risk  management 
capabilities.  
Supervisors are also ensuring that banks understand the full spectrum and the scale of the 
risks  inherent  in  increasingly  complex  banking  activities  and  the  potential  for  their  risks  to 
crystallize in times of stress. In particular, banks must focus on the inter-relationships among 
risk  types,  not  just  with  respect  to  those  areas  that  precipitated  recent  events,  but  more 
broadly.  
In light of recent events, we have redoubled our efforts to ensure that senior management 
properly defines overall risk preferences and  creates incentives for employees to abide by 
those preferences, such as effective firm-wide limits and controls. We are reminding banks of 
the importance of information-sharing throughout the entire organization and of the dangers 
of information silos. In addition, we are strongly encouraging institutions to improve and/or 
build out their risk functions, so that independent risk managers are empowered to dig deep 
for latent risks, including concentrations that often arise only in times of stress.  
Having  given  some  general  thoughts  on  current  supervisory  issues  and  supervisory 
approaches to improving risk management, I would now like to turn to a few specific areas in 
which  we  are  addressing  the  challenges  facing  institutions  and  helping  bring  about 
improvements in their risk management.  
Residential lending 
Risks  associated  with  residential  mortgage  and  home  equity  lending  remain  a  top 
supervisory priority due to the continued negative trends in home prices, elevated levels of 
delinquencies and foreclosures, and slack demand for residential mortgage securities in the 
secondary markets. Banks continue to experience losses on residential first mortgage loans, 
especially, but not exclusively, on nonprime lending. Losses on home equity loans are also 
increasing significantly, even for lenders not heavily involved in subprime lending, and loss 
severities as a percentage of outstanding exposure on this product are greater than for first 
lien  loans.  And  mortgage  securities  markets  whose  instruments  are  not  supported  by 
government-sponsored entities continue to be adversely affected by problems in the housing 
market, complicating banks' risk management in this sector.  
Supervisors are acting on several fronts to address problems related to residential first and 
second mortgages. First, we are making sure institutions comply with our existing guidance 
on  nontraditional  mortgages  and  on  home  equity  loans,  issued  in  2006  and  2005, 
respectively,  as  well  as  guidance  on  subprime  lending  issued  last  year.  And  we  are 
evaluating institutions based on the risk management practices discussed in those guidance 
documents. We expect institutions to conduct rigorous stress tests of potential future losses 
related  to  residential  mortgage  loans,  home  equity  lines,  and  mortgage-backed  securities. 
We  continue  to  encourage  lenders  and  mortgage  servicers  to  work  constructively  with 
borrowers  at  risk  of  default  and  to  consider  prudent  workout  arrangements  to  avoid 
unnecessary foreclosures. As you know, the Federal Reserve believes that prudent workout 
arrangements that are consistent with safe and sound lending practices are generally in the 
long-term best interest of both the financial institution and the borrower. 
Furthermore,  we  are  working  to  finalize  the  proposed  amendments  to  the  rules  under  the 
Home Ownership and Equity Protection Act that we proposed in December. The proposed 
amendments,  which  would  apply  to  all  creditors,  would  better  protect  consumers  from  a 
range of unfair or deceptive mortgage lending and advertising practices that have been the 
source  of  considerable  concern  and  criticism.  Our  proposal  includes  key  protections  for 
higher-priced  mortgage  loans  secured  by  a  consumer's  principal  dwelling  and  addresses 
concerns  about  a  lender's  assessment  of  a  borrower's  ability  to  make  the  scheduled 
BIS Review 80/2008 
 3
payments,  including  verification  of  the  consumer's  income  and  assets.  The  proposal  also 
addresses concerns about prepayment penalties and the adverse impact on consumers of 
lenders failing to escrow for taxes and insurance. Protecting consumers also has benefits for 
lenders because it should reduce delinquencies and defaults that can occur when consumers 
do  not  understand  or  cannot  afford  certain  types  of  loans.  We  are  working  toward  issuing 
final regulations in July. 
Commercial real estate lending 
Commercial  real  estate  (CRE)  lending  is  another  area  that  requires  close  supervisory 
attention. In 2006, well before CRE markets began to soften, property values began to level 
off  or  decline  in  certain  markets,  and  fundamentals  began  to  turn  somewhat  negative,  the 
Federal Reserve and other banking agencies issued guidance on CRE concentrations. We 
were  concerned  that  the  increasing  concentrations  of  CRE  loans  in  the  portfolios  of  many 
banks,  especially  small  and  medium-sized  lenders,  made  them  more  vulnerable  to  a 
softening  in  this  market  if  the  risks  were  not  well  managed.  Since  then,  delinquencies  on 
construction loans have begun to rise, particularly for residential construction loans, and they 
are expected to rise further. Those institutions with high CRE concentrations in geographic 
areas suffering real estate pressures will likely bear losses. Further, the significant slowdown 
in  the  origination  of  commercial  mortgage-backed  securities  will  reduce  banks'  options  to 
manage CRE portfolio risks through the secondary market.  
As  I  noted  in  my  March  testimony  on  the  condition  of  the  U.S.  banking  industry,  we  have 
been stepping up our reviews of state member banks and bank holding companies exhibiting 
concentrations in CRE, especially in those areas of the country exhibiting signs of weakness. 
We  continue  to  monitor  banks'  adherence  to  the  supervisory  guidance  I  just  noted.  These 
efforts  include  monitoring  carefully  the  potential  impact  of  lower  valuations  on  CRE 
exposures.  Through 
in  banks'  risk 
management practices, including underwriting practices, appraisal processes, stress testing, 
and  market  analysis.  Based  on  these  results,  we  are  updating  our  supervisory  plans  and 
examination  schedules  to  focus  our  resources  most  effectively  on  those  institutions 
presenting the greatest risk and needing the most improvement. Finally, we just concluded a 
Federal Reserve examiner training effort on CRE topics, including appraisal practices, loan 
loss allowances, stress testing, and board and management oversight. The training focused 
on the importance of ensuring prudent risk management practices, without unduly curtailing 
credit availability. 
those  reviews,  we  are 
identifying  weaknesses 
Counterparty credit risk 
Concerns  in  financial  markets  about  the  creditworthiness  of  some  financial  intermediaries 
have  eased  somewhat  since  the  first  half  of  March,  but  those  concerns  remain  relatively 
high. More fundamentally, the proper management of counterparty credit risk – which is the 
risk of loss from a counterparty's failure to perform its financial obligations – is a prerequisite 
for protecting the entire system from contagion when any one institution fails.  
Consistent  with  the  recommendations  of  recent  reports,  we  are  looking  at  how  firms  are 
addressing  weaknesses  in  counterparty  credit  risk  management  practices  highlighted  by 
recent events, including the measurement and aggregation of exposures stemming from a 
wide range of transactions with both unregulated and regulated entities. For instance, we are 
emphasizing that firms should use a variety of techniques to measure potential exposure on 
over-the-counter  (OTC)  derivatives,  repurchase  agreements,  and  other  contracts,  and  that 
they  should  aggregate  all  exposures  to  each  counterparty.  In  this  context,  we  have  been 
closely monitoring counterparty exposures arising from transactions with monoline financial 
guarantors  and  have  been  discussing  with  banks  the  measurement  and  management  of 
these positions.  
4 
 BIS Review 80/2008
In addition, we are working to strengthen the market infrastructure for financial transactions 
to make it more robust and more resilient. In particular, the Federal Reserve Bank of New 
York  continues  to  work  with  domestic  and  international  prudential  supervisors  of  OTC 
derivatives  dealers  to  strengthen  the  infrastructure  for  those  large  and  rapidly  growing 
markets. The supervisors are emphasizing to the major dealers and to other active market 
participants the importance of setting standards for the accuracy and timeliness of trade data 
submission  and  for  the  timeliness  of  resolutions  of  errors  in  trade  matching  for  OTC 
derivatives  contracts.  Furthermore,  consistent  with  the  recommendations  made  in  recent 
reports on turbulence in financial markets, supervisors are encouraging the development by 
the industry of a longer-term plan for an integrated operational infrastructure supporting OTC 
derivatives that captures all significant processing events over the entire lifecycle of trades, 
delivers  operational  reliability,  and  maximizes  the  efficiencies  obtainable  from  automation 
and  electronic  processing  platforms.  In  addition  to  supporting  more  robust  exposure 
measurement  and  capture,  these  enhancements  should  strengthen  participants'  ability  to 
manage counterparty risk through loss mitigation techniques such as the use of netting and 
collateral agreements. We are encouraged by recent industry efforts to address counterparty 
credit  risk,  such  as  plans  to  extend  central  counterparty  clearinghouse  services  to  credit 
derivatives and other initiatives.  
Credit cards 
Credit  card  charge-offs  have  continued  to  rise  over  the  past  several  quarters,  although 
charge-offs remain well below their early 2002 peak. Not surprisingly, some banks report that 
delinquency  rates  for  unsecured  consumer  debt  are  generally  higher  in  areas  that  have 
experienced significant home price depreciation and increased unemployment. In response 
to  these  trends,  many  issuers  are  tightening  credit  standards  and  reducing  exposures  in 
these  higher  risk  markets.  Rising  delinquencies  and  increased  card  usage  that  has  been 
reported  in  recent  months  are  likely  to  push  charge-off  levels  higher  in  future  quarters. 
Therefore,  we  will  continue  to  monitor  credit  card  markets  and  other  consumer  lending 
sectors for potential weaknesses. 
The Federal Reserve has also taken steps toward improving consumer protection for credit 
card users. Our first step was the Board's 2007 proposal to substantially revise and improve 
credit  card  disclosures  under  the  Truth  in  Lending  Act.  In  preparing  this  proposal,  we 
conducted extensive consumer testing to determine the type and format of information that 
consumers  find  most  useful  in  shopping  for  and  choosing  a  credit  card.  This  extensive 
consumer testing – and the thousands of public comments on our proposal – suggested that 
disclosures may not provide sufficient consumer protection with regard to certain practices. 
Therefore, we recently proposed rules under the Federal Trade Commission Act to protect 
consumers  from  financial  harm  caused  by  those  practices.  If  implemented,  the  proposed 
rules  would  require  financial  institutions  to  make  changes  to  their  business  models  and  to 
alter some practices. The Federal Reserve developed this proposal jointly with the Office of 
Thrift  Supervision  and  the  National  Credit  Union  Administration.  We  are  continuing  to  use 
consumer testing as we work toward issuing final rules for credit cards by year-end.  
Commercial lending 
Commercial  lending  activity,  aside  from  a  few  sectors  such  as  leveraged  lending,  has  not 
been markedly affected by the recent volatility in the financial markets, but may encounter 
more difficulty should slow economic growth persist. Lenders and investors are demanding 
stricter underwriting standards and higher returns for commercial loans. With regard to the 
condition of existing commercial loan portfolios, delinquencies have been rising recently as 
has the volume of criticized assets. This has been most evident in the leveraged loan market, 
where lending standards appeared to weaken noticeably in recent years, and which tends to 
be more susceptible to soft economic conditions.  
BIS Review 80/2008 
 5
Supervisors are monitoring banks' commercial lending activities, particularly leveraged loan 
portfolios,  to  detect  weaknesses  in  asset  quality  that  may  result  from  slowing  economic 
conditions and to ensure appropriate risk management practices. In part, the agencies rely 
on  their  Shared  National  Credit  (SNC)  program  to  assess  the  credit  quality  of  banks' 
commercial  loan  portfolios.  The  2008  review  is  now  underway  and  will  provide  additional 
insight into the condition of large syndicated credits that are shared by three or more banks, 
including an evaluation of underwriting practices and trends in the leveraged loan market and 
the broader syndicated loan market.  
Adequacy of loan loss allowance 
As  the  banking  system  has  faced  a  more  difficult  environment  in  recent  quarters,  our 
examiners  have  identified  significant  weaknesses  at  some  institutions  in  identifying  and 
reserving against problem loans, which in some cases have led to deficiencies in allowance 
levels  at  some  supervised  institutions.  In  response,  our  examiners  continue  to  remind 
bankers that allowance levels should be reflective of loan portfolio quality, based on sound 
processes,  and  consistent  with  current  supervisory  guidance.  We  recently  provided 
additional  clarity  to  our  examiners  regarding  existing  interagency  guidance  on  loan  loss 
allowances  that  should  be  factored  into  current  examinations  and  inspections  of  state 
member  banks,  bank  holding  companies,  and  their  nonbank  subsidiaries.  We  believe  this 
further clarity to our examination staff will help them in their regular discussions with bankers 
to ensure that reserving practices are robust and loan loss allowances are indeed adequate 
to the circumstances facing each institution.  
Liquidity risk management 
Recent reports cite the need for enhancement to liquidity risk management as one of the key 
lessons  from  recent  events.  Financial  institutions  must  understand  their  liquidity  needs  at 
both the legal entity and enterprise-wide level and be prepared for the possibility that market 
liquidity  may  erode  quickly,  unexpectedly,  and  for  a  protracted  time.  As  is  now  widely 
recognized,  many  contingency  funding  plans  did  not  adequately  prepare  for  the  possibility 
that  certain  off-balance-sheet  exposures  might  have  to  be  brought  onto  the  firm's  balance 
sheet,  calling  on  available  liquidity.  Nor  did  they  adequately  account  for  the  possibility  of 
widespread  and  protracted  declines  in  asset  market  liquidity.  While  liquidity  pressures  in 
banking  and  financial  markets  have  eased  of  late,  we  do  recognize  that  institutions  must 
prepare themselves for the possibility that liquidity problems could return, either market-wide 
or at an individual institution.  
Supervisors are working with institutions to improve liquidity risk management practices. For 
instance, we are reviewing banks' contingent funding needs and sources of funding. We are 
ensuring 
liquidity  risk 
management strategies. Consistent with the findings of recent reports, we are emphasizing 
the  importance  of  appropriate  stress  testing  of  liquidity  needs  and  maintenance  of  robust 
liquidity  buffers.  In  addition,  we  worked  with  our  colleagues  on  the  Basel  Committee  on 
Banking  Supervision  to  enhance  existing  guidance  on  the  management  of  liquidity  risks, 
which was released two days ago. That work was drawn from recent and ongoing efforts on 
liquidity risk by the public and private sectors and is intended to strengthen banks' liquidity 
risk management and improve global supervisory practices. Of course, the Federal Reserve 
has undertaken a number of programs to bolster market liquidity.  
that  bankers  develop  appropriate  short-term  and 
long-term 
Capital needs 
Clearly, capital is a critical defense against unexpected losses. Even with the recent turmoil, 
the  U.S.  banking  system  remains  well  capitalized.  However,  as  I  noted  in  my  June  5 
testimony, we are encouraging institutions to raise capital as needed, in part so that they will 
be well positioned to take advantage of future opportunities and to support a strengthening of 
6 
 BIS Review 80/2008
financial conditions and a rebound in economic growth. And the recent capital injections into 
banking organizations and other financial institutions are a good sign that investors see value 
in those institutions and in the banking industry as a whole.  
To assess the sufficiency of firms' capacity to absorb unexpected losses from a wide range 
of sources, Federal Reserve supervisors have heightened their review of capital analysis and 
forecasting  at  banking  organizations.  Examiners  are  reviewing  the  reasonableness  of 
assumptions  banking  organizations  use  to  assess  capital  needs  and  are  emphasizing 
forward-looking analysis. For example, we are evaluating banks' use of stress scenarios to 
see if they adequately incorporate a range of possible events and properly identify potential 
capital  needs  and  capacity  across  the  firms.  The  scenarios  address  a  number  of  possible 
factors  including  unexpected  balance  sheet  expansion,  earnings  deterioration  across  key 
business  lines,  and  stress-level  losses  generated  by  a  variety  of  positions  and  multiple 
sources.  
In  addition,  last  year  the  Federal  Reserve  conducted  a  review  across  a  number  of  large 
banking organizations to assess these firms' use of so-called "economic capital" practices, 
which are a means for firms to calculate, for internal purposes, their capital needs given their 
risk profile. Consistent with other findings, we found that some banks relied too extensively 
on  the  output  of  internal  models,  not  viewing  model  output  with  appropriate  skepticism. 
Models are dependent on the data used to construct them. When data histories are short or 
are drawn mostly from periods of benign economic conditions, model results may not be fully 
applicable  to  an  institution's  risk  profile.  We  concluded  that  banks  would  generally  benefit 
from better  evaluation of inputs used in their internal capital models, stronger validation of 
their  models,  and  broader  use  of  stress  testing  and  scenario  analysis  to  supplement  the 
inherent limitations of their models. We are incorporating the results of this horizontal review 
in our current assessments of banks' overall capital adequacy, as well as using it to evaluate 
banks' readiness to meet the requirement in Pillar 2 of Basel II that banks develop their own 
internal process to assess overall capital adequacy, beyond regulatory capital measures. 
Consolidated supervision program 
The  supervisory  activities  just  described  are  intended  to  address  many  of  the  risk 
management lapses seen over the past year, some of which pertain to shortcomings in firm-
wide  risk  identification  and  measurement.  Consistent  with  our  regular  efforts  to  improve 
supervisory  practices,  we  realize  that  our  program  of  consolidated  supervision  could  be 
enhanced  and  made  more  systematic.  Supervising  a  consolidated  banking  organization 
requires review of all risks on an enterprise-wide basis, not just review of the risks contained 
in  each  subsidiary  legal  entity.  To  this  end,  the  Federal  Reserve  is  nearing  completion  of 
enhancements  to  its  supervisory  guidance  to  clarify  our  role  as  consolidated  supervisor  of 
bank and financial holding companies.  
The updated consolidated supervision guidance, which will be publicly available, is primarily 
intended to provide greater clarity to our own examination staff. For example, it provides for 
more consistent Federal Reserve supervisory practices and assessments across institutions 
with  similar  activities  and  risks,  detailing  expectations  for  understanding  and  assessing 
primary governance functions and risk controls, material business lines, nonbank operations, 
funding and liquidity management, consumer compliance, and other key activities and risks. 
In  this  sense  the  forthcoming  guidance  is  very  consistent  with  the  Federal  Reserve 
supervisory actions I have just described. The enhanced guidance will help us better identify 
and  address  firm-wide  issues  at  supervised  banking  organizations,  while  also  promoting 
better risk management.  
I want to make clear that consolidated supervision of bank and financial holding companies 
in the United States generally works well, with strong, cooperative relationships between the 
Federal  Reserve  and  other  relevant  bank  supervisors  and  functional  regulators.  Indeed, 
much  of  the  supervisory  work  I  just  described  is  being  done  in  cooperation  with  primary 
BIS Review 80/2008 
 7
supervisors  and  functional  regulators.  Information  sharing  among  relevant  supervisors  and 
regulators is essential to ensure that a banking organization's global activities are effectively 
supervised  on  a  consolidated  basis,  and  we  have  worked  over  the  years  to  develop  and 
enhance  interagency  coordination  and  information  sharing.  But  as  institutions  grow  larger 
and  more  complex,  we  need  to  ensure  that  our  system  of  consolidated  supervision  keeps 
pace.  
Finally,  it  is  worth  noting  that  the  Federal  Reserve's  umbrella  supervision  role  closely 
complements  our  other  central  bank  responsibilities,  including  the  objectives  of  fostering 
financial stability and deterring or managing financial crises. The information, expertise, and 
powers derived from our supervisory authority enhances the Federal Reserve's ability to help 
prevent  financial  crises,  and  to  manage  such  crises  should  they  occur,  working  with  the 
Treasury Department and other U.S. and foreign authorities. In this manner, enhancements 
to  our  consolidated  supervision  program,  which  include  close  coordination  with  primary 
supervisors and functional regulators, should provide broad benefits for the financial system 
and the economy.  
8 
 BIS Review 80/2008
