Ric Battellino: Inquiry into competition in the banking and non-banking 
sectors 
Opening comments by Mr Ric Battelino, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, 
to 
the  House  of  Representatives  Standing  Committee  on  Economics,  Sydney, 
14 August 2008. 
 Mr Thomson, other members of the Committee, thank you for the opportunity to appear here 
today. 
We have provided a written submission to the Committee which looks at various aspects of 
competition in the financial sector. I won’t take up the Committee’s time by going through that 
submission  in  detail,  but  it  might  be  worth  highlighting  some  of  the  key  points  and  the 
conclusion. 
One way to analyse the competitiveness of the financial sector is to look for any signs that 
we would expect to see if the sector was not competitive. 
For example: 
1. 
2. 
if the overall provision of financing to the economy was inadequate;  
or if the costs paid by households and businesses for financial services was high by 
international standards;  
or if the availability of new financial products in Australia was less than overseas;  
3. 
4. 
or if the profitability of financial intermediaries was unreasonably high.  
When we look at the evidence in these key areas, we think it is quite reassuring: 
• 
Financial intermediation in Australia has been growing at a fast rate – on average 
about twice as fast as the growth of nominal GDP. This is among the highest in the 
developed  world.  There  is  no  suggestion  therefore  that  the  Australian  financial 
sector has been unable to provide adequate access to finance for households and 
businesses.  
In  the  case  of  interest  spreads  charged  by  intermediaries,  we  find  that  they  have 
declined substantially over the past 15 years, and as far as we can tell are in line 
with international norms.  
In  the  case  of  financial  innovation,  we  have  seen  a  marked  increase  in  the 
availability of financial products over the past 15 years, and the range of products 
compares favourably with the experience overseas.  
When we look at bank profitability, we find that Australian banks are around the top 
of  the  international  range.  On  the  surface,  this  could  indicate  a  lesser  degree  of 
competition  than  elsewhere.  But  when  we  look  a  bit  deeper  it  seems  that  an 
important reason for the high profitability of Australian banks is their unusually low 
bad  debt  experience.  Over  the  past  decade  or  so,  bad  debts  of  Australian  banks 
have been about half the long run average, and also around half the experience of 
overseas banks. This has been the result of the very strong domestic economy. It is 
also worth noting that other Australian industries have been very profitable over this 
period. 
If  we  adjust  for  the  unusually  low  bad  debts  of  recent  years,  the  profitability  of 
Australian banks falls back to around the middle of the international range.  
   BIS Review 98/2008 
 1
Overall,  when  we  look  at  all  the  evidence,  we  think  it  is  reasonable  to  conclude  that  the 
Australian  financial  sector  is  competitive,  and  that  its  performance  measures  up  quite  well 
across a range of international benchmarks.  
Some commentators have recently been concerned that the financial turmoil of the past year 
has lessened the degree of competition. This is because the turmoil has made it harder for 
lenders  who  fund  themselves  in  capital  markets  to  compete.  Some  have  argued  that  this 
requires  some  type  of  government  intervention  in  the  market,  such  as  setting  up  a 
government guaranteed securitisation vehicle. 
While it is true that lenders relying on securitisation have lost market share in recent months, 
it has always been the case that some phases of the economic cycle favour some forms of 
financing more than others. Securitisation had been strongly favoured over the previous five 
years of very low global interest rates; now it is at a disadvantage. 
Our view of recent events is that they are cyclical in nature rather than a permanent change 
to the structure of the market, in the sense that when market conditions settle, securitisation 
will pick up again. As such, it would be premature at this stage to embark on proposals such 
as the setting up of new government bodies to support certain forms of financial activity. 
The best way for the Government to promote a competitive financial sector in the long run is 
to ensure: 
• 
first, that regulations do not unreasonably impede new entrants (since history shows 
that it is new entrants that drive competitive behaviour);  
second, that users of financial services have good access to information about the 
range and cost of services available. It is also important that this information be in a 
form that is easy to understand; and  
• 
third, that switching between service providers be as costless and easy as possible.  
I  will  end  my  opening  remarks  here,  and  Phil  and  I  would  be  very  pleased  to  answer  any 
questions you may have. 
Thank you.  
 2 
 BIS Review 98/2008
