Gertrude Tumpel-Gugerell: Towards an integrated securities market – 
The TARGET2-Securities project 
Speech by Ms Gertrude Tumpel-Gugerell, Member of the Executive Board of the European 
Central, Bank, at the 12th FESE Convention, Stockholm, 18 June 2008. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
I am delighted to be here today at the FESE convention to share with you my vision of the 
T2S initiative, and its important role in creating an integrated European securities market. 
But  let  me  start  by  putting  the  T2S  project  into  the  broader  context  of  overall  financial 
integration in Europe. 
I am often asked why we need to integrate financial markets 
There  is  enough  economic  evidence  to  convince  even  the  most  hardened  sceptic  that 
financial  integration  at  European  level  will  create  substantial  gains  for  society  as  a  whole. 
Financial integration will foster a more efficient allocation of resources, increase competition, 
reduce costs, lead to higher trading activity, and more transparent pricing and thereby raise 
the overall potential for stronger economic growth. It will increase consumer choice, open a 
multitude  of  new  investment  opportunities,  strengthen  the  EU  banking  sector  and  make 
Europe a centre for financial innovation.  
Moreover, more from my perspective as a central banker, increased financial integration will 
enhance  the  smooth  transmission of  monetary  policy  and is  crucial  for  global  resilience  of 
financial markets which constitutes an important element for safeguarding financial stability. 
Efficient integrated markets generally reinforce the shock-absorbing capacity of the economic 
system as they offer a wider range of options for sharing risk among economic agents.  
The  economic  gains  of  financial  integration  coincide  with  the  objectives  expressed  in  the 
Lisbon agenda, of granting the citizens of Europe access to a genuine single market in which 
financial services are offered on the same conditions within and across borders. Thus every 
cross-border  business  in  Europe  needs  to  become  truly  domestic.  Achieving  this  requires 
action of several kinds at all stages in the process – in trading and in post-trading.  
I  think  there  is  evidence  of  already  great  progress  on  the  trading  side;  notably,  European 
Stock Exchanges and the relatively new MTFs (multilateral trading facilities) are extending 
the  range  of  instruments  offered  on  their  trading  platforms  to  create  genuine  competition. 
This offers the potential for lower costs for intermediaries and all classes of investors. It also 
improves  the  prospects  for  retail  investors  to  diversify  their  securities  portfolios  across 
Europe,  increasing  the  potential  returns  on  investments  and  diversifying  their  exposure  to 
financial risks. Issuers should also benefit from greater market depth for their fund raising.  
But what about the post trading arena?  
There is considerable evidence that costs in the European post trading area are much higher 
–  particularly  for  cross  border  activity  –  than  in  other  very  large  markets,  such  as  the  US 
market, but also several markets of the Eastern Hemisphere states. 
The cost gap – for example – in relation to the US market arises in large part because of 
differences between different European local markets. The lack of harmonisation is often the 
result of history – differences in market practices, laws, tax administration and so on. Often, 
the post trading infrastructure in the local market has been rapidly developed in the relatively 
recent  past  to  provide  very  efficient  means  of  accommodating  such  local  market  features. 
BIS Review 79/2008 
 1
The  solutions  were  often  created  under  huge  pressure,  to  help  each  individual  market  to 
cope  with  the  dynamics  of  innovation  and  of  trading  volumes.  These  were  major 
achievements in that context, but the world has changed and we now need to move to the 
next stage of development. 
Our  today’s  task  is,  therefore,  to  become  more  competitive  in  a  rapidly  changing  global 
financial market environment. Differences across Europe’s post trading markets have to be 
overcome. For this, integration and harmonization need to be promoted, synergies need to 
be used and economies of scale have to be exploited. This will foster competition and the 
expansion of markets, facilitating a more efficient allocation of better-priced capital.  
We, the Eurosystem, contribute our part in promoting further financial integration in the post 
trading sector by acting in several roles – as market operator, facilitator and catalyst.  
The  Eurosystem  already  offers  core,  neutral  and  borderless  infrastructure  to  support  real-
time settlement in central bank money with the TARGET2 system. Moreover, we are working 
to  produce  the  next  generation  of  the  Eurosystem’s  collateral  management  system 
(Collateral  Central  Bank  Management  or  CCBM2).  The  Eurosystem  also  supports  market 
initiatives  such  as  SEPA  –  the  new  Single  Euro  Payments  Area  –  enabling  customers  to 
make payments anywhere in the euro area as quickly, safely and easily as they can in their 
own country, by using a single set of payment instruments.  
How can the TARGET2-Securities initiative contribute to this process? 
Let  me  focus  today  on  the  Eurosystem’s  TARGET2-Securities  initiative  (T2S).  T2S  is  a 
proposal  to  overcome  the  fragmentation  in  the  European  market  for  securities  settlement 
providing a harmonised venue, a single European, borderless, settlement platform, offering 
highly  secure  delivery  versus  payment  for  any  security,  using  central  bank  money.  T2S 
reinforces the other main European Union initiatives, the Code of Conduct for clearing and 
settlement, the Giovannini harmonisation process and of course the MiFiD in driving forward 
the single market objectives set out by the Lisbon agenda. 
In particular, T2S will be tightly integrated with the TARGET2 system, combining cash and 
securities settlements in a single shared platform in real time to provide the single European 
settlement  platform  for  securities  in  central  bank  money,  irrespective  of  the  location  of  the 
issuer, the security or the settlement counterparty. This will create a single pool of securities 
available to market users and service providers through their chosen CSD, eliminating the 
costly process of cross-border security settlement in Europe. 
In  this  way,  T2S  will  provide  –  just  like  an  airport  servicing  various  airlines  –  a  basic 
infrastructure. In this basic infrastructure the CSDs can operate, offering – for example – a 
mix of products and services to their customers. In this regard, T2S will simply provide the 
basic platform that offers its services to all CDSs at the same unit costs. This will obviously 
contribute to more competition among the CSDs, leading to more transparent and efficient 
pricing, and facilitating competition to provide cross-border trading venues. This will create 
substantial gains for the European financial industry.  
Thanks to efforts made by hundreds of experts from over 80 European institutions and from 
the Eurosystem over the last year, the Governing Council of the ECB has been able in the 
last few weeks to invite the European CSDs to express their support for T2S. 
We have sent the European CSDs detailed user requirements, an economic impact analysis, 
a description of governance for the next project phase, and a presentation on harmonisation 
efforts  in  the  context  of  T2S.  These  are  the  outcome  of  a  transparent  and  constructive 
consultation process, cooperating with CSDs and market users. 
Let me just point to a few elements of the economic impact study which you can find on our 
website. This analysis confirms that the economic benefits of T2S will be substantial. Despite 
using rather conservative assumptions it shows that T2S has the potential to bring significant 
2 
 BIS Review 79/2008
benefits to both the securities market participants in particular and to the European economy 
in general. The analysis concludes that the costs of settlement can be reduced substantially 
from  the  73  cents  a  CSD  charges  on  average  in  the  euro  area  (excluding  communication 
costs) today to 32 cents per transaction under T2S.  
The  T2S  benefits  would  be  even  higher  if  the  CSDs  of  the  UK,  Sweden,  Denmark  and 
Switzerland  were  to  join;  in  such  a  scenario  the  T2S  settlement  cost  would  decline  to  21 
cents, and the annual savings would range between EUR 220 million and EUR 340 million.  
These numbers represent only the narrow business case, and do not capture – of course – 
the full dynamic impact of T2S arising from enhanced competition in a more complete single 
market for security settlement and related services. The Commission estimates the impact 
on EU welfare of such post-trading cost reductions to be in the range of EUR 1.1 billion to 1.6 
billion.  
Let  me  stress  very  clearly  that  while  there  is  room  for  much  discussion  about  the  exact 
estimates  I  just  mentioned,  we  definitely  cannot  contest  the  overall  benefits  of  a  more 
competitive and more integrated European financial market. 
You may wonder why I call for more competition but at the same time offer only one 
single settlement engine for Europe. 
The  answer  is  in  two  parts.  First,  the  alternative  to  what  we  offer  is  the  creation  of  many 
cross CSD  settlement links, which have to be  highly efficient and safe. This has not been 
realised  today,  partly  because  of  cost  and  partly  because  of  commercial  dynamics;  and  I 
suspect it would take many years for a suitable such network to become a reality. It is very 
likely  that  the  cost  and  time  would  be  better  employed  in  providing  cross  border  asset 
servicing,  which  is  of  course  necessary  to  take  full  advantage  of  borderless  settlement  in 
T2S. This activity is high value-added, and can involve taking commercial risk; it is a clear 
priority for investment and effort by the private sector.  
Second – in my view – there is unlikely to be much benefit in the form of innovation gains 
from  preserving  a  multiplicity  of  competing  platforms;  and  there  is  in  any  case  likely  to  be 
competition from settlement in commercial bank money. 
Let me also stress that integration and harmonisation have become a core objective of the 
European Union; the European financial industry is requested to increase competitiveness by 
giving access to an efficient, state of the art financial infrastructure supporting a true single 
market. 
In  this  respect,  T2S  has  been  developed  with  harmonisation  in  mind.  T2S  will  deliver  and 
embody  a  significant  amount  of  settlement  harmonisation  in  important  areas  such  as 
common  interfaces,  common  set  of  rules  for  intra-day  settlement  finality,  a  common  daily 
timetable,  and  common  messages.  These  features  are  an  immediate  contribution  to  the 
elimination  of  6  of  the  15  so-called  Giovannini  barriers.  For  the  future,  we  expect  T2S  to 
foster  greater  harmonisation  efforts  beyond  the  area  of  pure  settlement,  addressing  more 
barriers – as already addressed in the current concept of T2S – of the kind identified by the 
Giovannini  Group.  Accordingly  a  Harmonisation  Group  will  be  established  by  the  T2S 
Advisory Group to agree and implement an action plan for harmonisation with the support of 
market leaders.  
It  is  likely  to  be  necessary  to  harmonise  market  practices  for  –  among  others  –  repo 
instructions,  collateral  management  procedures,  auto  collateralisation  and  multilateral 
settlements without a central counterparty.  
And on top of this I expect that changes in legislation – where there is a credible consensus 
within the market that these produce significant benefits – will be proposed.  
BIS Review 79/2008 
 3
Before coming to an end, let me come back again to the decision that lies ahead of us. Since 
the participation of CSDs in the T2S project is voluntary, the ECB has asked all European 
CSDs to express – by 4 July 2008 – whether they support T2S. We are sure that CSDs will 
consult their clients and other stakeholders, many of whom have already expressed strong 
support.  I  would  like  to  encourage  all  of  you  to  express  your  views  so  that  CSDs  have  a 
sound basis to decide on the future of the European settlement landscape.  
Let me be very clear. The Eurosystem is ready to firmly commit to deliver T2S as a state-of-
the-art settlement system to the market via the CSDs by 2013 at the latest. But it is also clear 
that the Eurosystem cannot do it alone. As substantial financial investments will need to be 
made  for  building  T2S;  we  need  the  support  and  the  commitment  of  the  CSDs  and  their 
customers.  
To conclude, I see T2S as Europe’s best route to a single securities settlement system, in 
which secure real time settlement in central bank money is provided across accounts held 
within a single platform, open to all. It will be operated by a neutral and trusted entity, the 
Eurosystem. Therefore, it can be relied on to operate in a transparent way and on a not for 
profit basis.  
Let me also use this occasion, to express my warm “thank you” to all the stakeholders, the 
members of the national user groups, individuals and institutions who have worked together 
with  the  Eurosystem  on  the  T2S  project,  for  their  openness  and  expertise  and  their 
contribution  to  the  successful  completion  of  work  done  so  far.  This  is  an  example  of  how 
Europe can co-operate to harmonise and innovate in pursuit of the economic benefits of the 
single market. 
Nearly 10 years ago, the euro was introduced and is now the common currency of more than 
320 million Europeans. The euro has been a great success in harmonising the exchange of 
cash  across  the  euro  area.  Let  us  strive  for  a  similar  success  in  a  harmonised  security 
settlement market. It’s now time to implement the monetary union that we began 10 years 
ago in the post trading sector. I am sure we can do so with your support and co-operation.  
Thank you very much. 
4 
 BIS Review 79/2008
