Randall S Kroszner: Developing sustainable capital for community 
investments 
Speech  by  Mr  Randall  S  Kroszner,  Member  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  US  Federal 
Reserve  System,  at  the  Community  Reinvestment  Fund  First  Annual  Forum,  Minneapolis, 
Minnesota, 21 April 2008. 
The original speech, which contains various links to the documents mentioned, can be found on the US Federal 
Reserve System’s website. 
 Good  afternoon.  I  am  pleased  to  address  the  inaugural  Community  Reinvestment  Fund 
(CRF)  Annual  Community  Forum  Series.  The  development  of  sustainable  capital  sources 
through innovation is an important goal for the Community Development Financial Institutions 
(CDFI) industry. Today's host, CRF, has played a pioneering role in the development of  a 
secondary market for community development  loans, a topic I spoke on more than a year 
and a half ago in Washington, D.C.  
The financial markets have experienced much turbulence since that time. The turmoil in the 
subprime  mortgage  market,  in  particular,  has  affected  liquidity  of  the  larger  secondary 
markets. Given the cautious state of financial markets, how can the CDFI industry enhance 
the attractiveness of CDFI investments to private capital?  
The  markets  have  changed,  but  the  core  ideas  I  raised  in  my  previous  remarks  are  more 
relevant than ever. There is a striking parallel with the challenges for the re-emergence of the 
subprime mortgage market and the adoption of innovations in the community development 
investments market. To overcome the unease of the current financial markets and attract a 
new  source  of  capital,  new  market  entrants  must  make  particular  efforts  to  reduce  the 
uncertainty  associated  with  their  investment  opportunities.  For  the  CDFI  industry,  the 
challenges  that  need  to  be  addressed  are  improving  information  about  these  products, 
developing models of risk and pricing, and standardizing these contracts. Addressing these 
issues will be critical to jump-start sustainable private CDFI investments as well as to revive 
the subprime mortgage market. 
Growth of community development finance and current challenges 
The Community Reinvestment Act (CRA) was enacted more than 30 years ago in response 
to deteriorating economic conditions in urban areas, particularly in lower-income and minority 
communities.  The  CRA  served  as  a  catalyst  in  attracting  innovative  public  and  private 
investment  capital  into  low-  and  moderate-income  communities.  Consider  the  following:  In 
1991, 2,000 community development corporations (CDCs) built 300,000 units and 17 million 
square feet of commercial space. In 2006, 4,600 CDCs built 1.2 million units and 126 million 
square feet of commercial space. Today, there are more than 600 CDFIs with more than $19 
billion  in  assets  and  with  more  than  $20  billion  of  finance  activities.  The  CRF  has  issued 
three rated securities within the past six years totaling almost $200 million, opening the door 
to institutional investors and expanding the marketplace. 
The  migration  toward  sustainable  mainstream  capital  sources  is  important  in  light  of 
budgetary challenges facing governmental and philanthropic funding sources. For CDFIs to 
expand the scope and volume of their financing activities, they need to develop new products 
and innovations that tap more predictable sources of funding. Accessing the broad depth of 
the  capital  markets  as  a  self-sustaining  funding  source  for  community  development  would 
yield  enhanced  benefits,  such  as  more-efficient  delivery  of  capital,  greater  funding  and 
underwriting discipline, and reduced finance costs.  
BIS Review 47/2008 
 1
Of  course,  a  real  challenge  is  building  a  bridge  between  the  two  very  different  worlds  of 
capital markets and community development. The former requires strict market discipline, a 
rich  set  of  data  to  assess  risk  and  pricing,  and  standardization.  The  latter,  community 
development, however, has a commitment to individuals and communities that have been left 
out of the economic mainstream and uses products tailored to their unique circumstances. 
These  two  worlds,  however,  can  be  brought  together;  and  that  has  begun  to  happen, 
particularly around the challenges I will discuss in greater detail. 
learn  a  great  deal  about 
Importance of data for new products and proper risk modeling 
When a new product is being developed, there is an initial experimentation phase in which 
market  participants 
the  product's  performance  and  risk 
characteristics. This phase involves gathering and processing information and modeling the 
performance of the product in various scenarios and under different market conditions. It may 
then  take  time  for  market  participants  to  understand  what,  exactly,  they  need  to  know  to 
value a product. During the early phases, a fair amount of due diligence is appropriate, given 
the greater uncertainty associated with innovative products.1  
In  the  initial  experimentation  phase,  the  terms  and  characteristics  of  a  new  product  are 
adjusted  in  response  to  market  acceptance  –  or  lack  thereof.  During  this  period,  market 
participants  are  seeking  and  providing  information  so  that  they  can  properly  value  the 
product,  judge  its  potential  for  risk  and  return,  assess  its  market  acceptance  and  liquidity, 
and determine the extent to which the risks of the product can be hedged or mitigated. 
To do this, market participants must perform due diligence, a process to gather and assess 
relevant  sources  of  information  to  evaluate  that  product.  Due  diligence  is  critical  because 
market  participants  must  trust  but  verify  the  market-provided  information.  Potential 
purchasers,  for  example,  might  engage  in  various  activities,  ranging  from  assessing  risk 
exposures through stress testing to assessing the enforceability of contracts that define the 
requirements of investors, trustees, guarantors, and originators.  
We have recently seen how a lack of information and insufficient due diligence have created 
problems in the market for subprime residential mortgage-backed securities. Many investors 
appear  not  to  have  demanded  sufficient  information  about  these  investment  vehicles,  or 
perhaps did not carefully evaluate the information that was available. Instead, they may have 
simply accepted or trusted credit ratings as a substitute for their own risk analysis, and not 
verified  enough.  As  a  result,  subprime  delinquencies  and  defaults  exceeded  expectations. 
Lack of information, a stressed financial environment, and disparate contract obligations led 
to a general lack of liquidity in the subprime market, which later spread to the broader market 
for mortgage securities.  
Investors in new and innovative products have suffered losses before. In the early 1990s, for 
example, participants engaged in the collateralized mortgage obligation (CMO) market and in 
certain  types  of  interest  rate  derivatives  that  did  not  have  adequate  information  about  the 
potential  volatility  and  prepayment  risk  involved.  Consequently,  market  participants  did  not 
appropriately  model  these  risks  and  suffered  significant  losses  when  market  interest  rates 
rose  sharply  in  the  mid-1990s.  As  in  the  case  of  today's  market  for  residential  mortgage-
backed  securities,  the  general  market  reaction  was  a  flight  away  from  these  instruments. 
However,  over  time,  the  market  was  restored  as  market  participants  came  to  better 
understand the risks and as standardized methods were developed to measure the risks and 
model the value of these instruments under alternative scenarios. Increased information and 
                                                 
1   Randall S. Kroszner (2007), "Innovation, Information, and Regulation in Financial Markets," speech delivered 
at the Philadelphia Fed Policy Forum, Philadelphia, November 30. 
2 
 BIS Review 47/2008
standardized pricing conventions, such as the use of option-adjusted spreads, moved these 
instruments from the experimentation and learning phase to broad market acceptance. 
When market participants realize that they do not have the information necessary for proper 
valuation of risks, market liquidity can become impaired, such as in the CMO market in the 
1990s and in the subprime market recently. A significant investment in information gathering, 
processing, and evaluation may be necessary to revive markets. This process will likely take 
time. First, more-detailed data will need to be collected in a more systematic manner in order 
to  better  understand  the  nature  and  risks  of  the  instruments  and  their  underlying  assets. 
Second,  investments  will  need  to  be  made  to warehouse and  model data  related  to  these 
instruments,  which  will  enhance  the  understanding  of  risks,  particularly  under  stress 
conditions. Third, investments in human capital expertise – that is, in people so that they can 
better understand, interpret, and act appropriately on the results of the modeling and analysis 
of  the  information  gathered  –  will  also  need  to  be  made.  Finally,  sellers  may  respond  by 
reducing  complexity  and  by  improving  the  quality  of  the  underlying  assets,  increasing 
transparency,  or  both.  Ultimately,  the  payoff  from  these  activities  will  be  a  greater 
understanding of risks and greater ability to value the instruments.  
For  innovations  in  the  community  development  investment  markets,  it  will  also  likely  take 
time for these markets to mature because of the time and cost to systematically collect data 
and  for  investors  to  understand  these  new  instruments.  To  accelerate  the  development  of 
these markets, however, some key issues will need to be addressed. First, how will the CDFI 
industry  organize  itself  to  generate  and  collect  this  data?  Second,  who  is  poised  to  lead 
efforts in setting standards for industry data? Finally, who and how will the intellectual capital 
be  developed  to  model  and  structure  these  new  instruments?  There  should  also  be 
consideration of existing standards from established products that parallel developing ones, 
such  as  the  adoption  of  best  practices  for  both  mortgage  securitizations  and  community 
development securitizations. 
I do want to acknowledge that there have been many notable accomplishments in pioneering 
community development investments. For example, there is a growing secondary market for 
community  development  loans;  community  development  venture  capital  has  grown  100 
percent since 2002 to more than $800 million in assets under management in 2004; since 
2002,  the  New  Markets  Tax  Credit  Program  has  issued  $16  billion  in  allocations,  with  a 
growing sophisticated market for investments and trading of the tax credit equity.  
I am pleased that the Federal Reserve Banks have played an active role as a convener on 
these  topics  and  in  the  dissemination  of  best  practices  and  policy.  I  enjoyed  sharing  my 
thoughts  on  the  topic  of  the  development  of  the  secondary  markets  for  community 
development loans at a forum that was hosted last year by the Board of Governors and the 
Federal  Reserve  Banks  of  San  Francisco  and  New  York.  For  these  markets  to  grow 
significantly,  however,  there  must  be  continued  dialogue  and  exchange  between  market 
participants  to  collect  these  data  uniformly  from  the  beginning  to  the  culmination  of  these 
deals so that performance data are captured.  
Standardization in developing markets 
These data should be collected with consideration toward improving standardization of many 
of the aspects of the product, which can help to increase transparency, improve efficiency, 
and  reduce  uncertainty.  For  example,  the  recovery  of  the  CMO  market  was  aided  by 
improved  information  and  modeling,  which  increased  confidence,  especially  as  products 
became increasingly standardized. Standardization in the terms and in the contractual rights 
and obligations of purchasers and sellers of the product reduces, but does not eliminate, the 
need for market participants to engage in extensive efforts to obtain information and reduces 
the  need  to  verify  the  information  that  is  provided  in  the  market  through  due  diligence. 
Reduced  information  costs,  in  turn,  lower  transaction  costs,  thereby  facilitating  price 
discovery  and  enhancing  market  liquidity.  Also,  standardization  can  reduce  legal  risks 
BIS Review 47/2008 
 3
because litigation over contract terms can result in case law that applies to similar situations, 
thus reducing uncertainty. 
The  benefits  of  the  development  of  standardization  for  enhancing  the  liquidity  of  financial 
markets have a long history. One particularly clear example dates back to the development 
of exchange-traded commodities futures contracts in the mid-1800s. The standardization of 
the  futures  markets  improved  the  flow  of  information  to  market  participants,  reducing 
transaction costs and fostering the emergence of liquid markets.2  
In the mid-1850s, the market for grain did not enjoy the very deep liquidity we see in today's 
market. At the time, Chicago was facing competition from exchanges in Minneapolis and St. 
Louis and from some in Europe that had created innovative structures to make markets more 
liquid. To create a liquid market for grain trading, buyers and sellers of grain needed a way of 
systematically  analyzing  the  different  kinds  of  grain  that  came  into  the  exchange  from 
different sources. In other words, the market needed a way to "grade the grain." The market 
created special silos that combined grain from a number of sources. Buyers no longer bought 
a silo of grain from one source; a silo, for example, of "Winter Wheat Number 2" would be 
graded in a way that allowed buyers to know exactly what they were getting. 
Standardization  and  related  controls  reduced  traders'  information  requirements  and,  thus, 
their transaction costs. The Board of Trade established minimum quality standards based on 
the need for market participants to evaluate the reliability of promises of future deliveries of 
grain to the buyer. In 1865, the Chicago Board of Trade standardized the delivery dates for 
the contracts, thus fostering the emergence of liquid markets in which traders could readily 
hedge the risk of price changes in the commodities and contracts. Buyers and sellers of grain 
ultimately became members of the exchange, supported by an underpinning of standardized 
measures of grain quality and minimum standards for exchange members.  
This example of how standardization helped jump-start a marketplace may provide insights 
regarding the current challenges in the subprime markets as well as the development of the 
community development investment market. As of January 2008, the most recent month for 
which data are available, about 24 percent of subprime adjustable-rate mortgages (ARMs) 
were  90  or  more  days  delinquent,  twice  the  level  one  year  earlier.3  Roughly  190,000 
foreclosures were started on these mortgages in the fourth quarter, up 11 percent from the 
previous quarter.4 The cost of foreclosures is high for lenders, investors, communities and 
causes severe disruption and distress to individuals and families. With the continuing high 
rates of foreclosure and the high costs associated with foreclosures, it is in the interest of 
lenders,  investors,  and  borrowers  to  develop  prudent  loan  modification  programs  to  help 
borrowers on a larger scale and at sustainable levels. 
Efforts  to  streamline  or  standardize  the  loan  modification  process  could  lower  transaction 
costs, provide timely relief for distressed borrowers, and reduce uncertainties in the market 
for subprime mortgage-backed securities. Industry and consumer groups are exploring loan 
modification templates, clarification of accounting rules, automated electronic platforms, and 
standards  to  streamline  the  loan modification  process.  The  Hope  Now  Alliance  –  a  broad-
based  coalition  of  government-sponsored  enterprises, 
trade  associations, 
counseling  agencies,  and  mortgage  servicers  –  is  making  efforts  to  find  ways  to  help 
borrowers through loan modification plans. 
industry 
                                                 
2   Randall  S.  Kroszner  (1999),  "Can  the  Financial  Markets  Privately  Regulate  Risk?  The  Development  of 
Derivatives  Clearing  Houses  and  Recent  Over-the-Counter  Innovations",  Journal  of  Money,  Credit,  and 
Banking, vol. 31 (August), p. 600. 
3   Board staff calculation based on data from First American LoanPerformance. 
4   Board staff calculation based on data from the Mortgage Bankers Association. 
4 
 BIS Review 47/2008
The  Board  has  also  sought  to  ensure  clear  lending  standards  through  stricter  regulations 
prohibiting abusive and deceptive practices in the mortgage market under the authority of the 
Home Ownership and Equity Protection Act (HOEPA). This proposal is intended to protect 
consumers and to preserve consumer choice by targeting protections to borrowers who face 
the  most  risk.  Under  HOEPA,  the  Board  is  considering  changes  that  would  stem  abusive 
practices  by  addressing  the  following:  a  requirement  to  assess  repayment  ability,  a 
requirement  to  escrow  taxes  and  insurance,  a  ban  on  prepayment  penalties  in  certain 
circumstances,  a  prohibition  on  a  lender  paying  a  broker  more  than  the  consumer  had 
expressly agreed that the broker would receive, and a ban on specific advertising practices 
deemed unfair or deceptive. Clarifying lending standards will increase investor confidence in 
the  mortgage  market  and  help  to  revive  the  flow  of  credit  to  consumers,  particularly  those 
with shorter or weaker credit histories.  
These lessons learned from standardization challenges facing the subprime market may be 
helpful  as  the  community  development  industry  considers  ways  to  reduce  uncertainty  to 
enhance the attractiveness of CDFI investments. The wide variety of investment activities of 
the CDFI industry is a formidable challenge to standardization. The industry encompasses 
rental  housing  and  commercial  real  estate  and  small  business  finance  and  has  disparate 
origination  channels  that  range  from  small  non-profit  intermediaries  to  large  financial 
institutions.  
A more recent development in the over-the-counter markets may be informative. Over-the-
counter  derivative  products  are  multifaceted  and  designed  to  be  customized  to  the  unique 
needs of market participants. To standardize these products, while maintaining their unique 
features, the International Swaps and Derivatives Association created a master agreement 
that  not  only  provided  standard  definitions  and  a  general  outline  for  the  contract,  but  also 
provided  latitude  to  include  customized  terms.  The  master  agreement  also  sets  forth  a 
template  for  workout  procedures  if  a  counterparty  defaults,  allowing  parties  to  adjust  risk-
management strategies based on the work-out arrangements. Ultimately, the standardization 
provided  by  the  master  agreement  reduces  uncertainty  about  the  instruments,  lowers 
transaction costs, and facilitates price discovery and market liquidity.  
Similarly,  the  community  development  investments  field  may  consider  the  benefits  of 
standardizing  some  type  of  master  agreement  that  captures  key  structural  provisions  and 
that incorporates the flexibility to include customized terms of the underlying transactions. I 
would also encourage the CDFI industry to explore the possibility of some type of organized 
marketplace for its investments, whether it is an online platform or an added component of 
an existing marketplace, or some other similar initiative. 
Conclusion  
To achieve a more dynamic marketplace for community development investments, the CDFI 
industry  should  continue  to  dialogue  and  to  strengthen  bridges  with  mainstream  financial 
market participants. To reduce uncertainty around community development investments, the 
CDFI  industry  must  collect  and  provide  uniform  data  so  that  appropriate  risk  and  pricing 
models  can  be  developed  and  must  also  make  efforts  to  standardize  these  contracts. 
Conversely, capital providers must strengthen working relationships with the CDFI industry to 
develop  a  richer  understanding  of  the  finance  activities  and  unique  risks  and  strengths  of 
these  investment  opportunities.  As  these  two  seemingly  disparate  worlds  of  the  capital 
markets  and  the  community  development  industry  address  these  challenges  together,  a 
powerful  source  of  sustainable  private  capital  can  be  tapped  to  fund  an  equally  powerful 
spectrum of community investments. I am confident that the expertise and dedication found 
in  the  community  development  industry  can  move  the  industry  in  the  right  direction  to 
address  these  obstacles  as  well  as  to  expand  the  flow  of  capital  to  low-  and  moderate-
income communities and individuals.  
BIS Review 47/2008 
 5
