Lucas Papademos: Financial integration in Europe 
Presentation by Mr Lucas Papademos, Vice President of the European Central Bank, at the 
press briefing on the occasion of the publication of the second edition of the ECB Report on 
financial integration in Europe, Frankfurt am Main, 29 April 2008. 
 I. 
Introduction  
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
On behalf of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, I would like to welcome you 
to this press briefing on the occasion of the publication of the second edition of the ECB’s 
report on “Financial Integration in Europe”.  
The first report on “Financial integration in Europe” was published last year and we intend to 
release it annually. Its main purpose is to contribute towards the advancement of European 
financial integration and to raise public awareness of the Eurosystem’s role in supporting the 
financial integration process. 
Before I turn to the content of the report, let me briefly recall why we prepare and publish this 
report. The Eurosystem has a strong interest in the integration and the efficient functioning of 
the  financial  system  in  Europe,  particularly  in  the  euro  area,  because  it  facilitates  the 
performance of our core tasks.  
Starting with monetary policy, a well-integrated financial system facilitates the transmission of 
monetary policy throughout the euro area. Financial integration is also highly relevant to the 
Eurosystem’s  role  in  safeguarding  the  stability  of  the  financial  system.  More  integrated 
financial markets enhance the opportunities for sharing and diversifying risk and increase the 
market liquidity. At the same time, a more closely integrated financial system also raises the 
scope  for  spill-over  effects  and  contagion  across  borders,  as  the  recent  financial  market 
turmoil has manifested. Financial integration is also fundamental to our task of promoting the 
smooth  operation  of  payment  systems  and  of  securities  clearing  and  settlement  systems. 
Finally, without prejudice to our primary objective of price stability, we support the general 
economic policies of the European Union. The completion of a single market for capital and 
financial  services  is  an  important  policy  priority  which  should  foster  the  efficiency  and 
development of the European financial system and help increase potential growth.  
The ECB and the entire Eurosystem fully support the efforts of the private sector and the EU 
institutions to enhance the integration and development of the European financial system. In 
this  respect,  the  ECB  works  very  closely  with  the  European  Commission,  which  has  a 
primary responsibility in this field. The ECB report complements the work of the Commission 
in  this  area.  I  now  turn  to  the  content  of  the  report  and  will  highlight  some  of  the  main 
findings. 
The  report  consists  of  three  chapters  [see  slide  2].  The  first  chapter  sets  out  the  ECB’s 
assessment of the state of financial integration in the euro area. This assessment is based 
on a set of quantitative indicators we have developed. The second chapter contains in-depth 
analyses  of  selected  issues  relating  to  financial  integration.  The  final  chapter  of  the  report 
gives  an  overview  of  the  activities  of  the  Eurosystem  in  2007  aimed  at  advancing  the 
integration and development of financial markets in Europe.  
The state of financial integration in Europe 
II.  
Let me start with the ECB’s assessment of the state of financial integration in the euro area 
which covers the money, bond, equity and banking markets, as well as the underlying market 
infrastructures. The tables on this slide [see slide 3] and on the following one summarise our 
BIS Review 53/2008 
 1
assessment  of  the  degree  of  integration  in  the  various  market  segments.  Two  key  facts 
should be highlighted: first, financial integration is generally more advanced in those market 
segments  that  are  closer  to  the  single  monetary  policy;  and,  second,  it  depends  on  the 
degree of integration of the respective market infrastructures. These conclusions confirm the 
findings of last year’s report. 
In particular, the unsecured money market has been fully integrated since the introduction of 
the euro, and the repo market is also highly integrated. The full integration of the large-value 
payment systems has been instrumental in achieving this result. Government bond markets 
have also become considerably integrated. Similarly, the corporate bond market received a 
major boost with the introduction of the euro and has subsequently achieved a high degree 
of  integration.  Some  progress  has  also  been  made  in  the  integration  of  euro  area  equity 
markets, although the euro area securities infrastructure that underpins both bond and equity 
markets  is  not  yet  sufficiently  integrated.  However,  efforts  to  reduce  these  barriers  are 
currently under way. 
Turning to the banking markets [see slide 4], integration has advanced well in the fields of 
wholesale banking and capital-market activities. The integration of the retail banking market 
has,  however,  been  slow  and  hampered  by  the  fragmentation  of  the  European  payment 
systems. 
After  this  broad  overview,  allow  me  to  illustrate  some  specific  developments  in  particular 
market  segments,  also  with  reference  to  the  recent  episode  of  financial  turbulence.  In  this 
context, a pertinent question is whether the financial market turmoil has had an impact on the 
degree  of  integration  in  various  market  segments.  First,  with  regard  to  the  nearly  fully 
integrated  money  markets,  the  recent  financial  turmoil  has  undoubtedly  left  a  mark  on  the 
cross-country standard deviation of the unsecured interbank lending rates, as you can see 
from this chart [see slide 5]. Looking at this graph, one may wonder whether the turmoil has 
in fact led to a higher segmentation, and therefore, less integration, in the market.  
In response, let me now show you a related indicator for the secured money market which 
strongly suggests that this is not likely to be the case. As you see in the chart [see slide 6], 
the cross-country standard deviation of the interbank repo rates does not seem to have been 
similarly affected. As credit risk is an important element in the unsecured markets, but not so 
in the secured markets, this may lead us to conclude that the increase in differences in credit 
risk across institutions, rather than increased segmentation, is the likely explanation for the 
observed small but noticeable increase in the cross-country standard deviation in interbank 
lending rates. Of course, we continue to monitor the evolution of these and other indicators 
very closely in the coming months in order to obtain more information on the possible effects 
of the turmoil on the money markets as well as on other financial markets. 
I  already  mentioned  that  retail  banking  markets  continue  to  be  less  integrated  than  other 
banking  market  segments.  The  dispersion  of  total  assets of  euro  area  bank  branches  and 
subsidiaries across euro area countries illustrates the point [see slide 7]. The horizontal line 
within  the  pillars  shows  the  median  share  of  assets  for  both  types  of  establishments. 
Whereas the median share of assets of foreign subsidiaries increased to 14.4% last year, the 
median share of assets of foreign branches slightly decreased, reaching 2.0%. 
Special features 
III.  
The  second  chapter  of  the  report  contains  four  “Special  Features”.  These  are  in-depth 
assessments of policy issues relating to financial integration that are of particular relevance 
to  the  Eurosystem’s  tasks  [see  slide  8].  This  year,  we  selected  the  following  topics:  (1) 
concepts and measures of financial development; (2) the STEP initiative; (3) the integration 
and development of mortgage markets; and (4) the integration of large-value payment and 
securities transactions. Out of these four, I should like to focus on two, namely on financial 
development and on the integration of mortgage markets. 
2 
 BIS Review 53/2008
Financial development 
III.1.  
The special feature on financial development goes beyond financial integration and looks into 
other elements that affect the performance of the financial system [see slide 9]. The concept 
of  financial  development  is  introduced  and  is  related  to  other  concepts  such  as  financial 
integration,  efficiency  and  stability.  More  precisely,  financial  development  refers  to  the 
process  of  financial  innovation,  institutional  and  organisational  improvements  that  reduce 
asymmetric information, increase the completeness of markets and contracting possibilities, 
lower  transaction  costs,  and  enhance  competition.  In  particular,  financial  development  is 
complementary  to  financial  integration  in  reducing  market  frictions  and  fostering  financial 
market efficiency.  
This chart [see slide 10] presents a simple framework to summarise the determinants of the 
performance of the financial system and its links to the performance of the broader economy. 
There are three levels of analysis. The first level concerns the fundamentals of the financial 
system that do not change very fast, such as legal and regulatory frameworks or features of 
the  economy’s  financial  structure.  The  second  level  relates  to  the  performance  of  the 
financial  system,  that  is,  its  efficiency  and  stability.  The  third  level  focuses  on  the 
performance of the economy as a whole, that is, economic growth and price stability. As you 
can  see,  financial  integration  and  financial  development  are  processes  that  influence  the 
relationship between the fundamentals of the financial system and its performance.  
A selection of indicators is provided in this Special Feature to monitor financial development 
and  efficiency  [see  slide  11].  These  indicators  can  be  grouped  into  general  and  market-
specific  indicators.  An  example  of  general  indicators  is  the  size  of  capital  markets,  which 
aggregates the sizes of stock, bond and loan markets, as a percentage of GDP. On average, 
euro  area  capital  markets  tend  to  be  smaller  than  those  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  the 
United States.  
Let me continue with some examples of market-specific indicators. This chart [see slide 12] 
shows the notional amounts of nominal outstanding interest rate derivatives, that is, forward 
rate agreements, options, and swaps, by currency. By using derivatives, market participants 
can better manage risks, lock in the future price of the underlying assets and even alter the 
terms  of  the  underlying  financial  contract.  As  a  consequence,  the  allocation  of  capital  and 
risk across time and space is improved. The chart clearly shows that the most active interest 
rate derivative markets are those denominated in euro and in the US dollar, with outstanding 
amounts in 2006 of 86 and 75 trillion euro, respectively.  
Focusing  on  the  evolution  of  the  interest  rate  derivatives  market  over  time,  this  chart  [see 
slide  13]  shows  that  the  US-dollar  denominated  interest  rate  derivatives  grew  the  fastest, 
with the amount outstanding increasing sixfold. The second fastest growing markets were the 
interest rate derivatives denominated in euro and in pound sterling, which both quadrupled 
from 1999 to 2006. 
Securitisation  of  illiquid  bank  assets  is  a  form  of  financial  innovation  that  has  expanded 
substantially in recent years. This chart [see slide 14] shows the extent of off-balance sheet 
securitisation  via  asset-backed  and  mortgage-backed  securities  relative  to  gross  domestic 
product (GDP), using the location of the underlying collateral to link this financial innovation 
to countries. According to this indicator, the United States is by far the most active market for 
securitising mortgages and receivables such as car loans or credit card loans: the volume of 
issuance amounted to 25% of GDP. In the euro area, the average volume of issuance was 
only 2% of the GDP, with Spain, the Netherlands, Luxemburg, Ireland and Portugal having 
the  highest  levels.  The  lack  of  integration  in  European  mortgage  markets  partly  explains 
these facts. It also suggests that the ease with which issuers of asset-backed securities in 
one country can include illiquid assets from other European countries is an important factor 
that will influence the evolution of securitisation in Europe. 
Another example of a market-specific indicator of financial development is the total amount of 
venture  capital  financing  as  a  share  of  GDP  [see  slide  15].  Despite  having  grown 
BIS Review 53/2008 
 3
substantially over the past ten years, venture capital financing remains only a fraction of the 
UK and US figures in most euro area countries, with the exception of Finland. 
To sum up, on the basis of the indicators identified so far, it can be concluded that there still 
exists a fair degree of heterogeneity in financial development across markets and countries 
in the euro area. On average, the euro area financial system compares well to a group of 
benchmark countries, except perhaps relative to the United Kingdom and the United States, 
which perform better on the basis of most of the indicators presented in the report. There is 
certainly  room  for  further  analysis  and  assessment  of  financial  development  by  enhancing 
the existing indicators and by identifying new ones. And there is room for structural reforms 
that can foster financial market efficiency. 
The Short-Term European Paper (STEP) initiative 
III.2. 
The second Special Feature, entitled “The STEP initiative”, describes how the ECB and the 
Eurosystem  can  act  as  a  catalyst  for  private  sector  activities  and,  in  this  way,  promote 
financial integration in the euro area [see slide 17]. The Short-Term European Paper (STEP) 
initiative to develop a pan-European short-term paper market originated from the observation 
that the short-term securities market had been the least integrated money market segment 
since  the  introduction  of  the  euro.  The  STEP  label,  given  to  issuance  programmes  that 
comply with a core set of commonly agreed market standards and practices, provides market 
participants across the euro area with a common framework. Since its launch in 2006, the 
STEP 
integration  and 
transparency.  
initiative  has  already  yielded  significant  progress 
in  market 
III.3.   Mortgage markets in Europe 
The third special feature of the Report on which I will elaborate, given its topicality, concerns 
the integration and development of mortgage markets in Europe. Mortgage markets are an 
important  part  of  the  euro  area  financial  system:  the  provision  of  mortgage  loans  is  a  key 
financial  service  for  households;  mortgages  accounted  for  almost  30%  of  total  bank  loans 
and about 60% of the household liabilities; and asset-backed securities – of which mortgage-
backed securities represent a large share – have become an important source of collateral, 
accounting for approximately 16% of all collateral deposited with the Eurosystem, a slightly 
larger fraction than central government bonds.  
Mortgage markets are very important, yet they remain one of the least integrated financial 
markets in Europe and progress towards further integration has been slow. This is partly due 
to  natural  barriers,  such  as  language,  affinity  and  consumer  preferences.  However,  other 
factors  such  as  domestic  infrastructures  and  differing  legal  and  consumer  protection 
frameworks create barriers that can, and should, be addressed by policy-makers and market 
participants. 
The chart on slide 19 on new housing loans in euro area countries, classified by the period of 
interest rate fixation, illustrates the diversity in the mortgage lending markets. In general, not 
only the use of fixed and variable rate mortgages, but also early repayment and prepayment 
options and loan maturities vary considerably across the euro area. 
Similarly, diversity prevails on the funding side of mortgage markets. The chart on slide 20 
illustrates  the  relative  importance  of  residential  mortgage-backed  securities  (RMBSs)  and 
covered  bonds  in  the  national  markets.  The  dominance  of  only  one  type  of  instrument  in 
most  countries  is  related  to  the  presence  of  long-established  legal  frameworks,  or  the 
existence  of  certain  legal  or  other  obstacles.  Consequently,  there  seems  to  be  room  to 
improve the availability of different mortgage funding instruments in euro area countries as 
well as in other EU countries.  
This  Special  Feature  examines  in  considerable  detail  the  potential  implications  of  further 
integration in European mortgage markets for the monetary policy transmission mechanism 
4 
 BIS Review 53/2008
and for financial stability. Overall, the Eurosystem’s assessment is that further integration of 
mortgage markets is desirable because it is likely to bring about a more uniform transmission 
of  monetary  impulses  and  a  more  stable  financial  system  as  a  result  of  improved  risk 
diversification [see slide 21]. At the same time, the process of financial integration may entail 
certain risks to monetary and financial stability, such as increased vulnerability of domestic 
financial systems to external shocks and intense competition that may lead to an erosion of 
credit standards. So while we strongly support further integration in mortgage markets, we 
are also of the view that this process should be carefully monitored. 
That said, full integration of mortgage markets is a process that is likely to take many years 
and will largely be driven by market forces [see slide 22]. We believe that market participants’ 
actions will help achieve significant further progress. For example, they can increase market 
transparency,  improve  statistics,  promote  standardised  mortgage  products  and  develop 
market benchmarks. Within the scope of its competencies, the ECB stands ready to support 
such market initiatives, as we have done in the area of short-term securities.  
III.4.  
Integration of large-value payment and securities transactions: TARGET2, 
T2S, CCBM2 
The  final  Special  Feature,  entitled  “Integration  of  large-value  payment  and  securities 
transactions:  TARGET2,  TARGET2-Securities  and  CCBM2”,  considers  the  advances 
towards an integrated and well-functioning European market infrastructure, focusing on the 
contribution  of  the  Eurosystem  [see  slide 23].  During  the  run-up  to  the  introduction  of  the 
euro,  the  Eurosystem  established  the  TARGET  system  and  the  Correspondent  Central 
Banking Model (CCBM) which enabled the area-wide settlement of large-value transactions 
in central bank money and the cross-border delivery of collateral to the Eurosystem. While 
these  were  undoubtedly  already  major  steps  towards  the  integration  of  crucial  market 
infrastructures,  TARGET  and  CCBM  did  not  yet  allow  market  participants  to  manage  their 
cash,  collateral  and  securities  positions  in  an  integrated  way.  The  recent  establishment  of 
TARGET2  as  a  centralised  technical  service  addresses  this  shortcoming  for  euro-
denominated  large-value  and  urgent  payments.  It  also  enables  the  move  towards  a  fully 
integrated  infrastructure  in  the  fields  of  securities  settlement,  liquidity  and  collateral 
management.  The  envisaged  TARGET2-Securities  project  and  the  Collateral  Central  Bank 
Management (CCBM2) facilities, together with TARGET 2, are “second generation” services, 
which represent a quantum leap forward in the integration and quality of the euro area core 
infrastructure, with substantial benefits for financial market integration. 
Eurosystem activities to promote financial integration 
IV. 
I now turn to the report’s third chapter, titled “Eurosystem activities for financial integration”. It 
provides  an  overview  of  the  main  Eurosystem  activities  in  2007.  The  ECB  and  the 
Eurosystem  contributed  to  financial  integration  and  development  in  a  number  of  ways, 
building on their expertise and special nature as public institutions which are both active in 
the market and have close interaction with market participants. We distinguish between four 
types of activities [see slide 24].  
First, we give advice on the legislative and regulatory framework for the financial system and 
make rules. A good example is the Eurosystem’s contribution to the first full review of the 
Lamfalussy  framework  last  year.  The  Eurosystem  reiterated  its  support  to  the  Lamfalussy 
framework  subject 
the  current 
institutional  framework  and  in  particular  emphasised  the  need  for  intensification  of 
cooperation and information-sharing between supervisors and central banks. 
Second, we seek to act as catalysts for private sector activities. In this regard, we have been 
instrumental  in  the  success  of  the  short-term  European  paper,  or  STEP,  initiative.  This 
initiative  aims  to  promote  the  integration  of  short-term  paper  market  through  the  voluntary 
functional  enhancements  within 
to  some  necessary 
BIS Review 53/2008 
 5
compliance of market players with a core set of standards. The outstanding amount of euro-
denominated  STEP-labelled  securities  already  accounts  for  about  30%  of  all  euro-
denominated short-term paper placed by non-government issuers worldwide. 
Third, we enhance knowledge, raise awareness and monitor the state of European financial 
integration. This Report, and the indicators of financial integration that are presented here, 
are an illustrative example of this type of activity.  
Fourth, we provide central bank services that also foster European financial integration. As 
an example, I choose our wholesale payment system, TARGET2. The successful launch of 
this single technical platform in November last year marks a significant milestone in financial 
integration. TARGET2, replacing TARGET, provides for a harmonised service level, a single 
price structure, and a harmonised set of cash settlement services in central bank money for 
all  “ancillary”  systems,  such  as  retail  payment  systems,  clearing  houses  and  securities 
settlement systems. All central banks and TARGET users will have migrated to TARGET2 by 
19 May this year. 
Concluding remarks 
V. 
This  brings  me  to  the  end  of  my  presentation.  Central  banks  are  at  the  core  of  financial 
systems  and  therefore  closely  follow  developments  which  can  foster  integration  [see  slide 
25]. The ECB and the entire Eurosystem devote a substantial amount of resources to this 
task,  because  we  are  convinced  that  progress  in  this  area  is  important  for  the  European 
economy, within the framework established by the Lisbon agenda. 
Finally, I should also like to stress that, while financial integration is an important driver for 
increasing the efficiency of a financial system, financial efficiency also depends on financial 
development.  Therefore, 
to  encompass  analysis  and 
assessment  of  the  various  factors  determining  the  efficient  functioning  of  the  financial 
system. The special feature on financial development that I presented is a first step in this 
direction. 
Thank you very much for your attention. I am now at your disposal for questions. 
future  reports  are  envisaged 
 6 
  BIS Review 53/2008
    BIS Review 53/2008 
 7
    8 
 BIS Review 53/2008
    BIS Review 53/2008 
 9
    10 
 BIS Review 53/2008
    BIS Review 53/2008 
 11
    12 
 BIS Review 53/2008
    BIS Review 53/2008 
 13
    14 
 BIS Review 53/2008
    BIS Review 53/2008 
 15
    16 
 BIS Review 53/2008
    BIS Review 53/2008 
 17
  18 
 BIS Review 53/2008
