Gertrude Tumpel-Gugerell: The Single Euro Payments Area in a global 
context 
Speech by Ms Gertrude Tumpel-Gugerell, Member of the Executive Board of the European 
Central Bank, at the “The Global Payments Strategies 2008” Conference, hosted by NACHA 
– The Electronic Payments Association, Brussels, 22 January 2008. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is a great pleasure for me to give a keynote speech at this Global Payments Strategies 
conference  organised  by  NACHA.  This  year’s  event  focuses  on  global  trends  in  payment 
systems  and  the  impact  of  regulatory  developments  on  the  evolution  of  the  payment 
landscape.  
More than four and a half years ago, when I joined the Executive Board of the ECB, one of 
my  first  speeches  was  also  in  Brussels,  and  it  was  also  related  to  the  development, 
innovation  and  security  of  payments.1  I  concluded  that  new  payment  instruments  offer 
significant  opportunities.  Who  would  have  thought  that  the  industry  would  change  so 
dramatically in these few years?  
In  my  intervention  today,  I  will  address  how  payment  systems  are  increasingly  becoming 
global in nature, also in a domain which typically used to be purely domestic – namely retail 
payments. The treatment of other types of payments, such as large value – or wholesale – 
payments and foreign exchange payments, has been quite international for some time, and 
is  gathering  momentum.  Now,  small  value  (end-user)  payments  are  also  following  this 
direction.  
And Europe provides many good illustrations of retail payments becoming international. For 
example, until recently it was not possible to pay in Austria with my German debit payment 
card (EC Karte). I had to use either the international Maestro debit card scheme or a credit 
card. As of this year, I will be able to able to use my debit card all over Austria when I am 
there for holidays or business.2  
End-users  are  increasingly  being  exposed  to  global  trends,  and  younger  end-users,  in 
particular,  are  becoming  part  of  a  global  community  through  the  internet.  For  example,  e-
mails,  internet  search  engines  –  such  as  Google  –  and  online  publishing  tools  –  such  as 
Blogger – are extremely popular, and they are used in the same way, irrespective of where 
the  end-user  is  located.  In  addition,  internet  communities  –  such  as  Facebook  –  are 
becoming popular, which allow users to keep online contact with each other.  
A  few  years  ago,  these  internet-related  developments  were  not  widely  known  among  the 
general public, but they very quickly caught on worldwide. Their tremendous global success 
is based on the simplicity of the solutions offered and the real improvements they bring to 
end-users searching for information or who want to be in contact with each other. Not only 
were these services simple, cheap and good, in retrospect they also seem very obvious. But, 
before these services existed, it would have been difficult to explain their usefulness – take 
online diaries, for example.  
                                                 
1   “Payments and confidence - the views of the Eurosystem”, 16 September 2003. 
2   On 15 January 2008, a co-operation agreement  was signed between Zentraler  Kreditausschuss (ZKA) and 
PayLife Bank GmbH (formerly Europay Austria) on the acceptance of the German debit card EC Karte in all 
PayLife POS terminals in Austria. 
BIS Review 8/2008 
 1
Today,  I  will  focus  on  far-reaching  developments  in  the  field  of  retail  payments  in  Europe. 
The developments are grouped under the term “SEPA” – Single Euro Payments Area. SEPA 
is a key market-driven initiative, which aims to achieve a fully integrated market for euro retail 
payment  services.  Market-driven,  as  I  said,  but  with  the  considerable  support  of  the 
European Central Bank and the European Commission. 
What does SEPA mean at a global level? For long, the SEPA-vision seemed as remote and 
dreamy as the paradisiacal Indonesian island that is actually called “Sepa”. But the vision of 
a borderless payments area is now becoming a reality and in the search engines Sepa island 
has already been crowed out by references to the SEPA-project – much to the annoyance of 
the Indonesian tourist industry, I guess. 
I expect that SEPA will have a significant impact on global developments in retail payments 
systems. Why? As with the developments in the internet, SEPA will lead to simple, cheap 
and  common  services  for  end-users,  which  can  be  used  irrespective  of  the  end-user’s 
location.  SEPA  will  also  be  based  on  the  latest  international  standards  for  end-to-end 
payments and will therefore have a seamless connection with the rest of the world. And, as 
with internet services, end-users will also find SEPA very obvious in retrospect. Indeed, once 
SEPA instruments are on offer, in Europe it will be also obvious to have a harmonised set of 
payment  instruments  based  on  international  standards,  instead  of  having  to  cope  with 
national specificities and local payment instruments.  
The  European  banking  industry,  with  the  support  of  the  Eurosystem  and  the  European 
Commission,  has  embarked  on  the  SEPA  initiative,  and  financial  integration  has  been  a 
strong driver. I will therefore reflect in the first part of my presentation on the significance of 
financial  integration  and  the  effect  it  has  had  on  Europe  and,  in  particular,  the  payments 
industry. The next part of my presentation is related to the key components of SEPA, which 
are the core achievements so far. In addition, I will address developments related to payment 
cards and to innovation separately, as they will require special attention in 2008. Finally, I will 
conclude with the impact of SEPA in a global context.  
I.  
Financial integration  
The Eurosystem’s interest in financial integration  
Financial integration has been – and will be – a major driver for many changes in the banking 
industry at a global level and this is also the case for SEPA.  
The Eurosystem, which comprises the ECB and the national central banks of the euro area, 
has  a  keen  interest  in  the  financial  integration  and  the  efficient  functioning  of  the  financial 
system.3  Especially  for  the  euro  area,  which  is  a  “local”  financial  system,  there  are  many 
barriers that prevent economic agents from investing or doing business – or at least hamper 
them considerably – in areas outside their “home turf”. By facilitating an open and integrated 
market  economy  with  free  competition,  the  Eurosystem  fosters  the  efficient  allocation  of 
resources.  
Financial integration is particularly relevant to the four basic tasks of the ECB. It is of vital 
importance  for  the  conduct  of  the  single  monetary  policy,  since  a  well-integrated  financial 
                                                 
3  
In  general,  financial  integration  facilitates  a  better  functioning  of  the  financial  systems.  It  allows  a  better 
channelling of funds from those economic agents that have a surplus to those which have a shortage. It also 
facilitates a better functioning of financial systems, whereby risks are traded, hedged, diversified and pooled 
more  efficiently.  Indeed,  financial  integration  is  of  global  relevance,  as  it  leads  to  an  improved  sharing  and 
diversification  of  risk  and  lays  the  basis  for  an  increased  potential  for  stronger  economic  growth.  The 
Eurosystem has included the promotion of financial integration in its mission statement in order to underline its 
determination in this respect. 
2 
 BIS Review 8/2008
system  enhances  the  smooth  and  effective  transmission  of  monetary  impulses  throughout 
the euro area. Furthermore, it is highly relevant to the Eurosystem’s task of contributing to 
the safeguarding of financial stability and the promotion of the smooth operation of payment 
systems.  Finally,  financial  integration  promotes  the  development  of  the  financial  sector  – 
including  structural  reforms  such  as  SEPA  –  thereby  raising  the  potential  for  stronger 
economic growth.  
The Eurosystem believes it is a core task of a public authority to create a framework which 
fosters financial integration. The Eurosystem therefore closely analyses the state of financial 
integration and monitors its progress over time.4 For the ECB, a market – for a given set of 
financial instruments or services – is integrated when all potential participants in that market 
are  i)  subject  to  a  single  set  of  rules5  when  they  decide  to  deal  with  those  financial 
instruments or services, ii) have equal access to this set of financial instruments or services 
and iii) are treated equally when they operate in the market.  
Financial integration is, first and foremost, a market-driven process. However, it also requires 
an effective interplay between market forces and public authorities. In Europe, the foundation 
for market integration was laid more that half a century ago, in 1952, with the creation of the 
European Coal and Steel Community, which had six members.6  
Significant  progress  has  been  made  ever  since,  and  that  community  has  become  the 
European Union (EU) with its 27 Member States. Who would have believed a decade ago 
that Ireland would become one of the most prosperous countries in the EU? Today, 15 of 
those Member States form a European Economic and Monetary Union using the euro. And 
since the introduction of the euro, 15 million new jobs have been created. Participating in a 
community that becomes ever more integrated is coupled with the ambitious programme of 
reforms, as pursued under the Lisbon agenda. 
I would conclude that financial integration has brought prosperity to an increasing number of 
countries in Europe. However, in my view, we are still far from realising the full potential of 
the single currency and the single market considering our goals of greater economic growth 
and  competitiveness.  The  Eurosystem  will  therefore  continue  its  efforts  to  remove  the 
barriers  that  lead  to  fragmented  markets.  We  will  also  share  our  experiences  with  other 
communities that wish to foster improvements in financial sector performance.  
Let’s now turn to some of the implications of financial integration.  
Implications of financial integration  
The EU has become a large market, which in terms of population, GDP or capital markets is 
similar to other large markets, such as the United States. The EU is implementing the latest 
international  rules  and  standards  under  the  SEPA  project.  A  key  question  is  whether 
comparable markets could or should also have similar rules.  
When  looking  at  the  trends  in  the  use  of  different  payment  instruments,  we  notice  similar 
developments  on  a  global  scale,  namely  a  clear  increase  in  the  number  of  transactions, 
especially those involving payment cards, and a noticeable decline in the use of cheques.  
                                                 
4   Every year around March, the ECB will publish a report on the status of financial integration in Europe. The 
ECB has developed a set of quantitative indicators to assess progress over time. The first edition of the report, 
entitled 
2007 
(http://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/pub/prud/html/index.en.html). 
28  March 
integration 
“Financial 
published 
Europe”, 
was 
on 
in 
5   The  term  “rules”  is  used  in  a  broad  sense  and  refers  to  similar  laws  and  regulations,  supervisory 
arrangements, market conventions, standards and practices. 
6   Belgium, Germany, France, Italy, Luxembourg and the Netherlands. 
BIS Review 8/2008 
 3
For example, over the last few years, volumes of cashless payments in the European Union 
have increased by 7% per year.7 By comparison – and this is not presented in my slides – 
cashless  payments  have  increased  by  4.6%  in  the  US.8  In  the  case  of  card  payments, 
volumes have increased by 15% per year for credit and debit cards in the EU and by 17% 
per year for debit cards in the United States. In Europe, cards have become the most used 
payment  instrument,  with  over  15  billion  payments  per  year.  The  use  of  cheques,  on  the 
other hand, has decreased by 5% in the European Union and by 6.4% in the United States.  
We  notice  a  clear  trend  towards  cashless  payments  in  many  countries,  including  the  EU 
Member  States  and  the  United  States.  However,  despite  similar  trends  at  a  global  level, 
national payment habits still differ. Indeed, this is the case in the EU, which makes it is a real 
challenge for the industry to develop common solutions that are capable of coping with the 
different payment habits in Europe. The newly developed  solutions should also give users 
similar choices between payment services between Member States. Let me briefly illustrate, 
with four examples, how habits differ in the EU. 
First,  credit  transfers  are  widely  used  in  Hungary  and  Romania.  However,  they  are  rarely 
used in Portugal.  
Second, payment cards are widely used in Portugal but not as much in Romania.  
Third, in some countries, such as Spain and Germany, in relative terms more direct debits 
are used than other instruments, whereas in others, such as Poland, their use is infrequent.  
Fourth, cheques are still widely used in the two new euro countries, Malta and Cyprus, as 
well  as  France.  But  in  almost  all  other  countries,  little  use  is  made  of  cheques  and  their 
decline is increasing.  
While these examples show that EU Member States have different preferences for payment 
instruments, it is not possible, nor advisable, to present a single payment solution for the EU, 
or beyond, on a global level. Indeed, in the future we will most likely see the development of 
different  preferences  for  payment  instruments.  SEPA  will  offer  the  basic  payment 
instruments,  and  on  top,  it  will  offer  different  options  and  additional  services  to  meet 
customer preferences.  
Customers’  habits  when  purchasing  goods  and  services  are  nevertheless  changing.  More 
competition, more choice and new business opportunities – for example in the cards market 
– will influence their habits and could encourage a greater use of cards. Innovative payment 
solutions, such as online payments, are also likely to change customers’ habits. The banking 
industry  jointly  will  therefore  have  to  develop  innovative  solutions  for  international  online 
payments, which would meet customer needs. 
Key components of SEPA 
II.  
In this second part of my presentation, I will illustrate the key components of SEPA in more 
detail, as they provide a good example of the concrete steps that are being taken to create a 
more  integrated  market  in  Europe.  SEPA  is  designed  for  a  market  in  which  it  should  be 
possible to make payments in euro under the same basic conditions, regardless of location.  
With  SEPA,  the  banking  industry  has  come  up  with  a  single  set  of  instruments  for  euro 
payments, based on the latest international arrangements.  
                                                 
7   See  “Statistics  on  Payment  and  securities  trading,  clearing  and  settlement  -  data  for  2006”  (16  November 
2007). The trends in payment transactions reflect developments between 2000 and 2006. 
8   See  “The  2007  Federal  Reserve  Payments  Study”,  The  Federal  Reserve  System,  2007.  The  trends  in 
payment transactions reflect developments between 2003 and 2006. 
4 
 BIS Review 8/2008
An important distinction is made in SEPA between i) “business rules”, which define interbank 
agreements among participants of a payment scheme – typically banks – and ii) “standards”, 
which define the technical agreements for the transfer of a payment from one customer to 
another (namely end to end involving end-users).  
• 
The SEPA business rules, which are interbank, have been made publicly available 
by industry, in the form of “Rulebooks”, and have already attracted global interest. 
The  business  rules  therefore  have  the  potential  to  become  a  global  reference  for 
other countries that wish to modernise their retail payment systems.  
The  SEPA  standards,  on  the  other  hand,  were  developed  by  the  industry  as 
technical standards under the ISO umbrella, and are therefore already international. 
Indeed, with SEPA, banks are also preparing for the global payment landscape by 
introducing international ISO 20022 XML standards. 
 The first concrete deliverable of SEPA will be SEPA Credit Transfer, which will be launched 
on 28 January 2008. For this deliverable, the banking community has developed a single set 
of business rules for Europe. The industry will also use a single international ISO standard, 
for which they have developed European implementation guidance. So far, the vast majority 
of  banks  in  Europe  that  are  involved  in  payment  handling  have  implemented  this  single 
SEPA credit transfer rulebook.9 A successful launch is expected. 
The second deliverable of SEPA is SEPA Direct Debit, for which banks have developed two 
options: one for ordinary direct debits and one suited to corporates´ needs. These schemes 
will be launched towards the end of 2009.10
Finally, the third deliverable is the SEPA Cards Framework. As of January 2008, the industry, 
including  all  banks  and  schemes  that  follow  this  framework,  has  undertaken  to  offer  EMV 
chip cards and has agreed to separate the management of the scheme from the processing 
of  transactions.  The  framework  lays  the  foundations  for  the  gradual  creation  of  a  pan-
European cards market. 
How will these new SEPA arrangements influence the future payments market? With SEPA, 
we will most likely see an “industrialisation of financial services” in Europe, and potentially 
also in the rest of the world. Similar developments are already apparent in the automotive 
industry,  where  more  car  models  are  produced  on  fewer  common  platforms.  Indeed, 
Mercedes Benz, for example, used to produce three basic types of cars, but more recently 
they  have  expanded  their  range  of  products  and  “flavours”  extensively  to  suit  customer 
needs. In the case of the financial industry, this implies that the range of products will likely 
expand significantly, but the basic processing platforms and rulebooks will not.  
SEPA cards framework 
III.  
One  of  the  most  challenging  issues  currently  faced  by  the  industry  relates  to  the  future 
development of payment cards in SEPA, so let me briefly elaborate on the ECB’s views on 
this topic. For the ECB, it is important that the industry does not loose sight of the ultimate 
goal: the creation of an integrated and competitive market where you can use “any card at 
any terminal”.  
Currently,  almost  every  European  country  has  one  or  more  locally  developed  and  often 
efficient  card  schemes,  but  the  tendency  is  towards  a  high  multilateral  interchange  fee  in 
                                                 
9   Over  4,000  banks  have  applied  the  SCT  Scheme  Rulebook  so  far  in  January  2008  (see  www. 
Europeanpaymentscouncil.eu). 
10   By November 2009, the Payment Services Directive should be fully transposed into the legislation of the EU 
Member States. 
BIS Review 8/2008 
 5
some countries. Currently, there is also uncertainty about how far banks can go in collective 
agreements  on  cards,  as  competition  authorities  are  becoming  increasingly  attentive  to 
developments in card markets. I think that the recent MasterCard decision of the European 
Commission is a case in point. It can provide the basis of a constructive dialogue between 
the  European  competition  authorities  and  the  financial  industry  on  the  conditions  of 
acceptable business models for cards. 
Additionally,  national  schemes  are  often  owned  by  banks  and  therefore  the  schemes 
themselves have often little room for manoeuvre. Finally, the standardisation process is not 
yet complete, and efforts have to be stepped up to agree upon a common set of standards 
by the end of 2008.  
A certain similarity can be found between the EU today and the United States in the 1990’s, 
when almost every US State had its own network for PIN debit card payments. At that time, 
the industry in the United States failed to create a common debit card network with national 
coverage,  because  of  the  lack  of  vision  of  local  market  players.11  What  happened  instead 
was the consolidation and “survival of the fittest”, and the biggest. 
Uncertainties  are  counterproductive,  and  this  is  why  the  ECB  and  the  Eurosystem  have 
joined the discussion. We have emphasized that the industry should work together with one 
common  goal,  namely  the  creation  of  at  least  one  additional  pan-European  card  scheme. 
This would increase the choice of stakeholders and allow for diversity in products, business 
models and governance arrangements. 
Since the start of a more intensive debated about the possible merits and challenges of a 
new pan-European card scheme – or schemes – the number of supporters has increased. I 
would  encourage  the  industry  to  compile  the  relevant  numbers  and  to  investigate  the 
business case – better now than later.  
The Eurosystem is aware that a new pan-European scheme takes time to build. This is why 
we need to distinguish between what can be done in the short to medium term, and what can 
be done in the long term.  
As from 2008, the SEPA Cards Framework has to be applied by the card schemes active in 
Europe,  and  the  industry  has  to  define  its  strategy  to  adapt  to  SEPA.  Adapting  to  SEPA 
typically  involves  the  possibility  to  be  co-branded  with  an  international  scheme  for 
international reach, or the gradual alignment of the different business models to join alliances 
of  national  card  schemes.  Adapting  to  SEPA  would  also  imply  the  adjustment  of  current 
arrangements  to  achieve  the  separation  of  scheme  and  processing.  Finally,  adapting  to 
SEPA also implies the adoption of common card standards, such as EMV. 
In  the  long  run,  the  gradual  alignment  of  business  models  would  be  followed  by  the 
progressive merger of national card schemes, which at national level have been successful 
but individually cannot meet the SEPA challenge.  
SEPA and innovation  
IV.  
Before  I  conclude,  let me  briefly  present  my  views  on  the  remaining  developments  on  the 
payments horizon, in other words concerning SEPA and innovation. SEPA has come a long 
way  in  terms  of  the  harmonisation  and  modernisation  of  payments,  but  the  process  is  far 
from  complete.  SEPA  must  evolve  further  in  order  to  become  a  fully  integrated  and 
innovative market. I see, in particular, a need to broaden and deepen SEPA. 
• 
With the broadening of SEPA in mind, the industry has already taken several steps 
to  involve  corporates,  merchants  and  consumers  in  the  process.  A  separate 
                                                 
11   The “National Interchange Network” initiative failed in the 1990’s. 
6 
 BIS Review 8/2008
stakeholder  forum  has  been  set  up,  both  at  European  and  national  levels.  This 
allows  a  wider  view  to  be  had,  beyond  the  interbank  rules  and  standards.  The 
current dialogue on the further harmonisation of the initiation of payments and their 
reporting  is  strongly  encouraged  by  the  Eurosystem,  as  this  would  allow  a  fully 
automated  end-to-end  straight-through  processing  of  payments.  I  also  see, 
however,  the  need  to  further  formalise  the  involvement  of  stakeholders,  making  it 
less voluntary and more binding.  
In  terms  of  the  deepening  of  SEPA,  the  basic  SEPA  instruments  have  to  be 
complemented with additional services that involve innovative solutions and reduce 
the use of paper. The European Payments Council, as the decision-making body for 
the European payments industry, is expected to play its role.  
 Several initiatives are already under way: 
• 
SEPA online payments: Last December, the EPC agreed to work on a framework 
outlining the rules and standards relating to SEPA online payments. This could lead 
to a common “e-payment channel” for web retailers based on SEPA Credit Transfer. 
Mobile payments: It is also encouraging to see that the European Payments Council 
is  looking  for  viable  models  for  mobile  payment  solutions  and  is  exploring  the 
possibilities  of  cooperation  with  the  GSM  Association.  We  will  follow  with  great 
interest potential developments for a common framework for mobile payments. The 
industry  should  also  look  beyond  its  own  borders.  For  example,  I  understand  that 
NACHA has also started a project on mobile payments.12  
E-invoicing:  An  expert  group  has  been  set  up  by  the  European  Commission  to 
analyse  the  introduction  of  electronic  invoices.  Concrete  examples  can  be  found 
particularly in the Nordic countries especially.  
  Conclusion 
Let me now conclude with the following three points.  
First,  SEPA  is  necessary  and  inevitable.  SEPA  will  start  on  28  January  2008  with  SEPA 
Credit Transfer, and other instruments will follow. In retrospect, we will all find it normal that 
national  legacy  instruments  have  disappeared  and  to  have  a  harmonised  set  of  payment 
instruments across Europe, based on international standards. However, it requires end-user 
stakeholder involvement to be strengthened and formalised even further. 
Second, SEPA is a global relevance. It introduces, in a large, mature market, a single set of 
business rules and the latest international standards. I expect that other markets will follow in 
the same direction. SEPA also ensures that participants in this market have equal access to 
the  SEPA  payment  schemes.  Furthermore,  it  ensures  that  market  participants  are  treated 
equally when they operate under the SEPA rules, which facilitates the entry of new market 
players and will increase the competitiveness of service providers.  
Third,  SEPA  is  innovative.  We  are  already  benefiting  from  innovative  projects,  such  as  e-
payments and m-payments. A global exchange of views – for example on mobile solutions – 
could  be  useful.  I  expect  that  markets  will  develop  towards  an  increase  in  the  range  of 
products, based on fewer and similar platforms (ACHs).  
So,  SEPA  is  bringing  about  major  changes  in  the  payments  sector,  both  in  Europe  and 
globally.  In  the  coming  years  we  will  see  a  further  broadening  and  deepening  of  SEPA.  I 
                                                 
12   On December 13 2007, NACHA announced today that it has formed a Mobile Banking Work Group under the 
leadership of its Internet Council to develop an ACH payment platform strategy for mobile banking. 
BIS Review 8/2008 
 7
expect  to  see  a  transformation  from  a  banking  industry  with  a  single  focus  on  interbank 
transactions only, towards an industry that strives towards a holistic service approach.  
To  close  my  speech,  let  me  quote  the  English  poet  Lord  Byron,  whose  220th  birthday  is 
actually  today.  He  used  to  say  “ready  money  is  Aladdin's  lamp”.  Nowadays,  we  are  not 
relying on Aladdin’s lamp, but on efficient payment systems to receive our money efficiently 
and safely. I am grateful for your work in ensuring that this is the case.  
Thank you for your attention. 
8 
 BIS Review 8/2008
