Durmuş Yilmaz: Turkey’s monetary and exchange rate policy for 2008  
Speech by Mr Durmuş Yilmaz, Governor of the Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey, at 
the Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey, Ankara, 18 December 2007. 
General framework of the monetary policy 
 Overview of 2007 
The Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey (the Central Bank) has continued to implement 
the  monetary  policy  in  2007  based  on  the  principles  of  inflation  targeting  regime.  The 
Monetary  Policy  Committee  (the  Committee)  meetings  were  held  in  line  with  the  pre-
announced  annual  timetable.  Interest  rate  decisions  were  made  public  through  press 
releases on the same day along with the rationale of decisions. Moreover, “Summary of the 
Monetary  Policy  Committee  Meeting”  including  details  of  decisions  and  the  assessments 
made during the meetings started to be published along with the English translation within 
eight  working  days  following  the  meetings  in  2007.  Inflation  Report,  which  is  the  main 
communication tool of the Central Bank, continued to be published quarterly. Furthermore, in 
order to increase the efficiency in management of expectations, Price Developments Report 
was also published within a very short time with a detailed analysis of inflation data following 
the announcement of monthly price developments. 
Inflation in the first quarter of 2007, as foreseen, remained within the uncertainty band set 
around the path consistent with the target, whereas the decline in inflation stagnated in the 
last quarter due to both considerable increases in food prices, arising from drought as well as 
global  conjuncture,  and  adjustments  in  administered  prices.  Thus,  it  has  become  obvious 
that  the  year-end  inflation  would  remain  outside  the  uncertainty  band.  Though  the  Central 
Bank has targeted the CPI inflation, it has pursued an effective communication strategy by 
referring to core measures at times of price movements beyond its control and pursued an 
effective communication strategy. In line with the positive outlook of inflation trend in prices 
excluding energy, food and administered prices, a measured rate cut cycle has been initiated 
in September 2007. Accordingly, the overnight borrowing rate was decreased by 175 basis 
points in total until the end of 2007, from 17.50 percent to 15.75 percent. 
The  Central  Bank  has  made  significant  progress  over  the  last  two  years  in  terms  of 
communication  policy,  transparency  and  accountability.  Despite  the  fact  that  inflation 
remained  above  the  path  consistent  with  the  target  due  to  a  series  of  supply-side  shocks 
over the past two years, the inflation expectations for the next 12 and 24 months indicate low 
levels such as 6.1 and 5.2 percent, which have not been experienced for many years in our 
economy.  This  shows  that  inflation  targeting  regime  has  highly  succeeded  in  managing 
expectations.  In  the  meantime,  as  the  inflation  expectations  indicate  figures  above  the 
medium-term target of 4 percent points, we think that there are many things to do towards 
disinflation.  The  Central  Bank,  not  being  content  with  what  has  been  achieved  so  far,  will 
continue  to  further  increase  the  efficiency  in  expectations  management  in  forthcoming 
periods. 
The  rest  of  this  text  provides  the  general  framework  of  the  monetary  and  exchange  rate 
policy  to  be  implemented  in  2008.  The  first  part  addresses  the  strategic  framework  of  the 
monetary policy, while the second part explains the exchange rate policy, foreign exchange 
auctions and guidelines for liquidity management. 
BIS Review 4/2008 
 1
Inflation targets 
Inflation targets have been set as “point target” since 2006. The target has been defined as 
the  end-year  Consumer  Price  Index  (CPI)  inflation  calculated  by  the  annual  percentage 
change of the Consumer Price Index (CPI) and the target horizon, has been set as 3 years in 
line with 3-year budget implementation. The Central Bank continues this practice in 2008 as 
well. 
By  considering  the  structural  transformation  of  the  economy,  convergence  process  to  the 
developed countries and the pricing behavior that remained from high inflationary period, a 
target of 4 percent has been considered appropriate for the medium-term as agreed with the 
government.  Therefore,  inflation  targets  for  2008  and  2009,  which  were  previously 
announced as 4 percent, are maintained and the inflation target for 2010 has also been set 
as 4 percent. 
The importance of Special CPI aggregates 
Due  to  its  comprehensive  context  coming  from  its  definition,  consumer  price  index  can  be 
exposed  to  temporary  fluctuations.  Core  indicators  allow  for  differencing  out  the  price 
movements  in  items  unaffected  by  monetary  policy  actions,  and  thus  enable  much  better 
analysis  of  the  main  inflation  trend.  For  instance,  the  impact  of  a  significant  increase  in 
energy prices on consumer prices can be analyzed by using a price index excluding energy 
prices.  Similarly,  a  temporary  price  increase  arising  from  one-time  movement  in  special 
consumption  tax  levied  on  tobacco  products  can  also  be  identified  by  using  special  CPI 
aggregates excluding the item in consideration. 
A series of supply-side shocks that have occurred over the last 2 years have underlined the 
importance of special CPI aggregates. The relevant indicators, which may also be called as 
“core”  indices,  have  played  an  important  role  in  the  communication  of  monetary  policy 
decisions in 2007. 
Undoubtedly, it is not possible to define a single core indicator for inflation that can disregard 
all temporary effects observed in consumer prices. For instance, the Special CPI Aggregates 
issued  by  the  Turkish  Statistical  Institute  does  not  exclude  processed  food  group.  As  we 
have  experienced  recently,  the  drought  has  a  negative  impact  on  core  measures  via 
processed food prices. In other words, although the main inflation trend has not worsened, 
the growth rate of special CPI aggregates can display increases stemming from processed 
food prices. Accordingly, the Central Bank has established an index excluding all food items 
and started to monitor this index closely. 
From time to time, the Central Bank draws the attention to price movements in certain sub-
groups of the CPI in order to increase efficiency of the communication of the monetary policy 
and to take sound decisions. For instance, in order to highlight the effects of the monetary 
policy  tightening  being  implemented  since  mid-2006,  the  Central  Bank  has  frequently 
referred in 2007 to the developments observed in sub-groups, such as services or durable 
consumption goods, whose prices are sensitive to monetary policy actions. 
In summary, the Central Bank examines several variables including Special CPI Aggregates 
while  assessing  the  main  inflation  trend,  and  can  highlight  different  indicators  at  certain 
periods  depending  on  the  economic  conjuncture.  Understanding  of  the  Central  Bank’s 
approach to core inflation by the public will allow for a sound assessment of the monetary 
policy actions and hence an improved efficiency of communication policies. 
Uncertainty band and accountability 
It is stipulated in Article 42 of the CBRT Law that “The Bank shall submit information to the 
Government  in  writing  and  inform  the  public  disclosing  the  reasons  of  the  incapability  of 
achieving the determined targets in due time announced or the occurrence of the possibility 
2 
 BIS Review 4/2008
of not achieving the targets and the measures to be taken thereof”. While, it forms a basis for 
the accountability principle, the law does not specify the size of the deviation from the target 
that will require such an explanation. In other words, details of accountability mechanism are 
left  to  the  Central  Bank’s  own  initiative.  Therefore,  the  Central  Bank  has  established  an 
effective  and  enforceable  accountability  mechanism  by  setting  a  symmetrical  uncertainty 
band of 2 percentage points in both directions around the point target. 
As stated above, the inflation target has been defined over a very comprehensive CPI index. 
The  CPI  index  also  comprises  of  price  items  that  are  beyond  the  control  of  the  monetary 
policy such as food, energy and administered goods. In emerging markets like Turkey, short-
term  fluctuations  in  exchange  rates  can  lead  to  unpredictable  temporary  fluctuations  in 
inflation as well. Since a sudden reaction of monetary policy to factors that are beyond its 
control  will  increase  volatility  in  macroeconomic  variables,  inflation-targeting  central  banks 
adopt a medium-term approach and allow temporary fluctuations in inflation as long as the 
expectations  are  under  control.  In  this  framework,  the  primary  objective  of  setting  an 
uncertainty band is to establish a measurable criterion that will enable to determine to what 
extent the deviations from the point target will be tolerated with respect to the accountability 
principle. 
In view of the above-mentioned factors, it has been decided to keep the uncertainty band at 
2 percent for 2008 as well. In this context, the path consistent with the end-year target and 
the uncertainty bands defined for the end of each quarter of 2008 are given in Table 1. 
Table 1: Inflation path consistent with the end-year target and the uncertainty band  
 
Uncertainty Band (upper limit) 
Path  Consistent  with 
Target 
Uncertainty Band (Lower Limit) 
the 
March 
9.10 
7.10 
5.10 
June 
8.50 
6.50 
4.50 
September  December 
8.30 
6.30 
4.30 
6.00 
4.00 
2.00 
 
In case of realizations of the end-of-quarter figures outside the band, the Central Bank shall 
submit  an  open  letter  to  the  Government  disclosing  the  reasons  of  the  deviation  and  the 
measures already taken and to be taken for convergence to the target, and share this letter 
with the public. 
Recently,  the  Overview  chapter  of  the  Inflation  Report  has  been  restructured  in  line  with 
accountability principle. Accordingly, the Central Bank has started using Inflation Report to 
share  its  view  pertaining  to  inflation  and  monetary  policy  outlook  and  the  necessary 
measures  to  be  taken  to  keep  inflation  close  to  the  target.  Thus,  besides  being  the  main 
communication  tool  of  the  Bank,  the  Inflation  Report  has  therefore  assumed  an  important 
role  with  respect  to  accountability  principle  as  well.  Accordingly,  there  will  be  more 
references given to the Inflation Reports in the case of possible open letters in forthcoming 
periods. It is necessary for the communication policy of the Central Bank that the open letters 
and Inflation Report would be perceived as complementary factors. 
Role of public sector in inflation targeting strategy 
It should be reemphasized that the monetary policy should be supported by fiscal policy in 
order  to  be  able  to  turn  the  downward  trend  in  inflation  into  a  long-term  and  lasting 
achievement.  The  fiscal  policy  can  affect  inflation  through  various  channels.  A  particular 
channel,  through  which  fiscal  policy  has  direct  effects  on  inflation,  is  the  price  and  tax 
adjustments  in  the  goods  and  services  produced  by  the  public  sector.  Making  these 
adjustments in line with a pre-announced schedule or a pre-described rule would  diminish 
BIS Review 4/2008 
 3
the  monetary  policy  stance, 
uncertainties regarding inflation forecasts and thereby contribute to the reputation of inflation 
targeting regime. 
The Central Bank sets inflation targets on the basis of the budget projections of public sector. 
Therefore,  while  updating 
trend  of  public  sector 
expenditures,  which  is  a  very  important  component  of  total  demand,  is  closely  monitored. 
Moreover, keeping public sector wage adjustments consistent with the inflation target is very 
important as the private sector take these adjustments as a benchmark for their own wage 
adjustments. 
Due  to  all  these  reasons  mentioned  above,  the  Central  Bank  closely  monitors  the  income 
and  fiscal  policy  implementations,  and  frequently  emphasizes  the  importance  of  structural 
reforms that would enhance the quality of fiscal discipline and predictability of fiscal policies. 
the 
to  monetary 
transmission  mechanism  compared 
Transmission mechanism, inflation forecasts and monetary policy stance 
Uncertainties  regarding  the  impact  of  monetary  policy  implementations  on  inflation  are  an 
issue that central banks frequently underline in their monetary policy statements. In countries 
that are undergoing a structural transformation process like Turkey, the relationship between 
macroeconomic  variables  evolve  over  time,  leading  to  a  higher  degree  of  uncertainty 
pertaining 
to  developed  countries. 
Moreover, it is believed that Central Bank’s sharing of its evaluations about the transmission 
mechanism would contribute to the expectations management. 
The fact that the short-term interest rates have only shown a declining pattern for a long time 
with  the  disinflation  process  after  2001  and  this  trend  coincided  with  transition  to  inflation 
targeting regime made it difficult to evaluate the transmission mechanism. Nevertheless, the 
monetary  tightening,  which  have  been  made  since  the  mid-2006  and  the  macroeconomic 
dynamics  thereby,  allow  for  important  inferences  regarding  to  the  workings  of  the 
transmission mechanism. Upon the recent evaluations, it can be suggested that the effect of 
monetary policy tightening has lasted for one year on economic activity and for two years on 
inflation. The effect of monetary policy on private sector demand and inflation has become 
more evident in the last one-and-a-half years. Moreover, it has been affirmed that monetary 
policy can indeed control expectations. The sectors on which the monetary policy has been 
most  influential  have  been  consumer  durables  group  and  services  sector.  In  fact,  price 
dynamics of services and consumer durables sectors have contributed to disinflation process 
significantly. 
To  sum  up,  despite  the  fact  that  nearly  half  of  the  CPI  is  composed  of  energy,  food,  and 
administered goods prices, it is evident that monetary policy is still capable of keeping the 
main inflation trend under control via other items. 
As stated also in the last two years’ monetary policy statements, the inflation target would be 
changed only if sharp and long-term deviations from the target occur due to factors beyond 
the control of the monetary policy such that the medium-term targets no longer make sense. 
Within this framework, while considering the possibility that inflation might be exceeding the 
target for a while in the short run, the Central Bank maintains the 4 percent inflation target 
hinging on the evaluation that the general trend of inflation is downwards. 
The forecasts presented in the Inflation Reports will continue to refer to two-year periods. In 
phases  when  inflation  is  above  the  target,  the  forecasts  presented  in  the  Inflation  Report 
become  more  important.  The  forecasts  inform  the  public  about  the  path  that  inflation  will 
follow  while  moving  towards  the  medium  term  target.  In  other  words,  the  reference  value 
established for economic units is the inflation forecast in the short-run and the inflation target 
in the long-run. 
Another message that inflation forecasts contain is the monetary policy stance. The answer 
sought while forming forecasts and monetary policy outlook in the Inflation Report is: “What 
is the monetary policy stance that will keep inflation close to the target in the medium-term?” 
4 
 BIS Review 4/2008
The monetary policy stance in this sense does not only consist of the current level of short-
term  interest  rates.  Monetary  policy  stance  indicates  the  prospective  path  that  short-term 
interest rates will follow in a period that extends from today to medium term. Sharing with the 
public the interest rate assumptions that form the basis of forecasts, though qualitatively, is a 
remarkable  step  towards  enhancing  the  transparency  and  predictability  principles  that  are 
essential for inflation targeting. 
Communicating with the public about the possible Central Bank policies influences medium-
term  market  interest  rates  via  expectations  and  strengthens  the  transmission  mechanism. 
However, it should be reminded once again that the monetary policy stance path pronounced 
in the Inflation Report is produced according to currently available information and that each 
new data release related to the medium-term inflation outlook would necessitate the revision 
of  the  future  monetary  policy  stance.  Under  the  inflation-targeting  regime,  revisions  in  the 
monetary policy stance are not an exception, but a rule. Thus, the monetary policy stance 
established according to currently available data should not be interpreted as a commitment. 
Any unforeseen change in the variables that affect inflation outlook calls for the re-definition 
of the monetary policy stance. What is important here is to share openly with the public the 
reasons of the monetary policy stance update. As a matter of fact, the Central Bank explains, 
via Inflation Reports and other policy instruments, why and how the monetary policy stance 
has been reviewed. 
The  main  policy  instrument  of  the  Central  Bank  is  short-term  interest  rates.  The 
implementation and communication of the monetary policy decisions in the inflation-targeting 
regime will continue to be carried out through short-term interest rates. Moreover, as stated 
in previous policy documents, instruments such as reserve requirements or efficient liquidity 
management might be used, when deemed necessary. 
The decision-making process and communication 
The Monetary Policy Committee (the Committee) will continue to meet once a month in 2008 
as  well.  Meetings  will  be  held  according  to  the  previously  set  calendar  and  start  at  13.00. 
After  making  a  decision,  summary  of  the  decision  and  its  rationale  will  be  posted  on  the 
website of the Bank in a press release at 19.00 on the same day. English translation of the 
decision will be posted on the website on the same day. 
To  enhance  the  communication  of  monetary  policy  decisions,  “Summary  of  the  Monetary 
Policy  Committee  Meeting”  will  continue  to  be  posted  in  both  Turkish  and  English  on  the 
Bank’s website within eight working days following the meeting. 
The  Inflation  Report,  which  is  the  main  communication  tool  of  the  monetary  policy,  will 
continue to be published quarterly, and the general evaluation of the Report will be presented 
to the public with a press conference. The Financial Stability Report will be published twice a 
year1. The “Price Developments” report will be published on the working day following the 
announcement of inflation data. 
Beside  these  communication  tools,  speeches  and  presentations  made  by  Central  Bank 
autorities  at  the  meetings  in  Turkey  or  abroad  constitute  an  important  pillar  of  the 
communication  policy.  Working  papers,  booklets  and  technical  notes  published  along  with 
the  conferences  and  workshops  organized  by  the  Bank  will  be  used  as  effective  tools  for 
communication policy. 
                                                 
1   The publication calendar for the Inflation Report and  the  Financial Stability Report along  with the Monetary 
Policy Committee Meeting dates are presented in the Appendix. 
BIS Review 4/2008 
 5
Exchange rate policy and liquidity management 
Exchange rate policy and foreign exhange buying auctions 
Along with inflation targeting, the Central Bank will continue to implement floating exchange 
rate  regime  in  2008.  As  stated  in  the  annual  monetary  and  exchange  rate  policy 
announcements that have been published since 2002, the foreign exchange rate is neither a 
target, nor a policy tool in the floating exchange rate regime. Exchange rates are determined 
according  to  the  supply  and  demand  conditions  in  the  market.  The  main  factors  affecting 
foreign  exchange  supply  and  demand  are  the  monetary  and  fiscal  policies  implemented, 
international developments, economic fundamentals, and expectations.  
Even if floating exchange rate regime has been adopted, keeping a strong foreign exchange 
reserves  position  is  very  important  in  emerging  economies  like  Turkey  to  eliminate  the 
unfavorable effects of potential internal and external shocks and to boost confidence in the 
country’s economy. Moreover, the foreign debt payments of the Treasury should be settled 
and remittance accounts that comprise a significant part of the liabilities side of the Central 
Bank’s balance sheet need to be gradually reduced in the long-term. Therefore, the Central 
Bank  holds  foreign  exchange  buying  auctions  to  build  up  reserves  at  times  where  foreign 
exchange supply increases compared to foreign exchange demand.  
With  the  aim  of  minimizing  the  impact  on  supply  and  demand  conditions  in  the  foreign 
exchange market, the Central Bank has been buying foreign exchange via foreign exchange 
buying auctions with pre-announced terms and conditions since 1 April 2002 and has been 
announcing  annual  auction  programs  since  2005.  Even  if  the  aim  is  running  the  auctions 
according to the pre-announced program, in case of significant developments exceeding the 
forecasts  pertaining  to  foreign  exchange  supply,  amendments  to  auction  programs  can  be 
made with prior notice. 
Thus,  
i) 
The maximum amount to be purchased in daily foreign exchange buying auctions 
has been set as USD 45 million for 2007, with USD 15 million for auction amount 
and USD 30 million for optional selling amount,  
Then, the auction amount has been raised to USD 40 million as of 25 July 2007 with 
an assumption that the capital inflow to Turkey will follow a strong trend due to the 
end of the election process and positive expectations for macroeconomic policies, 
However, the auction amount has been lowered to USD 15 million as of 15 August 
2007  due  to  the  fact  that  the  unfavorable  developments  in  housing  and  credit 
markets in developing countries increased the volatilities in the Turkish markets as 
well as in other developing markets in the said period.  
The measures taken by central banks in order to alleviate the problems in housing 
and  credit  markets  have  relatively  reduced  the  volatilities  in  these  markets  and 
increased the global risk appetite. Therefore, the maximum amount to be purchased 
in auctions has been set as USD 90 million with USD 30 million for auction amount 
and USD 60 million for optional selling amount from 9 October 2007 onwards. 
ii) 
iii) 
iv) 
As of 14 December 2007, the total amount of foreign exchange purchased via auctions in 
2007  is  USD  9.5  billion  and  there  has  not  been  any  direct  intervention  in  the  foreign 
exchange market. The total amounts of foreign exchange purchased and sold by the Central 
Bank from 2002 onwards are shown year by year in the table below: 
6 
 BIS Review 4/2008
Table 2: The Central Bank’s net foreign exchange purchases and sales (2002-2007; 
USD million) 
 Year 
2002 
2003 
2004 
2005 
2006 
2007* 
Total 
FX Buying 
Auctions 
FX Selling 
Auctions 
FX Buying 
Interventions 
FX Selling 
Interventions 
Total Net FX 
Buying 
795 
5,652 
4,104 
7,442 
4,296 
9,494 
31,783 
-
-
-
-
1,000
-
1,000
16
4,229
1,283
14,565
5,441
-
25,534
12 
- 
9 
- 
2,105 
- 
2,126 
799
9,881
5,378
22,007
6,632
9,494
54,191
* As of 14 December 2007. 
Unless  extraordinary  differences  are  observed  in  foreign  exchange  liquidity  conditions, 
foreign exchange buying auctions will continue in 2008 with the aforementioned amount that 
has been set as USD 90 million maximum with USD 30 million for auction amount and USD 
60 million for optional selling amount. However, as was the case before, the developments 
related to foreign exchange supply will be closely monitored and in the event of unforeseen 
extraordinary  developments,  the  Central  Bank  may,  with  prior  notice,  change  the  daily 
auction  amount  and/or  optional  selling  amount  in  both  directions  and  may  suspend  the 
auctions temporarily for shorter and longer periods.  
On the other hand, the Central Bank will continue to closely monitor the volatility in exchange 
rates also in 2008 and will directly intervene in the market in the event of actual and potential 
excessive volatilities.  
Banks  will  also  be  able  to  borrow  foreign  exchange  in  terms  of  USD  and  euro  from  the 
Central  Bank  within  the  predetermined  limits  with  a  one-week  maturity  in  the  Foreign 
Exchange and Banknotes Market-Foreign Exchange Deposit Market in the upcoming period. 
Moreover,  the  purchase/sale  transactions  of  “foreign  exchange  against  foreign  exchange”, 
“foreign  exchange  against  foreign  banknotes”  and  “foreign  banknotes  against  foreign 
banknotes” conducted between the Central Bank and institutions authorized to operate in the 
Foreign Exchange and Banknotes Markets will continue. 
In conclusion, within the framework of the current exchange rate regime and the exchange 
rate policy of the Central Bank, economic agents should take into account that they operate 
in an environment of exchange rate risk and that they should establish mechanisms that will 
ensure the efficient management of this risk.  
Liquidity management 
As an outcome of the Central Bank’s foreign exchange purchases, the excess liquidity in the 
market  continued  in  2007,  as  well.  The  Central  Bank  continued  to  withdraw  the  excess 
liquidity  in  the  market  mainly  via  New  Turkish  Lira  deposit  transactions  in  the  Interbank 
Money Market within the CBRT and repo transactions in the Repo and Reverse Repo Market 
of the Istanbul Stock Exchange, on an overnight basis. However, when the excess liquidity 
withdrawn via overnight operations increased, the Central Bank has started to issue liquidity 
bills  from  July  onwards  in  addition  to  its  overnight  operations  in  order  to  increase  the 
flexibility and efficiency of liquidity management. Overnight interest rates in the market were 
generally around the borrowing rate of the Central Bank, depending on the withdrawal of the 
excess liquidity by the Central Bank via overnight operations. Hence, the borrowing rate of 
the Central Bank has continued to be an indicator for money markets.  
BIS Review 4/2008 
 7
The increase in base money, 
Coupon and principle redemption by the Treasury to the Central Bank, 
Treasury’s being net foreign exchange debt payer,  
Based on the information currently available,  
i) 
ii) 
iii) 
will have a lowering effect, while; 
iv) 
v) 
The Central Bank’s net foreign exchange purchases, 
Interest payments to be made by the Central Bank for required reserves and excess 
liquidity absorbing transactions, 
The decline in Treasury cash accounts within the Central Bank 
vi) 
will have an increasing effect on the level of the liquidity in the market in 2008.  
In view of the Treasury’s financing program for 2008 and the Central Bank foreign exchange 
buying auction program for 2008, the excess liquidity in the market is expected to continue 
generally at reasonable levels in 2008. However, as was the case in previous years, the level 
of liquidity in the market may change significantly depending on the changes in Treasury’s 
financing program as well as in foreign exchange buying amounts of the Central Bank and 
changes in Treasury cash accounts within the Central Bank. 
As long as the excess liquidity in the market remains at reasonable levels, the Central Bank 
will continue to withdraw the excess liquidity in the market on an overnight basis, via New 
Turkish lira deposit transactions in the Interbank Money Market within the CBRT and repo 
transactions  in  the  Repo  and  Reverse  Repo  Market  of  Istanbul  Stock  Exchange.  Hence, 
overnight interest rates will continue to be at the level of the borrowing rate of the Central 
Bank.  Thus,  the  overnight  borrowing  rate  of  the  Central  Bank  will  continue  to  be  the 
benchmark interest rate with respect to the monetary policy.  
In case of a permanent liquidity shortage in the market, the benchmark short-term interest 
rates will not be the borrowing rate of the Central Bank but the average interest rate of the 
repo  auctions,  which  is  the  basic  funding  instrument.  Therefore,  in  case  of  tightening  in 
liquidity, the interest rate taken as a benchmark by the market would have increased merely 
due to the decline in liquidity. In order to avoid the negative impacts of such a situation, the 
Central Bank could lower its borrowing and lending interest rates – provided that the inflation 
outlook is stable – so as to encounter the pressure created by liquidity shortage on overnight 
interest rates. However, such an interest rate cut would only mean a technical arrangement 
stemming  from  the  change  in  liquidity  conditions.  Therefore,  such  a  move  should  not  be 
perceived as loosening of monetary policy. 
The Central Bank does not foresee any significant changes in the general framework of the 
liquidity management for 2008. Accordingly, 2008 liquidity management strategy will be as 
follows:  
i) 
The Central Bank will continue to announce overnight borrowing and lending rates 
between  10:00-12:00  and  13:00-16:00  in  the  Interbank  Money  Market  within  the 
CBRT. In case of a liquidity shortage during the day, banks will be able to borrow at 
the Central Bank’s lending rate against collateral within their limits. In the event of a 
fall  in  interest  rates  due  to  increasing  liquidity,  banks  will  be  able  to  lend  New 
Turkish Lira to the  Central Bank at  the Central  Bank’s borrowing rate  without any 
limit. 
The Central Bank extended the transaction hours of Late Liquidity Window Facility 
from 16:00-16:30 to 16:00-17:00 and on the last working day of the required reserve 
provision  to  16:00-17:15  as  of  July  9,  2007  in  order  to  increase  the  flexibility  and 
effectiveness of the liquidity management of banks. The Central Bank will continue 
to  provide  Late  Liquidity  Window  Facility  such  that  banks  may  borrow  from  the 
ii) 
8 
 BIS Review 4/2008
iii) 
iv) 
v) 
vi) 
vii) 
viii) 
ix) 
Central Bank against collateral, and lend to the Central Bank without any limit within 
the hours mentioned above.  
In  case  of  a  temporary  or  permanent  liquidity  shortage,  the  Central  Bank  will 
continue  to  carry  out  its  liquidity  management  through  one-week  repo  auctions. 
When there is liquidity shortage in the market, the Central Bank will announce the 
amount of repo auction for that day on Reuters’ “CBTF” page at 10.00. As long as 
no  extraordinary  fluctuations  are  observed  in  the  market,  the  Central  Bank,  while 
determining  the  amount  of  the  auctions,  will  endeavor  to  maintain  the  average 
auction interest rate; 
a) 
At maximum of 1 percentage point above the borrowing rate of the Central 
Bank announced for the intra-day transactions to reduce fluctuations in O/N 
interest  rates,  in  cases  where  the  liquidity  shortage  in  the  market  is 
envisaged temporary and when the technical interest rate cut explained in 
paragraph 45 is not applied, 
Approximately at the mid point of the O/N borrowing and lending rates of 
the  Central  Bank,  in  cases  where  the  liquidity  shortage  in  the  market  is 
envisaged  permanent  and  the  technical  interest  rate  cut  explained  in 
paragraph 45 is applied. 
b) 
The weekly repo auctions will be held at 11:00. and the results will be announced on 
Reuters’  “CBTG”  page  no  later  than  11:30.The  traditional  method  will  be  used  in 
auctions;  in  other  words,  the  successful  bidders  will  be  evaluated  with  their  own 
interest rates. 
In case of unforeseen excessive liquidity shortage during the day, which would exert 
excessive pressure on money market interest rates, the CBRT may announce “Intra-
day Repo Auctions” in addition to the regular ones announced at 11:00. 
The  primary  dealer  banks  will  be  able  to  conduct  repo  transactions  within  the 
framework of open market operations, between 10:00-12:00 and 13:00-16:00. 
In  case  of  an  excessive  increase in  the  liquidity  surplus in  the  market,  mainly  the 
Central  Bank  liquidity  bills  with  maturity  up  to  91  days,  and  when  necessary  New 
Turkish Lira deposit buying auctions with standard maturities of 1, 2 and 4 weeks 
and  reverse  repo  auctions  with  maturities  up  to  91  days  will  be  used  actively,  in 
order  to  enhance  the  effectiveness  and  flexibility  of  monetary  policy  and  liquidity 
management  strategy.  However,  the  Central  Bank  will  continue  to  focus  on 
sterilizing the excess liquidity, which is at such a level that would bring the overnight 
interest  rates  in  the  money  markets  close  to  the  Central  Bank  borrowing  rates, 
through overnight transactions. 
In case of the emerge of extraordinary fluctuations in the market even at reasonable 
levels of excess liquidity, the Central Bank may allow the overnight interest rates to 
fluctuate between the Central Bank overnight borrowing and lending interest rates 
range  by  sterilizing  the  excess  liquidity  drained  in  overnight  transactions  through 
liquidity bills, New Turkish Lira deposit buying auctions and reverse repo auctions, in 
order to reduce the said fluctuations. 
In case of the emerge of a need to issue liquidity bills, information on auctions will 
be  announced  at  Reuters’  “CBTL”  page  at  10:00  one  working  day  prior  to  the 
auction  rather  than  on  the  same  day,  to  provide  investors  a  longer  time  for 
evaluation.  Information  on  auctions  will  continue  to  be  announced  to  banks  and 
financial  intermediaries  by  Electronic  Fund  Transfer  (EFT)  system.  Liquidity  bill 
auctions will be held at 11:00 with the value date of the following working day, and 
the results will be announced until 11:30 at Reuters’ “CBTM” page. Auctions will be 
held by the traditional method. 
BIS Review 4/2008 
 9
x) 
Information  on  New  Turkish  Lira  deposit  buying  auctions  will  be  announced  at 
Reuters’  “CBTY”  page;  while  information  on  reverse  repo  auctions  will  be 
announced at “CBTF” page at 10:00 on the same day. 
In  case  of  an  accelerated  credit  expansion  in  the  banking  system  in  such  an  extent  that 
would create inflationary pressure despite the active use of the said open market operations 
to drain the excess liquidity in the market, required reserves may also be used effectively to 
support liquidity management. 
The  Central  Bank,  the  primary  goal  of  which,  entrusted  to  it  by  law,  is  to  achieve  and 
maintain  price  stability,  will  continue  its  practices  to  enhance  the  effectiveness  of  the 
monetary policy and liquidity management, also in 2008. Accordingly, the Central Bank may 
change  not  only  its  liquidity  management  strategy,  but  also  the  borrowing  and  lending 
interest rate margins in cases of unpredictable changes in market conditions and emergence 
of needs that may arise.  
As  always  pointed  out,  the  Central  Bank  deems  the  stability  and  development  of  financial 
markets as a supportive objective for the efficient implementation of the policies pertaining to 
price stability. Obviously, under the floating exchange rate regime, the Central Bank is able 
to  implement  the  YTL  liquidity  policy  in  a  more  flexible  manner  than  it  can  under  a  fixed 
currency peg regime and can act more promptly and flexibly to meet the YTL liquidity needs 
of the banking system. Also, the Central Bank can prevent excessive fluctuations in money 
market interest rates as long as they are consistent with the inflation target. Furthermore, the 
Central  Bank  provides  the  banking  system  with  foreign  exchange  liquidity  via  short-term 
foreign exchange deposit auctions, albeit at limited amounts. However, it is worth mentioning 
once more that the banking system should not slacken risk management principles by simply 
relying  on  the  more  flexible  and  effective  New  Turkish  Lira  liquidity  management  and  the 
foreign exchange liquidity facility of the Central Bank. On the contrary, the banking system 
should use risk management principles effectively.  
Annex: calendar for 2008 
 
MPC Meeting Dates 
17 January, Thursday 
14 February, Thursday 
19 March, Wednesday 
17 April, Thursday 
15 May, Thursday 
16 June, Monday 
17 July, Thursday 
14 August, Thursday 
18 September, Thursday 
22 October, Wednesday 
19 November, Wednesday 
18 December, Thursday 
 
Inflation Report 
31 January, Thursday 
 
 
30 April, Wednesday 
 
 
28 July, Monday 
 
 
31 October, Friday 
 
 
Financial Stability Report 
 
 
 
 
30 May, Friday 
 
 
 
 
 
28 November, Friday 
 
10 
 BIS Review 4/2008
