Jacinta Mwatela: Regulation of microfinance in Kenya 
Speech  by  Mrs  Jacinta  Mwatela,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Kenya,  at  the 
Stakeholders  Forum  on  the  Deposit-Taking  Microfinance  Regulations  issued  under  the 
Microfinance Act, Kenya School of Monetary Studies, Nairobi, 12 May 2008.  
 The Chairperson, the Association of Microfinance Institutions (AMFI); 
The Chief Executive Officer, AMFI; 
Microfinance Practitioners; 
Development Partners; 
Distinguished Guests and Participants; 
Ladies and Gentlemen; 
It  gives  me  great  pleasure  to  be  with  you  this  morning  during  this  important  stakeholders’ 
forum on the Deposit-Taking Microfinance Regulations, 2008 issued under the Microfinance 
Act, 2006 (Act No. 19 of 2006). These Regulations set the stage for the implementation of 
the Microfinance Act and are expected to usher in a new dawn in the development of the 
microfinance industry in Kenya as an integral part of the financial system. 
Let me also take this opportunity to thank the Association of Microfinance Institutions (AMFI), 
all industry players and stakeholders for their collaboration, input and patience. I am aware 
that the delay in the completion of the drafting of the regulations and the appointment of the 
commencement date of the Microfinance Act has caused concern in the industry. The work 
on  the  regulations  has  been  a  considerable  one  and  the  challenges  mammoth.  However, 
good things, they say, come to those who wait. I therefore congratulate AMFI and the entire 
microfinance fraternity for keeping the faith and staying the course and urge them to continue 
to  be  patient  as  the  appointment  of  the  commencement  date  and  regulations  are  with  the 
Attorney General’s Chambers for gazettement. This will be out shortly. 
Ladies and Gentlemen; as you are aware the legal, regulatory and supervisory regime, spelt 
out  under  the  Act  and  Regulations,  will  allow  regulated  deposit-taking  microfinance 
institutions to offer a variety of financial services and products including savings mobilization, 
credit facilities and domestic money transfer, among others to Kenyans. I expect that many 
microfinance institutions and potential investors will take the opportunity to establish deposit-
taking business in order to enhance access to financial services and products by Kenyans. 
According to the Finaccess study conducted in 2006, about 38 per cent of adult Kenyans are 
un-served  by  our  financial  system  indicating  a  huge  market  potential  for  the  microfinance 
industry. The study shows that only 19 per cent of Kenyans are served by formal financial 
sector, namely commercial banks and the Kenya Post Office Savings Bank, while 8 per cent 
are served by semi-formal financial service providers such as microfinance institutions (MFIs) 
and Savings and Credit Co-operatives societies (SACCOs) and the remaining 35  per cent 
are served by informal financial service providers ranging from Accumulating and Rotating 
Savings and Credit Associations (ASCAs and ROSCAs) to shopkeepers and money lenders. 
This  indicates  a  big  gap  in  access  to  financial  services  by  Kenyans  that  I  expect  deposit-
taking microfinance institutions (MFIs) to play a major role in filling it by expanding access. 
Given this scenario the microfinance deposit taking institutions will be playing a major role in 
narrowing the service gap. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  the  former  UN  Secretary-General,  Kofi  Annan  stated  that 
“Sustainable  access  to  microfinance  helps  alleviate  poverty  by  generating  income  and 
wealth, creating jobs, allowing children to go to school, enabling families to obtain health care 
and  empowering  people  to  make  the  choices  that  best  serve  their  needs.  …The  great 
challenge before us is to address the constraints that exclude people from full participation in 
the financial sector.” 
BIS Review 59/2008 
 1
I couldn’t agree more and this is the challenge before us. A financial system that serves only 
a  minority  of  a  country’s  people  is  biased  and  unacceptable.  All  inclusive  financial  system 
that provides access for the majority is the central goal of the development of our financial 
system  as  envisaged  by  Vision  2030.  The  government,  as  envisaged  in  Vision  2030,  will 
strengthen  alternative  financial  service  providers  including  MFIs  and  SACCOs,  among 
others, to play a major role in savings mobilization and wealth creation, thus contributing to 
poverty reduction and economic growth. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, we expect that when the Act and Regulations are fully implemented, 
it will bring, in the not too distant future, a new breed of microfinance institutions, the deposit-
taking MFIs, which will enable these institutions to mobilise savings from the general public. 
Thus, the Act and Regulations will set in a new era in the growth and development of the 
microfinance  industry  by  integrating  the  industry  to  the  formal  financial  sector,  thereby 
promoting  competition,  efficiency  and  access.  Through  this,  we  expect  the  microfinance 
industry  to  play  a  pivotal  role  in  deepening  financial  markets  by  expanding  access  of 
affordable, appropriate and innovative financial services and products to majority of Kenyans. 
These include cellular phone banking, alternative, low cost outlets e.g. agencies, and mobile 
banking, among others. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, once the Act is fully implemented, it will promote an orderly growth 
and development of a sound and stable microfinance industry. The regime will also embrace 
microfinance  industry  corporate  governance,  accountability  and  transparency,  performance 
standards and benchmarking, deposit protection, efficiency and effectiveness, among others.  
As  you  are  aware  that  the  policy  underpinning  the  regime  is  based  on  a  three  tiered 
approach to regulation and supervision of the microfinance industry, with the deposit-taking 
MFIs and non-deposit taking MFIs falling under the Act. Informal microfinance institutions will 
remain unregulated. The deposit-taking MFIs are categorized into two: the community MFIs 
and the nationwide MFIs with a minimum capital requirement of KSh.20 and KSh.60 million, 
respectively. The nationwide MFIs will operate countrywide, while the community MFIs will 
operate with one Government Administrative District or Division if operating in a City. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  let  me  also  urge  the  industry  to  move  fast  and  develop  a  self-
regulatory  mechanism  in  addition  to  the  current  regime  provided  under  the  Act  and 
Regulations  to  provide  for  a  self-regulating  mechanism  including  a  code  of  conduct, 
oversight,  disciplinary  and  dispute  resolution  mechanism,  and  minimum  reporting  and 
performance standards. This should cover all practicing microfinance practitioners – ranging 
from deposit-taking MFIs, non-deposit taking MFIs and informal microfinance entities. 
You will note that in the recent past, the Central Bank of Kenya made press statements in the 
print media warning the public on the illegal operations of pyramid schemes in Kenya. The 
building of an all inclusive financial system including the strengthening of alternative financial 
service providers and public education and awareness campaign is expected to stem off the 
mushrooming  of  pyramid  schemes  and  similar  schemes.  The  Central  Bank  of  Kenya  will 
continue  to  educate  the  public  and  will  publish  licensed  deposit-taking  MFIs  in  the  Kenya 
Gazette and once in a year print media with national circulation. Anyone taking deposit from 
the public without a license from the Central Bank will be committing an offence under the 
Banking Act and Microfinance Act except those exempted under the respective legislations. 
I,  therefore,  strongly  advise  the  general  public  not  to  risk  losing  money  by  depositing  or 
placing the same in unregulated institutions like the pyramid schemes. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  let  me  highlight  some  key  silent  regulatory  and  supervisory 
requirements  for  deposit-taking  MFIs  which  include  licensing  requirements;  corporate 
governance;  performance  and  accounting  standards;  accountability  and  transparency; 
deposit  protection;  dissolution  mechanisms  and  supervision  by  the  Central  Bank.  The 
legislation further specifies limits on lending to ensure that MFIs retain their core business of 
extending  services  to  the  poor,  low-income  households  and  SMEs  as  their  core  market 
segments and minimize dealings with insiders.  
2 
 BIS Review 59/2008
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  I  expect  institutions  to  use  innovative  delivery  channels  and 
methodologies  and  reduce  entry  barriers  resulting  in  increased  efficiency  and  competition, 
hence reduction in costs and increased access in the near future. The ability to create new 
innovations and harness their potential will directly impact our market share and prosperity. 
Through  new  ideas,  best  practices,  innovative  delivery  channels  and  approaches,  we  can 
stimulate new thinking and, critically, new action. Unleashing home-grown capital can create 
a  pool  of  resources  for  local  entrepreneurs  to  set  up  small  business  and  diversify  their 
economic  base.  Microfinance,  a  new  pillar  of  development,  is  yet  another  instrument  to 
unleash  the  ideas  and  energies  of  local  entrepreneurs  with  a  potential  to  grow,  to  forge 
linkages with other businesses that will drive national savings and investments. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, the Central Bank, on its part, will continue to ensure macroeconomic 
stability and to provide an enabling regulatory environment for the financial sector growth and 
development. The supervisory and regulatory capacity of the Central Bank of Kenya is strong 
and  is  continually  being  enhanced  to  cope  with  market  dynamics  and  new  skills  and 
knowledge. We continue to be grateful to the development partners who have collaborated 
with  us  in  building  adequate  skills  and  capacity  in  the  field  of  microfinance.  We  shall  also 
continue to work closely with the Government ministries and microfinance practitioners in the 
development of the industry. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, we all would like to thank the Attorney General’s Chambers and the 
Treasury who have tirelessly worked hard hand in hand with the Central Bank team in the 
preparation  of  the  Regulations  and  look  forward  to  a  speedy  gazettement  of  the  same  to 
effect the Act into operation. 
Before I conclude, Ladies and Gentlemen, let me once again take this opportunity to assure 
the  AMFI,  microfinance  industry  players  and  key  stakeholders  of  the  Central  Bank’s 
continued commitment, collaboration and partnership in the development of the industry. 
Finally,  it  is  my  pleasure  to  now  declare  the  Forum  on  the  Deposit-taking  Microfinance 
Regulations 2008 officially opened and wish you fruitful deliberations. 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 59/2008 
 3
