Randall S Kroszner: Federal Reserve's initiatives to support minority-
owned institutions and expand consumer protection 
Speech  by  Mr  Randall  S  Kroszner,  Member  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  US  Federal 
Reserve  System,  at  the  Minority  Depository  Institutions  National  Conference,  Chicago, 
Illinois, 17 July 2008. 
The original speech, which contains various links to the documents mentioned, can be found on the US Federal 
Reserve System’s website. 
 Good morning. I am delighted to be here to participate in today's discussion about how we 
can  work  together  to  foster  and  preserve  the  strength  and  vitality  of  minority  depository 
institutions.  These  institutions  serve  essential  roles.  Most  important,  they  extend  credit  – 
which is essential to economic development and progress – to businesses and individuals in 
neighborhoods that otherwise may not have ready access to loans. They also foster a spirit 
of entrepreneurship in their communities, offer customized financial literacy education, and 
create  products  and  services  that  address  their  clients'  particular  needs.  Taken  together, 
such  activities  help  entrepreneurs  and  emerging  small  businesses  develop  and  create 
employment, encourage the prudent and productive use of credit, and ensure more-vibrant 
communities and a better quality of life.  
In my remarks this morning, I will focus on two important Federal Reserve initiatives. First, I 
will  update  you  on  our  new  Partnership  for  Progress  program,  which  is  designed to  foster 
and support minority-owned and de novo depository institutions. Second, I plan to discuss 
the recent finalization of significant Federal Reserve rules implementing certain provisions of 
the Home Ownership and Equity Protection Act.  
Partnership for progress 
Following  my  promise  at  last  year's  interagency  conference  in  Miami,  I  am  excited  to 
announce  that  we  have  made  good  on  our  pledge  to  design  a  proactive  training  and 
technical assistance program for minority depository institutions. Our initiative, known as the 
Partnership for Progress, was launched nationwide on June 18. The innovative outreach and 
technical assistance program seeks to help minority-owned and de novo institutions confront 
their unique challenges, cultivate safe and sound practices, and compete more effectively in 
today's  marketplace  through  a  combination  of  one-on-one  guidance,  targeted  workshops, 
and an extensive web-based resource and information center. 
As  locally  focused  institutions  that  have  deep  contacts  with  financial  professionals  in  their 
regions,  the  Reserve  Banks  have  been  able  to  ensure  that  we  tailor  the  Partnership  for 
Progress program as closely as possible to the specific needs of the institutions participating 
as well as the customers they serve. This program illustrates the advantages of the Federal 
Reserve System's unique decentralized geographical structure, which consists of the Board 
of  Governors  in  Washington,  D.C.,  and  the  twelve  Reserve  Banks  that  each  represent  a 
different region of the country. We also consulted with a number of executives from minority 
depository  institutions  to  better  understand  the  unique  challenges  that  minority-owned 
depositories confront in raising capital, managing risks, and attracting the right talent. This 
process has been invaluable in helping us to target our efforts and to focus on designing a 
program that the minority depository institutions have told us is most crucial to them. 
In recent months, I have had an opportunity to see firsthand the challenges that communities 
are facing in various parts of the country, which has underscored to me the importance of 
BIS Review 92/2008 
 1
programs  like  Partnership  for  Progress.  I  have  met  with  local  community  groups,  bankers, 
housing advocates, counseling agencies, and state and local government officials in many 
cities, including Atlanta, Boston, Cincinnati, Cleveland, Las Vegas, Miami, Minneapolis, and 
Philadelphia.  As  I  planned  for  my  participation  in  this  conference,  one  example  stood  out. 
While  in  Atlanta,  I  visited  a  predominantly  African-American  community.  In  this  community 
that  spanned  several  miles,  there  were  a  number  of  vacant  homes,  conditions  mirroring 
those that I have seen in other neighborhoods. However, what was different in this case, and 
quite  disappointing,  was  that  not  a  single  financial  institution  was  within  view.  This  lack  of 
local  financial  institution  presence  is  a  problem  that  is  not  unique  to  African-American 
communities.  Indeed,  this  absence  occurs  far  too  frequently  in  predominantly  minority 
communities.  Our  new  program  is  intended  to  enhance  the  vital  role  that  minority-owned 
institutions can play in making financial services more available and in providing access to 
credit in historically underserved communities. 
At the core of our program, we have implemented a series of web-based modules designed 
to assist banks in addressing three distinctive development stages: (1) starting a bank, (2) 
managing its transition from a start-up to an established bank, and (3) building shareholder 
value once a bank has been established on a sound footing. These easy-to-use modules are 
presented  on  the  program's  dedicated  website  –  http://www.fedpartnership.gov/  –  and  are 
available for your review and use at any time.  
The first module of the program, "Starting a Bank," provides useful guidance on the factors 
that must be considered in chartering a new bank. It includes background information that 
details  regulatory  capital  requirements,  discusses  the  steps  required  to  file  an  application, 
and  explains  the  responsibilities  of  a  bank's  board  of  directors.  The  module  has  video 
narratives  of  some  of  the  key  topics  to  provide  additional  insights  into,  for  instance,  the 
strategic  importance  of  strong  capital  for  all  financial  institutions.  Since  the  program  was 
launched, "Start a Bank" has been among the most popular pages on the website.  
The second module, "Managing Transition," focuses on the benefits that a bank can derive 
from well-planned growth. Because maintaining competitive products and services is a very 
important  aspect  of  managing  growth,  we  have  included  a  video  clip  on  how  minority 
depository institutions can use the natural branding inherent in their mission to stay ahead of 
the  competition  and  differentiate  themselves.  This  module  provides  some  examples  of 
approaches  and  strategies  to  establishing  a  bank  that  have  been  successfully  followed  by 
other new institutions to achieve stable and profitable performance.  
The third and final module, "Growing Shareholder Value," is designed to help more-mature 
institutions achieve an even stronger financial footing and improve shareholder value. This 
module  addresses  key 
topics,  such  as  corporate  governance  and  performance 
measurement, that can help to ensure that management remains on target with the overall 
goals of the organization. Given that most minority depository institutions are at this stage of 
life-cycle  development,  we  expect  the  topics  in  this  segment,  such  as  "Demographic 
Analysis," "New Product Implementation," and "Outsourcing and Vendor Management," to be 
particularly useful.  
We expect minority institutions will use the program to help them navigate three of the most 
challenging  periods  in  the  life  cycle  of  any  financial  institution.  I  expect  that  the  program, 
which  draws  on  insights  from  economics,  accounting,  finance,  and  regulatory  compliance, 
will become a valuable resource for institutions at different stages of their development. In 
order  to  further  expand  the  support  that  we  can  offer  to  these  institutions,  the  Federal 
Reserve also plans to conduct periodic training sessions for interested participants that will 
address  topics  of  particular  concern  and  relevance  to  minority  depositories  and  their  bank 
holding companies. 
2 
 BIS Review 92/2008
We also have designated Partnership for Progress contacts in each of the twelve Reserve 
Bank districts and at the Board to answer questions and coordinate assistance for institutions 
requesting guidance.1 I hope that you will consider contacting us for support or to provide 
additional  suggestions  for  improving  this  evolving  program.  We  are  pleased  with  the  initial 
feedback  we  have  received  since  the  program's  launch  and  will  continue  to  fine-tune  and 
enhance the program over time. In that respect, we look forward to continuing to work with 
you to make this exciting program even more effective. 
Home Ownership and Equity Protection Act  
I  would  now  like  to  turn  to  important  new  consumer  protections  that  the  Federal  Reserve 
Board adopted earlier this week. These new rules, which implement HOEPA, were put into 
place  to  protect  consumers  and  to  help  prevent  a  recurrence  of  the  problems  that  we  are 
now facing. The current wave of foreclosures is taking a very real toll on families and their 
communities, no place more so than in predominantly minority communities, where subprime 
loans were particularly common. 
The  U.S.  mortgage  market  has  seen  rapid  innovation  in  recent  years.  Changes,  such  as 
automated underwriting models, the evolution of the secondary markets, and specialization, 
have  had  many  positive  effects.  Some  changes  in  practices,  however,  have  not  been  so 
salutary. Abusive loans that strip borrowers' equity or cause them to lose their homes should 
not  be  tolerated.  Too  many  homeowners  and  communities  are  suffering  today  because  of 
these practices, and the Federal Reserve Board's rules will better protect consumers while 
preserving their access to credit as they make some of the most important financial decisions 
of their lives. 
Last December, the Board proposed changes using our authority under the Home Ownership 
and  Equity  Protection  Act.  In  formulating  that  proposal,  the  Board  sought  a  wide  range  of 
input  and  information  through  hearings  and  meetings  throughout  the  country.  In  response, 
we received, and considered, over 4,500 comment letters sent to us from community groups, 
industry participants, consumer advocates, and other interested individuals. We engaged in 
outreach  to  commenters  to  get  clarification  of  their  concerns  and  weigh  competing 
viewpoints. We gathered available data and conducted updated analyses. We undertook on-
the-ground consumer testing, which has proven to be an invaluable tool for us in determining 
policy effectiveness, to gauge the practical effects of one of the proposed rules on individual 
consumers.  Listening  carefully  to  the  commenters,  collecting  and  analyzing  data,  and 
undertaking consumer testing, I believe, have led to more-effective and improved final rules.  
Our goal throughout this process has been to protect borrowers from practices that are unfair 
or deceptive and to preserve the availability of credit from responsible mortgage lenders.  
These  rules  expand  upon  interagency  guidance  issued  last  year  on  subprime  loans.  That 
guidance,  however,  only  focused  on  certain  specific  subprime  products,  hybrid  adjustable-
rate mortgages, such as so called 2/28s and 3/27s, and only applied to federally supervised 
institutions.  Our  rules  now  apply  much  more  broadly  to  cover  all  higher-priced  mortgages, 
including virtually all closed-end subprime loans secured by a consumer's principal dwelling, 
and to all mortgage originators. These rules also cover a broad range of issues: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
lenders' assessment of consumers' ability to repay loans, 
lending with little or no documentation of income, 
prepayment penalties, 
escrow accounts for property taxes and insurance, 
                                                 
1   On the Partnership for Progress program website. 
BIS Review 92/2008 
 3
 mortgage servicing practices, 
coercion of appraisers,  
misleading or deceptive advertising practices, and 
disclosure  of  Truth-in-Lending  cost  disclosures  early  enough  to  help  consumers 
shop for a mortgage. 
I'd now like to focus in more detail on some key features of this wide-ranging set of rules and 
discuss a few of the most important changes that we have made since our proposal this past 
December because I think they are illustrative of how we approached these issues. 
On  one  issue,  loan  affordability,  we  proposed  a  rule  that  would  have  required  a  lender  to 
make sure that a borrower could afford the monthly payments before a loan is made. This 
step sounds like common sense, but unfortunately, as some loan originators pushed off more 
and more of the risk to investors, they made increasingly riskier loans to people who simply 
could not afford them. So we proposed a rule to address that problem, and it spelled out how 
a lender should assess this ability to repay, building on the earlier interagency guidance on 
subprime loans. Lenders would have violated the proposed rule if they engaged in a pattern 
or practice of making loans without considering consumers' repayment ability.  
During  the  public  notice  period,  we  received  a  number  of  comments  on  the  "pattern  or 
practice" element of the proposed rule, and we conducted further outreach to both consumer 
advocates and industry participants. Many advocates objected to this heavy burden of proof, 
calling into question the effectiveness of the intended consumer protection. Some mortgage 
lenders, however, suggested that the "pattern or practice" provision did not provide a safe 
harbor  that  would  ensure  compliance  and  that  their  procedures  for  compliance  would,  by 
necessity, be equally robust under either version of the rule. At the end of the day, we agreed 
that this provision would have limited the intended effectiveness of the rule and that removing 
it,  along  with  clarifying  other  requirements,  would  not  impede  the  availability  of  credit  to 
borrowers.  Accordingly,  the  final  rule  establishes  a  lender's  responsibility  to  assess  a 
borrower's ability to repay on every loan originated, effectively giving wronged consumers a 
private right of action without demonstrating that their case was part of a broader pattern. 
In  addition,  the  new  rule  requires  that  the  lender  take  into  account  future,  predictable 
changes  in  payments  in  determining  repayment  ability.  A  lender  complies,  in  part,  by 
assessing repayment ability based on the highest scheduled payment in the first seven years 
of the loan. For example, on a 5-1 ARM with a payment for the first five years based on a 
discounted  interest  rate,  the  lender  would  use  the  scheduled  payment  in  the  sixth  and 
seventh years, which is based on the fully indexed rate.  
Another  element  of  our  proposal  that  received  many  comments  was  a  rule  limiting 
prepayment  penalties.  On  the  one  hand,  numerous  commenters  argued  that  prepayment 
penalties  can  result  in  lower  interest  rates  paid  by  the  borrower.  Although  there  are 
exceptions  I  will  mention  in  a  moment,  a  number  of  studies  have  found  that  loans  with 
prepayment  penalties  carry  lower  rates  or  annual  percentage  rates  (APRs)  than  loans 
without prepayment penalties having similar credit risk characteristics.2 On the other hand, 
the rate benefit was called into question by many, who asserted that prepayment penalties 
                                                 
2   Chris Mayer, Tomasz Piskorski, and Alexei Tchistyi (2008), "The Inefficiency of Refinancing: Why Prepayment 
Penalties Are Good for Risky Borrowers", Gregory Elliehausen, Michael E. Staten, and Jevgenijs Steinbuks 
(2008), "The Effect of Prepayment Penalties on the Pricing of Subprime Mortgages", Journal of Economics 
and  Business,  vol.  60  (Jan.-Feb.),  pp.  33-46;  Michael  LaCour-Little  (2007),  "Prepayment  Penalties  in 
Residential Mortgage Contracts: A Cost-Benefit Analysis," unpublished paper, January; Richard F. DeMong 
and James E. Burroughs, (2005), "Prepayment Fees Lead to Lower Interest Rates", but see Keith S. Ernst 
from  Prepayment  Penalties  on  Subprime 
(2005), 
Mortgages," research 
January), 
http://www.responsiblelending.org/pdfs/rr005-PPP_Interest_Rate-0105.pdf. 
Interest  Rate  Benefits 
(Durham,  NC:  Center 
"Borrowers  Gain  No 
report, 
for  Responsible 
Lending, 
4 
 BIS Review 92/2008
may  lock  borrowers  into  unaffordable  loans,  particularly  adjustable-rate  loans  whose 
payments  may  change  dramatically.  Prepayment  penalties  were  also  criticized  because  of 
the  way  they  reinforce  another  potentially  abusive  practice  –  yield  spread  premiums,  or 
YSPs. Some lenders' rate sheets show that mortgage brokers can earn bigger YSPs, which 
are  essentially  commissions,  by  increasing  consumers'  interest  rates,  and  the  biggest 
increases are allowed only if a loan contains a prepayment penalty.  
After an exhaustive analysis of the issue and all available data, the Board concluded that the 
costs and benefits of prepayment penalty provisions on higher-priced mortgages depend, to 
an important extent, on the structure of the loan. It has been common in the subprime market 
to structure loans to have a short expected life span. This aim has been achieved by building 
in a significant payment increase just a few years after loan consummation. With respect to 
subprime loans designed to have shorter life spans, the injuries from prepayment provisions 
are potentially the most serious as well as the most difficult for a reasonable consumer to 
avoid.  Moreover,  according  to  research,  the  rate  reduction  for  a  prepayment  penalty 
provision on such short-lived loans is smaller and, in absolute terms, quite limited. For these 
loans,  therefore,  the  Board  concluded  that  the  injuries  caused  by  prepayment  penalty 
provisions outweigh their benefits, and we did ban them for these loans – specifically, loans 
in which the principal-and-interest payment can change within the first four years.  
With respect to subprime loans structured to have longer expected life spans, however, the 
Board concluded that the potential for harm from prepayment penalties is lower relative to 
potential benefits, warranting restrictions but not a ban. Our analyses indicate that for fixed-
rate  loans,  borrowers  can  obtain  meaningful  interest-rate  reductions  on  loans  that  contain 
provisions  for  prepayment  penalties,  and  performance  on  these  loans  has  typically  been 
superior. These factors generally reduce the negative impact of prepayment penalties, so for 
these loans, we added a restriction limiting the length of the prepayment penalty period to no 
more than two years.  
Another  change  has  to do  with  how  we  define  the  loans  that  we  most  want  to  cover.  Our 
principal goal was to cover the vast bulk of the subprime market, where most of the problems 
have been and where consumers may need the most protection. The challenge is that there 
is no one accepted definition of what makes a loan "subprime."  
We  anticipated,  and  received,  a  number  of  comments  about  this  problem  and  sought 
solutions. We looked at available sources of data on mortgage rates and concluded that the 
best  source  for  our  purposes  is  a  survey  called  the  Primary  Mortgage  Market  Survey®, 
published  by  Freddie  Mac.  The  Federal  Reserve  will  publish  our  own  index,  called  the 
"average prime offer rate," that will be based on Freddie's survey and other market data, and 
if we need to adjust the index over time, we can. We will still cover nearly all of the subprime 
market plus a sizable fraction of the so-called Alt-A market, as we intended with our initial 
proposal,  but  the  new  approach  will  do  so  in  a  more  accurate  and  consistent  way,  and 
therefore  better  ensure  that  we  protect  at-risk  consumers  without  impinging  on  the  prime 
market. 
Protecting  borrowers  with  responsible  underwriting  standards  can  also  provide  a  broader 
benefit  of  enhancing  the  integrity  and  proper  functioning  of  the  mortgage  market  by 
increasing 
to  repay  by  underwriting  and 
documenting  income,  for  example,  can  help  to  reduce  investor  uncertainty  about  the 
performance of mortgage-backed securities. Effective consumer protection thus can produce 
a complementary benefit for consumers by helping to revive mortgage funding markets and 
potentially improving credit availability.  
Finally, I'd like to highlight one other change  that shows how hard it can sometimes be to 
craft  solutions  that  work.  In  December,  we  proposed  a  rule  that  we  hoped  would  address 
some of the problems posed by YSPs. The heart of the rule involved an agreement that the 
broker and borrower would sign early on that would spell out the broker's compensation and 
how they are paid. 
investor  confidence.  Ensuring 
that  ability 
BIS Review 92/2008 
 5
As the public comment period was under way, we began consumer testing to see how this 
process  would  actually  work.  We  engaged  a  firm  that  specializes  in  this  testing  and 
conducted a rapid round of tests this spring with individual consumers. The firm developed 
and tested a form in which the broker would agree to total compensation and make certain 
disclosures that we thought would help consumers make informed decisions. Throughout the 
testing, revisions were made to the form in an effort to improve comprehension. The testing 
revealed two problems. 
The  first  problem  is  that  many  participants  believed,  after  reading  the  disclosure,  that  the 
broker would be obliged to find them the lowest interest rate and best terms available, which 
is  not  true.  The  second  problem  was  that  many  participants  came  to  believe  that  working 
through  a  broker  would  cost  them  more  than  working  directly  with  a  lender,  which  is  not 
necessarily true either. The firm tried to correct these misunderstandings, but no matter what 
it did to change the language, the forms continued to confuse consumers more than inform 
them. 
Our consumer testing led us to the conclusion that our approach was not serving its intent – 
that is, to better inform consumers. We are continuing to try to find an approach that would 
be  effective,  but  we  did  not  want  to  hold  up  all  the  other  consumer  protections  while  we 
worked on it. As a result, we decided to withdraw the proposed provision on mortgage broker 
compensation,  and  we  will  continue  to  explore  other  approaches  as  part  of  the  ongoing 
update  of  our  mortgage  rules  already  under  way.  Some  may  have  preferred  that  we  stick 
with our proposal, but creating a rule that informed consumers in theory, but only served to 
confuse them in practice, would have helped no one. 
Conclusion 
In closing, I would like to underscore the Federal Reserve's commitment to preserving and 
supporting  minority  depository  institutions.  I  look  forward  to  continuing  our  constructive 
dialogue on finding the best and most practical ways to address the challenges that these 
banks confront. I am confident that we will be successful in ensuring that these companies 
remain strong and continue to provide critical financial support to their communities.  
I also want to stress that finalizing our HOEPA rules does not represent the end of our efforts 
to improve transparency and consumer protections in mortgage lending. We will continue to 
work diligently to determine how best to address the issue of yield spread premiums. Further, 
we  will  collaborate  with  our  partner  agencies  to  enforce  these  rules  and  to  monitor  their 
impact on the market to ensure that they are effective in achieving their goals of protecting 
borrowers  from  abusive  practices  and  preserving  the  availability  of  credit  from  responsible 
mortgage lenders. 
6 
 BIS Review 92/2008
