Jan F Qvigstad: Trends in monetary policy transparency – comments on 
Petra M Geraats' paper  
Speech by Mr Jan F Qvigstad, Deputy Governor of Norges Bank (Central Bank of Norway), 
at  the  conference  "International  Experience  with  the  Conduct  of  Monetary  Policy  under 
Inflation Targeting", hosted by Bank of Canada, Ottawa, 24 July 2008. 
The Charts in PDF-format can be found on the Norges Bank’s website. 
 The paper by Petra Geraats provides an up-to-date and thorough analysis of the trends in 
transparency during the last ten years. Her analysis confirms the general trend of improved 
transparency,  but  she  also  provides  an  interesting  analysis  of  the  differences  across 
alternative monetary policy regimes. I am sure Petra’s paper will be a key reference in future 
research and policy discussions on transparency.1  
As  discussed  in  the  paper,  transparency  can  be  motivated  both  by  accountability 
requirements  for  independent  central  banks,  and  by  the  purpose  of  enhancing  the 
effectiveness  of  monetary  policy.  Both  have  been  important  factors  behind  the  process  in 
Norges Bank towards increased transparency.  
It  is  now  widely  accepted  that  monetary  policy  works  mainly  through  private  agents’ 
expectations. The widespread influence of the New Keynesian model in academic research 
on  monetary  policy  and  the  trend  towards  using  DSGE  models  in  central  banks  have 
underpinned the focus on expectations. Michael Woodford puts it in a clear-cut way:2 “For 
not only do expectations about policy matter, […] very little else matters”. The interest rate 
set by central banks is normally a very short-term interest rate, which in itself has negligible 
effects on economic decisions. It is mainly expectations about future policy rates that affect 
market interest rates and thus economic decisions.  
Most central banks communicate future policy intentions in one way or another. The majority 
of  central  banks  communicate  indirectly  through  forecasts  based  on  technical  interest  rate 
assumptions,  and  by  giving  verbal  signals  about  future  interest  rate  decisions  in  policy 
statements  and  speeches.  With  such  indirect  communication,  the  market  participants  gain 
information  about  the  sign  of  future  interest  rate  decisions,  but  may  have  less  information 
about the size. Until November 2005, Norges Bank used technical interest rate assumptions 
in  the  inflation  forecasts,  but  also  on  some  occasions  commented  on  whether  the  Bank 
intended to follow a different policy than what seemed to be reflected in market interest rates. 
Thus,  the  Bank  gave  signals  about  the  sign  of  future  policy  intentions  relative  to  market 
expectations,  but  not  on  the  size.3  From  November  2005,  Norges  Bank  started  to  use 
endogenous  interest  rate  forecasts  in  the  Monetary  Policy  Report.  Norges  Bank  was  the 
                                                 
1   This  process  has  also  been  acknowledged  by  the  Norwegian  parliament:  “The  majority  think  that  it  is  a 
prerequisite for an effective monetary policy that the central bank is open about the interest rate forecasts, and 
are  satisfied  with  the  fact  that  Norges  Bank  emphasises  this.”  (Innstilling  frå  finanskomiteen  om 
Kredittmeldinga 2007, Innst.S.nr.274, s.11. 
2   Woodford,  M.  (2005),  “Central-Bank  Communication  and  Policy  Effectiveness,”  paper  presented  at  FRB 
Kansas City Symposium on “The Greenspan Era: Lessons for the Future,” Jackson Hole, Wyoming, August 
25-27, 2005. 
3   Providing forecasts based on both a constant interest rate and market expectations give information not only 
about the sign but may also give some guidance about the range. See, for example, the following citation from 
the Bank of England’s Inflation Report of February 2008: “Under market interest rates, the central projection 
for inflation was a little above the target in the medium term, while under constant interest rates, it was below 
the target.” This suggests that the likely interest rate path lies somewhere between a constant rate and market 
expectations. 
BIS Review 94/2008 
 1
second central bank with endogenous interest rate assumptions, following the Reserve Bank 
of New Zealand, who introduced it in 1997. More recently, the Swedish Riksbank, the Czech 
National  Bank,  and  the  Central  Bank  of  Iceland  have  also  started  to  publish  interest  rate 
forecasts.  
Publishing  endogenous  interest  rate  paths  raises  a  number  of  issues,  and  there  is 
disagreement  among  both  academics  and  central  bankers  on  whether  being  that  precise 
about future policy intentions is beneficial or not. The key issue in the debate is whether such 
communication implies guidance or noise. Some of the arguments for transparency relate to 
the  beneficial  effects  when  private  agents  understand  the  central  bank’s  reaction  function, 
such that market interest rates will adjust more appropriately to economic news.  
Publishing the interest rate forecast may not be sufficient to communicate the central bank’s 
reaction function, as one specific forecast does not in itself convey much information about 
how the central bank responds to various shocks. One could argue that three ingredients are 
required; 1) the forecasts, 2) how the central bank responds to shocks, and 3) the criteria 
underlying the forecasts and reaction function.  
The  first  two  ingredients  provide  efficiency  in  monetary  policy,  in  the  sense  that  private 
agents  knowing  the  central  bank’s  assessments  and  reaction  function  can  respond 
appropriately  to  economic  developments.  The  third  ingredient  contributes  to  a  better 
understanding  of  the  objectives  of  monetary  policy  and  the  link  between  objectives  and 
policy.  This  could  underpin  the  credibility  of  the  reaction  pattern,  and  is  also  important  for 
democratic  accountability.  In  addition,  the  reaction  function  could  change  over  time,  for 
example  due  to  a  change  in  how  the  economy  works  or  an  improvement  of  the 
understanding of economic mechanisms. The criteria could then give some guidance to the 
public on how and why the reaction function might change. 
Let  me  briefly  explain  how  Norges  Bank  communicates  the  three  ingredients  of  our 
communication, and let me start with the forecasts. Chart 1 shows the forecasts of the key 
variables.  The  uncertainty  bands  are  based  on  model  simulations  and  reflect  estimated 
variances of the different shocks. (Note that there is also a fan chart for historical values of 
the  output  gap,  since  there  is  also  uncertainty  about  potential  output  in  retrospect.) 
Communicating uncertainty through fan charts in the inflation reports was introduced by the 
Bank of England in 1997. While the fan charts for inflation illustrate that inflation cannot be 
controlled perfectly by the central bank, this argument does not apply for the policy interest 
rate.  The  fan  chart  for  the  interest  rate  serves  a  different  purpose:  It  illustrates  that  the 
interest rate path is not a promise, but a forecast which is uncertain. Moreover, it reflects the 
central bank’s adjustment of the interest rate as a response to new economic developments, 
which are subject to uncertainty. Petra Geraats argues that central banks should not provide 
forecasts for the policy rate, since this could be confused with a commitment. She suggests 
that  central  banks  instead  could  have  forecasts  for  short-term  market  interest  rates.  Our 
experience  is  that  market  participants  and  the  public  understand  that  our  forecast  for  the 
policy rate is indeed a forecast and not a promise. Due to the close relationship between the 
policy rate and short-term market rates, it should not, in my view, matter very much whether 
it is the policy rate or a short-term market rate that is projected.  
Let me now turn to the second ingredient; how Norges Bank responds to new developments 
(“shocks”).  Monetary  policy  becomes  more  effective  if  market  participants  can  react 
adequately to economic news. In order to convey a broader reaction pattern, Norges Bank 
indicates how the Bank would react should certain disturbances occur. However, since no 
central  bank  follows  a  specific  reaction  function  mechanically,  it  would  be  misleading  to 
present  a  single  reaction  function  specified  mathematically.  Judgement  is  always  applied 
when  responding  to  shocks,  and  a  specific  reaction  function  will  give  a  very  simplified 
representation of the reaction pattern. There is thus a trade-off between misleading precision 
and uninformative generality. Norges Bank tries to balance this trade-off by applying various 
approaches to communicating the reaction pattern.  
2 
 BIS Review 94/2008
First,  the  Bank  presents  alternative  scenarios  in  the  Monetary  Policy  Report.  Chart  2 
illustrates the interest rate response to a positive and negative shock to inflation respectively. 
The exact specification of the shocks in the illustrations can differ somewhat from one Report 
to another, but the shifts in the interest rate, and the corresponding scenarios for inflation and 
the output gap give an indication of how the Bank responds. The shifts are specified such 
that, if shocks of the same type and size should occur, the alternative interest rate path is the 
Bank’s best estimate of how the interest rate would be set in such a situation.  
In addition to presenting policy reactions to new developments, the Monetary Policy Report 
includes  an  account  of  the  disturbances  that  have  lead  to  a  change  in  the  interest  rate 
forecast from the previous Report. For example, we see from Chart 3 that our interest rate 
forecast was revised upwards in the Monetary Policy Report 2 published in June. The shocks 
contributing to this revision are illustrated in Chart 4. The black line is the difference between 
the current interest rate path and the path in the previous Report.  
The “interest rate account” is a technical model-based illustration of how the change in the 
interest rate forecast from the previous Report can be decomposed by different exogenous 
shocks to the model. The illustration shows how changes in the assessment of international 
and domestic economic variables as well as changes in shock processes have affected the 
interest  rate  path,  and  is  based  on  our  core  forecasting  model.  Since  the  “interest  rate 
account”  follows  from  a  specific  model,  the  exact  decomposition  is  model-dependent  and 
should thus be interpreted as a model-based illustration rather than a precise description of 
the  Executive  Board’s  reaction  pattern.  Notwithstanding  this  reservation,  the  “interest  rate 
account”  serves  several  purposes.  First,  it  gives  information  about  the  reaction  function. 
Second, it provides a compact summary of the Monetary Policy Report. Third, it is a tool of 
communicating  commitment.  Norges  Bank  aims  at  influencing  expectations  in  order  to 
stabilize inflation. In this respect, our policy has elements of commitment. The interest rate 
forecast should reflect economic news and not re-optimisation of monetary policy. With an 
“interest rate account”, the public is better able to check whether the central bank honours 
past commitments. 
Let me turn to the criteria underlying the interest rate forecast and reaction function. Among 
the few central banks that publish interest rate forecasts, it is common to communicate these 
in quite general terms.4 When formulating the criteria, there is a trade-off between being too 
general, which does not provide very much information, and being too specific, which might 
overly  restrict  policymakers’  room  for  manoeuvre  and  be  less  robust  to  changes  in  the 
economic  landscape.  The  Bank  has  developed  a  set  of  criteria  for  an  appropriate  interest 
rate  path.  The  criteria  serve  both  the  purpose  of  communicating  the  reasoning  behind  the 
interest rate path to the public and of providing an agenda for the Board discussion, which 
makes it easier to decide on a particular path.  
The criteria used by Norges Bank to assess the interest rate reflect policymakers’ general 
views and assessments. They are therefore not “carved in stone”, but can be changed and 
modified  due  to  new  insights.  Currently,  the  Bank  uses  five  criteria,  which  can  be 
summarized as follows: 
                                                 
4   For  example,  the  Swedish  Riksbank  communicates  the  criteria  behind  the  forecasts  as  follows:  “The 
Riksbank’s forecasts are based on the assumption that the repo rate will develop in such a way that monetary 
policy  can  be  regarded  as  well-balanced.  In  the  normal  case,  a  well-balanced  monetary  policy  means  that 
inflation is close to the inflation target two years ahead without there being excessive fluctuations in inflation 
and the real economy.” (See p.3 in the Riksbank’s Monetary Policy Report). 
BIS Review 94/2008 
 3
Achievement of the inflation target 
1.  
The interest rate should be set with a view to stabilising inflation close to the target in the 
medium  term.  The  horizon  will  depend  on  disturbances  to  which  the  economy  is  exposed 
and the effects on the prospects for the path for inflation and the real economy.  
Reasonable balance between the inflation gap and the output gap 
2.  
Norges  Bank  conducts  flexible  inflation  targeting,  which  implies  that  stabilising  inflation 
around  the  target  should  be  weighted  against  stability  in  the  real  economy.  The  chosen 
interest  rate  path  should  therefore  imply  a  reasonable  balance  between  the  objectives  if 
there  is  a  conflict  in  the  short  term  between  stabilizing  inflation  around  the  target  and 
stabilizing the real economy. What is meant by a “reasonable” balance is obviously a matter 
of judgment and is an important element in Board discussions.  
In  the  assessment,  potential  effects  of  asset prices,  such as  property  prices,  equity  prices 
and the krone exchange rate on the prospects for output, employment and inflation are also 
taken into account. Assuming the criteria above have been satisfied, the following additional 
criteria are useful: 
Robustness 
3.  
Interest rate developments should result in acceptable developments in inflation and output 
also under alternative, albeit not unrealistic, assumptions concerning the economic situation 
and the functioning of the economy.  
Gradualism and consistency 
4.  
Interest rate adjustments should normally be gradual and consistent with the Bank’s previous 
response pattern.  
Cross-checking  
5.  
It is important to cross-check the Board’s judgments concerning the interest rate path against 
other information. One natural cross-check is market expectations about the future interest 
rate, as represented by implied forward interest rates (adjusted for risk and term premia). In 
addition,  simple  interest  rate  rules  like  the  Taylor  rule  and  other  variants  suggested  in  the 
literature provide potentially useful cross-checks.  
Experiences 
What  are  our  experiences  of  our  communication  approach?  The  ultimate  objective  of  our 
communication is to achieve better outcomes in terms of improved stability in inflation and 
the real economy. However, with less than three years of being fully transparent about our 
future  policy  intentions,  it  is  too  early  to  draw  a  conclusion  regarding  macroeconomic 
stability.  
An  intermediate  objective  of  communication  is  to  provide  a  better  understanding  of  the 
Bank’s reaction pattern. One test of this to consider the volatility of market interest rates on 
the day Norges Bank decides the interest rate. If the new communication approach has been 
successful, one should expect that the interest rate decisions are more predictable.  
Chart 5 shows the magnitude of market rate changes on the day the interest rate is decided. 
We see that volatility in market interest rates has on average been smaller after we started 
publishing  our  interest  rate  forecasts.  Although  one  cannot  exclude  the  possibility  that  the 
4 
 BIS Review 94/2008
reduction in volatility is caused by other factors than policy communication, it seems that our 
reaction pattern has become somewhat better understood.  
Petra Geraats argues that it is important not to delay policy decisions that are not expected 
by the market just in order to appear predictable. This, she argues, could impair the market’s 
understanding  of  the  central  bank’s  reaction  pattern  and  thus  reduce  predictability  in  the 
medium and long run. I fully share Petra’s view. As a general rule, the central bank should do 
what  it  considers  to  be  the  appropriate  thing  to  do  in  a  given  economic  situation. 
Predictability is not a goal in itself. However, one caveat to this rule is that in situations where 
there  is  unusually  high  uncertainty  and  turmoil  in  financial  markets,  it  could  sometimes  be 
unwise to add more uncertainty through unanticipated policy decisions. 
In her survey, Petra Geraats points out that transparency can have both information effects 
and incentive effects. One incentive effect which is not mentioned in the paper, but which I 
believe is very important in practice, is the effect transparency has on the internal decision 
process.  This  effect  is  difficult  to  detect  for  outside  observers,  but  I  have  observed  how 
transparency  has  changed  the  motivation  and  discipline  of  the  economists  within  Norges 
Bank. By publishing our own interest rate forecast, each sector expert will see how his or her 
judgment might affect policy. Moreover, by following the principle that what is communicated 
externally  should  reflect  the  internal  decision  process,  we  need  to  think  extra  hard  about 
what  we  do  internally.  Transparency  makes  the  public  better  capable  of  evaluating  the 
central bank’s analyses and policy assessments. If these are not of sufficient quality, we will 
be criticised (for example by the Norges Bank Watch, of which Petra Geraats was a member 
in  2004).  Public  scrutiny  disciplines  the  internal  process  and,  I  believe,  results  in  better 
monetary policy. 
BIS Review 94/2008 
 5
