T T Mboweni: Monetary policy, inflation targeting and inflation pressures 
Address by Mr T T Mboweni, Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, to the Bureau for 
Economic Research Annual Conference, Johannesburg, 22 May 2008. 
Honoured Guests 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
 Introduction 
1.  
The monetary policy framework in South Africa is facing its most severe challenge since the 
inception  of  inflation  targeting  in  the  year  2000.  Inflation  pressures  have  been  building  up 
strongly, and the most recent CPIX figure of 10,1 per cent is significantly above our inflation 
target  and  inconsistent  with  price  stability.  These  pressures  originated  primarily  from 
exogenous shocks such as oil, food and electricity price developments. However it is clear 
that  inflation  pressures  have  become  more  generalised,  as  evidenced  by  the  continuous 
upward trajectory in the core indicators. For example, in June 2006 CPIX excluding food and 
energy measured 2,5 per cent. By April this year it had risen to 5,6 per cent, and indications 
are that this measure could rise further.  
Of  great  concern  is  the  significant  deterioration  of  inflation  expectations,  which  will  give 
further impetus to these inflationary pressures. Over the past year inflation expectations have 
drifted upwards gradually, but nevertheless appeared to remain anchored within the inflation 
target range. This picture has changed significantly in the first quarter of this year. We have 
now observed the biggest increase in inflation expectations since the inception of the inflation 
expectations  survey  eight  years  ago.  Reference  here  is  made  to  the  BER  inflation 
expectations survey conducted on behalf of the South African Reserve Bank (SARB). This, 
together  with  the  possible  upward  trend  in  unit  labour  costs,  does  not  bode  well  for  the 
inflation outlook going forward. 
In response to these developments, and to the robust domestic demand that we have been 
experiencing,  the  monetary  policy  stance  of  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank  has  been 
tightened since June 2006 by a cumulative 450 basis points. The SARB, more specifically 
the Monetary Policy Committee (MPC), has been criticised by some commentators now that 
inflation has breached the upper limit of the target range, and this is interpreted as a sign of 
lack of determination, commitment, and the will to achieve and maintain price stability. At the 
same  time,  others  have  suggested  that  the  degree  to  which  the  SARB  has  responded  to 
those inflation developments has been excessive, too strict, dogmatic like inflation targeting 
“nutters”, insensitive to the plight of the poor, that monetary policy is after-all powerless in the 
face of supply side shocks, and that these actions have demonstrated a lack of concern for 
growth and employment in South Africa. Nothing can be further from the truth. 
The inflation targeting framework 
2.  
At this point it may be useful to make a few comments about inflation targeting in general. 
Some  recent  statements  from  many  commentators  about  the  appropriateness  of  inflation 
targeting  often  seem  to  misunderstand  what  the  framework  is  about.  Here  we  wish  to 
emphasise the word framework, because that is what it is. It is not a policy, and it is not an 
instrument. It is not a dogma. Take away inflation targeting, and we will still have monetary 
policy, we will still have the same instruments of monetary policy, and the Bank will still have 
a  constitutional  mandate  to  maintain  low  inflation.  Furthermore,  any  central  bank  worth  its 
salt would want in any case to achieve and maintain price stability, meaning low and stable 
sustainable inflation levels. So even if we did not have an explicit inflation target as set out in 
BIS Review 65/1008 
 1
the inflation targeting framework, we would still want to pursue price stability. Central banks 
are in the business of price stability. Our monetary policy objectives would therefore remain 
the same, and we would face the same challenges as we confront today on how to respond 
to exogenous shocks and second round effects. It should be noted that it is not only formal 
inflation  targeting  central  banks  that  successfully  pursue  a  low  inflation  objective.  The  US 
Fed and the European Central Bank are cases in point. 
The advantage of an inflation targeting framework is that it provides an anchor for inflation 
expectations,  as  it  makes  explicit  the  goal  of  monetary  policy.  That  publicly  stated  goal  is 
very, very significant in that it also binds politicians to abide by it. This is in our case ex-ante 
coordination  of  policy.  The  more  anchored  expectations  are  the  more  flexibility  monetary 
policy has in responding to exogenous shocks. But announcing a target on its own does not 
guarantee success. It is not a magic wand. It has to be backed up by appropriate actions to 
build monetary policy credibility in the eyes of the public. Credibility has to be earned, it is not 
ordained. 
Those  who  criticise  inflation  targeting  often  argue  that  the  framework  is  a  straight-jacket 
which induces procyclical monetary policy particularly in the presence of supply-side shocks. 
Whether or not this is the case is an empirical question for debate, and is determined in part 
by the flexibility with which monetary policy is implemented. There is in our view, a distinction 
between what is referred to as strict and flexible inflation targeting. Strict inflation targeting 
central banks (or what Governor Mervyn King of the Bank of England has termed “inflation 
nutters”) would give no weight to short-term output considerations in the conduct of monetary 
policy.  Most  central  banks,  including  the  SARB,  regard  themselves  as  flexible  inflation 
targeting  institutions.  By  this  we  mean  that  there  is  factored  into  our  decision-making 
systems concern about what the output costs of our monetary policy actions are going to be. 
In the jargon of economists, there is some weight on output variability in the Bank’s objective 
function.  The  inflation  objective  is  not  discarded,  but  rather  there  is  a  more  pragmatic 
approach  to  the  speed  with  which  inflation  is  brought  back  to  within  the  target  range. 
However  there  is  a  trade-off  between  an  excessively  long  period,  which  would  reduce 
credibility  and  raise  questions  about  the  commitment  of  the  monetary  authorities  to  low 
inflation,  and  an  excessively  short  period  in  which  real  costs  may  be  high.  The  rest  is 
judgement for which a central bank must and shall be held accountable. 
Inflation targeting has been an increasingly popular framework since it was first adopted by 
New  Zealand  in  1990.  Most  studies  have  shown  that  it  has  been  a  useful  framework  for 
assisting in bringing down and maintaining inflation at low levels. Currently inflation targeting 
is  probably  facing  its  most  severe  challenge,  as  international  oil  prices  have  quadrupled 
since the beginning of 2004, and global food and other commodity prices are experiencing 
persistent  strong  increases.  Whereas  a  few  years  ago  most  countries  were  within  their 
inflation targets, this unfortunately and regrettably is not the case today. The latest data show 
that 3 out of 7 industrial countries, and 4 out of 16 emerging market economies are within 
their  targets,  although  the  extent  and  persistence  of  the  deviation  differs  somewhat.  Does 
this mean that inflation targeting has failed? The true test of the framework will be whether 
inflation  expectations  can  be  sufficiently  anchored  to  weather  the  current  inflationary 
pressures, and facilitate a return to within the officially set targets.  
Dealing with shocks  
3.  
The nature of the original cost pressures that are facing the economy is well known. These 
pressures  –  food  and  energy  –  do  not  appear  to  be  cyclical.  This  might  be  a  debatable 
assertion.  We  are  facing  a  significant  and  probably  a  permanent  change  in  relative  prices 
globally. We also have to be concerned about pricing and unit labour cost responses to these 
relative price changes. If producers simply pass on these increases, and if wages increase to 
compensate labour for these increases without higher levels of productivity growth, and if we 
2 
 BIS Review 65/2008
allow  this  process  to  take  effect,  inflation  expectations  will  deteriorate  and  generalised 
inflation will accelerate. We cannot simply sit back idly, the stakes are too high. 
However,  dealing  with  supply  side  shocks  always  poses  difficulties  for  monetary  policy 
makers. The situation we are facing now differs in important respects from the standard case 
which sees either a shock which is expected to reverse, in which case not much action is 
required, or a discrete one-off change in relative prices. In the latter more difficult case, the 
usual response is to look through the inevitable impact on measured inflation, and once this 
change is through the system, inflation should ideally return to its normal levels. If inflation 
expectations are firmly entrenched within the inflation target range, then very little response 
may  be  required  from  the  monetary  authorities,  whose  main  objective  under  such 
circumstances  would  be  to  ensure  that  this  process  does  not  feed  through  to  more 
generalised inflation pressures. 
The challenge, however, is that we are not being faced by a discrete once-off event. Rather, 
we are facing what can best be described as a rolling or continuous shock. International oil 
prices have been on an upward trend since 2004, apart from some moderation in the latter 
half of 2006. Oil price increases have almost consistently surprised on the upside, requiring a 
continuous revision of our assumption and thus the forecasts. Indications are that food price 
inflation  is  expected  to  continue  to  remain  high  for  some  considerable  time.  This  is  most 
definitely  not  seen  to  be  a  temporary  phenomenon.  Similarly,  electricity  price  increases 
significantly in excess of the average inflation rate are expected to become a multiyear event, 
as  the  process  of  increasing  generating  capacity  is  rolled  out.  These  are  unusual 
developments.  Unusual responses might  be  necessary.  Things,  it  seems,  might  get  worse 
before they become better. We are going through bad times. 
The magnitude of these inflationary pressures has been such that a breach of the target was 
inevitable. Whereas we have to accept that we will be unavoidably outside the target range 
for longer than we would wish, we are determined to bring CPIX inflation back to within the 
target  range  within  a  reasonable  time  period.  If  we  seem  to  be  abrogating  our 
responsibilities,  inflation  expectations  could  get  out  of  hand,  price-setting  and  unit  labour 
costs could become excessive and we could experience an inflation spiral. As noted earlier, 
we have already seen evidence of second-round effects, deteriorating inflation expectations 
and  elevated  wage  demands  coming  through,  and  these  have  required  a  response  to 
prevent inflation getting out of hand. 
Has the monetary policy response been excessive? 
4.  
This raises the question of whether the SARB has gone for the overkill. There is no doubt 
that  the  tighter  stance  of  monetary  policy  has  caused  a  slowdown  in  domestic  household 
consumption expenditure. That is good. This is something that we wanted to achieve in order 
to moderate demand pressures in the economy. There are signs that output growth is also 
slowing  down,  but  this  is  not  solely  due  to  monetary  policy  actions  alone.  The  global 
economic  slowdown  and  electricity  supply  constraints  in  South  Africa  are  also  important 
variables influencing this outcome. Nevertheless we are of the view that output growth will 
decline  significantly  below  the  potential  growth  rate  of  the  economy  (4.5  per  cent),  but 
economic growth will continue to be underpinned by the massive infrastructure expenditure 
programme  that  is  currently  underway  to  improve  the  quality  of  our  transport  system, 
electricity  supply  and  telecommunications  networks.  These  initiatives  will  not  only  sustain 
growth but also increase the potential real GDP growth rate of the South African economy 
over  time.  The  forecast  of  the  South  African  National  Treasury  is  for  real  GDP  growth  to 
measure 4.0 per cent this year and to increase over the coming two years. That is not bad at 
all. Private sector forecasts are slightly less optimistic. The latest consensus forecast is a real 
GDP growth rate of 3.6 per cent for this year. While lower than in previous years, it is still 
relatively robust in the context of a weak global economy and overall domestic constraints. 
BIS Review 65/1008 
 3
From  a  technical  monetary  policy  perspective,  although  nominal  interest  rates  have  been 
increased  significantly,  real  rates  have  not,  and  in  fact  may  have  fallen  depending  on  the 
deflator used. Interest rates, in other words, have not increased by more than the increase in 
inflation. Does this mean that we have not been aggressive enough as some would argue? 
As  noted  earlier,  we  have  to  some  extent  allowed  for  first-round  effects  to  happen,  and 
therefore  it  may  have  been  inappropriate  to  have  responded  to  those  developments,  but 
rather pre-emptively focus on the second-round effects. 
Changing the target? 
5.  
A number of commentators have suggested that the inflation target range should be changed 
as a means of avoiding further tightening of the monetary policy stance. We do not support 
such a course of action. It would be very easy for government to announce tomorrow that our 
target has been changed from 3-6 per cent, to say 10-15 per cent. We would then be inside 
the target range, and for a short while no further interest rate action would be required. This 
would however signal that we are happy with inflation at these levels. But what would be the 
implication  of  setting  a  higher  target  range?  Almost  immediately  long-term  inflation 
expectations would be adjusted to these levels, and wage and price setting behaviour would 
be adjusted as well. Our inflation rate would most probably very soon be entrenched around 
the 15 per cent level, and in order to prevent it from rising further, we would very soon have 
to raise interest rates further. We cannot escape from the fact that a higher inflation trend 
requires even higher nominal interest rates. The increased risk premium associated with a 
higher  expected  inflation  may  result  in  even  higher  real  interest  rates.  There  can  be  no 
presumption that real interest rates with a higher target range will be any lower – they may in 
fact be higher.  
We cannot simply adjust the target range higher every time we move out of the existing one. 
The  ultimate  objective  is  low  inflation,  rather  than  to  be  within  a  target  range.  We  would 
rather  be  outside  a  low  target  range,  and  focus  on  getting  back  to  within  it,  than  define 
ourselves to within a high target range. We accept that we could be outside the target range 
for  longer  than  we  would  like  as  a  result  of  these  exogenous  shocks.  But  we  are 
nevertheless  determined  to  maintain  a  focus  on  the  inflation  target  range  and  get  back  to 
within  it  within  a  reasonable  time  frame.  Having  a  higher  target  will  not  only  reduce  our 
credibility and make South Africa a less attractive investment destination for foreign capital, it 
will  also  result  in  a  continuously  depreciating  exchange  rate,  as  our  inflation  rate  will  be 
significantly higher than that of our trading partners. This is turn would translate into further 
inflation pressures. 
Alternative proposals seek to redefine the target basket to exclude exogenous items such as 
food, electricity and petrol. That is a cop-out. In deciding on the appropriate monetary policy 
stance, we do look at various underlying core measures which do provide us with some idea 
of the underlying pressures in the economy. But we cannot ignore the headline figures which 
influence  inflation  expectation  and  other  pressure  points.  We  cannot  run  away  from  the 
problem and simply exclude a category every time its behaviour does not suit us. This will be 
a cosmetic change which will not help us get to grips with the underlying problem. We will 
also, most certainly, lose credibility in the eyes of investors (both domestic and international) 
as well as amongst global policy makers. This will not be helpful to South Africa’s poor or the 
South African economy generally. 
The explanation clause  
6.  
There  have  been  suggestions  that  we  invoke  the  explanation  clause as  a  means  to  avoid 
further monetary policy tightening. There appears to be confusion about the applicability of 
the  explanation  clause.  There  is  an  assumption  that  the  clause  relieves  us  of  the  need  to 
react to supply side shocks and that we do not have to worry about the inflation target. This 
4 
 BIS Review 65/2008
is a misinterpretation of the explanation clause. The clause is worded very carefully and it 
says that “when the economy is buffeted by a supply side shock similar to those envisaged 
by the original escape clause that will take CPIX inflation outside the target range (e.g. an oil 
price shock, a drought, a natural disaster, or financial contagion affecting the currency), at 
the  subsequent  meeting  of  the  Monetary  Policy  Committee,  the  SARB  will  fully  inform  the 
public of the nature of the “shock”, the anticipated impact on CPIX inflation and the monetary 
policy response to ensure that inflation returns to the target and the time frame over which 
this will occur.” 
There  are  two  important  points  worth  noting.  First,  the  clause  clearly  allows  for  us  to  be 
outside the target range because of first-round effects of supply side shocks. Second, it does 
not  relieve  us  of  the  responsibility  of  getting  inflation  back  to  within  the  target  range.  The 
clause clearly stipulates that if CPIX is out of the target range, we have to explain why, and 
what we are doing about it. This is something we do after each MPC meeting in any case. 
But it does not tell us that no effort should be made to ensure a return into the target range. 
CPIX is currently outside the target range primarily but not only as a result of factors beyond 
our control, and in line with the explanation clause, we are now taking strong steps to ensure 
that  CPIX  returns  to  within  the  target  range.  As  we  have  noted  in  our  most  recent  MPC 
statement, we currently expect CPIX to be back within the target range by the end of 2009. 
However, this is not an unconditional commitment. The outlook may deteriorate further in the 
light of new developments, and require a reassessment of the monetary policy stance. 
Conclusion 
7.  
We appear to be going through an extended adjustment in relative prices. The good news is 
that these relative price adjustments will eventually come to an end. The bad news is that we 
do not know when and what the long-term levels are going to be. Monetary policy decisions 
are made under conditions of uncertainty. Unfortunately, some periods are more uncertain 
than others. 
Given the extent of these supply-side shocks, no amount of monetary policy tightening could 
have prevented the first-round effects from emerging and a breach of the upper limit of the 
target range was unavoidable. However current evidence of more generalised inflation and 
higher expectations means that we have to be firm in our resolve to contain these pressures. 
The  Monetary  Policy  Committee  will  continue  to  implement  inflation  targeting  in  a  flexible 
manner.  While  at  times  reducing  inflation  may  lead  to  some  output  costs  in  the  short  run, 
achieving the long-term goal of price stability remains our primary objective. A low inflation 
environment supports growth as evidenced in South Africa’s growth rates in excess of 5 per 
cent  since  2004.  There  is  ample  evidence  that  high  inflation  does  not  create  jobs  on  a 
sustainable basis. Rather, it is simply a tax on the poor. 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 65/1008 
 5
