Denny H Kalyalya: Practical aspects of the risk management 
implementation process 
Opening remarks by Dr Denny H Kalyalya, Deputy Governor Operations, Bank of Zambia, at 
the Risk Management Workshop for Risk Liaison Officers, Alternates and Risk Coordinating 
Officers, Lusaka, 15 May 2008. 
 in 
to 
facilitate 
its  efforts 
The Director – Risk Management 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
• 
• 
I  wish  to  welcome  you  all  to  this  second  series  of  workshops  organized  by  the  Risk 
Management Department. This series of workshops is intended to help us all understand the 
practical aspects of the risk management implementation process as we proceed to apply it 
to our respective departments. 
The sessions you are going to have today and tomorrow focus on the first two stages in the 
risk management process i.e. the Context Establishment and Risk Identification stages. I am 
made to believe that, during the course of this year, you shall gather again to deal with the 
practical aspects of the other three critical stages in the approved risk management process, 
namely  Risk  Analysis,  Risk  Evaluation  and  Risk  Treatment.  As  you  participate  in  these 
workshops, it is important to bear in mind that senior management attaches great importance 
to the implementation of the risk management framework. 
Ladies and Gentlemen: 
These  workshops  have  come  against  a  backdrop  of  implementation  teething  problems. 
Departments  had  difficulties  in  understanding  the  initial  guidance  given  by  the  Risk 
Management  Department 
implementation  of  the  risk 
management  framework.  It  is  senior  management’s  hope  that  the  facilitation  that  will  be 
given in these workshops will go a long way in addressing the identified teething problems. 
It is extremely important that you all realize from the very outset that you will be the anchors 
for  the  success  of  this  process  for  your  respective  departments.  For  this  reason,  it  is 
imperative that you understand in full the processes that will be discussed in this workshop. 
Senior management’s expectation is that you will acquire the necessary tools to enable you 
facilitate  the  proper  completion  of  the  Context  Establishment  and  Risk  Identification 
exercises within your respective departments. 
Ladies and Gentlemen: 
Allow  me  to  give  you  a  brief  background  on  the  implementation  of  the  Risk  Management 
Framework at the Bank of Zambia. You will recall that starting in October 2006 through April 
2007,  the  Risk  Management  Department  embarked  on  a  programme  of  sensitizing  all  the 
members of staff and the Board of Directors on the establishment of the risk management 
framework  at  the  Bank.  Given  that  these  workshops  had  coverage  of  99%  of  all  Bank  of 
Zambia  staff,  I  am  more  than  confident  that  most  of  you  were  participants  in  those 
workshops.  The  end  of  this  series  of  workshops,  marked  the  end  of  Phase  I  of  the 
implementation programme of the Risk Management Framework at the Bank. 
Following  the  end  of  the  risk  sensitization  workshops  the  next  stage  required  the 
implementation of the framework in the business areas. As mentioned earlier, the Bank faced 
a  number  of  teething  problems  in  the  implementation  process  of  the  first  stages  of  the 
framework with departments having some difficulties in following written guidance that was 
being given by the Risk Management Department. As one of the possible solutions to this, 
senior management agreed to the Risk Management Department’s suggestion that Phase II 
of  the  risk  management  framework  implementation  process  also  be  effected  through 
the 
BIS Review 71/2008 
 1
workshops, targeting the Risk Liaison Officers who are, by definition, the critical anchors of 
the approved risk management framework. This background therefore justifies the gathering 
that we have here today. 
Ladies and Gentlemen: 
Your  group,  as  Risk  Liaison  Officers,  Alternates  and  Risk  Coordinating  Officers,  occupies 
and  a  plays  a  very  important  role  in  the  governance  structure  of  the  Risk  Management 
Framework. You may wish to note that your group plays a function of a “critical link” between 
staff from your respective departments and the Head of Department who is, by definition, the 
Risk Manager. For this reason, the importance of your responsibilities should be very clear 
and need not be overemphasized. For those who might have forgotten their roles, I wish to 
encourage  you  to  re-familiarize  yourselves  with  the  Risk  Management  and  Business 
Continuity  Management  (BCM)  Policies,  where  your  respective  responsibilities  are  clearly 
spelt out. 
Having said this, the workshop you are attending today and tomorrow has the following key 
objectives: 
i. 
to  explain  the  practical  aspects  of  “Context  Establishment”  and  the  “Risk 
Identification” processes so as to ensure that you fully understand these initial, but 
critical  steps,  in  the  risk  management  process  so  as  to  enable  you  to  assist  your 
respective departments to complete these important stages of the process; and 
to remind you of your role and responsibilities, as Risk Liaison Officers, Alternates 
and Risk Coordinating Officers, in the Risk Management Framework. 
ii. 
Ladies and Gentlemen: 
Allow me to reiterate what I said during the risk sensitization workshops – the success of the 
Bank of Zambia Risk Management Framework will in a large measure depend on how well 
this process will be understood and how well its implementation at departmental level will be 
facilitated by you. As Risk Liaison Officers, Alternates and Risk Coordinating Officers for your 
respective departments, you will be expected to not only provide leadership and guidance to 
your respective departments on risk management matters, but you will also be required to 
play a catalytic role in the whole risk management process. As the proverbial saying goes, 
the  buck  for  managing  the  risks  in  your  respective  Departments  stops  at  you!  The  Risk 
Management Department’s role will remain confined to the coordination and facilitation of the 
Bank-wide risk management activities. 
In  conclusion,  I  wish  to  urge  you  all  to  take  a  keen  interest  in  the  deliberations  of  this 
workshop. As officers at the frontline of risk management in the Bank, you are expected to be 
conversant with the risk management process that is being implemented at the Bank, and 
there is no better platform to provide that opportunity than now! To this end, the programme 
of that this workshop is organized in such a way as to be highly interactive. Therefore, I urge 
you to feel free to ask as many questions as possible. 
With  these  few  words,  it  is  now  my  singular  honor  and  privilege  to  declare  this  workshop 
officially open. 
I thank you. 
2 
 BIS Review 71/2008
