X P Guma: Communicating reserve management and exchange rate 
policies – a South African perspective 
Address by Dr X P Guma, Deputy Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at the Bank 
of  Tanzania-IMF-East  AFRITAC  Regional  Seminar  on  Central  Bank  Communication, 
Stonetown, Zanzibar, 6-8 May 2008. 
 Introduction 
1.  
Chairperson,  Lila  Mkila,  Deputy  Governor  of 
the  Bank  of  Tanzania,  distinguished 
participants, ladies and gentlemen; I wish to start by thanking the organisers of this seminar 
for their invitation to me to participate in these proceedings and to proceed on the premise 
that all protocol has been observed. Having said that, I must especially acknowledge Dr B. 
Ndulu, Governor of the Bank of Tanzania and my senior in several respects – not least in the 
context of the Africa Economic Research Consortium from which I benefited as a young(er) 
economist all those years ago, which he served with characteristic distinction. 
Communication: of what, how? 
2.  
A story is told, which I think may be appropriate to repeat here. It is said that in 1991 when 
Mr  Mervyn  King,  the  current  Governor,  joined  the  Bank  of  England  he  visited  the  former 
Chairman  of  the  Federal  Reserve  of  the  United  States  of  America  to  seek  advice  and  Mr 
Paul Volcker obliged with a marvellous word, “mystique”. 
And  that  appears  to  have  been  the  desired  practice  of  senior  central  bankers  of  the  time, 
“mystique”. The object of their communication was to create such uncertainty as to ensure 
that their decisions would be treated with the kind of awe that attends the devotions of the 
converted. Mr Volcker, it is said, described the central bankers of the Bretton Woods system 
as  “high  priests,  or  perhaps  stateless  princes”,  the  process  by  which  they  made  monetary 
policy  decision  resembling  the  elusive  mysteries  of  papal  successions.  That  perhaps 
explains the sea change that has occurred in thinking about communication by central banks. 
Having come of age in central banking at a different time, my purpose today is to be brief, to 
the point and as clear as possible. In the paragraphs which follow, I will outline the evolution 
of reserve management in South Africa, indicate the nature of the communication strategy 
which has been pursued and conclude. The interesting part, our joint deliberations, will be off 
the record. 
Of what? 
2.1 
Reserve  management  in  South  Africa  has  occurred  historically  in  an  environment  of 
exchange  controls.  These  were  originally  introduced  in  1939,  together  with  the  United 
Kingdom  and  other  members  of  the  then  sterling  area,  as  part  of  the  emergency  Finance 
Regulations  applied  by  that  group  of  countries.  The  original  objective  was  to  retain  a  free 
movement  of  funds  between  these  countries  whilst  preventing  “hard  currency”  funds  from 
flowing out of the area to non-sterling countries. 
Whilst  the  Sterling  Area  exchange  controls  were  removed  gradually  after  the  end  of  the 
second World War, liberalisation of controls in South Africa was halted by the declaration of a 
State of Emergency in March 1960, and the imposition by the authorities in May and June 
1961 of comprehensive measures which were intended to strengthen both the current and 
the capital accounts of the balance of payments. As Roger Gidlow (1995:181 et seq) states 
then,  stricter  import  controls  included  restrictions  on  inheritance,  gift  and  maintenance 
transfers  as  well  as  allowances  for  tourists  and  emigrants.  Even  more  significant,  capital 
BIS Review 58/2008 
 1
transfers abroad by residents were disallowed while residents were called upon to declare 
their  foreign  assets  and  liabilities.  Furthermore,  the  transfer  of  profits  earned  by  foreign 
controlled companies prior to 31 December 1959 was prohibited. 
Reviewing developments from the vantage point of 1996, the Governor of the South African 
Reserve Bank (SARB) wrote as follows (Stals, 1996-06-17): The initial non-economic factors 
that led to the outflows of capital from South Africa during the more than thirty years, from 
1961 until the early 1990’s rapidly disappeared after the announcement of the election of the 
Government of National Unity towards the end of 1993. Although a large amount of funds still 
flowed  out  of  the  country  during  the  first  half  of  1994,  the  situation  changed  dramatically 
thereafter. In the second half of 1994, there was a net inflow of more than R9 billion into the 
country, and during the calendar year 1995 a further net inflow of R21,7 billion, to bring the 
total net inflow for the 18 months from July 1994 to December 1995 to more than R30 billion. 
In  April  1994,  when  the  Government  of  National  Unity  took  office,  the  Reserve  Bank  held 
about R7 billion in foreign reserves, but also had about R6 billion outstanding in short-term 
borrowings. 
During  the  years  which  ensued,  the  SARB  followed  a  policy  of  trying  to  stabilise  the 
exchange rate of the rand by intervening in the domestic foreign exchange market, this being 
consistent  with  the  provisions  of  the  interim  Constitution  of  the  Republic  of  South  Africa 
which required the Bank to protect the internal and external value of the currency. However, 
as Mminele (2007) notes, because the level of its gross reserves were fairly low, averaging 
around USD3,8 billion between 1990 and the end of 1997, the Bank funded its intervention 
through the forward market, and in the process built up an oversold forward book which, at 
tits highest level in 1995, amounted to USD29 billion. This exceeded the level of net reserves 
by  a  considerable  margin,  leaving  a  negative  net  open  foreign  currency  position  (NOFP) 
which reached a peak of USD23, 2 billion in August 1998; a number which is still mentioned 
only in hushed tones by those Reserve Bank staff who can recall those momentous times! 
In  1998,  the  SARB  ceased  its  intervention  in  the  foreign  exchange  market,  abandoned  its 
attempts  to  influence  the  level  of  the  exchange  rate  and,  in  addition,  made  a  public 
commitment to eliminate the negative NOFP and to close out the oversold forward book. And 
this had the desired result. In September 1998, the level of gross reserves, at US$5,3 billion 
was  still  very  small  in  absolute  terms  and  relative  to  the  net  oversold  forward  book  of 
approximately  US$18  billion.  By  May  2003,  the  NOFP  was  marginally  positive;  but  by 
February 2004, the positions in the oversold forward book were balanced and gross reserves 
had  started to  increase.  At  the  time  of  writing,  the  Template  on  international  reserves  and 
foreign  currency 
interested  at 
www.reservebank.co.za, indicates that the approximate market value of the official reserve 
assets  as  at  end  of  March  2008  was  US$34,384  billion.  Chart  1,  beloved  of  those  SARB 
directors and staff who speak in public, illustrates these developments. 
In summary, then: the SARB now has reserves to manage. This was not always the case, for 
during some periods prior to 1998 what needed to be managed were negative net reserves. 
Second, the SARB has made a public commitment not to participate in the market for foreign 
exchange  in  an  attempt  to  influence  or  to  determine  the  nominal  exchange  rate.  Third, 
exchange controls have been liberalised significantly. South Africa does not appear now to 
be too different from its peers among emerging market economies. 
to  all  who  may  be 
liquidity,  which 
is  available 
How? 
2.2 
The  implications  for  communication  of  the  afore-going  narration  were  and  remain 
challenging. In a situation of economic vulnerability, such as characterised South Africa at 
various  moments  in  its  past,  the  need  was  for  the  Bank  to  maintain  a  sense  of  calm. 
Statements had to be circumspect without ever inducing a sense of panic. For nobody would 
have been prepared to say to all and sundry: “we don’t have sufficient reserves, but are still 
going to attempt to influence the exchange rate, so there! …” 
2 
 BIS Review 58/2008
Any student of this period in the economic history of the country will be struck by the subtle 
nature of the communications of this time. Consider, for example, the difference between the 
reporting  of  developments  regarding  reserves  in  the  Quarterly  Bulletin  of  the  SARB.  The 
March 1996 report reads as follows in the section on foreign reserves: “South Africa’s total 
gross gold and other foreign reserves rose from R14,1 billion at the end of 1994 to R15,2 
billion at the end of September 1995 and to R18,2 billion at the end of December 1995. After 
having  increased  by  R2,2  billion  in  December  1995,  the  gross  foreign  reserves  of  the 
Reserve Bank decreased by R229 million in January 1996. Without taking into account the 
credit facilities of the monetary authority, the total foreign reserves of the country were equal 
to seven weeks’ imports of goods and services at the end of December 1995.” 
Billions deflected by casual reference to a few millions: weeks of imports, not months; some 
numbers  refer  to  the  country;  others  to  the  Reserve  Bank;  others  still  to  the  monetary 
authority.  All  in  Rand,  not  in  SDR  or  dollar  values.  And  these  numbers,  of  course,  do  not 
include  the  credit  facilities  of  the  monetary  authority,  which,  if  included?  Draw  your  own 
inference and rest assured that we are not panicking. 
This may be contrasted with the confident tone of the most recent Quarterly Bulletin (March 
2008) which reports on International reserves and liquidity in the following manner: Measured 
in  US  dollar,  the  value  of  the  gross  gold  and  other  foreign  reserves  of  the  South  African 
Reserve  Bank  (the  Bank)  increased  from  US$  30,5  billion  at  the  end  of  September  to 
US$33,0  billion  at  the  end  of  December  2007  and  further  to  US$34,2  billion  at  the  end  of 
February 2008. The Bank’s international liquidity position increased from US$28,4 billion at 
the  end  of  September  2007  to  US$31,3  billion  at  the  end  of  December  and  further  to 
US$32,7 billion at the end of February 2008.” 
Straight, to the point and, to use the current idiom of some of the young, together! 
At least two things were done to manage communication during those difficult times. First, in 
order to ensure consistency, it was the practice for only the Governor of the Bank to address 
public  gatherings  on  monetary  policy.  Eschewing  the  use  of  speech  writers  and  speaking 
authentically and unmistakably in his own voice, the Governor, as the public face of the Bank 
would  explain  what  needed  to  be  explained  adopting  the  tone  of  wounded  indignation  to 
good  effect  when  necessary.  For  example,  commenting  on  macro-economic  adjustment 
during 1995 and 1996, the Governor (1997-09-08) wry and as caustic as decency allowed 
wrote, “the South African monetary authorities are indeed, in retrospect (my emphasis), now 
criticised by the International Monetary Fund for having intervened excessively in the foreign 
exchange market last year …. This was prompted, however, by an acute shortage of foreign 
exchange  reserves  …  at  the  time  of  the  currency  crisis”.  And  then  added,  diplomatically, 
“The Reserve Bank agrees with the Fund that the Bank’s role in the foreign exchange market 
should be reduced.” 
This  strategy  had  the  positive  effect  of  providing  consistency  in  the  language  of 
communication, effectively countering the nay-sayers in the market who consistently look for 
evidence  of  policy  conflict  within  the  Bank.  It  said,  in  effect,  “one  Bank;  one  policy;  one 
voice”. 
Secondly,  the  number  of  public  speaking  engagements  was  kept  limited,  but  unspecified, 
with  the  Quarterly  Bulletin,  the  statement  on  foreign  reserves  and  the  annual  Governor’s 
address  to  shareholders  of  the  Bank  being  the  only  documents  whose  release  could  be 
announced in advance. Market participants could, therefore, be assured of a comprehensive 
set of data, set out in accordance with the highest international standards, in the Quarterly 
Bulletin  and  the  statement  of  foreign  reserves;  and  would  be  guided  by  the  Governor’s 
address  on  matters  pertaining  to  exchange  rate,  reserve  management  and  over-arching 
monetary policy. Additional information was made available on a discretionary basis. 
Third,  in  recognition  of  the  fact  that  a  central  bank  can  only  be  as  independent  as  the 
government  of  the  day  wants  it  to  be,  regular  contact  was  maintained  with  the  Minister  of 
BIS Review 58/2008 
 3
Finance;  and  the  practice  of  briefings  to  be  relevant  Committee  of  Parliament  was 
maintained. 
Conclusion 
3.  
The challenge of communicating with the general public, financial analysts, the markets and 
other  interested  parties  remains.  However,  at  present,  the  message  which  needs  to  be 
communicated is that of monetary policy in the context of inflation targeting: exchange rate 
and  reserve  management  issues  have  lost  their  centrality,  important  as  they  may  remain. 
The tension caused by substantial deviation from the desired outcome, albeit on account of a 
concatenation of external shocks of unprecedented magnitude, poses an on-going challenge 
– with regard to time-consistent policy responses and with respect to communication. 
But  these  are  matters  for  discussion  and  debate  at  another  time.  Thank  you  for  your 
attention. 
References: 
1.  Asso  PF,  Kahn  GA  and  Leeson  R  (December  2007)  “The  Taylor  Rule  and  the 
Transformation  of  Monetary  Policy”,  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Kansas  City;  Research 
Working Papers. 
2. Gidlow, R (1995) “South African Reserve Bank Monetary Policies under Dr T.W. De Jongh 
1967-1980”, Pretoria, South African Reserve Bank. 
3. King, M (2000) Speech to the joint luncheon of the American Economic Association and 
the American Finance Association, Boston Marriot Hotel, January. 
4. Mminele D (2007) “The Accumulation of reserves by emerging markets and the case of 
South Africa”, JP Morgan Asset Management Central Bank Reserve Management Seminar, 
Johannesburg, November. 
5. South African Reserve Bank, Quarterly Bulletin, various issues; 1995-2008. 
6.  Stals,  C.L.  (1996)  “Exchange  Control  :  How  critical  is  it?”  Address  by  Dr  Chris  Stals, 
Governor  of  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank,  at  the  Europe-South  Africa  Business  and 
Finance Forum, Cannes; 17 June. 
 
(1997) “Exchange Controls and Monetary Policy.” Address by Dr Chris Stals, 
Governor  of  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank,  at  a  Roundtable  Discussion  arranged  by 
Economist Conferences, Johannesburg.  
 
South African Reserve Bank; 8 August. 
7.  Volcker,  P  (1990)  The  Triumph  of  Central  Banking;  Per  Jacobsson  Lecture,  Per 
Jacobsson Foundation, Washington DC. 
 
(1999) Remarks by Dr Chris Stals, retiring Governor at a Gala Dinner of the 
4 
 BIS Review 58/2008
 5
BIS Review 58/2008 
 