Anselmo L S Teng: Risk and compensation management 
Opening remarks by Mr Anselmo L S Teng, Chairman of the Monetary Authority of Macao, at 
the Macau Management Association (MMA) 2008 Annual Management Conference, Macao, 
14 June 2008. 
 Council Chairman Lau 
Distinguished Guests 
Dear Delegates 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Good morning! 
1. 
2. 
3. 
I  am  honoured  to  be  invited  by  the  Macau  Management  Association  to  make  an 
opening  remark  in  this  conference,  the  theme  of  which,  “Navigating  Complex 
Changes  through  Corporate  Strategies”,  is  most  timely  and  relevant,  especially 
when organizations, big and small, are facing a lot of threats and challenges, both 
internal and external, under a globalised environment nowadays. 
As you are aware, the business definition for corporate strategy is the direction an 
organization takes with the objective of achieving business success in the long term. 
I’ll use the sub-prime fallout as an example to illustrate two important aspects within 
corporate strategies, i.e. risk related aspects and human resources related aspects. 
The turbulence of the international financial markets caused by the subprime fallout 
will  probably  linger  for  another  1-2  years.  The  rescue  actions  adopted  by  central 
banks of the developed economies have prevented a major financial calamity from 
happening but the impact on global economy and financial markets will remain for 
quite a while. 
There  is  no  exact  figure  for  overall  subprime  losses.  The  estimates  made  by 
financial  experts  and  international  institutions  range  from  USD400  billion  to  USD1 
trillion. The losses will be borne by financial institutions and individual investors. The 
investors who have suffered losses will inevitably cut back investment and perhaps 
consumption.  The  losses  incurred  by  financial  institutions  of  the  developed 
economies  however  have  inflicted  more  serious  repercussions.  The  immediate 
effect is the overall shrinkage in liquidity in the international financial markets. The 
most devastating impact is the reduction in lending capacity of financial institutions 
as the write-off and provision of delinquent loans and/or investments directly eat into 
the shareholders’ fund of a financial institution. 
After the subprime crisis, financial experts around the world have started to find out 
the  reasons  why  it  happened  and  proposed  ways  to  prevent  similar  mistake  from 
happening again. There are a lot of findings but they all boil down to a big topic – 
“risk  management”.  In  the  past  few  years,  financial  and  technological  innovations 
have  given  rise  to  a  number  of  subprime  related  products  coming  from  financial 
institutions.  These  included  subprime  loans,  collateralized  debt  obligations  (CDO), 
structured investment vehicles (SIV) and other exotic financial products. As a matter 
of fact, a large number of risk management tools such as risk management models, 
ratings,  credit  default  swaps  (CDS)  did  emerge  in  the  subprime  cycle.  But 
unfortunately  fallout  still  occurred  which  in  essence  reflected  inadequate  risk 
management.  Financial  post  mortem  analysis  has  suggested 
financial 
institutions who have suffered seriously from subprime fallout have failed to mitigate 
a number of risks, such as market risk, liquidity risk, concentration risk and counter 
party  risk  etc.  That  is  to  say,  the  corporate  strategy  in  so  far  as  risk  mitigation  is 
concerned was incomplete, untimely and was not commensurate with its business 
that 
BIS Review 78/2008 
 1
the 
training  and 
last,  but  not 
profile  and  development.  As  financial  institutions,  or  organizations  with  different 
business nature, offer more sophisticated products and services in order to achieve 
business  success,  there  will  be  more  associated  risks  in  their  on-going  risk 
management  framework.  This  is  particularly  true  as  they  grow  in  size  and 
complexity,  and their ability to identify, define, measure, manage, and organize to 
manage  their  risks;  and  how  to  reflect  all  those  elements  as  appropriate  in  the 
corporate strategy is of utmost importance. 
Besides  risk  management,  however,  there  is  also  one  aspect  which  can  apply  to 
management of virtually all trades. 
The  human  resources  part  of  corporate  strategies  relates  to  the  management 
coherent to an organization’s most valued assets – the people working there who 
individually  and  collectively  contribute  to  the  achievement  of  the  objectives  of  the 
business.  The  goal  of  human  resources  management  strategy  is  to  help  an 
organization  to  meet  strategic  goal  by  attracting,  and  maintaining  employees  and 
also  to  manage  them  effectively.  In  practice,  human  resources  management 
incorporates a vast number of issues which include, but not confined to, recruitment, 
workforce  planning,  orientation,  skill, 
least, 
compensation.  We  have  to  admit  that  compensation,  amongst  other  motivating 
factors, is the most effective driving force behind a person’s desire to perform in the 
workplace.  There  have  been  many  papers  written  on  the  most  appropriate 
compensation  scheme.  One  of  the  many  schools  of  thought  is  the  performance 
related  pay  which  is  money  paid  to  someone  relating  to  how  well  he  or  she 
performs. Car salesmen, real estate agents, production line workers, for example, 
may  be  paid  in  this  way,  or  through  commission.  This  compensation  scheme  is 
based  on  the  belief  that  money  was  the  main  incentive  for  increased productivity. 
This scheme cannot be applied universally as it has its own limitations although it 
has been widely adopted in a number of fields and proven to be successful. The tool 
however  is  a  double  edged  knife  and  the  financial  sector  has  vindicated  such  a 
conviction. 
One of the causes of the subprime bubble is the pay structure adopted by financial 
institutions  in  launching  subprime  products.  During  the  subprime  cycle,  most 
financial institutions pursued a compensation scheme which gave incentives to all 
personnel  involved  in  the  subprime  products  to  chase  after  high  income  through 
risky trading, launching risky products that generally provided higher rates of return. 
Bonus  payments  for  successful  and  senior investment  bankers,  including  those  in 
the business holding subprime positions, were very substantial. Essentially, bonuses 
were measured against gross revenue after personnel costs, with no formal account 
taken of the quality or sustainability of those earnings. We have to admit that greed 
is part of our human nature. In the face of profit, quality of product and hence the 
revenue derived therefrom could be compromised. The phenomenon was common 
among institutions and staff involved in the subprime trade, from top management, 
originators, agents to traders. 
All  enterprises,  not  confined  to  financial  institutions,  should  learn  from  this  lesson 
that,  to  maintain  the  sustainable  growth  of  an  entity,  all  compensation  schemes 
should  in  future  adequately  reflect  performance  in  the  medium  and  long  term  as 
well.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  the  compensation  schemes  for  staff  involved  in  the 
subprime bubble all had a common feature in that there were enormous rewards for 
deals  but  there  was  also  a  failure  to  impose  penalty  symmetrically  when  losses 
occurred.  To  put  it  in  a  nutshell,  a  viable  compensation  scheme  should  be  well 
structured and be geared to the long term corporate target and strategy rather than 
short term profit. 
BIS Review 78/2008
4. 
5. 
6. 
2 
 7. 
I  hope  my  opening  remarks  on  risk  management  and  compensation  management 
will kick off a series of discussions on management of other facets of business. 
Experts and seasoned practitioners from different trades are going to share with us 
their  views,  experience  and  insights  to  resonate  with  today’s  theme  “Navigating 
Complex  Challenges  through  Corporate  Strategies”.  I  am  sure  the  conclusions  of 
this  Conference  will  enable  the  attendees  to  formulate  the  correct  corporate 
strategies  to  navigate  through  uncharted  waters  of  the  contemporary  global 
economy. 
Finally, please accept my best wishes for a huge success of this visionary conference. 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 78/2008 
 3
