Usha Thorat: Financial inclusion and information technology 
Keynote address by Ms Usha Thorat, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the 
“Vision 2020 – Indian Financial Services Sector”, hosted by NDTV, Mumbai, 12 September 
2008. 
 It is indeed very heartening to be here at this WIPRO-NDTV Convergence Conference on 
“Vision 2020 – Indian Financial Services Sector”. I thank the organizers for inviting me here 
today. 
Introduction 
The banking system has grown enormously in the last five years keeping pace with and in 
some cases leading the country’s remarkable economic growth. Simultaneously, the banking 
system has improved its strength, efficiency and resilience. There have also been significant 
improvements in the payments and settlements system and electronic payments and RTGS 
is now much more in use. IT has played a major role in these achievements. Today banks 
have  centralised  operations,  more  and  more  banks  and  branches  are  moving  to  CBS, 
network  based  computing,  new  delivery  channels  such  as  networked  ATMs,  internet 
banking,  smart  card  based  products,  mobile  access  etc  and  are  using  IT  for  customer 
relationship  management,  customer  transaction  pattern  analysis  credit  profiling  and  risk 
management.  
At  the  same  time,  large  number  of  households  continues  to  be  excluded  from  the  formal 
banking system and as per some recent surveys their share has increased. The extent and 
reasons  for  exclusion  are  many  and  have  been  well  documented  in  the  Rangarajan 
Committee  (RC)  and  more  recently  in  the  very  comprehensive  and  analytical  section  on 
financial inclusion in RBI’s latest Currency and Finance (RCF) released a few days ago. The 
RCF points out that despite the broad international consensus regarding the importance of 
access to finance as a crucial poverty alleviation tool, it is estimated that globally over two 
billion people are currently excluded from access to financial services (United Nations, 2006).  
Definitional issues 
No universally accepted definition of financial inclusion is available. Financial inclusion has 
generally  been  defined  in  terms  of  exclusion  from  the  financial  system.  Broadly,  financial 
exclusion  is  construed  as  the  inability  to  access  necessary  financial  services  in  an 
appropriate  form  due  to  problems  associated  with  access,  conditions,  prices,  marketing  or 
self-exclusion. The working or operational definitions of financial exclusion generally focus on 
ownership  or  access  to  particular  financial  products  and  services.  There  is  no  single 
comprehensive measure that can be used to indicate the extent of financial inclusion across 
economies. Specific indicators such as number of bank accounts, number of bank branches, 
that  are  generally  used  as  measures  of  financial  inclusion,  can  provide  only  partial 
information on the level of financial inclusion in an economy. 
Measures of financial exclusion 
Whatever  measure  one  may  use  for  India,  it  is  apparent  that  the  financially  excluded 
constitute a significant share of the population especially amongst the  low income  groups. 
Based on the AIDIS 2002 survey, RC showed that 111.5 million households had no access 
to formal credit. It also showed that 17 million households were indebted to moneylenders. 
The  recent  Arjun  Sengupta  Report  on  financing  enterprises  in  the  unorganized  sector  has 
BIS Review 110/2008 
 1
pointed out that only 2.4 million out of 58 million units in this sector (with investment of less 
than Rs 25000 ) have got credit from commercial banks. The AIDIS 2002 also showed that 
lower  the  asset  class  or  income,  higher  the  degree  of  exclusion.  These  findings  are 
corroborated by Invest India Incomes and Savings Survey (2007). The survey showed that 
32.8% of households had borrowed from institutional sources and 67.2 % had borrowed from 
non  institutional  sources.  The  survey  also  found  that  70  per  cent  of  earners  in  the  annual 
income bracket of more than Rs.400, 000 borrowed from institutional sources as compared 
with only 27.5 per cent in the case of earners in the income bracket of less than Rs.50,000.  
Causes of increased indebtedness from non institutional sources 
A  very  interesting  analysis  by  the  RCF  shows  that  the  major  reason  for  increase  in  the 
overall  household  debt  and  the  increase  in  the  share  of  households  indebted  to  non-
institutional  sources  between  1991  and  2002  was  a  significant  increase  in  current  farm 
expenditure  and  household  expenditure,  especially 
in  rural  areas.  The  “household 
expenditure”  includes  expenditure  incurred  on  purchase  of  residential  plot;  purchase, 
construction,  addition/alteration  of  building  for  residential  purposes;  purchase  of  durable 
households assets, clothes, among others and expenditure on medical treatment, education, 
marriages,  and  ceremonies.  Thus,  the  “household  expenditure”  includes  many  items  for 
which  households  may  find  it  difficult  to  obtain  loans  from  institutional  sources.  The  IIMS 
Survey  also  suggests  that  a  large  portion  of  loan  is  taken  by  the  households  for  meeting 
financial  emergency,  medical  emergency  and  social  obligations.  These  three  purposes 
accounted for about 53 per cent of the loans availed of by indebted earners. Furthermore, 
more  than  60  per  cent  earners,  indebted  to  non-institutional  sources,  took  loans  for  the 
aforesaid  three  purposes.  In  the  case  of  emergencies,  people  may  find  it  convenient  to 
approach non-institutional sources for their credit needs. Financial emergencies, for instance, 
include  unplanned  expenditure  on  business,  consumption  and  marriage,  among  others, 
which may not be financed by banks and other institutional agencies.  
Some of the other causes for greater recourse to non institutional sources as identified by the 
RCF  are  deceleration  in  bank  credit  to  households  in  the  context  of  change  in  banks’ 
behaviour  in  the  1990s  due  to  their  impaired  balance  sheets  and  tightening  of  prudential 
norms  and  the  slowdown  in  formal  credit  to  households  in  the  context  of  the  slowdown  in 
agriculture  and  allied  activities  that  may  have  induced  such  households  to  approach  non-
institutional sources to meet their credit requirements. The RCF has however noted that the 
last round of NSSO survey related to the year 2002. Subsequently, several policy initiatives 
have been taken by the Government/Reserve Bank to improve the credit flow to agriculture 
and  the  needy  sectors.  These  measures  had  a  significant  positive  impact  on  financial 
inclusion as revealed by the data for subsequent period.  
2 
 BIS Review 110/2008
  Challenges in achieving FI for inclusive growth 
Looking at the findings of these surveys and analysis, it is quite clear that financial inclusion 
has  to  be  an  urgent  national  priority  if  we  are  to  achieve  inclusive  growth.  The  major 
challenges in banks extending services to the excluded are large costs of covering the huge 
numbers (cost of enrollment), relative high maintenance costs for such accounts, small ticket 
size for each transaction, need for communication modes suited to the illiterate and in local 
language, affordability of the product or service, need for local acceptance and involvement 
of  locally  acceptable  personnel,  need  for  large  scale  coverage  including  over  difficult 
geographic terrain and areas where there is no electric power or normal telecommunication 
facilities.  Further,  as  is  now  very  obvious  from  the  recent  surveys  by  AIDIS  and  IIMS,  the 
challenge  also  lies  in  offering  to  low  income  households  and  unorganized  enterprises  a 
simple loan product which is not based on or linked to the purpose of the loan, the collateral 
BIS Review 110/2008 
 3
or  assets  held  or  income  earned  by  the  household  but  is  purely  based  on  cash  flow  and 
credit record of the household.  
Vision 2020 
Looking to 2020, it is even more apparent that the task of banking the unbanked will be truly 
daunting. Nearly 600 million new customers’ accounts will have to be opened and serviced 
through a variety of channels leveraging on IT.  
RBI initiatives for FI 
In the Annual Policy for 2005-06, for the first time the word financial inclusion was used and 
banks  were  asked  to  open  “no  frills”  or  a  basic  banking  account  to  all  those  desirous  of 
opening a bank account. Several other aspects such as simplified KYC, OTS for loans upto 
Rs  25000,  offering  a  GCC/simplified  overdrafts  etc  were  also  covered.  A  decentralized 
approach  was  advocated  through  targeting  100%  financial  inclusion  district  by  district 
involving  the  DCC  and  bank  and  government  officials  to  facilitate  enrolment  and 
identification. Another very important policy measure in January 2006 was to allow banks to 
adopt  the  agency  model  or  what  is  known  as  the  Business  facilitator  /Business 
Correspondent  model  for  achieving  greater  outreach  through  intermediaries  /agents.  The 
results have been extremely impressive. In just two years the number of no frills accounts 
opened  by  banks  has  increased  from  around  half  a  million  accounts  in  March  2006  to  15 
million in 2008. Going by the data from service providers offering smart card solutions, it may 
be assumed that smart card accounts probably account for 2 to 3 million of these no frills 
accounts. Evaluation by external agencies appointed by RBI has shown that while the first 
stage of opening no frills accounts has been quite impressive, due to inadequate f follow up, 
cost  of  transaction  and  access  constraints,  in  many  cases  the  accounts  have  not  been 
operated upon at all after having been opened. In order to improve access and use of these 
accounts , banks will have to offer the services much closer to the customer either through 
mobile branches, satellite offices, extension counters or using intermediaries like SHGs/MFIs 
or through business correspondents using IT to increase scale, access and reduce cost. Also 
as is obvious from the results of these recent studies and surveys, the credit product that has 
to be offered, if the low income borrowers have to be brought into the formal system, has to 
be  simple  covering  all  the  needs  of  small  borrowers.  I  have  absolutely  no  doubt  that  the 
simple  overdraft  or  GCC  based  on  cash  flow/ track  record  is  the  way  forward  to  meet  the 
challenges of providing access to the large numbers currently excluded.  
4 
  BIS Review 110/2008
SHGs and MFIs role in FI 
The need for informality in credit delivery and easy access is demonstrated by the fact that 
SHGs  and  MFIs  constitute  the  fastest  growing  segment  in  recent  years  in  reaching  out  to 
small borrowers. These institutions are able to effectively address the small ticket and last 
mile issues. In the four years between 2003 and 2007, small borrower bank accounts (credit) 
i.e.  upto  Rs  25000  increased  marginally  from  36.9  million  to  38.6  million,  while  SHGs’ 
borrowing members grew from 10 million to 40.5 million and MFIs’ borrowers grew from 1.1 
million to 8 million. In 2007-08, MFIs have added 6 million clients increasing their outreach to 
14 million as per data brought out by Sa Daan.  
Role of ICT in FI 
To be able to ensure that the challenges of banking the unbanked are met effectively and 
converted  into  growing  and  sustainable  business  for  banks,  there  is  no  alternative  to 
adoption  of  ICT  solutions  on  a  very  large  scale  and  range.  ICT  solutions  are  required  to 
capture  customer  details,  facilitate  unique  identification,  ensure  reliable  and  uninterrupted 
connectivity to remote areas and across multiple channels of delivery, offer multiple financial 
products (banking, insurance, capital market) through same delivery channel while ensuring 
consumer  protection,  develop  comprehensive  and  reliable  credit  information  system  so 
essential for efficient credit delivery and credit pricing, develop appropriate products tailored 
to  local  needs  and  segments,  provide  customer  education  and  counseling,  enable  use  of 
multi media and multi-language for dissemination of information and advice.  
ICT for FI – RBI initiatives 
I now turn to the specific initiatives of RBI in regard to ICT for Financial Inclusion. The very 
first initiative was emphasizing the use of IT solutions while adopting the agency or BC model 
for financial inclusion. A paper placed on the RBI website has envisaged a scheme with RBI 
support  for  providing  satellite  connectivity  for  remote  area  branches.  The  reports  of  three 
working groups set up by RBI to consider support to RRBs and UCBs in computerizing their 
operations and adopt IT solutions for financial inclusion have been placed in public domain 
for  comments.  These  groups  have  recommended  that  the  IDRBT  could  offer  interest  free 
loans to UCBs and RRBs for adoption of IT. Based on comments and response RBI will be 
firming up these schemes. Recognizing the penetration of mobile phones (including amongst 
the  low  income  population)  and  the  enormous  opportunities  they  offer  in  extending  the 
banking outreach. RBI had placed a paper on mobile banking in the public domain and the 
guidelines are now being finalized. The NFS is able to offer nationwide networking of ATMs 
and  can  facilitate  banking  transactions  including  remittances  through  ATMs  linked  to  the 
NFS. Effective from April 1, 2009 a customer will be able to use any ATM (including other 
bank ATMs) to operate his /her account at no cost. Other initiatives include those aimed at 
ensuring  quicker,  safer  currency  and  funds  transfer.  In  fact  RBI  has  put  on  its  web-site 
yesterday  an  approach  paper  on  rationalisation  of  service  charges  for  usage  of  electronic 
products, which would facilitate easier movement of funds at lower costs. 
Electronic benefit payments 
Recognising  the  several  advantages  of  using  bank  accounts  for  disbursal  of  government 
benefits,  many  State  Governments  have  decided  to  disburse  NREGA  payments  social 
security benefits electronically through no frills bank accounts and in some States with such 
accounts operated through smart cards with bio–metric identification. A Committee set up by 
RBI  examined  the  various  models  through  which  such  payments  can  be  made  and  has 
recommended  a  bank  led  model  with  sharing  of  costs  between  Government  and  banks. 
Appropriate support from the RBI or the Financial Inclusion Technology Fund could also be 
BIS Review 110/2008 
 5
thought of in the initial stages. Such accounts that have been opened to receive government 
benefits/payments can become the base for a host of other financial services and facilitate 
the objective of financial inclusion.  
Regulatory framework 
The regulations relating to IT solutions for banking services in general and financial inclusion 
in particular relate to ensuring integrity of banking system and ensuring customer protection. 
These  cover  customer 
identification/authentication,  customer  confidentiality/  privacy, 
KYC/AML  issues,  outsourcing,  bank’s  responsibility  for  their  agents,  ensuring  inter–
operability  and  open  standards,  imaging  standards  and  adherence  to  payments  system 
regulations. 
Way forward 
On the way forward the challenges are going to be banks using multiple channels for delivery 
of  variety  of  financial  services,  developing  synergies  with  MFIs  and  SHGs  by  introducing 
seamless ICT based models linked to such intermediaries, availability of skilled manpower to 
facilitate the adoption of IT on such large scale, use of IT for credit information and efficient 
credit  delivery  and  risk  management  in  a  much  bigger  way,  moving  away  from  the  use  of 
cash and emergence of enough leaders in the banking system especially in the public sector 
banks/RRBs  and  cooperative  banks  to  recognize  the  opportunities  and  take  advantage  of 
their specific strengths including location.  
6 
 BIS Review 110/2008
