Anselmo L S Teng: Corporate governance in the financial sector 
Welcome speech by Mr Anselmo L S Teng, Chairman of the Monetary Authority of Macao, at 
the  FSI-SEANZA 
for  banks,  Macao, 
22 April 2008. 
regional  seminar  on  corporate  governance 
 Distinguished Guests, Dear Delegates, Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Good  morning, I would  like to extend my  warmest welcome to all of you, on behalf of the 
Monetary  Authority  of  Macao,  for  attending  the  FSI-SEANZA  regional  seminar  in  the  next 
three days. It is our honour that FSI and SEANZA hold this prestigious seminar in Macao, a 
fascinating city of a unique mix of Eastern and Western heritage and recreation, featured by 
various historical and nostalgic constructions as well as gigantic entertainment complexes.  
I am very pleased to have the privilege to make an opening remark in this occasion and to 
share  with  you  some  of  my  views  on  corporate  governance  in  the  financial  sector. 
Undoubtedly, this is a prominent topic drawing extensive discussion amongst regulators and 
entrepreneurs in developed and developing countries at all times.  
To put the discussion in a nutshell, I would like to start with a study of the idea enshrined in 
the  term  “corporate  governance”  which  is  a  legacy  of  our  ancient  wisdom.  The  word 
“corporate” comes from Latin, meaning the formation of a body, and the word “governance” 
originates from Greek, implying to steer a vessel across the sea. These concepts of ancient 
wisdom  is  still  relevant  nowadays,  since  the  protection  of  shareholders’  or  stakeholders’ 
interests as well as the board’s role to lead an institution to sail through uncertainties and 
challenges is the essence of modern corporate governance.  
In  the  context  of  the  financial  sector,  effective  corporate  governance  practices  are 
indispensable  to  maintaining  trust  and  security  and  critical  to  the  proper  functioning  of 
economic  and  social  system  as  a  whole.  Poor  corporate  governance  may  lead  to  loss  of 
public confidence in the ability of a financial institution to manage its assets and liabilities in a 
prudent  manner,  trigger  more  serious  impacts  on  the  financial  sector  through  contagion 
effects  and  may  even  end  in  systemic  crises.  Different  from  other  sectors,  financial 
institutions, particularly credit institutions, have “duties of care” not only to their shareholders 
but also their stakeholders, namely, depositors and customers. 
As the sole regulator of the financial sector of the Macao Special Administrative Region, the 
Monetary Authority of Macao has exerted a lot of efforts to strengthen corporate governance 
in  order  to  cope  with  the  ever  changing  economic  and  financial  environment.  The  level  of 
corporate  governance  of  Macao  banks  remains  sound  in  general,  as  evidenced  by  their 
ability to survive the various economic downturns and financial crises in the past decades, 
and the results of past assessments initiated by international regulatory bodies, such as the 
International Monetary Fund (IMF). The Macao Financial System Act, promulgated in 1993, 
established the essential elements of corporate governance for credit institutions. Among all 
these  requirements,  fit  and  proper  reviews  of  shareholders  and  managers,  preventive 
procedures  for  conflicts  of  interests  and  restrictions  on  exposures  to  shareholders  and 
managers form the framework of proper standards of ethical conduct. In the Internal Control 
Guideline  introduced  by  the  Monetary  Authority  of  Macao  in  2002,  a  benchmark  of  best 
practices was suggested to promote corporate governance for all credit institutions, including 
the emphasis of high moral and integrity standards to be applied to the board of directors and 
senior management, appropriate measures for checks and balances as well as segregation 
of duties, in line with the corporate governance principles promoted by the Organization for 
Economic  Cooperation  and  Development  (OECD)  as  well  as  the  Basel  Committee  on 
Banking Supervision (BCBS). 
BIS Review 48/2008 
 1
Corporate Governance is not a new issue at all. The Asian Financial Crisis exposed the long-
term consequences of incompetent corporate governance. The recent fiascos of some major 
international financial institutions arising from subprime fallout again signify the importance of 
maintaining high standard of corporate governance. This seminar is both timely and relevant 
against contemporary global economic and financial backdrop. In the coming three days, I 
hope  that  experts  and  delegates  could  make  use  of  this  opportunity  to  exchange  their 
precious experiences and views on this topic. 
In  conclusion,  I  wish  this  seminar  a  tremendous  success  and  may  all  of  you  have  good 
health and enjoy a pleasant stay in Macao. 
Thank you! 
2 
 BIS Review 48/2008
