Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Towards a more efficient payment system – electronic 
payments 
Keynote address by Dr Zeti Akhtar Aziz, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, at the 
Mobile  Digital  Signature  Symposium  2008  –  "Towards  a  More  Efficient  Payment  System: 
Electronic Payments", Cyberjaya, 3 June 2008. 
 It is my honour and pleasure to be here today at this Mobile Digital Signature Symposium 
2008 to deliver an address at this important forum. This forum takes place at a time when 
developments taking place in the global economy are resulting in fundamental changes to 
our  lives.  While  the  global  economy  has  benefited  from  an  extended  period  of  high 
performance and strong growth, it now requires greater agility to adapt to the rapid changes 
that  has  occurred.  A  major  emerging  international  phenomenon  is  the  rising  inflationary 
pressures. 
We  are  now  living  in  an  environment  characterised  by  rising  prices,  with  energy  and 
commodity prices prevailing at record highs. Energy and commodity prices which have risen 
steeply have been driven by demand and supply factors and reinforced by market conditions. 
Clearly,  the  global  factors  that  have  influenced  these  international  prices  are  beyond  our 
control.  Individually  and  collectively,  we  therefore  need  to  adjust  and  adapt  to  these  new 
conditions. Increasing efficiency and adopting new business processes needs to be explored 
to reduce costs.  
An  area  in  which  the  quantum  leap  forward  can  be  made,  particularly  by  emerging 
economies, that  will  substantially  increase  the  level  of  efficiency  and  thus  reduce  costs,  is 
through the adoption of a more expedient and efficient means of payment. This will be the 
subject of my remarks today. While the Central Bank supplies currency notes and coins, we 
are  also  concerned  with  payments  in  its  broader  context.  An  important  function  and 
responsibility  of  the  Central  Bank  is  to  promote  the  development  of  safe  and  efficient 
payment systems. Any inability to make payments in an economy would have a far reaching 
and  widespread  impact  on  society.  Our  task  is  therefore  to  ensure  that  the  public  and 
businesses can make payments in a safe and efficient manner. 
The task also involves taking advantage of the technology and innovation wave and to move 
towards more efficient payment modes. The economic benefits from this can be immense. 
Studies  have  shown  that  shifting  from  paper  based  to  a  more  electronic  based  payment 
systems can generate an annual savings up to 1% of GDP. Further research has also shown 
that it becomes a catalyst that promotes increased consumption spending. Moreover, it can 
also  enhance 
the  unbanked 
communities.  In  so  doing,  such  communities  would  be  brought  into  the  formal  financial 
system  and  into  the  economic  mainstream.  This  would  not  only  promote  the  opening  of 
banking accounts amongst this target group but would also enable them to enjoy lower cost 
of financial services and better means of savings, thus benefiting the economy as a whole. 
As  the  electronic  payment  channels  become  more  easily  accessible,  user-friendly  and 
offered at a low cost, it would thus provide the opportunity to shift the remittance flows from 
the informal to formal channels. 
Indeed, electronic payments can be one of the strategic tools to meet these objectives and 
achieve  higher  economic  growth.  Electronic  payment  increases  operational  efficiency  and 
improves  productivity  levels  through  expedient  payments  and  receipts  of  funds.  Electronic 
payments  would  also  provide  the  speed  and  convenience  of  making  payments  from  any 
place or time. It also reduces costs through the reduction of redeployment of resources used 
for handling cash and cheques. Accelerating the country's migration to electronic payments 
has therefore become a part of Malaysia's larger national agenda to increase the efficiency of 
inclusion  by  extending 
financial  services 
financial 
to 
BIS Review 69/2008 
 1
the  nation's  payment  systems  which  would  ultimately  improve  the  competitiveness  of  our 
economy. 
Cash payments in Malaysia still account for a large portion of the number of transactions in 
the  economy.  Going  forward  it  is  expected  that  its  use  will  level  off  and  stabilise  with  the 
increased  use  of  electronic  means  of  payments.  Credit  cards,  ATM  cards,  debit  cards 
including  the  e-purse  application  embedded  in  the  MyKad  are  among  the  card  payments 
possibilities in Malaysia. The increased use of cards is an international trend and is expected 
to gain significance in Malaysia. Giro transfers, other credit transfers and direct debit are also 
gaining  significance  by  both  individuals  and  businesses.  Finally,  Internet  banking  has  also 
begun to experience stronger growth.  
While we have made considerable progress in promoting the adoption of electronic payment 
with  notable  growth  registered  across  all  electronic  payment  methods,  paper-based 
payments still remains the more popular form of payment. Cheques continue to account for a 
high percentage of the total non-cash retail payments while currency-in-circulation (CIC) as a 
percentage  of  GDP  remains  relatively  high  at  5.7%.  In  2006,  Malaysian  consumers  on 
average, made only 0.7 transaction via direct debit and credit transfer and 0.2 transaction via 
debit card transaction as compared to 84.7 and 109.5 transactions, respectively, in Sweden. 
Hence, more needs to be done to raise the level of adoption of electronic payments.  
In this regard, the Bank has formulated an Electronic Payments Roadmap aimed at bringing 
together  relevant  stakeholders  to  address  the  barriers  that  have  impeded  the  increased 
adoption  of  electronic  payment  in  a  comprehensive  and  strategic  manner.  The  Roadmap 
identifies  the  priority  areas  that  require  attention  and  collaboration  to  promote  an 
environment that is conducive for greater use of electronic payment in financial transactions. 
Firstly, is the need to put in place the payment infrastructure. The infrastructure for making 
payments  would  need  to  be  widened  and  enhanced  to  provide  the  convenient  access  to 
electronic payments. In addition, solutions need to be developed to enable users to integrate 
easily with the payment offerings. Secondly, the product range, the range of services would 
need to be expanded to cater for the different payment needs of consumers and business 
sectors.  Thirdly,  the  pricing  framework,  the  formulation  of  a  transparent  and  cost-effective 
pricing framework is important to provide the incentive structure that would spur the adoption 
of electronic means of payments. Fourth, is the consumer awareness. Programmes need to 
be implemented to inculcate the behavioral change among consumers. There needs to be 
trust  and  confidence  in  the  electronic  payment  systems.  The  fifth  area  relates  to  the 
standards,  the  setting  of  common  standards  to  address  the  interoperability  of  systems 
including  standardising  the  payment  messaging  format  is  vital  to  the  wider  acceptance  of 
electronic payment. Finally, is the need to ensure the security and integrity of the payment 
system which thus requires the supporting regulatory and legal framework to be in place. 
Among  the  series  of  initiatives  that  have  been  implemented  to  promote  the  greater  use  of 
electronic  payment  relates  to  the  leadership  role  of  the  Government  in  the  migration  to 
electronic  means  of  payment.  As  most 
individuals  and  businesses  have  payment 
transactions  with  the  Government,  the  role  of  the  Government  in  accepting  electronic 
payments  has  provided  an  important  catalyst  for  the  adoption  of  electronic  payment  on  a 
national scale. In this regard, Bank Negara Malaysia has been in active partnership with the 
Government to drive the electronic payment agenda. This has also served to reinforce the 
Government's  objective  to  enhance  the  efficiency  of  the  public  delivery  system.  This 
collaboration  has  resulted  in  the  acceptance  of  the  use  of  cards  including  the  ATM  card, 
which  also  functions  as  a  debit  card,  for  over  the  counter  services  and  the  offering  of 
payment services via Internet banking and the Internet-based Financial Process Exchange 
(FPX) payment system.  
Another initiative undertaken has been the review of the remittance and e-money regulatory 
framework  to  encourage  the  introduction  of  payment  products  that  would  cater  for  the 
unbanked and underserved communities such as migrant workers and consumers with low 
2 
 BIS Review 69/2008
income  and  low  financial  literacy  and  who  may  have  no  alternative  but  to  rely  on  informal 
payment service providers. There are now more than 20 new remittance and mobile payment 
products that have been launched.  
The Bank has already engaged the relevant stakeholders on the priority areas identified and 
welcomes any further industry efforts to address these issues. Given the significant pay-offs 
from the low cost technologies in accelerating the adoption of electronic payment, the mobile 
phone is identified as one of the delivery channels that should be leveraged on. 
Potential of mobile phones to make the transformation 
Bank Negara Malaysia sees tremendous promise in mobile telecommunication networks as 
an  electronic  payment  channel  since  mobile  phones  are  already  in  the  hands  of  most 
Malaysians, with 88% of the Malaysian population subscribing to mobile phone services. 
The high penetration rate affirms mobile phone networks as an increasingly popular channel 
for  Malaysians 
to  perform  a  plethora  of  activities  beyond  voice  communication, 
encompassing  all  forms  of  digital  communication,  commerce,  banking  and  payments. 
Indeed, payments via text messaging has the potential to grow in importance.  
With  25  million  mobile  phone  subscribers  in  Malaysia,  there  are  immense  opportunities  to 
leverage on mobile phones to accelerate the migration to electronic payments, to widen the 
reach  and  appeal  of  electronic  payment  services,  to  deliver  innovative  mobile  payment 
products that offer speed, simplicity and convenience at minimal cost for the public, as well 
as to provide an efficient and cost-effective method of delivering financial services even in 
the remote areas. Also of significance is the high level of financial inclusion in Malaysia. With 
a population of 27 million, the banking system in Malaysia has 55 million deposit accounts 
indicating that a high percentage of the population have deposit accounts with the banking 
system. This is confirmed by a survey of a sample of 5,000 in 2003 that indicated 97% of 
those surveyed have a bank account. The financialisation of savings is also confirmed by the 
high percentage of deposits to GDP at 152%. 
The  high  percentage  of  mobile  phone  subscriber  and  the  high  rate  of  participation  of  the 
population in the banking system are important pre-conditions for the significant use of the 
mobile  phone  as  an  ideal  platform  for  personal  payments.  Indeed,  the  large  mobile 
subscriber  base  and  the  positive  transformational  effects  of  mobile  banking  and  payments 
offer  a  unique  opportunity  to  open  up  the  financial  system  to  more  customers  and 
communities, in order to achieve financial inclusion for all segments of our society. 
With the favourable market conditions, various mobile banking and payment initiatives have 
been launched in recent years. This however, has yet to achieve widespread acceptance. To 
date,  there  are  only  460,000  subscribers  for  mobile  banking  and  payment  services.  This 
represents  only  1.8%  of  the  25  million  mobile  phone  subscribers  in  the  country.  There  is, 
therefore,  a  significant  untapped,  and  potentially  lucrative  market  for  mobile  payment  and 
banking services.  
Pushing mobile channel beyond the tipping point of development 
There are fundamental issues that need to be addressed if we are to realise the opportunities 
and allow Malaysia to take full advantage of new mobile technologies. To achieve their full 
potential, it is important to identify the gaps in the service offerings, and plan the way ahead 
for Malaysia to make the quantum leap in e-payment adoption. Market participants need to 
address the mismatch between what consumers expect and what is being offered. Openness 
and  inter-connectivity  are  also  critical  in  the  mobile  banking  and  payment  initiatives. 
Exclusive and proprietary services where the target market is limited to the customer base of 
individual mobile operators or individual banks will not allow for the potential to be realised. 
BIS Review 69/2008 
 3
Any  lack  of  interoperability  across mobile  operators  and  across  banks  will  not  achieve  the 
required critical mass and will also result in high transaction cost for consumers.  
It is hoped that market participants will be able to offer new and innovative mobile payment 
products and services that opens up new markets for mobile service providers and payment 
operators, offer the convenience at reasonable costs and thus deliver the cost savings and 
efficiency  gains  that  consumers  and  businesses  seek,  and  thus  allow  for  the  economic 
benefits to be realised.  
Industry players also need to work together. An area that needs critical attention is for the 
industry players to focus on the bigger picture and regard the mobile phone as a mechanism 
towards achieving a common goal. To promote the significant use of the mobile phone for 
financial services, the industry has to respond rapidly to address the need for interoperability 
and  collaborate  in  areas  such  as  developing  a  common  infrastructure,  common  payment 
messaging  format,  as  well  as  common  security  and  authentication  standards.  Common 
standards and infrastructure will create an accessible, open and vibrant payment eco-system 
that will attract a wider consumer base allowing all market participants to reap the benefits of 
a larger customer base. A shared integrated network with common security standards and 
common messaging standards will make it easier, more cost-effective, and more convenient 
for consumers, merchants and service providers to execute and receive payments, thereby 
increasing  the  attractiveness  of  the  mobile  network  as  a  payment  channel.  Such 
collaboration will also lead to greater innovation and increased productivity that will contribute 
to the overall effectiveness and performance of the mobile payment system.  
In delivering products that the market demands, substantial investments would be required of 
participants  in  the  mobile  eco-system:  the  mobile  operators,  banking  institutions,  mobile 
device  manufacturers,  and  payment  service  providers.  Equally  important  therefore,  is  the 
need for all the stakeholders to ensure that investments are channeled judiciously into the 
areas  of  greatest  impact.  Strengthened  collaboration  in  the  key  areas  will  minimise 
duplication  and  achieve  greater  resource  efficiency.  In  this  regard,  there  is  a  need  to  fully 
understand customer payment preferences. Product offerings need to meet the expectations 
of increasingly discerning and sophisticated consumers of payment services. Collaboration is 
also  required  in  the  area  of  education  and  outreach  programmes  to  increase  consumer 
awareness and public confidence in mobile payments. 
Thirdly, regulators and market players must also share a common vision on the future mobile 
payment  landscape  in  order  to  align  strategies  and  interests  to  achieve  holistic  mobile 
payment solutions that will widen access to  the retail payment system and thus achieve a 
critical  mass  of  consumers.  The  network  externalities  and  the  social  benefits  of  the  wide 
adoption of the mobile banking and payment system provides justification for Governmental 
intervention.  The  Bank 
together  with  Malaysian  Communications  and  Multimedia 
Commission  will  work  towards  providing  the  appropriate  environment  for  economic 
development and to catalyse the transformation of the mobile initiatives. This will also include 
engagement with the market participants, payment service providers and industry players to 
collaborate in these important areas.  
Finally,  for  mobile  payment  products  to  succeed  and  achieve  widespread  acceptance,  we 
need  to  strengthen  consumer  confidence  in  the  safety,  security  and  reliability  of  mobile 
networks  as  a  means  for  consumers  to  access  financial  services.  Indeed,  mobile  digital 
signature,  which  ensures  the  confidentiality,  authenticity  and  integrity  of  payments  initiated 
from  mobile  phones,  is  one  of  the  ways  forward  towards  building  a  secure  mobile 
infrastructure that is conducive for the delivery of financial services.  
Conclusion 
We are now operating in an environment where we have to do more with less. The point I 
would like to stress this morning is that in the pursuit of this cause, we have to learn to work 
4 
 BIS Review 69/2008
together. We need to come together to decide how this cooperation can be shaped. I believe 
this symposium will contribute towards achieving this objective. In this regard, I hope that the 
results of your deliberations in this symposium will provide valuable input for the formulation 
of strategies and modalities for both the industry and authorities. On that note, I would like to 
thank Malaysian Communications and Multimedia Commission for this opportunity to share 
my thoughts on electronic payments. I wish you a stimulating and productive discussion in 
this symposium. 
BIS Review 69/2008 
 5
