Christian Noyer: Opening address, “Globalisation, Inflation and Monetary 
Policy” Symposium 
Opening address by Mr Christian Noyer, Governor of the Bank of France, at the International 
Symposium  on  “Globalisation,  Inflation  and  Monetary  Policy”,  organised  by  the  Bank  of 
France, Paris, 7 March 2008. 
 I am delighted to open this 5th international symposium of the Banque de France, which is 
an opportunity to bring together heads of central banks and international institutions, leading 
academics  and  directors  of  private  banks,  as  well  as  representatives  of  industrialised  and 
emerging countries, in order to address a topical issue of common interest and concern to us 
all.  Today’s  debate  will  be  rich  and  intense.  The  first  session,  chaired  by  Jean-Claude 
Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, will present the main concepts and stylised 
facts of globalisation and world inflation. The second session, chaired by Jean-Pierre Roth, 
President of the Swiss National Bank, will focus on the links between globalisation and the 
determinants of domestic inflation. The third session, which will take the form of a round table 
chaired by Nout Wellink, Governor of the Nederlandsche Bank, will examine the impact of 
financial  globalisation  on  growth  and  asset  prices.  Lastly,  the  fourth  session,  chaired  by 
Guillermo Ortiz, Governor of the Bank of Mexico, will assess the implications for the conduct 
of  monetary  policy.  Jacob  Frenkel  has  agreed  to  take  on  the  difficult  task  of  making  the 
concluding  remarks  for  this  symposium.  Jacob,  like  a  number  of  others  here  today, 
epitomises  the  diversity  of  the  origins  of  the  participants  in  this  symposium  since  he  has 
served on the faculty of the University of Chicago, was the Economic Counselor and Director 
of  Research  at  the  International  Monetary  Fund  and  the  former  Governor  of  the  Bank  of 
Israel,  and  is  now  the  Chairman  of  the  Group  of  Thirty  and  Vice  Chairman  of  American 
International Group (AIG). 
I will now simply make a few brief introductory remarks. 
Our  colleague  Mervyn  King  often  says  that  monetary  policy  should  be  "boring".  This  is 
certainly  not  the  case  today.  Monetary  policy  is  interesting.  But  it  is  also,  and  above  all, 
difficult. In many respects, to put it informally, the good times are behind us. Globalisation 
has  no  doubt  considerably  helped  central  banks  over  the  past  decade.  Today,  this  is  less 
clear cut. 
We are facing a combination of two difficulties. 
First, at present, for all countries, the risks for growth are on the downside and for inflation on 
the upside. Beyond the diversity of their mandates, this represents a common challenge for 
all central banks. 
Second,  because  we  are  all  affected,  to  differing  degrees,  by  the  turmoil  of  the  past  eight 
months in the credit markets. In the coming hours we shall hold an in-depth debate on the 
relationship between financial stability and price stability. But I believe that we will all agree 
that the conduct of monetary policy is more difficult and more uncertain in a less stable and 
more volatile financial environment. 
I would briefly like to develop these two points. 
The  past  two  decades  have  been  characterised,  on  the  one  hand,  by  an  increasing 
integration at the global level of goods, services and capital markets and, on the other, by a 
reduction  in  inflation  that  has  stabilised  at  low  levels.  Given  the  coexistence  of  these  two 
phenomena, a number of observers have concluded that there appears to be a causal link. 
Where exactly do we stand today? 
BIS Review 28/2008 
 1
For over ten years, with the growing integration of our economies in the past few decades, 
powerful  forces,  throughout  the  world,  have  been  acting  to  enhance  price  stability.  Each 
year, the arrival of tens of millions of people on the world market increases global production 
capacity,  in  particular  for  tradable  goods.  For  monetary  policy  in  developed  countries,  this 
process  is  equivalent  to  a  sequence  of  positive  supply  shocks  that  take  the  form  of  a 
spontaneous  decline  in  the  import  prices  of  manufactured  goods.  All  other  things  being 
equal, this terms-of-trade gain allows for a lower inflation rate for a given capacity utilisation 
rate. More fundamentally, and although things seem to be less straightforward in this area, it 
is possible that the increasing openness of our economies may have structurally changed the 
wage  and  cost  formation  process  in  a  manner  that  favours  price  stability.  Heightened 
competition  triggered  by  imports  reduces  the  market  power  of  firms  at  the  national  level. 
However, other more indirect effects are also detectable. According to studies carried out at 
the  Banque  de  France1,  the  disinflationary  impact  of  imports  appears  to  be  relatively 
independent  of  import  volumes:  the  mere  existence  of  potential  competition  renders  the 
markets, in the words of experts, more “contestable” and influences behavioural patterns. 
These  disinflationary  forces  are  still  present.  However,  there  are  now  other  more  powerful 
forces that have the opposite effect. The growth of emerging market economies and the rise 
in the living standards of their populations are leading to a surge in the demand for natural 
resources, food and energy, which logically has a strong and permanent impact on inflation. 
Furthermore, by strengthening the magnitude of global shocks in relation to more specifically 
domestic  shocks  and  favouring  the  international  transmission  of  the  latter,  globalisation 
introduces a much greater synchronisation of inflationary cycles between countries, with the 
ensuing risks of amplification. 
Overall,  the  effects  of  globalisation  have  ceased  –  probably  in  the  long  term  –  to  be 
spontaneously disinflationary. 
The second topic that I wish to discuss concerns globalisation and financial innovation. 
There  is,  in  my  mind,  no  doubt  about  the  long-term  benefits  of  the  financial  innovation 
process that we have been witnessing over the past twenty years. However, we can also see 
that  it  may  be  accompanied  by  cyclical  developments  and  structural  changes  that  could 
potentially prove to be disruptive for monetary policy. Monetary and financial conditions are 
simultaneously  influenced  by  central  bank  decisions,  but  are  also  increasingly  affected  by 
sometimes  exogenous  trends  in  asset  prices  and  the  pricing  of  risk.  The  monetary  policy 
transmission mechanism is more fraught with uncertainty and less "linear" than it used to be, 
as shocks on asset and risk prices introduce discontinuity into financing conditions. 
These developments underscore two interesting issues in particular that I would like to briefly 
consider. 
The first concerns monetary policy responses. It will have escaped nobody’s attention that 
these  responses  are  not  identical  across  all  countries.  In  my  view,  this  reflects  different 
situations more than divergent approaches. All of the world’s economies are not affected in 
the same way by property market shocks or developments on credit markets. In particular, 
we can observe that the distribution of credit remains very dynamic in Europe and that, in 
most euro area countries, property markets remain relatively stable. 
More fundamentally, it seems to me that developments in the economic and financial context 
of globalisation bear out and reinforce the importance given to what, in Eurosystem parlance, 
we  call  monetary  analysis,  i.e.  the  examination  and  analysis  of  the  main  monetary  and 
financial aggregates. We derive three major benefits from our monetary pillar. First, it favours 
the anchoring of long-term inflation expectations, which is essential when, as is currently the 
                                                 
1   Guilloux  S.  and  Kharroubi  E.  (2008),  “Some  preliminary  evidence  on  the  globalization-inflation  nexus”, 
Working paper series N°195, January 
2 
 BIS Review 28/2008
case, instantaneous pressures are strong. Second, it constitutes an integrated framework for 
the analysis of financial and monetary developments, which is particularly useful in times of 
structural  change  and  turmoil  on  credit  markets.  Lastly,  it  is  an  indicator  of  underlying 
inflationary pressures – something that is indisputably necessary. 
It  is  possible,  indeed,  that  globalisation  reduces  the  sensitivity  of  inflation  to  domestic 
demand owing to the possibility of increased use of external supply. This leads to a degree of 
decoupling  of  the  capacity  utilisation  rate  and  the  level  of  inflation.  Under  these 
circumstances,  Phillips  curves  flatten  and  the  monitoring  of  instantaneous  inflation  is  no 
longer  sufficient  to  detect  underlying  pressures.  Monetary  analysis  therefore  provides  an 
indispensable insight into inflation developments. 
The  second  issue  concerns  future  developments  in  the  world  financial  system.  We  are 
honoured  to  have  among  us  today  high-ranking  policymakers  and  experts  from  both  so-
called  industrialised  countries  and  emerging  economies.  It  seems  clear  that  not  everyone 
shares the same vision or the same approach to the processes of liberalisation and financial 
innovation.  Yet  our  economies  are  increasingly  interdependent  and  our  financial  markets 
ever more interconnected. It seems that the time has come to ask how, in the future, financial 
systems organised and regulated on such different bases and principles can co-exist, and 
what the systemic and macroeconomic consequences of this diversity will be. At a time when 
we are all reflecting on the role and future of the International Monetary Fund, this, it seems 
to me, is a major challenge that could be taken up by this institution. 
It remains, Ladies and Gentlemen, for me to hope that this symposium gives rise to fruitful 
exchanges  and  a  deeper  understanding  of  the  links  between  globalisation,  inflation  and 
monetary policy. I wish you an enjoyable and productive day, and give the floor to President 
Jean-Claude Trichet. 
BIS Review 28/2008 
 3
