Heng Swee Keat: The first Shariah-compliant ETF in Singapore 
Congratulatory remarks by Mr Heng Swee Keat, Managing Director of the Monetary Authority 
of  Singapore,  at  the  Launch  of  Daiwa  FTSE  Shariah  Japan  100  ETF  at  SGX  Centre, 
Singapore, 27 May 2008. 
 President and CEO, Daiwa Asset Management, Mr Michihito Higuchi 
Vice-President and Head of Listings, Singapore Exchange, Mr Lawrence Wong 
Distinguished guests 
Ladies and gentlemen, good morning.  
I  am  pleased  to  join  you  at  this  ceremony  to  mark  the  debut  of  the  Daiwa  FTSE  Shariah 
Japan 100 Exchange Traded Fund (ETF), the first Shariah-compliant exchange traded fund 
to be launched in Singapore.  
The  Daiwa  FTSE  Shariah  Japan  100  ETF  will  provide  retail  and  institutional  investors  the 
opportunity to access the Japanese capital markets via a Shariah-compliant product traded 
on the Singapore Exchange (SGX).  
ETFs are one of the fastest growing asset classes in the investment funds industry. They aim 
to track the performance of indices and provide access to a wide variety of markets. As at the 
end of 2007, global assets managed via ETFs are estimated to have increased by 41% over 
the previous year to reach about US$800 billion while the total number of primary listings has 
increased by 64% to 1,171. 
There  are  currently  18  ETFs  listed  on  SGX  covering  regional  markets  such  as  the  Asia-
Pacific and ASEAN, and individual markets such as China, India, South Korea, Taiwan and 
Japan,  as  well  as  alternative  investments  such  as  gold  and  commodities.  These  provide 
investors  with  the  opportunity  to  access  key  Asian  markets,  to  diversify  their  investment 
portfolios and to execute their investment strategies. 
Daiwa’s  FTSE  Shariah  Japan  100  ETF  marks  a  key  development  for  our  Islamic  finance 
industry. To facilitate the development of this growing industry, over the past few years, we 
have reviewed and refined our regulatory framework and tax structures.  
In  February  this  year,  the  Finance  Minister  announced  in  the  Budget  that  a  5% 
concessionary  tax  rate  would  be  granted  for  income  derived  from  Shariah-compliant  fund 
management,  lending,  and  insurance  &  reinsurance.  The  tax  exemption  on  income  from 
Sukuks that are Qualifying Debt Securities will also be extended to all investors. A few weeks 
ago, MAS announced that it will be developing a facility for the issuance of Singapore Dollar, 
sovereign-rated  Sukuks  to  meet  the  needs  of  financial  institutions  conducting  Shariah-
compliant activities in Singapore. These Sukuks will be issued on a reverse enquiry basis, 
and will initially be priced off the Singapore Government securities market. 
These  initiatives  are  catalysed  by  feedback  from  the  industry,  which  has  taken  an  active 
interest in the development of Islamic Finance in Singapore. I would like to thank the industry 
for  your  feedback.  We  have  seen  promising  growth.  A  dozen  Middle  Eastern  banks  are 
operating  in  Singapore,  adding  Islamic  financing  activities  to  their  conventional  financing. 
Singapore's first Islamic Bank, Islamic Bank of Asia has just opened its first overseas office in 
Bahrain. International banks are structuring Islamic financial products in Singapore. 
Daiwa’s FTSE Shariah Japan 100 ETF is therefore well placed to meet the growing demand 
for Shariah compliant financial solutions. This listing adds to the range of ETF and Shariah 
compliant products in Singapore, and provides a direct channel for investing in Japan.  
Trade and investment between Japan and the Middle East are increasing, and will continue 
to  rise  in  the  coming  years.  The  flow  of  finance  and  investment  capital  will  rise  to 
BIS Review 67/2008 
 1
complement these. Japan which has the second largest economy in the world has much to 
offer to promote the flow of capital, ideas and technology. I am pleased that investors and 
financial  institutions  like  Daiwa  have  found  Singapore  a  useful  node  to  facilitate  this  flow 
between Japan and the Middle East. We will, on our part, continue to facilitate this deepening 
of business and financial relations. 
On that note, let me extend my heartiest congratulations to Daiwa Asset Management and 
the Singapore Exchange for embarking on this venture. We look forward to its success and 
the  creation  of  more  innovative  investment  products  from  Daiwa  Asset  Management  and 
other financial institutions to add to the vibrancy of our market. 
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS Review 67/2008
