Jean-Claude Trichet: Willem F Duisenberg Fellowship of the Netherlands 
Institute for Advanced Study 
Introductory remarks by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, at 
the  inauguration  of  the  Willem  F  Duisenberg  Fellowship  of  the  Netherlands  Institute  for 
Advanced Study, Amsterdam, 28 February 2008. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
It  is  a  great  pleasure  for  me  to  be  here  today  in  Amsterdam  to  inaugurate  the  Willem  F. 
Duisenberg Fellowship of the Netherlands Institute for Advanced Study.  
I am particularly delighted to be here for two reasons. First, this new Fellowship was set up in 
honour  of  Wim  Duisenberg,  the  first  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank  (ECB),  who 
successfully  led  us  through  the  uncharted  territory  of  introducing  the  euro  as  the  new 
currency for the, by now, around 320 million fellow European citizens. Second, the Willem F. 
Duisenberg Fellowship establishes another European programme that will foster top-quality 
research in the field of applied monetary and macroeconomics. It will thereby contribute to 
the continuous upgrading of our knowledge in these areas of research, which is fundamental 
for the sound conduct of monetary policy and of economic policies in the euro area.  
Let me also say now that we are in the purdah period as far as the Governing Council of the 
ECB is concerned. Nothing in what I will say is intended to and should be interpreted in any 
respect in terms of future monetary policy. 
The  ECB  has,  from  the  very  beginning  of  its  existence,  attached  great  importance  to 
establishing close ties with academic research, in order to ensure the constant exposure of 
our analyses and views to external ideas and expertise. We foster these close ties in various 
ways. We frequently co-organise conferences, workshops and seminars on topics relevant 
for policy-making in the euro area. To give you an idea, last year alone, we were involved in 
the  organisation  of  17  such  events.  Furthermore,  we  also  frequently  invite  academics  to 
come  to  the  ECB  to  present  their  work,  for  example,  in  the  context  of  a  weekly,  invited 
speaker seminar, called the Joint Lunchtime seminar, which we organise together with the 
Center for Financial Studies and the Deutsche Bundesbank. In addition, we make sure that 
the  analytical  output  of  our  staff  members  is  regularly  presented  and  discussed  at 
international research seminars and conferences. Finally, our close links with academia are 
also promoted through external consultancies and visiting research fellowships.  
In  order  to  ensure  that  there  is  fruitful  interaction  with  academic  researchers,  we  need  to 
maintain  strong  in-house  analytical  capabilities  at  the  ECB.  This  allows  us  to  continuously 
follow  the  latest  developments  in  academic  research  and  to  assess  their  relevance  for 
monetary  policy.  It  also  enables  us  to  better  connect  the  worlds  of  academia  and  policy-
making, as well as to identify and to contribute to closing gaps in research areas where we 
feel  more  in-depth  knowledge  is  required  to  support  policy-making.  This  has  been 
successfully  carried  out,  for  example,  in  the  context  of  a  number  of  Eurosystem  research 
networks that have been led and coordinated by the ECB, the past Monetary Transmission 
and Inflation Persistence Networks and the currently ongoing Wage Dynamics Network.  
While keeping up with academic research, which is very important for central banks, we must 
at the same time refrain from jumping immediately on the bandwagon of every new paradigm 
that  is  proposed  by  some  academic  researchers.  Prematurely  accepting  new,  untested 
theories entails the risk of serious policy errors if such work turns out to be flawed. This is 
what the experiences of the past have taught us. 
In the 1960s and 1970s, many economists subscribed to the view, which was also supported 
by  a  number  of  leading  academic  researchers  at  the  time,  that  a  permanent  trade-off 
BIS Review 24/2008 
 1
between inflation and unemployment existed, and that inflation was, to a large extent, driven 
by non-monetary factors outside the realm of monetary policy. This view also influenced a 
significant  number  of  central  banks’  policy  conduct  at  that  time,  leading  to  an  overly-
expansionary  monetary  policy  stance,  eventually  resulting  in  what  is  today  known  as  the 
Great  Inflation.  These  developments  brought  academic  researchers  and  monetary  policy-
makers to recall in particular one long-standing macroeconomic principle that had fallen into 
oblivion: that inflation is ultimately a monetary phenomenon, meaning that inflation is, in the 
long run, solely determined by monetary policy.  
Today,  there  is  far-reaching  consensus  between  academics  and  policy-makers,  distilled 
through  decades  of  academic  reflection  and  policy  experience,  that  price  stability  is  a 
necessary condition for sustained economic growth and sustained job creation, and that the 
responsibility for price stability is best placed in the hands of an independent central bank. 
This  consensus  is  enshrined  in  the  ECB’s  and  many  other  central  banks’  institutional 
architecture,  which  is  characterised  by  two  constituent  features:  a  clear  mandate  to 
safeguard price stability, and institutional independence in order to ensure that this mandate 
is effectively pursued.  
While  monetary  policy  can  make  an  important  contribution  to  economic  welfare  by 
maintaining price stability, and thereby eliminating distortions arising from high and volatile 
inflation,  the  development  of  growth  and  employment  are  ultimately  determined  by  the 
structural  features  of  an  economy.  Well-designed  structural  policies  promoting  flexibility  in 
product  and  labour  markets,  enhancing  education  and  training  and  fostering  research  and 
development are, therefore, crucial for the long-run performance and smooth functioning of 
an  economy.  This  holds  particularly  true  in  a  monetary  union  like  the  euro  area,  where 
national  monetary  and  exchange  rate  policies  are  no  longer  available  as  adjustment 
mechanisms.  
Recognising the need for sound structural policies, the Member States have established a 
comprehensive reform agenda in the context of the Lisbon Strategy aiming at enhancing the 
growth  and  employment  potential  of  the  euro  area  countries.  Yet,  while  there  have  been 
some remarkable improvements, reflected, in particular, in the creation of 15 million new jobs 
in the euro area since the start of Economic and Monetary Union (EMU) compared to only 
around  three  million  new  jobs  in  the  nine  preceding  years,  in  many  countries,  structural 
reform  efforts  have  not  sufficiently  enhanced  the  flexibility  and  efficiency  of  product  and 
labour markets. This is evidenced by the still unacceptably high unemployment rate in some 
regions or segments of the labour market, and the very low level of labour productivity growth 
in the euro area.1  
Implementing and carrying out structural reforms is undoubtedly a challenging and arduous 
task.  However,  it  is  particularly  important  to  resolutely  pursue  such  reforms  in  the  current 
environment,  where  the  euro  area  economy  is  facing  a  number  of  important  challenges, 
including  rapid 
forces  and  ageing 
populations. 
The  experience  of  those  European  countries,  which  have  undertaken  courageous  and 
successful  reforms  in  the  past,  shows  that  they  pay  off.2  The  Netherlands  is  one  such 
country, and is now characterised by a flexible labour market with the lowest unemployment 
rate in the euro area at 3.2% in 2007. In addition, with a total participation rate of 78.5% in 
2007, the highest in the EU, and a female participation of 72.2%, two of the Lisbon objectives 
have already been met.  
technological  change,  accelerating  globalisation 
                                                 
1   The annual growth rate of real GDP per hour worked in the euro area averaged only 1.3% over the period 
1999-2006. 
2   See A. Annett (2006) “Lessons from successful labour market reformers in Europe”, IMF euro area policies: 
selected issues, August 2006. 
2 
 BIS Review 24/2008
I would like to turn now to some of the reform policies pursued in the Netherlands that led to 
the remarkable performance of the Dutch labour market over the last quarter of a century. 
Speaking of structural reforms, and the successful reforms carried out by the Netherlands, it 
seems  fitting  that  Professor  Boeri,  who  is  known  as  a  forceful  exponent  of  economic 
liberalisation  and  structural  reform  in  Europe,  and  in  particular  in  his  own  country,  will  be 
conducting  his  fellowship  at  the  Netherlands  Institute  for  Advanced  Study  located  in 
Wassenaar, where, 25 years ago, the decisive Wassenaar Agreement was signed, steering 
the  course  towards  change  and  initiating  the  remarkable  and  substantial  recovery  of  the 
Dutch economy. 
The main outcome of the Wassenaar Agreement was the establishment of wage moderation, 
which,  in  turn,  helped  firms  to  restore  profitability  and  stimulate  both  investment  and 
employment.3  Prior  to  this  agreement,  the  Netherlands  had  been  gripped  in  a  wage-price 
spiral. However, through this agreement, which considerably diminished wage indexation, a 
platform for the remarkable turnaround of labour-market performance was created.  
In addition, a continuum of supportive policy frameworks aimed at reforming labour market 
institutions  was  adopted,  thereby  ensuring  the  underpinning  of  wage  moderation.4  The 
expansion of the part-time and temporary agency work sector in the Netherlands, combined 
with  the  implementation  of  effective  policies,  has  resulted  in  both  greater  flexibility  in  the 
labour  market,  and  job  certainty  for  part-time  and  temporary  agency  workers.  Moreover,  it 
has  assisted  in  alleviating  the  “insider-outsider”  characterisation  of  the  European  labour 
market. Furthermore, the steady reduction in tax wedges and reforms of the benefit system, 
in  particular,  the  shortening  of  the  maximum  duration  of  unemployment  benefits  and  the 
reforms governing the disability scheme which were implemented over several years, have 
also helped increase the labour market’s performance. 
What  the  Netherlands  and  all  successful  reformers  have  in  common  is  that  they  have,  in 
parallel,  successfully  reduced  product  market  regulation.  This  has  led  to  more  effective 
employment  growth  following  an  increase  in  labour  supply,  as  wage  moderation  has  fed 
through to jobs as opposed to rents.5 On this score, the proposed policies to further enhance 
the  innovative  environment  of  the  Netherlands  should  be  commended.  In  summary,  a 
successful reform programme is more than just the sum of the individual reform policies due 
to the synergies that are created. Additionally, and as Professor Boeri has recently pointed 
out,6 there can be no steps backward in undertaking and implementing reforms, particularly 
with the need for greater flexibility in this era of rapidly changing economic environments. 
Being  here  in  Amsterdam  today,  on  this  given  occasion,  I  should  also  like  to  take  the 
opportunity to recall the successful transition to Economic and Monetary Union (EMU). It was 
here in the Netherlands where the milestones, on the way to this truly historical achievement, 
were set. The Maastricht Treaty, signed in February 1992, and the Stability and Growth Pact, 
sealed  here  in  Amsterdam  in  June  1997,  laid  down  the  institutional  framework  for  EMU, 
which  provided  the  basis  for  the  successful  transition  to  the  euro  and  the  ECB’s  price 
stability-oriented monetary policy. And it was the Dutchman Wim Duisenberg, first President 
of the European Central Bank, who we are honouring here today with the inauguration of this 
new Fellowship, who led us into the most decisive phase of the monetary union. Indeed, for 
most  of  the  1990s,  global  investors  and  market  participants  had  been  lukewarm  and 
sceptical  vis-à-vis  the  prospects  for EMU.  But,  in  1998,  the  markets  radically  changed  the 
                                                 
3   See J. Eriksson and E. Udden-Jondal (1997) “Lessons of the Dutch model”, Riksbank, Quarterly Review 3/4. 
4   See A. Annett (2006) “Lessons from successful labour market reformers in Europe”, IMF euro area policies: 
selected issues, August 2006. 
5   See A. Annett (2006) “Lessons from successful labour market reformers in Europe”, IMF euro area policies: 
selected issues, August 2006. 
6   T. Boeri, “Europe is caught mid-river in labour reforms”, Financial Times, 16 January 2008. 
BIS Review 24/2008 
 3
way they viewed EMU, recognising that the new currency would display the best — not the 
average  —  characteristics  of  the  currencies  that  it  was  designed  to  replace.  All  along  the 
yield curve, the future euro-area market interest rates became progressively aligned with the 
lowest market rates denominated in the most credible currencies, reflecting the stabilisation 
of inflation expectations in the euro area at the levels prevailing in those countries with the 
best monetary tradition available in Europe. All of us at the ECB, and at the national central 
banks of the Eurosystem – in the Netherlands the Dutch Central Bank with Nout Wellink at its 
helm – we will continue to preserve this legacy and to do our best so that, as Wim said, “in 
the end history judges our new, shared currency to be a success.”7  
                                                 
7   W. Duisenberg, Address delivered on the occasion of a special ECOFIN dinner to pay tribute to his leadership 
of the European Central Bank, Venice, 29 October 2003. 
4 
 BIS Review 24/2008
