Usha Thorat: Ensuring dignity for the Indian customer – tasks head for 
Indian banks 
Address  by  Ms  Usha  Thorat,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the 
61st Annual General Meeting of the Indian Banks' Association, Mumbai, 26 May 2008. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
It  gives  me  great  pleasure  to  be  amidst  my  banker  friends  on  the  occasion  of  IBA’s  61st 
AGM. 
The activities of the IBA have grown in diversity and scale in the recent period, not in small 
measure  due  to  the  dynamic  leadership  of  CEO  Mr  Sinor,  who  I  understood  was  to  have 
demitted office on 31st May, but I believe has been persuaded by the Chairman to continue 
for a while. Chairman Mr Rao, Deputy Chairmen Mr Khandelwal, Mr Narayanswami and Mr 
Nayar have, I am sure, provided their own unique direction to IBA, which has today emerged 
as a highly respected body and voice of the industry. In fact, there is hardly any aspect of 
banking  that  RBI  would  consider  without  involving  and  consulting  IBA.  In  particular,  I  am 
happy  that  many  cooperative  banks  are  now  members  of  IBA.  I  feel  RRBs  also  could 
consider becoming members and  derive the benefits of such membership. Also, I suggest 
that IBA consider reduced fees for smaller cooperative banks and RRBs who could join as 
non voting members – they can greatly benefit by the professionalism imparted through such 
membership.  
For  those  of  us  who  joined  the  banking  industry  in  the  early  70s,  what  we  see  today 
represents a dream come true – India, aspiring to be a global player and leader in all fields, 
adopting and setting best practices in every way – I wonder how many of us imagined that 
we  would  see  this  happen  during  our  career.  Having  said  that,  I  would  hasten  to  add,  as 
Robert  Frost  put  it,  there  are  miles  to  go  before  we  sleep.  There  is  always  an  unfinished 
agenda –that truly represents the challenge of a banker’s job! 
Talking about leaving behind matters that are of true value, I recollect a truly inspiring speech 
given by Subroto Bagchi of Mind Tree to the IIM Bangalore class of 2006 and I quote (Mr 
Bagchi’s father was in Government service):  
“Government  houses  seldom  came  with  fences.  Mother  and  I  collected 
twigs  and  built  a  small  fence.  After  lunch,  my  Mother  would  never  sleep. 
She would take her kitchen utensils and with those she and I would dig the 
rocky,  white  ant  infested  surrounding.  We  planted  flowering  bushes.  The 
white  ants  destroyed  them.  My  mother  brought  ash  from  her  chulha  and 
mixed it in the earth and we planted the seedlings all over again. This time, 
they  bloomed.  At  that  time,  my  father's  transfer  order  came.  A  few 
neighbours told my mother why she was taking so much pain to beautify a 
government house, why she was planting seeds that would only benefit the 
next occupant. My mother replied that it did not matter to her that she would 
not see the flowers in full bloom. She said, “I have to create a bloom in a 
desert and whenever I am given a new place, I must leave it more beautiful 
than what I had inherited”.  
That  was  my  first  lesson  in  success.  It  is  not  about  what  you  create  for 
yourself, it is what you leave behind that defines success.” 
I often feel that being a banker is probably one of the most satisfying professions in the world 
–like being a doctor it gives you an opportunity to render service and make a difference to 
people  and  to  society.  It  involves  nurturing  entrepreneurs,  helping  businesses  grow  to 
become large corporates and MNCs; empowering people, helping them realise their goals by 
BIS Review 72/2008 
 1
giving them education loans and loans for their enterprises; providing the “blood circulation” 
viz, the payments system for the financial system – all this and more. Secondly, a banker is a 
person  of  substance  in  the  society.  Being  a  banker  involves  constant  human  and  social 
interaction with a wide cross section of public – an enriching and satisfying experience. The 
third most satisfying part of a banker’s job is that one continues to learn new things about 
practically every field of activity – agro tech, bio tech, software, steel, cotton textiles, cement, 
infrastructure and innumerable others – it is a profession where one can be most creative 
and one that challenges the intelligence and wisdom of the best. You are privileged to be a 
banker!! 
I am truly impressed looking at the breadth and depth of activities IBA has been involved in 
the past year – Basle II preparedness, payments and settlement system, legal interventions, 
consumer protection, accounting standards, IT usage, financial crime and financial inclusion. 
Each  of  these  areas  by  itself  represents  a  huge  amount  of  research,  dedicated  work,  and 
coordination. Other impressive initiatives include setting up of Cordex, a section 25 company 
for  pooling  of  risk  data  and  operational  loss  data,  participation  in  the  BCSBI,  launching  a 
financial  education  portal  and,  what  to  me  is  the  most  exciting  initiative,  the  possibility  of 
unique customer identity across banks. The impact that IT can have on financial inclusion is 
unimaginable  and  the  IBA’s  initiative  to  evolve  common  standards  for  this  purpose  is 
laudable. That India has arrived is reflected in admittance of IBA in the IBFed of six major 
bankers’ association from the developed countries. I am sure that the Indian banking system 
can provide leadership in quite a few areas. One area in which I know we are international 
leaders  is  in  providing  low  cost,  biometric  identified  bank  accounts  through  smart  cards, 
mobiles and hand held connected devices to ensure universal access to banking.  
Having praised the IBA management and members for their work and initiatives in 2007-08, 
let me turn to a few areas where I feel there is much to be done. In any forum of the public 
that  I  address,  be  it  citizens  forum,  Rotary,  SHG  groups  or  others,  one  feedback  that 
regularly comes is opening of a bank account is still quite a chore and full of hurdles; not 
every bank branch offers no frills or basic banking account and not many branch staff are 
aware,  or  even  if  aware,  are  willing  to  open  a  simple  account  where  RBI  has  specified  a 
simplified KYC for accounts with low level of transactions i.e. where balances do not exceed 
Rs 50000 and credits are not more that Rs.1.00 Lakh a year. Maybe in 2008-09, IBA should 
get its members to adopt software to be able to monitor these two conditions online, so that 
branch staff can confidently open such accounts without worrying that they may inadvertently 
be  KYC  non-compliant!  Similarly,  how  many  of  you  can  confidently  say  that  all  of  your 
branches provide cash exchange facilities and coins to walk in customers? How many of you 
can  confidently  say  that  you  render  this  service  at  least  at  all  currency  chest  branches? 
Unfortunately,  our  incognito  visits  have  revealed  that  seldom  are  such  services  offered  to 
walk in customers and even for regular customers, it is rarely a counter service. In fact, my 
personal  experience  during  incognito  visits  is  far  from  encouraging.  A  bank  branch  in  any 
location should offer some basic banking services such as currency, remittances, basic forex 
(with CBS this should not be a problem) as also shared ATM. When we license a branch, it is 
like providing a public good in that area, like electricity or telephony and I feel the spirit of this 
licence has to be respected.  
In  the  area  of  customer  service  the  cherished  principles  in  treating  customers  fairly  are 
transparency, reasonableness, truth in selling, confidentiality and assistance when needed, 
apart from effective grievance redressal machinery. However, quite often one comes across 
cases  of  complaints  where  these  principles  are  hardly  followed  and  the  customer  feels 
treated unfairly – for every one person who files a complaint there are probably 99 others 
who do not.. IBA, BCSBI and Banking Ombudsmen’s Offices are the three pillars for better 
customer service and we need to see that our dreams in this regard are achieved.  
I would now like to turn to areas where I feel banks may need to give strategic focus and 
evolve products, processes and have in place people with capacities to translate strategies 
into  action.  These  are  in  the  fields  of  agriculture,  unorganised  sector  and  supporting  skill 
2 
 BIS Review 72/2008
formation  of  every  type.  In  agriculture,  the  need  of  the  hour  is  efficiency,  supply  chain 
management  and  technology  for  improving  production  and  productivity  and  strengthening 
link  to  markets  both  for  inputs  and  output.  The  National  Development  Council  found  that 
there are several yield gaps across States indicating that there is potential for yield increase 
by investment in agriculture. This would call for new strategies for better credit delivery and 
credit culture in agriculture. In the last 10 years or so, it is found that the occupations that 
have  generated  maximum  jobs  are  IT,  ITES,  construction,  retail  trade,  hotels,  restaurants 
and tourism, health care, education, training and consulting. These are sectors where start 
up financing, bridge financing, working capital and investment financing are very important. 
Banks  will  need  to  channelise  all  their  creative  forces  jointly  in  meeting  the  financing 
challenges  of  these  sectors.  Credit  guarantee  schemes  and  operationalisation  of  credit 
information companies can provide a huge boost to these sectors but it will require willing 
banks to upscale their efforts in financing SMEs in these and other areas.  
I would like to conclude by citing Governor’s recent talk at the Institute of Asian Studies at 
Singapore  where  he  referred  to  the  “not  easily  quantifiable  strengths”  which  the  Indian 
economy  possesses.  A  vast  pool  of  science  and  technology  graduates  and  the millions  of 
people who are familiar with the English language are a source of strength. The familiarity 
with multiple languages in India prepares the people – and I would like to specifically include 
Indian bankers in this category – to adapt better to multi-cultural situations, making it easier 
for them to fit into international systems smoothly. In fact, I believe that one of the strengths 
of Indian bankers and banking is the versatility in being able to undertake the most complex 
financial structures to simple products like gold loans and loans to Self Help Groups – it is 
universal banking of a kind that is not so universal. In his speech Governor also referred to 
the “demographic dividend” seen as an inevitable advantage, provided pre-requisites such as 
skill-upgradation and sound governance to realize it are put in place. He said that perhaps 
we  should  track  not  only  the  addition  to  the  number  of  billionaires  in  India  but  also  the 
depletion in the number of millions of poor and unemployed. Summing up his talk, Governor 
observed “For some, Indian economic progress signifies the beginnings of a major economic 
powerhouse in the world. But for many of us, the optimism over the medium-term is only the 
beginning  of  an  arduous  journey  to  ensure  basic  nutrition,  clean  water,  safer  sanitation, 
minimal housing, personal security and individual dignity for millions in India”.  
Indeed,  fulfilling  the  basic  necessities  of  life,  providing  essential  services  and  ensuring 
individual dignity for the millions in the country continue to be the major challenges. Banks 
have a significant role to play in addressing these challenges. I am sure that you will all rise 
to the occasion, and in doing so, the IBA can only grow from strength to strength! 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 72/2008 
 3
