Shamshad Akhtar: Pakistan – economic sustainability 
Speech by Dr Shamshad Akhtar, Governor of the State Bank of Pakistan, at the JP Morgan – 
Pakistan Corporate Access Forum, Dubai, 5 March 2008. 
 Pakistan has withstood series of endogenous events, including political uncertainty as a lead 
up  to  election,  and  the  unprecedented  exogenous  shocks  that  have  ranged  from  financial 
markets  turmoil  to  climbing  global  commodity  prices.  On  domestic  political  front,  with 
elections now over the country is well on its way to a smooth transition gearing for a fully 
democratic system. Leading parties’ efforts to cement a coalition augurs well for confidence 
building;  smooth  functioning  of  legislature  and  their  inbuilt  accountability,  while  ensuring 
representation  of  public  voice  in  steering  the  formulation  and  implementation  of  the  future 
economic agenda. Ruling and opposition parties will need to rise above personal agenda to 
ensure sustainability of democracy. 
After a period of benign global economic environment, world economic outlook since August 
2007 has been adversely impacted by subprime mortgage meltdown and its ripple effects on 
financial markets. Advanced countries are facing slowdown in economic activity. To mitigate 
the ensuing recessionary pressures, easing of monetary policy by the United States are to 
compound the already high inflationary pressures emerging from the exceptional rise in the 
global commodity prices, in particular of products such as oil, gold and wheat. 
Thus far Pakistan, like other Asian economies, remained immune to these shocks. Economic 
and  financial  markets  remained  calm  in  Pakistan  as  they  had  limited  exposure  to  the  US 
subprime  market  and  other  related  products.  With  financial  market  turmoil  deepening,  the 
slowdown  in  economic  growth  and  consequent  reduced  demand  of  advanced  countries 
triggered  greater  uncertainty  and  induced  vulnerabilities  in  international  equity  markets. 
These  developments  have  begun  to  cast  shadow,  impacting  emerging  economies  equity 
markets softening their growth prospects, albeit they remain set to grow strongly and.  
Pakistan,  like  other  emerging  markets,  faces  a  key  question  regarding  sustainability  of  its 
economic achievements. Abstracting from political debates, there is widespread confidence 
that Pakistan has achieved a significant economic turnaround. While short terms challenges 
and stresses have magnified, I propose to provide perspectives that the turnaround achieved 
is sustainable provided it is urgently backed by a well designed macroeconomic stabilization 
package  and  deeper  structural  reforms.  In  my  presentation  I  make  the  case  that  Pakistan 
has  strong  economic  growth  potential  given  the  country’s  inherent  dynamics.  Second, 
restoring macroeconomic sustainability, despite disruption in FY08 trends, has to be on top 
of  economic  agenda  and  is  feasible  given  scope  for  domestic  resource  mobilization  and 
improved  debt  management.  Third,  there  is  need  to  deepen  investment  incentives  and 
climate have to improve. 
Finally, Pakistan is and has to build momentum to diversify agriculture, industry as well as 
export  base,  and  develop  infrastructure.  Implementation  of  this  agenda  will  augur  well  for 
country’s  long  term  economic  growth  prospects  while  offering  wide  range  of  investment 
opportunities that make Pakistan an attractive destination.  
Economic performance and potential 
Pakistan  average  economic  growth  rate  was  6.3%  for  fiscal  years  (FY)  FY03-07:  during 
these 5 years economic growth was above 7% in two years and 9% in FY04-05 confirming 
rise in trend growth rate and capturing well the real economic potential. In productive sectors 
growth  has  been  broad-based  but  accompanied  by  underlying  structural  shifts.  Services 
sector  has  been  the  most  buoyant  and  constitute  over  53%  of  the  overall  GDP,  with 
BIS Review 32/2008 
 1
agricultural  sector’s  share  declining  from  25.9%  in  FY00  to  20.9%  in  FY07  and  industrial 
sector’s contribution rising from 23% to 27% over this period. 
Rising  domestic  consumption  demand  has  been  the  main  driver  of  growth;  accompanying 
rise, albeit somewhat slow, in investment rate. After averaging around 18.6% over the FY03-
06,  investment  rate  grew  to  23%  in  FY07  –  reflecting  a  4.4%  percentage  point  growth  in 
investment/GDP  ratio  in  one  year.  This  was  expected  to  be  boosted  further  by  significant 
growth in public investment in FY08, though given fiscal exigencies a part of this may not be 
realized.  
Pakistan’s rich and large landscape offers a sizeable domestic market that is likely to double, 
reaching a population base of 230 million by 2030. Being at the crossroads of South Asia, 
Central  Asia  and  West  Asia  with  close  proximity,  both  by  air  and  sea,  to  the  Gulf  region 
makes  Pakistan  a  promising  regional  hub  and  market  for  nurturing  intra  and  inter-regional 
trade and investment. Recognizing these considerations, Multinational Corporations several 
years back set up businesses here. As confidence in Pakistan’s economy grew, there has 
been  a  significant  growth  in  foreign  capital  inflows,  cumulatively  estimated  to  be  around 
$13.5  billion  (including  global  deposit  receipts  flows)  over  the  last  five  years.  The  telecom 
sector,  the  major  recipient  of  foreign  investment  close  to  $4.6  billion,  is  under  private 
ownership and management; among other achievement the number of mobile subscribers is 
now  over  80  million.  Similarly,  close  to  half  of  banking  assets  are  now  under  foreign 
ownership as close to $2.7 billion foreign equity was injected in the sector and oil and gas 
sector  has  attracted  $1.4  billion.  Pakistan  is  now  a  well  tested  destination  for  foreigners. 
Corporate  and  banking  companies’  returns  have  been  high  and  investors,  be  domestic  or 
foreign, are being well compensated for whatever risk premium they attach to Pakistan.  
Restore macroeconomic stability; despite the disruption caused by 2007 events 
Economic  growth  of  Pakistan  has  benefited  from  macroeconomic  stability.  Containing 
macroeconomic imbalances helped generate (i) external current account surpluses in two of 
the  preceding  five  fiscal  years  while  (ii)  fiscal  deficit  was  below  4%  in  three  of  the  five 
preceding fiscal years supported by surplus or zero primary balances (reflecting an effort to 
balance current revenues with current expenditures).  
Pakistan however now faces renewed economic vulnerabilities. Among others, compulsion to 
subsidize  food,  oil  products  and  power  &  gas  tariffs  by  preventing  full  pass  through  of 
international price hikes and to raise public investment to address infrastructural and skills 
gaps,  essential  to  maintain  growth  path,  have  together  disrupted  progress  in  fiscal 
containment.  Corrective  policy  actions,  taken  in  the  last  few  weeks,  including  rise  in 
petroleum products, electricity and gas prices and cuts in development expenditures will at 
best ease marginally fiscal strains.  
Notwithstanding,  the  growing  aggregate  demand  pressures  in  face  of  rising  per  capita 
income, six-fold increase in remittance, set to reach $6.5 billion for FY08, and exceptional 
rise in private credit, high import growth of petroleum products and capital, intermediate and 
raw  material  goods  have  compounded  these  vulnerabilities.  Underlying  demand  pressure 
and  threefold  increase  in  import  oil  bill  coupled  with  slow  down  in  export  growth  has  also 
widened external current account deficit.  
Keeping  strong  vigilance  on  the  economy,  the  central  bank  took  a  lead  in  containing  the 
aggregate  demand  pressures.  Incrementally,  monetary  policy  was  tightened  through  three 
rounds  of  raising  the  SBP  policy  rate  (by  300bp)  since  April  2005  to  10.5%,  raising  the 
reserve  ratio,  and  improving  liquidity  management  through  open  market  operations. 
Monetary policy in Pakistan has benefited from the independence and strong accountability 
of  the  central  bank  as  well  as  from  the  central  bank’s  conscious  efforts  to  ensure 
transparency  in  public  communications  of  monetary  policy  stance  and  perspective  on  the 
economy.  Monetary  policy  has  managed  to  keep  inflationary  pressures  in  check  by 
2 
 BIS Review 32/2008
ii. 
iii. 
managing  to  lower  core  inflation;  slippages  in  inflation  target  were  inevitable  given  the 
uptrend in the global commodity prices as well as structural complexities and inefficiencies of 
wholesale and retail markets.  
Global and domestic cyclical events will undoubtedly pose frequent challenges for small and 
open  economies,  like  Pakistan.  Recognizing  this,  the  new  Government  will  need  to 
strengthen the Medium-Term Macroeconomic Stabilization Program and front load it, while 
accelerating the implementation of structural reforms to realign deficits to sustainable levels. 
Keeping  this  in  perspective,  the  Government’s  broader  economy  strategy  for  the  next  few 
years will need to include: 
i. 
Increasing domestic resource mobilization to raise revenue/GDP ratio by at least 5 
percentage points of GDP. This is possible given the scope for enlargement of tax 
base: the existing tax regime collects almost 68% of taxes from manufacturing and 
corporate  sector,  while  agriculture  and  services  sectors  (aside  from  banks)  are 
exempt and segments of economy are outside tax net; 
Nation-wide  campaign  to  raise  saving  levels  through  continued  efforts  to  raising 
awareness and deepening financial markets;  
Restricting large proportion of new resource mobilization for public investment, while 
prioritizing 
the 
Government machinery; 
Restoring  the  momentum  of  privatization  of  state-owned  enterprises,  which  has 
been one of the most successful in Asia. The Government has sold off cumulatively 
almost $7 billion of assets over FY00-FY08 and there are around 61 state entities in 
the pipeline; 
Providing  more  autonomy  to  public  sector  organizations,  with  effective  leadership 
and  management, 
financial  efficiencies 
accompanied by a program to strengthen their balance sheets which should allow 
them  to  graduate  from  budgetary  allocations  to  seeking  funding  from  the  market; 
and 
Raising private investment/GDP from 23% to at least 28% which involves significant 
tapping additional resources both from domestic and international financial markets. 
Although this is an ambitious macroeconomic framework, but launching and adhering to it is 
attainable  and  critical.  To  position  itself,  Pakistan  plans  to  further  enhance  its  policy 
framework and tap its economic potential by mobilizing additional foreign capital that is likely 
to be attracted as the country offers lucrative investment opportunities across all sectors. 
through  a  major  overhauling  of 
the  recurrent  expenditures 
their  operational  and 
improve 
iv. 
vi. 
to 
v. 
Deepening of liberal incentive and investment regime will help economic sustainability 
Broad  based  deregulation  and  liberalization  of  investment  and  pricing  regime,  Pakistan 
attracted  cumulatively  $13.5  billion  investment  across  all  strategic  sectors.  This  has  been 
facilitated by easing entry of domestic private sector and foreign equity with flexibility to fully 
own  businesses.  Long  standing  liberal  and  partial  capital  account  convertibility  allows 
individuals, firms or companies to freely undertake all international transactions through the 
interbank market. Aside from allowing 100% foreign equity, there are no bars on repatriation 
of  capital,  profits,  royalty  etc.  Exchange  rate  stability  has  been  supported  by  prudent 
exchange rate management. 
Recapitalization  and  restructuring/privatization  and  induction  of  professional  management, 
banking  sector  has  been  the  most  dynamic  sector.  Liberal  entry  requirements  and  huge 
market potential given the current low financial penetration ratio have encouraged entry of 
global players. Foreign investors are allowed to hold up to 49% of the foreign equity in the 
banking sector, while banks with global Tier-1 capital is US$ 5 billion or more or institutions 
BIS Review 32/2008 
 3
from the regional cooperation organizations (ECO) can hold up to 100% foreign equity in a 
banking institution in Pakistan. Companies acquired have to over the years be incorporated 
as  wholly  owned  subsidiary  or  opening  a  branch  in  Pakistan.  Even  in  those  cases  where 
foreign equity up to 49% is permissible, a higher percentage of foreign equity ownership is 
allowed  by  SBP  on  a  case-to-case  basis  depending  on  the  strength  of  the  incoming 
institution.  
Companies have further benefited from access to private credit which grew at an average 
rate of 25.5% for FY03-07. This growth has been supported by structural changes in banking 
sector  which  is  largely  private  sector  run.  Over  the  last  five  years,  profitability  of  banking 
sector has surged reaching $1.70 billion in 2007, return on equity growing to 20.0% by Sept 
07  and  net  NPLs  ratio  reducing  to  2.3%.  Capital  market  has  benefited  from  the  growth  in 
stock market capitalization from $7.51 billion to $65.9 billion by the end-2007 and rise in P/E 
ratios have attracted foreign portfolio investment.  
To promote competition and efficiency corporate tax rate has been lowered and trade has 
been  liberalized.  Average  tariffs  are  7.6%  and  tariffs  on  import  of  plant,  machinery  & 
equipment  for  industrial  sector  has  been  reduced  to  5%  and  for  agriculture  sector  to  zero 
percent  while  50%  Initial  Depreciation  Allowance  is  allowed.  Nontariff  barriers  have  been 
removed.  Pakistan  has  Free  Trade  Agreements  with  the  People’s  Republic  of  China,  Sri 
Lanka, Malaysia, Iran and Mauritius; negotiations are underway with Singapore and the Gulf 
Cooperation Council to be concluded in 2008, and preferential trade arrangements are also 
underway  with  Afghanistan,  Bosnia,  Bangladesh,  Canada,  Russian  Federation,  Serbia, 
Syria, Switzerland, Laos, Thailand, Indonesia etc.  
Future  prospects  for  economic  sustainability  depends  on  building  momentum  of 
structural reforms – I will however dwell on the most strategic elements here.  
Agriculture and food self sufficiency 
With global commodity prices on the rise and alternate uses of corn and other products as 
bio-fuels in vogue, enhancement of crop productivity and area under cultivation will be critical 
for stabilizing food prices and curbing recourse to imports that have induced fresh external 
vulnerabilities.  Given  also  the  country’s  rich  and  diverse  landscape,  Pakistan  has  good 
potential to serve the GCC and Middle East at large and exploit export potential of its agro-
based sector. Renewed efforts will need to be launched by the Government to improve yields 
of major crops by intensifying research and extension, application of right type of seed and 
other inputs and mechanization.  
Comparative  advantage  in  agriculture  gives  an  edge  in  the  development  of  agro-based 
industry,  value-addition  chains  and  processing  and  packaging  of  products  and  offer  huge 
potential for growth and investment. Besides increasing value-addition, the Government has 
promoted  private  sector  involvement;  except  for  setting  procurement  price  for  wheat  –  to 
maintain  strategic  reserves  –  market-based  pricing  mechanism  prevails  for  all  agriculture 
produce.  Efforts  are  underway  for  transmission  of  pricing  signals  to  farmers  (e.g.  through 
introduction of a commodity futures market), development of crop insurance (particularly to 
encourage  the  raising  of  new  cash  crops  such  as  oilseeds)  and  improvement  in 
transportation and storage infrastructure. The proximity to the rich Middle East states, which 
are  widely  dependent  on  import  of  vegetable  products,  provides  a  strong  market  for 
agriculture-based  products.  The  ancillary  requirements  to  boost  agricultural  products 
exports also require massive investment in mass storage and transportation activities. 
Industrial and export growth and diversification 
Manufacturing sector has been growing at 8.4% and its share rose from 14.7% in FY00 to 
19.1% by FY07. To realize its growth targets, industrial sector’s share in GDP has to rise to 
4 
 BIS Review 32/2008
30%  and  must  be  export  led.  The  corner  stone  of  industrial  growth  and  diversification 
strategy is to set in place programs to: 
• 
Move up the value added chain in all key industries by developing capacities, skills 
and attracting strategic partnerships and technology; 
Exploitation of mineral and other strategic resources of the economy; 
Modernization,  enhancement  and  design  innovation  in  the  textile  industry.  Scale 
enhancement  could  be  achieved 
joint 
venture/merger  and  acquisition.  This  would  enable  the  textile  industry,  currently 
accounting  for  one-fourth  of  Pakistan’s  output  and  69%  of  exports,  to  withstand 
aggressive regional competition; and  
Developing  backward  and  forward  linkages  of  large  scale  industry  with  small  and 
medium industry that will help in improving productivity and competitiveness. 
investment  and 
through 
foreign 
  Export growth has been quite impressive, more than doubling to $18 billion over FY01-07. 
Export Plan for 2006-20131 envisages a rise in export/GDP ratio from around 13% to 15% to 
generate almost $40-45 billion of export revenues. The principal thrust of this strategy will be 
to promote export diversification to reduce industry and exports vulnerability to textile sector. 
Substantial exploration is underway to exploit Pakistan’s potential to promote:  
• 
livestock  development 
Agriculture  exports  efforts  are  underway  to  promote  growth  of  minor  crops  and 
noncrop  sector  particularly  dairy  sector  where  Pakistan  is  now  the  world’s  fifth 
largest producer. Aside from developing innovative guidelines for credit flows to the 
sector, efforts are underway to improve agriculture marketing, grading and quality; 
establishment of agriculture export processing zones with public-private partnership; 
encouragement  of 
through  cross  breeding,  artificial 
insemination  and  embryo  transfer  technology.  Also,  there  is  scope  for  expanding 
inland fish farms and developing in public: private partnership fish harbors etc.  
Pakistan, being the fourth largest cotton producer in the world after China, India and 
US, has strong raw material and experience-edge in textiles. To augment capacities, 
industry invested $5.5 billion over the FY99-FY05. There is further scope for a three 
to fourfold increase in spindle and looms capacity and to diversify product (knitwear, 
bed  ware  and  ready-made  garments)  and  market  base  and  improve  quality  and 
design. 
In  view  of  the  relocation  of  industry  and  changing  production  and  subcontracting 
networks/hubs  and  alliances  as  newly  industrialized  economies  move  out  of  labor 
intensive industries, Pakistan has an opportunity to serve as an alternate production 
center for electronic, electrical, and engineering industry. 
Pakistan  has  made  some  inroads  into  the  medium  and  high-end  technology 
products such as electronic goods and this area could be explored further. 
Mineral  is  another  sector  where  Pakistan  has  large  potential  given  its  copper, 
high quality granite and marble and gem reserves. 
Finally, information technology (IT) and other services sectors which constitute 55% 
of GDP have a role to play in enhancing exports and can be nurtured by promoting 
venture capital and private equity funds and enhancing the skill base of population 
in this area. 
                                                           
1   Government of Pakistan, Planning Commission: Export Plan – Pakistan Inc. 2007. 
BIS Review 32/2008 
 5
ii. 
iii. 
Infrastructure 
To enhance the competitiveness of Pakistan’s industry and exports, it is however critical to 
bridge  infrastructure  gaps.  The  Government  has  developed  a  broad  based  strategy  and 
short, medium and long term plan for energy sector. Pakistan has good domestic reserves of 
oil, gas and other fuels and hydro potential. The investment requirements and opportunities 
arising from a well designed and integrated energy security plan that offers an Asian Energy 
Corridor  are  enormous.  Potential  within  this  corridor  exists  for  mega  projects  that  involve 
development, sharing and trading of energy resources between the largest producers of oil 
and  gas  in  the  Central  Asian  Republic  and  Middle  East  to  the  deficit  countries  including 
China, India and Pakistan.  
To ensure energy security and sustainability, Pakistan’s energy plan recognizes the growth 
in domestic demand for energy that has to be catered by exploitation and development of 
balanced  energy  mix  with  maximum  reliance  on  indigenous  and  environment-friendly 
resources, besides tapping the regional resources. Recognizing this, Pakistan plans to  
i. 
Optimize energy mix between hydel: thermal from existing levels of 28:72 to 39:61 
in  the  years  ahead  by  exploiting  all  key  sites  with  substantial  hydel  generation 
potential – this program will help in fuel substitution and energy efficiency resulting 
in savings of oil imports;  
Enhance  exploration  and  development  of  gas  reserves.  Gas  supplies  are  to  be 
supplemented by exploiting cross border energy transaction through Iran-Pakistan-
India pipeline, Turkmenistan and Qatar-Pakistan pipelines and import possibility of 
LNG;  
Unleash  coal  potential  given  the  large  measured  reserves  estimated  to  3,300 
million tons with substantially large inferred reserves. Major deposits are in Sindh 
province in Thar though other pockets also are showing promising signs; and  
Exploit renewable energy resources.  
iv. 
Investment requirements for key infrastructure programs were estimated to be in the range of 
$39 billion for 2005-2010. Over the long term, investment requirements will be staggering as, 
by  some  estimates,  the  aggregate  power  generation  requirements  alone  will  be  around 
143,310  MW  during  2005-2030.  Since  1994,  generation  has  been  largely  in  private  sector 
and WAPDA – the largest utility company of Pakistan – has been unbundled by spinning off 
the  regional  distribution  companies  which  are  to  be  privatized.  Given  fiscal  constraints, 
Pakistan has scope for limited public investments so bulk of the new development projects is 
to be available for private investment. The Private Power Infrastructure Board has floated 45 
projects of 12 GW in pipeline, involving cost of close to $11 billion.  
Independent  Power  Producers  (IPP)  are  generating  6005 MW,  with  remaining  13,083  MW 
MW generated by WAPDA and KESC. IPP have made significant progress (excluding Hubco 
outside Power Sector Policy framework) though 66% of the total capital requirements were 
met from official debt sources. Drawing from the lesson learnt of past power sector policy, 
the 2002 Power Sector Policy set prices based on cost structure of the project as determined 
by the regulator. Pricing policy allow pass through of items such as the fuel price, interest 
rate and exchange rate. 
Pakistan needs $1 billion per year for new dams and related infrastructure, and $5 billion per 
year for transport infrastructure etc. In road sector, the Medium Term Development Program 
includes  plans  to  improve  14000  km  of  existing  road  and  construct  7000  km  of  new  road. 
Pakistan has managed to promote public-private partnership for a highway project on BOT 
basis for Lahore-Faisalabad 4 lane divided express way on 25 year concession agreement. 
The National Trade Corridor is one of the strategic integrated projects that aims to develop 
trade  route  from  ports  in  south  of  Pakistan  to  northwest  towards  Afghanistan  and  Central 
Asian  Republics  and  will  carry  500  million  tons  of  freight  up  the  north-south  route  and 
another 50 million tons of international freight. Aside from expansion of two ports in Karachi 
6 
 BIS Review 32/2008
city,  commissioning  of  Gawadar  port,  awarded  to  Port  of  Singapore  for  management  and 
operation. Located at the mouth of the Persian Gulf and outside the Straits of Hormuz, this 
port will serve as a regional hub for energy transportation.  
The  Government  has  now  developed  a  policy  and  legal  framework  for  the  Public  Private 
Partnership  (PPP)  which  will  be  supported  by  the  Infrastructure  Project  Financing  Facility 
(financed by the Government and Multilateral Development Banks). A Project Development 
Fund  will  help  identify,  prepare  and  procure  PPP  projects  to  support  economically  viable 
projects, mobilize private capital resources and float the corporate and infrastructure bonds. 
To support delivery of basic services, public funding will complement and replace user fee to 
the extent feasible to facilitate viability gap funding along with a supportive risk management 
framework.  
Improving productivity 
Pakistan  is  structuring  a  number  of  initiatives  to  allow  for  enhancement  in  total  factor 
productivity  growth  which  has  been  key  driver  of  East  Asian  economic  growth.  Besides 
encouraging  higher  enrollment  accompanied  by  improvement  in  standards  in  each  of  the 
education  tier,  investments  are  being  made  to  (i)  enhance  vocational  and  technical 
education  which  thus  far  only  caters  for  requirements  of  one  percent  of  15-23  years  age 
cohort; (ii) open six foreign sponsored Universities to augment supply and quality of higher 
education  in  the  country;  and  (iii)  enhance  SME  and  industry  entrepreneurial  skills. 
Supplementary  efforts  are  underway  to  develop  strong  integrated  linkages  between 
technology and R&D needs of industrial sector and science and technical education. 
forward 
fairly  good 
Conclusion 
Pakistan  has  great  potential,  both  in  terms  of  its  natural  and  human  resource,  and  has 
developed 
looking  development  agenda  and  plans.  A  major 
breakthrough  in  industrial  and  export  diversification  depends,  among  others,  critically  on 
reinvigorating agriculture sector and ensuring adequate availability of infrastructure to meet 
the  growing  economic  requirements.  Given  huge  domestic  demand  and  high  returns  in 
virtually every sector, there has been a strong interest in Pakistan’s economy as illustrated 
by the strong foreign investment that has come from both GCC and West. The region given 
its diversity and richness of resources – with Gulf countries accounting for large proportion of 
world’s  oil  and  gas  proven  reserves  and  now  holding  sizeable  world  foreign  exchange 
reserves  –  along  with  Pakistan’s  large  agriculture  and  growing  industrial  base,  domestic 
market,  skilled  labor  force  which,  if  effectively,  exploited  offers  opportunities  for  deepening 
collaboration and cooperation for mutual advantage. The new Government given its strong 
political  backing  has  the  opportunity  to  restore  macroeconomic  stability  disrupted  in  last 
couple of years which should help restore investor confidence and allow country to attract 
non-debt creating flows critical for development of industry and infrastructure sectors and to 
ease the balance of payments situation. 
BIS Review 32/2008 
 7
