Njuguna Ndung’u: Kenya’s macroeconomic developments and key 
financial sector reforms 
Address by Prof Njuguna Ndung’u, Governor of the Central Bank of Kenya, at the Launch of 
Suntra Investment Bank Unit Trusts, Nairobi, 7 April 2008. 
 Mr.  Nguru  Wachira,  Chairman  of  Suntra  Investment  Bank,  Mr.  James  Murigu  –  Managing 
Director, Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen. 
I feel honoured by your invitation to grace this important occasion because it is not only a 
milestone to Suntra Investment Bank, but it is also a significant development in our capital 
market. 
Kenya’s macroeconomic environment and future prospects 
Ladies and Gentlemen, the Kenyan economy has grown steadily in the recent past with all 
sectors  registering  expansion,  and  therefore  creating  more  employment  and  investment 
opportunities  for  many  citizens.  This  growth  has  introduced  new  challenges  to  regulators 
particularly in the financial sector. For effective monetary policy, you also require an active 
and efficient financial sector. 
To  ensure  that  Kenyans  reap  the  benefits  of  economic  growth,  Central  Bank  has  pursued 
deliberate policies that have achieved relatively stable and low underlying inflation, even with 
supply  shocks,  the  current  inflation  bout  is  related  more  to  supply  constraints  rather  than 
monetary overhang, stable exchange rate even with some minor volatilities, a strong balance 
of  payments  position,  low  and  stable  interest  rates,  and  substantial  inflows  of  both  official 
capital  and  foreign  direct  investment.  It  is  noteworthy  that  since  KenGen  IPO  was  floated, 
many  Kenyans  have  a  high  appetite  of  investing  in  the  stock  market  which  has  boosted 
activity at the Nairobi Stock Exchange. KenGen IPO showed that investment opportunities 
constraints  the  boost  in  investment.  Unfortunately  this  growth  has  not  come  without 
challenges  ranging  from  payments,  settlements,  investors’  returns  to  safety  of  investors’ 
assets to the stock exchange, brokers, Capital Markets Authority. 
Despite  these  challenges  it  is  gratifying  to  note  the  significant  growth  in  the  Fixed  Income 
segment  of  the  Nairobi  Stock  Exchange  and  the  vibrancy  we  have  seen  of  the  capital 
markets in general. This has lengthened the maturity profile of the bond market. The Central 
Bank  of  Kenya,  in  consultation  with  Market  Leaders  Forum  successfully  issued  another 
15-year  Treasury  bond  thus  enhancing  the  continued  deepening  of  the  local  money  and 
capital  markets.  A  sure  way  to  assess  long-term  prospects  and  economic  confidence  in 
future. 
Ongoing key reforms to propel further growth and efficiency in financial markets 
Financial sector is singled out as a key industry that would play a pivotal role in successful 
implementation of the Vision 2030 through mobilization of long term financial resources. This 
will make Nairobi a financial hub of the region. 
The  Central  Bank  of  Kenya  in  collaboration  with  the  Treasury  and  other  stakeholders  are 
carrying out significant reforms to spearhead further growth and efficient functioning of the 
financial  markets.  Some  of  these  reforms  relate  to  the  introduction  of  an  efficient  trading 
platform.  The  proposed  phased  introduction  Primary  Dealership  will  further  deepen  the 
capital  markets.  The  proposed  reduction  of  the  threshold  for  investment  in  Kenya 
Government  Treasury  bills  will  undoubtedly  pave  way  for  wider  public  participation  in 
government  debt  markets  as  the  Government  starts  implementing  Vision  2030.  Further,  I 
BIS Review 41/2008 
 1
would like to commend the teams comprising of Central Bank of Kenya and the Nairobi Stock 
Exchange that have been working to connect CBK’s-CDS with the NSE’s Automatic Trading 
System(ATS)  to  facilitate  online  trading  of  bonds  in  the  secondary  market.  If  successfully 
implemented, Delivery versus Payment arrangements will be greatly enhanced to the extent 
that Over-The Counter (OTC) trading can effectively take place. The CBK and the Treasury 
are also working on a Benchmark Bonds programme to be rolled out in the near future. 
Investment banking in Kenya 
We have witnessed a steady growth of investment banks in Kenya. Kenya now boasts of 12 
investment  banks,  19  investment  advisors  and  7  stockbrokers.  Investment  bankers  and 
brokerage firms play a critical role in contributing to the efficient functioning of securities and 
equities  markets  in  the  economy.  With  the  deluge  of  information  available  to  market 
participants today, the value of investment analysts’ opinions – both to investors and issuers 
–  is  greater  than  ever  before.  If  we  aspire  to  be  the  financial  hub  of  the  Region  more 
investment  banks  and  other  intermediary  financial  institutions  (like  discount  houses)  must 
take firm root under the close supervision of the regulatory body. 
Effective  supervision  will  help  prevent  unprofessional  activities  by  players  by  ensuring  that 
brokers,  investment  banks  financial  advisors  among  others,  provide  the  appraisal,  the 
screening and the monitoring roles as required. 
Suntra Investment Bank Unit Trusts 
Let  me  now  turn  main  reason  that we  have  gathered  here:  The  Suntra  Investment  Bank’s 
UNIT TRUST. Suntra Investment Bank (SIB) Ltd has been active in the Capital Market. 
Distinguished Guests, we are here to celebrate with SIB Ltd as they continue to create value 
in  the  country’s  Capital  Markets  by  introducing  new  products.  Suntra  Unit  Trusts  are 
packaged to benefit Kenyans on many levels by efficient risk management and guaranteed 
positive  return  on  assets.  Unit  Trusts  go  hand-in-hand  with  other  traditional  products  they 
have in stock. Unit Trusts provide a sure avenue for investor diversification. Perhaps this is 
good to solve the supply side constraints of investment and also in small and manageable 
units. 
As approved / licensed Investment firms, Unit Trusts can facilitate / foster efficient liquidity 
management  during  an  IPO  since  they  have  the  privilege  of  depositing  funds  (settling  / 
paying for shares) after allocations have been announced. This means that investors’ money 
will  be  held  in  the  bank  accounts  of  Unit  Trusts  and  not  concentrated  with  the  receiving 
banks. The entry of SIB in this line with the efficiency they promise is great indeed. 
With  these  few  remarks,  Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  it  is  my  humble  duty  to  officially  declare 
Suntra Investment Bank Unit Trusts launched. 
Thank you for your kind attention. 
2 
 BIS Review 41/2008
