Caleb M Fundanga: Narrowing Zambia’s investment gap for sustainable 
development 
Keynote address by Dr Caleb M Fundanga, Governor of the Bank of Zambia, at the Euro-
Money Zambia Investment Conference “Narrowing Zambia’s investment gap for sustainable 
development”, Lusaka, 10 June 2008. 
 Introduction 
1.0  
Over the recent past, the Zambian economy has performed relatively well. This is reflected in 
the  positive  growth  rates  in  real  Gross  Domestic  Product  (GDP),  low  inflation,  relative 
stability in the exchange rate of the Kwacha against major currencies, stable financial sector 
and improved banking services. 
The recent impressive economic trends suggest that the reform programmes that have been 
pursued are working and bearing fruit. These reforms have focused on the restructuring of 
the  economy,  to  let  markets  determine  prices,  shift  production  decisions  from  the 
Government  to  the  private  sector  and  provide  an  enabling  environment  for  increased 
investment. This has led to a stable macroeconomic environment and has provided a basis 
for growth.  However, the challenge that still remains is that of meeting the basic needs of 
Zambians in order to uplift their living standards. Equally, the economy still has low savings 
needed to finance development activities and therefore needs more foreign capital to expand 
its productive capacity and create more jobs that contribute to the uplifting of people’s living 
standards. 
Zambia  is  a  country  with  abundant  natural  resources  and  human  capital.  It  is  a  centrally 
located country with eight neighbouring countries and close proximity to the large market of 
South Africa, a surface area of over 750,000 sq km, and an approximate population of over 
11 million people. It also boasts of a suitable climate, peace and a multi-party competitive 
democratic  political  system.  The  country  possesses  all  the  necessary  attributes  for 
sustainable  economic  growth  and  development.  Competitive  production  costs,  incentives, 
and reforms have also enhanced the attractive investment climate for both local and foreign 
investors. Numerous investment opportunities exist amongst the agriculture, manufacturing, 
tourism  and  mining  sectors  across  various  regions  of  the  country.  Almost  all  provinces  in 
Zambia remain potential areas of investment whose resources remain largely untapped. Its 
active  participation  in  the  SADC  Trade  protocol  and  the  COMESA/FTA  offers  preferential 
tariff access to market potential of nearly 380 million people. 
The  Zambian  Development  Agency  (ZDA)  Act  ensures  that  property  rights  are  fully 
respected with full compensation on market value made in case of expropriation. The country 
is also a signatory to the Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency of the World Bank which 
guarantees  foreign  investment  protection  in  cases  of  disasters  and  other  disturbances. 
Bilateral investment treaties with a number of countries also encourage, promote and protect 
foreign  investment.  Foreign  investors  seeking  joint  venture  partners  can  approach  ZDA 
which  registers  investors  together  with  project  profiles  of  domestic  investors  seeking 
collaboration. 
2.0  
Recent economic developments 
Real Gross Domestic Product (GDP) 
2.1  
During the period 2001-2007, growth in real Gross Domestic Product (GDP) averaged about 
5.1% per annum, largely due to investment in the mining, tourism, construction and transport 
BIS Review 76/2008 
 1
and agriculture sectors. This has set a strong basis for further favourable economic growth in 
the medium to long-term. Thus GDP growth is projected to rise by no less than 7.0% in 2008 
and beyond. Consistent with the developments in the economy, GDP per capita rose to US 
$934.5 in 2007 from US $360.5 in 2001. 
Interest rates 
2.2  
Commercial  banks’  lending  rates  have  also  been  declining,  though  not  as  fast  as  the 
reduction in inflation and Treasury bills rates. For instance, the commercial banks average 
lending rate fell from 54.6% in December 2001 to 24.4% in December 2007. Lower lending 
rates are expected in the current environment of low inflation and will contribute to reducing 
the cost of doing business in Zambia. 
Inflation 
2.3 
Inflation has declined from 18.7% recorded in 2001 to single digit level of 8.2% in 2006 and 
8.9% in 2007. It is projected to slow down further to 7.0% by December 2008. This inflation 
outturn  was  largely  credited  to  the  conduct  of  appropriate  monetary  policy  coupled  with 
prudent  fiscal  policy  and  relative  stability  of  the  Kwacha,  assisted  by  lower  food  prices 
following the favourable 2005/06 and 2006/07 farming seasons. 
External sector 
2.4  
Zambia’s external position continues to show remarkable improvements as reflected in the 
build  up  of  gross  international  reserves  to  3.6  months  of  import  cover  in  2007  from  0.9 
months  of  import  cover  in  2001.  Preliminary  assessment  is  that  Zambia’s  surplus  trade 
balance  rose  to  US  $983.1  million  compared  to  the  deficit  of  US  $342.2  million  in  2001. 
Similarly, the current account deficit as a percentage of GDP reduced to 4.4% in 2007 from 
19.1% in 2001. 
This outturn was mainly attributed to high receipts from increased copper exports following 
increased  production  and  record  high  prices  on  the  international  market  due  to  strong 
demand mainly from China. Coupled with this, between 2000 and 2007, nontraditional export 
earnings  rose  by  260%  from  US$  255.7  million  in  2000  to  US$  920.7  million  in  2007  with 
commodities  such  as  sugar,  copper  wire  and  tobacco,  coupled  with  receipts  from  tourism 
making notable contributions. 
In  addition,  the  attainment  of  the  enhanced  HIPC  completion  point  in  April  2005  and 
Multilateral Debt Relief Initiative (MDRI) in 2006 provided for cancellation of (IMF, IDA and 
ADB) debt resulting in a reduction in debt stock to about  US $2.1 billion in 2007 from the 
end-2001 debt stock of US $7.3 billion. The debt relief and increased budget support from 
cooperating partners also helped strengthen the external position. 
The foreign exchange market is liberalised, therefore the Kwacha is determined by demand 
and  supply  conditions  in  the  market.  In  2007,  the  Kwacha  appreciated  against  the  major 
international  currencies  with  the  exception  of  the  euro.  Against  the  US  dollar,  the  Kwacha 
appreciated  by  7.2%  compared  with  a  depreciation  of  20.7%  in  2006.  This  was  attributed 
largely to higher inflows of foreign exchange on the market due to increased export receipts, 
which largely reflected high copper prices and the continued participation of foreign portfolio 
investors  in  the  domestic  Government  securities  market.  The  depreciation  of  the  Kwacha 
against the euro can be attributed to significant gains of the euro against the US dollar and 
other major currencies, supported mainly by relatively buoyant growth prospects in the euro 
area. 
2 
 BIS Review 76/2008
Banking sector environment 
2.5  
The overall financial condition and performance of the banking sector has been satisfactory, 
as  reflected  in  adequate  capitalisation  and  most  banks  meeting  their  minimum  regulatory 
capital  requirements.  With  13  commercial  banks  in  operation  comprised  of  both  local  and 
foreign, investment opportunities are immense. The Government through the Bank of Zambia 
continues to modernise the overall commercial banking environment, by endorsing various 
legislation to promote safe, sound and efficient operations and development of not only the 
banking sector but the financial system as a whole. This is evidenced by enhanced financial 
stability and the emergence of a number of financial institutions offering an array of financial 
services. For example, the National Payments Systems Act was enacted in June 2007, while 
Access Bank, the fourth largest bank in Nigeria is expected to open a branch in the country 
by July 2008, raising the number of commercial banks to 14. 
Capital market developments 
2.6  
The Lusaka stock exchange performed remarkably well, market capitalisation increased by 
45.0%  to  K18,872.9  billion  compared  to  the  increase  of  13.9%  in  2006.  The  Lusaka  All 
Shares index almost doubled, rising by 92.9% to close the year at 3,533.52 points compared 
to an increase of 47.7% in the previous year. This robust performance was a reflection of 
strong  macroeconomic  fundamentals  in  the  economy  and  positive  investor  expectations  in 
the growth and earnings prospects for both listed and quoted companies. 
Government  introduced  7,  10  and  15-year  bonds  to  help  deepen  the  financial  markets  in 
2007. Foreign investments in Government securities rose to K830.5 billion as at December 
2007 from K539.8 billion recorded end-December 2005, an indication of the rising confidence 
in the economy. 
Fiscal developments 
2.7  
On the fiscal front the Government is expected to limit domestic borrowing to 1.2 percent of 
GDP  in  2008.  By  reducing  levels  of  government  borrowing  and  enforcing  prudent  budget 
execution,  this  should  result  in  greater  mobilisation  of  domestic  resources  and  effective 
coordination with the monetary authorities. 
Zambia  has  articulated  its  long-term  development  objectives  in  the  National  Long  Term 
Vision 2030, which is aimed at raising Zambia to a middle income status by 2030. Part of this 
vision is enshrined in the Fifth National Development Plan (FNDP); 2006-2010 whose theme 
is: “Broad Based Wealth and Job Creation through Citizenry Participation and Technological 
Advancement”.  The  growth  of  the  economy  will  be  driven  by  increased  activities  by  the 
private sector in agriculture, mining, export-led manufacturing and tourism. Government will 
support  this  growth  by  accelerating  the  implementation  of  structural  reforms  and  promote 
investing in key infrastructure such as roads, energy and telecommunication in conjunction 
with the private sector as well as improve legal, institutional and regulatory frameworks. 
Infrastructure development 
3.0 
In order to consolidate the recent economic successes and to realize full potential, Zambia 
needs  to  address  the  large  infrastructure  gap  that  is  inhibiting  further  growth.  Weak 
infrastructure such as: roads, rail system, airports/airstrips and other communication barriers 
reduce the ability to take advantage of the good location that the country has. Furthermore 
investment,  particularly  in  rural  infrastructure  needs  to  be  scale-up  significantly.  Poor 
infrastructure  and  inadequate  access  is  resulting  in  significantly  increased  cost  of  doing 
business,  making  it  difficult  to  integrate  the  rural  population  with  the  rest  of  economy. 
Opportunities for investment in infrastructure development exist in the following sectors: 
BIS Review 76/2008 
 3
in 
Transport and communication 
3.1  
The generally good land route communication networks of Zambia’s neighbouring countries 
have  encouraged  the  southern  connections. The  government  of  Zambia  has  embarked  on 
the  process  of  rehabilitating  the  road  network,  which  covers  35,168  km.  Therefore 
investment  opportunities  are  available 
the  areas  of  road  rehabilitation,  routine 
maintenance  and  consultancy.  Although  the  country  has  international  highway  links  with 
Tanzania,  Democratic  Republic  of  Congo,  Botswana,  Zimbabwe,  Namibia,  Malawi, 
Mozambique  and  South  Africa,  the  roads  can  not  accommodate  the  growing  traffic  due  to 
increased trade with other countries. There is a large investment potential for multiple lane 
highways to cater for the smooth running of traffic for increased efficiency in trade. 
Further, the railway system remains the dominant mode of transport for heavy goods to local 
and international routes. It also links Zambia to six African seaports such as Dar es Salaam, 
Beira, East London, Port Elizabeth, Durban and Cape Town. The railway system however, 
requires  substantial  investment  to  upgrade  it  into  an  ultra  modern  facility  that  would  allow 
speedy transportation of goods and products to the ports for delivery to other markets. 
In  air  transport,  Zambia  has  4  international  airports  at  Lusaka,  Livingstone,  Mfuwe  and 
Ndola. In order to support the increased transportation demand for goods and services, there 
is  need  to  increase  the  capacity  of  the  existing  airports  to  provide  direct  links  with  most 
countries in the sub-region and other places. Connections to all countries in the subregion 
will also encourage large commercial airlines to set up in the country and take advantage of 
Zambia’s central location. 
Over  97  percent  of  the  telephone  exchanges  are  automatic,  and  the  country  enjoys  direct 
dialling facilities, fax, e-mail and television links with the rest of the world. In the main urban 
centres,  public  telephones  and  independently  operated  cellular  telephone  networks  are  in 
place. Zambia also hosts ZamNet and other internet service providers. 
In order to continue diversifying our export base and further increase our export earnings, it 
is imperative that we intensify use of marketing strategies that take advantage of the fact that 
globalisation  requires  each  country  to  develop  more  efficient  modes  of  communication. 
Therefore,  inadequate  infrastructure,  institutional  capacity  and  investment  in  skilled  human 
resources should continue to be aggressively addressed by targeting identified weak areas, 
and  implement  policies  to  tackle  the  weaknesses  speedily  so  as  to  enhance  economic 
growth and developments prospects. In addressing these issues, it is crucial to build strong 
partnerships, particularly with the private sector, for effective Information and Communication 
Technology (ICT) development in Zambia. 
The agriculture sector however, remains one of the key areas where advancements in ICTs 
have  not  yet  been  fully  taken  advantage  of  in  order  to  benefit  rural  communities  and  the 
economy  in  general.  In  fact,  communications  infrastructure  has  been  either  lacking  or 
inadequate  in  most  rural  areas  of  Zambia  to  give  an  opportunity  to  rural  communities  to 
access and distribute information at low cost, as well as facilitate interactive participation in 
the  creation  and  use  of  agricultural  information.  The  potential  benefits  of  a  well  integrated 
ICT in agriculture are diverse and include: 
• 
transparent  dissemination  of  information  such  as  weather  patterns,  seed  and 
fertilizer use, availability and distribution; 
easy accessibility to suppliers of inputs; 
common distribution of information on market prices of crops; and 
generally bringing together of suppliers and buyers of crops. 
• 
• 
• 
Government has put agriculture at the core of rural development and poverty reduction as 
well as employment creation. It is therefore important to note that the expansion of ICTs in 
rural  communities  is  more  required  now  than  ever  before,  as  most  information  is  now 
4 
 BIS Review 76/2008
disseminated through internet and cellular phones. These facilities will help uplift the living 
standards of rural communities. 
Agriculture 
3.2  
Zambia’s agriculture sector has enormous potential to become a major grower and exporter 
of agricultural and horticultural produce. The country has an abundance of quality land, water 
(over 40% of fresh water resources in Southern Africa) and ideal climate all suited to a wide 
range  of  agricultural  products.  Only  15%  of  Zambia’s  60  million  hectares  of  arable  land  is 
under cultivation. 
The recent surge in food prices in the world presents an enormous opportunity for Zambia to 
become  the  food  basket  of  the  sub  region.  This  can  be  achieved  by  re-doubling efforts  to 
boost agricultural productivity coupled with substantial increase in infrastructure investment 
to  ease  supply  bottlenecks  that  are  pushing  up  prices.  Zambia’s  irrigation  potential  is 
estimated  at  more  than  500,000  hectares  while  only  about  40,000  hectares  are  irrigated 
despite  the  country  having  abundant  water  resources.  Increased  yields  in  agricultural 
products like maize, rice and wheat, requires inputs such as fertilizers, irrigation water and 
proper  roads  to  enable  the  harvested  crops  to  be  transported  to  the  main  markets  and  to 
prevent crop losses. 
Energy (electricity) 
3.3  
Abundant  investment  opportunities  exist  in  the  energy  sector  in  view  of  the  huge  power 
deficits  in  Southern  Africa  and  Zambia’s  potential  for  more  hydro-power  generation plants. 
Due  to  vast  water  resources  and  coal  reserves,  Zambia  is  ideal  for  the  provision  of 
hydroelectric power. Although most of the electricity is supplied from major hydro stations, 
there  are  also  small  diesel  power  stations  in  rural  areas.  There  are  plans  to  develop  a 
600-megawatt hydroelectric generation plant on the Kafue River. Currently, the development 
of  Itezhi-Tezhi  Hydro  Electric  Project;  Kafue  Gorge  Lower  Hydro-Electric  Project;  Zambia-
Tanzania Interconnector; and Zambia-Namibia Interconnector are underway. 
However, there is still potential for more power generation capacity for the private sector to 
invest in. Apart from the mining sector that provides a huge demand for power in the country, 
there is a huge demand for power in the SADC region as well as the Eastern African bloc. 
The  expected  rise  of  the  manufacturing  sector  will  also  increase  demand  for  power  in  the 
country. 
Opportunities also exist in alternative sources of power such as solar energy and gas energy 
for  domestic  cookers.  With  a  temperatures  ranging  between  15  and  27  degrees  for  most 
parts of the year, the solar energy potential is high. The oil refineries in the country also emit 
gasses that can be tapped and turned into gas for domestic cookers. 
Mining 
3.4  
Zambia’s mineral wealth remains substantial. Quite apart from the traditional mining activities 
in copper and cobalt the list of investment opportunities in this sector include: 
• 
• 
• 
Precious metal-gold; silver; selenium; 
The platinoid group – iron, tin, nickel and manganese; 
Agro-minerals-rock  phosphate  and  igneous  phosphate  suitable  for  conversion  to 
fertilizer, peat, limestone; 
Reclaiming of copper from slug tailing dumps; 
Gemstones-emerald, amethyst, aquamarine, tourmaline; 
Nickel; 
 BIS Review 76/2008 
 5
Uranium; and 
Other deposits-talc, fluorspar, graphite, barites and clays, etc. 
• 
• 
The  1995  Mines  and  Minerals  Act  provide  exemption  from  import  duty  and  VAT  on  all 
machinery and equipment, including specialised motor vehicles required for prospecting or 
mining activities. 
In its 2008 Budget, the Government introduced the new fiscal and regulatory framework for 
the mining sector. Under this framework, the mining sector will begin to adequately contribute 
to the advancement of and the social economic welfare of the people of Zambia. 
Tourism 
3.5  
Untapped tourism opportunities exist in all the 19 National Parks and 34 game management 
areas as well as the 23 million hectares devoted to the conservation of an amazing variety of 
animals. Major attractions include the Victoria Falls (one of the seven natural wonders of the 
world) and the Kariba Lake (one of the largest man-made lake). Specific areas of investment 
in this sector include: 
• 
• 
Game ranching; 
Provision of accommodation (i.e. high quality five and four star hotels, Lodges and 
Camp sites near the popular tourist areas); 
Transport service – Investment potential exists in air charters in form of helicopters 
and/or small planes to service game areas; 
Adventure holiday packages; 
Organised tours; 
Out door sports facilities (golf courses and stadia); and 
Zambia’s cultural heritage. 
  Construction and real estate 
3.6  
The construction sector is yet another area of investment as the economy expands. A lot has 
been  done  in  the  recent  past  in  construction  with  housing  schemes  coming  up  in  various 
parts of the country. However, there is still a large deficit in terms of housing in Zambia. This 
deficit in housing provides an opportunity for further investment in the construction of more 
houses. 
Conclusion 
4.0  
Looking ahead, the achievement and maintenance of a low and stable inflation rate, remains 
key  to  enhancement  of  investment,  business  planning,  confidence  in  the  economy, 
maintaining external competitiveness and stabilising people’s incomes. In the medium-term, 
Government continues to pursue market and structural reforms in partnership with the private 
sector with the view of consolidating the gains so far attained for sustained economic growth 
and  development.  Currently,  there  are  enormous  business  opportunities  which  still  lie 
unexploited in Zambia in virtually all sectors of the economy. 
The overall economic growth in the economy would be enhanced underpinned on low and 
single  digit  inflation  and  relative  stable  exchange  rate.  With  an  enabling  environment,  the 
private  sector  would  exploit  their  full  potential.  Hence,  employment  would  increase  and 
poverty reduction would be achieved. This would contribute to the achievement of MDGs and 
towards the attainment of the Vision 2030. 
6 
 BIS Review 76/2008
