Savenaca Narube: The economic challenges and lessons to raise Fiji’s 
competitiveness  
Presentation by Mr Savenaca Narube, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Fiji, to the TPAF’s 
Productivity Symposium, Suva, 5 June 2008. 
 The Director General of TPAF, Mr. Jone Usamate; 
Fellow Speakers; 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
Introduction 
It is that time of the year again where we elevate productivity to the national level for one 
week. We have held this annual event for some years now. I have been speaking at almost 
each  one  of  them.  But  it  seems  to  be  the  only  time  of  the  year  that  I  hear  people  talking 
about productivity. And that to me is simply not often enough. 
This symposium is a wonderful idea. We should continue to engage each other at this level 
to talk about productivity, share views and reignite our passion for progress. It is essential but 
unfortunately  not  sufficient.  I  have  said  this  many  times  in  the  past  and  I  will  say  it  again 
today that we must make productivity a national vision. The national leaders must get excited 
about productivity. Everyone at whatever level can make a difference on how we do business 
irrespective of whether you are in the public or the private sector or in between. 
I  have  also  noted  that  in  past  conferences  such  as  this,  there  is  a  lot  of  waiting  for 
Government to do something – introduce more incentives, set up committees, appoint think 
tanks, make laws – you name it – before we can do our own thing. But if I may boldly tell you 
this morning – this waiting around is a waste of time and money! Productivity is one of the 
few things that we can do something about without any help from anyone. The ball is clearly 
in our court. 
Economic growth 
I  have  been  asked  to  talk  on  “The  Economic  Challenges  and  Lessons  to  Raise  Fiji’s 
Competitiveness”. 
Let  me  start  with  the  economic  challenges.  There  are  many.  But  in  my  view,  our  major 
economic challenge is that the growth rate of our economy is extremely low. 
I spoke recently at the  National Micro, Small and Medium  Enterprise Forum.  My  message 
today is no different – we need to raise economic growth. Our average growth rate from 2001 
to 2007 was 1.7 percent. The next three years will be no different with a projected average 
growth rate of below 2 percent. 
I have said this in the past that with a growth rate this low, we will double the size of our 
economy in about 50 years! However, if we could lift our growth rate to, say, 5 percent per 
year, we would double our economy in less than 20 years. If growth was even higher, say 8 
percent per year, we would double in about 10 years. What a difference this would make to 
the fortunes of our children and grandchildren! 
Why  has  our  growth  rate  been  so  miserably  low?  There  are  several  answers  that  easily 
come to mind: 
BIS Review 73/2008 
 1
    Natural  disasters  like  hurricanes  and  droughts.  This  we  do  not  have  any  control 
over. 
World  developments  like  what  we  are  facing  right  now  in  the  rise  in  food  and  oil 
prices. Again, we do not have control on these developments. 
The  erosion  of  our  preferential  market  access.  We  also  have  very  little  influence 
over this. 
The political crisis. 
The  policies  that  we  put  in  place  and  more  importantly  the  commitment  to  their 
execution. This is one of the key areas that we have control over which can have a 
huge impact on our economic lives. This is where productivity plays a critical role. 
Several of the challenges that we face underline the fact that we live in a globalised world 
whether we like it or not. Globalisation is unstoppable. The barriers to trade, capital flows and 
labour migration are crumbling. Preferential treatments are being dismantled. 
In this rather turbulent world, the nice tradition of love thy neighbour, if there was ever one, is 
now  out  of  the  window.  We  either  swim  or  sink.  Not  only  that  we  cannot  influence  the 
direction of these global developments, the platform is not level and the goal posts can shift. 
The rules of the game are influenced by those that possess economic power and they can 
and do change these rules. That, unfortunately, is the reality of the world. 
But Fiji must take its place in the sun. We must compete. No one owes us a living. We must 
be quick to market and be a reliable source of supply of quality products. In summary, we 
must  do  more  with  what  little  we  have.  Productivity  is  absolutely  essential  for  our  future 
survival in this difficult world. 
I  am  therefore  somewhat  disappointed  that  we  have  not  made  productivity  an  issue  of 
national priority. A national productivity campaign such as this should be mounted not only 
once a year but throughout the year. In this campaign our leaders should be at the front, the 
Ministry should be the driving wedge and TPAF its dedicated foot soldiers. 
International comparison 
How do we compare economically with the rest of the world? 
One of the benchmarks we can use is the United Nation’s Human Development Index (HDI). 
The HDI is a comparative measure of life expectancy, literacy, education and standards of 
living  for  177  countries.  The  latest  results  are  based  on  2005  data  and  were  published  in 
November last year. 
Countries fall into three broad categories – high, medium and low human development. The 
highest  ranking  country  at  number  1  is  Iceland.  The  lowest  is  Sierra  Leone  at  177.  Our 
trading partners are highly ranked like Australia (number 3), Japan (8), United States (12), 
United Kingdom (16) and New Zealand (19). Our nearest neighbour, Tonga, at 55 has made 
it to the high HDI Group. 
Fiji is ranked as a medium HDI country. Fiji, at 92, is about half way on the ladder. However, 
more  seriously,  we  have  slipped  11  places  in  the  space  of  only  4  years.  Samoa  is  also 
ranked  better  than  Fiji  at  77.  Vanuatu  and  Solomon  Islands  are  ranked  120  and  129 
respectively. 
Another  international  measure  is  per  capita  GDP.  International  comparison  shows  that  in 
1978  Fiji’s  per  capita  GDP  was  higher  than  Mauritius.  However,  the  2005  data  show  that 
Mauritius  has  smartly  zipped  past  Fiji  and  is  now  nearly  four  times  higher  than  us.  In  the 
Pacific, Samoa and Papua New Guinea are doing extremely well and may also skip past Fiji 
if we do not get our act together. 
2 
 BIS Review 73/2008
Yet another indicator is the “ease of doing business”. The latest is for the period April 2006 
to June 2007. Fiji ranks 36th out of 178 countries – not too bad. But we have dropped two 
places from the previous survey. 
These  are  long  term  comparisons  not  short  term.  Of  course,  we  should  avoid  reading  too 
much  from  these  international  comparisons.  Some  countries  with  worse  ratings  are  still 
growing much faster than Fiji like China and India for instance. But these indicators all point 
to three broad conclusions. First, we are slipping in our world rankings. Second, the world is 
passing us by. Lastly, they reconfirm that we have a lot of catching up to do. I believe that we 
have already passed the point where action is critical, as we have talked enough. 
I am always surprised that we have not set ourselves a clear national economic target – one 
that  everyone  can  understand  and  embrace.  What  about  a  target  of  5  percent  growth  per 
year? Or doubling our economy in fifteen years? Let the cynics be cynics. But setting a clear 
target  helps  galvanize  the  whole  nation  to  achieve  them.  I  am  confident  that  we  have  the 
resources to realise this target if only we can raise the efficiency of using them and a firm 
commitment to implement what we agree to do. 
I am one of many who firmly believe that Fiji’s potential is huge. We have realised just a very 
small part of that. Where are these potential? My answer is that they can be everywhere – in 
tourism, in agriculture, in forestry, in fishing, in sports, in IT and so forth. There is no reason 
why Fiji cannot aspire to be like the Tigers of Asia such as Singapore, Malaysia and so forth. 
Again, productivity holds the key to growing these industries. 
We therefore need to ask ourselves – “What must we do to raise economic growth”? How 
can  we  grow  faster?”  Obviously,  we  need  to  do  many  things,  some  of  which  are  quite 
challenging to do, but we need to get started. I will highlight the two that I think are the most 
important and how productivity can contribute to solving our problems. 
Firstly, we must raise investment – we need to raise investment to over 25 percent of GDP. 
Foremost, let us not forget that we need to support and promote local investment. But this is 
not  enough.  We  need  to  attract  foreign  investment.  Here,  we  are  competing  for  the  same 
investment dollar with some bigger and richer countries. 
Investors look at several things before they invest. They look at the environment – political, 
economic and social. They look at government policies and regulations and how these are 
applied.  Investors  look  at  the  state  of  the  infrastructure.  Finally,  investors  also  look  at  the 
quality  of  labour  and  their  unit  cost.  The  efficiency  of  capital  is  a  key  decision  maker. 
Productivity therefore becomes an important issue for investors. 
Secondly, exports must drive growth – exports must be the key driver of economic growth for 
a country like Fiji. There is, in my view, no other way to grow the economy in a sustainable 
manner.  When  we  export  either  goods  or  services,  we  are  competing  with  other  countries 
supplying the same products. We cannot rely on preferential access anymore. As I said they 
are already coming down. We must stand on our own two feet. To enable us to do that, we 
must compete not only in prices but also in quality. We are competing with many countries 
which have low cost structures and high productivity. Our work is cut out for us. Therefore 
raising our productivity level must be a priority. If we cannot compete in this integrated world, 
we perish – simple as that. 
How do we raise the productivity in our export sector? Clearly, business as usual is not the 
answer.  We  must  change  how  we  do  things.  Productivity  in  the  cane fields  and  the  sugar 
mills are critical to the sugar reform. We must change how we work our agricultural sector. 
The existing model is clearly not working. Our land is fertile. We have the best pawpaw in the 
world, the tastiest bananas and the sweetest pineapples. But alas we are not even supplying 
enough of these to our hotels and supermarkets. Our oceans are large yet the price of local 
fish  keeps  rising.  Our mahogany  forests  are mature,  yet  we  are  not exporting  high  valued 
timber  products.  Obviously,  something  is  seriously  wrong  and  we  need  to  correct  that 
urgently. 
BIS Review 73/2008 
 3
We talk a lot about the potential of small businesses to raise growth and provide incomes 
and  employment.  Again,  while  we  continue  to  talk,  we  see  very  little  progress  in  this 
important area. Are we following the right model? Where is the bottle neck? 
Lessons  are  there  if  you  look  in  the  right  places  and  be  prepared  to  accept  them. 
Benchmarking  is  a  powerful  tool  to  use.  There  are  lessons  abound  from  our  Asian 
neighbours. I am pleased that we have several international speakers with us today and we 
look forward to the lessons that they will leave with us. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, the point that I want to make is this: We should acknowledge and 
accept  the  significant  role  that  productivity  and  competitiveness  can  play  in 
overcoming many of our economic challenges that we face particularly that of lifting 
economic growth, attracting investment and supporting exports. More importantly, we 
need to do something about this now at all levels, micro as well as macro. 
Measurement 
We know what we want to achieve and that is to raise productivity. We must now measure it. 
When I pose the question of productivity data, the usual answer I get is that we are working 
at it. I know that productivity is a complex indicator to measure but we should be taking some 
indicative measurement now. Keep it simple. 
The crude measure that we use at the Bank is calculating the total output per worker. This is 
obviously a very high level indicator of productivity and has many shortcomings. But for this 
morning’s purpose the broad message is what we want. Using this measure, we calculate 
productivity growth in Fiji to average 1 percent over the ten year period from 1996 to 2006. 
When compared to other countries, we are somewhere at the bottom of the pile. We are less 
than half of Australia. Mauritius’ productivity growth rate is four times higher. I am sure that 
the figures for Asia will be higher still. 
Does it therefore surprise us that our long term growth trend is below 2 percent? 
How can we improve our productivity? Not only that, how can we measure our progress over 
time? 
We  refer  to  our  culture,  the  low  capital  to  labor  ratio,  technology,  migration  and  skills  as 
possible constraints to productivity. These are relevant. But how are we overcoming them? 
How are we sharing and learning from each other’s experiences outside these forums? 
I suggest that we should all go away from this symposium with a piece of paper with three 
assignments on it: 
• 
One,  measure  the  productivity  in  your  organisation,  company  agency  or  wherever 
you are within the next month. Use whatever indicator you wish; 
Two,  appoint  productivity  champions  that  can  drive  productivity  growth  in  your 
company; and 
Three,  measure  the  productivity  again  in  six  months  and  share  your  experiences 
with everyone before the next productivity symposium. 
  If we can all do that, then we will progress. 
Finally,  raising  Fiji’s  competitiveness  is  not  solely  TPAF’s  responsibility,  nor  is  it  the 
Government’s alone. Everyone one of us in this room must take it as personal goal to raise 
Fiji’s competitiveness. 
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS Review 73/2008
