Svein Gjedrem: The economic outlook  
Address  by  Mr  Svein  Gjedrem,  Governor  of  Norges  Bank  (Central  Bank  of  Norway),  to 
invited foreign embassy representatives, Norges Bank, Oslo, 31 March 2008. 
The address is based on the assessments presented at Norges Bank’s press conference following the 
Executive  Board’s  monetary  policy  meeting  on  13  March,  Monetary  Policy  Report  1/08  and  on 
previous speeches. Please note that the text below may differ slightly from the actual presentation. 
 Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Since  our  last  meeting  about  a  year  ago,  the  international  economic  environment  has 
changed  quite dramatically.  Starting  in  the  US,  turmoil  in  financial  markets  has  quickly 
spread all over the world. The economic outlook for the US, and indeed the whole world, is 
weaker and a lot more uncertain than it was a year ago. 
In my presentation today, I will discuss the effects of the turmoil on the Norwegian economy 
and the consequences it may have for international growth. I will also talk a little about the 
Government  Pension  Fund  –  Global  in  the  context  of  the  ongoing  debate  on  sovereign 
wealth funds. 
Continued turbulence in financial markets 
The current turbulence in financial markets has its roots in high credit growth and reduced 
saving over the past decade, most notably in the US. Low interest rates and strong output 
growth triggered a sharp rise in house prices and housing investment.  
House prices in the US started to fall in 2006. There were reports of defaults on mortgage 
loans, but it was generally believed that the loans at risk were confined to a small segment of 
the US market. The first warning of more severe problems came in early 2007. And in the 
course of last summer, it became clear that the losses had spread. Other banks, funds and 
financial establishments in Europe, Asia and the US felt the turbulence. 
 BIS Review 37/2008 
 1
 to 
funds  and 
losses.  Banks, 
financial  establishments  started 
The  turmoil  spread  to  money  and  credit  markets  in  August  last  year.  Few  knew  who  was 
exposed 
to  question 
counterparties’  financial  situation,  and  held  on  to  their  money.  This  resulted  in  a  surge  in 
banks’ premiums on short-term interbank rates. Moreover, banks had to bring back on their 
books loans from companies they had established. This further reduced their capacity and 
willingness to provide new loans.  
When the interbank market seized up, many central banks injected extra liquidity. In periods, 
Norges Bank has also provided additional loans to banks. Liquidity injections have reduced 
swings and eased risk premiums in money markets. Nevertheless, the risk premiums are still 
high, especially for maturities from three months and longer.  
2 
  BIS Review 37/2008
As can be seen from this chart, credit risk surged towards the end of February, and is still 
markedly higher than in the latter part of 2007. 
Norwegian  companies  and  financial  institutions  have  also  been  affected  by  the  turmoil. 
Prices for credit insurance and funding costs have risen, although to a smaller extent than for 
many US and European institutions. 
As a result, Norwegian banks now have to put more effort into procuring deposits and a little 
less  into  selling  loans.  Such  a  change  in  banks'  behaviour  may  help  to  curb  growth  in 
demand and output in the period ahead.  
In  addition,  there  may  be  further  repercussions  for  the  Norwegian  economy  if  weaker 
developments in the US lead to a broad-based pause in global growth. 
First,  a  downturn  in  the  world  economy  may  have  a  negative  impact  on  activity  and 
profitability in export industries and perhaps even the oil sector. It may be more difficult to sell 
goods in a falling market, and prices for domestically produced goods may fall. 
Second,  turbulence  and  the  prospect  of  weaker  growth  may  increase  uncertainty  among 
Norwegian households and businesses. As a result, new projects and investments may be 
postponed, or enterprises may be reluctant to recruit new employees.  
Third,  the  financial  market  turbulence  has  a  more  direct  impact  on  the  business  sector. 
Banks and investors now apply a higher premium and higher prices for providing capital for 
acquisitions, restructuring and investment, and highly leveraged companies have to pay high 
loan risk premiums.  
We still do not know what the full impact of the turbulence will be. The US authorities have 
taken  measures,  both  fiscal  and  monetary,  to  address  weaker  growth  prospects.  Interest 
rates  are  shifting  down  in  the  US  and  many  other  countries.  Money  and  financial  market 
participants  still  expect  considerably  lower  interest  rates  ahead  than  they  did  last  autumn, 
particularly in the US, but also in Europe. 
 Norway – signs of easing growth and rising inflation 
Let me now turn to economic developments and the outlook for the Norwegian economy. 
BIS Review 37/2008 
 3
Inflation in Norway has been low and stable since the mid-1990s. Over the past 5-10 years, 
inflation has been fairly close to, but somewhat lower than the operational target of consumer 
price inflation of close to 2.5 per cent over time. 
 Recently,  however,  inflation  has  been  on  the  increase.  The  year-on-year  rise  in  consumer 
prices  (CPI)  picked  up  rapidly  towards  the  end  of  2007  and  the  first  two  months  of  2008, 
reflecting an increase in electricity prices. Other measures of consumer price inflation have 
picked up as well. In February, the year-on-year rise in core inflation was 2.2 per cent. Prices 
for  services  and  domestically  produced  goods,  in  particular  some  food  products,  have 
exhibited a particularly sharp rise. At the same time, prices for imported consumer goods are 
no longer falling.  
 4 
 BIS Review 37/2008
 The  Norwegian  economy  has  experienced  four  years  of  strong  growth.  Growth  has  been 
stronger than during the economic upturn in the mid-1990s. The continuous growth period of 
recent years is the longest ever recorded in the quarterly national accounts, which includes 
figures  back  to  1978.  Annual  growth  in  mainland  GDP  in  the  three-year  period  2004-2006 
was  more  than  4  per  cent.  Preliminary  national  accounts  figures  estimate  growth  at  6  per 
cent  in  2007.  According  to  the  quarterly  national  accounts,  growth  in  mainland  GDP 
remained high in the fourth quarter of 2007. 
The present economic expansion differs from previous upturns in that inflation has remained 
low  so  far  despite  strong  growth  and  increasing  capacity  utilisation.  There  are  several 
reasons for this. 
BIS Review 37/2008 
  5
First,  the  economic  developments  have  benefited  from  a  favourable  environment  for 
Norwegian exports, in particular oil prices, which have been rising for a long period. Over the 
past five years, oil prices have risen by over USD 60 and have recently reached historically 
high levels, both in nominal and real terms.  
Investment growth in the oil sector is expected to remain firm against the background of high 
oil prices, a high level of exploration activity and growth in investment in existing installations. 
 In other export markets, where prices have been rising rapidly over several years, prices for 
a number of important export goods, such as metals and fish, have shown wide swings. So 
far in the first quarter of this year, prices are on average at about the same level as in the 
fourth  quarter  of  last  year.  At  the  same  time,  the  business  tendency  survey  showed  that 
growth  in  export  orders  slowed  towards  the  end  of  last  year.  Further  ahead,  weak 
developments in the US economy may further reduce exports.  
In  addition  to  a  favourable  environment  for  Norwegian  exports,  Norwegian  importers  have 
gained access to new markets in central Europe and Asia which offer substantially cheaper 
consumer goods. As a result, Norway’s terms of trade have improved appreciably over the 
last few years. 
6 
 BIS Review 37/2008
A  second  characteristic  of  this  upturn  is  that  productivity  growth  has  been  unusually  high, 
resulting  in  lower  production  costs.  The  business  sector  has  been  quick  to  adapt  and 
change,  and  to  make  use  of  new  technology  that  is  available  in  an  international  market. 
Banks  and  other  service  sectors,  in  particular,  have  outperformed  other  countries  in  this 
respect. This is probably due to the modernisation of the economy through the 1980s and 
1990s, which resulted in more efficient markets. 
 A third characteristic has been an ample supply of labour, which has boosted output growth. 
Over  the  past  two  years,  an  increase  in  labour  force  participation  and  high  inward  labour 
migration has provided room for continued high growth. In both 2006 and 2007, the number 
 BIS Review 37/2008 
 7
of  employed  increased  by  over  3  per  cent.  The  number  employed  increased  by  93  000 
persons between 2006 and 2007, the highest increase over the past few decades.  
The sharp growth in employment has partly been reflected in a decline in unemployment and 
an increase in the labour supply. This is due to inflows of foreign labour and increased labour 
participation among the existing population. Labour force participation in the age group 15-74 
has  never  been  higher.  In  2007,  growth  in  the  labour  force  was  almost  as  strong  as 
employment  growth.  The  increase  in  the  labour  supply  has  been  particularly  sharp  in  the 
youngest and oldest age groups. 
 8 
  BIS Review 37/2008
One particular feature of this upturn has been high inward labour migration, accounting for 
almost half of the growth in the labour force in recent years. Most work permits have been 
given to nationals from Poland, Germany and Lithuania. Most foreign workers from the new 
EU countries probably intend to remain in Norway for some time.  
 Although  unemployment  has  fallen  sharply,  wage-earners’  share  of  value  added  has 
declined since the early 1990s, but has picked up lately. Solid productivity growth and high 
prices for export goods and goods supplied to the petroleum sector have boosted corporate 
earnings and reduced the wage share over the past few years. The ample supply of labour 
has  probably  also  had  a  dampening  effect  on  wage  growth.  Increased  globalisation  may 
have provided greater opportunities for Norwegian enterprises to relocate production to other 
countries  if  labour  costs  become  too  high.  This  probably  places  some  restraint  on  wage 
demands among workers in sectors where enterprises have such opportunities. 
But wage-earners have also fared well. We have seen solid growth in employment, and low 
prices  for  imported  goods  have  resulted  in  a  subdued  rise  in  consumer  prices  and  a 
substantial increase in wage-earners’ real wages.  
There  are  now  signs  that  productivity  growth  is  edging  down  at  the  same  time  as  wage 
growth is high. 
BIS Review 37/2008 
 9
Strong growth in real income has contributed to the long period of high housing investment 
and rising house prices. House price inflation peaked amid the housing market euphoria of 
about a year ago. The housing market is now cooling. 
 In parallel with rising house prices, households have been borrowing more and saving less. 
Household financial saving was negative in 2006 and 2007. At the same time, Norway has a 
substantial  current  account  surplus.  Most  of  the  current  account  surplus  is  matched  by 
government financial and oil sector surpluses – which are redeployed abroad. Adjusted for 
these outflows, Norway recorded a basic balance of an estimated minus NOK 150 billion in 
2007, or close to 10 per cent of mainland GDP. 
 10 
 BIS Review 37/2008
The  corollary  to  the  deficit  on  the  basic  balance  is  that  Norwegian  businesses,  as  well  as 
Norwegian banks, borrow in foreign markets. The recent turbulence in international money 
markets has affected the price and supply of funding in these markets. 
Monetary policy assessments 
Monetary  policy  in  Norway  is  oriented  towards  keeping  inflation  low  and  stable.  The 
operational  target  is  annual  consumer  price  inflation  of  close  to  2.5  per  cent  over  time. 
Norges  Bank  operates  a  flexible  inflation  targeting  regime.  Both  variability  in  inflation  and 
variability in output and employment are given weight in interest-rate setting. 
 Inflation has been expected to pick up for some time. Since summer 2005, the key policy rate 
has gradually – and ahead of the rise in inflation – been raised by 3.5 percentage points to 
5.25 per cent. This will contribute to more stable developments in inflation and in output and 
employment. The real interest rate has increased. 
The various factors that influence interest rate prospects are pointing in different directions. 
On the one hand, inflation has picked up markedly over the past few months. Growth has 
remained  firm,  capacity  utilisation  is  high,  the  labour  market  is  tight,  and  wage  growth  is 
picking  up.  In  order  to  guard  against  inflation  rising  further  and  becoming  too  high,  it  may 
thus be appropriate to continue raising the interest rate. 
On the other hand, in order to guard against an economic setback in Norway as a result of 
weaker external growth, it may be appropriate to leave the key policy rate unchanged for a 
period or lower the key rate. Weaker growth in the world economy may influence activity and 
profitability in the Norwegian business sectors. As a result of the financial market turbulence, 
we have also seen an increase in the financing costs for Norwegian banks and companies. 
Furthermore,  the  turmoil  and  the  setback  in  the  US  may  increase  uncertainty  among 
Norwegian households and businesses. 
BIS Review 37/2008 
 11
 If there are prospects that the interest rate in Norway will be held considerably higher than 
the interest rate level among our trading partners, the krone may appreciate. But there are 
also opposing forces in the foreign exchange market. The basic balance deficit suggests a 
weaker krone. If developments in the world economy translate into lower prices for oil and 
other export goods, the value of the krone may also fall. If the krone depreciates, the key rate 
must  be  raised  to  a  higher  level  than  otherwise  in  order  to  keep  inflation  in  check,  unless 
slackened activity in the Norwegian economy results in lower inflation. 
Over time, however, the nominal exchange rate is not the main force. The main determinant 
of  competitiveness  in  Norwegian  business  and  industry  and  the  purchasing  power  of  the 
Norwegian krone is the real exchange rate. 
12 
  BIS Review 37/2008
The real exchange rate can be measured in a number of ways, for example by  consumer 
prices  or  labour  costs  in  Norway  relative  to  our  trading  partners  measured  in  a  common 
currency.  This  provides  an  indication  of  the  relationship  between  the  level  of  external  and 
domestic prices, which in turn reflects developments in cost levels. In real terms, the krone 
has appreciated by about 10 per cent since the mid-1990s, while labour costs in a common 
currency have risen by close to 30 per cent more than among our trading partners. This may 
be partly ascribable to the cyclical expansion and the low level of household saving. But most 
likely  the  strong  real  krone  reflects  the  substantial  improvement  in  the  terms  of  trade  and 
productivity. In this respect, the strong krone is a sign that the Norwegian economy is faring 
well. 
Looking  ahead,  the  outlook  and  balance  of  risks  suggest  that  the  key  policy  rate  may  be 
raised further in the period to summer. The prospect of higher price and cost inflation will in 
the short term outweigh weaker growth in the world economy. 
 At  the  meeting  on  13  March,  Norges  Bank’s  Executive  Board  held  the  interest  rate 
unchanged  at  5.25  per  cent  and  presented  the  interest  rate  path  shown  in  this  chart.  The 
Board’s strategy is that the key policy rate should be in the interval 5-6 per cent in the period 
to end-June, unless the Norwegian economy is exposed to major shocks. 
The  projections  are  uncertain.  New 
information  may  reveal  aspects  of  economic 
developments that indicate that the Norwegian economy is moving on a different path than 
projected.  On  the  one  hand,  unexpectedly  high  cost  inflation,  higher  import  prices  or  a 
weaker krone may result in higher-than-projected inflation. On the other hand, if the global 
downturn  has  a  stronger-than-expected  impact  on  the  Norwegian  economy  or  if  the  krone 
appreciates markedly, inflation may be lower than projected. The uncertainty surrounding the 
interest rate ahead is illustrated by the shaded areas in the chart. 
The Government Pension Fund – Global 
Now,  let  me  turn  from  the  financial  turmoil  and  economic  developments  in  Norway  to  the 
Government Pension Fund – Global and the issue of sovereign wealth funds. 
BIS Review 37/2008 
 13
 Over the past year, we have seen a growing international debate about government-owned 
investment  vehicles;  so-called  sovereign  wealth  funds  (SWFs).  The  increased  attention 
reflects their rapid growth over the last decade. The debate has revealed some scepticism 
towards these funds, where key concerns relate to a lack of transparency and possible non-
financial investment objectives. 
In  my  view,  the  debate  should  also  reflect  these  funds’  potential  to  positively  influence 
international  financial  markets  through  enhancing  market  liquidity  and  financial  resource 
allocation. Typical features of this type of funds are long investment horizons, no leverage 
and  no  demands  for  the  imminent  withdrawal  of  funds,  unlike  the  growing  number  of 
leveraged hedge funds with short time horizons. Hence, sovereign wealth funds have a high 
risk-bearing  capacity  and  are  resilient  to  short-term  volatility.  They  may  therefore  act  as  a 
stabilising  factor  in  financial  markets  by  dampening  asset  price  volatility  and  liquidity  risk 
premiums. 
Let me elaborate and exemplify this by looking at the Government Pension Fund – Global: 
The Pension Fund is a policy tool to support long-term management of Norway’s petroleum 
wealth  and  avoid  the  resource  curse.  An  important  objective  is  to  shield  the  Norwegian 
economy from fluctuations in prices and extraction rates in the petroleum sector. The Fund is 
only invested abroad in financial markets. 
The alternative to an oil fund would have been to regulate the extraction path by putting a 
conservative  upper  limit  on  annual  extraction.  By  setting  up  the  Pension  Fund,  we  have 
separated the extraction of oil and gas from the actual spending of the petroleum revenues. 
This has probably resulted in higher production of oil and gas over the past two decades. 
14 
 BIS Review 37/2008
 The Pension Fund was formally established in 1990, but it was not until 1996 that the first 
allocation – NOK 2 billion – was made to the Fund. Since then, it has grown to around NOK 2 
trillion (well above USD 350 billion).  
The Fund is fully integrated with the government budget, and the same priorities are imposed 
on spending from the Fund as on any other government spending. This means that the entire 
petroleum  revenues,  as  well  as  the  return,  go  into  the  Fund.  Then,  as  part  of  the  budget 
resolution, the Storting decides on an annual transfer from the Fund to cover the government 
budget deficit. This procedure effectively prohibits use of the capital in the Fund for purposes 
not considered sufficiently important to be prioritised in the regular budget process. 
BIS Review 37/2008 
  15
The fiscal rule states that the Government is to spend – as an annual average through the 
business cycle – the expected real return on the Fund, estimated at 4 per cent. This cyclically 
adjusted transfer is estimated at a good NOK 80 billion this year – that is around 10 per cent 
of public expenditure. It is estimated that the transfer will increase in the years ahead. 
But even with this substantial source of income, only a share of future pension payments – 
which  basically  are  financed  by  current  income  –  will  be  matched  by  revenues  from  the 
Pension Fund. Estimates show that the capital in the Fund will only cover some 50-60 per 
cent of public pension expenditure in the future.  
One key element of the Fund Management Model is accountability. The role of the political 
authorities as well as of Norges Bank as manager is clearly defined. Another key feature is 
transparency and disclosure of information. 
The management of the Fund is based on two ethical commitments. 
 16 
 BIS Review 37/2008
 First,  there  is  the  consideration  relating  to  future  generations.  The  Fund  must  ensure  high 
capital  returns  at  a  moderate  risk,  by  means  of  professional  management  with  effective 
control of operational risk.  
Since 1997, the average annual net real return has been a little above the expected 4 per 
cent, partly due to excess return attributable to Norges Bank’s management. 
Second, the Fund must respect the fundamental rights of those affected by the companies in 
which  the  Fund  has  invested.  The  instruments  used  here  are  the  exclusion  of  companies 
from the Fund’s investment universe and the active exercise of ownership rights. 
The Ministry of Finance excludes companies that produce certain types of weapons. They 
also  exclude  companies  when  they  identify  an  unacceptable  risk  of  contributing  to  gross 
corruption, severe environmental degradation, and serious violations of human rights and of 
fundamental ethical norms.  
Norges Bank exercises its ownership rights by voting at general meetings and through direct 
contact  with  companies.  Moreover,  priority  is  given  to  combating  child  labour  and  we  look 
critically at how companies influence the authorities in environmental issues. 
The combination of accountability and transparency has contributed to building trust in the 
Pension Fund, both domestically and internationally. Domestically, a high level of confidence 
is  vital  in  maintaining  motivation  among  Norwegians  for  saving  rather  than  spending  the 
petroleum wealth. Furthermore, the transparency of the Fund is also viewed in a favourable 
light  by  those  countries  in  which  we  invest,  and  it  obviously  exerts  a  certain  disciplinary 
pressure on the management that improves its quality. 
Thank you for your attention! 
BIS Review 37/2008 
 17
