Mark  Carney:  The  implications  of  globalization  for  the  economy  and 
public policy 
Remarks  by  Mr  Mark  Carney,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  to  the  British  Columbia 
Chamber  of  Commerce  and  the  Business  Council  of  British  Columbia,  Vancouver,  British 
Columbia, 18 February 2008.  
 I  am  delighted  to  give  my  first  public  address  as  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada  in 
Vancouver, not only because my roots are here in the West, but also because Vancouver 
aptly symbolizes the subject of my remarks today – globalization.  
I chose to speak about globalization at the outset of my tenure because it will continue to be 
one  of  the  forces  shaping  our  economy  and  economic  policy  for  years  to  come.  Steady 
advances  in  transportation,  communication,  and  information  technologies,  underpinned  by 
the more widespread adoption of free-market economic policies, are shrinking the globe and 
expanding the global economy. It is incontestable that the current wave of globalization has 
been, on balance, of great benefit. Hundreds of millions of people have already been lifted 
out of poverty, with the real potential for hundreds of millions more to share their destiny.1
Globalization  has  also  had  numerous  economic  benefits  for  Canada.  The  recent  period  of 
international  integration  has  coincided  with  the  second-longest  expansion  in  our  nation's 
history,  characterized  by  rising  real  incomes,  surging  employment,  and  low,  stable,  and 
predictable inflation. However, these outcomes are not preordained; to reap fully the benefits 
of  globalization,  policy-makers  must  weigh  its  implications  and  respond  effectively  to  its 
challenges. 
In  my  time  today,  I  will  discuss  these  policy  challenges,  particularly  those  related  to  the 
conduct  of  monetary  policy.  First,  I  will  talk  about  how  the  current  wave  of  globalization 
differs  from  previous  periods  of  economic  integration,  and  then  I  will  address  some  of  the 
economic impacts of globalization. Before concluding, I will also say a few words about the 
current outlook for the Canadian economy, which, not surprisingly, is importantly influenced 
by global economic developments. 
What is different? 
In some respects, the current wave of globalization resembles earlier episodes. There have 
been  occasional  periods  of  intense  economic  integration  over  the  centuries,  most  notably 
during  the  Roman  Empire  and  in  the  latter  half  of  the  19th  century.  These  have  shared 
several  common  features:  for  example,  technological  innovations  that  shrank  economic 
distances (e.g., standardized roads, the telegraph and, more recently, the Internet) and, very 
importantly,  governments  that  pursued  supportive  economic  policies.  These  governments 
recognized  the  long-term  benefits  of  economic  integration  and  were  large  enough  to 
internalize the costs – both political and fiscal – of promoting public goods such as the rule of 
law;  common  standards  for  trade,  products,  and  services;  and  the  liberalization  of  trade. 
Many of their decisions, such as the repeal of the Corn Laws in England, were unpopular at 
the time, but ultimately proved beneficial.2 We should all hope that similar courage will begin 
to guide participants in the current Doha Development Round of trade negotiations. 
                                                 
1   For  a  further  discussion,  see  X.  Sala-i-Martin,  "The  World  Distribution  of  Income:  Falling  Poverty  and  … 
Convergence, Period," The Quarterly Journal of Economics. CXXI, no. 2 (May 2006): 351–397. 
2   See M. King, Speech at a Dinner for Kent Business Contacts, Ashford, Kent, U.K., 16 January 2006, which 
cites the example of protests against the use of foreign hops in beer. 
BIS Review 20/2008 
 1
So, is there anything different about this period of integration? I would argue that there are 
three aspects. First, the sheer scale of the process is unprecedented; second, the relative 
size of the emerging economies being integrated into the core of the global economy means 
that  their  policies  matter  for  advanced  economies,  as  well  as  for  their  own;  and  third,  the 
widespread adoption of supply-chain management by business further enhances the depth 
of integration. 
In terms of scale, it is safe to say that never in history has economic integration involved so 
many  people,  both  in  raw  numbers  and  as  a  percentage  of  the  global  population.  For 
example, when North America and the periphery of Europe were integrated during the latter 
half  of  the  19th  century,  their  total  population  was  half  the  size  of  the  then-advanced 
countries. The comparable ratio for postwar Japan was 10 per cent. Contrast that with China 
and  India  today,  which  alone  represent  2.5  times  the  current  population  of  advanced 
countries.3 Of course, the entire populations of China, India, and other emerging markets are 
not being instantly integrated into the global economy. If you adjust for the percentage of the 
population  in  the  traded-goods  sector,  however,  the  effective  global  labour  supply 
quadrupled between 1980 and 2005, with most of the increase taking place after 1990.4 This 
trend is set to continue: The globally integrated labour force is projected to double again by 
2050.5  
Similarly,  the  scale  of  cross-border  flows  of  goods,  services,  and  capital  is  now 
unprecedented.  The  global  economy  has  opened  dramatically  –  merchandise  exports  now 
make up about 20 per cent of global GDP, compared with about 9 per cent at the height of 
the  last  great  wave  of  globalization,  roughly  a  century  ago.6  According  to  research  at  the 
OECD,  advances  in  communications  technology  mean  that  up  to  1 in  5  services  are  now 
tradable, although this potential has only just begun to be tapped.7 Cross-border capital flows 
are now roughly 15 per cent of global GDP, compared with 3 per cent at the turn of the last 
century.8  
The second difference that characterizes this wave of globalization is that, given the relative 
size of emerging markets, their policies matter. For the most part, the economic policies of 
emerging-market  countries  have  improved  the  welfare  of  both  their  citizens  and  our  own, 
through  the  gains  from  trade.  With  some  policies,  however,  most  notably  in  the  degree  of 
exchange  rate  flexibility  and,  by  extension,  in  the  conduct  of  their  domestic  monetary 
policies, some emerging markets have run great risks. In particular, they continue to import, 
what is, for them, overly loose monetary policy that will ultimately lead to adjustments in the 
real exchange rate through higher domestic inflation, with the attendant economic distortions, 
adjustment costs, and risk of a hard landing. 
Moreover,  at  the  global  level,  there  are  important  spillovers  of  these  policies  onto  other 
economies,  such  as  Canada's.  Export-promotion  strategies  underpinned  by  undervalued 
4  
                                                 
3   For a more complete discussion, see A. Maddison, "World Development and Outlook 1820–2030: Evidence 
Submitted to the House of Lords" (20 February 2005). Available at <http://www.ggdc.net/maddison/>. 
International  Monetary  Fund,  World  Economic  Outlook  (April  2007),  162.  Each  country's  labour  force  is 
weighted by its export-to-GDP ratio. 
Ibid., 180. 
5  
6   See  A.  Maddison,  Monitoring  the  World  Economy,  1820–1992  (OECD,  1995)  and  C.  Alexander  and 
K. Warwick,  "Governments,  Exports  and  Growth:  Responding  to  the  Challenges  and  Opportunities  of 
Globalisation," The World Economy 30, no.1 (2007), 178. 
7   See D. van Welsun and G. Vickery, "Potential Offshoring of ICT-Intensive Using Occupations," (OECD, April 
2005). 
8   See K. H. O'Rourke and J. G. Williamson (1999), Globalization and History; The Evolution of a Nineteenth-
Century Atlantic Economy, and R. Battellino (2006), Regional Capital Flows, a speech to the 6th APEC Future 
Economic Leaders Think Tank, Sydney, 28 June. 
2 
 BIS Review 20/2008
exchange  rates  are  generating  unprecedented  reserve  accumulation,  as  central  banks 
intervene  to  forestall  exchange  rate  adjustment.9  In  contrast  to  earlier  periods  where 
emerging  markets  imported  capital  to  finance  investment,  today's  largest  emerging 
economies are important capital exporters, to such an extent that they have been significant 
drivers  of  lower  global  long-term  interest  rates.  Since  the  level  of  long-term  interest  rates 
influences  risk  appetite  and  capital  allocation,  the  extent  to  which  they  are  determined  by 
non-market forces can lead to distortions. Indeed, the low level and relative stability of long-
term interest rates encouraged investors to "search for yield," which in turn contributed to the 
dramatic  increase  in  highly  structured  credit  products,  including  those  backed  by  U.S. 
subprime mortgages. 
The  third  aspect  of  today's  globalization  that  is  different  is  the  relative  novelty  of  global 
supply-chain  management.  Advances  in  information  technologies,  specialized  production 
processes, and reduced communication and transportation costs have all led to a whole new 
range of goods and services becoming tradable. For example, over the past 30 years, the 
share of imports as a percentage of manufacturing production has tripled to nearly 30 per 
cent.10
These developments mean that firms are now able to increase production efficiency in ways 
previously  unimaginable.  In  addition  to  the  rising  trade  in  components  or  intermediate 
products,  an  entirely  new  class  of  tradable  services  –  including  financial,  engineering, 
medical, and legal – has emerged. There is reason to believe that these trends will continue. 
With these advances, it is easy to imagine a product designed and marketed in Canada, will 
be assembled in China, using parts sourced from elsewhere in emerging Asia and supported 
by technicians in India. By breaking down production processes along a global supply chain, 
firms are better able to find the efficiency gains that have led to increased productivity and 
lower prices.11  
Integration has had a clear dampening effect on the prices of manufactured goods. In effect, 
technology and globalization are facilitating more widespread application of two of the most 
powerful forces in economics: the division of labour and comparative advantage. This allows 
companies to organize the production process in the most cost-effective way possible, which 
maximizes the likelihood that Canada will retain positions in the high-value-added segments 
of many industries. A recent analysis by the Conference Board of Canada suggests that, at 
least  with  respect  to  Asian  supply  chains,  Canadian  firms  could  do  more  to  exploit 
opportunities.12  
Some economic implications of globalization 
At the same time, the rapid increase of manufacturing in emerging markets has led to strong 
demand for many commodities, and thus, to steady upward pressure on the prices of many 
of the commodities that Canada produces and exports. The combination of lower prices of 
our  imports  and  higher  prices  for  our  exports  means,  by  definition,  an  improvement  in 
Canada's terms of trade. Rising terms of trade alone have bolstered real disposable income 
                                                 
9   Between  the  end  of  2001  and  the  end  of  2004,  global  foreign  exchange  reserves  increased  by  over 
US$1.6 trillion,  reflecting  reserve  accumulation  by  emerging-market  economies  in  Asia.  See  Bank  for 
International  Settlements,  "Foreign  exchange  market  intervention  in  emerging  market  economies:  motives, 
techniques and implications," BIS Papers No. 24 (May 2005). 
10   OECD Economic Outlook No. 81 (2007), 188. 
11   M. Amiti and S.-J. Wei, "Demystifying Outsourcing." (IMF, 2004). Also, see D. Leung and Y. Zheng, "What 
Affects  MFP  in  the  Long-Run?  Evidence  from  Canadian  Industries,"  Bank  of  Canada  Working  Paper  No. 
2008-4. 
12   The Conference Board of Canada, Canada's “Missing” Trade with Asia (2008). 
BIS Review 20/2008 
 3
per  capita  by  8.5  per  cent  over  the  past  five  years,  and  have  contributed  to  healthier 
corporate balance sheets and continued improvement in government fiscal positions.  
Canada  has  adjusted  well  to  the  sharp  movements  in  our  terms  of  trade.  Through 
conversations that we at the Bank have had with business leaders, through the responses to 
questions in our Business Outlook Surveys, and through data showing an average annual 
increase  of  8  per  cent  in  the  volume  of  business  investment  since  2002,  there  is  clear 
evidence that the Canadian economy is becoming increasingly oriented to high-end services. 
Within the goods sector, firms are specializing and concentrating on those areas where they 
hold a comparative advantage.13  
Globalization  is  commonly  charged  with  being  responsible  for  increasing  inequality  and 
falling wages in certain sectors of industrialized economies, as lower-skilled jobs are shifted 
offshore.  Indeed,  the  OECD's  2007  Employment  Outlook  noted  that  the  share  of  labour 
income relative to GDP has fallen in a majority of member countries, including Canada, over 
the past two decades, while in 16 of the 19 countries where data are available, the earnings 
of workers at the top of the wage distribution have risen relative to earnings of those at the 
bottom  of  the  distribution  since  the  early  1990s.  While  globalization  has  played  a  role  in 
these  trends,  the  story  is  much  more  complex.  There  is  considerable  evidence  that 
technological change is behind a large part of the declining ratio of labour income to GDP.14 
Further, labour income in Canada has continued to rise in recent years because of strong 
employment growth.  
What  is  clear  is  that  globalization  has  affected  the  makeup  of  the  labour  force  in  many 
countries  by  promoting  a  shift  of  lower-skilled,  labour-intensive  production  processes  to 
emerging  markets  and  encouraging 
the  growth  of  higher-skilled,  knowledge-based 
production  in  industrialized  countries.  While  it  is  true  that  this  adjustment  process  can  be, 
and has been, difficult for certain individuals and firms, the overall picture is quite positive. In 
countries where labour markets are flexible, displaced workers have been more able to re-
skill  or  retrain  and,  on  balance,  find  more  productive  employment.  Since  December  2002, 
employment in Canada's manufacturing sector has fallen by roughly 14 per cent, or 320,000 
jobs, while employment in other goods-producing sectors has risen by roughly 23 per cent, or 
382,000 jobs. Further, over the same period, employment in the services sector has risen by 
more than 1.4 million jobs. Average hourly earnings have increased over this period at an 
average annual pace of 3.3 per cent. Moreover, everyone in our economy benefits from the 
lower  cost  of  imports.  While  Canada's  impressive  employment  performance  cannot  be 
ascribed to globalization per se, clearly globalization has not prevented it. At the same time, 
just as globalization has a long way to run, the adjustment process is far from finished. That 
is why it is so important for Canada to continue to improve its economic flexibility – a point 
that has been made repeatedly in Bank of Canada speeches.  
Policy challenges posed by globalization 
It  is  plain  from  this  discussion  of  the  economic  impact  of  globalization  that  it  also  has 
important  implications  for  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy.  I  will  touch  briefly  on  four 
implications that are relevant for the Bank of Canada. It should be recognized at the outset, 
however, that these implications can be conflicting, and none is relentless, so they need to 
be considered carefully.  
First, the Bank needs to be mindful of the possibility that movements in the terms of trade 
may affect the relationship between core and total CPI inflation. Recall that globalization has 
                                                 
13   J. Mair, "How the Appreciation of the Canadian Dollar Has Affected Canadian Firms: Evidence from the Bank 
of Canada Business Outlook Survey," Bank of Canada Review (Autumn 2005): 19–25. 
14   International Monetary Fund, World Economic Outlook (April 2007), 161–192. 
4 
 BIS Review 20/2008
led to lower prices for many manufactured goods and higher prices for many commodities, 
particularly  energy  products.  While  both  of  these  groups  are  represented  in  the  total 
consumer price index, many energy prices are excluded from our core measure of inflation 
because of their volatility. In the pursuit of our 2 per cent target for total CPI, we use our core 
measure as an operational guide because it has been a good gauge of the underlying trend 
of inflation and has been a better predictor of future changes in the total index than has total 
CPI  itself.  Forthcoming  research  at  the  Bank  of  Canada  indicates  that  this  relationship 
continues to hold in Canada, although it has diminished in many other countries.15 We will 
continue to monitor the stability of this relationship, and the Bank will also continue to look at 
a range of measures to assess the underlying trend of inflation. Considerable judgment must 
always be applied, and no one measure should be relied on exclusively. 
Second, globalization may affect the degree and speed of the pass-through of exchange rate 
movements to domestic prices. It is widely believed that globalization acts as a stabilizer that 
should  dampen  exchange  rate  pass-through  because  the  increased  competition  faced  by 
businesses will lead them to compress their margins to remain competitive and absorb rising 
costs.16 Eventually, however, local prices should adjust to exchange rate movements, if they 
persist. We may, in fact, be seeing this effect here in Canada, since some retailers in the 
automotive and book sectors have recently adjusted prices downwards in the face of greater 
competitive pressures stemming from the rise of the Canadian dollar.  
Third,  globalization  may  have  a  conflicting  influence  on  productivity.  I  have  already 
mentioned how globalization promotes higher productivity by allowing firms to arrange their 
production processes in the most cost-effective ways. Again, however, the reality in Canada 
is  more  complex.  The  large  swings  in  relative  prices  fed  by  globalization  have  sparked  a 
reallocation  of  resources  between  sectors  and  regions.  This  reallocation  can  lead  to  a 
temporary slowing in productivity growth as the adjustments take place. This is particularly 
true in the natural resources sector, where investments typically have long lead times, where 
a substantial amount of labour has been absorbed, and where high commodity prices have 
encouraged  the  production  of  more  marginal  resources.  These  effects  may  be  behind  a 
portion of Canada's disappointing productivity record in recent years.17  
Fourth, the impact of globalization on market interest rates is an area where economic theory 
and  reality  do  not  quite  align.  The  increase  in  the  effective  labour  supply  in  the  global 
economy should have raised the return on investment, all other things being equal, and led 
to  an  increased  demand  for  capital  to  employ  this  extra  labour.  This,  in  turn,  would  be 
expected to lead to higher interest rates. As I mentioned earlier, however, long-term interest 
rates  around  the  world  have  fallen  in  recent  years,  partly  because  of  the  exchange  rate 
policies  of  some  emerging  markets.  There  are  several  other  possible  explanations  for  this 
phenomenon,  including  the  balance  of  private  savings  and  investment  in  emerging-market 
economies, itself the product of the economic policies in these countries.18  
                                                 
15   See  Bank  of  Canada,  Renewal  of  the  Inflation-Control  Target  –  Background  Information  (2006)  and 
J. Hoddenbagh, M. Johnson, and E. Santor, "Total and Core Inflation: Recent International Evidence" (Bank of 
Canada Working Paper, forthcoming). 
16   There is evidence that import competition dampens markups in Canada. See D. Leung, "Markups in Canada: 
Have They Changed and Why?" (Bank of Canada Working Paper, forthcoming). 
17   R.  Dion,  "Interpreting  Canada's  Productivity  Performance  in  the  Past  Decade:  Lessons  from  Recent 
Research," Bank of Canada Review (Summer 2007): 19–32. 
18   Bank of Canada research has pointed to the relative weakness of investment demand as more important than 
the relative increase in desired global savings in explaining the low level of interest rates (B. Desroches and 
M.  Francis,  "World  Real  Interest  Rates:  A  Global  Savings  and  Investment  Perspective,"  Bank  of  Canada 
Working Paper No. 2007-16). The research also found that the key factors explaining movements in savings 
and investment were variables that evolve slowly, such as growth of the labour force and age structure of the 
population.  Other  factors  may  also  explain  the  low  interest  rates,  including  the  policy  choices  of  some 
emerging markets and imperfect development of global financial markets. 
BIS Review 20/2008 
 5
Given these four effects, some have argued that the large scale of the current globalization is 
undermining  the  effectiveness  of  monetary  policy.19  I  disagree.  In  short,  provided  that  a 
country retains a flexible exchange rate, it retains control of its monetary policy. The rate of 
inflation in Canada is a function of the effectiveness of our monetary policy in the face of both 
global forces and evolving domestic circumstances. 
Essentially, the main challenges for monetary policy posed by globalization are: the impact 
on the growth of our economy's potential output, and changes in relative prices, such as the 
prices  for  energy  or  manufactured  products.  The  growth  rate  of  our  economy's  potential 
matters because it affects the balance of supply and demand in the economy. If the effects of 
these  changes  are  not  addressed  by  monetary  policy,  they  will  affect  the  degree  of 
inflationary pressures in the economy. As for relative price changes, the Bank tries to look 
through  one-off  changes,  since  these  only  temporarily  affect  inflation.  However,  the 
"temporary" price-level shifts driven by globalization can last a long time, and the pace of the 
shifts can be variable. It is the job of the Bank of Canada to conduct monetary policy in a 
manner that takes into account such persistent shocks and ensures that they do not affect 
inflation expectations. 
Recent economic and financial developments 
So  how  have  these  different  factors  been  affecting  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy  in 
Canada?  Many  of  the  factors  just  discussed  featured  prominently  in  the  recent  Tokyo 
meeting  of  the  G-7  finance  ministers  and  central  bank  governors.  Key  topics  included  the 
slowdown  in  the  U.S.  economy  and  the  related  tightening  of  credit  conditions  in  most 
advanced economies. In addition to outlining a series of measures to improve the functioning 
of financial markets, my colleagues and I agreed that each country should continue to take 
fiscal and monetary policy measures appropriate to their particular economic circumstances. 
Canada's  current  economic  circumstances  were  spelled  out  in  the  Bank's  Monetary  Policy 
Report  (MPR)  Update  last  month.  In  that  document,  the  Bank  said  that  the  economy  has 
been  operating  above  its  production  capacity,  thanks  to  strong  domestic  demand.  This 
demand has been supported by a rise in real incomes, stemming from the gains in Canada's 
terms of trade which, as I mentioned earlier, have been driven by globalization. The evolution 
of our terms of trade will depend importantly on demand from major emerging markets. The 
impact  from  our  terms  of  trade  is  one  factor  that  could  lead  to  stronger  domestic  demand 
growth than we had assumed. This is something that we at the Bank will continue to watch 
closely. 
Another issue that will continue to be important for us is the evolution of the pass-through to 
prices  of  movements  in  the  exchange  rate.  As  I  noted  earlier,  some  retailers  –  notably  of 
motor  vehicles  and  books  –  have  adjusted  prices  downwards  in  the  face  of  greater 
competitive pressures stemming from the rise of the Canadian dollar. In the MPR Update, 
the  Bank  said  that  we  expect  this  to  be  a  one-off  movement  in  prices,  but  there  is  a 
possibility that there could be greater and more persistent downward pressure on prices than 
we assumed.  
The Bank also identified the downside risk that the tightening in credit conditions could be 
greater  and  more  protracted  than  assumed.  As  well,  there  could  be  a  more  prolonged 
slowdown  in  the  U.S.  economy,  exerting  a  greater  drag  on  Canadian  GDP  growth  and 
inflation. These two risks are, of course, related. 
In line with our base-case projection and the associated risks, the Bank lowered the target for 
the  overnight  rate  by  one-quarter  of  one  percentage  point  on  22  January.  This  followed  a 
                                                 
19   C. Borio and A. Filardo, "Globalisation and inflation: New cross-country evidence on the global determinants of 
domestic inflation" (Bank for International Settlements Working Paper, May 2007). 
6 
 BIS Review 20/2008
similar reduction on 4 December,  and brought the Bank's key policy  rate to 4 per cent. In 
making the announcement in January, the Bank said that further monetary stimulus is likely 
to  be  required  in  the  near  term  to  keep  aggregate  supply  and  demand  in  balance  and  to 
return inflation to target over the medium term. As I said recently, the timing and degree of 
that  stimulus  will  be  determined  at  future  fixed  announcement  dates,  after  we  have 
conducted a thorough analysis of, and applied our judgment to, all information available to us 
at that time. 
Conclusion 
Let  me  conclude  with  some  brief  thoughts  about  how  policy-makers  in  general  should 
approach  the  issue  of  globalization.  There  are  tremendous  benefits  from  embracing  this 
integration of markets, but there are adjustment costs as well, in the form of exposing our 
economies to global competition and swings in relative prices. 
The challenge for policy-makers is to ensure that the benefits of globalization are maximized 
and widely shared. In general, this means making sure that policies do not frustrate market-
based  adjustments,  but  rather  are  aimed  at  promoting  flexibility  in  markets  –  particularly 
labour  markets.  This  means  maximizing  the  ability  of  workers  to  relocate  if  they  wish, 
maintaining appropriate social safety nets that do not discourage employment, and focusing 
on  lifelong  learning  and  training.  Beyond  labour  markets,  governments  should  focus  on 
domestic  integration.  The  Trade,  Investment  and  Labour  Mobility  (TILMA)  pact  between 
British  Columbia  and  Alberta  is  a  good  example.  Internationally,  governments  should  also 
concentrate  on  removing  barriers  to  trade  and  investment  to  maximize  the  benefits  of 
globalization. These imperatives will be tested during the current economic slowdown. 
From the Bank of Canada's perspective, our challenge is to understand the various ways in 
which globalization affects both financial stability (a topic for another speech) and inflation. At 
the  Bank,  we  will  continue  to  share  our  perspectives  on  globalization  and  other  broader 
trends  so  that  individual  Canadians,  companies,  and  governments  have  the  necessary 
context when making their savings and investment decisions. Finally, in light of the growing 
importance  of  global  forces  and  the  risk  of  negative  spillovers  from  the  policies  of  some 
emerging  markets,  we  will  continue  to  use  our  participation  in  international  fora  to  shape 
global institutions and national policies so that globalization can fulfill its promised benefits for 
all.  
BIS Review 20/2008 
 7
