Jean-Claude Trichet: Interview with Die Presse, Der Kurier, Der Standard 
and Salzburger Nachrichten 
Interview  with  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  by 
Ms Christine  Domforth  (Die  Presse),  Mr  Reinhard  Göweil  (Der  Kurier),  Mr  Andreas 
Schnauder  (Der  Standard)  and  Mr  Richard  Wiens  (Salzburger  Nachrichten),  conducted  on 
28 April 2008 and published on 30 April 2008. 
 Will the next decision of the ECB be to cut interest rates or is it possible that you will 
raise them? 
Trichet: As you know, we at the ECB’s Governing Council take the decisions on monetary 
policy on a monthly basis after a thorough analysis of the facts and figures. We believe that 
the  current  monetary  policy  stance  will  contribute  to  delivering  price  stability  and  to  firmly 
anchoring inflation expectations.  
Some days ago Governor Noyer of the Banque de France hinted that the ECB could 
increase interest rates instead of lowering them. Was he expressing the opinion of the 
whole ECB council? 
Trichet: I do not comment on declarations made by members of the Governing Council in 
their own capacity. As you know, the President is the “porte parole” of the Governing Council 
and expresses the opinion of the whole Council. This is what I have done on behalf of the 
Governing Council. Our opinion is that we believe that our current monetary policy stance will 
contribute to delivering price stability. Allow me also to stress the formidable team spirit that 
we  have  in  the  Eurosystem.  I  would  like  to  praise  the  work  of  Governor  Liebscher  in 
particular for his invaluable contribution to our work.  
The European Commission delivered a new, more pessimistic, outlook for 2008 and 
2009. Does this change your projection? 
Trichet: There is a wide range of forecasts for this year and next; there are a lot of figures, 
from  the  EU,  from  the  OECD,  from  the  IMF  and  from  private  institutions.  In  the  case  of 
growth, as well as inflation, it depends very much on new data that are incorporated, so it is 
often  a  question  of  timing.  What  we  are  observing  in  the  first  quarter  of  2008  is  that  the 
economy  was  quite  robust  and  in  the  first  half  of  the  year  it  will  probably  be  reasonably 
resilient.  At  this  stage  we  consider  that  the  projection  of  the  IMF  for  the  EU  may  be  too 
pessimistic. We will see what happens. As you know, the ECB’s staff projections do not give 
a precise figure for growth, but rather a range. The range for GDP growth in 2008 is 1.3% to 
2.1%. 
Would  you  say  that  the  current  monetary  policy  of  the  ECB  accommodates 
sustainable economic growth? 
Trichet:  I  would  say  that  delivering  price  stability  and  being  credible  in  this  delivery  is  a 
precondition  for  sustainable  growth  and  sustainable  job creation.  There  is  no contradiction 
between  these  goals.  Our  past  track  record  argues  in  favour  of  this.  We  have  created 
15.7million new jobs in Europe, almost three times more than in the nine years preceding the 
euro. This was more than the jobs created in the United States during the same period. As 
you know, at the global level, there is now a mainstream sentiment among economists that 
price stability permits sustainable growth and job creation. We have maintained medium-term 
inflation expectations in line with our aim of price stability – less than 2%, but close to 2% – 
whilst contributing to creating a significant number of new jobs.  
BIS Review 54/2008 
 1
The  Federal  Reserve  lowers  the  interest  rates,  the  Bank  of  England  does  it.  Do  you 
think that the pressure on the ECB will get stronger to lower interest rates as well? 
Trichet: Each of us has its role and responsibilities. We have to face different economies, 
with different features, different levels of flexibility and very different kinds of shocks within 
each economy. There is one thing we have in common: We have to deliver price stability and 
we have to be credible. And we have to continue to solidly anchor price expectations. That is 
true for all central banks. Otherwise we would jeopardise medium and long-term growth and 
job creation and we would also create problems for the financial markets. 
When the Fed makes another cut of interest rates, will there be more pressure on the 
US-dollar and because of this more problems for the European export industry? 
Trichet:  There  have  been,  at  times,  sharp  fluctuations  in  the  exchange  rates  of  major 
currencies.  We  are  concerned  about  their  possible  implications  for  economic  and  financial 
stability. Also, I trust it is important that the US President, the US Secretary of the Treasury 
and  my  colleague  Ben  Bernanke  said  that  a  strong  dollar  is  in  the  interest  of  the  United 
States. 
You stressed many times that extreme exchange rate volatility is highly unwelcome. 
But the markets tend not to listen to you and other central bankers. Why is this so? 
Trichet: I think that observers and market participants are certainly listening to what we say, 
on both sides of the Atlantic.  
Two questions: What are your expectations as regards the financial market crisis and 
what repercussions will it have on credit activities for businesses?  
Trichet: At the moment outstanding loans to the non-financial corporate sector are growing 
at  a  rate  of  15%,  which  is  dynamic.  On  the  one  hand  we  see  a  progressive  slowdown  as 
regards loans to households and the housing sector. At the same time credit standards have 
tightened and we have to look at the situation very carefully. As regards the very significant 
ongoing  market  correction  we  will  continue  along  our  path:  on  the  one  hand  adopting  the 
appropriate monetary policy stance to deliver price stability and, once that decision is made, 
we have to ensure the smooth functioning of the money market in line with our policy rate. As 
you know, we have also been in close contact with other central banks, including the Federal 
Reserve.  
In the course of the financial crisis the impression of many people is that gains are 
privatised and losses are socialised. Do you regard this as a problem? 
Trichet: I think the issue of moral hazard is very important. It is absolutely clear that if those 
who have behaved improperly are not punished and do not take their losses then we cannot 
pave  the  way  for  sound  decisions of  financial  institutions  in  the  future.  Therefore  we  have 
always made the point that what we are doing is not, in any manner, aiming at bailing out any 
individual  or  institution  and  at  diminishing  the  losses  that  would  be  made  because  of  bad 
management. It is all about protecting those who behaved properly against the harm that has 
been done to the market as a whole by those who have taken bad decisions. That has been 
very well understood by observers and by market participants. 
But  there  are  tendencies  in  the  European  Union  to  think  that  bailouts  would  be 
considered if distortions of the economy are at stake. 
Trichet:  I  was  speaking  for  the  ECB,  the  Eurosystem  and  central  banks  in  general.  In 
exceptional cases one can imagine that the executive branches and the parliaments would 
consider  that  the  systemic  risk  associated  with  the  collapse  of  one  particular  institution 
because of a solvency issue would make it worth mobilising taxpayers’ risk and taxpayers’ 
money.  This  is  something  which  cannot  be  excluded.  As  central  banks  we  exclude  taking 
such risks associated not with a liquidity issue but with a solvency issue of a given financial 
institution.  
2 
 BIS Review 54/2008
But  the  European  Union  has  already  proposed  sharing  the  burden  in  case  of  a 
collapse in order to divide the rescue costs.  
Trichet: There can be no decision ex ante to mobilise taxpayers’ money. In very exceptional 
cases,  the  decisions,  if  any,  would  have  to  be  taken  ex  post.  To  my  knowledge  there  is 
absolutely no consensus of ex ante burden-sharing of taxpayers’ money. 
We  can  now  have  a  lively  discussion  about  the  stronger  regulation  of  financial 
markets. Do you think that we need tougher equity rules for banks? And what should 
be done with hedge funds that oppose stronger disclosure rules? 
Trichet: You know that we have 67 recommendations that were made public by the Financial 
Stability Forum and approved by the G7 and the international community. We are not at a 
level at which we are still exchanging ideas. We have come to an agreement. What inspired 
these  recommendations  was  the  idea  of  transparency  –  more  transparency  for  both 
institutions and for the sophisticated financial instruments that were the source of the market 
correction. It is exactly the same as we did in the case of the Asian crisis. We have to correct 
all the components of global finance if we want to avoid new significant market corrections 
with all their negative consequences. We have to correct the elements of procyclicality which 
currently exist in global finance and which amplify both the booms and the busts.  
Would off-balance risks be one of the components that have to be adjusted? 
Trichet: That is something which has been identified as one of the main problems. It calls for 
a  review  of  the  “originate  and  distribute”  model  that  has  been  generalised  in  commercial 
banking. It appears that it was a dangerous way of distributing credit. We have also noted 
that the rules of Basel I were very complacent regarding these structured investment vehicles 
or  conduits  or  other  off-balance-sheet  entities.  Basel  II  rules  are  fortunately  much  more 
stringent in this respect. Had we generalised Basel II earlier, it is likely that we would have 
fewer  of  these  operations  and  therefore  fewer  damages.  So  it  is  important  that  more 
countries  implement  Basel  II  and  that  we  see  how  we  can  improve  and  update  this 
framework.  And  we  are  also  strongly  encouraging  the  private  sector  to  improve  its  risk 
management. 
So everything is left to the behaviour of the private sector? 
Trichet:  Certainly  not.  Surveillance  authorities  have  to  be  as  alert  as  possible,  as 
recommended  in  the  Financial  Stability  Forum  (FSF)  report.  And  we  have  to  update  and 
improve regulation. I also welcome the work which has been done by the private sector. It 
seems fair to me to give the financial institutions a chance to work out good practices and 
benchmark principles for their own voluntary behaviour. If they are not able to do that or if we 
judge  their  work  insufficient  then  we  have  a  case  for  regulation.  In  any  case  we  should 
implement 
the  FSF  as  actively  as  possible.  Some 
recommendations should be implemented in 100 days, others by the end of the year. 
How do you judge the plans to create a World Financial Organisation proposed by the 
Austrian Chancellor? 
Trichet: I would take the Chancellor’s suggestions as a call to “work as actively and as well 
as possible at the level of Europe and the international community”. I have to say we have 
the FSF, which has been created after the Asian crisis. It is a group which brings together all 
the relevant financial institutions and groupings. We have the International Monetary Fund, 
we have the Bank for International Settlements, we have the G7 and we have the G20. So 
my  sentiment  is  that  there  is  a  will  to  make  the  present  framework  function  as  well  as 
possible, and this is good.  
the  67  recommendations  of 
BIS Review 54/2008 
 3
The  new  ECB  tower  in  Frankfurt  is  being  planned  by  the  Austrian  architects  COOP 
HIMMELB(L)AU. Are there any delays in the work on this building and when will the 
tower be ready? 
Trichet: We must be very alert, cautious and prudent, but at the moment there are no delays 
that I know of. The inauguration could take place at the end of 2011. 
One final question. Do you ever listen to politicians like Prime Minister Berlusconi or 
President Sarkozy when they are criticising the ECB – or does a central banker have to 
ignore such comments? 
Trichet: Let me say that the Maastricht Treaty has given us full independence. This is very 
well known the world over. I do not know of any observer or market participant who would 
call into doubt the fact that we are fully independent and that the President and the members 
of  the  Governing  Council  are  fiercely  attached  to  this  independence,  as  required  by  the 
Treaty.  
4 
 BIS Review 54/2008
