Sheryl Kennedy: Transparency – the more, the better? 
Remarks by Ms Sheryl Kennedy, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Canada, to l'Association 
des femmes en finance du Québec, Montréal, Quebec, 8 January 2008.  
 Transparency is the cornerstone of a well-functioning financial system. It's an issue that has 
been getting a lot of attention, and deservedly so, as we consider what has gone wrong in 
the market for asset-backed commercial paper. I'll be happy to take any queries you might 
have on this topic during the question and answer session following my remarks. But first, I 
want  to  talk  to  you  about  transparency  in  central  banking  and  in  setting  monetary  policy. 
Then, I'll close my remarks with a review of the changing monetary policy outlook over the 
past six months, which serves to illustrate my key points.  
So, what has been done, and what more can we do to improve transparency in monetary 
policy?  Are  there  any  limits?  I'll  approach  these  questions  from  three  perspectives: 
transparency  about  the  Bank's  policy  framework;  transparency  about  the  inputs,  the 
processes, and the reasoning behind monetary policy decisions; and transparency about our 
assessment of the outlook for the economy and monetary policy. 
That  last  element,  disclosing  more  of  the  Bank's  assessment  about  the  outlook,  including 
forward-looking  statements  about  monetary  policy  actions,  is  particularly  tricky  and  really 
tests the limits of transparency. Nevertheless, it is in this area that there may be the most 
room to increase transparency. But first, we must figure out if it would be beneficial to provide 
more information for market participants, firms, and individuals. More fundamentally, would it 
improve the effectiveness of monetary policy? And if we find that it would be beneficial, how 
can we convey this information so that it would be readily understood? Or more importantly, 
how can we convey this information in a way that will not be misunderstood?  
At  the  Bank  of  Canada,  we  do  not  believe  in  constructive  ambiguity,  nor  in  saturating  the 
market  with  a  lot  of  information  that  has  no  clear  message.  Real  transparency  involves 
judgment: communicating what is important, what clarifies, and not what obscures. I'll have 
more to say on this in a few minutes. 
Why be transparent? 
But first, let's back up one step to look more closely at just why transparency is so important 
to the conduct of monetary policy. It has become very clear over time and with experience, 
that  monetary  policy  is  most  effective  when  the  policy  objective  is  clearly  understood  and 
accepted. When consumers and savers, business owners, and financial market players, all 
understand the Bank of Canada's policy objective – and believe that it is attainable – then 
they can make better long-term plans and decisions. And when everyone expects this target 
to be maintained, and acts accordingly, then the target becomes self-reinforcing.  
But the benefits of transparency don't stop there. I believe that transparency also helps us to 
make  better  decisions.  The  extra  rigour  that  comes  from  holding  the  rationale  behind  our 
decisions up to external scrutiny leads to better results.  
Finally,  the  Bank  of  Canada  is  a  public  institution  –  funded  by,  and  accountable  to,  the 
taxpayer. Information and analysis gathered in the context of the Bank's business should be 
considered a public good – except when the release of such information would compromise 
the implementation of the Bank's mandate.  
BIS Review 1/2008 
 1
Are there limits to transparency? 
In general, more transparency is better than less. But this does not mean that there are no 
limits. First, there is the need to protect the confidentiality of some information and analysis 
that  is  given  to  the  Bank  by  outside  parties,  be  they  public-  or  private-sector  institutions. 
Indeed,  public  release  of  third-party,  confidential  information  would  jeopardize  the  central 
bank's ability to get all the information it needs to make good monetary policy decisions. 
Second, there is the need to protect the integrity of some internal policy deliberations. For 
example,  the  public  release  of  policy  advice  and  recommendations  could  stifle  the  free 
debate and consensus building that is necessary for sound policy-making. We want to hear 
all aspects of an argument, but it could be hard for staff members to play devil's advocate, 
knowing  that  such  a  position  will  be  made  public  and  could  be  taken  out  of  context.  And 
certain information should not be released while policy is still being developed, or has not yet 
had its full effect. In such cases, premature transparency could lead to misinterpretation or 
be acted on inappropriately, which could derail good policy intentions and could potentially 
be damaging to Canada's economic interests. 
Third, there is the need for good quality information. Providing useful, relevant information is 
far more important than dumping a large quantity of information of questionable quality. Too 
much information can actually cloud what is important. As a result, actions and decisions can 
become  less  transparent,  because  the  really  important,  effective,  and  relevant  information 
gets lost in the minutiae. 
Good quality information must not  only be accurate, it must also be communicated clearly 
and simply, so that it won't be misunderstood. This is especially germane when we try to be 
transparent  about  our  assessment  of  the  outlook  by  publishing  our  economic  projections, 
along  with  the  risks  and  uncertainties  surrounding  them,  and  forward-looking  statements 
about possible future policy actions. 
Transparency in setting monetary policy 
Debates  about  the  limits  to  transparency  for  effective  monetary  policy  are  certainly  not 
unique  to  the  Bank  of  Canada.  Central  banks  around  the  world  are  still  learning  the  best 
ways to communicate monetary policy. This is an important element of the art, rather than 
the  hard  science,  of  central  banking.  I  believe  that  we  at  the  Bank  of  Canada  have  made 
great strides in this area. 
So let's now take a closer look at the issue of transparency in setting monetary policy from 
the  three  perspectives  that  I  mentioned  at  the  outset:  transparency  about  our  policy 
framework;  transparency  about  the  inputs,  the  processes,  and  the  reasoning  behind 
monetary policy; and transparency about our assessment of the outlook. 
The  Bank  made  a  major  leap  forward  in  increasing  transparency  about  our  policy 
framework when we adopted an explicit inflation target in 1991. This target provides a clear 
objective for monetary policy, which has helped to anchor financial and economic decisions. 
It  makes  it  easy  to  measure  the  success  of  monetary  policy  and  to  hold  the  Bank 
accountable  for  its  actions.  Canadian  individuals  and  firms  can  align  their  savings, 
investment,  and  spending  plans  with  a  common  inflation-control  objective.  If  inflation 
persistently deviates from the target, we are committed to explaining the reasons why, what 
we will do to return it to target, and how long we expect the process to take. Previously, when 
we  targeted  monetary  aggregates,  for  example,  there  was  ambiguity  about  what  the  bank 
was trying to achieve, and we were not always clear about the implications of such a target 
for output, inflation, and interest rates.  
Now,  as  well  as  being  clear  about  our  objective,  we  are  also  being  transparent  about  our 
assessment  of  the  factors  that  influence  inflation  and  about  how  we  implement  monetary 
policy. We conduct monetary policy in a symmetric way, worrying as much about the trend of 
2 
 BIS Review 1/2008
inflation falling below target as we do about it rising above target. To keep inflation on target, 
we try to keep the economy operating near its full capacity. When the demand for goods and 
services  pushes  the  Canadian  economy  against  the  limits  of  its  capacity,  and  inflation  is 
poised to rise above target, the Bank will raise interest rates to cool off the economy. And 
when  the  economy  is  expected  to  operate  below  its  production  capacity,  and  inflation  is 
poised  to  fall  below  target,  the  Bank  will  lower  interest  rates  to  stimulate  growth.  We  also 
factor in shocks that directly affect inflation.  
Because  we  target  domestic  inflation,  we  have  a  floating  currency.  A  central  bank  cannot 
successfully control both the domestic and external values of its currency at the same time. 
And a flexible exchange rate is an important price signal of changing global and domestic 
circumstances that can help to prompt and facilitate necessary adjustment. 
This is our paradigm for the conduct of monetary policy, and we have been so transparent 
about it that we have devoted entire speeches and published a great deal of staff research 
on the topic. We do this so that a careful observer can understand just how monetary policy 
will adjust to changing circumstances. 
Our inflation target is established under an agreement with  the federal government. When 
this  is  reviewed  periodically,  we  look  for  ways  to  improve  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy 
based on recent experience and research in order to clarify aspects of our framework. In the 
most  recent  review,  for  example,  we  examined  how  to  deal  with  asset-price  bubbles  and 
looked at the appropriate time horizon for returning inflation to target following an economic 
or financial shock. In preparation for the next review of our inflation targeting agreement in 
2011, we are conducting an intensive research program into possible improvements to our 
policy framework. Specifically, we are looking into the merits of a lower inflation target and 
price-level targeting. 
Now,  let's  look  at  transparency  about  the  inputs,  the  processes,  and  the  reasoning 
behind monetary policy decisions. Just a little over a decade ago, the Bank didn't even 
issue a press release when it made an interest rate decision. Now, our rate announcements 
are widely anticipated. There is a very high level of interest, stretching from households to 
office  towers,  in  what  the  Bank  of  Canada  has  to  say  on  interest  rates,  inflation,  and  the 
economy. 
This interest is at least partly the result of a series of measures taken by the Bank to increase 
transparency. After the introduction of the inflation target, we moved in 1994 to become more 
open  about  how  we  implement  monetary  policy  by  targeting  the  overnight  interest  rate.  A 
further major step towards greater transparency came in 1995 when we began to publish a 
regular  Monetary  Policy  Report,  and  later  added  MPR  Updates,  to  provide  a  window  for 
financial  markets  and  the  general  public  into  the  analysis  behind  our  conduct  of  monetary 
policy. Soon after that, the Bank began to publicly announce interest rate changes through 
press releases. These steps helped to increase understanding and acceptance of the Bank's 
policy objective.  
Still, there was a lot of ambiguity and uncertainty in financial markets about exactly when the 
Bank  of  Canada  might  change  its monetary  policy  stance.  So,  in  2000,  we  decided  to  set 
eight  fixed  dates  each  year  for  interest  rate  announcements,  regardless  of  whether  rates 
were changed or not. This commitment to a timetable provided more certainty for markets, a 
better  focus  for  external  commentators  to  develop  and  expand  their  own  views  on  the 
economic  outlook,  and  regular  opportunities  for  us  at  the  Bank  of  Canada  to  review  the 
accumulation  of  data  and  to  update  our  views  about  the  outlook  for  inflation  and  the 
appropriate  course  for  monetary  policy.  This  extra  focus  and  rigor  has,  in  my  opinion, 
improved  our  decision-making  process.  Of  course,  the  Bank  retains  the  option  of  moving 
between dates in extraordinary circumstances, an option that has been exercised only once 
since fixed announcement dates were established. 
Most  of  the  information  and  analysis  that  the  Bank  uses  when  it  makes  monetary  policy 
decisions are based on data that are also available to the public. There was a time when one 
BIS Review 1/2008 
 3
such  input  –  our  Business  Outlook  Survey  –  was  not  publicly  available.  But  after  we 
conducted  research  to  determine  which  of  our  survey  questions  provided  the  most  useful 
information, we began to publish the results of those questions. The motivation was not only 
to help improve the public's understanding, but also to be as open and transparent as we 
could, given our responsibilities as a public institution. We continue to examine whether we 
can  make  public  more  of  the  inputs  to  monetary  policy,  without  compromising  the  policy-
making  process.  Indeed,  in  the  upcoming  January  Business  Outlook  Survey,  we  will  be 
including responses to two additional questions on past sales and credit conditions.  
I'll now turn to the third perspective, which is transparency about our assessment of the 
outlook for the economy and monetary policy. Because it can take as long as two years 
for monetary policy actions to have their full effect on inflation, we must always be looking 
well into the future. So, the questions become: how can we effectively communicate the kind 
of uncertainty and the many risks that any views about the future must always include? How 
can  we  talk  openly  about  possibilities  and  risks  in  a  way  that  won't  be  misunderstood?  It 
would  not  aid  transparency  if  our  assumptions  and  projections  of  what  might  transpire  – 
assessments  which  are,  by  their  very  nature,  conditional  –  were  misconstrued  as  more 
concrete predictions or commitments.  
At the Bank of Canada, the Governing Council sets out its base-case projection for inflation 
and growth in the Canadian economy four times a year in our Monetary Policy Reports and 
Updates.  This  base-case  projection  reflects  Governing  Council's  best  judgment  about  the 
most likely outcome, based on a number of assumptions. Over the years, we have become 
increasingly transparent in describing our projections, and the underlying assumptions. This 
January, we will include in our Update projection tables on global economic growth – tables 
that previously had only been included in full Monetary Policy Reports. 
We have provided more detail about how we see the economy unfolding, what forces might 
affect inflation, and what assumptions we have had to make about more volatile or uncertain 
variables. This, in turn, helps to explain the reasons behind our most recent decisions and 
provides some insight into possible future actions.  
The  base-case  projection  embeds  changes  in  the  policy  interest  rate  that  would  be 
necessary to achieve our 2 per cent inflation target over the medium term. We describe the 
direction  and  magnitude  of  that  interest  rate  path  in  a  few  words,  in  Chapter  4  of  the 
Monetary  Policy  Report  and  when  we  update  the  base-case  projection  in  the  Update.  We 
may also give an indication of the time horizon for this path. 
We  have  also  become  more  forthcoming  in  recent  years  about  the  risks  that  we  see 
surrounding the base-case projection and whether we think these risks are balanced or not. 
Our policy rate statements, in press releases and in the Overview section of the Monetary 
Policy Report and Update, reflect our best judgment in the context of the overall outlook at 
that time, including the balance of risks. But that, too, is no guarantee that the future will play 
out the way we expect.  
There are several ways we might consider providing more transparency about the risks and 
uncertainties around our base-case projections. Some central banks use fan charts showing 
confidence intervals that can suggest the extent of uncertainty around a particular factor in 
the overall forecast. Another approach is to publish complete alternative scenarios in addition 
to  presenting  a  base-case  projection.  And  some  academics  have  called  for  more 
transparency  by  sharing  the  monetary  authorities'  probability  estimates  of  different  risks. 
Examining some of these possibilities is in our work plan for the year ahead. 
What is not in our work plan is the use of stock words and phrases to signal policy intentions. 
This isn't our practice at the Bank of Canada. Instead, we try to spell out the situation as we 
see it. We set out our base-case projection for the economy and the key risks; we make clear 
the indicators that we're closely following; and by being clear about our paradigm, we try to 
help a careful observer to better understand how monetary policy could evolve, depending 
on changing circumstances.  
4 
 BIS Review 1/2008
But  we  count  on  outside  observers  to  do  their  own  analytical  heavy  lifting  as  well.  In 
preparing for our interest rate decisions, we look at market prices, external commentary, and 
other analysis. We rely on observers to provide their own perspective on the outlook. If our 
views differ substantially from the consensus of external observers, we might consider either 
redoing our own analysis, seeking out further information, or communicating more explicitly 
our views and analysis to help those observers to understand the factors that we consider to 
be  important.  As  I  have  said  on  many  occasions,  if  you  are  considering  placing  a  bet 
between what you think we said we were going to do and what you think we ought to do, I'd 
go with the latter. 
Outlook for the Canadian economy and inflation  
So, let me conclude by looking at the evolution of monetary policy over the past six months. 
It  certainly  has  been  a  fluid  situation,  and  an  excellent  example  of  how  forward-looking 
assessments can change quite rapidly. 
Back  in  July,  we  raised  our  policy  rate  by  a  quarter  of  one  percentage  point  because  we 
judged that the economy was operating, at that time, at a level further above its production 
potential  than  had  been  projected  at  the  time  of  the  April  Monetary  Policy  Report.  As  we 
expected  both  total  and  core  CPI  to  remain  above  2  per  cent,  we  concluded  that  some 
modest  further  increase  in  the  overnight  rate  might  be  required  to  bring  inflation  back  to 
2 per cent over the medium term.  
By  the  end  of  the  summer,  the  situation  had  changed  in  many  respects.  The  Canadian 
economy was operating even further above its production potential than estimated in July, 
which was putting upward pressure on inflation. Developments in financial markets had led to 
some tightening of credit conditions for Canadian borrowers, however, which would temper 
the growth in domestic demand. And the U.S. economic outlook had also weakened. This, 
together with a higher assumed level for the Canadian dollar, suggested that there would be 
more  drag  from  net  exports  in  2008  and  2009  than  previously  expected.  Given  these 
developments, we held our policy rate steady through September and October. We identified 
several  risks  to  the  outlook  for  inflation  and  judged  them  to  be  roughly  balanced,  with 
perhaps a slight tilt to the downside. 
In the event, the downside risks prevailed. When we re-examined our monetary policy stance 
early  in  December,  the  Canadian  economy  was  growing  broadly  in  line  with  the  Bank's 
expectations, reflecting in large part the underlying strength of domestic demand. But both 
total  CPI  and  core  inflation  were  now  below  the  Bank's  expectations,  reflecting  increased 
competitive  pressures  related  to  the  level  of  the  Canadian  dollar.  In  addition,  other 
developments since October suggested that the downside risks to our inflation projection had 
increased.  Global  financial  market  difficulties  had  worsened,  tightening  credit  conditions 
further,  and  there  was  an  increased  risk  to  the  prospects  for  the  demand  for  Canadian 
exports, since the outlook for the U.S. economy had weakened further. So, on 4 December, 
we judged that the balance of risks had shifted to the downside, and we lowered our target 
for the overnight rate to 4 1/4 per cent. 
Now,  as  we  prepare  for  our  next  interest  rate  announcement  on  22 January,  and  our 
Monetary  Policy  Report  Update  two  days  later,  we  are  preparing  our  regular  quarterly 
economic projection and risk assessments, so that we can fully assess the implications of all 
economic  and  financial  developments  since  the  October  Report,  and  set  the  appropriate 
course for monetary policy.  
Conclusion 
At the Bank of Canada, we are very interested in any ideas you might have on this topic of 
transparency in monetary policy – what the limits are and how transparency can continue to 
BIS Review 1/2008 
 5
be  improved.  In  my  view,  generally,  more  is  better.  Apart  from  the  need  to  protect 
confidential  information  and  not  compromise  the  policy-making  process,  the  true  limits  to 
transparency in monetary policy lie in communicating effectively in the face of uncertainty, a 
skill which we are constantly striving to master.  
6 
 BIS Review 1/2008
