Stefan Ingves: Policy rate setting and the monetary policy steering 
system 
Speech  by  Mr  Stefan  Ingves,  Governor  of  the  Sveriges  Riksbank,  at  Handelsbanken, 
Stockholm, 28 April 2008. 
 During  the  autumn  and  spring  the  international  financial  markets  have  been  marked  by 
considerable uncertainty and turmoil. The situation has caused several central banks to take 
extraordinary measures, while for instance the Riksbank has not seen any reason to do so. 
One reason why central banks have acted differently is that the financial crisis has affected 
different countries to differing degrees. In Sweden we have not observed any major problems 
as a result of the financial crisis. This is linked to the fact that Swedish banks have not been 
exposed to the US subprime market to any great extent. Nor has there been any distrust of 
Swedish  banks,  which  have  a  good  capacity  to  deal  with  unexpected  negative  events. 
Ultimately,  it  is  a  question  of  a  broad  view  that  Swedish  banks  do  not  have  problems. 
Another reason why central banks have acted differently is the differences in monetary policy 
steering systems between countries. It is therefore important to create an understanding of 
how the Swedish monetary policy steering system works.  
In my speech today I will talk about monetary policy from the production of the background 
material for making a decision until the decision has been implemented. I will focus on how 
an  interest  rate  decision  is  put  into  practice.  Less  than  a  week  ago  we  members  of  the 
Riksbank’s Executive Board decided to hold the repo rate unchanged at 4.25 per cent. What 
does this mean? How can we steer the short-term interest rate and thereby affect inflationary 
pressures in the economy?  
I shall begin with the formulation of the inflation target and then describe how the repo rate 
affects  inflation.  After  that  I  will  talk  about  the  background  material  for  monetary  policy 
decisions. I will then go through the Riksbank’s monetary policy steering system, that is, how 
a decision on the repo rate is actually put into practice. Finally, I will mention a few words 
about the financial turmoil and why there has not been reason for the Riksbank to take any 
special  measures,  although  the  financial  developments  are  of  course  one  of  many  factors 
affecting our assessments of inflation and resource utilisation. I shall also partly use our most 
recent interest rate decision as an example. 
Inflation shall be low and stable 
The Riksbank’s statutory objective is to maintain price stability. We have specified this as an 
explicit  inflation  target  according  to which  the  annual  change  in  the  consumer  price  index, 
CPI,  is  to  be  2  per  cent.  In  addition,  we  have  formulated  a  tolerance  interval  around  the 
target  of  plus/minus  1  percentage  point.  The  tolerance  interval  marks  both  the  fact  that 
monetary policy cannot achieve the target exactly all of the time and the fact that excessive 
deviations cannot be accepted if the target is to remain credible. To further enhance clarity, 
monetary  policy  is  guided  by  a  principle  according  to  which  the  aim  is  normally  to  bring 
inflation back to target within two years after a deviation has occurred. The two-year horizon 
makes  it  possible  to  bring  back  inflation  to  the  target  gradually  and  in  this  way  to  avoid 
excessive  fluctuations  in  the  real  economy.  The  target  horizon  thus  allows  flexibility  in 
monetary policy, while helping to anchor inflation expectations. 
BIS Review 51/2008 
 1
The policy rate’s path to inflation takes time  
The  Riksbank’s  target  is  to  maintain  a  low  and  stable  level  of  inflation.  We  can  influence 
inflation by means of our steering interest rate, the repo rate. Through the steering system, 
the Riksbank aims to keep the shortest market rate, the overnight rate, close to the repo rate. 
The overnight rate in turn affects the interest rates faced by the general public, and thereby 
activity  and  prices  in  the  economy.  So,  the  repo  rate  expresses  the  level  at  which  the 
Riksbank  wants  the  overnight  rate  to  lie.  Interest  rates  with  a  slightly  longer  duration,  for 
instance 3 months, are determined in the financial markets, partly by expectations of what 
the repo rate will be on average during this period. Banks’ lending rates to households and 
companies and interest rates on securities with different durations are affected therefore by 
both the actual and expected repo rate. In the slightly longer term there is greater uncertainty 
and  it  may  be  difficult  to  form  an  opinion  of  the  future  repo  rate.  The  long-term  inflation 
expectations then play an important role. Here we can mainly have an effect by conducting a 
credible monetary policy. Long-term interest rates are also affected by the economic outlook 
and by long-term growth.  
The level of the repo rate is set so that inflation will be close to the target within a couple of 
years  at  the  same  time  as  inflation  and  the  real  economy  should  not  show  excessive 
fluctuations. What is known as the transmission mechanism is often described in terms of the 
different  channels  through  which  the  repo  rate  has  an  effect  on  the  real  economy  and 
inflation; the interest rate channel, the credit channel and the exchange rate channel.  
According to the “interest rate channel”, higher interest rates normally make it more attractive 
to save. A higher interest rate also means that it becomes more expensive for companies to 
finance  investments,  and  for  households  to  borrow  for  consumption.  The  “credit  channel” 
describes how monetary policy’s impact on the economy can be reinforced by companies’ 
and  households’  credit  ratings  declining  when  interest  rates  are  higher.  Households  and 
companies  find  it  more  difficult  to  borrow  money.  All  in  all,  a  higher  repo  rate  dampens 
household  consumption  and  corporate  investment  and  thereby  also  total  demand  in  the 
economy.  This  in  turn  means  that  production  growth  slackens  and  resource  utilisation  is 
lower. Prices and wages then rise at a slower rate. The “exchange rate channel” describes 
how monetary policy affects the value of the currency. Normally, an increase in the repo rate 
leads to a strengthening of the krona. This is partly because Swedish assets appear more 
attractive  than  investments  in  other  currencies.  A  stronger  exchange  rate  affects  inflation 
directly in that imported goods will become cheaper. Inflation is also dampened indirectly in 
that foreign goods become cheaper than domestically-produced goods. This leads to a rise 
in  imports  and  a  decline  in  exports.  Lower  demand  for  domestic  goods  contributes  to  a 
reduction  in  resource  utilisation  and  dampens  inflationary  pressures.  In  addition,  inflation 
expectations are important to how companies set prices and to wage formation, and thereby 
to  inflation.  If  everyone  trusts  that  inflation  will  remain  low,  the  companies  do  not  need  to 
change their prices so often, and employees do not need to increase their wage demands. 
This makes it easier for the Riksbank to achieve the inflation target.  
Some of these mechanisms act on inflation fairly quickly, while others take longer to have an 
effect. Empirical research indicates that a change in the repo rate has its greatest impact on 
inflation  after  one  to  two  years.  This  means  that  the  Riksbank  must  base  its  actions  on 
forecasts of what direction inflation will take. Such assessments are made six times a year, 
prior  to  the  monetary  policy  meetings,  and  they  function  as  a  basis  for  the  interest  rate 
decisions. 
Forward-looking information to base decisions on  
The work on producing background material for the decision begins with an analysis of the 
new statistics and new events that have occurred both in the Swedish economy and abroad. 
Using this as a base, an assessment is made of international economic activity and inflation 
prospects,  and  a  review  of  developments  in  the  financial  markets.  International  economic 
2 
 BIS Review 51/2008
activity  affects  the  assessment  of  Swedish  exports,  while  international  price  movements 
affect pricing of the goods and services imported to Sweden. After this a forecast is made of 
economic activity and inflation in Sweden. The Riksbank uses a combination of assessments 
made  by  sector  experts  and  results  from  several  models  in  its  forecasting  work.  The 
information is weighed together to form a main forecast for how inflation, the repo rate and 
the economy as a whole will develop. In addition, various alternative scenarios are produced, 
which illustrate how the course of events is affected by other assumptions regarding central 
variables,  for  instance,  productivity  growth  or  international  economic  activity.  Gradually  a 
monetary policy report is pieced together. This is an extensive process, where the Executive 
Board and officials from the Monetary Policy Department regularly discuss and take a stance 
on different alternative forecasts. Prior to the monetary policy meetings that do not coincide 
with  the  publication  of  a  Monetary  Policy  Report,  the  forecasting  work  is  carried  out  in  a 
similar  manner.  Since  last  winter  a  “Monetary  Policy  Update”  is  published  on  these 
occasions, a report which contains a more limited number of forecasts. 
On the basis of the work described above, the Executive Board establishes its majority view 
of what is considered a well-balanced monetary policy, giving consideration to inflation and 
the  developments  in  the  real  economy  during  the  forecast  period.  Last  Wednesday  we 
published the first Monetary Policy Update of the year. We observed in this report that the 
financial  turmoil  has  persisted  since  the  monetary  policy  meeting  in  February.  It  has 
contributed  to  subduing  households’  and  companies’  expectations  for  the  future  in  many 
countries. At the same time, energy and food prices have risen more than expected. All in all, 
this  means  that  international  economic  activity  is  showing  weaker  development  than  the 
Riksbank had earlier anticipated. Economic activity is still good in Sweden, with high growth 
in  consumption  and  employment.  Exports  have  also  shown  good  growth.  The  weaker 
international economic activity will contribute to a slowdown in the Swedish economy. Rising 
energy and food prices mean that inflation is high and it is expected to be slightly higher next 
year than was forecast in February. 
As before, the Riksbank has to take into account different counteracting factors. On the one 
hand, inflation is still high, as are inflation expectations. On the other hand, the increasingly 
weak international economic activity will have an effect on Swedish growth and inflation. 
Given  this,  we  decided  at  the  monetary  policy  meeting  last  Tuesday  to  hold  the  repo  rate 
unchanged at 4.25 per cent. The repo rate path remains the same as in February. A repo 
rate of around 4.25 per cent over the coming year will contribute to bringing inflation back 
towards  the  target  of  2  per  cent  a  couple  of  years  ahead  and  contribute  to  a  balanced 
development in production and employment. However, there is still considerable uncertainty 
regarding the economic outlook and inflation prospects.  
Conditions for the Riksbank’s monetary policy steering system 
How is an interest rate decision put into practice? What actually happens when the Executive 
Board decides that the repo rate should be raised, cut or held unchanged? This can best be 
answered with a description of how our system works.  
Like many other central banks, the Riksbank aims its monetary policy at steering the shortest 
market rate, the overnight rate. This can be done in many different ways. We have a system 
where  we  decide  the  conditions  for  the  banks’  deposits  and  loans  with  the  Riksbank.  The 
Riksbank supplies a payment system, RIX, which manages payments in Swedish krona. A 
payment  system  is  an  infrastructure  that  makes  it  possible  to  forward  payments  from  one 
bank to another, and thus payments from households’ and companies’ accounts in one bank 
to the recipient’s account in another bank. RIX consists of an account system where each of 
the  participating  banks  has  its  own  account  in  which  payments  between  the  banks  are 
booked. By determining the conditions for the banks’ deposits in and borrowing from the RIX 
system,  the  Riksbank  can  affect  the  overnight  rate,  that  is  the  interest  on  overnight  loans 
between the banks. 
BIS Review 51/2008 
 3
Deposit and lending rates set the limits for the overnight rate 
When the payment system closes for the day and trade between the banks in the overnight 
market has been concluded, the banks’ accounts in RIX must be in balance. This means that 
the  banks  must  finance  their  deficits  or  invest  their  surpluses.  The  banks  have  two 
alternatives for achieving this. They can either balance their respective deficits and surpluses 
against  one  another  on  the  overnight  market,  or  they  can  use  the  Riksbank’s  deposit  and 
lending  facility.  The  latter  means  that  they  can  deposit  in  or  borrow  from  the  Riksbank 
overnight at interest rates published in advance. These are known as the deposit and lending 
rates,  which  are  0.75  percentage  points  below  and  above  the  repo  rate  respectively.  This 
difference  creates  an  incentive  for  the  banks  to  firstly  borrow  from  and  deposit  funds  with 
each other at a rate of interest in this so-called interest rate corridor. One could thus say that 
the deposit and lending rates set the limits for the overnight rate.  
How does the Riksbank ensure that the overnight rate is stable? 
But we do not leave it at that. The facilities ensure that the overnight rate remains within the 
corridor. But the Riksbank also wants the overnight rate to be stable and close to the repo 
rate, which is in the middle of the interest rate corridor. In other words, we want the overnight 
rate to be predictable and not to fluctuate within the corridor. 
The reason why the overnight rate can vary is that the bank system as a whole may have a 
need to borrow or invest. This means that one or more banks may have a minus or plus in 
their accounts in RIX at the end of the day, even after adjustments on the overnight market. 
Without any other alternative, this would mean that banks with a deficit would have to borrow 
from the Riksbank at the lending rate, and banks with a surplus would have to invest at the 
deposit rate. The effect would be an overnight rate that varies within the corridor. To prevent 
this, the Riksbank accomodates the bank system’s total borrowing or investment requirement 
every  week  at  the  repo  rate.  We  thus  make  sure  that  the  bank  system  as  a  whole  firstly 
borrows or deposits at the repo rate, and thus minimise the banks’ need to use the standing 
facilities.  At  the  same  time,  we  signal  the  level  at  which  the  Executive  Board  wants  the 
overnight rate to lie in the coming week. In recent years the bank system as a whole has 
needed to borrow from the Riksbank. Whether the bank system needs to borrow or deposit 
funds at the Riksbank has no significance, however, for the Riksbank’s capacity to steer the 
overnight rate.  
The fact that the bank system as a whole has a borrowing requirement with the Riksbank 
means that we lend funds to the banks. This weekly loan transaction can be described in two 
stages.  
In the first stage, the traders at the Riksbank make a forecast of the bank system’s borrowing 
requirement in the coming week. This involves making an assessment of the payments or 
flows that occur between the Riksbank and the banks, and affects the bank system’s total 
borrowing  requirement  with  the  Riksbank.  The  latter  is  an  item  in  the  Riksbank’s  balance 
sheet.  The  forecast  of  the  bank  system’s  borrowing  requirement  is  therefore  in  practice  a 
forecast  of  the  most  important  changes  in  the  Riksbank’s  balance  sheet  over  the  coming 
week. On the whole, there are two items in the Riksbank’s balance sheet that are important 
in this context, one on the liability side and one on the asset side. On the liability side it is 
mainly  changes  in  the  general  public’s  demand  for  banknotes  and  coins  that  needs  to  be 
estimated.  The  Riksbank  has  a  monopoly  on  issuing  new  banknotes  and  coins.  Issuing 
banknotes and coins can be compared with issuing securities and arises as a liability in our 
balance  sheet.  Changes  in  the  general  public’s  demand  for  banknotes  and  coins  show  a 
clear and stable seasonal pattern and are therefore relatively easy to forecast. On the asset 
side it is a question of changes in the gold and foreign currency reserve linked to the sale or 
purchase of foreign currencies. Such interventions are very rare and usually affected by our 
own decisions. Other items in the Riksbank’s balance sheet only show small and predictable 
changes. The total of the estimated changes in the balance sheet corresponds to how much 
4 
 BIS Review 51/2008
the  bank  system’s  borrowing  requirement  is  expected  to  change  over  the  coming  week. 
Compared  with  many  other  countries,  it  is  easy  to  make  forecasts  of  the  Swedish  bank 
system’s  borrowing  or  investment  requirement.  This  is  partly  because  the  government 
transactions  no  longer  go  via  the  Riksbank,  and  there  is  very  seldom  a  need  to  make 
currency interventions when one has a floating exchange rate.  
In a second stage, the actual loan transaction is carried out by means of what is known as a 
repo.  The  monetary  policy  repo  means  that  the  bank  system  borrows  money  from  the 
Riksbank against collateral, with an agreement to “repurchase” a week later. When the repo 
matures, the banks pay interest on the past week’s loans, that is the repo rate. At the same 
time a new repo is carried out. The conditions for the repo are normally announced every 
Tuesday and the repo runs from Wednesday to Wednesday. 
As  the  size  of  the  repo  transaction  is  based  on  a  forecast  of  the  borrowing  requirement 
during  the  coming  week,  and  the  RIX  accounts  must  be  regulated  daily,  the  bank  system 
may nevertheless need to borrow or deposit in the standing facilities on individual days. If the 
amounts  are  large,  this  could  risk  leading  to  major  fluctuations  in  the  overnight  rate.  The 
Riksbank is therefore prepared on a daily basis to carry out what are known as fine-tuning 
operations.  These  operations  involve  meeting  the  bank  system’s  borrowing  or  deposit 
requirement on a particular day at a rate of interest that is 10 basis points above or below the 
repo rate.  
To summarise this relatively detailed outline, the Riksbank’s monetary policy steering system 
means that the Riksbank, by supplying a payment system and lending and deposit facilities, 
confines the market’s overnight rate within an interest rate corridor of 150 basis points. But it 
is through the weekly repo transaction and the daily fine-tuning operations that we ensure 
that the overnight rate is close to the repo rate. Following the most recent monetary policy 
decision, we want the overnight rate to be close to the repo rate of 4.25 per cent. In practice 
this means that this week’s monetary policy repo will be carried out at a repo rate of 4.25 per 
cent.  
Same objective but different systems 
Many other countries also have the objective of steering the short market rate. However the 
systems  used  may  differ.  Many  central  banks  apply  an  interest  rate  corridor,  like  the 
Riksbank,  with  the  aim of  keeping  the  short  market  rate  in the  centre  of  the  corridor.  This 
applies for instance to the Bank of England and the ECB. Like the Riksbank they carry out 
weekly repos at a particular interest rate, with the objective that the short market rate should 
be close to this. In addition, there is the possibility to carry out fine-tuning operations.  
An  important  difference  from  the  Riksbank  is  the  application  of  a  minimum  reserve 
requirement. Like many other central banks, both the ECB and the Bank of England require 
that the banks on average during a certain period have a particular, predetermined amount in 
their  accounts  with  the  central  bank.  The  banks  receive  interest  on  these  funds,  at  a  rate 
close or equal to the policy rate. As long as the banks on average fulfil the minimum reserve 
requirement, they can to some extent decide themselves when the deposits and withdrawals 
from  the  account  will  be  made  during  the  period.  This  means  that  the  minimum  reserve 
requirement can be used to even out temporary imbalances in the payment flows between 
the banks, and between the banks and the central bank. As long as the average minimum 
reserve requirement is met, there is usually no cost if a bank wishes to deposit more in its 
account  at  the  beginning  of  a  period,  for  instance.  The  bank  can  count  on  being  able  to 
invest  any  surplus  remaining  at  the  end  of  the  period  in  the  market  at  a  rate  close  to  the 
policy rate.  
It is possible that the formulation of minimum reserve requirements can affect the need to 
stabilise the overnight rate in periods of financial turmoil. As it does not normally entail any 
additional cost, there may be an incentive for the banks to increase their deposits with the 
BIS Review 51/2008 
 5
central bank at the beginning of the minimum reserve period when there is great uncertainty 
in the interbank market. This can entail a reduction in supply and thus rising interest rates in 
the interbank market. 
Recent developments 
Since  last  summer,  developments  in  the  financial  markets  have  been  turbulent.  The 
problems  were  triggered  in  the  US  subprime  market,  which  caters  to  borrowers  with  low 
credit ratings. The problems actually began back in 2005 when rising interest rates affected 
many borrowers. When loans were renewed at new, higher interest rates the loan costs for 
these  borrowers  rose  substantially.  And  when  property  prices  fell,  there  was  no  scope  to 
mortgage  the  house  so  householders  could  borrow  their  way  out  of  their  problems.  Many 
borrowers  could  no  longer  make  the  interest  and  mortgage  payments  on  their  loans.  This 
caused  major  loan  losses  for  many  mortgage  institutions  and  a  general  unease  among 
investors.  The  loans  had  moreover  been  repackaged  into  what  are  known  as  structured 
products and sold on to investors around the world. There was considerable uncertainty over 
who was actually holding the bad loans and the problems quickly spread around the world. 
The uncertainty increased over the summer when credit rating agencies downgraded many 
of  these  products.  During  the  third  quarter  of  last  year  several  investment  banks  reported 
large write-downs as a result of the bad loans, and in connection with this uncertainty once 
again  increased.  In  recent  months  the  situation  in  the  financial  markets  has  been 
characterised  by  considerable  uncertainty  over  future  risks,  large  write-downs  and  funding 
problems for financial institutions.  
The instability has led to a fear among the banks that they may face liquidity problems, that 
is, experience difficulty taking new loans when the old ones fall due for payment. It has also 
lead to fears of an increased credit risk when lending to other banks. This means that the 
banks  have  preferred  more  liquid  and  risk-free  investments,  while  more  banks  have 
experienced  difficulties  in  financing  themselves  in  the  interbank  market.  As  a  result, 
government rates have been pushed down, while interbank rates have risen. We have seen 
this development in many large economies.  The interbank markets have been much more 
volatile than normal. In many countries they have at times functioned poorly in the sense that 
there has been reluctance to lend money to some banks. 
In  some  countries,  such  as  the  United  Kingdom  and  the  euro  area,  the  considerable 
uncertainty  has  led  banks  to  prefer  to  invest  safely  in  the  central  bank  instead  of  on  the 
interbank market. This has also put upward pressure on interbank rates. Some central banks 
have thus experienced problems in keeping the overnight rate, the shortest interbank rate, at 
the target levels. 
These events have led to several central banks taking different types of measures. To carry 
out their task of stabilising the overnight rate, the ECB and the Bank of England for instance, 
have been more active than normal in supplying and withdrawing liquidity through their open 
market  operations.  To  reduce  the  pressure  on  the  slightly  longer  interbank  rates  and  to 
contribute to efficient markets for different durations, several central banks have also taken 
measures to increase the supply of loans with longer durations. In this context it is important 
to clarify that it has not always been a question of a net supply of liquidity. When liquidity is 
added in the slightly longer term, the ECB for instance has often restored the corresponding 
amount at shorter durations to avoid the overnight rate deviating too far from the policy rate. 
A  further  measure  has  been  to  accept  more  securities  than  before  as  collateral  for  its 
lending. The Bank of England has also cut its policy rate, but this was also linked to signs of 
weaker economic activity.  
6 
 BIS Review 51/2008
What has happened in Sweden? 
In Sweden the interbank market has on the whole functioned smoothly. The financial turmoil 
has not expressed itself in an increased demand for investment in the Riksbank overnight or 
in an increased reluctance to lend on the interbank market. The overnight rate has remained 
stable around the repo rate. However, as in many other countries, Swedish interbank rates 
have risen. On the interbank market for loans from tomorrow until the day after, the interest 
rate has been higher than normal, and movements have been more volatile. But higher and 
more  volatile  interbank  rates  do  not  automatically  mean  that  the  banks  will  experience 
problems. Swedish banks have had good opportunities to obtain financing during the entire 
financial crisis, solvency is good and loan losses are currently small. 
The fact that we have not seen any major problems in Sweden is of course linked to the fact 
that Swedish banks have not been exposed to any great extent to the US subprime market. 
Nor has there been any “distrust” of Swedish banks. Ultimately, it is a question of a broad 
view that Swedish banks do not have problems. The fact that the overnight rate has been 
stable  around  the  repo  rate  may  also  be  linked  to  the  way  in  which  our  monetary  policy 
steering system is constructed. An increased demand for deposits with the Riksbank would 
have been visible in that banks with surpluses would have put their money in their deposit 
accounts. The return on this is 75 basis points lower than the repo rate, and thus poorer than 
the  overnight  market.  It  would  thus  be  expensive  from  day  one.  This  differs  from  systems 
with  an  average  minimum  reserve  requirement.  There  it  is  possible  for  a  bank  to  deposit 
more in its minimum reserve account at the beginning of the period without any extra cost in 
the  form  of  lower  interest  than  the  market  rate.  This  difference  in  interest  rate  systems  is 
reflected in the fact that the overnight rate tends to fluctuate slightly more in, for instance, the 
United Kingdom and the euro area than in Sweden, even under normal circumstances.  
Thus,  there  has  been  no  reason  for  Sweden  to  take  measures  to  ensure  the  overnight 
market  functions.  The  Riksbank’s  objective  of  stabilising  the  overnight  rate  has  been 
achieved.  At  the  same  time,  Swedish  banks  have  had  good  opportunities  to  finance 
themselves.  
On the other hand, the uncertainty in the financial markets could lead to monetary policy not 
affecting  other  market  rates  in  the  way  we  are  used  to.  Ultimately,  this  could  mean  that 
monetary  policy  does  not  have  the  desired  impact  on  economic  activity  and  prices.  At 
present we can see, for instance, that the uncertainty on the financial markets has probably 
contributed a restraining effect in addition to the actual monetary policy, which is reflected in 
a larger spread between the interbank rate and the expected monetary policy than normal. 
However, this is something we handle within the framework of how we conduct our monetary 
policy, by taking account of events in our decision-making base.  
There  has  thus  not  been  any  reason  for  the  Riksbank  to  take  special  measures  from  a 
monetary policy perspective. Nor has there been reason to take any measures on the basis 
of our other task, safeguarding financial stability. Swedish banks are profitable and financially 
strong, and therefore have good opportunities to manage unexpected negative events.  
The role of central banks in times of financial turmoil 
The role of central banks is to safeguard economic stability. We can do this best by focussing 
on achieving our objectives, that is, price stability and financial stability. However, the recent 
developments  in  the  financial  markets  have  illustrated  the  importance  of  increased 
cooperation  both  with  other  Swedish  financial  authorities  and  among  countries’  central 
banks.  One  important  challenge  is  to  manage  financial  crises  which  risk  spreading  across 
national  borders.  In  December  2007  and  March  2008  the  Federal  Reserve,  the  Bank  of 
England  and  the  ECB  coordinated  measures  to  meet  the  banks’  needs  of  short-term 
financing. The Riksbank expressed its support for this action, although we did not consider it 
necessary to take corresponding measures in the Swedish financial system.  
BIS Review 51/2008 
 7
It  is  not  self-evident  what  the  role  of  the  central  bank  should  be  when  uncertainty  and 
financial turmoil create problems in certain parts of the financial markets. The fact that central 
banks  take  measures  to  ensure  the  targeted  interest  rate  is  at  the  right  level  may  appear 
reasonable. Similarly, we can observe that several central banks see arguments in favour of 
also influencing interest rates with a slightly longer duration.  
But  potential  measures  must  be  balanced  against  the  risk  that  the  interbank  market  will 
cease functioning more quickly if there are signs of financial turmoil in the future. There is 
also a risk that a temporary extension of the collateral a central bank accepts can reduce the 
banks’ incentives to hold sufficient amounts of what are normally considered eligible assets. 
If the central bank takes over some of the functions of the shortest interbank market, there is 
also a risk that banks which are essentially creditworthy will suffer liquidity problems as the 
access to short-term financing in the interbank market will disappear. Although there is still 
the  possibility  to  borrow  from  the  central  bank,  collateral  is  required,  while  the  interbank 
market usually provides loans without collateral. 
Even though we have not needed to take a stand in these considerations in an emergency 
situation, we do of course discuss the issues and monitor developments closely.  
Conclusion  
The financial turmoil has meant that several central banks have had problems stabilising the 
overnight rate at the target levels. The uncertainty has also contributed at times to difficulties 
for  some  banks  in  obtaining  funding  on  the  interbank  market.  Several  central  banks  have 
therefore taken measures beyond the normal to stabilise the overnight rate and to reduce the 
pressure on the slightly longer interbank rates.  
In  Sweden  there  has  been  no  reason  to  take  any  extraordinary  measures.  The  Swedish 
interbank  market  has  on  the  whole  functioned  smoothly.  This  is  partly  because  Swedish 
banks have not to any great extent been exposed to the US subprime market, and we have 
not  seen  any  distrust  of  Swedish  banks.  Ultimately,  it  is  a  question  of  a  broad  view  that 
Swedish banks do not have problems. Further, there is no incentive for Swedish banks to 
invest in the Riksbank’s standing facilities instead of on the overnight market. One reason is 
that our monetary policy steering system is constructed so that it would immediately be more 
costly  for  the  banks,  unlike  systems  with  average  minimum  reserve  requirements.  Let  me 
here point out that my intention is not to say whether one system is better than another; I 
merely wish to illustrate that the differences in monetary policy steering systems may be one 
reason why central banks have acted differently. 
Nor  has  there  been  reason  to  take  measures,  given  the  background  of  financial  stability. 
Swedish banks are profitable and financially strong, and therefore have good opportunities to 
manage unexpected negative events.  
However, as usual we are following developments closely. If there was a risk of problems 
arising  that  would  make  it  difficult  for  the  banks  to  conduct  their  operations  and  thereby 
endanger the system, the situation would be different. However, this is not the case today; 
we are continuing to observe the financial crisis largely from the outside.  
8 
 BIS Review 51/2008
