Ben S Bernanke: Semiannual Monetary Policy Report to the Congress 
Testimony of Mr Ben S Bernanke, Chairman of the Board of Governors of the US Federal 
Reserve System, before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, US Senate, 
Washington DC, 15 July 2008. 
 Chairman Dodd, Senator Shelby, and members of the Committee, I am pleased to present 
the Federal Reserve's Monetary Policy Report to the Congress. 
The U.S. economy and financial system have confronted some significant challenges thus far 
in  2008.  The  contraction  in  housing  activity  that  began  in  2006  and  the  associated 
deterioration in mortgage markets that became evident last year have led to sizable losses at 
financial  institutions  and  a  sharp  tightening  in  overall  credit  conditions.  The  effects  of  the 
housing contraction and of the financial headwinds on spending and economic activity have 
been compounded by rapid increases in the prices of energy and other commodities, which 
have sapped household purchasing power even as they have boosted inflation. Against this 
backdrop, economic activity has advanced at a sluggish pace during the first half of this year, 
while inflation has remained elevated. 
Following a significant reduction in its policy rate over the second half of 2007, the Federal 
Open  Market  Committee  (FOMC)  eased  policy  considerably  further  through  the  spring  to 
counter actual and expected weakness in economic growth and to mitigate downside risks to 
economic  activity.  In  addition,  the  Federal  Reserve  expanded  some  of  the  special  liquidity 
programs that were established last year and implemented additional facilities to support the 
functioning  of  financial  markets  and  foster  financial  stability.  Although  these  policy  actions 
have  had  positive  effects,  the  economy  continues  to  face  numerous  difficulties,  including 
ongoing  strains  in  financial  markets,  declining house  prices,  a  softening  labor  market,  and 
rising prices of oil, food, and some other commodities. Let me now turn to a more detailed 
discussion of some of these key issues. 
Developments  in  financial  markets  and  their  implications  for  the  macroeconomic  outlook 
have been a focus of monetary policy makers over the past year. In the second half of 2007, 
the  deteriorating  performance  of  subprime  mortgages  in  the  United  States  triggered 
turbulence  in  domestic  and  international  financial  markets  as  investors  became  markedly 
less  willing  to  bear  credit  risks  of  any  type.  In  the  first  quarter  of  2008,  reports  of  further 
losses and write-downs at financial institutions intensified investor concerns and resulted in 
further sharp reductions in market liquidity. By March, many dealers and other institutions, 
even those that had relied heavily on short-term secured financing, were facing much more 
stringent borrowing conditions.  
In mid-March, a major investment bank, The Bear Stearns Companies, Inc., was pushed to 
the brink of failure after suddenly losing access to short-term financing markets. The Federal 
Reserve  judged  that  a  disorderly  failure  of  Bear  Stearns  would  pose  a  serious  threat  to 
overall financial stability and would most likely have significant adverse implications for the 
U.S.  economy.  After  discussions  with  the  Securities  and  Exchange  Commission  and  in 
consultation  with  the  Treasury,  we  invoked  emergency  authorities  to  provide  special 
financing to facilitate the acquisition of Bear Stearns by JPMorgan Chase & Co. In addition, 
the  Federal  Reserve  used  emergency  authorities  to  establish  two  new  facilities  to  provide 
backstop  liquidity  to  primary  dealers,  with  the  goals  of  stabilizing  financial  conditions  and 
increasing the availability of credit to the broader economy.1 We have also taken additional 
                                                 
1   Primary  dealers  are  financial  institutions  that  trade  in  U.S.  government  securities  with  the  Federal  Reserve 
Bank  of  New  York.  On  behalf  of  the  Federal  Reserve  System,  the  New  York  Fed's  Open  Market  Desk 
engages in the trades to implement monetary policy. 
BIS Review 90/2008 
 1
steps to address liquidity pressures in the banking system, including a further easing of the 
terms for bank borrowing at the discount window and increases in the amount of credit made 
available to banks through the Term Auction Facility. The FOMC also authorized expansions 
of its currency swap arrangements with the European Central Bank and the Swiss National 
Bank to facilitate increased dollar lending by those institutions to banks in their jurisdictions. 
These steps to address liquidity pressures coupled with monetary easing seem to have been 
helpful in mitigating some market strains. During the second quarter, credit spreads generally 
narrowed, liquidity pressures ebbed, and a number of financial institutions raised new capital. 
However,  as  events  in  recent  weeks  have  demonstrated,  many  financial  markets  and 
institutions remain under considerable stress, in part because the outlook for the economy, 
and thus for credit quality, remains uncertain. In recent days, investors became particularly 
concerned  about  the  financial  condition  of  the  government-sponsored  enterprises  (GSEs), 
Fannie  Mae  and  Freddie  Mac.  In  view  of  this  development,  and  given  the  importance  of 
these firms to the mortgage market, the Treasury announced a legislative proposal to bolster 
their capital, access to liquidity, and regulatory oversight. As a supplement to the Treasury's 
existing authority to lend to the GSEs and as a bridge to the time when the Congress decides 
how to proceed on these matters, the Board of Governors authorized the Federal Reserve 
Bank of New York to lend to Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, should that become necessary. 
Any  lending  would  be  collateralized  by  U.S.  government  and  federal  agency  securities.  In 
general,  healthy  economic  growth  depends  on  well-functioning 
financial  markets. 
Consequently, helping the financial markets to return to more normal functioning will continue 
to be a top priority of the Federal Reserve. 
I turn now to current economic developments and prospects. The economy has continued to 
expand, but at a subdued pace. In the labor market, private payroll employment has declined 
this year, falling at an average pace of 94,000 jobs per month through June. Employment in 
the  construction  and  manufacturing  sectors  has  been  particularly  hard  hit,  although 
employment declines in a number of other sectors are evident as well. The unemployment 
rate has risen and now stands at 5-1/2 percent.  
In the housing sector, activity continues to weaken. Although sales of existing homes have 
been about unchanged this year, sales of new homes have continued to fall, and inventories 
of  unsold  new  homes  remain  high.  In  response,  homebuilders  continue  to  scale  back  the 
pace of housing starts. Home prices are falling, particularly in regions that experienced the 
largest price increases earlier this decade. The declines in home prices have contributed to 
the  rising  tide  of  foreclosures;  by  adding  to  the  stock  of  vacant  homes  for  sale,  these 
foreclosures have, in turn, intensified the downward pressure on home prices in some areas. 
Personal  consumption  expenditures  have  advanced  at  a  modest  pace  so  far  this  year, 
generally  holding  up  somewhat  better  than  might  have  been  expected  given  the  array  of 
forces  weighing  on  household  finances  and  attitudes.  In  particular,  with  the  labor  market 
softening and consumer price inflation elevated, real earnings have been stagnant so far this 
year;  declining  values  of  equities  and  houses  have  taken  their  toll  on  household  balance 
sheets; credit conditions have tightened; and indicators of consumer sentiment have fallen 
sharply.  More  positively,  the  fiscal  stimulus  package  is  providing  some  timely  support  to 
household  incomes.  Overall,  consumption  spending  seems  likely  to  be  restrained  over 
coming quarters. 
In the business sector, real outlays for equipment and software were  about flat in the first 
quarter of the year, and construction of nonresidential structures slowed appreciably. In the 
second quarter, the available data suggest that business fixed investment appears to have 
expanded  moderately.  Nevertheless,  surveys  of  capital  spending  plans  indicate  that  firms 
remain  concerned  about  the  economic  and  financial  environment,  including  sharply  rising 
costs  of  inputs  and  indications  of  tightening  credit,  and  they  are  likely  to  be  cautious  with 
spending in the second half of the year. However, strong  export growth continues to be a 
significant boon to many U.S. companies. 
2 
 BIS Review 90/2008
In conjunction with the June FOMC meeting, Board members and Reserve Bank presidents 
prepared  economic  projections  covering  the  years  2008  through  2010.  On  balance,  most 
FOMC participants expected that, over the remainder of this year, output would expand at a 
pace appreciably below its trend rate, primarily because of continued weakness in housing 
markets, elevated energy prices, and tight credit conditions. Growth is projected to pick up 
gradually over the next two years as residential construction bottoms out and begins a slow 
recovery and as credit conditions gradually improve. However, FOMC participants indicated 
that considerable uncertainty surrounded their outlook for economic growth and viewed the 
risks to their forecasts as skewed to the downside.  
Inflation has remained high, running at nearly a 3-1/2 percent annual rate over the first five 
months of this year as measured by the price index for personal consumption expenditures. 
And, with gasoline and other consumer energy prices rising in recent weeks, inflation seems 
likely to move temporarily higher in the near term.  
The elevated level of overall consumer inflation largely reflects a continued sharp run-up in 
the prices of many commodities, especially oil but also certain crops and metals.2 The spot 
price of West Texas intermediate crude oil soared about 60 percent in 2007 and, thus far this 
year, has climbed an additional 50 percent or so. The price of oil currently stands at about 
five times its level toward the beginning of this decade. Our best judgment is that this surge 
in  prices  has  been  driven  predominantly  by  strong  growth  in  underlying  demand  and  tight 
supply conditions in global oil markets. Over the past several years, the world economy has 
expanded at its fastest pace in decades, leading to substantial increases in the demand for 
oil. Moreover, growth has been concentrated in developing and emerging market economies, 
where  energy  consumption  has  been  further  stimulated  by  rapid  industrialization  and  by 
government subsidies that hold down the price of energy faced by ultimate users.  
On  the  supply  side,  despite  sharp  increases  in  prices,  the  production  of  oil  has  risen  only 
slightly  in  the  past  few  years.  Much  of  the  subdued  supply  response  reflects  inadequate 
investment and production shortfalls in politically volatile regions where large portions of the 
world's oil reserves are located. Additionally, many governments have been tightening their 
control  over  oil  resources,  impeding  foreign  investment  and  hindering  efforts  to  boost 
capacity and production. Finally, sustainable rates of production in some of the more secure 
and  accessible  oil  fields,  such  as  those  in  the  North  Sea,  have  been  declining.  In  view  of 
these factors, estimates of long-term oil supplies have been marked down in recent months. 
Long-dated  oil  futures  prices  have  risen  along  with  spot  prices,  suggesting  that  market 
participants also see oil supply conditions remaining tight for years to come. 
The decline in the foreign exchange value of the dollar has also contributed somewhat to the 
increase  in  oil  prices.  The  precise  size  of  this  effect  is  difficult  to  ascertain,  as  the  causal 
relationships  between  oil  prices  and  the  dollar  are  complex  and  run  in  both  directions. 
However, the price of oil has risen significantly in terms of all major currencies, suggesting 
that  factors  other  than  the  dollar,  notably  shifts  in  the  underlying  global  demand  for  and 
supply of oil, have been the principal drivers of the increase in prices.  
Another  concern  that  has  been  raised  is  that  financial  speculation  has  added  markedly  to 
upward pressures on oil prices. Certainly, investor interest in oil and other commodities has 
increased  substantially  of  late.  However,  if  financial  speculation  were  pushing  oil  prices 
above the levels consistent with the fundamentals of supply and demand, we would expect 
inventories of crude oil and petroleum products to increase as supply rose and demand fell. 
But in fact, available data on oil inventories show notable declines over the past year. This is 
not to say that useful steps could not be taken to improve the transparency and functioning of 
                                                 
2   The dominant role of commodity prices in driving the recent increase in inflation can be seen by contrasting 
the overall inflation rate with the so-called core measure of inflation, which excludes food and energy prices. 
Core inflation has been fairly steady this year at an annual rate of about 2 percent. 
BIS Review 90/2008 
 3
futures markets, only that such steps are unlikely to substantially affect the prices of oil or 
other commodities in the longer term. 
Although the inflationary effect of rising oil and agricultural commodity prices is evident in the 
retail  prices  of  energy  and  food,  the  extent  to  which  the  high  prices  of  oil  and  other  raw 
materials  have  been  passed  through  to  the  prices  of  non-energy,  non-food  finished  goods 
and  services  seems  thus  far  to  have  been  limited.  But  with  businesses  facing  persistently 
higher input prices, they may attempt to pass through such costs into prices of final goods 
and services more aggressively than they have so far. Moreover, as the foreign exchange 
value of the dollar has declined, rises in import prices have put greater upward pressure on 
business  costs  and  consumer  prices.  In  their  economic  projections  for  the  June  FOMC 
meeting,  monetary  policy  makers  marked  up  their  forecasts  for  inflation  during  2008  as  a 
whole.  FOMC  participants  continue  to  expect  inflation  to  moderate  in  2009  and  2010,  as 
slower  global  growth  leads  to  a  cooling  of  commodity  markets,  as  pressures  on  resource 
utilization  decline,  and  as  longer-term  inflation  expectations  remain  reasonably  well 
anchored.  However,  in  light  of  the  persistent  escalation  of  commodity  prices  in  recent 
quarters, FOMC participants viewed the inflation outlook as unusually uncertain and cited the 
possibility  that  commodity  prices  will  continue  to  rise  as  an  important  risk  to  the  inflation 
forecast. Moreover, the currently high level of inflation, if sustained, might lead the public to 
revise up its expectations for longer-term inflation. If that were to occur, and those revised 
expectations  were  to  become  embedded  in  the  domestic wage-  and  price-setting  process, 
we  could  see  an  unwelcome  rise  in  actual  inflation  over  the  longer  term.  A  critical 
responsibility of monetary policy makers is to prevent that process from taking hold. 
At  present,  accurately  assessing  and  appropriately  balancing  the  risks  to  the  outlook  for 
growth and inflation is a significant challenge for monetary policy makers. The possibility of 
higher  energy  prices,  tighter  credit  conditions,  and  a  still-deeper  contraction  in  housing 
markets all represent significant downside risks to the outlook for growth. At the same time, 
upside risks to the inflation outlook have intensified lately, as the rising prices of energy and 
some  other  commodities  have  led  to  a  sharp  pickup  in  inflation  and  some  measures  of 
inflation  expectations  have  moved  higher.  Given  the  high  degree  of  uncertainty,  monetary 
policy makers will need to carefully assess incoming information bearing on the outlook for 
both  inflation  and  growth.  In  light  of  the  increase  in  upside  inflation  risk,  we  must  be 
particularly alert to any indications, such as an erosion of longer-term inflation expectations, 
that  the  inflationary  impulses  from  commodity  prices  are  becoming  embedded  in  the 
domestic wage- and price-setting process. 
I  would  like  to  conclude  my  remarks  by  providing  a  brief  update  on  some  of  the  Federal 
Reserve's actions in the area of consumer protection. At the time of our report last February, 
I described the Board's proposal to adopt comprehensive new regulations to prohibit unfair or 
deceptive practices in the mortgage market, using our authority under the Home Ownership 
and Equity Protection Act of 1994. After reviewing the more-than 4,500 comment letters we 
received on the proposed rules, the Board approved the final rules yesterday.  
The  new  rules  apply  to  all  types  of  mortgage  lenders  and  will  establish  lending  standards 
aimed  at  curbing  abuses  while  preserving  responsible  subprime  lending  and  sustainable 
homeownership. The final rules prohibit lenders from making higher-priced loans without due 
regard for consumers' ability to make the scheduled payments and require lenders to verify 
the income and assets on which they rely when making the credit decision. Also, for higher-
priced  loans,  lenders  now  will  be  required  to  establish  escrow  accounts  so  that  property 
taxes and insurance costs will be included in consumers' regular monthly payments. The final 
rules  also  prohibit  prepayment  penalties  for  higher-priced  loans  in  cases  in  which  the 
consumer's  payment  can  increase  during  the  first  few  years  and  restrict  prepayment 
penalties on other higher-priced loans Other measures address the coercion of appraisers, 
servicer practices, and other issues. We believe the new rules will help to restore confidence 
in the mortgage market.  
4 
 BIS Review 90/2008
In  May,  working  jointly  with  the  Office  of  Thrift  Supervision  and  the  National  Credit  Union 
Administration, the Board issued proposed rules under the Federal Trade Commission Act to 
address unfair or deceptive practices for credit card accounts and overdraft protection plans. 
Credit  cards  provide  a  convenient  source  of  credit  for  many  consumers,  but  the  terms  of 
credit  card  loans  have  become  more  complex,  which  has  reduced  transparency.  Our 
consumer testing has persuaded us that disclosures alone cannot solve this problem. Thus, 
the Board's proposed rules would require card issuers to alter their practices in ways that will 
allow consumers to better understand how their own decisions and actions will affect their 
costs. Card issuers would be prohibited from increasing interest rates retroactively to cover 
prior  purchases  except  under  very  limited  circumstances.  For  accounts  having  multiple 
interest  rates,  when  consumers  seek  to  pay  down  their  balance  by  paying  more  than  the 
minimum,  card  issuers  would  be  prohibited  from  maximizing  interest  charges  by  applying 
excess  payments  to  the  lowest  rate  balance  first.  The  proposed  rules  dealing  with  bank 
overdraft services seek to give consumers greater control by ensuring that they have ample 
opportunity to opt out of automatic payments of overdrafts. The Board has already received 
more than 20,000 comment letters in response to the proposed rules. 
Thank you. I would be pleased to take your questions. 
BIS Review 90/2008 
 5
