Rundheersing Bheenick: Local currency bond trading and risk 
management 
Opening address by Mr Rundheersing Bheenick, Governor of the Bank of Mauritius, at the 
Workshop  on  Local  Currency  Bond  Trading  and  Risk  Management,  organized  by  the 
Financial Markets Association of Mauritius, Balaclava, 24 March 2008. 
 It is a great pleasure for me to address you this morning at the opening of this Workshop. I 
consider  the  theme  which  you  have  chosen  “Local  Currency  Bond  Trading  and  Risk 
Management”  quite  topical  at  this  juncture  of  the  development  of  our  domestic  financial 
market. I salute the initiative of the Financial Markets Association and I would also like to add 
my own welcome to our resource person, Dr Graeme West. 
I understand that this is the third workshop organized by the Association after those held in 
2003  and  2006  which  focused  on  Treasury  and  Risk  Management,  and  Derivatives, 
respectively. Do I detect a slight increase in frequency here? Does this reflect the quickening 
pace  at  which  things  are  happening  in  the  financial sector  these  days?  Be  that  as  it  may, 
such workshops help to enhance the skills of participants and enable them to keep up with 
the continuous innovations that characterize the changing financial landscape. 
Skilled  professionals  and  technicians  are  at  the  root  of  all  innovations.  A  well-functioning 
bond market will help to create more growth and stability, not only in Mauritius, but also in the 
region.  
As  we  all  know,  a  deep  and  liquid  bond  market  is  a  key  component  of  a  thriving  financial 
centre.  An  efficient  and  mature  bond  market  contributes  directly  to  macroeconomic  and 
financial stability. It constitutes an alternative source of funding which can help the corporate 
sector  to  reduce  over-reliance  on  short-term  foreign  currency  loans.  Currently,  in  the 
absence of a properly functioning local bond market, issuers who qualify for bond financing 
must have recourse to international financial markets to finance their local projects and have 
to bear the attendant exchange rate risk. Local currency bonds can thus help to protect such 
issuers from foreign currency shocks. The improved financial intermediation resulting from an 
active  bond  market  also  brings  such  microeconomic  benefits  as  efficiency  gains  and 
diversification of tools for both borrowers and savers.  
Let me reaffirm that, as a trusted partner in economic development, the Bank of Mauritius is 
committed to promoting the development and efficiency of all markets, whether the foreign 
exchange market or the domestic money market and we keep a watchful eye on the stock 
market and other asset markets. 
We see a need to add greater depth to the market. Central banks and governments share 
the responsibility to facilitate and promote the development of local bond markets, remove 
market friction and unnecessary restrictions, and provide an environment that is conducive to 
both supply and demand, that is to both the issuers and investors. Bond market development 
has been targeted by the central bank over the past years through various initiatives. This 
included  the  establishment  of  an  appropriate  market  infrastructure  that  facilitates  cost-
effective  and  secure  trading,  and  a  transparent  price  discovery  process.  With  regard  to 
secondary market development, you all know that we set a Secondary Market Cell within the 
Bank in 1994. We established a Primary Dealer System in 2002. Treasury Bills have been 
listed  on  the  Stock  Exchange  of  Mauritius  since  2003.  We  have  re-introduced  sales  of 
Treasury Bills and Treasury Notes at the counters of the Bank of Mauritius last July.  
The  deepening  of  local  currency  bond  market  across  a  range  of  maturities  will  encourage 
increased participation by institutional investors. We have started issuing medium – to long – 
term  bonds  on  a  more  regular  basis  to  develop  a  benchmark  yield  curve  for  Government 
BIS Review 34/2008 
 1
securities across the whole spectrum. This will facilitate the development of a corporate bond 
market. In 2007, the European Investment Bank, with the State Bank of Mauritius and West 
LB  from  South  Africa  as  lead  managers  issued  Synthetic  Mauritian  Rupee  debt  in  the 
international  market.  We  are  now  considering  a  proposal  from  the  World  Bank  for  the 
Government to allow them to issue Mauritian rupee denominated or linked bonds  
In the end, however, there is only so much that the authorities can – or should – do. Whilst 
these initiatives add up to the necessary conditions for market development, they are unlikely 
to prove sufficient on their own. However good the infrastructure may be, it is for the players 
themselves,  that  is  the  issuers,  investors  and  the  financial  intermediaries  to  eventually 
determine the shape and size of the market. It is also of paramount importance that market 
players  adopt  a  participative  approach  for  the  development  of  the  money  market,  as  the 
existence of trading limits are impeding the development of these markets. 
Allow me now to dwell a little on the challenges that a small country like Mauritius is currently 
facing in the conduct of monetary policy. Today, the Bank of Mauritius finds itself confronted 
with the important challenge of reducing the rate of inflation, which stood at 9.0 percent at the 
end  of  February  2008,  and  preserving  the  competitiveness  of  the  export-oriented  sectors. 
And we must meet this challenge against a backdrop of unprecedented capital inflows which 
are driving up the exchange rate of the rupee.  
With  globalization,  a  small  open  economy  receiving  such  large  capital  inflows  faces  the 
daunting  task  of  managing  these  external  flows  to  ensure  macroeconomic  and  financial 
stability.  Interventions  by  the  central  bank  to  purchase  large  amounts  of  foreign  exchange 
from  the  market  have  an  expansionary  impact  on  the  domestic  money  supply  and  pose 
severe challenges for the conduct of monetary policy.  
Since mid-December 2007 the Bank has purchased a total amount equivalent to US Dollars 
193  million  from  the  domestic  foreign  exchange  market.  To  sterilize  the  excess  liquidity 
stemming from these capital inflows, the Bank has to issue central bank paper as we now 
have a separation of debt management from monetary management. This entails the issue 
of  a  huge  amount  of  Bank  of  Mauritius  Bills  for  monetary  policy  purposes,  which  has  a 
potentially  adverse  impact  on  the  central  bank’s  balance  sheet.  The  Central  bank,  as 
regulator,  has  a  different  role  and  a  slightly  different  perspective  compared  to  commercial 
banks,  Our  mandate  is  price  stability,  financial  stability  and  the  promotion  of  economic 
development. In the pursuit of these objectives, profitability becomes a secondary issue and 
at times like the present, we have to dip into our reserves to meet the costs. When balance 
sheet considerations conflict with other public interest, there is no doubt in my mind which 
way the Central Bank should lean.  
We must explicitly recognize that there are costs for the central bank in running monetary 
policy. That is why the central bank is required to strengthen its balance sheet in order to 
manage the shocks impacting on the economy. The central bank’s capital and reserves have 
to be strong enough to be able to sustain repeated intervention in the money market. Given 
the  uncertainty  surrounding  the  nature  of  capital  inflows,  it  would  also  be  prudent  for  the 
central bank in a small open economy to build up reserves as a cushion against a possible 
reversal of capital flows.  
Presently, we have Treasury and Bank of Mauritius Bills with maturities of 91 days up to 364 
days. Treasury notes with maturities of 2, 3 and 4 years and bonds with maturities ranging 
from 5 years to 29 years are issued on a regular basis. Lately we have introduced a 14 day 
Special  Deposit  facility.  We  feel  that  there  is  a  gap  between  the  14  day  Special  Deposit 
Facility and the 91 day bill and in order to close the gap and manage the persistent excess 
liquidity  in  the  system,  the  Bank  is  contemplating  the  issue  of  Central  Bank  papers  with 
maturities of 1 and 2 months.  
Let me say a word about exchange rate, a subject of much interest right now. As a matter of 
policy, the Bank allows the free play of market forces to determine the exchange value of the 
rupee. Our intervention in the domestic foreign exchange market is not aimed at offsetting 
2 
 BIS Review 34/2008
market forces, or at targeting any specific exchange rate. Our only objective is to smooth out 
unwarranted volatility in the rupee exchange rate and improve the functioning of the market.  
In a brief interview that I gave to the “Business Standard” newspaper in India last week, I 
said that even if our economy was suffering from a deluge of foreign exchange inflows, most 
of the foreign exchange operations were confined to the spot market. This is why we want to 
encourage the development of a vibrant futures and forward market that will help in creating 
an  active  foreign  exchange  market  and  introduce  newer  instruments  for  exporters  and 
entrepreneurs to hedge and trade in the financial services sector.  
As  regards  the  issue  of  risk  management,  it  is  a  correct  practice  these  days  to  use 
derivatives to hedge against unwanted volatilities. Derivatives can bring substantial benefits 
to  the  commercial  community,  in  facilitating  hedging  and  business  planning.  Such 
instruments enable financial institutions to offer a progressively wider range of services and 
achieve greater efficiency in the intermediation process.  
Unfortunately, this is one area where Mauritius is lagging behind. The market for derivatives 
has  not  picked  up  significantly  compared  to  other  emerging  market  economies.  I  strongly 
believe that the domestic financial market is mature enough to engage in derivatives trading 
under proper regulation. The Bank is now considering the necessary measures that need to 
be implemented to stimulate the development of this market. I know that. In many quarters, 
derivatives have a murky reputation. We do not believe that derivatives necessarily lead to 
market  manipulation,  which  would  be  bad  for  a  small  market  like  ours.  Rather,  we  see 
derivatives  as  enhancing  the  efficiency  of  financial  markets  and  this  is  why  we  are 
determined  to  put  in  place  in  the  near  future  the  necessary  building  blocks  for  its  rapid 
development.  
We are conscious that derivatives involve multiple extra policy responsibilities for the Bank. 
Derivatives  and  derivatives-trading  have  the  potential  to  bring  disaster  if  not  properly 
supervised. Therefore one of the areas that the Bank will concentrate upon therefore is to 
ensure that risks are properly identified, and managed, and that downside risks which might 
threaten systemic stability are avoided.  
As we move into these new pastures designed to deepen the financial market and broaden 
the  range  of  financial  products  and  instruments,  we  feel  that  it  is  also  the  right  time  to 
encourage Rating Agencies to start operations in Mauritius. In any case this move will also 
be  beneficial  to  the  sector  as  we  move  on  to  implementation  of  Basle  II.  The  Bank  has 
already  stated  its  intention  to  sell  data  held  by  the  Mauritius  Credit  Information  Bureau  to 
accredited  Rating  Agencies.  All  these  concerted  initiatives  will  certainly  take  us  in  the 
direction of developing the local bond market. 
We  also  welcome  the  recent  initiative  taken  by  the  Mauritius  Bankers  Association  to  kick-
start discussions relating to the netting of financial contracts and applicable law of securities, 
based  on  the  Model  developed  by  the  International  Swaps  and  Derivatives  Association 
(ISDA).We  hope  to  move  rapidly  in  this  direction  at  the  level  of  the  legislative  support 
required.  
The Bank is once again pleased to associate itself with events such as the present one. My 
predecessor, Governor Basant Roi initiated this arrangement with your Association and I am 
happy to follow. We believe that it is part of our role to develop the skills of our treasurers 
and we try to achieve this through our participation in events such as this one. 
Finally,  I  would  like  once  again  to  commend  this  initiative  of  the  Financial  Markets 
Association to organize this workshop and I am sure that participants will make the most of it.  
I now have the pleasure to declare this Workshop open. I hope you will find it instructive and 
rewarding. 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 34/2008 
 3
