Thomas Jordan: The various waves of money market turbulence and the 
measures taken by central banks 
Introductory remarks by Mr Thomas Jordan, Member of the Governing Board of the Swiss 
National Bank, at the half-yearly media news conference, Geneva, 19 June 2008. 
 The  money  markets  are  the  lifeblood  of  the  international  financial  system.  Properly 
functioning money markets are absolutely essential for the solvency of banks, as well as for 
the effective implementation of monetary policy. Hence, events on the money markets since 
the onset of the financial turmoil have been a particular focus of central banks’ attention.  
So far, there have been three waves of turbulence. At the time of the last news conference, 
we were almost at the height of the second wave. In the meantime we have experienced a 
third  wave,  which  peaked  in  April.  An  appropriate  barometer  of  the  health  of  the  money 
market  is  the  difference  between  the  three-month  Libor  and  the  three-month  (T)OIS  rate 
(tom-next/overnight indexed swap). This difference reflects the credit and liquidity premium 
on unsecured money market trades compared to purely derivative business with virtually no 
counterparty risk. With the help of chart 1, which can be regarded as a “fever curve”, I would 
now  like  to  look  back  at  how  events  unfolded,  and  comment  on  the  measures  which  the 
central banks took in response.  
The  first  wave  peaked  in  September  2007.  Money  market  risk  premia  rose  sharply,  from 
below 10 basis points to over 50 basis points, and even exceeding 100 basis points for some 
currencies.  In  this  phase,  we  reacted  flexibly  to  the  volatile  bank  demand  by  providing 
generous amounts of liquidity at our repo auctions, and by increasing the frequency of fine-
tuning operations. In October, there was a period of calm and risk premia retreated. In this 
phase,  our  patient  –  the  market  –  was  prescribed  the  usual  remedies,  although  in  higher 
doses and several times a day if necessary.  
The second wave arose out of concerns about refinancing shortages around the year-end, 
and reached its peak in December. To reduce uncertainty on the part of market participants, 
the Swiss National Bank increased its repo transactions at maturities of several weeks, or 
even several months, instead of the usual weekly maturity. These measures made it easier 
for banks to manage liquidity around the end of the year.  
During  this second  wave,  European  banks  found  it  increasingly  difficult  to  refinance  in  US 
dollars, and dollar rates were regularly higher in Europe than in the US. One reason for this 
was  the  structural  dollar  short  position  of  the  European  banks  and  their  concern  that  they 
would not have sufficient dollar liquidity at close of business as a result of poorly functioning 
money  markets.  For  this  reason,  the  Federal  Reserve,  ECB  and  SNB  decided  to  take 
concerted  action.  In  December  2007,  for  the  first  time  in  its  history,  the  SNB  was  able  to 
provide  its  counterparties  with  US  dollar  liquidity  against  the  usual  SNB  eligible  collateral, 
thanks to a swap agreement with the Fed. In this context, it is important to point out that this 
dollar liquidity had no impact on either monetary policy or the SNB’s income statement. Yet it 
helped to facilitate refinancing by our counterparties, and thus made a positive contribution 
towards  easing  the  tension  on  the  Swiss  franc  money  market.  In  this  phase,  the  central 
banks supplemented their usual remedies with some booster treatments.  
The third wave of turbulence, in March this year, resulted from acute liquidity problems faced 
by individual international banks, combined with concerns that the money market problems 
might  become  chronic.  In  this  third  phase,  the  SNB  did  not  provide  any  new  instruments, 
preferring to make greater use of our existing tools. In particular, we resumed our US dollar 
auctions,  at  which  we  now  offer  USD  6  billion  on  a  fortnightly  basis.  In  this  way,  we  are 
providing  the  market  with  a  maximum  of  USD  12  billion.  In  addition, we  are  supplying  the 
BIS Review 80/2008 
 1
market  with  generous  amounts  of  Swiss  franc  liquidity  and  actively  engage  in  fine-tuning 
operations whenever necessary.  
Other central banks have opted for more wide-reaching measures over the past few months. 
For instance, the range of eligible participants and collateral for refinancing operations was 
expanded. The Fed and the Bank of England have introduced a new “collateral swap facility”, 
under  which  the  banks  can  temporarily  swap  their  unsaleable  securities  against  liquid 
government paper. The pressure on banks to refinance their balance sheets is thus reduced 
without additional central bank money having to be injected into the market. The Fed went 
even  further  in  providing  support  during  the  sale  of  investment  bank  Bear  Stearns.  It  took 
illiquid and risky securities directly onto its own balance sheet. Thus, in the third phase, some 
countries administered new remedies in addition to the existing ones, and even performed a 
few emergency operations.  
In the SNB’s case, the range of counterparties admitted to repo auctions has already been 
very broad for some time. Indeed, shortly before the turmoil began, we decided to expand 
the  range  of  eligible  securities  for  money  market  operations,  whilst  still  retaining  stringent 
quality  standards.  Measures  such  as  those  used  in  the  US  and  UK  have  not  proved 
necessary in Switzerland to date.  
Monetary policy steering during the crisis 
The measures taken by the SNB, as described above, were primarily aimed at ensuring the 
smooth  functioning  of  the  Swiss  franc  money  market  during  the  turbulence.  However,  it  is 
also  important  to  look  at  the  actual  implementation  of  monetary  policy  strategy  during  the 
crisis.  Of  particular  interest  in  this  regard  are  two  aspects  which  have  occasionally  been 
misinterpreted by the general public. First, there is the question of whether, in stabilising the 
money market, the SNB released a flood of liquidity, thereby entering into inflation risks. The 
SNB  did  indeed  sometimes  inject  large  amounts  of  central  bank  money  into  the  market. 
Since the onset of the turmoil, we have in principle always provided a generous supply of 
liquidity through repo operations. However, fine-tuning was also consistently used to absorb 
any excess liquidity, as soon as call money rates fell below a certain level. Since the banks 
ultimately only have limited end-of-day demand for central bank money, there was a regular 
flow of funds back to the SNB. These operations allowed us to do two things: first, to limit the 
volatility of call money rates; and, second, to keep market rates close to our repo rate. This is 
shown in chart 2. Moreover, this also enabled us to keep the average level of sight deposits 
stable,  which  meant  that  we  did  not  allow  the  banking  system  to  be  supplied  with  excess 
liquidity.  As  can  be  seen  from  chart  3,  there  was  a  wide  day-to-day  fluctuation  in  sight 
deposits  during  the  crisis  but,  on  average  over  the  month,  levels  remained  more  or  less 
stable. Thus Switzerland cannot be said to have been flooded with liquidity. 
Second, attention has focused on how the interest rates are fixed for monetary policy repo 
auctions. The SNB, on the basis of its monetary policy assessment, decides on a range for 
the  three-month  Libor  which  it  considers  appropriate  for  monetary  policy  purposes.  This 
means  that  movements  in  the  Libor  that  are  not  in  line  with  the  SNB’s  monetary  policy 
objectives have to be countered with a change in repo rates. Thus, over the course of the 
turbulence, we consistently offset changes in Libor risk premia with changes in the repo rate, 
as  shown  in  chart  4.  For  this  reason,  the  Libor  remained  in  the  middle  of  the  target  band 
during the whole episode. The Swiss franc Libor was much more stable during the turmoil 
than the Libor for other currencies. This simply means that we were able to protect the Swiss 
economy from part of the crisis-induced increase in risk premia.  
Libor criticised 
Recently, some  market observers  have questioned the information value of the Libor. The 
Libor  for  all  major  currencies  is  fixed  daily  in  London  by  the  British  Bankers  Association 
2 
 BIS Review 80/2008
(BBA)  on  the  basis  of  a  survey  of  top-rated  international  banks.  Critics  argued  that  some 
banks  would  report  unduly  low  Libor  rates,  in  an  effort  to  talk  up  their  creditworthiness. 
Others claimed that the rates were too high because the panel of reporting banks was not 
sufficiently  representative.  These  criticisms  almost  exclusively  concerned  the  dollar  Libor. 
The BBA has found no evidence of a systematic distortion of the Libor, and has announced 
that  it  is  leaving  the  fixing  method  for  the  Libor  unchanged.  However,  it  will  strengthen 
governance of the Libor fixing process, especially the monitoring of individual banks’ reports. 
In  this  regard,  the  BBA  has  recently  published  a  report,  and  has  invited  comments  from 
financial market participants. 
What is the SNB’s standpoint on this discussion? The SNB – like all market participants – 
has a strong interest in ensuring that the Libor reflects true market interest rate conditions. 
For the three-month Swiss franc Libor, there has so far been no evidence that this has not 
previously been, or is no longer, the case. 
The  use  of  the  three-month  Libor  as  an  operational  target  stems  from  its  considerable 
economic significance as a reference rate for many financial and lending contracts. Here too, 
there is so far no evidence that the Libor has lost its significance in the Swiss franc market.  
Since not all reporting banks have been equally affected by the financial market turmoil, and 
since the extent and liquidity of Libor-based, unsecured money market trading in a crisis is 
automatically  much  lower  than  usual,  the  range  of  numbers  reported  will  automatically  be 
wider in such a situation. This can also give rise to random fluctuations. Moreover, in general 
the risk premium inherent in the Libor has become a lot more volatile since the start of the 
turmoil. This volatility makes it harder to steer the Libor. It should, however, be borne in mind 
that the SNB does not use a point target but a target range, which allows a certain amount of 
fluctuation in the Libor. Yet the most notable thing is that, despite these difficulties, we have 
succeeded in keeping the Libor around the middle of the target band. This is, after all, what 
counts for the implementation of monetary policy.  
So neither the current criticisms levelled at the Libor nor the actual movements in the Libor 
are an immediate reason to dispense with this rate as the operational target of the SNB.  
Conclusion 
Let me briefly conclude. Despite clear signs of a return to calm, the money market has not 
yet  gone  back  to  “business  as  usual”.  The  Libor/TOIS  differentials  continue  to  indicate  a 
certain  degree  of  tension.  The  various  waves  of  turbulence  also  show  how  difficult  it  is  to 
predict what will happen next.  
Central bank actions have helped to defuse the situation. Nevertheless, they can only treat 
the symptoms of the malaise, or fever. An effective cure and the restoration of confidence 
between market participants are primarily a matter for the banks themselves. 
The  SNB’s  tools  –  its  medicine  cabinet  –  have  so  far  proved  their  worth  during  the 
turbulence. Yet the crisis provides a reason to review and where necessary adapt them. For 
central banks, it is important to consider, not just the immediate effect of an instrument, but 
also  the  longer-term  repercussions.  Thanks  to  their  monopoly  in  issuing  currency,  central 
banks  can  engage  in  almost  unlimited  short-term  intervention  when  markets  and  market 
participants are threatened with collapse. However, such extreme measures carry high risks 
for  the  longer  term.  It  is  all  too  easy  for  market  participants  to  assume  that  they  will  be 
protected from the negative effects of their own actions during a crisis. Central banks need to 
keep  a  close  eye  on  this  moral  hazard  problem,  and  if  necessary  take  steps  to  contain  it 
through appropriate regulation. 
BIS Review 80/2008 
 3
 
Chart 1: Risk premia measured by the Libor/TOIS (or OIS) spread 
CHF
EUR
USD
GBP
%
1.20
1.00
0.80
0.60
0.40
0.20
0.00
Jan 07 Mar 07 May 07 Jul 07 Sep 07 Nov 07 Jan 08 Mar 08 May 08
 
 
Chart 2: Fine-tuning operations 
Repo ON Index (SNB)
Fine-tuning
 2.80
2.60
2.40
2.20
2.00
1.80
1.60
1.40
1.20
Jan 07 Mar 07 May 07 Jul 07 Sep 07 Nov 07 Jan 08 Mar 08 May 08
   4 
 BIS Review 80/2008
Chart 3: Sight deposits 
Sight deposits of domestic banks
Average of reporting period
in CHF billion
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
Jan 07 Mar 07 May 07
 
 
Chart 4: Libor steering 
Jul 07
Sep 07 Nov 07
Jan 08 Mar 08 May 08
 Middle of target band
CHF 3-month Libor
SNB 1-wk repo rate
 3.00
2.75
2.50
2.25
2.00
1.75
Jan 07 Mar 07 May 07 Jul 07 Sep 07 Nov 07 Jan 08 Mar 08 May 08
BIS Review 80/2008 
  5
