Caleb M Fundanga: Financing for gender equality 
Opening remarks by Dr Caleb M Fundanga, Governor of the Bank of Zambia, at the official 
launch  of  the  Financial  Institutions  exhibition  in  commemoration  of  International  Women’s 
Day, Lusaka, 5 March 2008. 
 The Honourable Minister for Gender and Women in Development 
The Country Coordinator of the United Nations System 
The Permanent Secretary, Gender in Development Division 
The Director, Environmental Council of Zambia 
Chief Executives of Financial Service Providers 
Heads of Non Governmental Organisations 
Invited Guests 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
I am honoured this morning to address you at the launch of this important Financial Sector 
Exhibition  by  financial  service  providers,  in  commemoration  of  the  International  Women’s 
Day  for  2008,  under  the  theme  “Financing  for  Gender  Equality”.  The  purpose  of  this 
exhibition is for financial service providers to showcase how they are contributing to financing 
for  gender  equality.  It  also  provides  an  opportunity  for  the  various  institutions  to  market 
financial products that can be accessed by women. A further objective is the sensitization of 
the  financial  service  providers  and  indeed  the  public  at  large  to  the  need  for  gender 
mainstreaming in access to finance. 
International  Women’s  Day  began  with  the  declaration  of  International  Year  for  Women  in 
1975.  Since  then,  many  countries  world-wide  celebrate  International  Women’s  Day  to 
recognize the achievements of women without regard to national, ethnic, cultural, economic 
or  political  divisions.  International  Women’s  Day  is  an  occasion  to  look  back  on  past 
struggles and accomplishments but even more importantly a time to look ahead to untapped 
potential  and  opportunities  that  await  future  generations  of  women.  In  Zambia  today  we 
recognize the strides that have been made by women in national development and we look 
ahead  at  the  challenges  that  are  before  us  as  we  strive  to  achieve  our  goal  of  gender 
equality. 
In  this  regard,  Zambia  is  a  signatory  to  many  international  instruments  and  Conventions 
seeking to empower women. These include the United nations Convention on the Elimination 
of  all  Forms  of  Discrimination  Against  Women  and  the  SADC  Declaration  on  Gender  and 
Development. This declaration calls for the equal representation of women and men in the 
decision making structures of member states at all levels, and also for the achievement of at 
least 30 per cent target of women in political and decision-making structures. 
I must concede here, Ladies and Gentlemen, that although we have made significant strides 
as a country in women representation; we are yet to meet the target of 30 per cent. I still 
believe that this target is not impossible to attain. With concerted effort we can achieve and 
even  exceed  it  because  this  country  has  scores  of  women  with  untapped  potential.  This 
exhibition  gives  us  an  opportunity  to  identify  this  potential  and  encourage  our  women  to 
stand up, and be counted and contribute to the development of this country. In this regard, 
the Bank of Zambia and the financial service providers under its regulation and supervision 
are pleased to be part of the celebrations for International Women’s Day 2008 
Distinguished Ladies and Gentlemen, our country has  made great economic strides in the 
past few years. We have had positive economic growth averaging 5% in the last five years. 
The macroeconomic environment has stabilised with the achievement of single digit inflation 
as  well  as  reduced  interest  rates.  In  addition  we  have  seen  increased  investments  in  the 
mining and other productive sectors. This improved environment presents great opportunities 
BIS Review 29/2008 
 1
for  our  country  for  both  men  and  women.  As  you  all  know,  women  have  from  time 
immemorial taken centre stage in the running of small and medium enterprises ranging from 
agriculture, mining, and tourism, to manufacturing as well as cross border trading. All these 
economic  activities  need  financing  in  order  to  grow  and  contribute  to  our  country’s  Gross 
Domestic Product. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  this  brings  me  to  the  theme  of  International  Women’s  day  for  this 
year and that is “Financing for Gender Equality”. At the international level, commitments have 
been  made  on  financing  for  gender  equality  and  the  empowerment  of  women  by 
governments  all  over  the  world.  A  large  number  of  governments  have  taken  initiatives  to 
integrate gender perspectives into their national budgets in order to reflect the differentiated 
needs of women and men. At a national level, Zambia is committed to financing for gender 
equality.  The  theme  for  the  2008  national  budget  is  “unlocking  resources  for  economic 
empowerment and wealth creation”. I believe  the economic empowerment is for both men 
and women. Furthermore, in order to achieve our vision to be a prosperous middle income 
country by 2030, both women and men must be empowered equally. Women must not be left 
behind in the drive to this vision. 
I  recognize  the  creation  of  the  Ministry  of  Gender  and  Women  in  Development,  as  a 
deliberate effort by the Government to ensure that the needs of women are addressed. Let 
me  also  take  this  opportunity  to  appreciate  the  efforts  by  our  cooperating  partners  in  the 
financing  of  activities  promoting  gender  equality.  This  is  evident  by  the  number  of  non 
governmental organizations looking at women’s issues, some of whom are represented here 
today. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  when  we  talk  about  financing,  we  must  focus  on  the  institutions 
through which most of this financing is channeled namely, financial service providers, most of 
whom are participating in this exhibition. No matter what kind of financing, be it government, 
donor or private financing, it is channeled through our financial institutions. As earlier stated, 
the main reason this exhibition is being held is to showcase how our financial institutions are 
contributing  to  financing  for  gender  equality.  I  also  hope  that  the  exhibition  will  encourage 
increased access to financial services by not only women but also men from all walks of life. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, the 2005 Finscope Survey undertaken by Finmark Trust confirmed 
that levels of access to financial services in Zambia are extremely low. Fewer than 15% of 
adult  Zambians  are  reported  to  have  had  access  to  commercial  banks.  Of  the  15%,  the 
majority  were  men.  Therefore  more  needs  to  be  done  to  enable  women  have  increased 
access to financial services. This is why one of the strategic objectives of the Bank of Zambia 
in its 2008-2011 Strategic Plan is to promote financial inclusion. The more financial services 
are extended to ordinary citizens and small business enterprises, the more there will be a 
greater proportion of women amongst those receiving these services. We should note that it 
is  women  who  have  special  needs  in  terms  of  access  to  financial  services.  In  small 
businesses, such as small scale farming and market trading, it is very important to have a 
safe place to save money, maintain working capital and also access loan facilities. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, as we discuss financing for gender equality, there are fundamental 
questions we need to ask ourselves such as: 
• 
Are  services  available  from  a  financial  service  provider  more  to  the  advantage  of 
men, rather than women? 
Are men’s interests served more than women’s? 
Do  financial  service  providers  enable  women  to  overcome  discrimination  against 
them in their economic life? 
 I believe these questions will be answered positively by the institutions present here. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, I am happy to inform you that among the products on exhibition here, 
we have Finance Building Society marketing loans without collateral. This is a very welcome 
2 
 BIS Review 29/2008
development  as  one  of  the  challenges  to  women  accessing  finance  is  the  requirement  for 
collateral which most do not have. We also have the United Nations country office with all 
their respective agencies participating in this exhibition to show case how they are supporting 
women  in  this  country.  We  appreciate  your  collaboration  with  us  in  this  exhibition.  The 
Environmental  Council  of  Zambia  has  also  joined  with  the  financial  institutions  to  increase 
our awareness on environmental issues and thus promote sustainable development. 
Distinguished Ladies and Gentlemen, I believe the next two days will be very informative and 
rewarding.  We  have  10  commercial  banks,  2  building  societies  and  over  10  microfinance 
institutions  exhibiting  their  products.  I  understand  that  tomorrow,  these  institutions  will  be 
recognizing some of their most loyal and exemplary customers and for this I commend them. 
I am sure that not only women but men will find this exhibition beneficial and I wish you a 
productive and informative two days. 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 29/2008 
 3
