Randall S Kroszner: The importance of fundamentals in risk 
management 
Speech  by  Mr  Randall  S  Kroszner,  Member  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  US  Federal 
Reserve System, at the American Bankers Association Spring Summit Meeting, Washington 
DC, 11 March 2008. 
The original speech, which contains various links to the documents mentioned, can be found on the US Federal 
Reserve System’s website.  
 It is a pleasure to be addressing the new American Bankers Association, which has arisen 
from the successful merger of America's Community Bankers and the ABA. Your association 
truly represents the full range of banks in the United States. The focus of my remarks today – 
the importance of fundamentals in risk management – should still resonate with all of you, 
whether  you  are  part  of  a  large  global  bank  or  a  smaller  community  bank.  Unfortunately, 
recent  market  events  have  shown  us  that  banking  institutions  still  face  some  risk 
management challenges, including a need to refocus on some key fundamentals. The good 
news, however, is that we also have many examples of sound risk management practices 
during the recent disruptions.  
Risk management challenges  
Getting  the  fundamentals  right  –  and  being  ever  vigilant  about  their  consistent  application 
and execution – forms the basis of any sound risk management system. I am not trying to 
imply  that  implementing  risk  management  fundamentals  is  easy;  that  is,  just  because 
something is fundamental does not mean that it comes naturally. In fact, there are a number 
of  risk  management  challenges  inherent  in  banking  that  require  careful  identification  and 
attention. 
One of the most basic risk management challenges relates to concentration of risks. From 
the beginnings of banking, bankers always have had to be cautious to guard against, as the 
old  adage  says,  "putting  all  their  eggs  in  one basket."  For  example,  Renaissance  bankers 
learned the lesson – some of them the hard way – that they did better by lending not just to a 
few merchants active in one trade, but to a range of merchants active in a variety of trades. 
As  risk  management  techniques  grew  over  the  centuries,  bankers  became  more  adept  at 
identifying, measuring, and managing risk concentrations, but that does not mean the original 
problem presented by concentrations – that losses could occur all at the same time – has 
vanished.  Indeed,  some  bankers  occasionally  forget  that  this  challenge  still  exists,  usually 
with unfavorable consequences. 
It is also important to note that concentrations in banking include not just basic lending, but 
also holding securities, trading complex instruments, providing liquidity facilities, engaging in 
off-balance  sheet  transactions,  and  conducting  other  financial  activities.  As  banks  have 
extended their range of activities and involvement in new markets, they must be particularly 
mindful of potential for concentrations of risk to arise for a number of reasons. First, any new 
activity  will  be  less  familiar  and  involve  less  data  and  experience  for  evaluating  risk 
compared  with  long-standing  activities  or  markets.  Second,  risk  concentrations  can  be 
hidden during normal times and may only manifest themselves during times of stress when 
activities or instruments that might in normal times have little or negative correlation suddenly 
become correlated, such as with a market-wide increase in the demand for liquidity as we 
have seen recently. In other words, bankers may have far more eggs jostling around in the 
same basket, and each of those eggs may be more fragile than originally thought. 
BIS Review 29/2008 
 1
Understanding  the  linkage  between  risk  concentrations  and  capital  is  especially  important, 
since the concentration of risk of a given portfolio markedly affects the amount of capital that 
should  be  held  against  it.  Heavy  concentrations  can  produce  so-called  fat  tails  in  a  loss 
distribution, meaning that considerably higher capital levels are required to support the risk 
taken.  If  one  underestimates  the  amount  of  capital  needed  to  be  held  against  risk 
concentrations  and/or  the  extent  of  the  concentrations  themselves,  then  a  banker  would 
realize that the initial level of capital was not sufficient and that remedial actions would need 
to  be  taken.  Naturally,  both  large  and  small  banks  can  continue  to  be  successful  and 
profitable  by  having  some  lending  or  other  types  of  concentrations,  but  they  need  to  be 
aware  of  the  risks  involved  and  have  the  proper  risk  management  and  capital  to  support 
those concentrations. 
Risk management fundamentals 
I  would  now  like  to  elaborate  on  three  key  risk  management  fundamentals  and  their 
relationship  to  concentrations  of  risk  in  banking:  Governance  and  risk  control;  risk 
identification and measurement; and liquidity risk management. In doing so, I will  highlight 
some important findings from a report released last week by a group of supervisory agencies 
from France, Germany, Switzerland, the United Kingdom and the United States, known as 
the  Senior  Supervisors  Group  or  SSG.1  The  report,  "Observations  on  Risk  Management 
Practices during the Recent Market Turbulence," provides a summary and analysis of a joint 
survey and  review, initiated last autumn, of risk management practices to understand how 
different approaches fared during the recent financial stress. Although the analysis covered a 
group  of  the  largest  banking  and  securities  firms,  the  lessons  learned  actually  have 
relevance for all financial institutions of all sizes and scope – even those that have thus far 
not  suffered  from  recent  financial  turbulence.  I  will  also  discuss  a  few  other  examples  of 
supervisory activities, such as our recent guidance on commercial real estate concentrations, 
from which we have learned valuable lessons. 
Governance and controls 
I will start with perhaps one of the most fundamental aspects of risk management at banking 
organizations  –  in  fact,  at  any  organization:  governance  and  controls.  The  SSG  report 
highlighted  solid  senior  management  oversight  and  engagement  as  a  key  factor  that 
differentiated performance during recent events. Clearly, senior management must take on a 
very  active  and  involved  role  in  risk  management.  Although  this  may  seem  somewhat 
obvious,  a  few  recent  cases  demonstrate,  unfortunately,  that  senior  management  may  not 
always exercise proper oversight and may not have been as engaged as would have been 
wise. As supervisors, governance and controls is a key feature we look at in assessing risk 
management at an institution. 
Clearly,  senior  managers  also  need  to  ensure  that  they  have  proper  understanding  of  the 
risks assumed by their firm, but this does not always happen. For example, we have seen 
some evidence that information was kept in silos within firms and not adequately distributed 
both  vertically  and  horizontally  within  certain  firms.  This  segregation  prevented  senior 
managers  from  developing  an  enterprise-wide  perspective  on  risks  to  the  whole  entity.  It 
meant  that  managers  were  not  fully  aware  of  the  extent  to  which  the  risks  of  the  different 
activities  undertaken  by  the  firm  could,  first,  become  correlated  in  times  of  stress  and, 
second,  result  in  high  concentrations  of  risk  exposures.  To  be  quite  specific,  in  particular 
cases,  senior  management  was  not  fully  aware  of  the  firm's  latent  concentrations  to  U.S. 
subprime mortgages, because they did not realize that in addition to the subprime mortgages 
                                                 
1   The report is available at: http://www.newyorkfed.org/newsevents/news/banking/2008/rp080306.html. 
2 
 BIS Review 29/2008
on  their  books,  they  had  exposure  through  off-balance  sheet  vehicles  holding  mortgages, 
through  claims  on  counterparties  exposed  to  subprime,  and  through  certain  complex 
securities. Adequate distribution of information allows for an enterprise-wide perspective on 
risk. Information must percolate up to senior management, but top executives must, in turn, 
disseminate their views and analysis back down through the business lines. 
Effective  risk  management  remains  sturdy  and  durable  only  if  supported  by  strong  and 
independent risk functions that produce unbiased information. Empowering independent risk 
managers results in clear, dispassionate thinking about the entire firm's risk profile, with no 
favoritism  toward  any  business  unit.  Senior  managers  should  encourage  risk  managers  to 
dig deep to uncover not only risks within each business unit, but also risk concentrations that 
can arise from the set of activities undertaken by the firm as a whole as well as latent risks – 
such as hidden risk concentrations that can arise from correlation of risk in times of stress. 
Such risk management assessments should lead risk managers to point out cases in which 
certain business lines are assuming too much risk.  
In other words, it is good to have a few people within the institution who – to paraphrase a 
former  Federal  Reserve  Chairman  –  know  when  to  take  away  the  punch  bowl.  Being  the 
party pooper, however, can be very difficult in any organization, and that is why it is crucial 
for  the  risk  manager  to  be  known  as  an  independent  voice  who  is  influential  with  top 
management and for top executives, of large or small firms, to set the appropriate "tone at 
the top" with respect to the importance of independent and unbiased risk evaluation. 
As I discussed in detail at a speech before the Global Association of Risk Professionals a 
couple of weeks ago, any successful organization needs to develop appropriate mechanisms 
to ensure adherence to, and sustainability of, its risk management.2 Incentive structures are 
a  key  mechanism  for  this  purpose.  Appropriate  incentives  reward  good  behavior  and 
penalize inappropriate behavior. Of course, incentives work best when they are known well in 
advance, that is, when they serve as ex ante signals of what should and should not be done. 
Naturally,  in  very  large  organizations  it  is  difficult  for  senior  management  to  monitor  each 
individual,  so  incentives  need  to  be  consistent,  permeate  even  the  lowest  levels  of  the 
organization,  and  remind  each  individual  that  his  or  her  risk-taking  affects  the  whole 
enterprise.  
Limits  and  controls  can  be  useful  tools  for  creating  the  right  incentives  and  sending 
appropriate signals, but they of course need to be tailored individually to each firm. Problems 
can arise when incentives are not properly structured and appropriate "risk discipline" is not 
exercised  –  for  example,  when  limits  and  controls  are  not  set  or,  if  they  are  set,  when 
adherence  to  them  is  not  monitored  or  enforced.  Such  controls  provide  incentives  for 
business-line  leaders  to  assume  only  the  risks  that  the  firm  can  absorb  because  they 
penalize  those  who  try  to  take  on  excessive  risk  or  inadequate  mitigation  in  the  name  of 
maximizing  short-term  profit.  This  is  just  as  true  at  large  international  firms  as  it  is  at 
community banks. 
Risk identification and measurement 
The  second  fundamental  of  sound  risk  management  relates  to  risk  identification  and 
measurement. Timely and accurate information is the lifeblood of sound risk management. A 
good risk-management structure must encompass risks across the entire firm, gathering and 
processing information on an enterprise-wide basis in real time. In short, you cannot manage 
your risks if you do not know what they are. 
                                                 
2   Randall S. Kroszner, 2008, "Improving Risk Management in Light of Recent Market Events," speech delivered 
at  the  Global  Association  of  Risk  Management  Professionals  Annual  Risk  Convention,  New  York, 
February 25. 
BIS Review 29/2008 
 3
Aggregating information across a large, diversified financial institution is not easy and should 
be  done  with  appropriate  care  and  with  adequate  resources  for  checking  timeliness  and 
veracity.  The  SSG  report,  for  example,  noted  that  some  firms  could  not  easily  integrate 
market  and  counterparty  risk  positions  across  risks  types,  making  it  difficult  for  their 
executives  to  identify  concentrations  across  the  entire  firm.  Aggregating  information  about 
risk  exposures  and  the  concentration  of  risks  may  not  be  as  challenging  at  smaller 
institutions, but checking the timeliness and veracity of the data is important at institutions of 
all  sizes.  In  other  words,  risk  managers  should  live  by  the  adage  "Trust  but  verify,"  being 
careful  not  to  rely  on  assessments  or  data  from  others  without  conducting  proper  due 
diligence. 
It  is  also  worth  noting  that  financial  institutions  should  gather  a  wide  range  of  relevant 
information  before  they  see  market  troubles  brewing.  In  other  words,  scrambling  for 
information  once  turbulence  sets  in  is  not  good  practice.  Understanding  a  firm's  true  risk 
exposures requires examining not just risks on the balance sheet, but also off-balance-sheet 
risks that are sometimes more difficult to identify and often not so easy to quantify. Latent 
risks  from  certain  complex  products  and  certain  risky  activities  should  be  properly 
recognized, because they can manifest themselves when market turbulence sets in. 
As the SSG report indicates, some firms had a poor understanding of the risks inherent in 
certain complex products or failed to recognize that certain activities contained latent risks 
that  could  be  manifest  in  unexpected  concentrations  of  risk  exposures  when  market 
turbulence  arose.  For  example,  we  witnessed  some  lapses  in  credit  risk  identification  and 
measurement when, as I noted, certain institutions underestimated the actual credit risk of 
subprime  mortgages  and  the  secondary  or  tertiary  effects  brought  on  by  disruptions  in 
subprime markets for their broader set of activities. 
Stress  testing  and  scenario  analysis  are  of  paramount  importance,  since  they  can  reveal 
potential concentrations of risk that may not be apparent from using information gleaned from 
normal times. The SSG report emphasizes this point, but the U.S. banking agencies have 
also highlighted its importance for smaller- and medium-sized institutions, for example in the 
guidance  on  commercial  real  estate  (CRE)  concentrations  we  issued  at  the  end  of  2006. 
After on-the-ground supervisors reported seeing increases in CRE concentrations at many 
institutions across the country, supervisors examined historical data on risks associated with 
CRE concentrations to provide the basis for developing supervisory guidance. That guidance 
counseled banking organizations with high CRE exposures  relative to capital to engage in 
stress testing to evaluate behavior of those exposures and the impact on capital in adverse 
circumstances. 
Some  financial  institutions  already  employ  stress  tests,  but  they  should  re-check  their 
robustness in light of recent events. For example, banking organizations might benefit from 
expanding  tests  to  include  a  wider  set  of  variables  to  stress  and  to  consider  shocks  they 
might  have  considered  much  less  probable  one  or  two  years  ago.  Banks  should  also 
remember that past experience is not always predictive of future events, meaning that they 
should  be  somewhat  creative  in  designing  potential  shocks.  In  CRE,  for  example,  banks 
should move beyond considering single-name risk and include scenarios involving broader 
risks to the CRE sector and how such risk may be correlated in times of stress with other 
parts of the portfolio.  
In  addition,  a  number  of  risk-measurement  and  risk-quantification  challenges  relate  to 
valuation practices, particularly with new products. Firms should have greater motivation for 
applying proper valuation practices as part of good risk management.3 At the center of these 
practices is the ability to make appropriate judgments about the quality of information being 
                                                 
3   Randall S. Kroszner, 2007, "Innovation, Information, and Regulation in Financial Markets," speech delivered at 
the Philadelphia Fed Policy Forum, Philadelphia, November 30. 
4 
 BIS Review 29/2008
used for valuations. The process usually starts with an initial experimentation phase in which 
market  participants  learn  a  great  deal  about  the  product's  expected  performance  and  risk 
characteristics, preferably under different market conditions. Conducting due diligence about 
new products can be costly and take time, but it is usually worth it. Unfortunately, in some 
recent cases new products were developed very quickly and not properly "road-tested." In 
observing the valuation challenges, the "Trust but verify" adage has equal application. Market 
participants  must  ensure  that  they  do  not  make  valuation  decisions  based  solely  on 
excessive reliance of external ratings or evaluations, but that they also undertake their own 
assessment. And I would suggest that the value of independent due diligence on the part of 
market participants is especially high for newer and more-complex products. 
Encouragingly,  we  have  examples  of  some  firms  recognizing  the  potential  risks  of  broad 
market disruptions, for example, if there were dramatic and unexpected price movements, or 
if market illiquidity set in. Those firms faring better typically use a number of tools to assess 
risk positions that draw on differing underlying assumptions. Such tools provide management 
with more information and different perspectives on its potential risk exposures. In the best 
cases,  the  tools  are  flexible  enough  to  allow  perspectives  on  risk  to  change  as  business 
conditions  change.  For  example,  they  can  help  identify  when  risk  concentrations  are 
changing as a result of market movements or changes in counterparty positions. 
Liquidity risk management 
Now I wish to consider the third fundamental. Liquidity risk management. Banks, of course, 
have  been  managing  expected  liquidity  demands  since  the  beginning  of  banking  itself.4 
Because  of  its  central  role  in  the  business  of  banking,  liquidity  risk  requires  rigorous  and 
effective management. Naturally, financial institutions both large and small must pay careful 
attention to liquidity risks, even if they manifest themselves in different ways. 
Regarding recent events, a number of financial firms were surprised by the extent of market 
disruptions  and  were  forced  to  take  funding  actions  not  anticipated  in  their  contingency 
funding plans, including some decisions to support affiliates that were based on reputational 
concerns rather than contractual obligations. At the same time, some institutions were able to 
avoid more serious problems from these events by aligning treasury functions more closely 
with  risk-management  processes  and  incorporating  information  from  all  businesses  into 
global  liquidity  planning,  including  actual  and  contingent  liquidity  risk.  They  also  made 
attempts to embed market liquidity premia or apply market liquidity haircuts in pricing models 
and valuations.  
Recent  events  have  shown  that  during  times  of  systemwide  stress,  liquidity  shocks  can 
become correlated so that the same factors that can lead to liquidity problems for the bank's 
assets or off-balance sheet vehicles can simultaneously put pressure on banks' own funding 
liquidity. Again, we see the trouble that risk concentrations can cause if an institution has not 
tried to identify them in advance and take steps to mitigate their effects. As with other risk 
areas,  supervisors  suggest  extensive  use  of  firm-wide  stress  testing  to  ensure  the 
incorporation  of  low-probability  but  potentially  severe  liquidity  events  that  may  have  the 
potential to converge. Smaller banks, as well as large, global banks, should conduct liquidity 
stress tests to evaluate what could happen to liquidity positions in times of stress. 
We have also noticed the potential for liquidity risk to have an impact on capital adequacy. 
As you are  well aware,  several large global banks ended up having to deal with so-called 
unplanned asset expansions arising from a variety of liquidity stresses related to the asset 
side of the balance sheet. In a few cases, these unexpected increases in the balance sheet 
created  some  pressures  on  capital  ratios,  even  if  the  level  of  capital  remained  stable. 
                                                 
4   Randall S. Kroszner (2008), "Liquidity-Risk Management in the Business of Banking," speech delivered at the 
Institute of International Bankers, Washington, DC, March 3. 
BIS Review 29/2008 
 5
Although bank liquidity management and capital management may be conceptually distinct, 
recent  events  illustrate  in  practice  how  liquidity  management  and  capital  management  are 
intimately related, particularly in times of financial stress. Since risk concentrations have the 
potential  to  manifest  themselves  during  times  of  stress  and  at  that  time  adversely  affect 
capital positions, it is particularly important that firms assess how liquidity events could place 
pressure on capital levels. In a nutshell: liquidity problems always have the potential to affect 
bank balance sheets and, in doing so, bank capital adequacy. 
the 
the 
importance  of  getting 
Conclusion 
One  of  the most  basic  lessons  of  banking  is  that  lending  concentrations  must  be carefully 
identified,  monitored,  and  managed.  As  I  noted  at  the  outset,  the  current  financial  market 
turbulence  underscores 
fundamentals  of  sound  risk 
management right and being ever vigilant about their consistent application, execution, and 
improvement in light of new data and experiences. I have highlighted the importance of three 
fundamentals  –  governance  and  risk  control;  risk  identification  and  measurement;  and 
liquidity  risk  management  –  and  the  SSG  report  provides  evidence  that  those  institutions 
taking care to get these fundamentals right generally performed better during recent events 
than  other  institutions.  Concentrations  of  risk  can  pose  challenges  to  financial  institutions, 
and top managers must be aware of their potential and have a risk management system in 
place ready to deal with them. This is true not only for large global players but also for small-
and medium-sized banks, as my discussion of the CRE concentration guidance emphasized. 
As  supervisors,  we  strive  to  achieve  the  appropriate  balance,  recognizing  that  supervision 
and  regulation  has  costs  and  benefits  that  need  to  be  weighed  against  one  another.  For 
instance,  we  need  to  be  careful  that  lending  is  conducted  on  a  prudent  basis,  and  at  the 
same time, take care not to stifle the provision of credit when it is done properly. 
Before concluding, I would like to mention a topic in supervision and regulation that I have 
not  yet  touched  upon  in  these  remarks,  namely,  credit  cards.  As  you  know,  the  Federal 
Reserve has proposed new rules under Regulation Z, which implements the Truth in Lending 
Act,  regarding  open-end  credit  to  require  new,  more  informative,  and  consumer-tested 
disclosures by credit card issuers and expects to propose new rules for credit cards under 
the Federal Reserve's unfair and deceptive acts and practices authority. To help us better 
assess  the  current  state  of  the  credit  card  market  and  possible  challenges  in  credit  card 
markets for consumers and others involved in those markets, I have invited key credit card 
market  participants  –  card  issuers  and  processors,  consumer  advocates,  counseling 
agencies,  and  other  regulatory  agencies  –  to  participate  in  a  forum  hosted  by  the  Federal 
Reserve  Board  on  April  8.  The  forum  will  allow  us  to  collect  additional  information  about 
relevant industry trends and to identify areas that may warrant action or further study. 
6 
 BIS Review 29/2008
