Rasheed Mohammed Al Maraj: Vigorous economic growth in Bahrain 
Speech by His Excellency Rasheed Mohammed Al Maraj, Governor of the Central Bank of 
Bahrain, at the Strategic Forum on the Bilateral Trade and Investment Opportunities in the 
Banking and Finance, London, 10 January 2008. 
 In 2008, in a time of economic boom, it seems almost a fruitless exercise to embark on a 
discussion  about  the  benefits  of  economic  liberalization  in  the  Gulf  region.  Why  would  we 
want to talk about the continuing need for economic liberalization when economic growth in 
recent  years  has  exceeded  all  expectations?  The  large  number  of  public  and  private 
investment  projects  currently  underway  have  collectively  achieved  unprecedented  record 
levels of growth, furthering the region’s attractiveness to international investors. Some might 
even say that we don’t need any more liberalization. We are doing quite well enough thanks 
to oil. Frankly, I would have to disagree.  
Even in boom times, the key challenge to GCC Governments is to maintain the momentum 
of economic activities thereby creating additional job opportunities. This means encouraging 
economic diversity, and increasing the private sector’s role in the economy. And hopefully, 
with  increased  diversity  and  a  larger  private  sector,  there  will  be  less  dependence  on  oil 
income  as  a  catalyst  for  growth  in  the  future.  The  way  to  achieve  a  more  efficient  and 
competitive private sector is not by protectionism but to increase competition and open up 
the domestic economies further.  
Let me explain this perspective first by looking at the key factors that have contributed to the 
vigorous economic growth we are witnessing at the moment. The key growth factors are:  
1. 
2. 
A large increase in oil revenues, which have permitted high government spending.  
More flexible economic policies aimed at reducing red tape, and facilitating greater 
participation by the private sector; including trade liberalization and allowing foreign 
ownership of local companies.  
A redefinition of the government’s role from being purely an owner of nationalized 
industries and job provider into a more regulatory and supervisory capacity; allowing 
more room for the private sector to function effectively and efficiently.  
The  emergence  of  a  highly  qualified  professional  domestic  private  sector  that  is 
capable of engaging in entrepreneurial activities and adding value locally rather than 
engaging in the traditional role as merchant where frankly little if any economic value 
was added locally.  
3. 
4. 
As an example of economic restructuring taking place in the Region, I would like to review 
briefly Bahrain’s experience in economic reform and liberalization over the last 30 years and 
the benefits we have derived.  
A  key  objective  of  Bahrain  since  the  70s  was  to  work  on  diversifying  the  economy  and 
reducing  dependence  on  oil,  and  since  then  Bahrain  adopted  a  number  of  significant 
initiatives  to  develop  the  financial  sector  which  has  made  Bahrain  the  center  of  choice  for 
many international and regional financial institutions.  
These early initiatives proved successful by increasing the contribution of the financial sector 
to the economy and introducing competition to the local financial institutions. The financial 
sector  provided  additional  benefits  by  way  of  training  of  large  numbers  of  nationals  and 
improving the quality and choice of services available to the public.  
The arrival  of foreign institutions also encouraged innovation in banking and prompted the 
authorities to continually improve the quality of banking regulations and supervision.  
BIS Review 5/2008 
 1
This  open  door  policy  attracted  many  leading  regional  financial  institutions  such  as  ABC, 
GIB, Investcorp and AUB to set up in Bahrain from the early 1980s onwards. Bahrain also 
played  a  pivotal  role  in  developing  the  banking  regulations  and  supervisory  legislation  to 
facilitate the growth of Islamic banking since the mid 1990s. This environment has helped in 
attracting a lot of interest from regional and international institutions to set up Islamic banks 
and  Takaful  companies.  There  are  over  30  institutions  in  Bahrain  specializing  in  Islamic 
finance.  
Similarly, the Government of Bahrain undertook initiatives in other sectors focusing on trade 
liberalization and less restriction to foreign investment.  
Such initiatives, which hold at their core the objective of an open economic policy, reiterate 
the fact that Bahrain and other countries in the region depend on additional integration with 
the global economy for their economic success and must take further measures to facilitate 
the flow of capital and trade into the region.  
At present, the GCC region is observing a major economic boom, however, this time, unlike 
previous boom times, private investment currently is playing a significant role. Many projects 
in  the  services,  industrial,  and  infrastructure  sectors  are  currently  being  provided  either  in 
part or exclusively by the private sector.  
Such  changes  in  economic  activity  will  provide  a  solid  platform  for  a  continued  economic 
growth. Moreover, the establishment of a single market and additional economic integration 
among  the  GCC  states  will  result  in  the  creation  of  a  large  economic  grouping  with  a 
tremendous potential. We are not only a major source of oil and oil derivatives, but we are 
increasingly perceived as a region with large investment opportunities.  
Despite oil’s dominance in the GCC economies, the major challenge for the region will be, 
ironically to reduce reliance on oil as a main source of income.  
We  should  not  rely  exclusively  on  high  oil  prices  to  manage  the  economy  of  tomorrow. 
Increased oil revenue should work side by side with the increasing efficiency and improved 
professional and technical skills of the local workforce to generate wealth. The most visible 
and  lasting  benefit  of  economic  liberalization  will  be  that  the  citizens  of  the  GCC  shall  no 
longer  have  to  rely  on  the  public  sector  to  be  the  main  driver  of  economic  growth  and 
provider of jobs.  
2 
 BIS Review 5/2008
