Hermann Remsperger: Financial market turbulences – some 
observations 
Speech  by  Professor  Dr  Hermann  Remsperger,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the 
Deutsche Bundesbank, at the conference “Bond markets in emerging market economies – 
financial globalisation, vulnerabilities and data needs”, Frankfurt am Main, 31 January 2008. 
 I 
Introduction  
Ladies and gentlemen  
First of all, let me welcome you to tonight’s dinner in the Japan Tower. I think this is a very 
suitable  location,  given  the  fact  that  Japan  has  recently  taken  over  the  G7/G8  presidency 
from Germany. 
I hope you all enjoyed today’s presentations and discussions on bond markets in emerging 
economies. Tonight, I would like to take the opportunity to turn to a topic that is not directly 
related to the topic of our conference but is of key relevance, also for emerging markets. 
I  am  going  to  discuss  three  aspects  of  the  recent  financial  market  turbulences  that  I  find 
particularly important. First of all, I would like to talk about the originate-to-distribute model, a 
segment in financial markets that has grown dramatically over recent years and has played 
an important part in the turbulence. Second, I will look at the role of risk management, and, 
third, I am going to consider some regulatory issues.  
But  before  addressing  these  three  points,  let  me  remind  you  that  there  had  been  early 
warnings that the benign conditions in global financial markets would not last forever.  
Among many others, we at the Bundesbank had pointed to obvious risks, such as very low 
risk premiums, the complexity of financial instruments and of the models for their valuation. 
However, I do not want to pretend that we had foreseen exactly when and how the financial 
turmoil would emerge. 
For instance, the very strong impact on the interbank money market came pretty much as a 
surprise.  The  provision  of  liquidity  by  the  Eurosystem  and  operations  in  cooperation  with 
other  central  banks  have  eased  tensions  in  the  money  market.  However,  some  of  the 
underlying  problems  still  persist.  Actually,  recent  events  show  that  confidence  in  financial 
markets has not yet returned to normality. 
Meanwhile, banks had to take off-balance-sheet assets on board and make substantial write-
downs. Some had to look out for fresh capital, which was partly provided by sovereign wealth 
funds from Asia and the Middle East, an aspect that may play a role in further discussions on 
sovereign wealth funds. 
We  have  also  seen  spillovers  into  other  market  segments.  For  instance,  the  previously 
booming mergers and acquisitions business, above all leveraged buy-outs, has slowed down 
significantly.  
Considerable  uncertainty  is  now  surrounding  US  monoline  insurers,  and  this  may  have 
negative  implications  for  the  municipal  bond  market  and  other  more  complex  instruments 
protected by monoline insurance. 
In addition, I would like to emphasise that the global economic outlook is very uncertain. It 
may be adversely affected by the financial market problems. In turn, there may be a negative 
feedback from a possible economic slowdown on the financial markets. A worsening in the 
credit cycle in the US cannot be ruled out.  
BIS Review 13/2008 
 1
Weaknesses in the originate-to-distribute model  
II 
After this short snapshot of the current situation let me now come a bit closer to the originate-
and-distribute model. The basic idea is that loan “production” can be decoupled from holding 
assets and/or risks. In principle, this is a valid division of labour within the financial industry, if 
it is handled with a high degree of risk-awareness and sophistication. 
However, it has now become clear that these requirements have often been disregarded. In 
many cases, the credit quality of underlying assets was low, not least as a result of doubtful 
practices in the US subprime market. Many of the loan originators were not regulated. 
Shortcomings in banks’ risk management, also as regards off-balance-sheet exposures, and 
investors’ due diligence practices have become apparent. And all this played hand in hand 
with  an  over-reliance  on  credit  ratings  as  well  as  difficulties  regarding  the  valuation  of 
complex financial instruments. 
Moreover, pipeline risks were not managed well, leading to large warehouse exposures for 
originators and packagers, inflating their balance sheets and using up their capital.  
The  turbulence  has  resulted  in  a  slowdown  in  credit  repacking.  Business  in  structured 
products has decreased significantly. Banks had to take SIVs and conduits into their balance 
sheets. 
However,  this  does  not  mean  that  the  originate-to-distribute  model  has  become  fully 
obsolete.  If  market  participants  draw  the  right  conclusions  with  a  view  to  higher  safety 
standards, adequate incentive structures and perhaps a preference for financial instruments 
with less opaque financial structures, securitisation will continue to play an important role. 
At this point I should add that the financial turmoil has revealed a number of weaknesses in 
the  rating  process.  Overall,  it  seems  fair  to  say  that  credit rating  agencies  have  tended  to 
underestimate the risks contained in structured credit products. 
As  the  risk  properties  of  such  products  differ  considerably  from  those  of  traditional  bonds, 
agencies should think about using a different rating scale for structured products. 
Moreover,  conflicts  of  interest  need  to  be  considered  as  rating  agencies  are  paid  both  for 
advising  the  issuer  on  the  best  way  to  structure  their  products  and  for  rating  the  same 
products. 
To  tackle  these  weaknesses,  the  rating  industry  has  already  indicated  the  readiness  to 
develop some guidelines for “best practices”. 
I  believe  it  would  be  helpful  if  regulators  discussed  the  necessary  changes  with  rating 
agencies and other market participants. Such discussions could lead to a higher degree of 
transparency,  including  the  assumptions  underlying  the  ratings  as  well  as  methodologies 
used or minimum requirements for rating quality. 
Risk management 
III 
At  the  same  time,  I  cannot  repeat  often  enough  that  external  ratings  are  no  substitute  for 
appropriate  risk  management  within  financial  institutions.  The  turbulence  has  made  it  very 
clear that improvements in risk management practices are absolutely necessary. 
This concerns in particular credit and liquidity risk. Stress tests are key, and their use should 
be enhanced to identify potentially excessive exposures. 
Over recent years, liquidity risk has obviously been underestimated by financial institutions. It 
should  receive  more  attention  in  the  future.  Currently,  work  is  being  done  on  international 
liquidity guidelines, but this seems to be a very difficult subject to put into practice.  
2 
 BIS Review 13/2008
Regulatory issues 
IV 
So let me draw your attention to regulation that is already in place today. Basel II came into 
force  in  Europe  at  the  beginning  of  this  year.  I  expect  it  to  prevent  at  least  some  of  the 
problems that contributed to the financial market turbulence. 
For instance, with the introduction of Pillar 1, financing facilities for special purpose vehicles 
will become subject to a capital charge. This will reduce the regulatory arbitrage that resulted 
in large off-balance-sheet exposures. 
Financial  institutions’  internal  control  mechanisms  will  be  strengthened  by  the  supervisory 
review process in Pillar 2. Last but not least, Pillar 3 lays down disclosure requirements and 
will thus strengthen market discipline. 
In the light of the current developments, some refinement of Basel II should not be ruled out. 
For  instance,  it  may  be  worth  reconsidering  if  the  originally  agreed  risk  weights  and  the 
conversion factors for off-balance-sheet exposure need readjusting. 
Furthermore,  I  would  like  to  stress  that  regulatory  arbitrage  needs  to  be  avoided  and 
loopholes should be identified quickly in the future. 
In  recent  years,  and  in  particular  in  the  structured  finance  business,  unregulated  financial 
institutions  have  played  an  increasing  role.  The  growing  importance  of  hedge  funds  and 
private  equity  firms  and  the  establishment  of  off-balance-sheet  vehicles,  such  as conduits, 
are cases in point. At the end of the day, a significant share of financial market activities was 
outside the focus of regulators and supervisors.  
This leads me directly to another issue with regard to supervision and financial stability. In 
my view, the constant and rapid development of new financial instruments, valuation models 
or legal structures poses a particular challenge to financial authorities. What we need is a 
speedy transfer of insights gained in international financial markets into our supervisory work.  
And this is one of the many reasons why central banks should be involved in supervision. 
The current turmoil has clearly demonstrated how important the interaction between central 
banks and supervisors is. 
Thanks  to  its  direct  contact  with  market  participants,  the  Bundesbank  has  access  to 
important details that are essential for the assessment of financial market turbulence and its 
impact on the German financial system. 
Furthermore,  such  information  is  of  key  importance  for  central  banks’  responses  to 
disturbances in the financial market, as we have seen with regard to the liquidity provision of 
the Eurosystem in the money market. 
Statistics 
V 
Last but not least, I’d like to mention another factor that might increase financial transparency 
and thus help to reduce, at least indirectly, the risk of future financial turbulences, and that is 
closing some statistical gaps.  
An  important  aspect  that  is  currently  being  considered  by  Eurosystem  statisticians  is  how 
credit risk transfer by banks could be covered statistically. This could include both data on 
the traditional “true sale” and synthetic securitisation operations as well as on transactions in 
credit derivatives.  
Some additional insight might also come from more data on the so-called Financial Vehicle 
Corporations  issuing  asset-backed  and  other  securities  in  the  process  of  securitisation. 
Collecting data on such entities is currently under discussion in the Eurosystem.  
Moreover, it is essential to gather more information on the holders of financial assets. The 
Bundesbank has initiated a security-by-security data collection on the holdings of the various 
BIS Review 13/2008 
 3
sectors,  as  is  also  practised  in  some  other  countries  of  the  euro  area.  The  Centralised 
Securities Database that is being developed in the ESCB – and that will be presented at this 
conference – could bring us a step forward in these endeavours at the European level. 
Conclusions 
VI 
To sum up, let me emphasise six points.  
First, the current financial turbulence has revealed weaknesses in the originate-to-distribute 
model.  It  needs  careful  handling  and  a  high  degree  of  sophistication  and  prudence  from 
market participants. Therefore, strengthening banks’ risk management practices must have 
priority. 
Second, market participants should not rely exclusively on extremely complex models. While 
financial markets get increasingly complicated, the traditional principles of prudent banking 
are  still  not  outdated.  Thus,  a  re-pricing  of  risk  is  not  enough.  What  we  need  is  a  re-
evaluation of the way credit markets work. 
Third, the role of ratings in the originate-to-distribute process must be reviewed. 
Fourth, banks need to build up sufficient capital and liquidity buffers because financial crises 
are very hard to predict. It is primarily up to the market participants to deal with the risks they 
incur. 
Fifth, we should only resort to additional regulation where market failures become obvious. 
Regulators should set incentives that promote institutional and market discipline. 
Sixth, closing some statistical gaps might help to increase financial transparency and thus 
help to reduce the risk for future financial market turmoil, at least indirectly. 
4 
 BIS Review 13/2008
