Martín Redrado: The impact of global financial turbulence on financial 
markets in Latin America – the monetary policy response 
Remarks  by  Mr  Martín  Redrado,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Argentina,  at  the  2008 
Annual Meeting of Latin American Chief Executives of the Institute of International Finance 
(IIF), hosted by Corpbanca, Santiago, 2 April 2008. 
 Latin America faces definitely a hostile international financial scenario. This episode is the 
most important global crisis of the past decades. And, it is here to stay.  
In the U.S. the current situation shows troubling signals. Daily reports of economic indicators 
reflect the weaknesses of the economy. The subprime meltdown continues to boost defaults 
and  foreclosures,  now  well  beyond  the  real  estate  market.  In  the  banking  system  today’s 
pressures come from two sources. The first one is a continuous uncertainty about the value 
of  underlying  assets,  underscored  by  a  deterioration  in  economic  growth.  The  other  is 
associated  with  the  nature  of  financial  intermediation:  banks  have  adopted  a  position  of 
increased risk aversion and demand high premiums to offer funds. As a result there is an 
erosion on both credit quality and availability which, at the end of the day, translates into a 
further worsening of the real economy. In order to offset a credit crunch a recapitalization of 
lenders seems inevitable. 
We  are  witnessing  a  growing  use  of  unconventional  tools  to  deal  with  the  crisis  in  the 
developed world. The often criticized “pragmatism” is taking the stand both economically and 
politically.  Tools  like  the  ones  used  in  the  Bear  Stearns  transaction,  which  –  with  no 
precedents  –  extended  the  Fed’s  “umbrella”  to  investment  brokerage  houses.  After  this,  it 
would be hard to avoid further direct assistance to help struggling homeowners to avoid the 
housing crisis, where the recession is spreading from residential to non-residential.  
In  this  context,  the  Fed  proved  a  strong  commitment  to  providing  liquidity  to  the  financial 
system. The move – somewhat delayed – has been more aggressive than expected, leading 
real short term interest rates into negative territory.  
Fed action is also directly addressing liquidity concerns, making bank assets more fungible 
and reducing the risk of liquidation. From my standpoint, this is nothing but the prevalence of 
the ideas that Bernanke has worked on during his whole academic tenure. Actually, one of 
his  first  contributions  to  the  economic  literature  was  to  prove  the  strong  links  between  the 
liquidity squeeze in the banking system and the credit crunch that led the U.S. economy to 
the Great Depression. He also deeply studied the particular issues of monetary policy under 
stress such as the zero nominal interest rate case.  
Ben  has  insightful  knowledge  on  how  liquidity  constraints  in  the  banking  system  could 
translate into problems in the real economy. He thoroughly acknowledges the boundaries of 
monetary policy that only have interest rates as a tool. I discussed this with him many times 
for the case of emerging markets.  
This background helps to better understand the wave of liquidity injections that the Fed has 
adopted since mid-2007. This view can also explain the recent disagreement between the 
FOMS members at the time of voting changes in rates.  
However, the jury is still out there. There is no guarantee that credit will be restored soon as 
we are clearly facing a solvency problem. Also, credibility is at stake. The shift away from 
“market” measures to a “rescue” kind of approach may encourage reckless behavior in the 
future. It may also undermine the “inflation fighter” track record of the Fed. The aggressive 
moves are going far beyond than the so-called “Greenspan put” that was behind the scenes 
over the last years.  
BIS Review 39/2008 
 1
In the euro area the “re-coupling” story seems very reasonable to me. Growth prospects are 
rapidly  deteriorating  and  the  risk  of  recession  should  not  be  underplayed.  The  European 
downturn  could  take  longer  to  run  its  course  than  the  U.S.,  but  it  will  probably  also  last 
longer. In fact, borrowing costs for consumers and firms have already increased as banks 
ran  up  losses  on  investment  tied  to  U.S.  mortgages.  Further  losses  in  the  banking  and 
financial  system  could  soon  be  disclosed,  impairing  bank lending  and  hitting  corporates  in 
particular.  
A  reversal  in  the  capital  flows  of  banks  from  subsidiaries  in  the  emerging  world  to  meet 
liquidity and solvency requirements in their main houses in Europe is something to closely 
monitor.  On  the  other  hand,  persistent  inflation  and  budget  deficits  may  prevent  policy 
makers from moving aggressively to stall the vicious circle of mounting financial losses and 
recession.  
Today  intervention  is  a  “worldwide”  phenomenon.  In  the  UK,  Mervyn  King  is  prepared  to 
adopt a “long-term resolution approach”, which includes acquiring illiquid assets from banks 
to improve their financial condition and cutting interest rates to provide liquidity.  
We have seen all across the developed countries the kind of “unconventional policymaking” 
that was very much condemned in the emerging world: policies that, at the end of the day, 
are fully backed up by tax-payers monies.  
The picture in the emerging world is quite different. For the first time we are not the epicenter 
of a crisis so conditions for contagion are less obvious.  
Latin American countries in particular seem to be better prepared to face this new financial 
turmoil.  The  majority  of  the  economies  in  the  region  are  experiencing  robust  growth, 
underpinned by a buoyant domestic demand. This is mainly due to sound macroeconomic 
policies followed during the last years. Fundamentals are definitely more solid. In a context of 
soaring  commodity  prices,  growth  in  south-south  trade  flows,  together  with  strong  fiscal 
policies, monetary prudence and robustness and sounder financial systems were crucial to 
foster sustainable growth.  
On  the  liability  side,  significant  progress  has  been  made.  The  public  debt  to  GDP  ratio 
decreased almost 30 percentage points over the last five years. This reflects in part in better 
liability  management,  which  also  shows  up  in  the  enormous  reduction  in  the  exposure  to 
foreign currency debt.  
The  region  is  finally  leaving  behind  the  well-known  original  sin  that  features  last  decades 
(currency mismatches), providing solid grounds for developing a domestic yield curve in local 
currency. 
Also,  all  over  Latin  America,  financial  systems  are  well-matched,  well  capitalized  and  less 
exposed to public sector debt; another sin from the past. 
While  financial  assets  deteriorate  given  the  greater  volatility  worldwide,  a  different  pattern 
was  observed  compared  to  past  episodes.  The  impact  was  moderate  all  across  assets 
classes  and  the  recovery  was  achieved  at  a  faster  pace  consistently  with  improved 
fundamentals.  Also  investors  are  differentiating  among  countries.  Eastern  Europe,  for 
instance, shows a different exposure vis-à-vis our region and Asia. In emerging Europe wide 
current  account  and  fiscal  deficits  have  been  financed  by  large  foreign  capital  inflows  that 
could revert at any time, triggering a crisis.  
However,  Latin  America  is  not  fully  immune.  In  my  view,  the  region will  not  be affected  in 
2008 while some slight impact on growth rates would take place next year. Tighter financing 
conditions will marginally affect both the corporate and sovereign sectors.  
Even though financing needs are not an issue as it was in the past, shallow capital markets 
throughout the region act as a constraint for sustainable growth over a longer term. Financial 
development is key – and will be even more so in our agenda. It allows agents to substitute 
assets in local currency to protect themselves against inflation, restraining the discretionary 
2 
 BIS Review 39/20086
use of monetary policy. The depth of the financial system and its integration with international 
capital  markets  has  a  powerful  disciplinary  effect  as  it  reduces  incentives  to  follow 
expansionary policies (at the expense of higher inflation) as foreign capital would flow out to 
other markets with more predictable returns.  
Anyway, this time the effects of the financial crisis are more likely to be transmitted through 
the trade channel rather than the financial channel (which historically affected the most Latin 
America).  However,  in  my  view,  the  challenges  would  be  coming  more  in  the  form  of 
managing the social tensions that could come as a result of record-high commodity prices 
(mainly in terms of higher domestic inflation). 
The perspective of slower growth globally driven by the U.S. (and Europe) is obviously a red 
light  but  the  impact  will  be  limited.  Structural  and  seasonal  factors  are  driving  commodity 
markets.  Among  them,  it  is  worth  mentioning  supply  shocks  from  climate  hazards  and 
geopolitical conflicts. Another factor is the increase as from the second half of 2007 in the 
speculative  demand  to  protect  against  the  depreciation  of  the  dollar  and  asset  losses. 
Looking  ahead,  weak  growth  in  the  U.S.  And  its  eventual  contagion  to  other  economies 
would restrict non-speculative demand for commodities, especially oil and metals.  
And here it is necessary to distinguish between the effects on hard and soft commodities. 
Agricultural  commodities  would  be  less  affected  mainly  because  of  their  lower  income 
elasticity and the relative strong fundamentals of emerging economies (and not only in China 
and India), where demand increased the most.  
Soft commodities accumulate increases ranging from 100% to 150% since the beginning of 
the  century  with  an  acceleration  in  2007-2008,  that  is  leading  to  historically  low  stock  to 
consumption ratios; the lowest in the last three decades. 
In the cases of soy and corn, demand is consistently outpacing supply due to a hike in food 
consumption  in  the  emerging  world  and  a  growing  demand  for  biofuels  in  the  industrial 
countries. While supply stays in historically high levels it cannot keep up with the enormous 
demand. Just to give you an example, corn inventories are 30% below the average of the 
last ten years.  
Speculative trading on commodities as an asset class will remain strong. The continuity of 
monetary policies aimed at reducing reference rates could also favor it. In Latin America, the 
challenge  is  to  take  the  necessary  policy  measures  in  order  to  avoid  that  this  exogenous 
volatility turns into domestic or endogenous risks. 
Food  price  rises  can  potentially  lead  to  wage  demands  which,  given  the  stickiness  of  this 
component  of  business  costs,  would  result  in  a  subsequent  increase  in  headline  inflation. 
However, this risk is more evident in emerging countries than in developed ones, where the 
weight of food products in cpi is lower. In Latin America, inflation will remain the dominant 
theme and the risks on this front will remain skewed to the upside. 
In  Argentina  the  monetary  and  financial  regime  has  faced  the  most  significant  challenge 
since the crisis of 2001-2002, but  when we look at the results it is clear that we definitely 
managed  to  rise  to  it.  For  the  first  time  in  decades  regardless  of  external  and  domestic 
disruptions, as the ones seen in the last days, the central bank is providing monetary and 
financial stability, two essential public goods for sustainable development. 
We know that the country has a long history of macroeconomic instability. Monetary regimes 
have unsuccessfully shifted from one extreme to the other. Therefore, in an economy with 
precedents such as confiscation of deposits (1989, 2001), hyperinflation (1989, 1990), mega-
devaluations (1989, 1990, 1991, 2002), and a default on the public debt (2001), the monetary 
system  cannot  set  itself  an  exclusive  goal,  ignoring  the  economy’s  idiosyncrasy  and 
vulnerabilities. To achieve long-term monetary and financial stability, this historical evolution 
needs  to  be  taken  into  account.  Hence,  the  central  bank  must  have  an  “across  the  cycle” 
view rather than a short-term one.  
BIS Review 39/2008 
 3
Our country is still going through a transition phase typical of post-crisis periods. And these 
transition stages – where key macroeconomic variables converge to their long-term values – 
take  time  and  raise  enormous  challenges.  The  Chilean  case  shows  that  it  takes  time  to 
become a normal country.  
Unlike the cases of Brazil, Mexico or Southeast Asia, the abandonment of the convertibility 
regime  included  simultaneously  an  institutional  breakdown,  a  huge  devaluation,  the 
destruction of the financial system and the default on the public debt.  
There  are  several  examples  of  the  normalization  phase  that  is  still  taking  place:  monetary 
transmission channels are just being rebuilt, since credit to the private sector accounts for 
only 12 percent of the economy; far below the Latin American average. 
The experience of other emerging economies shows that consistency and gradualism in both 
policy design and implementation are the adequate approach during this phase. Therefore, 
patiently rebuilding the power of monetary policy is a key step towards stability.  
It  is  then  clear  that  the  argentine  economy  is  simply  at  a  different  stage  compared  to  the 
current  situation  in  other  Latin  American  countries.  Hasty  diagnosis  and  simplistic 
comparisons  among  the  various  countries’  situations  may  lead  to  inappropriate  policy 
recommendations.  
Under these circumstances, a sustainable and long-lasting reduction of inflation depends on 
the comprehensive, joint and coordinated action of the monetary policy, the fiscal policy, the 
wage policy, and the competition policy during the transition phase. The path is a sequential 
one while we build the traditional monetary tools as effective policy instruments. 
Within this framework, today’s monetary and financial strategy is based on three main pillars: 
First, a robust and consistent monetary policy that ensures the equilibrium between supply 
and demand in the monetary market. This system is the most appropriate for an economy 
that still makes intensive use of relatively liquid means of payment and has a relatively low 
bank penetration. 
For the first time after the crisis, money supply is growing below the growth of nominal GDP, 
reflecting the prudential bias of our approach. The control of the growth in m2 is based upon 
a  deep  sterilization  policy,  which  its  key  element  is  the  issuance  of  bills  and  notes  of  the 
central bank and the development of a repo market. And these securities are by no means 
straight  public  debt  (the  central  bank  is  not  using  them  to  finance  itself).  They  reflect 
postponed liquidity (they will be monetized when circumstances require so as it happened in 
the second half of 2007).  
Second, a managed floating exchange rate regime that enables us to weather situations of 
financial  stress  –  that  is,  a  regime  that  provides  predictability.  We  do  not  want  to  prevent 
variables  from  converging  to  their  long-term  values,  but  we  would  rather  avoid  excessive 
volatility as a source of unnecessary disturbances in economic decisions. On the other hand, 
we do not want to provide any sort of insurance that favors speculative flows. 
Third,  countercyclical  policies  to  prepare  the  economy  against  shocks.  These  include  the 
accumulation of foreign reserves and a sound financial system that buffers turmoil, instead of 
spreading it. 
I cannot find a more telling proof of the reasons why we have pursued antyciclical policies – 
such  as  foreign  reserve  accumulation  –  during  these  years:  the  recent  external  shock  we 
faced can be compared to the “tequila effect” in terms of the magnitude of the outflows, but 
had a mild impact on domestic variables. The monetary and financial system truly protected 
it against financial contagion.  
Another example of our risk management approach is the recovery of banking liquidity and 
solvency. Due to an improved regulatory framework, we developed a sound financial system 
today that acts as a “turbulence buffer” rather than “amplifier”. 
4 
 BIS Review 39/20086
Our  risk  management  approach  addressed  three  basic  aspects  to  deal  with  the  crisis: 
preserving sufficient liquidity, foreign exchange market stabilization, and regulatory changes 
to soften the impact of turbulences on the financial system. 
The liquidity stress caused by international financial volatility in the local market was dealt 
with  through  measures  such  as  buying  back  part  of  the  central  bank  notes  directly,  or 
auctioning floating-rate and then fixed-rate repos – distributed among institutions according 
to their market share, and extending their terms from 7 to 30 days. 
Regarding the fx market evolution, the right question to ask is: what would have happened 
under the same circumstances but with a pure floating exchange rate regime in place? The 
timely  intervention  curbed  depreciation  expectations  and,  thus,  the  potential  pressure  on 
prices with minimal use of reserves. 
Bank regulations were tailored to circumstances in order to minimize the adverse effects of 
the shock.  
The  changes  involved  operational  aspects  (allowing  the  use  of  sovereign  bonds  as  a 
collateral for repos), accounting standards (valuation of instruments held by banks to maturity 
to buffer the impact on balance sheets), and liquidity regulations (extension of terms to meet 
reserve requirements and reduction of the daily minimum cash requirement). 
All in all, central bank actions show the consistency and robustness of our strategy, which 
are  allowing  us  to  pass  the  current  stress  test  with  no  stress.  We  proved  to  have  the 
necessary  “artillery”  to  “buffer”  domestic  variables  while  maintaining  monetary  prudence  in 
the face of turbulences with clear symptoms of permanence in time. 
To sum up, policy makers around the globe face significant dilemmas. While challenges are 
significant, now we seem to understand that policy recipes vary from one country to the other 
in this complex scenario. This progress is, obviously, welcomed.  
Especially for us, emerging markets’ policy makers, as we have to catch up with growth, deal 
with the tensions derived from buoyant economies and, most importantly, build institutions at 
the same time.  
In fact, it is more a synchronic than a sequential two-fold challenge: advancing towards the 
aims  set  to  develop  our  economies  and  building  institutions  simultaneously.  To  implement 
these policies effectively, the only possible way is to keep the consistent (i mean consistent 
with  the  history  and  idiosyncrasies  of  each  economy)  and  gradualist  approach  that  has 
guided us in recent years. The approach that seems to be the rule rather than the exception 
not only in the emerging world but also all across developed countries. 
BIS Review 39/2008 
 5
