Lim Hng Kiang: Singapore Exchange Beijing Representative Office 
Opening  speech  by  Mr  Lim  Hng  Kiang,  Deputy  Chairman  of  the  Monetary  Authority  of 
Singapore and Minister for Trade and Industry, at the Launch Ceremony of the Singapore 
Exchange Beijing Representative Office, Beijing, 21 April 2008. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
 Congratulatory remarks 
I  am  delighted  to  be  here  with  you  this  evening  to  commemorate  the  opening  of  the 
Singapore Exchange Beijing Representative Office. First, I would like to take this opportunity 
to  express  my  appreciation  to  the  Chinese  Government  and  the  Chinese  Securities 
Regulatory  Commission  for  the  generous  support  of  the  Singapore  Exchange’s  efforts  in 
China. 
Establishment of the Singapore Exchange Beijing representative office 
The  setting  up  of  the  Singapore  Exchange’s  first  overseas  representative  office  in  Beijing 
underscores  the  exchange’s  commitment  to  China.  This  representative  office  will  further 
strengthen  existing  links  between  our  two  business  and  finance  communities  under  the 
broader China-Singapore partnership framework. 
Chinese listings on the Singapore Exchange 
The Singapore Exchange started serving the fund-raising needs of Chinese companies since 
1997,  and  it  has  seen  strong  interest  in  the  recent  years.  Encouraged  by  the  Chinese 
government’s  "go  out"  policy  and  also  boosted  by  the  economic  strength  of  the  Chinese 
economy,  Chinese  companies  have  increasingly  taken  significant  steps  to  regionalise  and 
internationalise their businesses. 
Many Chinese companies have chosen Singapore as a springboard into the region and the 
Singapore Exchange as a fund-raising platform. Besides accessing global capital, a listing on 
the Singapore Exchange also helps the companies create overseas brand awareness and 
broaden shareholder base. It is an effective enabler in assisting the Chinese companies to 
pursue their international business strategies. 
Today, there are 143 Chinese companies listed on the Singapore Exchange. These Chinese 
listings  cover  a  wide  range  of  industries,  including  manufacturing,  services,  real  estate, 
transportation, pharmaceutical and many other rapidly growing industry sectors. 
Particularly, some Chinese companies have chosen to leverage on Singapore’s competitive 
advantages  in  certain  sectors  including  real  estate  and  shipping.  In  the  real  estate  sector, 
Singapore  has  attracted  Yanlord  Land  Group,  a  leading  developer  of  high-end  residential 
properties in China, and CapitaRetail China Trust, the world’s largest China REIT, to list in 
our  equity  market.  Yangzijiang  Shipbuilding  and  Cosco  Corporation,  China’s  largest 
shipbuilders, have also chosen Singapore as their international listing destination. 
Regional growth 
I expect Chinese companies’ regionalisation efforts to continue, notwithstanding the recent 
market  volatility.  The  recent  subprime  crisis  in  the  United  States  has  dented  investors’ 
BIS Review 46/2008 
 1
confidence  but  it  is  important  to  take  a  longer  term  view.  The  medium  and  long-term 
fundamentals of Asian economies are strong, driven in no small part by China’s economic 
engine.  I  believe  we  will  continue  to  see  strong  intra-regional  trading  volumes  and  wealth 
creation.  As  the  Asian  economies  grow,  opportunities  will  arise  in  the  capital  markets  for 
financing Chinese companies’ regionalisation, if not, globalisation efforts. 
Singapore’s value proposition to Chinese companies 
I  believe  the  Singapore  Exchange  will  be  committed  to  maintain  a  robust  market-oriented 
framework,  which  facilitates  organisations  that  would  like  access  to  global  capital  for  their 
business expansion plans. To date, the Singapore Exchange is one of the most international 
equity  markets  globally,  boosting  38%  of  international  listings  originated  from  a  myriad  of 
places such as the ASEAN nations, Hong Kong, India, Japan, South Korea, North America, 
Europe, and of course, China. 
Singapore  welcomes  Chinese  companies  to  use  Singapore  as  a  second  home,  to  pursue 
regional business opportunities, to build international connections, as well as a test-bed for 
new,  innovative  ideas.  At  a  point  where  East  meets  West,  Singapore  today  is  home  to 
26,000  international  companies.  Of  these,  approximately  4,200  MNCs  have  regional 
activities in Singapore to leverage on the Singapore connectivity to service their clients from 
within the region. 
An increasing number of financial institutions are also using Singapore as a regional hub to 
conduct  their  investment,  fund  management  and  private  wealth  management  activities. 
Singapore’s  asset  management  industry  has  boomed  and  flourished,  with  assets  under 
management surpassing S$900 billion. 
Closing 
The  establishment  of  the  Singapore  Exchange’s  presence  in  Beijing  could  not  be  more 
relevant, with the Chinese market growing at a strong pace, and as Chinese companies and 
markets become increasingly linked to the global community. The strong economic growth in 
China, Singapore, as well as the ASEAN region, gives us a window of opportunity to deepen 
and enhance market integration, strengthening Asia’s competitive edge. 
The  Singapore  Exchange  Beijing  representative  office  will,  I  am  sure,  play  an  important 
supporting role in bridging both China and Singapore’s equity capital markets, and servicing 
the current and future listed Chinese companies. It also demonstrates Singapore’s long-term 
commitment to China, and I believe both markets will stand to gain in the long run. 
As  a  Chinese  saying  goes,  Spring  is  the  season  we  sow  the  seeds  in  the  fields.  As  the 
Singapore  Exchange  sows  its  promising  seeds  in  China,  I  very  much  hope  that  both 
Singapore and the Chinese companies who choose Singapore as their financing location will 
enjoy the harvest of good fortune in time to come. 
With that, I would like to extend my heartiest congratulations once again to the Singapore 
Exchange for its representative office opening in Beijing. I encourage the exchange to play 
its role well in serving the specific needs of the Chinese companies with the ambition to grow 
regionally  and  in  doing  so,  contribute  to  the  strengthening  partnership  between  the  China 
and Singapore. 
Have a great evening, thank you. 
2 
 BIS Review 46/2008
