Lucas Papademos: The economic outlook, financial market 
developments and prospects 
Address  by  Mr  Lucas  Papademos,  Vice-President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the 
Conferencia Buenos Aires 2008, organised by the Americas Society and the Council of the 
Americas, Buenos Aires, 27 August 2008. 
 Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is a great pleasure for me to participate in the Conference Buenos Aires 2008. I would like 
to thank the Americas Society and the Council of the Americas for inviting me to speak at this 
panel discussion on “World Economic Opportunities, Risks and Prospects”. In my remarks, I 
would  like  to  present  you  our  current  assessment,  mainly  –  but  not  exclusively  –  from  a 
European perspective, of the economic outlook and to address a number of issues pertaining 
to financial market developments and prospects.  
* * * 
At the current juncture, the performance of the global economy is being strongly influenced 
by  the  simultaneous  effects  of  two  substantial  and  persistent  shocks:  (1)  the  significant 
increase  in  the  price  of  oil  and  the  prices  of  other  commodities,  including  many  food 
products, and (2) the turmoil in the financial markets of advanced economies which erupted 
more than a year ago.  
The  magnitude  and  duration  of  these  two  shocks  are  adversely  affecting  both  the  current 
economic  situation  and  the  outlook  for  the  global  economy.  In  the  advanced  industrial 
economies, the large rise in oil and other commodity prices – crude oil prices have tripled 
since 2000, and an index of food prices has doubled since the beginning of 2005 – have had 
a  negative  impact  on  aggregate  demand  and  especially  on  aggregate  supply  and  have 
resulted in a sharp and protracted increase in inflation. The financial market turbulence has 
led to a tightening of credit standards, an increase in financing costs and a deceleration of 
credit growth – though the severity of its impact on credit markets differs across countries. 
Moreover,  the  financial  turmoil  has  adversely  affected  the  profitability  and  the  capital  and 
liquidity positions of many financial institutions worldwide and in some cases it has caused 
severe distress or even the collapse of a number of banks. 
As  a  result  of  these  developments,  advanced  industrial  economies  are  experiencing  the 
uncomfortable  combination  of  weakening  economic  growth  and  increasing  inflationary 
pressure.  In  addition,  the  macroeconomic  outlook  is  surrounded  by  exceptionally  high 
uncertainty, with risks to economic growth on the downside and risks to inflation clearly on 
the upside.  
The effects of the commodity price shock and of the financial turmoil on the emerging market 
economies bear similarities, but also differences from their effects on advanced economies. 
Economic growth in some emerging or developing economies has also moderated somewhat 
but in most cases it remains fairly robust supported by domestic demand and the increased 
income  of  commodity  exporting  countries.  On  the  inflation  front,  however,  developments 
have  been  universally  unfavourable.  Average  inflation  in  emerging  (and  developing 
economies) accelerated to 8.0% in the first half of this year from an average annual rate of 
4.5%  in  2006.  Moreover,  the  economic  and  social  impact  of  higher  inflation  is  especially 
acute  in  those  economies  as  food  accounts  for  over  30%  of  the  consumption  basket  of 
households, compared to less than 20% in Europe or in the US.  
 BIS Review 101/2008 
 1
Let me now focus on the economic and financial situation in Europe and, in particular, in the 
euro area economy of the 15 EU countries – to become 16 next year – that use the euro as 
their currency. As a result of the direct and indirect effects of the two shocks I referred to, 
economic growth in the euro area has moderated significantly this year, and indeed real GDP 
declined slightly  by  0.2%  in  the  second  quarter.  Part  of  this  decline  can  be  attributed  to a 
technical reaction to the strong growth (of 0.7%) recorded in the first quarter. Nevertheless, 
economic  activity  is  expected  to  remain  subdued  in  the  coming  months  and  to  gradually 
recover in the fourth quarter of this year and in the course of 2009. However, it is likely that 
the annual average rate of growth next year will be lower than previously expected.  
Over  the  medium  term,  economic  growth  in  the  euro  area  should  be  underpinned  by  its 
sound fundamentals and the absence of major imbalances. Moreover, the implementation of 
reforms  planned  in  a  number  of  euro  area  countries  should  help  raise  productivity  and 
potential  output  growth.  However,  the  uncertainty  surrounding  the  likely  path  of  euro  area 
economic activity in the coming quarters is unusually high and the risks to growth are on the 
downside. Among these risks, the potential impact of the financial market turmoil on the real 
economy  could  turn  out  to  be  larger  and  broader  than  currently  expected.  In  addition, 
unanticipated increases in energy and other commodity prices cannot be excluded, despite 
the recent drop in prices, especially if demand from emerging economies remains strong.  
Despite the significant weakening of real GDP growth in mid-2008, inflation in the euro area 
has  remained  stubbornly  high  and  well  above  the  level  that  would  be  consistent  with  the 
ECB’s definition of price stability (an inflation rate of below but close to 2%). In July 2008, 
annual inflation reached 4.0%, having steadily risen from 2.1% in September 2007. This is 
largely due to the direct and indirect effects of past sharp increases in energy and food prices 
globally.  There  are  some  indications,  however,  that  domestic  inflationary  pressures  are 
intensifying as labour cost growth has been increasing in the recent quarters. 
Looking forward, given the current futures prices for oil and other commodities, the annual 
inflation rate in the euro area is likely to remain significantly above the level consistent with 
price stability for a considerable period of time before declining only gradually in the course 
of 2009. With regard to the outlook for price developments, the main and serious concern is 
that  a  protracted  period  of  high  inflation,  even  if  it  is  largely  due  to  the  direct  and  indirect 
effects of previous commodity price increases, has the potential to adversely affect price and 
wage-setting behaviour and short to medium-term inflation expectations, thereby inducing a 
wage-price  spiral  via  broadly-based  second-round  effects.  The  likelihood  of  such  an 
undesirable scenario should be avoided. For if it materialises, it will adversely and perversely 
affect growth and the purchasing power of households. Moreover, it will require a stronger 
degree of monetary tightening in order to achieve price stability in a sustained manner. This 
concern is further heightened by other upside risks to price stability. As I previously noted, 
notwithstanding  the  recent  sharp  decline  in  oil  prices,  the  possibility  of  renewed  increases 
cannot be excluded. In addition, despite some signs of moderation of growth in broad money 
and credit aggregates, the continued vigorous underlying pace of monetary expansion over 
the past few years confirms the existence of upside risks to price stability over a medium to 
longer term horizon. 
In order to address these upside risks and achieve price stability in the euro area over the 
medium-term, in accordance with the ECB’s mandate, the Governing Council raised the key 
ECB interest rates by 25 basis points in July. The Council decided to keep the interest rates 
unchanged at its August meeting. We believe that the current stance of monetary policy will 
contribute to achieving our overriding objective of price stability and to maintaining medium 
and longer-term inflation expectations firmly anchored to this objective. Looking forward, we 
will  continue  to  monitor  very  closely  all  relevant  developments  and  we  will  do  what  is 
necessary to ensure that price stability will be maintained over the medium term. 
It is evident from price developments in many countries that rising and persisting inflationary 
pressure  is  becoming  a  global  phenomenon.  Although  from  the  perspective  of  individual 
2 
 BIS Review 101/2008
countries or economic areas, the recent surge in inflation is mainly due to “external shocks” 
affecting oil and other commodity prices, in a global context these shocks are internal and 
reflect, to a considerable degree, aggregate demand pressures, particularly stemming from 
the growing demand for commodities by emerging and developing economies which account 
for  the  largest  share  of  global  demand  growth  for  commodities.  This  in  turn  reflects  the 
continuing strong growth in emerging market economies –which in some cases is driven by 
an  expansion  of  aggregate  demand  that  outstrips  the  growth  in  aggregate  supply  and  is 
supported by accommodative monetary policies. The global inflation risk is that the indirect 
and potential second-round effects of external commodity price shocks on domestic prices 
and wages in individual countries can, if accommodated, help sustain inflationary pressure in 
these  countries  and  elsewhere.  It  is,  therefore,  necessary  to  address  the  surge  in  global 
inflation  by  concerted  efforts,  especially  by  the  monetary  authorities  in  economies 
experiencing strong but unsustainable growth.  
 Let  me  now  conclude  by  elaborating  on  recent  developments  in  financial  markets  and 
assessing their implications for the economic and financial stability outlook. As I previously 
stressed, some of the risks surrounding the economic outlook, globally and in Europe, stem 
from  the  ongoing  financial  turmoil,  which  has  caused  sizeable  losses  for  banks  in  several 
advanced  industrial  economies  and  has  resulted  in  increased  financing  costs  and  tighter 
credit market conditions. In fact, recent developments in the global financial markets point to 
a renewed intensification of the financial turbulence that commenced more than a year ago.  
More specifically, tensions in the global term money markets are persisting despite several 
measures  taken  by  central  banks  to  improve  the  access  of  their  counterparty  financial 
institutions to funds so as to alleviate funding liquidity pressures. The spreads between the 
three-month deposit and the overnight index swap (OIS) rates have broadly stabilised, but at 
rather high levels ranging between 60 and 80 basis points in all major markets, including the 
euro area, the US and the UK. At the 12-month maturity, however, euro area money market 
spreads recently increased and exceeded 90 basis points. Before the turmoil erupted, these 
same  spreads  typically  stood  at  around  5  basis  points.  These  protracted  pressures  in  the 
term money markets continue to have a considerable negative impact on the financing costs 
of those financial institutions which cover a large part of their funding needs in the short-term 
wholesale money market.  
In the markets for asset-backed securities and structured credit products, where activity was 
booming and liquidity was abundant until August last year, new publicly-placed issuance has 
virtually  dried  up,  except  for  the  simpler  securitised  instruments  backed  by  high-quality 
collateral.  Moreover,  the  value  of  many  of  the  outstanding  complex  structured  products, 
including some of those backed by high-quality assets, has fallen in recent months. In the 
corporate  credit  markets,  spreads  in  the  below-investment  grade  segment  have  recently 
widened  to  the  highest  levels  since  the  beginning  of  the  turmoil.  In  addition,  the  cost  of 
buying  protection  against  the  risk  of  default  by  some  of  the  major  financial  institutions  (as 
reflected  in  corporate  credit  default  swaps  spreads)  has  increased  again,  reaching  levels 
comparable to those seen in late March, before the Bear Stearns rescue. In equity markets, 
the  stock  prices  of  non-financial  firms  have  also  declined  sharply  since  early  May,  while 
(implied)  stock  market  volatility  rose  to  a  peak  in  July  and  has  remained  high.  These 
developments  reflect  market  expectations  of  a  deteriorating  corporate  earnings  outlook, 
increased financing costs and high and volatile commodity prices.  
Overall, a number of developments, both external to and within the euro area, suggest that 
the  uncertainty  surrounding  the  euro  area  financial  stability  outlook  has  increased.  This 
assessment  reflects  to  a  considerable  extent  the  continuing  decline  in  US  house  prices, 
which  is  leading  to  a  sharp  rise  in  loan  delinquencies  and  losses,  and  associated  further 
declines in the prices of mortgage backed securities. In the euro area, credit risks have risen, 
stemming  from  developments  in  some  housing  markets  as  well  as  in  those  non-financial 
BIS Review 101/2008 
 3
corporate sectors which are more exposed to residential construction activity. At the same 
time, however, there is little evidence so far to suggest that the availability of bank credit in 
the euro area as a whole has been significantly affected by these developments and, more 
generally, by the financial turmoil. In particular, the expansion of credit to the non-financial 
corporate sector remains strong, though moderating.  
The persistence of the financial turmoil may also make the financial system more vulnerable 
to the crystallisation of other risks that have been previously identified by the ECB and other 
central banks and institutions. These include the possibility of a more broad-based turn in the 
global  credit  cycle,  a  disorderly  unwinding  of  global  imbalances  and  the  financial  stability 
implications of persistently elevated energy prices. It seems that large euro area banks have 
so far weathered the financial storm somewhat better than their global peers. Nevertheless, 
the investment losses suffered by some banks could make these institutions more vulnerable 
to a sharper deterioration in the credit cycle.  
All in all, the outlook for both global and euro area financial stability remains highly uncertain. 
A lot will depend on the interaction between macroeconomic developments and the financial 
system  and  on  how  banks  respond  to  an  operating  environment  that  presents  various 
challenges, including some new ones. The financial turmoil could be gradually broadening in 
scope and evolve into a more traditional credit-cycle downturn. In such circumstances, it is 
likely that the adjustment process will remain protracted as key participants in the financial 
system  continue  their  efforts  to  strengthen  their  liquidity  and  capital  positions.  In  an 
environment where balance sheet conditions can change unexpectedly, there is obviously no 
room for complacency. Vigilance remains of the essence for market participants and policy 
makers. 
Thank you for your attention. 
4 
 BIS Review 101/2008
