Barbro Wickman-Parak: Some reflections on the current situation 
Speech  by  Ms  Barbro  Wickman-Parak,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Sveriges  Riksbank,  at 
Handelsbanken, Stockholm, 19 September 2008. 
 Hawks  and  doves  –  opinions  may  differ  on  this  way  of  trying  to  characterise  me  and  my 
colleagues on the Executive Board of the Riksbank, but it cannot be denied that it has had a 
major  impact.  How  often  the  terms  are  used  in  the  media  varies  somewhat  over  time 
depending on how great the difference of opinion among the Executive Board members is 
assumed to be at the moment. Prior to the most recent repo rate decision, the terms were 
used quite frequently and it was claimed that there was a fight between the hawks and doves 
on the Board about the direction the interest rate should take.  
The  minutes  of  the  latest  monetary  policy  meeting,  which  were  published  the  day  before 
yesterday,  reveal  that  I  am  one  of  the  doves  –  if  I  myself  should  now  lapse  into  this 
ornithological  terminology.  This  time,  I  would  like  to  add  –  it  is  not  my  intention  to 
characterise  myself  as  a  permanent  dove,  no  more  than  I  intend  to  become  a  permanent 
hawk.  As  a  monetary  policy  decision-maker  you  cannot  sit  in  a  predetermined  rut,  even 
though this would make life easier for those who like to express themselves in clichés.  
The minutes also reveal that the Board was divided right down the middle, as was indeed 
speculated on beforehand. It was the Governor's casting vote that decided the issue and that 
led to the repo rate being increased rather than being left unchanged. 
Before I explain what lay behind the decision and present my own view, I would like to say 
something  more  general  about  the  even  result  of  the  vote.  There  are  a  number  of 
observations and reflections that can be made and that I feel are worth highlighting. I intend 
to conclude by saying something about the new statistics that have been presented since our 
meeting. A great deal has happened recently, not least on the financial markets.  
An entirely divided Executive Board is unusual 
A first observation is that if we look to the past it is very unusual for the Board to be split 
down  the  middle.  During  the  almost  ten  years  that  the  Board  has  existed  and  the 
approximately  85  monetary  policy  meetings  that  have  been  held,  this  has  in  fact  only 
happened four times, counting the latest meeting. The most usual result, not surprisingly, is 
that  the  Board  has  been  unanimous.  Fairly  frequently,  however,  at  about  a  third  of  the 
meetings, at least one member has entered a reservation against the interest rate decision.  
As an aside it may be worth pointing out that for some time now it has perhaps been more 
noticeable than before if we are in disagreement. These days, we also have to decide on a 
forecast  for  the  repo  rate.  At  the  meeting  in  July,  for  example,  all  of  the  Board  members 
agreed to increase the interest rate. But three of us felt that the forecast for the repo rate 
path in the period ahead should be some-what lower. This disunity attracted a lot of attention 
in  the  media  and  also  provided  some  clues  that  made  it  easier  to  forecast  what  the  vote 
would be at the latest meeting.  
Previously,  before  we  began  publishing  interest  rate  forecasts,  there  were  also  different 
opinions among the Board members about how the interest rate should develop in the future. 
But as no forecast for the repo rate was published and there was nothing concrete to enter a 
reservation  against,  any  differences  of  opinion  were  not  visible  to  the  outside  world.  It  is 
probably also the case that the future development of the repo rate was not discussed as 
much internally then as it is today. 
BIS Review 113/2008 
 1
Disagreement a healthy sign 
Another thing that I feel is worth pointing out is that disagreement among the members of the 
Board  should  not  be  seen  as  a  sign  of  weakness.  This  would  perhaps  be  a  reasonable 
interpretation if you held the view that the Board members should be so wise that we can 
simply  "calculate"  which  decision  is  the  only  possible  correct  one  and  agree  on  it. 
Unfortunately, the world is far too complicated for this to be possible. And if it were possible 
there would be no real reason to let the monetary policy decisions be made by a Board with 
six members. It would be enough to have a single wise decision-maker.  
In recent decades, however, the trend has been in the opposite direction. All over the world, 
it has become more and more common to let monetary policy decisions be made by a group 
of  individuals  –  a  committee  or  board  –  rather  than  by  a  central  bank  governor  alone. 
Probably  the  most  important  explanation  for  this  is  that  many  central  banks  have  become 
more independent in this period. This has made it seem more natural to delegate the right to 
make decisions to a group of people rather than to one individual.  
This  development  has  meant  that  research  on  monetary  policy  decision-making  in  groups 
has accelerated.1 One result that has emerged is that groups tend to make better decisions 
than  individuals.2  This  may  be  because  the  members  of  the  group  have  different 
backgrounds,  knowledge  and  experience  that  they  can  bring  to  the  monetary  policy 
discussion. These differences mark the decisions that the group makes in different ways so 
that these decisions tend to be better than the decisions that an individual would have made 
alone – the whole becomes greater than the parts. 
This applies irrespective of how the decision is made – by voting, as at the Riksbank, or in 
some other way. So, the fact that we disagree should be seen as a sign that everything is 
working the way it is supposed to. It would in fact be surprising if the entire Board supported 
every interest rate decision made. 
Unusually difficult to assess the situation  
The third thing I would like to point out is perhaps the most important. This is that the even 
vote is of course more than anything else a sign that it is unusually difficult to assess the 
current situation – there is a fine balance to be drawn. I think that it is important to say this as 
this is not really the picture that has emerged from the debate. Instead, an unchanged repo 
rate has most often been portrayed as the only reasonable and self-evident alternative. Even 
though I myself eventually came to the conclusion that the interest rate should remain un-
changed, I must say that I did not feel that this was an entirely self-evident decision. 
The Executive Board thus decided by the smallest possible margin to increase the interest 
rate by 0.25 percentage points. Three main reasons were given for this. First, inflation has 
continued to increase. In July it reached the highest level measured since the mid-1990s and 
was  far  above  the  inflation  target.  The  much-publicised  revision  of  the  CPI  by  Statistics 
Sweden last week does not significantly alter this picture, by the way, even though the figure 
for June is now higher than that for July.  
Secondly, inflation expectations are also still high. Different measures paint slightly different 
pictures, but all of the measures are above the inflation target. Thirdly, cost pressures have 
                                                 
1  For a review of current research see, for example, Blinder, A., ”Making Monetary Policy by Committee”, an 
essay  presented  at  the  conference  ”International  Experience  with  the  Conduct  of  Monetary  Policy  Under 
Inflation Targeting”, 22-23 July, 2008, Bank of Canada. 
2   See, for example, Blinder, A. and J. Morgan, ”Are Two Heads Better than One? An Experimental Analysis of 
Group versus Individual Decision Making”, Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 37, 2005, 789-811. 
2 
 BIS Review 113/2008
increased. This is largely related to the fact that growth in productivity has been surprisingly 
weak for some time. 
The  assessment  made  by  the  majority  was  that  an  increase  was  needed  to  prevent  price 
rises for energy and food from spreading to other areas – to prevent the high level of inflation 
from becoming entrenched. The increase is expected to help bring inflation back to a level 
close to the target within a couple of years. Resource utilisation is also expected to fall but to 
be roughly normal at the end of the forecast period.  
At the same time as the repo rate was increased, the repo rate path for the period ahead was 
adjusted downwards compared to the decision taken in July. This is partly because growth 
has slowed down more than expected in Sweden and abroad and partly because the price of 
oil and the prices of other commodities have fallen.  
The increase may be a way of safeguarding the real economy in the long term 
A common reaction to the decision to increase the interest rate was that the Riksbank pays 
too  much  attention  to  inflation  and  too  little  attention  to  the  real  economy.  I  would  like  to 
comment on this claim. 
One reason for increasing the interest rate was that an increase was needed to prevent the 
high level of inflation from becoming entrenched. This could happen if the price increases for 
energy and food begin to spread to other areas. This could ultimately lead to a risk of the 
Riksbank's  ability  to  hold  inflation  in  check  being  called  into  question  and  of  inflation 
expectations remaining at a consistently high level. This is what happened in the 1970s in 
many parts of the world, although inflation at that time became entrenched at much higher 
levels  than would  be  the  case today.  But  even  though  the  levels  are much  lower  today,  it 
could still be relatively costly to get inflation back to the target. It cannot be ruled out that this 
could require quite a long period with high interest rates and restricted demand.  
There is thus a risk that conducting too expansionary a policy today would sooner or later 
give rise to costs in the real economy that, furthermore, could be quite considerable. I do not 
feel, therefore, that it is correct to say that the increase in the interest rate is an indication 
that the Riksbank does not care about the real economy. It is rather the case that by focusing 
clearly on the inflation target we will be able to avoid considerable costs to the real economy 
in the slightly longer term.  
I should perhaps add that the forecast in the Monetary Policy Update, as I just mentioned, is 
that  resource  utilisation  will  be  roughly  normal,  rather  than  low,  at  the  end  of  the  forecast 
period. So from this perspective too we can question the claim that the Riksbank pays too 
little attention to the real economy.  
In my view, all the arguments for an increase in the interest rate that were put forward by the 
majority are reasonable. So even though I voted to leave the repo rate unchanged I respect 
the  majority's  view.  But  this  does  not  mean  that  I  share  it.  It  is  possible  to  have  different 
views of how great the risk of contagion effects is, and here I have a different view than the 
majority.  
My own view 
So, what was my thinking at the time? As I said in the minutes, I already saw clear signs of a 
slowdown in the Swedish economy at the time of the monetary policy meeting in July. The 
outcome figures and indicators that have been presented since the July meeting also clearly 
indicate  a  weakening  of  economic  activity.  Resource  utilisation,  as  calculated  by  the 
Riksbank  using  various  measures,  is  currently  estimated  to  be  higher  than  normal,  but  is 
falling rapidly. Capacity utilisation according to Statistics Sweden and the National Institute of 
Economic Research, is still at a high level but is moving downwards. The downswing in the 
BIS Review 113/2008 
 3
Swedish economy has come sooner and been more pronounced than was expected only a 
few  months  ago.  It  covers  the  manufacturing  industry  as  well  as  the  retail  and  service 
industries. 
Households  have  clearly  become  more  pessimistic,  not  least  with  regard  to  the  national 
economy and the labour market. For example, the survey conducted by the National Institute 
of Economic Research at the end of 2007 showed that an excess amount of 40 per cent of 
the households believed that unemployment would be lower in a year's time. Now, however, 
an  excess  amount  of  50  per  cent  of  the  households  believes  that  unemployment  will  be 
higher one year ahead. This deterioration in general sentiment has been accompanied by a 
fall-off in private consumption. This applies mainly to capital goods, which is common at the 
beginning of an economic downswing. 
But it is not only private consumption that has declined; investments and exports have also 
weakened. GDP growth has been revised downwards for both 2008 and 2009, although the 
forecast predicts a recovery in 2009 in line with developments abroad and it is believed that 
Sweden's exports will be an import driving force in this context. However, I am far from sure 
that such an upswing in economic activity will actually take place. Developments in the USA 
play a key role here and the recovery that is expected to begin next autumn presupposes 
that  the  housing  market  there  has  stabilised,  that  the  repercussions  of  the  financial  crisis 
have faded and that employment has begun to increase again. As the international forecast 
is highly uncertain, this also applies to the recovery that is predicted to take place here in 
Sweden next year.  
When  it  comes  to  inflation,  it  is  of  course  impossible  to  deny  that  it  is  uncomfortably  high 
today. However, I do not believe that the outcome figures contain evidence that shows that 
the price increases for oil and other commodities have spread to other areas. The repo rate 
increase  in  July  was  also  intended  to  prevent  such  contagion  effects.  The  risk  of  these 
effects  has  also  declined  recently,  partly  due  to  the  fall  in  the  price  of  oil  and  other 
commodities and partly because economic activity is declining. 
The  development  of  productivity  has  been  a  disappointment  and  we  do  not  have  a  really 
good  explanation  of  why  it  has  been  so  weak.  Weak  productivity  also  helps  to  keep  cost 
pressures high. However, I was more worried about this earlier when economic activity was 
higher and the pressure on the labour market was stronger. In the current economic situation 
it is probably difficult for the companies to pass cost increases on to the consumers.  
There is every reason to continue to keep a close eye on inflation expectations as they are 
still  some  way  above  the  inflation  target.  My  assessment  is,  nevertheless,  that  they  will 
decline as economic activity weakens and the actual rate of inflation falls. 
To sum up it can be said that the Executive Board agreed on a great deal – that economic 
activity  is  weakening,  that  inflation  is  declining  and  that  it  will  be  possible  to  reduce  the 
interest  rate  in  the  period  ahead.  Our  disagreements  related  primarily  to  our  different 
assessments of the strength of the processes and of how much monetary policy would need 
to  help  to  reduce  inflation.  My  final  assessment  was  that  inflation  in  the  period  ahead  will 
move  towards  the  target,  in  roughly  the  same  way  as  illustrated  in  the  Monetary  Policy 
Update,  without  the  need  to  increase  the  interest  rate.  I  thus  voted  to  leave  the  repo  rate 
unchanged. 
Nor did I support the repo rate path presented in the Monetary Policy Update. The path had 
been  lowered  compared  to  the  assessment  made  in  July.  But  I  felt  that  the  force  of  the 
economic downswing may easily make it necessary to reduce the interest rate more than is 
indicated in the new path.  
4 
 BIS Review 113/2008
New statistics and developments on the financial markets  
Some important statistics have been published since we made our decision on the interest 
rate. These include the inflation figures for August which showed that the CPI increased by 
4.3 per cent over the last 12 months. This was 0.2 percentage points lower than our forecast 
in the Monetary Policy  Update. Everyone who produces inflation forecasts knows that it is 
difficult to exactly assess monthly changes and there is nothing remarkable about a forecast 
deviation  of  0.2  percentage  points.  A  factor  that  contributed  to  the  forecast  error  was  that 
Statistics Sweden, when it published the new figures, also downwardly revised the inflation 
figures  for  the  period  January  to  the  end  of  July  this  year.  It  is  of  course  unfortunate  that 
miscalculations are made in a variable that is of such central importance to the Riksbank and 
many others, but it should be pointed out that this is very rare. The revision attracted a lot of 
media attention and there was speculation that the Riksbank would have decided differently 
if this miscalculation had been known at the time the decision was made. The July figure for 
the CPI was then 4.4 per cent, while the revised figure is 4.1 per cent.  
Allow me therefore to comment briefly on this. It need hardly be said that my decision, and 
that  of  the  two  colleagues  who  also  entered  a  reservation,  to  recommend  an  unchanged 
interest rate would not have been effected. Whether it would have affected the decision of 
the majority I cannot of course say. But it should be remembered that it is the processing and 
analysis of a great quantity of information that leads to the overall assessment of economic 
development and inflation prospects. And it is the forecast derived from this information that 
largely determines the interest rate decision. In our latest assessment this was based on the 
belief  that  inflation  was  somewhat  higher  than  now  proves  to  be  the  case.  But  monetary 
policy does not have such a degree of precision that it can control inflation to a tenth of a 
degree. And, moreover, inflation in July was high and far above the inflation target even after 
the downward revision of the figure.  
In the discussion ahead of the interest rate decision, I and other members of the Executive 
Board  highlighted  the  weak  labour  market  indicators  which  uniformly  pointed  to  a  weaker 
development  of  employment,  which  is  also  in  line  with  the  Riksbank's  forecast.  After  the 
decision,  the  Labour  Force  Survey  for  August  has  been  presented.  This  shows  that 
employment increased by a moderate 0.5 per cent on a 12-month basis, which is marginally 
lower than the Riksbank's forecast.  
At our September meeting, we had access to the initial version of the National Accounts for 
the second quarter. These showed that GDP did not increase at all compared to the previous 
quarter and increased by only 0.7 per cent on a calendar-adjusted12-month basis. Now that 
the revised version of the National Accounts has been published, we can see that growth in 
the first two quarters has been marginally adjusted downwards in both cases. This means 
that growth in the first quarter was 2 per cent on a 12-month basis and with calendar effects 
taken into account. The corresponding figure for the second quarter was 0.6 per cent. The 
new  figures  thus  confirm  that  there  has  been  a  sharp  downturn  in  the  growth  rate  and 
completely support the picture that could be discerned at our latest meeting. 
Increasing cost pressures have been an important factor behind the series of interest rate 
increases introduced by the Riksbank. The new figures from the National Accounts show that 
the figures for hours worked have been revised up-wards compared to the version available 
to us in September. Together with the marginal downward revision of the figures for growth, 
this means that productivity declined more than indicated by the preliminary figures. As the 
figures for labour costs per hour worked have also been adjusted upwards, the new figures 
show  that  unit  labour  costs  increased  by  5.3  per  cent  on  a  12-month  basis  in  the  second 
quarter.  This  was  almost  a  percentage  point  more  than  in  the  preliminary  version  of  the 
National Accounts.  
The fact that productivity is weak may be because companies have not had time to adjust 
their workforce as the downturn in economic activity has been so sudden. We can now see 
that  the  number  of  vacancies  is  falling  and  that  plans  to  recruit  new  personnel  are  being 
BIS Review 113/2008 
 5
toned down. An adjustment is underway which will be followed by a recovery in productivity, 
in line with the Riksbank's forecast. Rising costs are of course a factor that the Riksbank has 
every reason to monitor and analyse carefully. But as I mentioned earlier, my  view is that 
given the down-turn in economic activity that is now becoming apparent it is difficult to see 
how the companies would be able to pass on increased costs.  
At our latest meeting, the price of oil had fallen from its peak level in July, and it has fallen 
further since then.  
Let me say a few words about developments on the financial markets. We are now seeing a 
new wave of unrest sweep across the international financial markets. This is nothing new but 
something we have had to live with for over a year now. From time to time it has appeared 
that things may have calmed down somewhat, only for the unrest to return in other forms. 
Over  the  last  few  days,  major  American  investment  banks  and  a  number  of  other  players 
have experienced acute problems.  
It  is  difficult  to  say  at  the  moment  where  all  this  will  end.  We  are  of  course  following 
developments closely. So far, we can note that financial stability in Sweden is satisfactory. 
Swedish banks are only marginally involved as their exposure to the US market is limited. 
Nevertheless,  the  Swedish  market  is  significantly  affected  by  events  on  the  international 
stage. The costs of borrowing are increasing and some financial markets are working less 
efficiently  than  normal.  Yesterday,  the  National  Debt  Office,  in  consultation  with  the 
Riksbank, took steps to facilitate the functioning of the market. The National Debt Office will 
now issue short-term treasury bills in a number of extra auctions. This is very positive and 
will alleviate the shortage on this market that has arisen in the wake of the global financial 
turmoil. The Riksbank's assessment is that the unrest on the financial markets is not affecting 
financial  stability  in  Sweden.  We  can  note  that  the  Swedish  banks  have  made  very  good 
profits in recent years and are financially robust. However, if the banks were to experience 
liquidity  problems  that  could  threaten  financial  stability  we  are  ready  to  take  measures  to 
provide liquidity assistance.  
It will take time for the uncertainty on the financial markets to abate and for the situation to 
stabilise in a lasting way. We have already seen how the financial unrest has left its mark on 
the  development  of  the  real  economy,  and  uncertainty  about  how  it  will  affect  growth 
prospects in the period ahead remains. At the end of October, the Executive Board will once 
more make an overall assessment of the growth and inflation prospects.  
Exaggerated focus on the current interest rate decision 
I would like to conclude with a final reflection. It is natural and important that monetary policy 
is debated. Sometimes, however, it feels as though a little too much focus is placed on the 
current interest rate decision. To say that a lot has been written about the latest interest rate 
increase  would  be  somewhat  of  an  understatement.  The  discussion  conducted  in  certain 
quarters almost gives the impression that this increase will throw Sweden into a bottomless 
pit  of  recession.  Opinions  may  differ  on  the  value  of  such  prophecies,  but  I  still  think  it  is 
difficult  to  see  how  an  interest  rate  increase  of  0.25  per  cent  could  have  such  a  decisive 
impact. 
In this context there is an important point that has fallen into the background a little. It is not 
individual  interest  rate  decisions  but  a  series  of  decisions  –  an  interest  rate  path  –  that 
determines  the  effects  that  monetary  policy  will  ultimately  have  on  inflation  and  the  real 
economy. If we look back in, say, three years time, the development we will see will not of 
course  depend  solely  on  the  fact  that  the  Riksbank  raised  the  interest  rate  in  September 
2008  but  also  on  what  happened  with  the  interest  rate  thereafter,  and  to  a  certain  extent 
before this too. And in the forecast that the Riksbank presented a couple of weeks ago the 
repo  rate  path  was  lowered  and  the  interest  rate  is  lower  than  in  the  July  forecast  for  the 
entire forecast period. 
6 
 BIS Review 113/2008
If,  moreover,  it  turns  out  that  economic  activity  weakens  even  more  and  that  inflation  falls 
more rapidly than the Riksbank now predicts it will of course be possible to adapt the policy 
in  line  with  these  developments.  It  is  naturally  not  possible  to  withdraw  an  interest  rate 
increase "retroactively". One can, on the other hand, if it becomes apparent that economic 
activity is declining, reduce the interest rate more rapidly than was originally intended. There 
is, in other words, a degree of flexibility in monetary policy, both upwards and downwards of 
course, that should not be underestimated.  
With this comforting thought in mind I would like to thank you all for your attention. 
BIS Review 113/2008 
 7
