Charles Bean: Business surveys and monetary policy 
Speech by Mr Charles Bean, Deputy Governor (Monetary Policy) of the Bank of England, at 
the CBI Industrial Trends Survey 50th Anniversary Reception, Centre Point, London, 24 July 
2008.  
 Good evening! It is a great pleasure to be asked to say a few words to mark the 50th birthday 
of the CBI’s Industrial Trends survey. The birthday boy and I have, in fact, been acquainted 
with each other for over thirty years – from when I started my professional career in 1975 as 
a forecaster in the Treasury. In those days, the quarterly Industrial Trends survey was really 
the only game in town as far as business surveys go. Since then, the field has become more 
crowded,  but  the  Industrial  Trends  survey  remains  a  key  source  of  information  about 
business developments. 
To celebrate the survey’s birthday, I thought that I might say a few words tonight about the 
part played by business surveys, and intelligence about business conditions more generally, 
in  our  setting  of  Bank  Rate  each  month.  Because  our  interest  rate  decisions  affect  UK 
economic activity and inflation with a rather long, and sometimes rather variable, lag, there is 
nothing  much  that  we  can  do  to  affect  the  current  and  near-term  rate  of  inflation.  That  is 
already largely baked into the cake. Instead we have to focus on inflation prospects in the 
medium term – that is, two years or so ahead. So we therefore need to form a judgement on 
where the economy is likely to be heading. But to do that, we need to start by figuring out 
where we are now. 
The great Danish physicist Niels Bohr is supposed to have observed that “Prediction is very 
difficult, especially about the future.” But I don’t think he realised just how tough economic 
forecasting is. Not only is the MPC unsure of the prospects for commodity prices, how the 
credit  crunch  will  play  out  and  a  myriad  of  other  future  events,  but  we  don’t  even  have  a 
precise picture of the current state of the economy. As a result, controlling the economy has 
been likened to driving along a winding road looking only in the rear-view mirror. Indeed, it’s 
worse than that as we don’t even have that good a view of where it has been in the past 
either! It is as if the rear window is also a bit misted up. 
Our  primary  signposts  are,  of  course,  the  official  data  provided  by  the  Office  for  National 
Statistics  for  the  key  macroeconomic  variables,  such  as  output,  spending,  employment, 
prices,  wages  and  so  on.  However,  we  do  not  rely  on  the  official  data  exclusively,  for  a 
number of reasons. First, it takes time for the official data to be collated and published. For 
instance,  the  preliminary  estimate  of  GDP  growth  in  Q2  only  appears  tomorrow,  almost  a 
month after the quarter ended. 
Second,  early  official  estimates  are  often  based  on  incomplete  samples,  with  missing 
information extrapolated from other indicators. As more information accrues over time, so the 
data gradually then get revised. And significant revisions can still occur for some years after 
the event. For an example, look at Chart 1. This plots the initial and current official estimates 
of four-quarter UK GDP growth, as well as the range of the intervening estimates. As you can 
see, the picture provided by the mature data sometimes looks quite different to that furnished 
by the first estimates. For instance, the initial estimates suggested a sharp slowdown in 1998 
in  the  wake  of  the  Asia  and  Long-Term  Capital  Management  crises,  whereas  the  current 
estimates suggest that the pace of expansion barely eased. For more recent quarters, the 
initial and current estimates are closer together, but that may simply reflect the comparative 
youth of the latest estimates, as well as the fact that the 2007 Blue Book did not involve a full 
balancing of the National Accounts. 
BIS Review 95/2008 
 1
 Finally, even mature data that has gone through the full revision process may still not give a 
fully  accurate  picture  because  of  the  intrinsic  difficulty  of  measuring  a  particular  economic 
concept, for instance the value added by the financial sector. In such cases, the ONS are 
instead forced to employ proxies, but sometimes these are just not all that good a guide. 
The need to form as up-to-date and reliable a picture of the current state of the economy as 
possible means that the MPC makes extensive use of business surveys alongside the official 
data. That includes not only the quarterly Industrial Trends survey and its monthly sibling, but 
also the other, more recent, CBI surveys, such as those covering the distributive trades and 
service  sectors.  The  various  surveys  carried  out  by  other  organisations,  such  as  the 
Chartered Institute of Purchasing Supply and the British Chambers of Commerce, are also 
valuable sources of information for us. Moreover, we have our own network of 12 regional 
agencies,  whose  role  is  to  collect  intelligence  as  to  what  is  happening  on  the  ground. 
Collectively, our regional Agents have about 8000 business contacts and they represent an 
important additional source of timely information for us. 
The uses of the survey data are varied. First, different indicators more often than not seem to 
tell  different  stories  and  we  need  to  figure  out  which  is  the  right  one.  For  instance,  at  the 
current juncture, there is a marked discrepancy between the official data on the volume of 
retail  spending,  which  points  to  considerable  robustness  this  year  –  including  whopping 
growth of 3.6% in May alone, though that was fully reversed in today’s release for June – and 
the Distributive Trades survey, which suggests significant weakness (see Chart 2). While the 
ONS have suggested that the official data are likely to be better at picking up small retailers 
and  unconventional  shopping  channels,  such  as  internet  purchases,  the  conformity  of  the 
picture  given  by  the  Distributive  Trades  survey  with  other  potential  indicators  of  spending, 
such as consumer confidence and the Agents reports, have led us to place less weight on 
the official data on retail spending for the present. 
2 
 BIS Review 95/2008
The surveys will not always provide the best coincident guide, however. For instance, during 
the  1999-2002  period,  the  official  data  suggested  greater  swings  in  manufacturing  output 
growth than did the Industrial Trends survey (see Chart 3). Now, during this period, we know 
that there was a rapid expansion in ICT-related activities, followed by a sharp contraction. 
The simple balance of “ups” over “downs” in the Industrial Trends survey could therefore be 
expected  to  have  failed  to  reflect  adequately  the  sharp  movements  in  that  sub-sector’s 
activity. So, for this period, the official data probably gave a better picture of what was going 
on. 
 BIS Review 95/2008 
  3
A second use of surveys is in the application of forward-looking questions to form a view of 
the near-term outlook. In that regard, questions on business and consumer confidence, and 
on the trend in orders and backlogs, can give some indication of likely trends in output and 
spending. The surveys are also useful in forming an assessment of the prospects for capital 
spending,  as  this  is  an  area  where  statistical  models  are  particularly  poor  –  and  I  should 
know, having spent some of my formative years at the Treasury unsuccessfully trying to build 
econometric models to predict investment! Both the CBI and BCC surveys collect information 
on  investment  intentions,  and  it  is  also  something  we  ask  our  Agents  to  take  a  view  on, 
based  on  their  contact  interviews  (see  Chart  4).  We  look  closely  at  this  information  when 
assessing the outlook for business investment. 
 Other  forward-looking  questions  can  also  prove  valuable.  For  instance,  at  the  current 
juncture, with CPI inflation well above our 2% target, we need to judge how much further it 
will rise and for how long that might persist. Past experience gives us some guide as to the 
speed at which higher commodity prices pass down the supply chain and the extent to which 
those movements are amplified or attenuated by movements in other costs and prices. But 
the questions on pricing intentions contained in the business surveys represent a valuable 
additional source of information on near-term inflation pressures. 
A third use of surveys is in helping the MPC diagnose the causes of recent developments. 
Here, the quarterly Industrial Trends survey stands out as particularly useful because it has a 
rich set of questions that explore companies concerns. For example, it has questions about 
the factors limiting investment, exports, and output. Responses to those sorts of questions 
can,  for  instance,  help  us  work  out  how  businesses  have  been  affected  by  the  recent 
depreciation of sterling, and the tightening in credit conditions. 
A fourth use of the surveys is in providing measures of variables for which there is no official 
counterpart. In particular, the amount of economic slack in the economy is a key determinant 
of  inflationary  pressures.  We  have  official  indicators  of  slack  in  the  labour  market  – 
unemployment, vacancies and the like – which is one factor determining pay growth. But we 
have no official measures of the amount of slack within businesses, which potentially affects 
pricing pressures. Business surveys such as the Industrial Trends survey do, however, ask 
how  intensively  firms  are  working  their  capital  (see  Chart  5).  And  the  MPC  draws  on  this 
4 
 BIS Review 95/2008
information  in  forming  a  judgement  about  the  overall  margin  of  spare  resources  in  the 
economy. 
 A fifth, and perhaps less obvious, use of survey information is in refining our picture of the 
past. I noted earlier that the official data tends to get revised for some while after it is first 
released.  But  it  turns  out  that  there  are  some  systematic patterns  in  the  historical  revision 
process.  Moreover,  for  some  series,  we  have  found  a  tendency  for  revisions  to  be  in  the 
direction  of reducing  the  discrepancy  with  the  corresponding  survey  information.  So  rather 
than  just  taking  the  latest  vintage  of  official  data  at  face  value,  we  can  employ  statistical 
techniques to exploit this information in order to refine our assessment of the past. 
An example of this approach, drawn from our May Inflation Report, is shown in Chart 6. This 
shows our assessment of the range of possible final outturns for four-quarter GDP growth 
rates for the past six years. The current vintage of official GDP growth data is shown by the 
green  line.  The  centre  of  the  darkest  purple  band  of  the  fan  reflects  our  view  of  the  most 
likely path once the revisions process is complete – a “backcast”, if you like. The fan around 
this  path  indicates  the  uncertainty  around  this  projection,  with  a  9  in  10  chance  of  the 
eventual outturn lying somewhere inside it. The width of this fan is based on the historical 
experience  of  data  revisions.  The  fan  becomes  progressively  narrower  the  further  back  in 
time one goes, reflecting the reduced incidence of revisions for more distant periods. For the 
recent past, the most likely path for the mature estimates of growth lies above the current 
vintage of data, reflecting our judgement that the business surveys and the past history of 
revisions together make it somewhat more likely that the official estimates for this period will 
in future be revised up, rather than down. 
BIS Review 95/2008 
 5
 I hope that this gives you a sense of the use we make of business surveys, and business 
intelligence more generally, in making our regular assessment of the state of the economy 
each month, before taking our decision on the appropriate level of Bank Rate. The timeliness 
of this information is particularly important at the current juncture, when the economic climate 
is changing rapidly. The global and UK economies have been subject to two large shocks of 
uncertain  magnitude,  duration  and  impact.  The  first  is  the  continuing  de-leveraging  in  the 
banking  system  and  the  attendant  squeeze  on  the  terms  and  availability  of  credit.  The 
second is the fairly relentless rise in commodity prices, especially that of oil, driven in part by 
the robust growth in demand in the emerging economies. These two shocks both depress 
output growth, though they have divergent effects on inflation. 
In our May Inflation Report, our central expectation was for four-quarter GDP growth to slow 
markedly  through  this  year,  reflecting  both  subdued  real  income  growth  and  tighter  credit 
supply (see Chart 7, which also includes the same backcast information as Chart 6). It was 
then expected to gradually recover through 2009 as credit conditions slowly improved. The 
corresponding  projection  for  CPI  inflation  is  shown  in  Chart  8  (note  that  no  uncertainty  is 
shown for the past, as the data for CPI inflation are rarely revised). Our central projection 
was for inflation to continue to rise during the second half of this year to a peak close to 4% 
and  then  –  assuming  that  oil  prices  stabilised  –  to  fall  back  towards  the  2%  target  as  the 
growing margin of spare capacity in the economy held back pay and price increases. Since 
May,  inflation  has  turned  out  higher  than  expected  and  oil  prices  have  risen  further, 
notwithstanding some moderation in the past week or so. But the news on activity has not 
been  very  good  either,  with  some  distinctly  downbeat  business  surveys,  including 
yesterday’s Industrial Trends survey, further weakening in the housing market and continued 
fragility in the financial sector. All this points to a worse near-term prospect for both growth 
and inflation. The net impact of this on the outlook for inflation in the medium term is less 
clear, though for our considered view on that, you will have to wait until our August Inflation 
Report is published in a couple of weeks time. 
6 
 BIS Review 95/2008
  Moreover, there are considerable risks surrounding the central outlook. A particular risk on 
the upside is that the extended period of elevated inflation leads to an acceleration in pay 
and  causes  inflation  expectations  to  rise.  That  could  lead  the  higher  inflation  to  become 
embedded. But on the downside, there is a risk that the credit crunch leads to a deeper and 
more prolonged slowdown, leading to greater slack in the economy and causing inflation to 
undershoot our target. 
In setting policy, we have been trying to balance off these risks against each other. In making 
that  judgement,  the  more  accurate  a  picture  we  have  of  the  economy,  the  better.  So  the 
Industrial Trends survey, as well as the other business surveys, will continue to be a crucial 
BIS Review 95/2008 
 7
input into forming that picture. Let me therefore conclude by wishing Many Happy Returns to 
the Industrial Trends survey on the occasion of its 50th birthday. We hope that you and your 
younger siblings will continue to flourish in the years ahead. Thank you! 
8 
 BIS Review 95/2008
