Jean-Claude Trichet: Risk and the macro-economy 
Keynote address by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, at the 
conference “The ECB and its Watchers X”, Frankfurt am Main, 5 September 2008. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
After an extended period of ample financial market liquidity and exceptionally low rewards for 
risk,  the  loss  in  the  value  of  important  classes  of  real  assets  has  imparted  a  sharp 
deterioration  in  investor  appetite.  Rises  in  commodity  prices,  by  eroding  consumers’ 
purchasing power and real income prospects, have reinforced households’ risk aversion.  
A  long  phase  of  heightened  risk  tolerance  in  our  economies  has  come  to  an  end.  To  the 
extent that the more recent turns in the markets correct past excesses, this is a welcome – if 
painful  –  process  that  we  had  anticipated  and  asked  market  participants  to  prepare  for  in 
past interventions.  
At the same time, the decline in the compensation for risk that the recent turmoil has partly 
reversed is not a recent development. It started a quarter of a century ago, in tandem with – 
and probably reflecting – what seems to have been a persistent decline in macroeconomic 
uncertainty.  So,  to  the  extent  that  this  moderation  in  macroeconomic  fluctuations  –  in 
aggregate risk – would be confirmed as a permanent acquisition of modern economies, there 
is  some  reason  to  believe  that  the  trend  to  lower  risk  valuations  –  beyond  the  needed 
corrections of the more recent excesses – could in the end reassert itself.  
In this talk I will reflect upon some evidence that lies at the heart of the mechanisms through 
which  risk  valuation  makes  contact  with  real  economic  decisions.  The  ultimate  aim  of  my 
reflections is to find hints about the fundamental value of risk.  
Theories,  for  which  I  have  some  sympathy,  have  it  that  there  is  a  historical  break  in  risk 
valuation  in  the  markets,  and  the  realisation  of  that  break  largely  mirrors  structural 
developments  in  the  balance  between  savings  and  investment  on  a  global  scale.  China’s 
phenomenal  growth  in  domestic  manufacturing  capacity  and  income  production  was  not 
matched by an equi-proportional growth in domestic spending capacity – so Chinese savings 
grew ahead of even the dramatic pace at which domestic investment has expanded. At the 
same  time,  the  aftermaths  of  the  East  Asian  crisis  brought  about  an  “investment  strike”  in 
many  economies  bordering  on  the  Asian  Pacific,  and  taught  authorities  in  those  countries 
that  bigger  liquidity  buffers  –  denominated  in  safe  Western  currencies  –  were  needed  to 
defend  themselves  against  the  volatile  behaviour  of  foreign  private  investors.  Finally, 
international financial markets were called upon – once again – to recycle the massive hard-
currency balances that were being accumulated  by commodity exporting countries. All this 
has made saving – and wealth – abundant ex ante relative to investment and income. And 
has  led  to  a  downside  adjustment  in  the  rewards  that  investors  can  claim  to  receive  in 
compensation for their finance.  
These developments at time have dominated the financial landscape. But the breaks in the 
evolution of the market rewards for risk on which I will focus date long before the rise of the 
Asian economies and the increase in commodity prices. So, I will search for a fundamental 
connection  between  financial  risk  and  macroeconomic  performance  in  the  developed 
countries, which will be the focus of my remarks. What is the direction of this link? Does the 
Great Moderation determine the quantum of risk traded in the markets? Or does the price of 
risk determined in the financial markets contribute and partly determine those fluctuations? 
And what is structural in this link – and thus likely to persist beyond short-term volatilities – 
and what is transient?  
BIS Review 105/2008 
 1
A  complete  understanding  of  these  relations  would  bring  invaluable  insights  for  policy 
considerations. For one thing, the centrepiece of dynamic macroeconomics is the equation of 
savings to investment. Asset prices – and the risk remuneration that they embody – are the 
mechanisms that do all this equating. Therefore, sustained movements in risk premia of the 
size  that  we  have  seen  in  the  past  quarter  of  a  century  are  bound  to  have  important 
implications  for  the  allocation  of  consumption  and  investment  across  times  and  states  of 
nature,  and  for  the  determination  of  aggregate  demand  at  any  point  in  time  and  in  any 
economic state. I will also mention new – to some extent unknown – forms of interactions 
between financial markets and the real economy.  
One possibility that many observers have contemplated is that the prices determined in the 
market  for  key  factors  of  production  –  such  as  energy  or  other  commodities  –  might  be 
increasingly  influenced by  forces  and  trading  strategies  that  are  motivated  by  the  financial 
drive  toward  portfolio  diversification,  beside  the  desire  to  secure  access  to  a  physical 
delivery.  Again,  the  way  these  markets  might  be  pricing  financial  risk  might  make  the 
interpretation of those prices more difficult.  
Unfortunately, my conclusion is that the state of our knowledge is not advanced enough to 
draw  definitive  conclusions  about  the  nature  and  the  directions  of  influences  between  risk 
pricing and the macro-economy. I will nevertheless submit my conjectures and lay out some 
basic  behavioural  principles  that  could  help  policymakers  minimise  major  losses  amid  the 
uncertainty surrounding the current economic juncture.  
I also appeal to the many distinguished scholars that sit in front of me today to concentrate 
their minds to elucidate these relations.  
Risk premia and macroeconomic conditions 
1.  
There is no univocal way to assess whether asset values are high or low relative to economic 
norms. Popular commentary often focuses on price indices and how they deviate from long-
term  averages.  But,  of course, index  levels  can  vary  because  of  general  price  inflation,  or 
growth in the real economy, or changes in the size of publicly traded assets relative to the 
economy. So, it is customary for analysts to scale asset prices in various ways.  
A  summary  statistic  of  valuations  that  abstracts  from  scaling  problems  is  the  “asset  risk 
premium”, or the rate of excess return investors expect to earn over the long run from their 
investment at current prices.1 If the asset generates uncertain payoffs, investors ask to be 
compensated  for  this  risk,  which  they  would  not  bear  if  they  chose  to  hold  a  competiting 
security  with  comparatively  more  predictable  returns.  The  risk  premium  represents  this 
reward. For a given stream of expected cash flows, a higher risk premium today signals a 
diminished  willingness  to  hold  the  risky  asset  or,  equivalently,  a  higher  required  return  for 
doing  so.  Higher  returns  can  be  generated  only  by  future  price  appreciation  from  a  lower 
current price. So, an increase in the premium today is associated with a capital loss in the 
form of a drop in the current price of the asset. Conversely, a low premium signals a high 
current price relative to the expected income stream discounted at the risk-free rate. 
The  risk  premium  measures  the  attractiveness  of  a  risky  investment  relative  to  risk-free 
alternatives. Indirectly, it is a measure of the market’s appetite for investment risk.  
                                                 
1   Defining the stream of cash-flows earned by the asset by {dt}t=0...∞, the market price at time t of an asset with 
an extremely long maturity, pt, satisfies the following identity: pt = ∑j=1... ∞ (1+ rt + πt)-j Et dt+j, where Et is 
the  expectations  operator  at  time  t.  The  financial  factor  that  is  used  to  discount  the  expected  stream  of 
payouts, rt + πt, has two components: a risk-free rate, rt, which could be earned on a competing asset with 
certain returns, and an excess rate of return, πt, which remunerates the investor for the added risk that she is 
taking on. I shall refer to the latter factor, interchangeably, as excess return or risk premium. 
2 
 BIS Review 105/2008
These figures [Figures 1a, 2a and 3] document the basic facts that constitute the subject of 
my considerations on the risk and the macro-economy. I focus here on estimates of the risk 
premia  paid  on  four  important  asset  classes:  equity,  houses,  government  bonds  and 
corporate  credit  securities.  They  span  the  four  markets  for  external  finance  that  are  most 
critical to the functioning of modern economies: the market for capital, installed in businesses 
and  in  residential  establishments,  and  the  market  for  credit,  to  government  and  corporate 
borrowers.  I  use  US  and  euro  area  observations,  whenever  these  are  available,  but 
international evidence broadly confirms this picture. And I concentrate on the last quarter of a 
century when the movements which I shall reflect upon are most evident.  
What do we see in these pictures? Two things: First, if I emphasise trends rather than waves, 
I  see  that  risk  premia  on  a  representative  spectrum  of  assets  have  declined  more  or  less 
consistently since the middle of the 1980s. This is another way to say that the market price of 
those  assets  has  tended  to  appreciate  relative  to  the  stream  of  their  expected  payoffs, 
discounted  at  the  risk-free  rate.  Second,  looking  at  higher-frequency  movements  around 
trends,  I  notice  a  turnaround  in  some  financial  series  toward  the  end  of  the  period.  In 
particular, equity and credit financing has become more costly for firms to obtain, as the risk 
premia required for holding stocks and credit securities have recently bounced back from the 
lows achieved earlier. The upswing in the equity risk premium came first. The violent reversal 
in the credit risk premia is even more recent history. 
Understanding  these  trends  and  co-movements  is  an  important  pre-condition  for  any 
inference we need to draw on the more recent turnarounds. So, I shall concentrate on low-
frequency movements first, and come back to my interpretation of the turnarounds and the 
future at the end of my talk. 
Why  have  required  excess  returns  –  risk  premia  –  on,  say,  stocks  trended  down?  Many 
explanations  specific  to  the  market  for  business  capital  are  conceivable.  One  is  that 
expectations of future cash-flows in the form of dividend payments might have consistently 
lagged behind  ex post realisations, which in the end drive stock prices.2 For example, the 
potential for sustained economic growth in excess of historical precedents, the availability of 
profitable  investment  projects  beyond  the  frontier  that  was  considered  attainable  ex  ante 
might explain a fraction of the decline in required stock returns over a certain phase. 
Why have term premia on bonds trended down? Again, specific factors affecting the market 
for  safe  financial  investments  have  been  cited.  I  have  mentioned  already  that  the  rapid 
expansion of incomes in countries with high propensities to save meant that a large share of 
their increased demand for assets was directed to the risk-free financial liabilities of primary 
sovereign issuers, most prominently the US Treasury.  
Similarly,  trends  in  the  market  for  homes  and  for  private  credit  can  be  given  explanations 
rooted in housing preferences and the evolution of default rates through time.  
                                                 
2   Referring to the formula in the previous footnote, and interpreting {dt}t=0...∞ as the actual (ex post) stream of 
dividend payments, systematic underprediction of the dividend stream looking forward from any given vantage 
point t can result in an underestimation of the return that can be expected, at t, from holding the stock at the 
current price pt because the market price grows at the growth rate of the actual dividend payments. 
BIS Review 105/2008 
 3
But  there  is  one  question  which  remains,  beyond  all  these  explanations.3  They  all are  too 
specific  to  one  market.  As  we  see,  declines  in  returns  have  been  generalised.  Estimated 
premia  in  the  stock  market  in  2008  lie  one  third  and  two  thirds  below  their  values  at  the 
beginning  of  the  1980s,  in  the  euro  area  and  the  US  respectively.  In  the  meantime,  term 
premia on the bond market have lost three fourth of their estimated value at the middle of the 
1990s in a seemingly relentless fall spanning the entire period for which we could compute 
them. The premium for investments in houses has followed a similar trend, despite a sharp 
reversion,  in  particular  in  the  US  in  the  most  recent  period.  Finally,  the  cost  of  corporate 
borrowing  in  excess  of  a  riskless  rate  [Figure  3],  which  remunerates  credit  risk,  has  also 
decreased  significantly  in  both  economies,  although  its  trend  is  punctuated  by  significant 
oscillations in the opposite direction. Obviously we observe the same movements across the 
board.  
Facts  common  to  multiple  markets  suggest  the  existence  of  a  common  factor,  something 
truly related to the size of the required premium for holding all types of risky assets. If the 
compensation for bearing risk is compressed in all markets, this must reflect that either the 
quantity of macroeconomic risk has gone down, or the price at which investors trade that risk 
has declined, or some combination of these two possibilities.  
In these two further pictures [Figures 1b and 2b], the quantity of aggregate risk is proxied by 
the  macroeconomic  uncertainty  introduced  by  the  volatility  of  real  per-capita  consumption 
growth  [–  as  measured  by  rolling  standard  deviations  of  per-capita  real  consumption 
growth –]  and  the  level  of  inflation  in  the  two  economies.4  Unfortunately,  the  price  that 
markets attach to that quantity – agents’ risk aversion – is not directly observable or easily 
approximated by observable variables. I shall come back to this point later. 
Why  concentrate  on  consumption  volatility  as  a  proxy  of  real  macroeconomic  uncertainty? 
Because  this  is  the  privileged  statistic  of  macroeconomic  conditions  in  consumption-based 
asset  pricing  models,  the  standard  tool  of  financial  economics.  In  these  models,  it  is  the 
marginal utility of consumption and its variance that should help price real payoffs in different 
states of nature.5 Why focus on inflation as an indicator of nominal uncertainty? If the level of 
inflation is correlated with its perceived variability, then the level of inflation should influence 
people’s  views  of 
their  macroeconomic 
environments. If the nominal scale of the economy is more firmly secured, financial markets 
will likely reflect it in lower premia. 
the  degree  of  uncertainty 
that  surrounds 
                                                 
3  
In fact there are more problems. First, explaining low equity risk premia with systematic under-prediction of 
income  streams  has  limited  explanatory  power.  If  anything,  the  scant  evidence  available  on  earnings 
expectations point in the opposite direction. Sharpe (1999), for example, finds that in the period between 1994 
and the end of the century forecasts of two-year nominal earnings growth were high and stable (between 10% 
and 15%), even though realised two-year earnings growth were declining. It should also be noted that higher 
growth  in  realised  payoffs,  per  se,  is  not  sufficient  to  account  for  price  movements  over  the  entire  sample, 
because dividend-to-price and earning-to-price ratios have themselves trended down. The secular fall in the 
dividend-to-price and earnings-to-price ratios is actually the fact that needs to be explained in the first place. 
See,  among  many  others,  Jagannathan,  McGrattan  and  Scherbina  (2000).  Second,  concerning  low  term 
premia, foreign official purchases of US bonds – by the monetary authorities of countries which follow a stable 
exchange rate policy vis-à-vis the US dollar – was found to have played little or no role as a factor contributing 
to low long-term interest rates in a study of the interest rate conundrum. See Rudebusch, Swanson and Wu 
(2006). 
4   The  level  of  inflation  is  found  to  be  correlated  with  its  variability,  which  in  turn  should  influence  people’s 
perceptions of the degree of uncertainty that surrounds their macroeconomic environments. 
In many standard asset-pricing models with complete markets, the risk premium, or excess return, paid by an 
asset with uncertain payoffs is proportional to the volatility of consumption, with a risk aversion parameter as 
the  constant  of  proportionality.  In  these  models,  aggregate  consumption  volatility  stands  for  the  quantity  of 
risk,  while  the  parameter  scaling  agents’  risk  aversion  stands  for  the  price  of  risk.  A  crucial  subsidiary 
assumption behind this logic is that all wealth – including human capital – is tradable, so that the aggregate 
return can be interpreted as the gross return to an asset that represents a claim to aggregate consumption. 
BIS Review 105/2008
5  
4 
 The drawn-out moderation in real macroeconomic volatilities – the Great Moderation – is a 
well-known  fact.  It  has  been  persistent,  as  the  pictures  indicate,  and  broad,  spreading 
beyond  inflation  and  consumption  to  virtually  all  sectors  and  components  of  income,  on  a 
global  scale,  as  many  studies  have  demonstrated.6  The  tight  correlation  between  the  risk 
premia  priced  in  various  markets  and  movements  in  macroeconomic  risk  is  less  known, 
however. It is certainly of great interest to policymakers.7  
It is a challenging piece of evidence for two reasons. Because causation can run both ways, 
from macroeconomic volatility – the quantum of non-diversifiable risk – to risk compensation 
in the financial markets, or from the market determination of the reward for risk – the market 
price of risk – back to the macroeconomic equilibrium. And because both chains of causation 
entail a blend of structural and contingent factors: factors that are likely to last and factors 
that are transient and bound to be reversed.  
Therefore,  in  September  2008  a  scholar,  a  forecaster,  a  policymaker  looking  back  to  the 
financial  history  of  the  last  quarter  of  a  century  for  clues  about  the  proximate  future 
evolutions faces two questions. First, what determined the compression of risk in virtually all 
markets: was it a reduction in aggregate risk, or was it a compression in the price for which 
markets trade and distribute that risk? Second, whatever the cause, did the compression of 
risk reflect permanent shifts in fundamental connections, or was it transient?  
A lot – not least in terms of policy decisions – is conditional on a clear identification of these 
links, of these directions and their nature.  
The quantum of risk: what is structural and what is transient? 
1.1  
Staring at the statistical association between premia and macroeconomic volatilities it would 
be tempting to draw a line of causation running from declining macroeconomic risk to falling 
premia. The decrease in macroeconomic uncertainty associated with the fall in the volatilities 
of consumption and inflation can arguably be expected to have resulted in a corresponding 
reduction in the uncertainty on future asset returns, thus leading to lower risk premia across 
the  board.  In  the  case  of  government  bonds,  for  example,  a  decrease  in  macroeconomic 
volatility  reduces  the  risk  of  unexpected  future  changes  in  interest  rates  –  perhaps  policy-
induced – and removes one primary source of return uncertainty that investors in bonds have 
to  hedge  against  in  less  tranquil  times.8  For  corporate  bonds  and  commercial  paper,  a 
decrease in the amplitude of business-cycle fluctuations should bring about, ceteris paribus, 
a lower probability of default, which, once again, can translate into lower credit risk premia. 
Analogous reasoning holds for stock and housing markets, with the fall in macroeconomic 
volatility  translating  into  a  decrease  in  the  uncertainty  about  expected  future  returns,  and 
therefore leading to lower risk premia. 
However, even if one is prepared to entertain the possibility that the line of causation runs 
predominantly from macroeconomic conditions – fundamental macroeconomic stability – to 
asset price determination, the prospects for the evolution of market prices in the near future 
are vastly conditional on the nature of the macroeconomic moderation.  
                                                 
6   Stock  and  Watson  (2002),  among  others,  show  that  the  decline  in  volatility  appears  in  a  large  number  of 
macroeconomic time series: employment growth, consumption growth, inflation and sectoral output growth, as 
well as in GDP growth. The decline is not confined to the US economy, but is well visible in a vast array of 
economies, both industrialised and developing, with few exceptions. 
7   A correlation between different indicators of equity valuations and consumption volatility for a set of eleven 
industrialised countries has been noted before. See, for example, Lettau, Ludvigson and Wachter (2008). But 
Figures  1  and  2  document  that  evidence  of  this  type  of  correlation  is  more  pervasive  than  studied  in  their 
paper. 
8   A detailed discussion along these lines of the impact of a fall in the volatility of inflation and output growth on 
the bond term premium can be found, e.g., in Plosser (2007). 
BIS Review 105/2008 
 5
If one believes that the main reason for the observed decline in macroeconomic volatilities – 
and, indirectly, for low risk compensations and high prices in asset markets – is that policy 
regimes  have  become  more  stable,  more  predictable  and  confidence-inspiring,  then 
prospects for market participants and policymakers alike will be brighter. We all know that the 
institutional roots of the Great Moderation are significant, as studies done at the ECB and 
elsewhere have shown.9 We know that policy statutes – disciplining monetary policy and the 
fiscal  authority  –  have  been  carefully  crafted  in  many  countries  to  make  sure  that  stable 
policy  conditions  are  put  in  place  and  are  there  to  last.  So,  if  all  this  is  true,  one  could 
perhaps confidently extrapolate the moderate macroeconomic volatilities of the past into the 
future.  And,  in  so  doing,  one  would  equally  be  reassured  that  the  down-trends  in  risk 
compensation that we have observed for so long – beyond short-run ups and downs – would 
not be reversed in a sustained manner.  
But  the  same  line  of  causation  could  be  less  reassuring  from  another  angle.  The  same 
studies that have found an important role for policies in the Great Moderation of the last two 
decades cannot certainly rule out that “good luck” might have exerted a reinforcing influence. 
More moderate exogenous shocks might have contributed – more or less accidentally – to 
smoothing economic fluctuations. In the terms of our picture, this would be equivalent to say 
that the moderation in some non-policy factor driving activity might have been responsible for 
the fall in inflation and consumption variability. 
To the extent that this interpretation has some merit, a less fortunate string of shocks could 
always bring more ample swings in economic conditions – looking forward – than we have 
grown  accustomed  to  from  past  experience.  And  this  could  entail  repercussions  for  the 
valuation  of  investment  risk  in  various  financial  markets.  In  this  case  a  return  to  historical 
valuations for risk would imply large negative returns for a possibly extended period of time.  
The price of risk: what is structural and what is transient? 
1.2 
It  is  important  to  understand  that  the  close  co-movements  that  appear  when  comparing 
trends  in  premia  with  trends  in  macro-volatilities  are  not  inconsistent  with  an  alternative, 
inverse pattern of causation: one predominantly running from financial market prices to the 
macro-economy.  
Exogenous  changes  in  financial  markets  may  have  caused  an  original  fall  in  risk  premia. 
Since asset prices provide signals for profitable investment opportunities, affect the wealth of 
households, and influence the cost of capital to firms and households, a compression of risk 
premia  in  the  markets  for  capital  and  credit  may  have  put  the  economy  on  a  different 
expansion path where incomes grow faster and are less uncertain.  
But, again, independent changes in financial markets can be of a structural or more transient 
nature.  
I shall start with structural factors. A major source of structural evolution in financial markets 
over  the  last  twenty  years,  one  that  is  difficult  to  overlook  and  that  is  likely  to  last,  comes 
under  the  encompassing  label  of  increased  financial  market  participation.  Institutional 
investors,  such  as  pension  and  mutual  funds,  hedge  funds,  and  more  recently  sovereign 
wealth funds, have been playing an increasingly important role in many asset markets. The 
informed,  active  trading  of  these  investors  has  increased  market  liquidity  and  led  to  a 
reduction  in  transactions  costs.  Deeper  and  less  expensive  markets  have  meant  that  the 
typical  investor  –  once  holding  a  poorly  diversified  portfolio  with  skewed  returns  –  is  now 
better  diversified  and  thus  more  risk-tolerant.  At  the  same  time,  the  introduction  of  non-
redundant  and  previously  non-existing  assets  and  liabilities  has  provided  a  further 
                                                 
9   Benati and Surico (2008) finds that the role of stabilising monetary policy can go some way toward explaining 
the Great Moderation. 
6 
 BIS Review 105/2008
encouragement for investors and financial intermediaries to transform and transfer risk. The 
enhanced  availability  of  these  new  instruments  has  increased  the  accessibility  and 
availability of credit to the private sector. I will return to the toxic side of these developments 
in  a  minute.  Here,  as  in  many  studies,  I  note  that  an  increase  in  participation  has  the 
potential  to  decrease  the  required  risk  premium  on  a  wide  spectrum  of  assets,  because  it 
spreads market risk over a broader population.10  
For a given amount of macroeconomic risk – a given quantum of macro-volatility – increased 
participation can cut the price of risk. And a lower price of risk that is due to a structural break 
in market participation rates is more likely to persist.  
But  transient  factors  in  financial  markets  might  have  been  at  work  as  well.  For  a  given 
quantum  of  macro-volatility  and  a  given  fundamental  price  of  risk,  markets  can  at  times 
under-appreciate the former and under-price the latter. Risk aversion can fluctuate around a 
fundamental  value  which  is  determined  by  long-lasting  evolutions  in  financial  market 
infrastructures and financial market participation. And these more contingent fluctuations in 
risk aversion can be slow to re-absorb. Changes in risk aversion can at times look a lot like 
“bubbles”.  But  swings  in  risk  aversion  that  will  eventually  revert  back  to  some  sort  of 
equilibrium  are,  in  my  view,  the  manifestation  of  a  phenomenon  –  more  general  than 
“bubbles” – which has been rationalised and modelled in various ways.11 The important point 
is not so much to understand what causes such fluctuations in risk preferences – whether 
explosive  expectations12  or  habit  formation  in  consumption  –  but  that  they  are  ephemeral 
and, once they take off, they tend to fall back to ground.  
Occasional  waves  of  higher  risk  tolerance  in  financial  markets  can  expand  the  supply  of 
external finance for the productive sector and for government. And this can make previously 
unprofitable investment programs look attractive, which can boost growth. But, unlike more 
structural shifts in financial market infrastructures, occasional turns in risk tolerance are just 
that: occasional.  
Reversion to some sort of steady values for risk appetite can undo established market trends 
and give rise to a prolonged period of strains in market valuations. 
                                                 
10   The emergence and growth of new financial intermediaries can have further and deeper causes. For example, 
the  more  recent,  accelerated  integration  of  emerging  markets  into  the  global  economy  may  have  led  to  an 
increase  in  global  savings  and,  as  a  result,  to  a  growing  demand  for  financial  services  and  new  financial 
operators. Also, the achievements of peak-savings years by the baby-boom generation might have expanded 
the pool of resources that need to be intermediated by specialised pension funds. In fact, the abundance of 
global savings – whether induced by the globalisation of economic processes or by the aging of a large share 
of the  world population – is indeed one of the explanations advanced for the exceptionally low bond yields 
recently observed in the U.S. and, to a lesser extent, also in the Euro area. 
11   For example, models in which investors’ preferences display habit formation – the argument of utility is not the 
absolute  level  of  consumption  but  the  level  of  consumption  relative  to  some  “normal”  level  –  can  generate 
time-varying risk tolerance. Agents are more risk averse when current consumption is around the level that 
they  consider  “normal”  based  on  their  past  income/consumption  history.  In  these  circumstances  –  which 
indeed  should  apply  in  normal  times  –  only  a  small  fraction  of  consumption  is  available  as  a  surplus  to 
generate  utility,  and  even  small  shocks  to  consumption  can  have  a  large  effect  on  this  surplus.  Therefore, 
investors are extremely risk averse. A positive shock to income can cause actual consumption to exceed its 
perceived “normal” by a wide margin and for a prolonged period of time. This increases agents’ risk appetite 
because now the consumption surplus is larger. Campbell and Cochrane (1999) prove that the (equity) risk 
premium can fluctuate due to this mechanism. 
12   Within  the  cash-flow-discount  model  for  asset  pricing  that  is  expounded  in  footnote  2,  seemingly  explosive 
price dynamics can be generated by a sequence of negative innovations to the risk premium, πt. 
BIS Review 105/2008 
 7
New channels of interaction 
2.  
Varying risk premia blur the fundamental connection between asset prices and real economic 
decisions. This has been studied extensively and the evidence that I have provided thus far 
is, after all, but one variation on a traditional theme in financial economics: the risk premium 
puzzle. 
But today risk pricing and macroeconomic performance can make contact in ways that are 
novel  and  still  little  known.  Here  I  would  like  to  draw  your  attention  to  the  increased 
participation  of  financial  investors  –  especially  hedge  funds  and  institutional  investors  –  in 
commodity  markets.13  This  trend  has  accompanied  the  spectacular  boom  in  commodity 
prices  over  the  last  few  years  and  has  complicated  the  interpretation  of  the  fundamental 
drivers of prices in those markets in various phases.  
We can take the oil futures markets as an example. Futures contracts are agreements to buy 
or  sell  a  specified  quantity  of  a  commodity  at  a  future  date,  at  a  price  agreed  upon  when 
entering the contract, the futures price. However, in regulated exchanges [such as NYMEX 
or ICE] these contracts are traded chiefly for hedging risk on price changes rather than for 
arranging  physical  delivery  of  oil.14  Traditionally,  these  markets  have  been  characterised, 
more frequently than not, by a market constellation of prices known as “backwardation”. This 
indicates a situation in which futures prices are below the current spot price [see Figure 4].15 
To understand what this means, note that both producers and consumers of oil are normally 
interested in hedging the risk of fluctuations in the future spot price of oil – which is unknown 
today. But, since oil production and supply is concentrated among far fewer participants than 
total  consumption  among  consumers,  suppliers  are  more  likely  to  factor  the  risk  of  future 
price fluctuations into their economic decisions to a larger extent than any single buyer. This 
strengthens the incentive for suppliers to hedge against adverse fluctuations in spot prices. 
Traditionally, the market for oil futures has been a “sellers’ market.” And sellers have been on 
average happy to pay a premium to market traders willing to buy a futures contract and take 
upon themselves the risk of future spot price declines. “Backwardation” means that buyers as 
a  whole  normally  agree  to  provide  this  insurance  if  they  can  expect  to  earn  a  positive 
premium on top of the expected change in the future price of oil.16 Assuming that the best 
predictor  of  the  spot  price  in  the  future  is  the  current  spot  price,  the  spread  between  the 
current spot price and the futures price reflects the remuneration for the risk that buyers as a 
whole accept to bear.17  
Over the last two decades when backwardation has been the norm, the risk premium paid by 
hedgers  to  financial  investors  has  been  relatively  stable,  moving  predictably  with  the  spot 
                                                 
13  See, for example, Domanski and Heath (2007).  
14   Although physical delivery of oil may occur, this in reality occurs rather rarely. Contracts are instead liquidated 
before expiration usually leading to exchange of cash among market participants. So, for example, while an 
airline normally buys jet fuel through its usual physical supplier, it can purchase a futures contract to hedge 
possible price increase over the subsequent months. If the price actually rises, the gain from liquidating the 
futures contract towards expiration will offset the loss from the greater cost of fuel.  
15   The  opposite  situation  in  which  the  term  structure  of  futures  prices  is  upward  sloping  is  known  in  traders’ 
jargon as “contango”, and has traditionally occurred less frequently than “backwardation”. 
16   Some financial participants may be enticed to buy or sell futures contracts by different views on the future oil 
price  than  the  market.  But  on  average  financial  participants  are  net  buyers  and  assuming  that  they  are  on 
average  no  better  than  sellers  in  predicting  the  future  spot  price,  they  will  need  a  discount  over  the  price 
expected at the expiration of the futures contract to be motivated to purchase it. 
17   This  risk  premium  is  the  mirror  image  of  what  sellers  as  a  group  are  willing  to  give  up  for  the  benefits  of 
holding physical inventories of oil, which have the important role of ensuring the continuation of production and 
sale  in  the  face  of  potential  disruption  in  the  oil  supply  chain.  In  jargon  inventories  provide  a  “convenience 
yield”, which in the oil market can be quite sizeable. The convenience yield is normally inversely related to the 
deviation of inventories from their desired size. 
8 
 BIS Review 105/2008
price  of  oil  [Figure  4].18  More  recently,  since  2005,  this  relationship  between  the  risk 
premium and the spot price of oil appears to have changed and risk premia paid by hedgers 
have been shrinking to become even negative between early 2005 and 2007.19 This is clear 
from the evolution over time of the futures price curve [for Brent oil price], on which the ECB 
oil  price  projections  are  based.  The  curve  clearly  moved  from  a  downward  slope  to  an 
upward tilt around the same time and maintained the increasing tilt at least until the middle of 
2007 [Figure 5].  
This atypical compression – and inversion – of the risk premia paid in the oil futures market 
has gone hand in hand with an appreciable change in the structure of these markets, with a 
growing involvement of non-commercial participants. The change in the composition of the 
market has been made evident by the emergence of a new net positive speculative position 
[Figure 6]. It seems as though the market for oil futures, traditionally dominated by hedging 
sellers, had at times become a “buyers’ market.” 
How are these developments to be interpreted? What is the direction of influence between 
fundamental  trends  in  the  real  economy  and  the  pricing  of  financial  risk?  A  fundamentals-
driven interpretation has it that increasing futures prices indeed signal a fundamental break in 
spot  price  expectations:  which  traditionally  had  been  “mean-reverting”  and  might  have 
become  persistently  bullish,  reflecting  a  perceived  break  in  the  anticipated  imbalances 
between  oil  demand  and  oil  production  on  a  global  scale.  But  observers  focusing  on  the 
change in the balance between short and long positions in the market have pointed to the 
possibility  that  futures  prices  –  determined  on  a  market  in  which  buyers  are  increasingly 
motivated by a search for financial yield rather than the incentive to hedge – might have been 
contributing in certain market phases to movements in the spot price.  
Have  financial  investors  played  a  stabilising  or  a  destabilizing  role  at  a  time  of  booming 
commodity prices and heightened uncertainty about their long-term fundamentals? According 
to  a  benign  view,  “financial  investors”  have  expanded  liquidity  in  commodity  markets,  and 
have  made  the  market  more  efficient  in  processing  information,  thus  improving  price 
discovery at a time of greater uncertainty about fundamentals. New financial actors such as 
highly leveraged funds and institutional investors may have contributed to lowering spreads 
and the associated risk premia in commodity futures markets by spreading their own portfolio 
risk more widely. In this sense, they may even have strengthened the traditional insurance 
role of futures markets. In addition, financial investors may have helped bring forward price 
increases that would have occurred nonetheless. This may have provided a signal to both 
consumers  and  producers  that  they  needed  to  start  adjusting  their  consumption  and 
investment plans before the economy hits the physical constraints of oil supply. In this sense, 
some volatility today might have been the price to pay to avoid even higher volatility in the 
future. 
But, according to an opposite interpretation, financial investors operating systematically on 
the futures market might have reduced the risk and the cost faced by sellers who want to 
accumulate  inventories,  or  possibly  delay  production  to  gain  from  steep  anticipated  price 
trends.  In  this  way  they  might  have  exacerbated  changes  in  prices  and  inventories  due  to 
                                                 
18   This pattern presumably reflected the belief of market participants in a stable long-run price of oil to which the 
spot price was expected to revert eventually. 
19   Here  we focus on a measure of the risk premium (or roll return) earned by buyers of futures based on the 
assumption that the best predictor of the future spot oil price is today spot price. This allows an immediate 
interpretation of the observed spreads over the spot  price at which futures contracts are traded. And, most 
importantly,  over  longer  samples  it  is  found  to  be  the  most  accurate  predictor  (Alquist  and  Kilian,  2008). 
However,  other  measures  of  the  risk  premium  in  oil  futures  are  also  conceivable  and  used  in  practise  (in 
particular in central banks’ forecasts). For example, Pagano and Pisani (2006) regress the ex-post realised 
risk premium on a constant and the degree of variable capacity utilisation in US manufacturing (a proxy for the 
state of the business cycle), taking the fitted value as their measure of risk premium. 
BIS Review 105/2008 
 9
predicted  changes  in  fundamentals.  They  might  have  sent  noisier  and  potentially  distorted 
signals to producers and consumers.20  
If this seems to me a reasonable conjecture, I admit, though, that existing evidence does not 
provide  uncontroversial  support  to  the  notion  that  non-commercial  investors  in  futures 
markets have been systematically playing a significant role in pushing spot prices out of their 
fundamental equilibrium.  
Interpreting the present situation 
3.  
Since August 2007, markets have become increasingly discriminating with regard to the risks 
posed by the real investment projects underlying a wide range of securitised credit. This new 
attitude  is  reflected  in  the  large  rebounds  in  risk  premia  that  I  have  noted  in  my  charts. 
Spreads on financial institution debt, in particular, have widened in the euro area and in the 
US reflecting uncertainty over the extent of future credit write-offs, the full recognition of off-
balance-sheet  commitments,  and  future  earnings  capacity.  The  wide  perception  in  the 
markets  is  that  financial  institutions  face  difficulties  in  maintaining  earnings  due  to  falling 
credit quality and declining fee income in a macro-economic environment already taxed by 
sharp rises in real production costs. As intermediaries tend to economise on capital, assets 
are  being  sold  and  lending  conditions  have  tightened.  As  I  have  shown  in  Figure  3,  the 
correction in the appraisal of risk has thus been broad-based, and spreads on funding costs 
for corporates have stuck to levels that had not been on market records for a long period of 
time.  
My conjecture is that the recent corrections and retrenchments in financial markets bring two 
lessons and leave much to be learned from future analysis and experience. I start from the 
two lessons.  
• 
First, as has often happened in the past, non-fundamental market dynamics have 
grown out of fundamentals and the feed-back loops that these have created. As I 
said  already,  increased  financial  market  participation  has  set  a  new  secular  trend 
toward  a  lower  price  of  risk  sustained  by  long-term  financial  deepening.  Financial 
deepening,  in  turn,  has  initially  responded  to  a  real  demand  for  a  more  efficient 
sharing  of  risk.  More  effective  risk  sharing  has  meant  better  mechanisms  through 
which  producers  and  ultimate  savers  can  hedge  open  positions  arising  from  their 
real  transactions.  As  a  side-effect,  this  process  –  generalised  to  a  wide  range  of 
markets  –  has  brought  sustained  capital  gains  to  an  expanding  number  of 
beneficiaries. This, in turn, has improved incomes and the economic outlook. And 
the process has been feeding and reinforcing itself.  
Second lesson: “good health is always a precarious situation that does not presage 
anything  good.”  At  some  point  in  the  maturing  process,  brighter  prospects  have 
meant  under-assessment  of  the  macroeconomic  risk  and  under-pricing  of  the  unit 
quantity of risk. Financial markets have ceased to facilitate the dispersion of the risk 
that is intrinsic to the underlying economic activities, and they have developed into 
formidable  risk  multipliers.  The  new  structured  financial  products  that  grew 
exponentially in the ten years leading up to the recent disorders in financial markets, 
by  pooling  and  repackaging  income  streams  of  different  quality,  gave  the  false 
impression that the benefits of diversification would reduce the risks inherent in the 
underlying  assets.  But  the  leverage  embedded  in  those  products  meant  that  end-
investors were in fact exposed to a quantum of risk that could outstrip – rather than 
                                                  
20   The accumulation of inventories may have sustained increasing spot prices from 2003 till the middle of 2007. 
Yet the spot price has continued to rise since. The fall in inventories may of course simply be due to tighter 
fundamentals. 
10 
 BIS Review 105/2008
   mitigate – that implied by the underlying pool of assets. Excessive leverage was the 
mechanism which – at some point – turned an efficient process of risk diffusion into 
a dangerous spiral of risk amplification and concentration.  
Third: stable institutions and firm monetary policy frameworks are needed more than 
ever in times of turbulence: financial stability is no substitute to price stability. The 
latter is a precondition to the former. As I said, a significant part of the decline in 
macroeconomic  uncertainty  is  no  windfall  for  modern  societies:  it  is  the  fair  and 
expected reward for institutional reform. In continental Europe, this reform has been 
induced  largely  by  the  need  to  converge  to  sound  macroeconomic  policies  as 
signalled, in particular, by the best macroeconomic regimes that were available in 
the  Continent.  The  process  has  been  successful,  both  historically  –  comparing 
performances before and after monetary union [Figure 1b] – and in cross-section. 
This figure [Figure 7] establishes a comparison between macroeconomic volatilities 
in  the  euro  area  and  elsewhere  since  1999:  a  comprehensive  cross  section  of 
international  macroeconomic  outcomes.  Despite  recent  shocks,  the  euro  area 
countries have compressed aggregate risk relative to their past, and have done it 
beyond  the  standards  that  are  set  by  other  countries.  Stable  and  transparent 
monetary institutions have helped the economy before – remember the stock market 
collapse of the early years of this decade – and will help this time.  
But – here suggestions for further reflection and analysis start – to what extent have 
stable  macroeconomic  frameworks  genuinely  squeezed  risks  out  of  the  system? 
And to what extent have they encouraged over-confidence and complacency? We 
saw that complacency played a role in the under-pricing of risk in a certain market 
phase.  But  the  remaining  question  is  whether  the  relaxation  in  financial  prudence 
could have been triggered by false expectations of a perennially smooth economic 
environment that policymakers could have avoided in words and deeds. 
Developments in financial markets have largely coincided with pressures on the real 
costs  of  commodities  which  –  in  terms  of  intensity  and  persistence  –  have  been 
largely unprecedented. As I tried to argue, it is not clear whether the inversion of the 
oil  futures  curve  –  with  futures  prices  occasionally  increasing  above  spot  prices  – 
should  be  taken  to  signal  a  permanent  inversion  of  spot  price  expectations, 
presaging  a  long  period  of  further  appreciations  in  the  real  price  of  energy.  Or, 
simply, it should be understood as yet another reflection of a varying risk premium 
signalling a wedge between asset prices and fundamentals.  
Today  more  than  ever  before,  efforts  –  by  scholars  and  central  banks  alike  –  to  connect 
market  returns  and  risk  pricing  to  a  fuller  range  of  macroeconomic  phenomena  have  high 
potential pay-offs. The challenge, in the end, is to build models that can match asset pricing 
facts, while at the same time maintaining – if not improving on – the existing business cycle 
models’ ability to account for quantity fluctuations. This is no small challenge. These models 
would need to match the price of risk and the relative volatilities of consumption, output and 
investment.  By  doing  so,  they  would  offer  instruments  for  evaluating  the  predictability  of 
asset returns – and their cross-section – based on assumptions about the evolution of the 
real economy.  
They would allow interpreting the drawn-out declines in risk appreciation that have spanned 
more than two decades. Most importantly, they would be suitable tools to measure the exact 
proportion  in  which  the  more  recent  changes  in  risk  premia  reflect  stable  breaks  in  the 
reward for risk, or are products of transient market whims. They would help disentangle the 
effects  on  commodity  prices  of  fundamental  trends  in  oil  demand  –  which  are  likely  to  be 
sustained and thus most relevant for policy – from the swinging influences of new financial 
strategies. 
BIS Review 105/2008 
 11
Ideally,  these  new  models  would  offer  ways  to  simulate  and  stress-test  situations  of 
unquantifiable  –  Knightian  –  uncertainly,  where  past  correlations  collapse  and  perverse 
expectations determine new dynamics.  
Implications for financial participants  
4.  
But, as I speak, we still have a lot of work to elucidate these interactions.  
Financial  participants  and  policymakers  have  to  rely  on  robust  behavioural  rules  that  can 
minimise  the  chance  that  business  strategies  and  policy  decisions  might  be  based  on  a 
misguided model or an over-optimistic representation of economic reality. I will start with two 
fundamental  principles  that  should  govern  the  business  model  of  financial  operators  and 
protect them from the hazards of excessive risk taking. I will then turn to monetary policy.  
First,  financial  participation  and  financial  sophistication  find  their  limit  in  complexity.  The 
recent  experience  has  taught  us  that  increasing  complexity  of  financial  instruments  can 
undermine the benefits of financial innovation. Savers become more risk averse – sometimes 
through  abrupt  retractions  from  market  trading  –  if  faced  with  increasing  difficulties  in 
evaluating  the  risk  to  which  they  are  exposed.  The  recent  market  strains  started  to  pose 
challenges to the macro-economy at large when investors sought clarity about the quality of 
specific assets supporting investment securities, and shed those whose risk they could not 
easily  assess.  And  a  primary  source  of  losses  for  financial  institutions  came  from  the 
concentrated  exposures  that  were  implicit  in  the  warehousing,  structuring  and  trading  of 
complex credit derivatives. Complexity prevented them from fully appreciating the possibility 
that the losses in the underlying assets could – in distressed market conditions – reach levels 
which  would  impair  the  value  of  the  super-senior  tranches  that  they  had  retained  in  their 
balance sheets.  
Second,  the  management  and  the  valuation  of  risk  at  the  level  of  business  units  have 
become critical activities. As I said before, expanded financial participation can cut the share 
of  risk  that  each  participant  shoulders  at  each  point  in  time.  But  the  dark  side  of  this 
phenomenon is that it also provides an encouragement for financial services organisations to 
expand  the  overall  amount  of  risk  that  is  traded.  And  it  weakens  market  participants’  anti-
bodies  against  excessive  individual  exposure  and  risk  taking.  There  is  evidence  that  the 
financial firms that have performed better since the turmoil began a year ago are those in 
which  management  had  established  rigorous  internal  processes  and  discipline  in  the 
valuation of risk. Those are firms that had not exclusively relied on external views of credit 
risk – from rating agencies or pricing services – but had also developed in-house expertise to 
conduct  independent  assessments  of  the  most  critical  positions.  They  had  established 
stronger  internal  checks  over  individual  business  lines  to  control  activities  that  had  the 
potential to lead to significant balance sheet growth or unexpected reductions in capital. The 
sophistication of their risk measurement processes had kept pace with increasing risk taking. 
The  quantitative  methodologies  employed  were  varied  –  notional  limits  to  risk  assumption, 
value-at-risk indicators, stress tests and forward-looking scenario analysis – and flexible, so 
that management could quickly vary assumptions about the scale of shocks or the degree of 
market  volatility  and  the  pattern  of  asset  correlations  in  difficult  market  conditions.  These 
firms had resisted the tendency – which becomes widespread in times when risks seem well-
distributed and traders well-diversified – to a dilution of the incentive to exercise prudence.  
Controlling the primary sources of excessive risk taking is within the control of major financial 
participants. It is critical that internal processes and practices be deployed that can curb the 
tendency to expand business aggressively in times of greater propensity to risk taking, to a 
point beyond the capacity of the relevant control infrastructures.  
Supervisory oversight can and will support efforts in this direction. Among other supporting 
measures, strengthened prudential oversight of capital, liquidity and risk management is of 
the essence to ensure an appropriate capital treatment and disclosure of on and off-balance 
12 
 BIS Review 105/2008
exposures and that liquidity buffers correspond to the liquidity risks incurred. Supervisors and 
regulators will communicate early to firms’ boards their risk management concerns and the 
need to take responsive action.  
Implications for monetary policy 
5.  
The  swinging  and  unpredictable  interactions  between  the  markets  and  real  economic 
decisions are unlikely to have long-lasting and severe consequences for the macro-economy 
as long as monetary policy maintains a clear sense of direction.  
I  already  highlighted  the  role  that  new  monetary  policy  frameworks  have  played  in  the 
transition  to  a  new  macroeconomic  regime,  in  which  incomes,  consumption  and  other 
measures of economic welfare follow a steadier course. As I tried to argue, the interpretation 
of  the  link  between  the  reduction  in  macroeconomic  uncertainty  –  the  Great  Moderation  – 
and the pricing of that uncertainty in the markets poses many unresolved issues. But very 
few observers and scholars would object that central banks’ commitment to keeping inflation 
low and stable, their improved communication about their price stability objectives and their 
acting on those objectives by the force of deeds, has importantly contributed to the reduction 
in macroeconomic risk that we find in the data. They would also agree that if aggregate – un-
diversifiable – risk diminishes, this ought to be reflected in the premia that financial markets 
pay  for  risk  taking.  That  fraction  of  reduced  risk  compensations  is  a  stable  acquisition  of 
modern  economies.  The  complement  to  that  fraction  –  what  is  due  to  excessive  financial 
sophistication, abnormal risk tolerance and shortcomings in risk management; and what is 
due  to  the  persistence  of  international  imbalances  and  the  steady  appreciation  of 
commodities – will pass.  
At this stage, let me make three remarks.  
First, we have exercised an ongoing warning function, whenever the amount and the price of 
risk  traded  in  financial  markets  had  departed  from  the  trends  that  appeared  justified  by 
lasting  changes  in  macroeconomic  fundamentals.  Our  communication  on  the  financial 
imbalances  that  were  being  created  in  the  over-confident  market  conditions  that  prevailed 
until the summer of 2007 has been vindicated ex post. Starting from last summer, financial 
markets have finally initiated a process of re-pricing of risk to more appropriate levels, and to 
pay more attention to the quality of the assets they invest in, although this process has been 
significantly  less  orderly  than  we  would  have  hoped.  Since  risk  premia  across  a  wide 
spectrum  of  assets  had  fallen  to  excessively  low  levels,  their  return  to  more  appropriate 
values—and the accompanying process of financial de-leveraging—is to be regarded as a 
necessary  development.  Under  this  respect,  the  most  appropriate  policy  response  is 
therefore  to  allow  such  process  to  take  place  in  an  as  orderly  way  as  possible,  playing  a 
supporting role whenever medium-term downside risk to price stability might emerge along 
the way.  
Second, we have been crystal-clear since the beginning of the financial turbulence that we 
would  make  a  strict  separation  between  the  monetary  policy  stance  –  which  is  designed 
exclusively to deliver price stability in the medium term in an exceptionally difficult period – 
and  the  implementation  of  this  monetary  policy  through  the  Eurosystem  credit  operations. 
These operations were designed with a view to maintaining the short-term rates close to our 
policy rates within an environment of turbulent money markets. This concept has been well 
understood by market participants and has preserved the integrity and the credibility of our 
monetary policy. It has also facilitated our fundamental goal to preserve a firm anchoring of 
inflation expectations in line with our definition of price stability. 
Third,  let  me  concentrate  on  inflation  expectations  in  an  environment  of  sustained  supply-
side shocks. We need to consider that the sequence of shocks to commodity prices that we 
have faced in the past five years confronts us with a difficult identification problem. Supply-
side  shocks  that  hit  in  one  direction  for  such  a  prolonged  period  of  time  can  become 
BIS Review 105/2008 
 13
engrained in inflation expectations. If – and when – this happens, then these shocks change 
their nature. If they de-stabilise expectations, they become more similar to demand shocks. A 
demand shock calls for a shorter policy horizon. 
Our policy horizon is the medium term, and the medium term should be taken to be at least 
as long as the average transmission lag for policy actions. While facing rises in commodity 
prices, the policy horizon could theoretically be more extended. But, the circumstances that I 
just described are not typical and the risk that a repeated sequence of supply-side shocks 
might  turn  into  a  demand  disturbance  with  long-lasting  implications  for  price  stability  has 
made our horizon shorter. It has made it closer to the average transmission lag.  
Concluding remarks 
6.  
As I pointed out in my opening remarks, these are testing times. The financial turbulence that 
started last summer, and the increases in commodity prices of the last few years, conjured to 
create a very challenging environment, in which central banks have to simultaneously face 
off the fragilities of the financial fabric and the inflationary pressures originating from global 
commodity  markets.  It  is  precisely  during  such  difficult  times  that  the  benefits  of  a  solid 
monetary  framework  oriented  to  price  stability  become  apparent.  Our  framework—with  a 
strong mandate for price stability, a focus on a firm anchoring of inflation expectations, and a 
crucial role assigned to a monetary aggregates—is, under this respect, ideally suited to the 
challenges  we  are  currently  facing,  as  it  encodes  the  lessons  of  the  central  banks  which, 
during  the  1970s,  successfully  “opted  out”  of  the  Great  Inflation.  This  framework,  coupled 
with our absolute resolve to avoid repeating the mistakes of the 1970s, will guarantee price 
stability, thus contributing to economic growth and job creation in the euro area.  
Thank you for your attention. 
14 
 BIS Review 105/2008
Figure 1: Euro area, risk premia and macroeconomic risk  
(1a) Equity, bond, housing risk premia  
(1b)  Consumption  growth  volatility 
and HICP inflation  
 Source: ECB, Datastream. 
Note: The equity (Total EMU stock market) and the housing 
(residential property prices) risk premia are calculated based 
on  the  assumption  of  a  very  long-term  risk-free  nominal 
interest rate and a very long-term growth rate of payouts. The 
term  premium  (10  year  bonds)  is  calculated  based  on  an 
affine  term  structure  model  with  survey  data  similar  to  Kim 
and Orphanides (2005).  
 
 Source: ECB, Eurostat, European Commission. 
Note: The consumption growth standard deviation 
is  computed  as  the  5-year  moving  standard 
deviation of per capita consumption growth. HICP
inflation is the year-on-year percent change in the 
HICP.  
BIS Review 105/2008 
 15
Figure 2: US, Risk premia and Macroeconomic Risk  
(2a) Equity, bond, housing risk premia  
(2b)  Consumption  growth  volatility  and  CPI 
inflation  
Source:  ECB,  Kim  and  Wright  (2005),  Davis  et  al.  (2007), 
Global Financial Data, Datastream, Freddie Mac and Bureau of 
Labor Statistics  
Note:  The  equity  (S&P  500)  and  the  housing  (owner-occupied 
houses) risk premia are calculated based on the assumption of 
a very long-term risk-free nominal interest rate and a very long-
term growth rate of payouts. The term premium (10 year bonds) 
is calculated based on an affine term-structure model (Kim and 
Wright, 2005).  
 
Source: ECB, St. Louis FRED database  
Note:  The  consumption  growth  standard  deviation  is  computed 
as 
the  5-year  moving  standard  deviation  of  per  capita 
consumption  growth.  CPI  inflation  is  the  year-on-year  percent 
change in the CPI-U.  
16 
 BIS Review 105/2008
Figure 3: Credit spreads in the euro area and US  
Source: ECB, St. Louis FRED database, Merrill Lynch 
Note: Spreads over AAA corporate bond yield.  
Figure 4: Futures spreads on NYMEX & oil spot price (WTI)  
Source: Bloomberg.  
Note: Futures spreads (right hand scale) are defined as the difference between the current spot price and the futures 
prices at different maturities, scaled by the current spot price. Prices are those traded in NYMEX and refers to West 
Texas Intermediate (WTI). The spot oil price is in log (left hand scale). Monthly observations refer to the last trading day 
of each month. 
 
BIS Review 105/2008 
 17
Figure 5: Futures curve for Brent oil price  
Source: IMF, Bloomberg, and ECB calculations. 
Note: The futures price curves reflect the path implied by futures markets in the two-week period ending on the cut-off date 
of the Eurosystem/ECB staff macroeconomic projections. 
Figure 6: Number of positions by non-commercial participants (NYMEX) & WTI oil 
price  
Source: Bloomberg. Note: Number of contracts in thousands (3-month moving average). The oil price is in logs. 
18 
 BIS Review 105/2008
Figure 7: Macroeconomic volatility in the euro area and elsewhere since January 1999  
Source: ECB Calculations.  
Note: Standard deviations of annual CPI inflation and output growth since January 1999. 
 References 
Alquist,  R.  and  L.  Kilian  (2008),  “What  do  we  learn  from  the  price  of  crude  oil  futures?”, 
unpublished paper, University of Michigan.  
Benati,  L.  and  P.  Surico  (2008),  “VAR  Analysis  and  the  Great  Moderation”,  forthcoming  in 
American Economic Review. 
Campbell, J. and J. Cochrane (1999), “By Force of Habit: A Consumption-based Explanation 
of Aggregate Stock-Market Behaviour”, Journal of Political Economy 107: 205-251. 
Campbell, J. and R. Shiller (2003), “Valuation Ratios and Long-run Stock Market Outlook: An 
Update”,  in  Advances  in  Behavioural  Finance,  Volume  II,  edited  by  N.  Barberis  and  R. 
Thaler, Russel Sage Foundation, New York, NY. 
Davis, M., A. Lehnert and R. Martin (2007), “The Rent-Price Ratio for the Aggregate Stock of 
Owner-Occupied Housing”, mimeo, Federal Reserve Board of Governors. 
Domanski,  D.  and  A.  Heath  (2007),  “Financial  Investors  and  Commodity  Markets”,  BIS 
Quarterly Review (March). 
Gorton, G. and K. G. Rouwenhorst (2004), “Facts and Fantasies about Commodity Prices”, 
NBER Working Paper No. 10595.  
Jagannathan,  R.,  E.R.  McGrattan,  and  A.  Scherbina  (2000),  “The  Declining  U.S.  Equity 
Premium”, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review 24(4), Fall 2000: 3-19. 
Kim, D. and A. Orphanides (2005), “Term structure estimation with survey data on interest 
rate forecasts”, FED Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2005-48. 
BIS Review 105/2008 
 19
Kim, D. and J. Wright (2005), “An Arbitrage-Free Three-Factor Term-structure Model and the 
Recent  Behavior  of  Long-Term  Yields  and  Distant-Horizon  Forward  Rates”,  FED  Finance 
and Economics Discussion Series 2005-33.  
Lettau, M., S.C. Ludvigson, and J.A. Wachter (2008), “The Declining Equity Premium: What 
Role Does Macroeconomic Risk Play?”, Review of Financial Studies 21(4): 1653-1687.  
Pagano, P. and M. Pisani (2006), “Risk-adjusted forecasts of oil prices”, Temi di discussione 
no. 585, Bank of Italy. 
Plosser, C. I. (2007), “What Can We Expect from the Yield Curve?”, speech given by Charles 
I. Plosser, President and Chief Executive Officer Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia to the 
New Jersey Bankers Annual Convention, Palm Beach, Florida, March 23, 2007. 
Rudebusch, G., E. Swanson and T. Wu (2006), “The Bond Yield Conundrum from a Macro-
Finance Perspective” Monetary and Economic Studies, Institute for Monetary and Economic 
Studies, Bank of Japan, vol. 24(S1), pages 83-109, December. 
Sharpe, S. (1999), “Stock prices, Expected Returns and Inflation”, Board of Governors of the 
Federal Reserve System FEDS Paper, 99-02. 
Stock,  J.  and  M.  Watson  (2002),  “Has  the  Business  Cycle  Changed  and  Why?”,  in  NBER 
Macroeconomics Annual 2002, Cambridge, Mass., The MIT Press.  
20 
 BIS Review 105/2008
