Masaaki Shirakawa: Recent economic and financial developments and 
the conduct of monetary policy  
Speech  by  Mr  Masaaki  Shirakawa,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  at  a  meeting  with 
business leaders, Osaka, 25 August 2008. 
 Introduction 
I am honored to be here today to speak and to exchange views with business leaders from 
the  Kansai  region.  I  have  especially  fond  memories  of  the  region  because  I  taught  as  a 
professor  at  the  Kyoto  University  School  of  Government  for  about  two  years  before  being 
appointed  as  the  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Japan  this  spring.  I  would  like  to  take  this 
opportunity to express my deep gratitude for your cooperation with the Bank's branches in 
Osaka, Kobe, and Kyoto. 
Today, I will speak about issues facing Japan's economy and the Bank's thinking regarding 
the conduct of monetary policy. 
The current situation of Japan's economy 
I.  
First, I would like to discuss the current situation of Japan's economy. Since the beginning of 
2002, the economy has enjoyed a moderate but prolonged period of economic expansion. 
Since  the  end  of  last  year,  however,  the  pace  of  economic  growth  has  gradually  slowed. 
Business  fixed  investment  has  been  leveling  off  because  the  rise  in  energy  and  materials 
prices,  which  has  accelerated  since  this  spring,  has  depressed  corporate  profits.  Private 
consumption  has  also  been  relatively  weak  due  to  the  ongoing  price  rise,  while  growth  in 
wages has remained sluggish. The pace of increase in exports has slowed, because of the 
effects of a slowdown in overseas economies. Given this situation, the Bank's assessment at 
the Monetary Policy Meeting held on August 18 and 19 was that Japan's economic growth 
has been sluggish. 
Prices, on the other hand, have been on the rise. The year-on-year rate of increase in the 
domestic corporate goods price index (CGPI) exceeded 7 percent in July due mainly to the 
rises in prices of steel and petroleum products. This was the highest rate of increase in 27 
years, since 1981. The year-on-year rate of increase in the consumer price index (CPI) also 
rose in June to 1.9 percent. This was the highest rate in 15 years excluding fiscal 1997, when 
CPI inflation increased reflecting the rise in the rate of consumption tax. 
Japan currently faces a difficult situation given the sluggishness in the economy and the rise 
in prices. This situation has been caused by two factors: the surge in energy and materials 
prices;  and  the  disruptions  in  global  financial  markets  stemming  from  the  U.S.  subprime 
mortgage problem, and the slowdown in the global economy. 
The surge in energy and materials prices and Japan's economy 
II.  
First, I will address a topic related to the surge in energy and materials prices. A rise in such 
prices exerts downward pressure on Japan's economy, which depends heavily on imports of 
resources,  through  a  decrease  in  purchasing  power  –  an  outflow  of  income.  At  the  same 
time, it exerts upward pressure on prices. 
Let us look back on the two oil crises Japan previously faced. During the first oil crisis, crude 
oil  prices  surged  from  3  U.S.  dollars  to  12  dollars  per  barrel  –  a  fourfold  rise  –  in  a  brief 
period between 1973 and 1974. During the second oil crisis, they surged from 15 dollars to 
40  dollars  between  1979  and  1980.  Unlike  these  two  cases,  the  current  surge  has  been 
BIS Review 101/2008 
 1
continuing  over  an  extended  period,  which  makes  a  comparison  of  the  rise  in  oil  prices 
difficult,  since  the  extent  of  the  increase  differs  depending  on  where  one  starts  the 
calculation. If we start from 2002, when the level of oil prices was 21 dollars, the current level 
of  110-120  dollars  –  somewhat  below  the  recent  peak  –  is  more  than  five  times  the  level 
recorded in 2002. This means that the rise during the current phase has been the largest, 
even compared with the two oil crises. As a result, the size of the income outflow resulting 
from  the  surge  in  oil  prices  has  also  been  the  largest  during  the  current  phase:  about  5 
percent of real GDP, compared with about 3 percent during the two oil crises. 
Rises  in  crude  oil  prices,  as  well  as  the  resultant  outflows  of  income  and  decreases  in 
production capacity, should be accepted as given conditions for Japan's economy. In other 
words,  they  cannot  be  avoided.  However,  economic  and  price  developments  differed 
markedly between the periods immediately after the two oil crises emerged. 
During the first oil crisis, Japan's economy suffered from a combination of runaway inflation 
and  economic  stagnation  –  in  other  words,  stagflation.  Economic  indicators  show  that  the 
economy, which continued enjoying rapid annual growth of 8-9 percent until 1973, suddenly 
contracted by 1 percent in 1974 and CPI inflation peaked at an annual rate of 25 percent in 
1974.  Contrarily,  during  the  second  oil  crisis,  the  economy  continued  to  grow  at  a  rate  of 
3-5 percent  and  the  CPI  posted  only  a  single-digit  increase.  At  that  time,  CPI  inflation 
exceeded 10 percent in the United States and 20 percent in the United Kingdom, and it can 
therefore  be  said  that  during  the  second  oil  crisis  Japan's  economy,  together  with  the 
German economy, performed extremely well relative to other countries. 
What  then  made  the  difference  in  Japan's  economic  and  price  performances  between  the 
two oil crises? Of the various factors, two seem to be most important. 
The first factor was the difference in the economic and price situation immediately before the 
crises as well as the policy response. Just before the first oil crisis, there was an economic 
boom  stemming  partly 
the  Japanese 
archipelago."  The  economy  was  overheated  and  the  financial  environment  was  overly 
accommodative, having increased the inflation expectations of households and firms. In fact, 
the rate of annual wage increases exceeded 20 percent in 1973. Against this background, a 
surge in crude oil prices increased inflation expectations further, making matters even worse. 
On the other hand, when the second oil crisis occurred, the economy was not overheated, 
the  financial  environment  was  not  overly  accommodative,  and  inflation  expectations  were 
restrained.  In  this  situation,  monetary  tightening  was  initiated  in  a  timely  manner,  and  this 
kept inflation expectations low and thus succeeded in avoiding the so-called second-round 
effects – a rise in prices of non-petroleum goods and services triggered by a rise in crude oil 
prices. It was widely acknowledged that Japan's economy had successfully contained "home-
made" inflation. 
The  second  factor  was  that  Japan  succeeded  in  transforming  its  economic  structure  while 
accepting the change in the relative-price structure due to the surge in crude oil prices. After 
the first oil crisis, Japanese firms pursued resource-saving production, and as a result, crude 
oil consumption per unit of output – the amount of crude oil used to produce a unit of value 
added  –  decreased  in  1980  by  22  percent  compared  with  the  period  of  the  first  oil  crisis. 
Meanwhile, Japanese firms made use of the change in the operating environment, seeking to 
develop energy-saving products such as small passenger cars, and this strengthened their 
international competitiveness. To put it another way, Japanese firms – which succeeded in 
transforming  their  production  structure  into  one  that  was  compatible  with  high  crude  oil 
prices, or with the new structure of relative prices – reacted positively to the change in the 
operating  environment  and  created  areas  of  comparative  advantage.  This  contributed  to 
overcoming the second oil crisis and to Japan's economic growth thereafter. 
The two factors I have just mentioned caused the large difference in economic developments 
between the two oil crises. The experience seems to clearly suggest policies necessary to 
cope  with  the  current  rise  in  crude  oil  prices.  First,  the  second-round  effects  should  be 
the  government's  plan 
for  "remodeling 
from 
2 
 BIS Review 101/2008
avoided so that inflation is contained within the rise in import costs and passing of the rise in 
import costs on to output prices. And second, it is crucial to promote a change in economic 
and industrial structures to make them compatible with the new structure of relative prices. It 
should, however, be noted that the current rise in crude oil prices has characteristics different 
from  the  past  crises.  In  the  current  phase,  global  demand  for  crude  oil  has  continued 
expanding over an extended period, and growth in demand from emerging economies has 
contributed in particular. On the other hand, in the past oil crises, supply constraints were the 
main cause of the rise in crude oil prices, rather than increases in demand. I will touch on 
such issues related to the difference in the background of price rises later when I discuss 
risks related to price developments. 
The U.S. subprime mortgage problem 
III.  
I  will  move  on  to  the  second  factor  causing  sluggish  growth  in  Japan's  economy:  the 
disruptions in global financial markets and the slowdown in the global economy. 
Roughly one year has passed since the U.S. subprime mortgage problem emerged, and the 
nature of this problem seems to have evolved over time. 
The first stage was the time of "liquidity constraints." Conduits and aggregators of securitized 
products  including  those  backed  by  subprime  mortgages  faced  difficulties  in  raising  funds 
from  the  market,  as  a  result  of  large  declines  in  the  prices  of  such  products.  Financial 
institutions' liquidity demand grew considerably to provide the conduits and aggregators with 
liquidity,  and  this  exerted  strong  upward  pressure  on  interest  rates  in  U.S.  and  European 
money markets, where financial institutions borrow and lend funds. In reaction to the liquidity 
constraints  and  the  surge  in  money  market  rates,  central  banks  have  strived  to  ensure 
market  stability  by  devising  various  measures,  for  example,  extending  the  term  of  liquidity 
provisions and widening the range of counterparties and collaterals. 
As the money markets gradually moved closer toward stability, the second stage emerged: 
the  time  of  "credit  contraction,"  which  began  in  early  2008.  The  declines  in  the  prices  of 
securitized products increased financial institutions' losses and reduced their capital bases; 
consequently,  financial  institutions  have  tightened  their  credit  standards  and  their  lending 
attitudes. This has exerted strong downward pressure on the economy. 
Most  recently,  a  third  stage  has  emerged.  In  this  stage,  delinquency  rates  of  not  only 
subprime-related products but also commercial real estate loans and consumer loans have 
been rising reflecting the sluggishness in the U.S. economy. As a result, a situation in which 
the  sluggishness  in  the  economy  causes  financial  institutions'  asset  quality  to  deteriorate 
further – with further adverse impact on the economy – is becoming a cause for concern. To 
put  it  another  way,  at  the  third  stage  there  are  concerns  about  a  negative  feedback  loop 
between financial markets, asset prices, and economic activity. 
Many discussions have taken place on what kinds of lessons can be drawn from the U.S. 
subprime mortgage problem. Since the nature and background of the problem are complex, I 
hesitate to draw lessons prematurely. It might be argued that the cause of the problem was 
investors'  and  financial  institutions'  lax  risk  management.  This  observation  seems  to  me 
accurate, but it would not be true to say there were no warning signs about the accumulation 
of  risks.  We  must  therefore  pursue  the  reason  why  many  market  participants  made  the 
mistakes that eventually led to the problem despite the warning signs. Although solutions at 
this  point  have  yet  to  fully  emerge,  several  major  issues –  although not  completely  new  – 
seem again to have come to the fore. 
Looking back at previous bubbles in financial activities and asset prices, including Japan's 
asset price bubble, we can see that many have occurred following a period of price stability 
and continued low interest rates. In the current phase too, investors and financial institutions 
eased their credit standards and increased dependence on loans or leverage, accelerating 
their "search for yield" through investment in, for example, securitized products. Underlying 
BIS Review 101/2008 
 3
this situation were excessively accommodative financial conditions and credit expansion on a 
global scale – amid a prolonged period of economic growth and low inflation. On the other 
hand, when bubbles burst, capital bases of financial institutions are impaired and the period 
of credit contraction begins, depressing economic activity and constraining the transmission 
of  monetary  policy.  Similar  to  cases  when  bubbles  emerge,  the  current  U.S.  subprime 
mortgage problem keenly illustrates that it is difficult to recognize the bursting of a bubble as 
it happens. Central banks should therefore pay due attention, in their conduct of monetary 
policy,  to  the  negative  effects  that  may  arise  from  prolonged  accommodative  financial 
conditions. 
Let me bring the topic back to the future course of the global economy. As described earlier, 
with regard to the U.S. economy, it is unforeseeable when and how the negative feedback 
loop between financial markets, asset prices, and economic activity will diminish. In Europe, 
economic  growth  is  slowing  further.  In  Asia,  although  the  Chinese  and  Indian  economies 
continue  to  post  high  growth,  some  of  the  NIEs  and  ASEAN  economies  are  showing 
deceleration in exports and signs of slowing domestic demand. Developments in the global 
economy as a whole are therefore likely to remain highly uncertain for the time being. 
The outlook for Japan's economy and the conduct of monetary policy 
IV.  
In view of the two problems I have discussed, I would now like to talk about the outlook for 
Japan's economy and the Bank's conduct of monetary policy.  
The Bank's main scenario is as follows: growth will likely remain sluggish for the time being 
against the backdrop of high energy and materials prices and weaker growth in exports due 
to a slowdown in overseas economies; however, Japan's economy is unlikely to experience a 
deep adjustment phase. 
Let  me  explain  the  thinking  behind  this  projection.  First,  as  a  result  of  firms'  restructuring 
efforts,  which  continued  in  the  1990s  up  until  recently,  the  "three  excesses"  –  namely,  in 
production capacity, employment, and debt – have been eliminated, and Japan's economy 
has become more resilient to shocks that weaken economic growth. Second, losses incurred 
by  Japanese  financial  institutions  due  to  the  subprime  mortgage  problem  are  limited 
compared  to  those  of  U.S.  and  European  financial  institutions  and  Japanese  financial 
markets  continue  to  be  stable,  which  suggests  that  the  functioning  of  the  financial  system 
remains intact. And third, Japan's financial conditions have been accommodative. Although it 
is  a  cause  for  concern  that  financing  conditions  of  firms  in  construction  and  real  estate 
industries and small firms in general are becoming increasingly severe, financial conditions 
taken as a whole have been accommodative. The short-term real interest rate calculated by 
subtracting the CPI inflation rate from the call rate has been negative, as the policy interest 
rate – the uncollateralized overnight call rate – has been at a low level of 0.5 percent. Firms' 
financing  costs  have  also  remained  low.  This  accommodative  environment  for  corporate 
finance is expected to continue to support business activity. 
Because of this, it is reasonable to expect, as the main scenario, that Japan's economy will 
return  gradually  to  a  moderate  growth  path  as  commodity  prices  level  out  and  overseas 
economies move out of their deceleration phase. 
Regarding the outlook for prices, it is unlikely that the second-round effects will intensify in 
the  near  term,  judging  from  the  current  level  of  the  domestic  output  gap,  the  inflation 
expectations  of  households,  and  firms'  price-setting  behavior.  Developments  in  wages  are 
one of the important indicators pointing to the emergence of second-round effects, and so far 
wage growth has been relatively weak. The rate of increase in consumer prices will likely rise 
slightly over the coming months, since the pass-through of earlier increases in import prices 
is expected to continue for a while. Thereafter, however, the rate of increase is expected to 
decline gradually in line with the expected moderation in the rises in international commodity 
prices and the resultant subsiding of firms' raising of sales prices.  
4 
 BIS Review 101/2008
Economic  forecasts  often  differ.  Economic  forecasters,  including  central  banks,  do  their 
utmost to provide accurate projections of economic activity and prices, but projection errors 
are often sizable. In view of that, it is very important for the Bank to carefully consider the 
most  likely  outlook,  the  main  scenario,  as  well  as  various  factors  causing  uncertainty  in 
making economic projections, which are the basis for the conduct of monetary policy. It is 
also  important  for  the  Bank  to  not  take  any  predetermined  view,  but  to  maintain  an  open-
minded stance when it examines incoming data and to revise its projections as necessary. 
Let me move now to a discussion of risk factors. Global financial markets, which I mentioned 
earlier, are likely to remain unstable for the time being, and there are downside risks to the 
world  economy.  Regarding  the  outlook  for  Japan's  economy,  there  is  a  risk  that  domestic 
demand  may  weaken  as  a  result  of  the  outflow  of  income  due  to  the  high  energy  and 
materials prices. The Bank is therefore attentive to the downside risks to economic growth, 
although the economy does not face the need to adjust production capacity and employment.  
As  for  prices,  the  Bank  is  focusing  on  the  upside  risks  to  inflation.  Energy  and  materials 
prices  have  been  rising  for  a  long  time  due  to  the  aforementioned  worldwide  growth  in 
demand,  especially  demand  from  emerging  economies,  in  addition  to  factors  pertaining  to 
supply constraints. Therefore, this rise should not be regarded as temporary. Given the trend 
increases in energy and materials prices and the fact that Japan's economy has not faced 
such a high level of inflation in recent years, the Bank should pay attention to the risk that 
possible changes in the inflation expectations of households and firms' price-setting behavior 
may generate second-round effects.  
As  I  have  explained,  the  current  situation  requires  the  Bank  to  carefully  monitor  both 
downside risks to economic growth and upside risks to inflation. Furthermore, if the downside 
risks  to  the  economy  turn  out  to  decrease,  there  is  a  risk  that  prolonging  the  period  of 
accommodative financial conditions will lead to swings in economic activity and prices. The 
Bank continues to carefully assess the future outlook for economic activity and prices, closely 
considering  the  likelihood  of  its  projections  as  well  as  factors  posing  upside  or  downside 
risks,  and  will  implement  its  policies  in  a  flexible  manner.  Moreover,  since  global  financial 
markets are expected to remain unstable and there are various uncertainties in the outlook 
for  economic  activity  and  prices,  it  is  essential  for  the  Bank  to  ensure  the  stability  of  the 
Japanese financial markets.  
Closing remarks 
As  I  have  so  far  explained,  the  current  state  of  Japan's  economy  and  the  world  economy 
pose an extremely difficult situation for the conduct of monetary policy. While monetary policy 
is expected to contribute to sustainable economic growth by creating a stable financial and 
economic environment, it cannot by itself increase the potential growth rate of the economy. 
A prerequisite for the economy to boost its growth potential is a rise in productivity, facilitated 
by innovation and a continual review of resource allocation.  
The  Kansai  region  is  famous  for  its  long  history  of  pioneering  entrepreneurship,  as 
demonstrated by the fact that the world's first futures trading was carried out at the Dojima 
rice  exchange  in  Osaka  during  the  Edo  Period  (1603-1867).  In  the  current  environment,  I 
look forward to seeing the region's originality and inventiveness add to the vigor of Japan's 
economy.  For  our  part,  we  will  continue  to  support  your  efforts  through  our  conduct  of 
monetary policy. 
I would like to close my speech by mentioning an early episode in the relationship between 
the  business  community  of  the  Kansai  region  and  the  Bank  of  Japan.  The  Bank  was 
established in 1882 with capital of 10 million yen – equivalent to approximately 30 billion yen 
today. Of the contribution to the Bank's capital from the private sector, which accounted for 
half of the total, about 60 percent of the shareholders and 48 percent of the amount came 
from  the  Kansai  region.  In  other  words,  the  business  community  of  the  Kansai  region 
BIS Review 101/2008 
 5
contributed  significantly  to  the  establishment  of  Japan's  central  banking  system,  which 
underpins the market economy.  
Thank you very much for your kind attention. 
6 
 BIS Review 101/2008
