Irma Rosenberg: The current situation and monetary policy 
Speech  by  Ms  Irma  Rosenberg,  First  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Sveriges  Riksbank,  at  the 
Stockholm Chamber of Commerce, Stockholm, 30 May 2008. 
 The Riksbank is currently facing a rather difficult task. This, by the way, does not apply just to 
us but to the other central banks as well. The Riksbank’s task is to keep inflation low and 
stable  and  to  help  make  sure  that  production  and  employment  levels  do  not  fluctuate  too 
much. However, inflation is now high at the same time as economic activity is slowing down. 
Raising the policy rate in order to curb inflation would lead to a further decrease in economic 
activity. This is a dilemma that we and other central banks face. 
When  the  Executive  Board  met  on  22  April  to  decide  on  monetary  policy,  we  took  into 
account, as usual, all the factors that may affect the development of the Swedish economy. 
Our decision then was  to hold the  repo rate unchanged. Today, I intend to tell you a little 
about  our  thinking  at  the  time  and  to  discuss  the  problems  we  now  face  in  the  current 
situation. In particular I will, in a little more detail, address the dramatic development in food 
and energy prices in recent years and how these affect inflation in Sweden. I will conclude by 
discussing the new information we have received since our latest meeting. 
However, let me say straight away that although energy and food price trends will affect the 
general price level during a transitional period, it is monetary policy that determines the level 
of inflation in the long term. The Riksbank does not need to, and shall not, accept a higher 
rate of inflation in the long term just because the prices of certain goods rise. However, the 
time  required  to  get  inflation  back  on  target  may  vary  depending  on  how  severe  and 
prolonged the shocks are and how much consideration the central bank wants to give to the 
real economy. I will return to my views on this issue in a moment.  
Weaker economic activity versus rising inflation 
Let  me  begin  by  summing  up  the  situation  at  the  time  of  our  latest  policy  rate  decision  in 
April.  The  turmoil  on  the  financial  markets  had  continued  since  our  previous  meeting  in 
February and the interbank rates had risen again. The high interest rates on interbank loans 
revealed that many banks were still experiencing liquidity problems. There was considerable 
uncertainty over how long it would take for conditions to return to normal. This also increased 
uncertainty over how great the impact of this financial turmoil would be on the real economy 
internationally and in Sweden.  
Economic activity in the United States had been weaker than expected and our forecast for 
US growth was revised sharply downwards in April. In the euro area too, economic activity 
appeared  to  be  slightly  weaker.  We  assumed  therefore  that  growth  in  the  world  economy 
would be somewhat weaker in 2008 and 2009. 
In  Sweden  on  the  other  hand,  economic  activity  was  somewhat  stronger  than  expected. 
Nevertheless, it was assumed that the weaker prospects for economic activity internationally 
would lead to a slowing down of growth in Sweden as well later this year and early next year. 
Signs  of  this  slowdown  were  already  beginning  to  appear,  for  example  in  the  data  in  the 
National Institute of Economic Research’s Economic Tendency Survey and in the statistics 
on retail sales and new job vacancies.  
Our assessment, however, was that the slowdown in Sweden would be relatively moderate. 
GDP growth remained good, and the potential for future growth was still relatively favourable. 
The  level  of  saving  among  households  and  in  the  public  sector  was  high.  Property  prices 
were fairly stable and the direct effects of the financial turmoil were expected to be relatively 
slight.  
BIS Review 68/2008 
 1
At the same time, inflation was high both in Sweden and abroad. This related above all to 
higher  energy  and  food  prices  on  the  world  market.  Inflation  expectations  in  Sweden  also 
remained high, and were also way above the inflation target even in the longer term. We thus 
had  to  take  various  counteracting  factors  into  account.  On  the  one  hand,  growth  in  the 
Swedish economy was still good and both inflation and inflation expectations were high. On 
the other hand, the turmoil on the financial markets and weaker growth in the world economy 
were expected to curb growth and inflation in Sweden. This led to our decision to hold the 
repo rate unchanged at 4.25 per cent, a decision I voted in favour of. We also held to our 
forecast that the repo rate would remain at this level over the coming year in order to bring 
inflation back to the target over a period of a couple of years and to enable production and 
employment to develop in a balanced way.  
We also emphasised that there was still considerable uncertainty over future developments. 
Personally, I saw an evident risk that the slowdown in the United States could become more 
prolonged than was assumed in the forecast. I also saw a risk that the rapid price increases 
in the world energy and food markets could subdue demand and thereby growth in the rest of 
the world, which could also further hold back Swedish growth and inflation. There were also 
clear signs that the Swedish labour market was about to cool down and my view was that the 
weak  productivity  growth  indicated  that  companies’  demand  for  labour  could  decline.  This 
indicated that there was no great risk that the rate of wage increase would accelerate more 
than anticipated. This was the combined reason why I did not wish to rule out the possibility 
of a cut in the policy rate later in the forecast period. 
For my part I considered it important to ensure, when making the interest rate decision that 
the  strong  price  impulses  from  the  world  market  do  not  push  up  inflation  expectations 
lastingly  and  through  second  round  effects  lead  to  higher  permanent  inflation.  However, 
there is considerable uncertainty as to how commodity prices in the world market will develop 
and what consequences this will have for inflation and monetary policy. Let me explain this 
reasoning.  
Relative prices are only important to monetary policy if they influence inflation… 
Since  last  autumn  Swedish  food  prices  and  oil  product  prices  in  the  CPI  have  increased 
rapidly. In April this year food prices had risen by around 6 per cent compared with the same 
month last year. They thus contributed around 1 percentage point in April to the CPI inflation, 
which  amounted  in  total  to  3.4  per  cent.  Oil  product  prices  contributed  a  further  0.3 
percentage points. 
The  upswing  in  Swedish  food  prices  mainly  reflects  the  rapid  price  increases  in  the  world 
food commodities market over the past year. Despite the turbulence in the financial markets 
and weaker growth in the world, food prices in the world market have increased by 60 per 
cent (expressed in USD) since the end of 2006.1 Prices of many goods have reached record 
high  levels,  including  prices  of  soya  beans,  maize  and  wheat.  The  oil  price  has  also 
constantly reached new record levels in recent years. 
In the world market we have nevertheless been able to see a slightly calmer development in 
the price of some food commodities. The price of wheat has fallen. According to the Chicago 
stock exchange, the forward price in dollars fell by 30 per cent between mid-March and the 
end  of  April.  But  the  price  is  still  slightly  above  the  average  for  last  year.  One  factor 
contributing to the decline in the price of wheat is that the Ukraine has eased its restrictions 
on  wheat  exports.  The  price  of  rice  has  also  fallen  very  recently,  while  maize  prices  have 
                                                 
1   According to The Economist's commodity price index for food. 
2 
 BIS Review 68/2008
continued to rise.2 In total, food prices have fallen slightly in recent months, but are expected 
to remain at high levels in the future.3  
What significance does the fact that world market prices are rising rapidly have for monetary 
policy? One must realise that these are examples of changes in relative prices. That is, the 
prices  of  commodities  such  as  food  and  energy  are  rising  in  relation  to  the  prices  of,  for 
instance, manufactured goods. For monetary policy it is important to note that the changes in 
relative  prices  are  not  in  themselves  inflation.  Inflation  refers  to  a  rise in  the  general  price 
level, or the average of all prices.  
Central banks cannot and should not counteract changes in relative prices. But what central 
banks  can  influence  with  monetary  policy  is  the  way  inflation  develops  in  the  long  term. 
Some changes in relative prices can occur when inflation is low if the price increases on the 
goods that have become relatively more expensive is compensated by a weaker growth in 
prices  of  other  goods.  The  same  relative  price  change  can  be  achieved  when  inflation  is 
high, if the prices of all goods rise, but at different paces. 
If  food  commodities  and  oil  prices  soar,  this  means  that  companies'  costs  will  rise  and 
inflation  will  be  pushed  up.  It  is  not  possible  to  immediately  counteract  such  strong 
inflationary  impulses  with  monetary  policy,  as  monetary  policy  works  with  a  time  lag.  But 
what a central bank with an inflation target then faces is the task of ensuring that the rising 
food and energy prices do not result in permanently higher inflation expectations and second 
round effects in the form of demands for higher wages and prices of other goods. Regardless 
of what happens to the relative prices, our task is – and this is important – to ensure that 
inflation is on average 2 per cent a couple of years ahead.  
…and we are only concerned with the lasting effects 
How should monetary policy respond to the rapid increases in food prices? This depends on 
whether the effects on inflation are assessed as temporary or lasting. Monetary policy cannot 
respond  to  temporary  upswings  in  inflation  that  can  be  expected  to  subside  quickly,  as 
monetary  policy  acts  with  a  time  lag.  Raising  the  interest  rate  to  counteract  temporary 
inflationary impulses could cause unnecessary costs. And here I mean costs in the form of 
production and employment falling too much. However, monetary policy should react to price 
impulses that would otherwise risk having lasting effects on inflation. 
As I have mentioned earlier, monetary policy both in Sweden and abroad is facing a severe 
challenge. On the one hand, the fact that oil and food prices have recently shown a rapid 
upturn,  both  in  the  world  market  and  in  Sweden,  means  that  inflationary  pressures  have 
increased substantially. This implies that the interest rate should be raised. 
On the other hand, our most recent growth forecasts indicate that international growth will be 
weaker, or at least in the United States and the euro area. There is a risk that this will also 
subdue growth in the rest of the world.  
In  addition,  the  upswing  in  oil  and  food  prices  risks  further  dampening  world  growth. 
Domestic  demand  is  a strong  driving  force  for growth  in  many  developing  countries  and it 
may be weakened by the large rises in food prices. But US growth is also highly dependent 
on domestic consumption, which can be negatively affected by the high oil price. All of these 
factors would instead indicate that the interest rate should be cut. 
                                                 
2  
3   According to the Food Outlook from the Food and Agricultural Organization of the United Nations (FAO), 22 
International perspective, no. 15 2008, LRF, the Federation of Swedish Farmers. 
May 2008. 
BIS Review 68/2008 
 3
When we decide on the future direction of monetary policy, it is important to know whether 
the rising oil and food prices will have lasting or temporary effects on inflation.4 It is difficult to 
know  this  in  advance.  We  must  follow  developments  closely.  But  we  can  receive  some 
guidance by looking at the factors that lie behind the price increases.  
Increased demand, supply effects and portfolio investment behind rising commodity 
prices 
One reason for the high commodity prices is the increased demand in the world market from 
emerging economies. Higher incomes per capita in China, India and other rapidly growing 
economies  have  led  to  increased  demand  for  food  and  also  to  changes  in  the  patterns  of 
food consumption. Demand for meat has increased in particular, which has in turn pushed up 
the  demand  for  and  prices  of  feed  grain.  This  also  spreads  to  other  food  crops.  It  is 
reasonable to believe that the demand for food in the world will remain high.  
Another important driving force behind the world demand for commodities is the investment 
in ethanol and biodiesel in recent years. The increased use of some food commodities in the 
production of biofuels limits the supply of food and increases the price of food crops. When 
the  oil  price  reaches  record  high  levels  it  creates  a  further  incentive  to  increase  the 
production of  biofuels at  the  cost  of  food.  The  IMF  observes  in  its  most  recent  report  that 
biofuels account for only 1.5 per cent of the supply of liquid energy. But the use of these fuels 
led to demand for crops used in their production doubling between 2006 and 2007.5
In the slightly longer term the high food prices lead to the supply of food increasing and this 
dampens prices. But there are also factors that could hold back supply and mean that it does 
not increase as much as would be necessary to meet the increased world demand. Some 
supply shocks are of a temporary nature, such as the drought in Australia last year and poor 
harvests in some regions. One cannot rule out the possibility that climate effects have played 
a role, and in this case such shocks may be a recurring problem.6  
Another  factor  that  has  had  a  restraining  effect  on  supply  and  has  thereby  contributed  to 
boosting  the  increase  in  world  food  prices  is  the  export  restrictions  introduced  by  some 
countries  that  are  major  producers  of  food,  in  an  attempt  to  protect  their  domestic 
consumption  from  the  price  increases.  The  effect  on  the  price  of  wheat  when  export 
restrictions were reduced in the Ukraine is, as I mentioned earlier, a good example of how 
this can have tangible effect on prices.  
Another  factor  that  has  certainly  been  significant  is  the  depreciation  of  the  dollar. 
Commodities are priced in dollars, and this may mean that commodities exporters will try to 
gain compensation through higher prices if the dollar falls.  
In  recent  years,  portfolio  investment  in  commodities  has  become  an  increasingly  common 
means of diversifying and spreading risks. The fact that interest has increased is due to the 
return on other investments deteriorating and this has probably contributed to reinforcing the 
upswing  in  commodity  prices.  If  the  expectations  of  the  relative  return  on  this  type  of 
investment were to decline, it could instead have a subduing effect on prices. 
How  does  one  weigh  together  all  of  the  factors  I  have  mentioned?  There  is  of  course 
considerable uncertainty. The assessment we made at our last monetary policy meeting was 
that the world market prices would not continue to rise at the same rapid rate. This meant 
that the high inflationary impulses from the price rise on food commodities were assessed as 
                                                 
4   See Irma Rosenberg, “Rising commodity prices”, speech held on 9 May 2008. 
5  
6   See the UN’s climate panel 2007: Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability. 
IMF (2008) World Economic Outlook. 
4 
 BIS Review 68/2008
partly  temporary.  This  is  something  that  is  so  far  supported  by  the  tendencies  towards  a 
slowdown in food commodities prices in the world market which we have been able to see 
recently.  
Information received since the last meeting 
I now intend to move on to say a few words about the information received since the most 
recent interest rate decision.  
There  are  now  signs  that  may  indicate  that  the  turbulence  in  the  financial  markets  has 
declined  somewhat.  The  Federal  Reserve’s  actions  to  save  the  US  investment  bank  Bear 
Stearns appear to have contributed to restoring confidence among investors. Some signs of 
this are that both access to capital and investors’ willingness to take risk have increased. The 
CDS premiums, which reflect the market’s valuation of credit risk, have fallen since the end 
of March. The so-called TED spread (the difference between the three-month interbank rate 
and the corresponding treasury bill rate) has fallen in the United States and is currently at 
around  the  same  level  as  in  the  euro  area.  However,  the  Swedish  TED  spreads  have  not 
fallen  back  recently,  and  they  are  slightly  higher  than,  for  instance,  the  corresponding 
spreads in the euro area. This is partly linked to the short-term Swedish government rates 
not having risen as much as the US rates, for example, which is probably due to a reduced 
supply  of  treasury  bills.  In  other  words,  this  spread  cannot  be  regarded  as  a  sign  that  the 
market  has  changed  its  view  of  the  risks  in  the  Swedish  bank  sector.  As  always,  the 
Riksbank  is  closely  following  this  development  and  has  not  seen  any  reasons  to  take 
extraordinary measures. The Swedish banks have no problems with funding. 
However, there is still considerable uncertainty in the financial market, and there is a risk of 
setbacks. Although the interbank rates, that is, the rates banks pay when borrowing from one 
another,  have  fallen  they  are  still  much  higher  than  the  average  rate  in  recent  years.  The 
TED spread in the United States and the euro area is for example three times higher than the 
average. The housing market in the United States has not yet bottomed out. If new large loan 
losses arise in the financial system again this may shake market confidence once again.  
Over the past few days a large amount of new information has been received regarding the 
situation in the US economy. Inflation in the United States remains high. This is largely due 
to the increasingly high food prices, as well as high energy prices. However, the rate of wage 
increase has slackened. Inflation in the euro area is also affected by the higher energy and 
food prices. However, growth appears to have been stronger than we had expected for the 
United States in the most recent quarter, as well as in the euro area, particularly Germany. At 
the same time, there are indicators for both the United States and the euro area pointing to a 
slowdown in the second quarter.  
International developments affect us all, both you as entrepreneurs and Sweden as a whole. 
We have assumed that foreign trade will slow down in the future, as world growth is expected 
to  continue  slackening.  Orders  from  the  export  market  have  so  far  declined  in  2008.  New 
statistics  on  foreign  trade  indicate  that  a  slowdown  can  be  expected  during  the  second 
quarter, roughly in line with the assessment made in the April Monetary Policy Update. But it 
is difficult to compare foreign trade in recent months with the corresponding period last year, 
as we have had a leap year this year and the Easter holiday came unusually early. This has 
an effect on the number of business and working days.  
Employment  has  continued 
in  recent  months  and 
unemployment is still falling slightly. But there are also indications that the labour market will 
weaken in the future. The number of redundancy notices in April was double that in the same 
month  last  year.  At  the  same  time,  it  is  still  difficult  to  find  the  right  competence  to  fill  job 
vacancies  in  some  industries.  The  demand  for  labour  has  declined  in  recent  months,  for 
instance, the number of newly-reported vacancies has declined. This picture is confirmed by 
the  National  Institute  of  Economic  Research’s  most  recent  Economic  Tendency  Survey, 
increase  relatively  strongly 
to 
BIS Review 68/2008 
 5
which indicates a declining need for new recruitment in the business sector. The survey also 
shows  that  companies’  views  of  the  Swedish  economy  have  deteriorated.  All  in  all,  the 
confidence indicator for the business sector has moved from being stronger than normal to 
slightly weaker between April and May.  
The Consumer Tendency Survey also indicates that consumers have become increasingly 
pessimistic. Their view of the Swedish economy has continued to deteriorate and they have 
also  become  gloomier  with  regard  to  their  own  economy.  At  the  same  time,  households’ 
inflation expectations one year ahead have risen significantly. However, it can also be noted 
that households perceive the current inflation rate to be much higher than it actually is. Prior 
to  our  next  monetary  policy  meeting  we  will  receive  measures  of  inflation  expectations 
among other groups which must also be analysed (Prospera). 
The new National Accounts for the first quarter that were published earlier today show that 
growth  in  the  first  quarter  was  weaker  than  we  had  expected.  They  also  show  that  labour 
productivity increased slightly in the first quarter of this year, after having fallen for most of 
2007.  We  will  be  closely  analysing  what  the  new  GDP  statistics  otherwise  entail  for  our 
assessments prior to our next meeting in July. 
Preliminary statistics indicate a lower rate of wage increase than we had estimated – both for 
blue-collar  and  white-collar  workers  –  during  the  first  months  of  this  year.  One  possible 
reason for this is the composition effects in the wage statistics. If, for example, new groups 
are being employed at low entry wages to a greater extent than before, then the average rate 
of wage increase will be lower. But so far there have not been any signs that the rate of wage 
increase has accelerated. Of course, this is something we are monitoring closely. 
Inflation is still high, just as I said before. In April it was 3.4 per cent according to the CPI. 
This was entirely in line with our assessment at the most recent monetary policy meeting. 
Since April the oil price has risen substantially. Spot and forward prices of oil are now around 
30 per cent higher than they were in April. It is probable that the higher oil prices may affect 
inflation via higher petrol prices.  
In July we will once again weigh up these counteracting forces 
This was some of the new information received in recent weeks. Further information will be 
presented over the coming weeks, and we will give consideration to this information as well 
at our next monetary policy meeting.  
At the most recent meeting in April the Executive Board’s view of the interest rate path was 
the same as in February. My view then was that there was a greater risk of international price 
impulses forcing up inflation through higher inflation expectations. This was a reason why I 
voted to hold the repo rate unchanged. At the same time, I also considered that the financial 
unease and the slowdown in international growth could mean a risk of weaker growth and 
inflation in the long term.  
The counteracting forces we had to consider in April are still in place. There are discussions 
of what will happen to monetary policy when the oil price has risen roughly in line with the 
alternative scenario outlined in our February report. This could indicate a higher interest rate 
path. But it is not that simple. The analysis made in that scenario only takes into account an 
alternative outcome for the oil price. The analysis made in a monetary policy decision takes 
into account everything that has happened in the economy. How all these aspects should be 
weighed  together  is  something  I  and  my  colleagues  on  the  Executive  Board  will  have  to 
consider when we meet for a new monetary policy meeting in the first week of July. 
6 
 BIS Review 68/2008
