Shyamala Gopinath: Banks' relationship with customers – evolving 
perspectives 
Address by Ms Shyamala Gopinath, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the 
4th M R Pai Memorial Award Function, organised by the All India Depositors' Association, 
Mumbai, 8 April 2008. 
 I feel it a privilege to be associated with today's function as a tribute to the late Mr. M.R.Pai, 
the  doyen  of  consumer  activism  in  India.  He  successfully  championed  the  cause  of 
consumers,  particularly  bank  depositors,  during  a  different  economic  setting  when  the 
institutional  dynamics  were  different,  particularly  for  the  public  sector,  and  customer  as  a 
generic  entity  had  not  acquired  the  high  pedestal  in  public  discourses  and  management 
meetings. Times have changed. But as a Sanskrit saying goes…kadachit anidrishyam jagat. 
The  world  has  always  been  the  same  and  consumer  issues  in  the  new  economic  order 
remain as pressing as ever, even more so. Even in developed countries issues relating to 
customer  protection  and  financial  inclusion  are  finding  increasing  focus.  There  is  as  much 
need for a Mr. Pai today, as it was then in putting across consumer issues to the fore in an 
effective manner.  
In  my  address  today,  I  intend  to  share  my  perspective  on  the  evolving  nature  of  banks' 
relationship with its individual customers and the new challenges in this regard. The role of 
banks in intermediation of financial needs of different classes of customers has undergone 
significant  changes.  For  the  sake  of  convenience,  banks'  various  roles  vis-à-vis  their 
customers  can  be  broadly  categorized  as  (i)  acceptors  of  deposits  (ii)  credit  providers 
(ii) providers of payments and remittances services (iv) provider of foreign exchange services 
(v)  facilitators  in  circulation  of  currency  notes/coins;  and  (vi)  providers  of  financial 
instruments.  
One of the defining features of the process of reforms initiated in the early nineties was the 
deregulation  of  interest  rates.  On  the  deposit  side,  interest  rates  on  all  deposits,  except 
savings  accounts,  have  been  de-regulated.  Similarly,  on  the  bank  lending,  rates  to  be 
charged by the banks on most of the credit facilities have been deregulated except a small 
component for lending related to certain segments. Simultaneously, in 1993, as per the new 
licensing policy, fresh licenses were issued to a few private sector banks with the objective of 
enhancing the level of competition in the sector. One of the expected outcomes of this policy 
was  expanding  the  reach  of  banking  services,  both  in  qualitative  and  quantitative  terms. 
Technology emerged as the backbone of banking operations, revolutionizing service delivery 
through new platforms and channels. But it became evident gradually, these developments 
created more challenges for the customer in terms of service quality, non-human interface, 
unsolicited marketing of products, ever-increasing fine-prints on documents etc. all of which 
got  compounded  on  account  of  basic  financial  unawareness  on  part  of  the  ordinary 
customer. 
Self regulation by the banking industry would have been the ideal redressal for the emerging 
challenges. But due to heterogeneous and complex nature of the problems coming to light, 
some  regulatory  initiative  had  become  necessary.  In  the  mid  term  review  of  the  Monetary 
and Credit Policy 2003-2004, it was decided to review the level of public service provided by 
the Reserve Bank and banks, and to evolve appropriate incentives to facilitate change on an 
ongoing basis. Accordingly, the Committee on Procedures and Performance Audit on Public 
Services  was  set  up.  The  Committee  focused  on  the  inadequacy  in  banking  services 
available to common person and looked into the need to (i) benchmark the current level of 
service,  (ii)  review  the  progress  periodically,  (iii)  enhance  the  timeliness  and  quality,  (iv) 
rationalize  the  processes  taking  into  account  technological  developments,  and  (v)  suggest 
appropriate incentives to facilitate change on an ongoing basis. Following the Committee's 
BIS Review 43/2008 
 1
   recommendations,  various  important  customer  service  regulations  were  issued,  notable 
among  them  being  the  guidelines  on  facilitating  the  payment  to  survivor/nominee  of  a 
deceased depositor, simplifying the KYC requirements, collection of cheques and facilitating 
operations in bank accounts.  
Simultaneously,  a  series  of  measures  was  taken  to  improve  the  institutional  mechanism 
within as well as outside the banks to improve the quality of customer service.  
• 
the  branch 
All  the  banks  were  advised  to  constitute  a  Customer  Service  Committee  of  the 
Board  with  a  view  to  strengthening  the  corporate  governance  structure  in  the 
banking  system  and  also  to  bring  about  ongoing  improvements  in  the  quality  of 
customer service provided by the banks.  
In order to encourage a formal channel of communication between the customers 
and the bank at the branch level, banks were advised to take necessary steps for 
strengthening 
level  customer  service  committees  with  greater 
involvement  of  customers.  Further  as  senior  citizens  usually  form  an  important 
constituency in banks, banks were advised to preferably include a senior citizen in 
the branch level committees.  
The Banking Ombudsman Scheme was revised to enlarge the scope of the Scheme 
to  include  customer  complaints  on  certain  new  areas,  such  as,  credit  card 
complaints,  deficiencies  in  providing  the  promised  services  even  by  banks'  sales 
agents,  levying  service  charges  without  prior  notice  to  the  customer  and  non- 
adherence to the fair practices code as adopted by individual banks. The Scheme 
therefore  provides  a  forum  to  bank  customers  to  seek  redressal  of  their  most 
common complaints against banks, including those relating to credit cards, service 
charges,  promises  given  by  the  sales  agents  of  banks,  but  not  kept  by  banks,  as 
also,  delays  in  delivery  of  bank  services.  The  bank  customers  would  be  able  to 
complain  about  non-payment  or  any  inordinate  delay  in  payments  or  collection  of 
cheques  towards  bills  or  remittances  by  banks,  as  also  non-acceptance  of  small 
denomination  notes  and  coins  or  charging  of  commission  for  acceptance  of  small 
denomination notes and coins by banks. The present Scheme also allows appeals 
from both banks and complainants against the decisions of Banking Ombudsmen.  
Recognising an institutional gap in measuring the performance of the banks against 
codes  and standards  based  on  established  best  practices,  Reserve  Bank  of  India 
has  taken  the  initiative  in  setting  up  the  Banking  Codes  and  Standards  Board  of 
India (BCSBI). It is an autonomous and independent body, adopting the stance of a 
self-regulatory organisation in the larger interest of improving the quality of customer 
services by the Indian banking system. Banks register themselves with the Board as 
its  members  and  provide  services  as  per  the  agreed  standards  and  codes.  The 
Board  in  turn,  monitors  and  assesses  the  compliance  with  codes  and  standards 
which  the  banks  have  agreed  to.  The  registration  of  banks  with  the  BCSBI,  as 
members, enables the Reserve Bank of India to derive greater supervisory comfort, 
so also the customers of the member banks. This would also enable the BCSBI to 
accommodate  the  bank-specific  differences  in  the  customer  service  related 
benchmarks  set  by  the  banks  for  themselves.  As  on  date,  around  71  banks  have 
joined the BCSBI as members.  
Deposit accounts 
I.  
With  regard  to  account  holders,  it  would  be  useful,  to  recollect  some  of  the  important 
incremental measures taken by RBI, which over a period have made significant impact: 
• 
Banks are required to inform customers upfront about the requirement of minimum 
balances  and  the  charges  if  such  balances  are  not  maintained.  They  are  also 
2 
 BIS Review 43/2008
       required to inform customers one month in advance any changes in such minimum 
balances and charges.  
It has been clarified to banks that NRO accounts can be held jointly with residents  
In case of collection of cheques, banks are required to formulate and disclose their 
policy for affording immediate credit, time frame for collection and interest payment 
for delayed collection, taking care to ensure that the interests of the small depositors 
are fully protected. The policy should clearly lay down the liability of the banks by 
way of interest payments due to delays for non-compliance with the standards set 
by  the  banks  themselves.  Compensation  by  way  of  interest  payment,  where 
necessary, should be made without any claim from the customer.  
Banks  are  required  to  provide  both  the  drop  box  facility  and  the  facility  for 
acknowledgement of the cheques at the regular collection counters and no branch 
should refuse to give an acknowledgement if the customer tenders the cheques at 
the counters.  
Banks have been advised to ensure that brief, intelligible particulars are invariably 
entered  in  passbooks/statements  of  account  and  they  adhere  to  the  prescribed 
monthly periodicity while sending statement of accounts.  
It has been clarified to banks that payment to the survivor/nominee of a deceased 
depositor where there is a valid nomination or where the account has been opened 
with  a  survivorship  clause  is  a  valid  discharge  of  liability  provided  inter  alia  it  has 
been made clear to the survivor(s)/nominee that he would be receiving the payment 
from the bank as a trustee of the legal heirs of the deceased depositor, i.e., such 
payment  to  him  shall  not  affect  the  right  or  claim  which  any  person  may  have 
against  the  survivor(s)/nominee  to  whom  the  payment  is  made.  In  such  cases 
insistence  on  production  of  legal  representation  is  unwarranted  and  would,  invite 
serious supervisory disapproval. In such case, therefore, while making payment to 
the  survivor(s)/nominee  of  the  deceased  depositor,  the  banks  have  to  desist  from 
insisting on production of succession certificate, letter of administration or probate, 
etc.,  or  obtain  any  bond  of  indemnity  or  surety  from  the  survivor(s)/nominee, 
irrespective of the amount standing to the credit of the deceased account holder.  
In  case  where  the  deceased  depositor  had  not  made  any  nomination  or  for  the 
accounts  other  than  those  styled  as  “either  or  survivor”  (such  as  single  or  jointly 
operated  accounts),  banks  have  been  told  to  adopt  a  simplified  procedure  for 
repayment to legal heir(s) of the depositor keeping in view the imperative need to 
avoid  inconvenience  and  undue  hardship  to  the  common  person.  In  this  context, 
banks  may,  keeping  in  view  their  risk  management  systems,  fix  a  minimum 
threshold  limit,  for  the  balance  in  the  account  of  the  deceased  depositors,  up  to 
which claims in respect of the deceased depositors could be settled without insisting 
on production of any documentation other than a letter of indemnity.  
In  the  case  of  term  deposits,  banks  are  advised  to  incorporate  a  clause  in  the 
account  opening  form  itself  to  the  effect  that  in  the  event  of  the  death  of  the 
depositor, premature termination of term deposits would be allowed. The conditions 
subject  to  which  such  premature  withdrawal  would  be  permitted  may  also  be 
specified in the account opening form. Such premature withdrawal would not attract 
any penal charge.  
In order to avoid hardship to the survivor(s)/nominee of a deposit account, banks are 
advised to obtain appropriate agreement/authorization from the survivor(s)/nominee 
with regard to the treatment of pipeline flows in the name of the deceased account 
holder.  
BIS Review 43/2008 
 3
   Banks  are  advised  to  settle  the  claims  in  respect  of  deceased  depositors  and 
release payments to survivor(s)/nominee(s) within a period not exceeding 15 days 
from the date of receipt of the claim subject to the production of proof of death of the 
depositor and suitable identification of the claim(s), to the bank's satisfaction.  
Information should not be gathered in the name of KYC with the intention of using it 
for  cross-selling  of  services.  The  banks  should  obtain  the  information  required  for 
opening  an  account  independent  of  any  other  information  that  they  may  seek  for 
cross-selling purposes with the consent of the customer. The forms containing this 
information must not be a part of the account opening form.  
The  KYC  procedure  for  opening  accounts  for  those  persons  who  intend  to  keep 
balances  not  exceeding  rupees  fifty  thousand  (Rs.  50,000/-)  in  all  their  accounts 
taken together and the total credit in all the accounts taken together is not expected 
to exceed rupees one lakh (Rs. 1,00,000/-) in a year has been simplified to enable 
those  belonging  to  low  income  groups  without  documents  of  identity  and  proof  of 
residence to open banks accounts. In such cases banks can take introduction from 
an account holder on whom full KYC procedure has been completed and has had 
satisfactory  transactions  with  the  bank  for  at  least  six  months.  Photograph  of  the 
customer who proposes to open the account and his address need to be certified by 
the  introducer.  Recently,  clarification  had  also  been  issued  to  facilitate  account 
opening by close relatives, e.g. wife, son, daughter and parents etc. who live with 
their husband, father/mother and son, as the case may be, who may not have the 
utility bills required for address verification in their name.  
Bank lending 
II.  
On the lending side, guidelines were issued on Fair Practices Code for Lenders, including 
comprehensive details in loan applications and conveying reasons for rejection of loans.  
In  terms  of  the  guidelines  banks/FIs  are  required  to  ensure  that  loan  application  forms  in 
respect of priority sector advances up to Rs.2.00 lakhs contains comprehensive information 
about the fees/charges and any other matter which affects the interest of the borrower. The 
Guidelines were further revised to ensure that all loan applications in respect of all categories 
of loans irrespective of the amount of loan sought by the borrower contains comprehensive 
information about fees/charges etc.  
Banks/FIs are also required to convey in writing, the main reason/reasons which have led to 
rejection  of  the  loan  applications  in  case  of  all  categories  of  loans  irrespective  of  any 
threshold limits, including credit card applications. 
RBI has issued comprehensive Credit Card Guidelines relating to credit card operations of 
banks/NBFCs in November 2005. These guidelines have been issued aimed at encouraging 
growth of credit cards in a safe, secure and efficient manner as well as to ensure that the 
rules, regulations, standards and practices of the card issuing banks are in alignment with 
the best customer practices. These guidelines address issues relating to billing, use of Direct 
Selling  Agents  (DSAs)  and  other  agents,  protection  of  customer  rights,  customer 
confidentiality, fair practices in debt collection, redressal of grievances, etc. Master Circular 
on the issue has since been issued.  
Measures for ensuring reasonableness of service charges 
Reserve  Bank  has  made  it  obligatory  for  banks  to  display  and  update,  in  their 
offices/branches  as  also  on  their  websites,  the  details  of  various  service  charges  in  a 
prescribed format. The banks are also required to display the service charges and fees on 
the homepage of their website at a prominent place under the title of “Service Charges and 
Fees” so as to facilitate easy access to the bank customers. Reserve Bank has also placed a 
4 
 BIS Review 43/2008
web-link  to  these  web  pages  of  banks  in  its  website  to  facilitate  comparison  of  service 
charges and thereby enabling the customer to take an informed decision. A Working Group 
was also set up to look into the issue of reasonableness of bank charges, which submitted its 
Report  in  August  2006.  The  Working  Group  indicated  broad  principles  of  reasonableness 
that  banks  should  adopt  in  fixing  and  notifying  the  service  charges  for  providing  basic 
services  to  individuals.  Guidelines  have  been  issued  to  the  banks  based  on  the 
recommendations  of  the  Working  Group  and  steps  taken  by  the  banks  in  this  regard  are 
being examined. 
Instructions to guard against incidence of excessive interest rates & charges 
Based on feedback that excessive interest and charges were being levied on certain loans 
and advances, banks were advised to lay out appropriate internal principles and procedures 
so that usurious interest, including processing and other charges, are not levied by them on 
small value loans, particularly personal loans and such other loans of similar nature. Banks 
are  also  required  to  fix  appropriate  ceiling  on  the  interest,  including  processing  and  other 
charges that could be levied on such loans, which may be suitably publicised.  
Foreign exchange 
III.  
Over the last two decades, there has been a paradigm shift in the foreign exchange regime 
in  India.  The  approach  of  conservation  and  preservation  of  foreign  exchange  has  been 
replaced  with  a  liberal  framework  aimed  at  facilitation  of  external  trade  and  payments  and 
orderly  development  of  foreign  exchange  markets.  In  the  process,  the  RBI  has  moved 
beyond the role of a regulator to that of a facilitator of foreign exchange transactions. 
Several  measures  have  been  taken  to  expand  the  delivery  channels  of  foreign  exchange 
services  for  reducing  transaction  costs  and  to  undertake  external  transactions  in  a  hassle 
free  manner.  These  measures  include  –  licensing  of  a  new  category  of  entities  as  AD 
category-II to handle non-trade related current account transactions and licensing of select 
Urban Cooperative Banks and RRBs as well to operate as AD Cat-II. In addition, the norms 
for the Full Fledged Money Changers have been reviewed and the ADs have been permitted 
to  enter  into  franchisee  arrangements  for  provision  of  money  changing  facilities.  Further, 
measures have been taken to simplify procedures in respect of cross-border flows through 
Exchange Houses (Rupee Drawing Arrangements).  
Resident individuals have been permitted to make remittances overseas up to USD 200,000 
per financial year for undertaking any of the permitted current or capital account transactions 
or a combination of both. Only requirements are a designated bank account, PAN number 
and a simple declaration. 
The  critical  issue  at  this  juncture  is  for  the  banks  to  ensure  efficient  customer  service  by 
equipping the frontline staff with up-dated instructions and bring about an attitudinal change 
in  their  approach  towards  foreign  exchange  business.  It  is  disconcerting  to  note  that  the 
incognito visits to various banks have revealed that the services delivered at various banks 
are deficient and insistence on unwarranted or complex documents continues for individuals. 
Another  issue  is  the  reluctance  of  the  banks  to  extend  service  to  walk-in  customers  for 
handling their small value transactions. We have been sensitizing banks to these issues.  
The steps taken by the RBI in liberalizing the forex regulations, delegating authority to the 
ADs  and  simplify  the  procedures  is  basically  designed  to  extend  the  forex  services  to  the 
residents and non-residents in a simple and hassle free manner with minimal documentation.  
BIS Review 43/2008 
 5
Payment systems 
IV.  
The  traditional  role  of  banks  as  providers  of  various  payment  and  settlement  services  to 
customers is getting redefined. Until recently, requirements of customers, be it corporate or 
retail, were determined and extended by banks based on their perception and understanding 
of customer necessities. This to a large extent was also dictated by the banks’ ability to offer 
such products. The scenario is fast changing and changing for the better. Now, the banks are 
encouraged to innovate and tailor products to suit various segments of customers, apart from 
being more sensitive to their demands. Competition between banks for market share and the 
emergence of other service providers are other reasons for this push. 
It is also necessary to put into context the magnitude of challenges that are ahead of us. The 
paper  clearing  volumes  we  handle  is  the  sixth  largest  in  the  world  with  a  volume  of  1.44 
billion cheques cleared during the year 2007. The RBI has launched the Cheque Truncation 
System  in  the  National  Capital  Region  of  New  Delhi  on  February  1,  2008  with  the 
participation of 10 banks in the pilot run. Once fully operational, the system will be the largest 
in  the  world  and  leapfrog  the  country  into  migrating  the  paper  based  instruments  to  the 
electronic  mode.  The  electronic  suite  of  products  is  continuously  expanding  in  terms  of 
coverage of branches, volume of transactions and number of users availing the facility. The 
Reserve  Bank  has  intervened  and  mandated  (a)  reasonability  in  pricing  of  transactions 
effected  through  ATMs,  (b)  compulsory  use  of  electronic  mode  of  initiating  transactions 
above a specified cut-off limit, (c) strengthening the payment systems infrastructure, etc.  
Whilst the clearing cycle operating across the country on a T+1 basis for cheques payable 
locally, favourably compares with the best in the world, it is necessary to look into the entire 
cycle from the time a customer deposits a cheque at a branch till the point of realisation of 
credit in his account. There is scope for continuous improvement in overall cycle. Going by 
the number of complaints, it is felt that customer-service in this area is not customer-centric. 
Albeit the fact that electronic payment products are improving their share in the overall retail 
portfolio, the volume of paper instruments would continue to be significant in the near future 
as well.  
The share of electronic payment products like RTGS, NEFT and ECS is rising by the day and 
the  number  of  branches  which  are  offering  this  facility  is  also  increasing.  Notwithstanding 
this,  the  share  of  public  sector  banks  in  the  electronic  product  usage  is  very  less.  It  is 
necessary  to  make  available  these  products  across  all  bank  branches.  While  the  build-up 
should  continue,  banks  need  to  also  concentrate  on  reaching  geographical  areas  and 
segments  of  populace  that  have  not  been  embraced  by  this  expansion.  It  is  difficult  to 
achieve financial inclusion without involving rural-India in the payment system out-reach and 
those  banks  who  do  so  first,  will  reap  the  benefits  of increase  in  volumes  and  increase  in 
market-share, leading to concomitant increase in revenues, and of-course increase in other 
businesses as well. And as we all know, the electronic medium is location independent, can 
leave  a  better  audit-trail  and  will  surely  improve  customer  involvement  and  service 
expectations. It is our vision that electronic products reach 50% of volume and 95% of value 
by the end of March 2009. 
Banks  need  to  adopt  a  “STOCK”  approach  while  conceiving  and  bringing  out  products. 
Products  that  are  “Secure  and  scalable”,  Transparent  in  terms  and  conditions  of  usage, 
Operationally 
reasonably  priced,  and 
Knowledgeable  to  staff  and  customers.  The  customers  have  an  equal  if  not  higher 
responsibility to ensure banks adopt this approach while innovating products for them. 
resilient  and  efficient,  Cost-effective  and 
Currency management 
V.  
As  per  the  provisions  of  Reserve  Bank  of  India  Act  1934,  RBI  is  statutorily  required  to 
undertake certain activities in the area of currency management. In view of the fact that RBI 
has its Offices only at state capitals or at large centres, the services of commercial banks are 
6 
 BIS Review 43/2008
used  to  store  banknotes  on  behalf  of  the  Reserve  Bank  in  the  currency  chests  held  at 
designated  branches.  These  bank  branches  may  operate  on  the  balances  of  the  currency 
chests as per their requirements with correct and timely reporting being their responsibility. A 
decision  has  also  been  taken  to  provide  the  currency  chest  facility  to  private  sector  and 
foreign banks with 99 currency chests being held by these banks. Further, now the Urban 
Cooperative Bank and RRBs are also allowed to hold the facility. These steps would improve 
the availability of banknotes and coins across the country.  
The channel of currency chests is used not only for distributing banknotes and coins but also 
for  collecting  back  the  soiled  notes.  While  the  banks  are  under  instructions  to  sort  the 
banknotes before depositing them into the currency chest, it was observed that meaningful 
sorting  was  not  done  as  evident  from  a  number  of  reissuable  notes being  retrieved  at  the 
level of the Reserve Bank regional offices. To overcome this, all the banks were advised to 
install Note Sorting Machines at their currency chests, a task that has been completed. To 
carry the Clean Note Policy further, banks have been instructed to process all of their daily 
receipts over Note Sorting Machines and keep a daily record thereof. It may be mentioned 
here that banks are already under instructions by way of a Directive under Section 35A of the 
Banking  Regulation  Act  1949  on  non-stapling  of  banknotes,  issue  only  good  quality  of 
banknotes and not to write anything on the watermark portion. This would be evident from 
the general improvement in the quality of notes in circulation. 
Further, to extend the reach of channels for distribution of coins, the services of Post Offices, 
Urban  Cooperative  Banks  and  Regional  Rural  Banks  are  being  used  in  view  of  their  wide 
reach to the members of general public.  
Financial education and inclusion 
VI.  
Lastly,  let  me  come  to  the  very  significant  aspect  of  financial  inclusion  which  has  been 
pursued with a missionary purpose by the Reserve Bank of India during the last four years. 
Given the socio-demographic complexities in India, the endeavour has been towards a multi-
institutional  and  multi-instrumental  approach  to  comprehensively  address  the  issue  of 
financial  inclusion  in  all  its  entirety,  going  beyond  mere  availability  of  credit.  By  financial 
inclusion  we  mean  the  provision  of  affordable  financial  services,  viz.,  access  to  payments 
and  remittance  facilities,  savings,  loans  and  insurance  services  by  the  formal  financial 
system to those who tend to be excluded. 
Globally  the  issue  of  financial  inclusion  has  now  assumed  significance  not  merely  in 
developing  countries  but  also  in  developed  countries.  RBI  started  a  focused  drive  in  this 
regard in 2004.  
In the Annual Policy of the Reserve Bank for 2004-05, the Governor,  Dr. Reddy  observed 
and I quote - 
“There  has  been  expansion,  greater  competition  and  diversification  of  ownership  of  banks 
leading to both enhanced efficiency and systemic resilience in the banking sector. However, 
there are legitimate concerns in regard to the banking practices that tend to exclude rather 
than  attract  vast  sections  of  population,  in  particular  pensioners,  self-employed  and  those 
employed in unorganised sector. While commercial considerations are no doubt important, 
the banks have been bestowed with several privileges, especially of seeking public deposits 
on  a  highly  leveraged  basis,  and  consequently  they  should  be  obliged  to  provide  banking 
services to all segments of the population, on equitable basis.”  
Pursuant to this, the Reserve Bank has undertaken a number of measures with the objective 
of  attracting  the  financially  excluded  population  into  the  structured  financial  system  going 
beyond credit to a whole range of financial services.  
• 
In November 2005, banks were advised to make available a basic banking “no-frills” 
account  with  low  or  nil  minimum  balances  as  well  as  charges  to  expand  the 
BIS Review 43/2008 
 7
    outreach of such accounts to vast sections of the population. Banks are required to 
make  available  all  printed  material  used  by  retail  customers  in  the  concerned 
regional language. 
In order to ensure that persons belonging to low income group, both in urban and 
rural  areas  do  not  encounter  difficulties  in  opening  bank  accounts,  the  know  your 
customer  (KYC)  procedures  for  opening  accounts  has  been  simplified  for  those 
persons with balances not exceeding Rs 50000/- (about GBP 600) and credits in the 
accounts  not  exceeding  Rs.100000/-  (about  GBP  1200)  in  a  year.  The  simplified 
procedure  allows  introduction  by  a  customer  on  whom  full  KYC  drill  has  been 
followed.  
Banks have been asked to consider introduction of a General purpose Credit Card 
(GCC) facility up to Rs. 25000/- at their rural and semi urban braches. The credit 
facility  is  in  the  nature  of  revolving  credit  entitling  the  holder  to  withdraw  upto  the 
limit  sanctioned.  Based  on  assessment  of  household  cash  flows,  the  limits  are 
sanctioned without insistence on security or purpose. Interest rate on the facility is 
completely deregulated.  
In January 2006, banks were permitted to utilise the services of non-governmental 
organisations  (NGOs/SHGs),  micro-finance  institutions  and  other  civil  society 
organisations as intermediaries in providing financial and banking services through 
the  use  of  business  facilitator  and  business  correspondent  (BC)  models.  The  BC 
model allows banks to do “cash in – cash out” transactions at the location of the BC 
and allows branchless banking.  
Other  measures  include  setting  up  pilots  for  credit  counselling  and  financial 
education. A multilingual website in 13 Indian languages on all matters concerning 
banking and the common person has been launched by the Reserve  Bank on 18 
June 2007.  
The  key  driver  in  the  success  of  these  initiatives  would  undoubtedly  be  technology. 
Technology  today  provides  a  lever  which  can  enable  multilevel  leapfrogging  in  pursuit  of 
financial  inclusion.  Andhra  Pradesh  has  started  a  project  that  aims  to  improve  the 
mechanism for paying pensions and unemployment benefits to around half a million people 
in villages in the Karimnagar and Warangal regions of the state. It is a tiny start – so far some 
40,000 cards have been issued – but the potential is clear. The initiative is to have a bank tie 
up and extend this model to other places and states.  
The  role  of  financial  literacy  in  this  regard  can't  be  over-emphasised.  As  noted  by  the 
Economist in a recent issue, a global crusade is under way to teach personal finance to the 
masses.  Governments  from  USA  to  Britain  to  Russia  are  declaring  their  commitment  to 
financial  education.  This  month  the  World  Savings  Banks  Institute,  which  represents  retail 
and  savings  banks  from  92  countries,  will  hold  a  summit  in  Brussels  about  financial 
education  in  the  light  of  the  sub-prime  crisis.  There  is  also  an  exhortation  to  the  policy 
makers to simplify the choices available to people in financial matters, quoting the Swedish 
savings plan for old age, which offers a choice of funds to invest in but also includes a low-
cost default option, chosen by 90% of the people. 
Financial education has an ever more critical role to play in the changed financial landscape 
of India which, while on one hand has presented with newer opportunities for future collective 
growth, on the other, it has also heightened fears of uncertainty in certain quarters mainly 
because  of  increasing  multi-faceted  choices  and  options  in  the  management  of  personal 
finances and exposure to a gamut of risks. Financial education could ideally supplement the 
financial inclusion initiatives for long term efficacy. RBI has recently put out a concept paper 
on setting up Financial Literacy and Counseling Centres with the objective of providing free 
financial  literacy/education  and  credit  counselling.  The  specific  objectives  of  the  proposed 
FLCCs would be: 
8 
 BIS Review 43/2008
     To  educate  the  people  in  rural  and  urban  areas  with  regard  to  various  financial 
products and services available from the formal financial sector;  
To  make  the  people  aware  of  the  advantages  of  being  connected  with  the  formal 
financial sector;  
To  provide  face-to-face  financial  counselling  services,  including  education  on 
responsible borrowing and offering debt counselling to individuals who are indebted 
to formal and/or informal financial sectors;  
To formulate debt restructuring plans for borrowers in distress and recommend the 
same to formal financial institutions, including cooperatives, for consideration;  
To  take  up  any  such  activity  that  promotes  financial  literacy,  awareness  of  the 
banking products, financial planning and amelioration of debt-related distress of an 
individual; and  
To take up any other activity that facilitates the above.  
• 
Once  feedback  is  received,  the  initiative  could  be  carried  forward  in  consultation  with  all 
stakeholders.  
Conclusion  
I would like to conclude by quoting from one of Governor Dr. Reddy's speech:  
"Banking is a trust-based relationship and the banking licence from the regulator provides an 
assurance  of  trust  to  the  public  at  large.  To  the  banks,  the  banking  licence  provides  the 
privilege of accepting uncollateralised deposits from the public. However, the acts of stealth 
banking,  negative  option  marketing,  misleading  advertisements,  information  gathering  from 
customers  for  cross  selling  of  products  and  services,  and  tie-up  arrangements  are 
inconsistent with the concept of a trust-based relationship. The lack of transparency, coupled 
with  the  difficulty  of  consumers  in  identifying  key  information  from  the  large  volume  of 
material and communication in fine print, leads to an information asymmetry, which renders 
the banker-customer relationship one of unequals."  
The broad approach of RBI is to empower the common person where banking services are 
concerned  and  strengthen  customer-service  delivery  in  banks  by  adopting  a  consultative 
process with banks, through the IBA. Specifically, the focus is on: 
a) 
Sensitising  banks  to  customer  service  and  encouraging  the  involvement  of  the 
Boards  of  the  banks,  especially  to  strengthen  the  banks  own  grievance  redressal 
machinery.  
Insisting  on  transparency  in  all  the  dealings  with  the  customers,  and  ensuring 
reasonableness in pricing. 
Promoting  adherence  to  self  imposed  codes  by  banks  on  commitments  to  bank 
customers and monitoring compliance by an independent agency, viz. BCSBI. 
Strengthening the mechanism for dispute resolution. 
Using  regulation/prescription  only  when  essential,  while  encouraging  the  industry 
association (IBA) to take initiatives.  
Rationalising RBI's own systems and procedures. 
f) 
It is a constant endeavour to meet the above objectives and collectively, I am sure we can 
build a customer-oriented banking culture and, through the initiatives on financial inclusion, 
achieve democratization of the financial sector.  
b) 
c) 
d) 
e) 
BIS Review 43/2008 
 9
