Nout Wellink: Financial globalisation, growth and asset prices 
Speech by Dr Nout Wellink, President of the Netherlands Bank and Chairman of the Basel 
Committee  on  Banking  Supervision,  at  the  International  Symposium  on  “Globalisation, 
Inflation and Monetary Policy”, organised by the Bank of France, Paris, 7 March 2008. 
 Financial globalization and financial innovation 
I have been asked to introduce the round table with a group of very distinguished panellists 
who will discuss the topic of “Financial globalisation, growth and asset prices”. I was pleased 
to see that the panellists, through their different fields of expertise, will be able to illuminate 
us with a broad range of ideas on this topic. 
Before giving them the floor, let me raise a few issues. Financial globalization, like most good 
things  in  life,  has  its  doses  of  risks  and  challenges.  The  recent  wave  of  financial 
globalization,  which  began  in  the  mid  1980s,  has  been  seen  as  a  catalyst  for  financial 
innovation. We have witnessed borders opening for banks and other market players. As a 
result,  global  financial  markets  have  become  deeper  and  more  diversified  and  financial 
products have become  more complex. In response to these changes, supervisors and the 
industry  have  had  to  keep  pace  by  adapting  the  regulatory  structures.  The  Basel  II 
framework  in  that  sense  is  inherently  flexible  with  its  risk-based  approach.  Even  so,  as 
lessons from the turmoil become clearer, it may be necessary to fine-tune certain elements 
of Basel II. 
To  make  our  work  as  central  bankers  even  more  interesting,  financial  globalization  has 
changed the environment for monetary policy with the growth of cross-border financial flows 
and the transfer of risk across different jurisdictions. In response, central bankers have also 
taken  a  number  of  steps  to  adapt  their  strategies  to  support  financial  markets  and  price 
stability.  Just  to  mention  a  recent  example,  the  collective  actions  among  central  banks  to 
facilitate  liquidity  provision  in  short-term  money  markets  were  an  important  initiative  in  this 
sense. 
But to what extent does increasing financial globalization affect the efficiency and stability of 
asset prices and economic performance in general? 
Financial globalization, growth and asset prices 
In  the  past  years,  as  financial  globalization  and  deeper  financial  markets  became  more 
prominent  there  was  an  improvement  in  the  stability  of  the  macroeconomic  environment. 
Global inflation was contained, accompanied by a decline in the volatility of economic growth, 
exchange rates and interest rates leading to the so-called Great Moderation.1 These factors 
contributed to improving market sentiment. Liquidity seemed plentiful and this perception had 
a strong influence on the behaviour of investors and their risk tolerance, which grew with the 
search  for  yield.  Alternative  asset  classes  began  getting  large  injections  of  liquidity.  Real 
estate,  high  risk  credit  products,  private  equity  and  art,  for  instance,  saw  their  prices  rise 
considerably, which increased the potential for financial bubbles. Capital flows to and from 
emerging  markets  have  also  been  surging.  In  the  past  five  years,  emerging  markets  have 
seen capital inflows almost six fold, raising challenges for many economies. 
                                                 
1   B. Bernanke in a speech given in 2004 indicated that among the explanations for the Great Moderation (the 
decline  in  economic  volatility  in  the  past  years)  were  structural  changes  led  by  deeper  financial  markets,  a 
more stable monetary policy and good luck. 
BIS Review 28/2008 
 1
This  environment  contributed  to  a  new  trend  in  financial  innovation,  mainly  through 
securitization  and  a  change  in  banking  strategy  to  the  so  called  “originate-to-distribute 
model”. This model allowed banks to originate loans, pool credit risks and sell them on to 
investors.  The  securitization  of  mortgage  loans  became  an  important  platform  for  the 
originate-to-distribute  model.  Initially,  a  problem  that  started  in  the  US  housing  market, 
spread rapidly across borders and across other financial markets, particularly to where credit 
risk  had  been  transferred  but  not  exclusively.  There  continues  to  be  a  generalized 
uncertainty related to valuation losses of securitized products ($250-600 billion), the use of 
credit  ratings,  possible  spillover  effects  to  other  financial  institutions  (including  monoliners) 
and the overall impact of the turmoil on global economic growth. The recent developments in 
the  US  and  in  foreign  financial  markets  are  stimulating  considerable  review  and  analysis. 
Regulators, supervisors, central banks, accounting boards, rating agencies and academics 
are trying to distil lessons from the crisis. To help address and coordinate this endeavour, the 
Financial Stability Forum for instance, has set up a working group on Market and Institutional 
Resilience.  This  group  has  analyzed  the  causes  of  the  market  turbulence  and  proposes 
policy directions to strengthen financial resilience. The results of the report will be available in 
April 2008. 
The quality of financial globalization matters 
If  markets  remain  fragmented,  not  all  the  fruits  of  financial  globalization  can  be  reaped. 
Consequently, we probably need to work more in a concerted fashion to enhance the quality 
of globalization. Let me address some lessons from the recent turmoil: 
• 
First,  I  would  stress  that  complacency  in  risk  management  is  often  fertile  soil  for 
financial  distress.  Complacency  spread  through  global  markets  has  contributed  to 
over-optimistic assumptions for market liquidity conditions and led to a great reliance 
in rating agencies. 
Second,  in  the  past,  liquidity  risk  management  had  not  been  at  the  centre  stage. 
Most  improvements  in  liquidity  risk  management  were  tailored  for  each  country. 
Today, there is consensus among supervisors and the banking industry that liquidity 
risk  management  needs  to  be  upgraded  to  capture  the  implications  of  a  more 
globalized financial system and the rapid growth in financial innovation. 
Third, the originate-to-distribute model encountered several shortcomings: The sub-
optimal  incentives  in  the  chain  of  origination,  acquisition  and  distribution  led  to  a 
poor assessment of risks, based on the expectation that credit risk could be quickly 
transferred through securitization. Another important weakness was the inadequate 
information on products and the quality of underlying assets. Moreover, the model’s 
dependency on market liquidity made it extremely vulnerable. 
Fourth, recent events that have led to changes in the implementation of monetary 
policy  through  open  market  operations.  G10  central  banks  took  coordinated 
measures to bring money market rates back down to target levels. 
Finally, from our specific experience at the Dutch Central Bank, I must add that the 
combination  of  central  bank  and  supervisor 
internal 
communication structure and to timely interaction with the financial industry during 
recent events. 
to  a  successful 
led 
    Follow-up issues 
To conclude, the pace of financial developments has accelerated with financial globalization. 
Consequently,  we  must  remain  exceptionally  alert  and  flexible  to  encounter  adverse 
dynamics that may threaten financial or economic stability. In my opinion, developments that 
2 
 BIS Review 28/2008
should be followed closely are the strengthening of risk management and the implementation 
of  Basel  II.  There  are  other  interesting  issues  to  follow-up  such  as  the  role  of  sovereign 
wealth funds in a context of globalized financial markets. I trust that the panellists will focus 
on this and other interesting issues in the coming hours. 
BIS Review 28/2008 
 3
