Shamshad Akhtar: Financial sector – ten-year vision and strategy 
Speech by Dr Shamshad Akhtar, Governor of the State Bank of Pakistan, at the inauguration 
of  the  Development  Finance  Conference  on  “Expanding  Frontiers  of  Financial  Access  in 
Pakistan”,  organised  by  State  Bank  on  the  eve  of  60th  Anniversary  of  the  State  Bank  of 
Pakistan, Karachi, 1 July 2008.  
 Pakistan’s financial system grew significantly in the last few years. At present, total financial 
assets have reached $175 billion (110% of GDP). The banking system constitutes 95% of 
the total assets of financial institutions and bank shares constitute 40% of the stock market 
capitalization.  Among  different  segments  of  financial  markets,  banking  sector  has  gained 
dynamism,  profitability,  respectability  and  strength.  Deposit  base  rose  to  $60  billion  and 
advances  to  $47  billion.  Supported  by  growing  financial  intermediation  process,  banks 
aggregate profitability rose to $1.8 billion. Recapitalization and prudent lending has lowered 
net non-performing loans (NPLs) to below one percent of assets. Banks capitalization and 
quality of assets have helped raise the risk weighted capital adequacy ratio to 13.2 percent.  
These achievements are impressive, however: 
(i) 
(NBF) 
including 
institutions 
investment 
A large segment of population and geography is still under served from the existing 
financial markets and this gap will grow as Pakistan’s population rises further.  
The  financial  system  has  to  gear  itself  to  meet  the  growing  requirements  of  the 
economy  in  particular  infrastructure  which  conservatively  requires  almost  $150 
billion over next few years;  
New  types  of  risks  have  emerged  as  banks  acquired  different  types  of  nonbank 
financial 
finance,  brokerage,  asset 
management and insurance companies etc. Some of these have been merged into 
the  banks  while  others  remain  as  subsidiaries.  Banks  are  beginning  to  cross-sell 
different  financial  products  through  their  branch  networks.  This  is  a  market  driven 
development but does pose systemic risks and supervisory challenges. Some banks 
have  also  acquired  strategic  and  non  strategic  stakes  in  nonfinancial  companies. 
These create a different set of risks that will need to be thought through and dealt 
with carefully. 
Financial  sector  needs  to  be  diversified  as  bulk  of  the  country’s  financing 
requirements  is  currently  met  by  the  banks.  While  market  capitalization  of  stock 
market  has  increased  significantly,  new  issuance  of  capital  is  small.  Similarly,  the 
debt markets constitute largely of government securities, while the corporate paper 
market is limited.  
Finally, within regional context Pakistan’s financial system despite its growth is still 
small. For instance, the financial system of other Asian emerging financial market 
countries twice or three times larger in relative terms and the Gulf States have now 
geared themselves into regional financial hubs. 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
Keeping in view these considerations, the State Bank of Pakistan’s (SBP) is now launching a 
ten  year  Financial  Sector  Strategy.  This  strategy  has  been  developed  based  on  (i)  a 
comprehensive  assessment  and  evaluation  of  the  banking  system  that  helps  draw  key 
lessons; (ii) Pakistan’s forward looking economic development strategy and vision; and (iii) 
learning from the emerging changes in global and regional financial architecture and financial 
advancement and innovation. This paper aims to capture the objectives and broad elements 
of the financial sector strategy which will be finalized and adopted by the third quarter of the 
2008 after consultation with stakeholders. The scope of the paper is confined principally to 
BIS Review 85/2008 
 1
reforms  of  banking  sector  and  regulatory  architecture  which  would  require  some  principal 
changes or new legislation.  
The  objective  of  the  financial  sector  strategy  will  be  to  broaden  and  deepen  the  financial 
system to help Pakistan:  
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
Achieve higher and sustainable economic growth,  
Develop a dynamic, robust and stronger system, 
Mobilize the domestic and foreign resources for private investment (which has to be 
the key driver of the economy), and  
Deepen financial penetration for poor and underserved regions. 
(iv) 
Prerequisite for financial sector growth is, however, macroeconomic and political stability and 
augmentation  of  the  enabling  policy  environment  in  the  real  sector.  Assuming  these 
preconditions are restored, the ten year strategy will 
(i) 
Stimulate growth in financial assets to 165% of GDP, growth in deposit base by 13% 
to reach $217 billion, and advances to allow private sector credit/GDP ratio to rise 
from 27% to 42%; 
Be financially inclusive supporting the small savers and meeting the requirements of 
small borrowers in agriculture, housing, small and medium enterprises (SME) and 
microfinance  sectors  by  raising  financial  penetration  ratio  through  enabling  policy 
environment and outreach expansion (coverage of per bank branch to improve from 
19,000 to 15,000 persons).  
Developing  financial  infrastructure  and  automation  to  enhance  the  coverage  of 
automated teller machines (ATMs) to 10,000; and 
Reduce the systemic risks of the financial system by developing an adequate safety 
net for the small depositors and the central bank’s lender of last resort functions as 
well as a framework for dealing with failing banks. 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
To  achieve  these  goals,  SBP  is  in  process  of  putting  together  a  comprehensive  reform 
program.  SBP  has  developed  and  has  full  ownership  of  this  reform  agenda  and  received 
technical assistance from the International Monetary Fund, the Asian Development Bank and 
the DFID of United Kingdom to draw from international experience and expertise.  
Central bank governance  
Principal driving factor for the formulation and implementation reform is the autonomy and 
competence  of  the  organization.  Over  the  years,  emerging  evidence  has  confirmed  the 
significant  benefits  of  central  bank  autonomy  (not  just  de  jure  autonomy  but  de  facto 
autonomy too) for macroeconomic performance as central banks play a primary role in price 
stability,  while  also  ensuring  financial  stability.  This  role  has  been  supported  by  assigning 
requisite  powers  to  central  banks  not  only  in  monetary  policy  formulation,  conduct  and 
implementation  but  in  effective  enforcement  of  fiscal  discipline.  This  has  been  achieved  in 
several jurisdictions without any real additional costs or sacrifices in terms of output volatility 
or  reduced  economic  growth.  Further,  central  banks  in  number  of  jurisdictions  have 
performed the role of regulator of the full or part of the financial system. The recent financial 
market  turmoil  has  also  brought  under  scrutiny  the  models  and  governance  structures  of 
central  banks/financial  regulators,  while  bringing  to  forefront  the  risks  of  leaving  nonbank 
financial (NBF) sector virtually unattended. In absence of proper regulatory and supervisory 
oversight, the NBF sector’s overleveraging of the financial systems has exposed the global 
financial system to multiple risks. As defaults emerged the financial institutions lacked ability 
to  service  obligations.  This  episode  has  generated  unprecedented  liquidity  crisis  and  bank 
losses  whose  undervaluation/closures/liquidation  impacted  the  financial  markets  at  large. 
2 
 BIS Review 85/2008
Rescue  operations  and  economy  wide  and  household  losses  have  not  only  impacted 
advanced countries but taken a toll on global financial system and send warning signals on 
need  for  change  in  financial  regulatory  architecture  and  its  landscape.  These  attributes  of 
central banks helps cushion the impact of political cycles on economic cycles. 
SBP  over  the  years  has  acquired  not  only  the  required  autonomy  to  steer  the  monetary 
policy  and  financial  stability  mandates,  but  has  regulated  and  supervised  well  the  banking 
sector reforms. Notwithstanding, SBP set up under the State Bank of Pakistan Act, 1956 has 
been amended occasionally to strengthen its powers and mandate but now it needs to be 
modernized in line with the international best practices. The key issues with SBP Act are that 
(i) it contains outdated provisions that have lost their validity in light of the administrative and 
structural changes at the economy level; (ii) governance structure of central bank which over 
the years has undoubtedly served well the interest of autonomy and accountability of central 
bank but does still contain provisions which undermine the functioning of central bank, (iii) if 
price stability is to be upheld, in line with the mandate adopted by other central banks, than 
provisions  pertaining  to  the  monetary  and  fiscal  coordination  need  to  be  re-examined  to 
ensure  proper  enforcement  of  fiscal  discipline  through  more  explicit  restriction  on  central 
bank borrowings, (v) it ought to now include appropriate provision for the financial stability 
defining explicitly mandate of central bank in financial safety net, bank exit and lender of last 
resort functions and (iv) it includes provisions which ought not to be in primary legislation but 
in supportive regulations etc.  
In addition to modernizing the SBP Act, as a part of financial sector reforms central bank has 
reviewed the supportive laws such as the Banking Companies Ordinance, 1962 and other 
principal laws. In parallel, SBP has been working on a host of new laws to develop adequate 
financial  safety  nets  such  as  the  Deposit  Protection  Scheme  (to  be  discussed  later  in  this 
paper) and Consumer Protection and financial crimes law.  
The sections below further outline the major areas of thrust of the financial sector reforms, 
but do not as yet cover the full reform agenda. 
Financial Inclusion Program  
In  Pakistan  the  level  of  financial  exclusion  is  quite  steep:  only  17%  of  the  population  (30 
million) has bank accounts and less than 4% (5.5 million) are borrowers. Moreover only 25% 
of the total bank deposits and 17% of the total borrowers are from rural areas. In value terms 
their  shares  are  even  smaller,  10%  and  7%  of  the  total  value  of  deposits  and  advances, 
respectively. Limited access to services is captured by the low level of branch penetration, 
especially in rural areas and this has held back the growth of savings and impacted credit 
distribution system.  
To address issues of access, SBP has established a Development Finance Group which has 
developed a comprehensive Financial Inclusion Program (FIP) that aims to promote access 
to development finance for all small and underserved markets. In Pakistan context there is 
need to encourage shift in banks’ focus away from large companies to smaller companies 
and the household sector. Most credit to the enterprise sector goes to manufacturing, which 
receives  a  disproportionately  large  share  of  bank  credit  compared  with  this  sector’s 
contribution  to  GDP  (20%).  Aggregate  data  for  all  credit  by  borrower  size  shows  an 
extremely skewed distribution: 22,000 or 0.4% of all 5.2 million banks’ borrowers account for 
65% of all bank credit—and the remaining 5+ million borrowers for the remaining one third. 
At the very top there is even more concentration; the largest 50 borrowers account for 37%1 
of all credit outstanding. Given that the manufacturing sector is the predominant recipient of 
credit, it is safe to assume that most of the large borrowers are concentrated in that sector. 
                                                 
1   As of 31st March, 2008 of all banks/DFIs. 
BIS Review 85/2008 
 3
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
The  FIP,  to  be  supported  by  DFID  and  other  donors,  is  quite  broad  based  and  will  help 
enhance  the  outreach.  To  start  off,  SBP  and  Pakistan  Microfinance  Network  (PFM)  has 
developed  a  multi-faceted  microfinance  strategy  to  triple  the  number  of  microfinance  (MF) 
beneficiaries  from  1  million  to  3  million  by  2010  and  then  to  10  million.  To  support  this 
program,  SBP  has  encouraged  commercialization  of  microfinance  industry  so  that  it  is 
financially and socially sustainable. Some of the specific actions being launched to facilitate 
this involves encouraging: 
(i) 
Microfinance institutions (MFIs) to develop commercially viable operations that are 
financially  and  socially  sustainable  operations  and  transform  them  into  MFB  to 
provide holistic services. Tax holiday for five years has been provided to MFIs once 
they transform themselves into full-fledged microfinance banks (MFBs).  
Development of partnership between commercial banks and MF providers and the 
post  office  (PO)  network  and  MF  providers.  (POs  already  manage  over  4  million 
savings  accounts,  mainly  small  accounts  below  Rs  10,000,  through  more  than 
12,000 branches.) There is scope for the PO and MF providers to join forces with 
the  latter  acting  as  intermediaries  for  funds  from  the  PO,  especially  as  many  MF 
providers are constrained in their operations by limited funding.  
Flexible regulatory regime for MFBs to allow innovation and organic growth without 
compromising prudential objectives. Limits for MFBs (and MFIs) will be adjusted at 
least  in  line  with  inflation  and  a  two-tier  regime  is  to  be  considered  under  which 
MFBs  (and  MFIs)  with  track  record  of  prudent  governance,  risk  management  and 
financial  success  could  be  given  more  room  to  operate.  This  includes  capital 
adequacy requirements, which will be reviewed so as not to put MFBs (and MFIs) in 
a competitive position substantially worse than that of banks.  
Mobile  phone-based  banking  services  which  is  a  cost  effective  way  of  bringing 
financial services even to the most remote areas of the country. This is an option 
with  enormous  potential  as  there  already  are  almost  two  times  as  many  mobile 
phone owners (some 80 million) than there are depositors. Mobile phone services 
reach almost every part of the country and would be an extremely cheap way for 
banks and other financial institutions to extend their reach.  
Development of domestic and international MFI partnership. 
Financial literacy and customer awareness program. 
(v) 
(vi) 
In parallel, SBP has been promoting Islamic Banks (IBs) to appeal to the population which 
has thus far excluded itself for faith reasons. A separate Islamic Finance Strategy paper has 
been developed which projects that given the growth rate in IBs businesses, Islamic Finance 
is expected to constitute almost 12% of the Pakistan financial system in next five years or so. 
To  encourage  sound  growth  SBP  has  laid  out  an  elaborate  prudential  regulatory  and 
supervisory framework which conforms to the International Islamic Financial Service Board’s 
(IFSB) framework in whose development Pakistan has played a key role. To ensure proper 
due  diligence  of  the  IF  development  SBP  has  constituted  Shariah  Advisory  Board  which 
approves broad policy and regulatory framework and new products etc. SBP is working to 
develop proper liquidity management framework and instruments to allow the IBs progress in 
a prudent and sound manner.  
SME sector faces a host of both demand and supply side constraints impeding delivery. On 
demand  side,  lack  of  planning  and  entrepreneurial  skills  and  problems  with  SME  policy 
framework remain a major hindrance, while on supply side banks perceive financing these 
entities as high risk in absence of credit history and collateral. Notwithstanding the growth in 
the SME financing has been significant and its share in total outstanding advances is close to 
14.5% and the number of borrowers in the sector is around 185,000. In line with international 
best  practice,  SBP  plans  to  promote  SME  financing  through  supportive  mechanisms.  This 
would involve help in designing specific products, and developing credit scoring system for 
4 
 BIS Review 85/2008
SME finance and SME financial reporting system. In addition, banks are being encouraged to 
facilitate program based lending – in which banks establish general criteria for meeting the 
specific  financing  requirements  of  businesses  –  and  cash  flow  based  lending  rather  than 
collateral  based  lending.  Work  is  underway  to  develop  an  appropriate  credit  enhancement 
mechanism  which  will  facilitate  bank  lending  to  the  sector.  Also,  SBP  is  exploring  with 
industry possibility of development of venture capital funds focusing on SME promotion and 
offering training to commercial bankers on SME lending methodology and approaches. 
Agriculture  lending  has  received  a  significant  boost  with  the  banks  meeting  the  target  of 
Rs200  billion  set  for  2007/2008.  Outstanding  agriculture  advances  account  for  6%  of  total 
advances.  However,  the  current  flow  of  credit  meets  only  45%  of  the  agriculture  credit 
requirements.  SBP  strategy  for  agriculture  credit  focuses  on  doubling  the  number  of 
borrowers  from  2  million  to  4  million  and  meeting  75-80%  of  the  agriculture  credit 
requirements. SBP has encouraged a revolving credit scheme for three years – under which 
farmers can borrow for one year and can continue to borrow without providing documentation 
each  year;  guidelines  have  been  issued  lending  for  livestock,  fisheries  and  horticulture 
subsectors  and  programs  are  being  launched  for  dairy  sector.  In  addition,  a  small  farmer 
financing  scheme  has  been  promoted  based  on  group  based  lending  and  a  crop  loan 
insurance  scheme  has  been  structured  which  is  now  being  offered  by  some  insurance 
companies.  Work  has  been  completed  on  promoting  agriculture  Islamic  finance  and  also 
providing capacity building both to farmers and bankers in regional languages.  
Finally,  to  promote  rural  areas,  SBP  has  mandated  banks  to  establish  20%  of  their  new 
branches  in  rural  areas.  As  competition  for  deposits  grows  and  lending  is  backed  by 
adequate  margins,  banks  will  find  their  rural  operations  to  be  more  attractive.  Innovative 
products and methods of selling them will also increase banks’ reach and may change the 
“brick-and-mortar” nature of branch operations.  
Strengthen consumer protection and financial education 
Over  time  competition  backed  by  financial  literacy  and  awareness  will  impose  the  right 
pressure  on  banks  to  upgrade  their  customer  services.  SBP  on  its  part  is  focusing  on 
effective  compliance  with  customer  service  regulations  and  following  it  up  with  proper 
enforcement  to  motivate  banks  to  render  good  service  and  deal  fairly  with  customers.  To 
supplement and reinforce this, SBP plans to: 
(i) 
Introduce a Consumer Protection Bill, in line with international best practices, which 
would  among  others  provide  guidance  on  issues  of  transparency,  confidentiality, 
availability  of  statements,  account  servicing,  protection  against  fraud,  unfair 
contracts and lending practices, methods of debt collection, arbitrary penalties, etc. 
Supported  by  the  legislation  an  appropriate  dispute  settlement  mechanism  will  be 
established.  Currently  consumer  protection  is  codified  in  SBP  regulations  but  this 
will have to be also reviewed and updated in line with the new legislation. 
Encourage Pakistan Banks’ Association (PBA) to adopt a Banking Code to commit 
banks to fairness, disclosure and ethical standards.  
Strengthen  the  newly  established  Consumer  Protection  Department  of  SBP  to 
monitor compliance with such new laws, regulations and codes. 
Introduce a depositor protection scheme to protect small depositors. 
Transform and strengthen the role and functions of Banking Ombudsman, which will 
remain an independent body from the regulators, to be better aligned with the above 
developments.  
A  long-term  campaign  to  enhance  financial  literacy  will  be  launched  in  rural  and 
urban  areas  both  by  the  commercial  banks  and  SBP  with  the  support  of  the  IBP, 
NIBAF and PBA.  
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) 
BIS Review 85/2008 
 5
Consolidate and strengthen the banking sector 
Further consolidation is necessary to ensure presence of stronger and well capitalized banks 
that  can  support  diverse  financial  services  and  client  requirements,  while  adequately 
managing  risks.  Even  though  the  number  of  conventional  commercial  banks  has  declined 
from 41 to 29 through mergers and acquisitions and closures, there remain some banks with 
lagging performance. As the most attractive mergers already have been consummated, the 
pace  of  additional  mergers  requires  SBP  to  further  enhance  the  banks’  minimum  capital 
requirement (MCR). Moratorium for issuance of new licenses, extended now to Islamic banks 
too,2  will  remain  –  exceptions,  if  any,  will  require  new  banks  to  comply  with  $300  million 
capital  requirements.  Meanwhile  all  existing  banks  will  be  provided  with  a  time  frame  to 
comply with the new MCR. Outside the ambit of moratorium will be MFBs but licensing for 
these will henceforth be at the national and provincial levels. New institutional arrangements 
such as introduction of credit unions that aim to serve the lower tier markets will be examined 
favorably. 
In  the  banking  sector,  specialized  government-owned  banks  have  only  made  limited 
contribution in their niche markets. They have out-served their purpose and/or their dismal 
performance  has  impacted  the  SBP  balance  sheet  (requiring  regular  provisioning  for  the 
losses). Compensating their losses is not an option given the fiscal stress. In view of this, 
proper resolution program is being worked out for these institutions. For instance: SME bank 
is being privatized, the House Building Finance Corporation (HBFC) will be restructured and 
privatized  and  the  Zarai  Taraqiati  Bank  Ltd.  (ZTBL),  a  highly  strategic  case,  needs  to  be 
restructured  financially  and  operationally.  The  Industrial  Development  Bank  has  now  been 
incorporated as a public company and will be available for sale. Privatization agenda should 
also  be  extended  to  insurance  sector  as  this  sector  is  quite  critical  for  Pakistan’s  overall 
financial sector development.  
Strengthen competition and efficiency 
Competition drives a market-based financial system that helps bring about efficiencies and 
innovations by encouraging price discovery and formation process. In Pakistan, banks with 
substantive  market  power  and  access  to  low  cost  funds  by  virtue  of  their  age  old  captive 
clients have ended up distorting price mechanism as they are principal price setters. As a 
result, real returns have been negative for the bulk of deposits, which has deterred effective 
fund mobilization and distorted the yield curve and pricing for loans and advances.  
To  assess  the  degree  of  competition  in  financial  markets,  SBP  examines  market  structure 
indicators (such as the number of institutions) or concentration (Herfindahl or other indexes) 
as well as the performance measures such as bank margins or profitability – though it has to 
be  acknowledged  that  these  variables  are  influenced  by  multiple  factors  ranging  from 
macroeconomic  conditions  to  bank  specific  factors  such  as  scale  of  operations  and  risk 
preferences etc.  
To enhance competitiveness, SBP will primarily focus on continuing to broaden and deepen 
financial  system  further.  Notwithstanding,  efforts  are  under  way  to  (i)  review  the  actual 
behavior and conduct of banks related to structure of banking industry and take the required 
actions, (ii) encourage contestability by allowing entry and (iii) promote development of NBF 
intermediation to improve bank competition, . Furthermore, competition in banking system is 
likely to grow as demand for advances results in need for higher deposit mobilization which 
would then alter the pricing for both advances and deposits.  
                                                 
2  
Islamic banking constituting over 4% of banking assets, are encountering competition from within and from 
conventional banks and we need to nurture and solidify their performance.  
6 
 BIS Review 85/2008
Taking advance action, SBP has sought to remove structural distortions that have impeded 
competition. A case in point is the minimum deposit rate of 5% on all PLS savings product as 
banks had for quite some time enjoyed ample access to a pool of excessively cheap savings 
deposits. In addition, SBP regulations require greater transparency and disclosure in interest 
rates  and  rate  setting.  As  market  matures,  competition  will  encourage  better  alignment  of 
interest rates both on deposits and advances. Large corporate borrowers that have largely 
dependent thus far on banks, may over time find it more attractive raise financing from debt 
markets. In other countries such financing is typically cheaper than bank borrowing.  
Strengthen prudential regulation and supervision 
SBP  has  a  broad  set  of  prudential  regulations  that  aim  to  strengthen  risk  management, 
internal controls and corporate governance in banks, while providing effective guidance for 
promotion of development finance and consumer related matters. The regulatory framework 
for  banks  is  now  quite  complete,  although  it  needs  constant  updating  and  upgrading  to 
conform  to  evolving  international  best  practices.  Some  challenges  remain:  (i)  loan 
concentration,  (ii)  emergence  of  financial  conglomerates  and  their  supervision,  and  (iii) 
implementation of the Basel II regime.  
Given high concentration of credit to the manufacturing sector, there is need to re-examine 
the  regulation  relating  to  exposures  of  large  company/borrowers  and  related  companies. 
High exposure has developed as banks and companies have been reluctant to go to seek 
alternate sources of financing and instead seek relaxation of SBP prudential regulations to 
borrow  from  banking  system.  Excessive  exposure  poses  a  threat  to  broader  financial 
stability,  while  deterring  growth  in  nonbank  finance  sector.  Stricter  limitations  on  bank 
exposures to large companies would drive those companies to raise capital from debt and/or 
equity markets. This would support financial sector and risk diversification and contribute to 
financial stability.  
In  developing  prudential  regulatory  framework  SBP  will  draw  on  the  debate  between  the 
Rules  versus  Principle  based  regulatory  regime.  The  former  takes  a  legalistic  approach  in 
attempting  to  codify  all  prudential  requirements  into  either  primary  law  or  regulations.  This 
approach is common in Spanish speaking countries as well as the United States. While this 
approach provides certainty to the industry, it limits the flexibility of the supervisor to adapt to 
changing  circumstances  and  experience.  Thus  it  puts  a  high  premium  on  thinking  through 
every possible practical variation and also on having near perfect legal drafting. The problem 
with this approach is that financial regulation is more of an art than a science. Many of the 
rules  that  are  introduced  for  prudential  purposes  need  continuing  modification  and 
refinements  based  on  experience.  The  danger  of  relying  too  heavily  on  detailed  rule 
books/regulations is that the principle gets lost in the details. There is also a danger that the 
industry becomes unduly focused on avoiding the wording of the rules rather than the intent. 
The  principles-based  approach  attempts  to  limit  hard-coded  law  and  regulations  to  broad 
statements of principle. For example, the law might identify the need for banks to implement 
sound risk management frameworks. However, rather than trying to identify every feature of 
such a system, the principles-based approach allows the supervisor to develop its framework 
and its own understanding of best practice in line with the principles.  
Given the pros and cons of two approaches, SBP will try to strike a balance between these 
two  philosophies.  The  industry  is  still  evolving  and,  as  such,  needs  some  guidance  in  the 
form of detailed rules. At the same time, the need to adapt quickly to changing circumstances 
and to learn from experience means that we need to retain flexibility around the detail that 
supports our principles. 
BIS Review 85/2008 
 7
Basel II implementation 
SBP  has  initiated  the  implementation  of  the  new  Basel  II  minimum  capital  adequacy 
requirements. The Standardized Approach to credit risk and the Basic Indicator Approach to 
operational risk became effective at the beginning of 2008 after running the new regime in 
parallel  with  the  old  one  last  year  (2007).  Banks  have  made  major  advances  in 
implementation  of  the  new  framework,  though  many  are  facing  challenges  in  areas  like 
integrated  risk  management  policy,  collateral  management  and  the  limited  availability  of 
credit ratings for counterparts. Almost one half of banks’ on-balance sheet exposures require 
external credit ratings but only one sixth of those exposures have ratings. Of those that have 
been rated, most are banks, while only a small portion of corporate exposures are rated.  
The policy issue for SBP is how fast to allow or require implementation of the more advanced 
approaches. Given the dearth of external ratings, banks will reap the full benefit of the new 
Basel II regime only when they can apply the advance approaches based on internal credit 
ratings. For this they need further improvements in their risk management systems. To push 
the reforms, SBP has made it mandatory for banks to carry out internal risk ratings though 
banks will be provided lead time for implementation.  
The application of the basic Basel II approaches is not likely to result in any major change in 
banks’ capital adequacy ratios (CARs). The impact studies done so far indicate that lower 
capital  requirements  against  credit  risk  are  offset  by  the  new  capital  charge  against 
operational risk, when compared against the previous Basel I regime. Only by moving to the 
advanced approaches can banks expect to lower their CARs.  
Financial conglomerates 
Commercial  banks  are  de  facto  moving  into  conglomerate  modes  by  venturing  into  other 
sectors. Some banks have acquired or merged NBF institutions such as investment finance, 
brokerage, asset management and insurance companies into the banks, while others remain 
as  subsidiaries.  Conglomerates  have  become  the  norm,  as  banks  broaden  their  product 
offerings and seek cross-selling opportunities. Presently, 5 banks (and one DFI) own shares 
in  insurance  companies,  12  banks  have  interests  in  asset  management  companies  and 
mutual  funds,  and  many  are  involved  in  other  areas  like  leasing,  financial  advisory  and 
brokerage services, modaraba management and foreign exchange.  
Financial conglomerates present a major challenge for the SBP. It is generally acknowledged 
that  financial  conglomeration  makes  good  business  sense,  and  that  these  developments 
should  be  regulated  but  not  stifled  by  regulation.  The  main  challenges  that  financial 
conglomerates pose for regulators are: 
• 
First,  unless  there  is  strict  implementation  of  sound  banking  practices,  there  is  a 
danger that a bank can become a cheap source of finance to the other members of 
a group without proper recognition and management of the risks involved. 
Second, failures elsewhere in the group can expose the bank to contagion risk. 
Third,  especially  where  the  conglomerate  group  includes  commercial  businesses, 
there  is  a  risk  that  the  bank  depositors  end  up  carrying  the  residual  risk  for  non-
financial businesses. 
 Regulators  address  these  concerns  through  consolidated  supervision  which  places  a 
supervisory  net  around  all  members  of  the  group.  The  primary  intention  is  to  prevent  an 
otherwise sound bank from being impaired by association. As a part of supervisory reform 
agenda,  SBP  will  be  moving  towards  consolidated  supervision  system  in  compliance  with 
Basle  Core  Principles.  To  allow  for  this  appropriate  structural  change  in  financial  sector 
regulatory architecture would be required and legislated. 
8 
 BIS Review 85/2008
Regulatory architecture 
The  emergence  of  financial  conglomerates  has  had  an  impact  on  the  shape  of  regulatory 
architectures  around  the  world.  Internationally  there  has  been  a  marked  trend  towards 
regulatory amalgamation and, within that trend, towards creation of a single or minimum two 
agencies  with  responsibility  for  all  regulation  within  the  financial  sector.  The  reason  most 
commonly  cited  for  this  trend  is  the  need  to  better  cope  with  the  regulation  of  financial 
conglomerates.  
Our  current  architecture  in  Pakistan  is  not  well  suited  for  consolidated  supervision.  Some 
members  of  financial  conglomerates  are  under-regulated  and  no  agency  has  power  to 
regulate financial groups as a whole. At the centre of the case for reform in this area is the 
need for the SBP to regulate and supervise banking groups on a consolidated basis and to 
apply prudential norms to all aspects of the business of groups that include banks.  
This  can  be  achieved  in  Pakistan  context  best  by  ensuring  that  all  deposit  and  lending 
institutions  are  under  oversight  of  SBP  and  the  responsibility  of  lead  supervisor  for 
consolidated supervision be entrusted fully to SBP. The basic rationale for this proposal is to 
protect  depositors  and  public  liability  from  the  contagion  that  can  arise  from  financial 
conglomeration.  This  case  is  strengthened  by  the  role  that  SBP  plays  in  financial  system 
stability and the independence and skill base it has to carry out this function effectively.  
Financial safety net framework 
Depositor  protection  scheme.  Aside  from  yield,  safety  of  depositors  is  one  criterion  for 
enhancing  deposit  mobilization.  Since  private  banks,  which  form  the  bulk  of  the  financial 
system, are outside the Banks’ (Nationalization) Act, 1974 SBP is developing a blue print for 
a  limited  deposit  protection  scheme  (DPS)  to  protect  small  depositors.  DPS  increases 
depositor  confidence  in  all  banks  and  comforts  small  savers  and  helps  the  competitive 
position of small private banks in relation to large banks or government owned banks, which 
typically are viewed as safe and/or “too big to fail” (TBTF). DPS reduces the probability of 
open bank runs, which can be damaging to confidence in banks more generally and lead to 
contagion in other banks. The protection of deposits under a limited DPS typically would be 
strictly confined to small depositors which constitute majority of the depositors but represent 
only a small proportion of total deposits in value terms.  
A DPS typically establishes a Depositor Protection Fund (DPF) to facilitate depositor payouts 
funded  by  the  initial  capital  contribution,  premium  payments  from  banks  and  its  own 
investment income. The premium charged can be fixed across the board or risk based for 
each bank. Managing expectations associated with DPS is critical as it does not prevent all 
bank runs and systemic crises but it can be a helpful tool in managing a systemic crisis. The 
SBP  has  advanced  plans  for  introducing  a  DPS  in  Pakistan  and  will  soon  be  circulating  a 
concept paper and supportive legislation for stakeholder consultation. 
Lender  of  last  resort.  A  principal  role  of  SBP  is  to  maintain  confidence  in  the  banking 
system in times of systemic illiquidity. In light of this, internally SBP needs to define clearly 
Lender of Last Resort (LOLR) functions and the supportive liquidity arrangements. Currently 
SBP provides liquidity for solvent banks facing temporary liquidity problems using different 
instruments,  like  repos,  access  the  discount  window,  or  using  other  monetary  policy 
instruments  like  outright  securities  purchases  (OMOs  or  directed)  or  changes  in  the  cash 
reserve  ratio  (CRR).  Since  SBP  has  a  strong  banking  surveillance  mechanism  as  well  as 
regular banking inspection, the probability of banks having solvency problems is low but one 
cannot rule out such cases. Banks do have high exposures in loans and shares to certain 
companies and economic groups – often related parties – and liquidity and solvency issues 
could  emerge  despite  high  vigilance.  In  view  of  this,  SBP  plans  to  develop  a  policy 
framework and guidelines for its LOLR functions.  
BIS Review 85/2008 
 9
Exit framework. A strong legal framework for bank exit is already provided for in the draft 
amended  Banking  Companies  Ordinance.  Under  this  SBP  would  have  strong  powers  to 
intervene, reorganize or close unviable or failing banks. SBP has experience of handling and 
intervening in problem banks and their subsequent liquidation or managed mergers. SBP will 
further develop a suitable range of resolution options to deal with TBTF banks.  
In parallel, there is need to develop a Prompt Corrective Action (PCA) regime that obliges 
SBP to take specific corrective actions once certain trigger ratios are reached. The typical 
PCA regime is based on CARs and if the CAR falls to below the regulatory minimum CAR 
certain prescribed actions are triggered.  
Development of Core Financial Infrastructure. Host of initiatives are under implementation 
or to be launched. 
a) 
repayment  histories  and  some  non-financial 
Retail  payment  system:  SBP  is  launching  today  the  1st  of  July  2008  the  Pakistan 
Real Time Gross Settlement (RTGS) system for wholesale transactions. In addition, 
work  has  started  for  modernization  of  the  retail  payments  and  settlement  system 
which will encourage electronic and mobile phone based transactions, while taking 
due  consideration  of  privacy  and  security  matters  and  the  development  of  an 
appropriate legal framework.  
Credit Information Bureau: The SBP’s electronic Credit Information Bureau (eCIB) 
has  already  helped  credit  risk  management  in  all  financial institutions. With  up-to-
date  (almost  real-time)  data  and  coverage  of  almost  5  million  consumer  and 
commercial  borrowers,  it  provides  financial  institutions,  both  large  and  small,  an 
invaluable risk management tool. The data includes not only outstanding amounts 
but  also 
information.  The 
comprehensive  coverage  of  corporate  borrowers  down  to  very  small  consumer 
finance amounts provides a unique statistical basis for credit scoring techniques and 
other  methodologies.  SBP  will  further  develop  operational  software  for  borrower 
analysis and credit scoring which will help in credit analysis of banks. 
Credit rating agencies: Corporate ratings are needed for the standardized approach 
of Basel II implementation as well as for the development of a private debt securities 
market  and  for  listing  of  companies  on  the  stock  exchange.  There  are  two  rating 
agencies who have rated a few companies, as there is little need and few incentives 
for companies to subject themselves to external scrutiny. The incentive framework 
for  the  services  provided  by  private  rating  agencies  needs  to  be  analyzed  with  a 
view towards identifying measures and incentives that will result in more company 
ratings. That would also help facilitate private listings of private debt securities.  
Land and property registries: Land and property titles are available in urban but not 
in  rural  areas.  Improved  land  titling  systems  in  rural  areas  could  be  seen  as  a 
necessary  underpinning  for  an  improved  credit  extension  process,  by  allowing 
collateralized lending for the agriculture, SME and housing sectors. Security of title 
is essential. SBP is exploring ways to facilitate pilot studies and efforts to develop off 
the  shelf  systems  and  make  it  affordable  for  local  and  provincial  governments  to 
introduce new registries and systems over the medium term. 
The  judicial  system:  An  efficient  financial  system  requires  legal  certainty  and 
enforceability of contracts. The present court system needs to be further equipped to 
deal  with  financial  transactions  and  disputes.  This  would  require  a  long-term 
program  to  train  judges  in  commercial  and  financial  law  and  perhaps  to  establish 
more specialized courts to deal with financial matters. 
b) 
c) 
d) 
e) 
10 
 BIS Review 85/2008
Conclusion 
Drawing up the financial sector strategy for next ten years the paper has outlined the vision, 
objectives  and  strategy  for  financial  sector.  This  paper  concentrates  largely  on  reforms  of 
banking  sector  and  central  bank  –essentially  focusing  on  its  role  as  regulator.  Driving  this 
reform  is  the  country’s  overall  development  program  which  being  ambitious  requires 
resources for both the public and private sector. Pakistan’s financial markets need to grow at 
a faster pace to not only meet the domestic requirements but to be able to position itself to 
receive  the  foreign  inflows  that  will  be  critical  to  meeting  our  infrastructure  and  industry 
financing requirements. Financial sector broadening and deepening is critical to ensure the 
profitability  and  sustainability  of  banks,  while  ensuring  that  our  citizens  have  access  to 
development  finance  to  change  their  lives.  It  is  essential  to  structure  and  put  in  place 
financial safety nets with supportive legislation on a timely basis for banking sector to grow in 
a sound and efficient manner, while managing properly its systemic risks. Empowering and 
gearing the primary regulator will be key to keeping on track and effectively implementing the 
reform agenda. 
In conclusion it is important to highlight that besides banking sector reforms, the broadening 
and  deepening  of  financial  markets  requires  equal  emphasis  on  development  of  securities 
and debt markets along with the insurance and pension reforms which have lagged behind 
the banking sector reforms. Adhering to macroeconomic stability and developing an enabling 
environment for real sector, both at the federal and provincial level, and a functioning judicial 
system would be key to keeping the necessary momentum for financial sector reforms.  
BIS Review 85/2008 
 11
