Caleb M Fundanga: Improved financial services in Zambia 
Speech by Dr Caleb M Fundanga, Governor of the Bank of Zambia, at the official opening of 
The Barclays Bank Zambia Plc, Chilenje Branch, Chilenje, 9 January 2008. 
 • Mr Fritz Seegers – Barclays Global Retail and Commercial Banking ChiefExecutive 
• Mr J J Sikazwe – Barclays Bank Zambia Plc Chairman 
• Mr Ahmed Khan – Barclays GRCB Emerging Markets Chief Executive Officer 
• Mr Michael Miebach – Barclays Sub-Sahara Africa Managing Director 
• Mr Zafar Masud – incoming Barclays Bank Zambia Managing Director 
• Mr Danie Nel – outgoing Barclays Bank Zambia Managing Director 
• Invited Guests 
• Ladies and Gentlemen 
I am delighted to be the Guest of Honour at the official opening of the Barclays Bank Zambia 
Plc  Chilenje  branch.  My  appreciation  of  this  opening  is  because  it  reflects  a  fundamental 
change in strategy by Barclays Bank Zambia over the last few years. I recall that only a few 
years  ago,  Barclays  Bank  Zambia  closed  a  number  of  its  branches  in  several  towns  and 
locations. We were greatly concerned because it meant that even the few that were serviced 
by commercial banks would have greater problems in accessing financial services. Barclays 
Bank Zambia obviously had its reasons for taking such an action and we cannot fault them 
for attempting to curb their costs. 
However, it is now evident that there is a turnaround in the situation. I am reliably informed 
that the number of branches has increased from 17 at the beginning of April last year to 55 at 
the end of November 2007. What is even more impressive is that these branches are found 
in  areas  which  were  previously  not  serviced  by  commercial  banks.  This  indeed  is  a  bold 
move and for this we must commend Barclays Bank Zambia. I am aware that the expansion 
programme is backed by a capital injection of approximately K40.0 billion which will make it 
possible for Barclays Bank Zambia to increase its services in the country, particularly to the 
SMEs sector. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, the 2005 Finscope Survey undertaken by FinMark Trust confirmed 
that  levels  of  access  to  financial  services  in  Zambia  are  low.  Fewer  than  15%  of  adult 
Zambians are reported to have had access to commercial banks. The reasons given for this 
low accessibility varied but some of the critical reasons included the distance to banks, the 
time  spent  getting  to  a  bank  and  the  cost  of  getting  a  bank  service.  With  Barclays  Bank 
Zambia  opening  branches  closer  to  the  people  it  is  our  conviction  that  the  number  of 
Zambians  to  have  access  to  banking  services  will  increase.  We  therefore  encourage  as 
many Zambians as possible to use these facilities. To the residents of Chilenje, I urge you to 
utilize the services offered by Barclays Bank, otherwise the bank may opt to close its branch 
due to lack of business and you will be left with no bank in your area. You must recognize 
that the era of keeping monies in mattresses is long gone. 
We  recognize  that  Barclays  has  obviously  seen  a  window  of  opportunity  in  opening  its 
branches in such localities. However, it is important to note that the level of incomes in such 
areas  is  not  at  the  same  levels  as  for  those  that  obtain  their  services  from  high  street 
locations. In this regard, we urge Barclays and other banks opening their branches in these 
communities to design suitable products. The banks should structure the related costs such 
that  they  take  into  account  the  lower  income  status  of  their  clients.  I  have  in  mind  the 
withdrawal  of  small  sums  of  money  without  necessarily  charging  for  the  withdrawals.  The 
challenge  of  extending  access  to  financial  services  to  the  remaining  adult  population  still 
remains, and for this unbanked population cost is a major consideration. 
BIS Review 5/2008 
 1
Ladies and Gentlemen, I am aware that the demand for banking services is high in Chilenje 
and  therefore  Barclays  Bank  should  consider  moving  to  bigger  premises.  There  are  a 
number of longstanding neighbourhood businesses in this location. I can point at Sir Jack, 
Janu Plaza, Karibu Bakery and Robert’s Fish and Vegies. There are also business entities 
which  were  formally  parastatals  located  here.  I  also  know  that  private  entities  that  have  a 
national presence such as Zambeef Plc and Pama Meats have established branches here. 
This is a reflection of the economic viability of Chilenje Township and Barclays has done well 
to come here. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  as  you  are  aware  the  Zambian  economy  has  taken  a  turn  for  the 
better over the last few years. We are fortunate that the rise in copper prices has created a 
greater interest to invest in the mines. We have also witnessed increased investment in other 
areas such as agriculture, tourism, construction and manufacturing. This has culminated in a 
25.6%  increase  in  non-traditional  exports  to  US$845.1  million  by  November  2007.  This 
obviously gives a wider spread of lending opportunities for the banking sector. It is important 
to note that this growth in non-traditional exports is to a large extent associated with small 
and medium scale enterprises. The commitment by Barclays Bank Zambia to upscale their 
support to the SMEs is thus very welcome. This commitment has been exemplified by your 
decision  to  locate  a  branch  in  Chilenje.  I  am  also  happy  that  your  commitment  to  the 
community has extended to the renovation of the Community Centre, a building which carries 
a strong historical background for this country. We encourage you to extend this further by 
helping with other requirements such as the drainage system in the locality, street lighting for 
specific  areas  and  enhancing  other  communal  facilities  as  part  of  the  Keep  Lusaka  Clean 
campaign. 
Ladies and gentlemen, without further ado, it gives me great pleasure to declare the Barclays 
Bank Zambia Plc Chilenje Branch officially open. 
I thank you! 
2 
 BIS Review 5/2008
