Ignazio Visco: Divergence in monetary policies across the Atlantic? 
Remarks  by  Mr  Ignazio  Visco,  Deputy  Director  General  of  the  Bank  of  Italy,  at  the  policy 
panel of the CEDERS – 3rd Meeting on Open Macroeconomics and Development “The Euro 
Area, the Euro and the World Business Cycle”, Aix-en-Provence, 3-4 July 2008. 
I am grateful to Sergio Nicoletti Altimari for comments and suggestions while remaining solely responsible for the 
views here expressed. 
 In  my  remarks,  I  will  first  start  with  the  basic  question  raised  to  the  panel:  are  there 
differences  in  the  Fed's  and  ECB's  behaviour?  I  will  then  tackle  two  issues  that  have 
probably become more pressing in light of the current financial turmoil: i) are there obvious 
limitations in the monetary frameworks and how should they be addressed?, and ii) do we 
need some form of monetary policy coordination? 
FED – ECB divergences 
1.  
A  popular  belief  is  that  the  dual  mandate  of  the  Fed,  as  opposed  to  the  overriding  price 
stability objective of the ECB, is the major source of policy differences across the Atlantic. In 
this respect, if we take a medium- to long-term view, and we agree that over those horizons 
money  cannot  affect  potential  output  (the  Phillips  curve  is  vertical),  then  the  different 
mandate should not be relevant. Indeed: 
• 
The track record of the Fed in the past 20 years, as well as the positions expressed 
repeatedly by its executives, speak by themselves of the centrality the Fed attributes 
to the price stability objective (see Figure).  
An  important  difference  is  of  course  that,  contrary  to  the  ECB,  the  Fed  has  not 
announced a quantitative definition of its goal: this may give the ECB some (slight) 
advantage in anchoring expectations, as some recent studies appear to suggest,1 
and thus perhaps a more favourable shorter-run trade off. 
 It is at the shorter horizons, in the strategic conduct of monetary policy by the two central 
banks, that we may more likely find some differences:  
• 
A starting point in this respect is the observation that since the start of the euro in 
1999 the volatility of policy interest rates in the US has been two times larger than in 
the euro area (see Figure).2  
Understanding  why  this  is  the  case  is  not  easy,  as  the  difference  may  reflect 
differences in the conduct of policy, in the structures of the economy, in the size and 
nature of economic shocks. Indeed, the few analyses that have tried to address the 
                                                  
1   M.J. Beechey, B.K Johannsen and A. Levin (2007), “Are long-run inflation expectations anchored more firmly 
in the Euro Area than in the United States?”, CEPR Discussion Papers No. 6536. 
2   The standard deviation of the (target) Fed fund rate since 1999 is 1,83 percentage points, compared with 0,89 
percentage points of the policy rate of the ECB. The average policy rate has been 3,6 for the Fed and 3,1 for 
the ECB. 
BIS Review 89/2008 
 1
issue in a systematic way give some hints that all of these factors may have played 
a role.3 In particular:  
o 
Shocks:  Differences  in  the  type  and  intensity  of  shocks  (especially 
productivity shocks) have probably played a major role in the last decade.  
Structure: Higher wage and price flexibility may explain part of the higher 
volatility of policy rates in the United States.  
Policy: The ECB may have, at least according to some estimates, a higher 
degree of policy inertia, which may grant it with more leverage on long-term 
interest rates.  
o 
o 
There is however no crystal clear evidence of a significantly different response to measures 
of economic slackness, which may indicate that the different mandates do not impinge too 
much even in the shorter term. Besides this, we have to be very careful in judgement as we 
are far from being in a position to state how close to optimal is any of the two policies, given 
structure and preferences in the two economies.  
The recent financial turmoil and the different policy responses across the Atlantic have once 
again  spurred  a  debate  (particularly  in  Europe)  on  whether  the  different  mandate  is  the 
source of divergence (and political calls on the ECB to adopt a Fed-like response). Again it is 
likely that a combination of factors are at play:  
• 
If we compare, for example, the change in the forecasts of the two central banks in 
the last year, we see that the Fed has changed its forecasts of growth for 2008 by 
much  more  than  the  ECB  (-2%  vs.  -0,5%),  while  the  reverse  is  true  for  inflation 
(+0,4% vs. +0,9%). These changes in the respective outlook go some way towards 
explaining  a  different  policy  response:  after  all,  and  notwithstanding  the  strict 
financial linkages, we should not forget that the sub-prime crisis originated in the US 
and it is linked to real economic problems in that country.  
The  difference  in  the  policy  stance  may  also  have  accentuated  the  perception  of 
differences in the liquidity provision policies followed by the two central banks. While 
some differences were certainly present (in terms of counterparties, instruments and 
facilities used for open market operations), overall the two banks did not inject more 
reserves  than  needed  to  maintain  reference  rates  near  policy  rates  and  net 
injections  were  quickly  reversed.  However,  while  the  ECB  had  to  clearly  (and 
successfully) distinguish liquidity provision from the monetary policy stance, in the 
Fed  case  active  liquidity  provision  and  more  expansionary  monetary  policy  went 
hand in hand. 
 Financial turmoil and monetary frameworks 
2.  
According  to  some  observers,  financial  crises  are  manifesting  themselves  with  increased 
frequency  also  because  of  the  success  achieved  by  macro-stabilization  policies  and  the 
better anchoring of inflation expectations in good and services markets. An aspect of this is 
that episodes of excess creation of liquidity and credit may fuel asset price bubbles, rather 
than increase consumption prices. In this respect: 
                                                 
3   See L. Christiano, R. Motto and M. Rostagno (2007), “Shocks, structures or monetary policies? The euro area 
and  US  after  2001”,  ECB  Working  Papers  No.  774,  and  J.G.  Sahuc  and  F.  Smets  (2008),  “Differences  in 
interest rate policy at the ECB and the Fed: an investigation with a medium-scale DSGE model”, Journal of 
Money, Credit and Banking, vol. 40, March-April. 
2 
 BIS Review 89/2008
  It has been observed that in both the high-tech equity bubble of the late 1990s and 
in the more recent escalation of real estate prices a “too easy for too long” monetary 
policy stance may have had some responsibility. 
There  are  also  claims  that  portfolio  relocations  and  abundant  liquidity  may  be 
causing episodes of bubbles in commodity prices for which future markets exist, with 
consequences for the prices of other commodities and final consumer prices. 
By  committing  itself  to  closely  monitor  and  to  respond,  if  needed,  to  developments  in 
monetary and credit aggregates, the ECB has probably made a step towards addressing this 
issue. Indeed: 
• 
Excessive growth in monetary aggregates, credit and leverage may provide useful 
early  signals  of  the  building  up  of  financial  imbalances  and  their  potential  longer 
term implications for financial stability, macroeconomic volatility and price stability.4  
The  ECB  has  also  manifested  a  different  attitude  towards  asset  price  bubbles, 
whereas it has not ruled out the possibility of “leaning against the wind” in the face of 
excessive asset price developments.5  
We  should  however  acknowledge  the  enormous  difficulties  of  defining  what 
“excessive” means in this area and of designing a policy that aims at mitigating the 
risks of imbalances and crises in the financial sector while keeping it consistent with 
the preservation of price stability. We should probably also avoid asking too much to 
monetary  policy;  certainly  frameworks  and  rules  in  capital  markets  need  to  be 
revised and other policies (regulatory, supervision …) to be involved. 
  In this respect, is the adoption of a fully fledged “flexible inflation targeting” – a framework 
from which both the Fed and the ECB have differentiated themselves (perhaps for different 
reasons)  –  the  right  way  to  go?  Nowadays  flexible  inflation  targeting  is  understood  as  a 
framework in which the central bank announces (and specifies in quantitative terms) its price 
stability goal and designs an optimal policy to reach it. But then, one may ask whether this 
may  be  too  general  a  framework  to  provide  an  actual  guidance  to  monetary  policy.6 
Furthermore: 
• 
Is there a role for asset prices in flexible inflation targeting (independently of their 
direct effects on inflation)? 
In particular, may asset prices play a role in the anchoring of price expectations that 
is  nowadays  recognized  by  policymakers  as  a  paramount  condition  for  achieving 
price stability? 
 Anyway, the real issue to me does not lie much in the policy framework, but rather in the 
limitations of the models we use to interpret economic data and to decide our policy. This is 
particularly true for how we treat asset prices. Let me just mention two points in this respect. 
First,  we  probably  do  not  know  enough  about  the  effects  of  asset  price 
• 
misalignments and related imbalances in equity, real estate and currency markets, 
as well as in bank credit and government debt. My reading of the empirical literature 
is  that  normally  these  effects  are  found  to  be  relatively  small  and  asset  price 
                                                 
4   See also, on this issue, the influential BIS view as exemplified for instance in C. Borio and P. Lowe (2002), 
“Asset prices, financial and monetary stability: exploring the nexus”, BIS Working Papers No. 114. 
5   See  for  example  O.  Issing  (2004),  “Financial  integration,  asset  prices  and  monetary  policy”,  speech  at  the 
Symposium  concluding  two  years  of  the  ECB-CFS  research  network  on  “Capital  Markets  and  Financial 
Integration in Europe”. 
6   On this see also my discussion of C. Bean (2003), “Asset prices, financial imbalances and monetary policy: 
are inflation targets enough?”, BIS Working Papers No. 140. 
BIS Review 89/2008 
 3
movements are found to play a relatively little role in the transmission of monetary 
policy. But this conclusion may be seriously biased, as these are often likely to be 
rare  and  extreme  events.  Even  if  they  materialised  in  strong  manner,  in 
macroeconomic  estimates  they  are  likely  to  be  dominated  over  the  sample  by 
“normal time” observations and frequently end up to be “dummied out”.  
Second, many of the effects associated with asset prices imbalances are likely to be 
highly non-linear and complex. The implicit monetary policy reaction function would 
also  then  be  non-linear  and  complex  and  likely  to  depend  on  asset  prices  and 
financial imbalances.7  
 Let me just mention some of the weaknesses we need to address in the near future: 
• 
Our models do not treat asset prices in any depth; we are unable to appropriately 
model movements in the risk premia over the cycle. 
We are not able to satisfactorily model interactions and feedbacks between the real 
and the financial sectors; this is particularly true for the non-linearities that emerge 
during crises. 
We  lack  a  deep  understanding  of  the  potential  link  between  monetary  policy  and 
asset  price  bubbles;  this  may,  inter  alia,  require  a  departure  from  the  rational 
expectation hypothesis (as recently suggested for example by Sims8). 
  Coordination of monetary policies 
3.  
The financial turmoil has brought back at the centre of the international debate the issue of 
monetary policy coordination. In this debate, many feelings and perceptions mix together. At 
the bottom, there is the argument that the spectacular increase in financial integration implies 
a progressive decline in the effectiveness of domestic monetary policy. This combines with 
the perception that central banks may have lost their leverage on longer-term interest rates 
(see  the  discussion  on  the  “saving  glut”),  as  is  evident  from  a  lower  impact  of  short-term 
interest rates on the yield curve, a higher correlation of interest rates across countries and a 
flattening of the Phillips curve caused by globalisation.  
In this new global environment, it is argued by some, domestic monetary policies can do little 
in isolation; the only possibility is to join forces. I will structure my remarks on this issue along 
a few questions.  
First,  does  globalisation  (increased  trade  and  financial  integration)  necessarily  reduce  the 
effectiveness of monetary policy?  
• 
Here, I think worries are probably exaggerated. From a theoretical point of view, we 
have  no  reasons  to  think  that  because  of  financial  and  commercial  integration 
domestic monetary policies should lose control of their statutory goal.9 As long as 
domestic  currencies  continue  to  be  used  as  means  of  payments  for  the  internal 
transactions  the  ability  of  monetary  policy  to  control  inflation  is  not  affected  and 
domestic inflation remains a domestic monetary phenomenon.10  
                                                 
7   See,  among  others,  the  example  provided  in  Bordo  and  Jeanne  (2002),  “Boom-busts  in  asset  prices, 
economic instability and monetary policy”, NBER Working Papers No. 8966. 
8   C. A. Sims (2008), “Inflation expectations, uncertainty and monetary policy”, manuscript, mimeo. 
9   See Woodford (2008), “Globalization and monetary control”, NBER Working Papers No. 13329. 
10   Of course, to the extent that  globalisation also increases the flexibility of prices and  wages, it may  hamper 
monetary  policy  ability  to  influence  short-run  output  movements.  But,  in  this  case,  this  ability  would  not  be 
needed any longer. 
4 
 BIS Review 89/2008
  A question may however remain whether domestic policies may have become more 
costly, in terms of their short-run effects on economic activity, due to the increased 
importance of external spillovers.  
Some of the evidence I just referred to (diminished impact of policy rates on longer 
term rates, flattening of the Phillips curve) may be explained by a higher degree of 
credibility  of  central  banks,  rather  than  globalization,  and  indeed  we  have  some 
evidence that this may be the case.11 This would reflect an increased, rather than 
reduced, effectiveness of monetary policy.  
Second, even if we do not necessarily need to join forces to control domestic inflation, may 
coordination nevertheless be useful? 
• 
Here the answer from theory becomes more blurred. The recent literature based on 
dynamic  general  equilibrium  models  with  sticky  prices  has  highlighted  the 
importance of relative prices. Whether there is room for welfare improving monetary 
policy coordination depends very much on exchange rate pass-through behaviour. 
Overall,  I  take  from  this  literature  that  targeting  domestic  inflation  produces 
outcomes close to optimal in most cases.12  
If  we  add  to  this  the  real  life  complications  of  getting  into  (and  respecting  under 
changing  conditions)  formal  agreements  and  the  uncertainties  surrounding  the 
effects of monetary policy moves (for example on exchange rates), then the case for 
coordination becomes even more doubtful. Indeed, the experiences of the past (e.g. 
the Louvre – Plaza agreements) are not particularly encouraging.  
In any event, what cannot be compromised is the statutory mandate of our central 
banks to deliver the assigned objectives. Any formal agreement casting doubts on 
this  principle  and  causing  inflation  expectations  to  slip  away  would  be  extremely 
costing. Considering all this, the road of coordination, understood as entering into 
formal and binding contingency plan agreements, appears quite narrow.  
Finally, do we need more cooperation? 
• 
The answer in this case is probably positive. Even if we do not necessarily need to 
coordinate  ex  ante  to  attain  the  final  goal,  it  is  quite  evident  that  the  increasing 
interdependencies  among  the  economies  complicate  the  conduct  of  monetary 
policies a great deal. In the new environment the case for reinforcing international 
cooperation  is  strong.  And  I  do  not  exclude  that  particularly  for  small  open 
economies this may mean a strong incentive to join or to create monetary unions 
(an extreme form of cooperation).  
We  are  seeing  that  forms  of  cooperation  are  becoming  more  and  more  crucial  in 
many fields, such as in liquidity provision policies, in financial institution regulation 
and  supervision,  in  order  to  tackle  possible  systemic  crises,  avoid  regulatory 
arbitrage, ensure a level-playing field. 
In  the  monetary  policy  field,  there  certainly  is  a  high  degree  of  interaction  among 
central bankers, for example through their frequent participation to BIS meetings in 
Basel.  It  is  indeed  essential  to  ensure  a  continuous  exchange  of  views,  full 
understanding  of  each  other’s  goals,  policy  intentions  and  possible  spillovers  of 
                                                     
11   See, for example, E. Gaiotti (2008), ”Has globalisation changed the Phillips curve? Firm-level evidence on the 
effect of activity on prices”, Banca d’Italia, Temi di discussione, No. 676. 
12   See, for example, M. Obstfeld and K. Rogoff (2002), “Global implications of self-oriented national monetary 
rules”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, May, and G. Corsetti and P. Pesenti (2005), “International dimensions 
of optimal monetary policy”, Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 52 n. 2. 
BIS Review 89/2008 
 5
different policy options. In some cases this may lead to a common understanding 
that a particular direction of policy is in the interest of all parties involved.  
I believe that the situation we are facing nowadays illustrates this case rather well. 
• 
We are observing an emergence of strong inflationary pressures around the globe. 
Monetary policy at the world level appears to be quite expansionary. Short-term real 
interest rates are negative in the US and are very low or negative in many regions, 
particularly in emerging economies (for the total of emerging economies’ real short-
term interest rates are close to zero, they are positive for those that have an inflation 
targeting framework, and significantly negative for the others.) 
In many emerging economies, particularly in China, the pegging to the dollar implies 
importing  US  monetary  policy  even  if  internal  conditions,  especially  domestic 
demand, are very different. On the one hand, this policy is fuelling liquidity and credit 
expansion,  pushing  domestic  demand  and  pushing  inflation  rates  in  these 
economies towards double-digit values. On the other hand, through the increasing 
pressure on commodity prices (oil and food) it puts pressure to inflation rates also in 
main industrialised economies. 
In advanced economies monetary policy is  directed to avoid second-round effects 
from commodity price increases, but it is unlikely to be able to address the sources 
of  first-round  effects  (excess  demand  in  large  emerging  economies),  unless  it 
creates  so  much  slack  in  the  advanced  economies  as  to  dampen  exports  and 
internal demand in emerging economies as well. 
  The  need  to  come  to  a  common  understanding  of  the  international  situation  appears 
therefore  to  be  particularly  pressing  at  the  moment.  Getting  out  of  problems  may  be  quite 
costly if done in sparse order.  
6 
 BIS Review 89/2008
US PCE Inflation
Euro Area HICP inflation
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
ECB Minimum Bid Rate
Federal Funds Target Rate
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
4.0
3.0
2.0
1.0
0.0
1999
7.0
6.0
5.0
4.0
3.0
2.0
1.0
0.0
1999
BIS Review 89/2008 
  7
