Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Economic outlook and business opportunities in 
Malaysia 
Opening remarks by Dr Zeti Akhtar Aziz, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, at the 
5th  IFSB  Summit  "Economic  Outlook  and  Business  Opportunities  in  Malaysia",  Amman, 
Jordan, 12 May 2008. 
 It is my pleasure to welcome you to the Malaysia Country Showcase held in conjunction with 
the 5th Islamic Financial Services Board Summit. On behalf of the Malaysian delegation, I 
wish to thank you for your presence here to give us this opportunity to share with you the 
Malaysian  business  proposition  and  our  drive  to  strengthen  trade  and  investment  ties 
between  our  regions.  We  have  with  us  today  a  special  panel  to  discuss  the  business 
potentials and opportunities in Malaysia. We are very pleased to be here in Jordan and to be 
given this opportunity to hold this event in this beautiful country. 
The  current  global  economic  and  financial  environment  is  being  confronted  with  new 
challenges  and  uncertainties.  The  financial  crisis  in  the  United  States  has  spread  to  other 
parts of the world, increasing the prospects for a global economic slowdown. We are seeing 
in  the  global  financial  markets,  banks  continuing  to  de-leverage  and  reducing  lending 
activities,  resulting  in  a  contraction  in  credit  supply.  Going  forward,  financial  markets  are 
expected to continue to be volatile. In this environment, the fear of contagion is prompting 
investors to spread their investment and business risks and to search for new asset classes 
and for markets that provide stability. 
Economic and business environment in Malaysia  
Malaysia has entered this period of global uncertainty from a position of strength. In 2007, 
the Malaysian economy expanded by 6.3 percent, the fastest pace in the past three years. 
This has been largely due to strong domestic demand from the private and public sectors. 
This  is  also  the  result  of  the  increasingly  more  diversified  structure  of  the  Malaysian 
economy.  This  growth  has  also  been  achieved  with  relative  price  stability,  high  level  of 
savings at 38 percent of the GDP, and a strong external balance with international reserves 
that  is  now  exceeding  USD120  billion.  The  Malaysian  economy  is  expected  to  sustain  a 
growth of 5 to 6 percent in 2008.  
Malaysia has an open economy with a strong commitment to promote international trade and 
investment. Malaysia with a population of over 26 million is ranked among the top 20 trading 
nations in the world that offers a wide range of world class products. The volume of trade 
activities in Malaysia is now about two times the size of our economy with the ratio of trade to 
GNP  being  among  the  highest  in  the  world.  Not  too  long  ago,  Malaysia's  total  trade  has 
breached the RM1 trillion mark or USD320 billion, reflecting the robustness of the economy. 
Malaysia has also been an important destination for foreign direct investment for more than a 
hundred years. In 2007, Malaysia was ranked the 16th most attractive destination for such 
investment.  
Our pattern of trade and economic structure has evolved over several decades to become a 
highly  diversified  economy.  The  macro  economic  stability  reinforced  by  the  long  term 
development  plans,  pro-business  policies,  developed  physical  infrastructure,  conducive 
business environment and trained labour force, have contributed to the advancement in our 
trading and industrial sector. Malaysia, in particular, has become a global player in the export 
of several products. In the electrical and electronics sector, Malaysia is a major exporter of 
semiconductors,  automatic  data  processing  machines  and  telecommunications  equipment. 
BIS Review 57/2008 
 1
While in the furniture industry, Malaysia is currently ranked among the top ten exporters of 
furniture in the world.  
In the services sector, Malaysian companies have ventured abroad, undertaking projects in 
the construction of roads, ports, airports, highways, bridges, houses, commercial buildings, 
power  generation  and  telecommunication,  in  countries  of  the  Middle  East,  Africa,  ASEAN 
and South Asia. Malaysian companies have also gained expertise in the oil and gas sector, 
education and healthcare. In the ICT sector, Malaysia has been ranked globally as the third 
most favoured location for outsourcing of business processes.  
Business and investment opportunities 
Trade  has  for  many  centuries  been  an  important  factor  that  has  linked  the  Middle  East  to 
Asia. In the recent few years, the trade between Asia and countries in the Middle East has 
been on an upward trend. Today, while the world trade has on the average expanded by 10 
percent over the period 2001-2005, Asia's trade with the Middle East has increased at the 
average rate of 24 percent. There is also increasing interest by the Middle East investors in 
the  Asian  region  driven  by  the  investment  opportunities.  While  the  US  remains  the  major 
recipient of investment flows from the Middle East, Asia has surpassed the Euro region as 
the  second  most  popular  investment  destination.  Of  the  USD2  trillion  foreign  investment 
flows from the Middle East in 2006, USD450 billion flowed into Asia. 
Malaysia  is  centrally  located  in  the  ASEAN  region  which  comprises  a  potential  market  of 
about 570 million population and a combined GDP of more than US$1,000 trillion. Malaysia 
is  well  positioned  to  provide  the  linkages  to  support  investment  flows  in  the  region.  The 
development of Malaysia as an Islamic financial hub in the Asian region has facilitated this 
process.  In  relation  to  this,  Malaysia  has  become  a  centre  for  origination,  distribution  and 
trading of Islamic bonds or sukuks. It is also becoming a centre for Islamic fund and wealth 
management  services  and  for  international  Islamic  banking  business,  and  for  international 
takaful  and  retakaful  business  as  well  as  a  centre  for  Islamic  finance  education,  training, 
consultancy and research. 
Significant progress, in particular, has been achieved in the development of the Malaysian 
sukuk market. The Malaysian sukuk market has now evolved into the world's largest Islamic 
bond  market.  At  the  end  of  2007,  it  accounted  for  about  60  percent  of  the  global  sukuk 
outstanding  which  now  amounts  to  about  USD100  billion.  The  sukuk  market  has  been  an 
important  source  of  financing  for  productive  investment  activities,  while  for  investors,  it 
provides great potential for diversification into new asset classes. The issuance of sukuk has 
not only become a means of raising financing but it also provides access to a wider base of 
investors, both Islamic and conventional. 
The Malaysian bond market has also been liberalised to enable non-resident corporations to 
raise ringgit and foreign currency denominated funds from our market. International issuers 
may  thus  issue  multi-currency  sukuks  or  alternatively  have  the  flexibility  to  swap  domestic 
currency funding into other currencies. Stamp duty exemption for ten years beginning 2007 
has been granted on these instruments. There is also withholding tax exemption on income 
earned by non-residents for investments in ringgit and non-ringgit Islamic securities. With the 
growing maturity of the market, it has been able to efficiently manage significantly large size 
issuances.  Recently,  a  Malaysian  telecommunications  company  issued  the  largest-ever 
sukuk in the world market that amounted to an equivalent of USD4.7 billion. Though the size 
was large, the issue was two times oversubscribed, indicating the depth of the market. 
As an investment destination, the Malaysian capital market offers a wide range of world class 
products. More than 85 percent of the companies listed on the Stock Exchange are Shariah 
compliant, representing about 60 percent of total market capitalization. In addition, there are 
about 130 Islamic unit trusts issued in Malaysia. Thirdly, there are two Shariah-compliant real 
estate investment trust (REIT) listed on the stock exchange – a hospital REIT and an oil palm 
2 
 BIS Review 57/2008
plantation  REIT.  Finally,  Asia's  first  Islamic  exchange  traded  fund  (ETF)  was  issued  in 
January  2008  valued  at  the  equivalent  of  USD262.5  million.  A  second  foreign  currency 
tranche  is  expected  to  be  launched  later  in  the  year  which  is  open  for  participation  of 
international investors.  
In relation to this, Malaysia maintains a liberal foreign exchange administration regime where 
investors  are  freely  able  to  obtain  ringgit  and  foreign  currencies  to  fund  their  investments. 
There continues to be free mobility of inward and outward movement of funds relating to both 
foreign direct investment and portfolio investments.  
Having developed a comprehensive Islamic financial system that is supported by the legal, 
Shariah  and  regulatory  infrastructure,  the  Islamic  financial  landscape  has  been  liberalised 
with  the  entry  of  new  international players.  In addition,  the  foreign  equity  ceiling  in  Islamic 
financial institutions has also been raised to a maximum of 49 percent as part of the effort to 
promote  strategic  alliances.  New  licences  are  also  being  offered  for  International  Islamic 
Banks  and  International  Takaful  Operators  to  conduct  the  full  range  of  Islamic  banking 
business or takaful and retakaful business in international currencies. These institutions may 
be established as a branch or subsidiary and are accorded a tax holiday until 2016. These 
entities may be 100 percent foreign owned and have the freedom on employment in these 
financial  institutions.  To  facilitate  foreign  employment,  an  "executive  green  lane"  is  being 
accorded to expedite applications by expatriates for long-term employment. 
Having a sufficient pool of best talent has been key to the development of an Islamic financial 
hub in Malaysia. In 2006, the International Centre for Education in Islamic Finance (INCEIF) 
was established as part of Malaysia's commitment to human capital development in Islamic 
finance.  INCEIF,  which  has  an  international  faculty  and  students  from  more  than  40 
countries, is envisaged to produce high quality Islamic finance professionals and specialists 
not only to meet the domestic requirements but also for the global Islamic financial industry. 
The Malaysian economy has for several years now been on a steady growth path. In 2006, 
Malaysia launched the Ninth Malaysia Plan to be implemented in the period 2006-2010. One 
of  the  objectives  of  the  Plan  is  to  achieve  developed  nation  status  in  2020.  While  the 
Government has allocated USD53.4 billion for development under this plan, the economy will 
continue to be private sector driven. Sectors emphasised in the plan are the high-technology, 
knowledge-based  and  skills-intensive  activities,  and  the  services  sector.  Under  the  Ninth 
Malaysia  Plan,  several  new  growth  regions  have  also  been  identified  for  integrated 
development.  
The  first  growth  area  launched  is  the  Iskandar  Malaysia,  a  region  covering  2,200  sq.  km. 
located  in  the  state  of  Johor,  in  the  south  of  Peninsular  Malaysia.  Up  to  USD100  billion 
investments in the region are expected over the next 25 years. As at the end of April 2008, 
more than USD10.4 billion of investment have been committed by investors, accounting for 
about  70  percent  of  the  USD15  billion  investment  targeted  by  2010.  The  targeted  sectors 
identified  for  development  in  the  region  are  financial  advisory  and  consulting  services; 
creative industries; logistics; educational services; tourism related services; and healthcare.  
As  an  international  Islamic  financial  hub  in  the  Asian  region  with  a  track  record  of  almost 
three decades in Islamic finance, Malaysia is well positioned to promote stronger economic 
linkages  between  our  two  regions.  Malaysia  is  not  only  already  highly  integrated  to  the 
ASEAN region and to the greater Asia, but also has own initiatives and exciting development 
projects. 
On that note, it is our hope that the Malaysia Country showcase be an engaging event for the 
business  and  financial  communities  from  this  region  and  the  Malaysian  delegation.  It  is 
hoped  that  this  greater  engagement  will  lead  to  increased  economic  and  financial  ties 
between our regions.  
Thank you. 
BIS Review 57/2008 
 3
