L Wilson Kamit: Microfinancing in Papua New Guinea 
Speech  by  Mr  L  Wilson  Kamit,  CBE,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Papua  New  Guinea,  at  the 
presentation  of  Banking  Licence  to  Nationwide  Microbank  Limited  and  opening  of  its  new 
Boroko branch, Boroko, 17 June 2008. 
 Acknowledgement 
Hon. Powes Parkop, MP – Governor for National Capital District 
Chairman of Wau Microbank – Mr Ray Clark 
Deputy Governor – Mr Popoitai 
Deputy Governor – Mr Bakani 
Mr Lionel Somaratna, CEO, Wau Microbank 
Distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen 
Introduction 
1.0 
I wish to thank the Board of Wau Microbank for the invitation to officiate in today’s event. 
In  particular,  there  are  a  few  important  reasons  for  being  here  today  partly  to  witness  the 
results of the hard work of the Board, Management and Staff of Wau Microbank, culminating 
in  the  opening  of  the  new  microbank’s  branch  in  the  National  Capital  District  but  also  to 
present  a  new  banking  licence  to  the  entity  that  will  continue  the  work  of  the  “Wau 
Microbank”. 
Historical developments 
2.0  
The  development  of  microfinance  in  PNG  dates  as  far  back  as  the  1960s  with  the 
establishments of savings clubs and savings and loan societies in many parts of the country 
under  the  guidance  and  involvement  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Australia  through  its  branch 
based in Port Moresby and later by the Bank of Papua New Guinea through the Registrar of 
Savings and Loan Societies. 
Over  the  years,  numerous  attempts  to  establish  microfinance  institutions  and/or  provide 
microfinance products were also undertaken by various non-government organizations and 
other government-funded donor agencies. The Development Bank in its various forms over 
the years has been known to have provided some microfinancing. Many of these initiatives 
were very much subsidized. 
Typically, many of these initiatives faced lots of challenges which included sustainability. It is 
one  aspect  to  open  up  branches  and  other  points  of  representation  and  yet  another  to 
sustain,  maintain  and  grow  the  business  without  resorting  to  any  form  of  subsidies. 
Dependence on subsidized funds is fraut with problems as we have experienced in Papua 
New  Guinea.  CEO  Lionel  Sonaratna  mentioned  and  emphasized  sustainability  in  his 
remarks. 
However, despite these challenges and sad experiences many of us are keen to foster the 
growth  of  microfinance  alongside  the  expansion  and  growth  of  other  financial  service 
providers  such  as  banks,  superannuation  funds  and  the  insurance  industry.  There  is 
research  and  documentation  that  suggests  a  link  between  financial  development  (or 
accessibility to finance) and reduction of poverty and indeed financial access does facilitate 
growth. 
BIS Review 90/2008 
 1
Providers of financial services 
3.0  
Financial  accessibility  and  access  to  financial  products  in  Papua  New  Guinea  is  provided 
through  4  commercial  banks,  11  Finance  Companies,  7  Superannuation  Funds,  6  Life 
Insurance  Companies,  2  Licensed  Microfinance  Institutions  and  20  Savings  and  Loan 
Societies. Each of these entities complement each other in the different services and target 
specific  market  segments.  Of  interest  to  the  Bank  is  the  growth  of  these  financial  service 
providers side by side yet find enough competitive opportunities to service a virtually large 
unbanked  population  of  PNG.  For  example,  in  a  number  of  centres,  banks,  finance 
companies,  savings  and  loan  societies  and  microfinance  institutions  are  operating  quite 
successfully next to each other. In Kokopo and Kimbe this is most obvious. 
Legislation 
4.0  
There  is  no  separate  legislation  for  the  microfinance  industry  and  only  two  deposit  taking 
microfinance institutions are licensed by the Bank of Papua New Guinea under the Banks 
and Financial Institutions Act 2000 in the same fashion as commercial banks and financial 
companies.  Savings  and  Loan  Societies  are  administered  under  the  Savings  and  Loan 
Societies Act which is in its financial stages of a review to “modernize” the legislation. 
2 licenced micro-banks in Papua New Guinea are: 
(i) 
PNG Microbank Limited is owned by the PNG Sustainable Development Ltd (49%), 
Bank of South Pacific Limited (32%) and International Finance Corporation (19%). 
Wau Microbank Limited was licenced as a pilot project. (More on this later) 
(ii) 
Challenges for the microfinance industry 
5.0  
A  major  challenge  for  the  microfinance  industry  and  particularly  for  the  two  (2)  licensed 
microbanks is to ensure that in their quest to expand the branch network (outreach) to rural 
and other areas where banking services are not available, they must ensure sustainability. I 
have already mentioned the pitfalls of reliance on subsidies and other market distortions. 
Financial  literacy.  I  believe  it  is  also  our  duty  to  educate  the  public  in  financial  matters  to 
enable them to make informed decisions about their financies. 
Dangers  of  Fast  Money  Schemes.  The  public/your  stakeholders  should  be  continuously 
advised  to  place  their money  with  licensed  financial  institutions  and beware  of  fast  money 
schemes or scams that often make false promises of paying high returns in a very short time. 
To  educate  the  public  on  the  dangers  of  investing  in  fast  money  schemes  or  scams,  the 
Central Bank puts out public notices in the media to educate and warn the public. You can 
assist us by relaying these messages to your stakeholders. 
Challenges  continuously  faced  by  the  financial  sector  are  the  tendency  for  the  Board  and 
management to become complacement in the management of the institutions, to ignore good 
governance  and  accountability  standards  and  allowing  non-commercial  pressures  to  derail 
good commercial practice. 
Wau Microbank Limited 
6.0  
In 1998, the Government and the Asian Development Bank (ADB) agreed on the PNG-ADB 
Microfinance  and  Employment  Project  (Project).  The  purpose  of  settling  up  the  microbank 
was  to  use  as  a  “laboratory”  to  test  different  microfinance  products,  services  and  delivery 
methodologies. 
One of the components of the Project was the establishment of Wau Microbank which was a 
pilot project established under the PNG-ADB Microfinance and Employment Project. It was 
2 
 BIS Review 90/2008
Total assets of the WMB increased from K 4.3m to K 22.2m 
Total deposits increased from K 2.8m to K15.6m 
Total loans increased from K 0.6m to K 5.5m 
Branches in Lae (HO), Wau, Bulolo, Madang, Kainantu and Wewak. 
It had 165,029 depositors, and 
It has 10,113 borrowers 
granted a conditional licence by the Bank of Papua New Guinea in 2004. This in essence 
exempted the financial institution from some requirements of the BFIA to accept deposits and 
provide microfinance services. 
The operations of Wau Microbank under the conditional licence has been satisfactory. Over 
the past 2 years ended March 2008: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
During  2007,  the  Wau  Microbank  applied  for  a  full  licence  to  enable  it  to  expand  its 
operations. The due diligence on the application was undertaken and the Bank is satisfied 
with  the  application.  One  of  the  requirements  imposed  by  us  was  for  the  bank  to  have  a 
country wide recognized and acceptable name. 
On  that  note,  ladies  and  gentlemen,  it  gives  me  great  pleasure  to  announce  that  on  12th 
June 2008, in accordance with Section 10 of the Banks and Financial Institutions Act 2000 
approval  was  granted  to  Wau  Microbank  to  change  its  name  to  “Nationwide  Microbank 
Limited”. 
I  would  like  to  ask  the  Chairman,  Mr.  Ray  Clark  to  come  forward  and  receive  the  new 
Banking Certificate for Nationwide Microbank Limited. 
In line with that authority, it is also my pleasure to invite the Governor of the NCDC, Hon. 
Powes Parkop, MP and the Chairman of Nationwide Microbank Limited, Mr. Ray Clark to join 
me in opening the Port Moresby Branch of Nationwide Microbank Limited. 
It gives us great pleasure in declaring that the Nationwide Microbank Limited is now open for 
business. 
Thank you, ladies and gentlemen. 
BIS Review 90/2008 
 3
