Jean-Claude Trichet: Interview with Le Figaro, Frankfurter Allgemeine 
Zeitung, Irish Times and Jornal de Negócios 
Interview  with  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  by  Jean 
Pierre Robin (Le Figaro), Benedikt Fehr (Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung), Paul Tansey (Irish 
Times)  and  Rui  Jorge  (Jornal  de  Negócios),conducted  on  11  July  2008  and  published  on 
18 July 2008. 
 1. Could you outline how you see the euro economy evolving over the short run and 
the implications for euro interest rates? 
I always said – on behalf of the Governing Council with all our colleagues, Vítor Constâncio, 
John  Hurley,  Christian  Noyer  and  Axel  Weber  –  that  in  order  to  have  clear  indications  on 
what the euro area economy has been doing in the last months, we should take together the 
first and second quarter of 2008. Whilst the first quarter was very dynamic, due to particular 
circumstances including the weather and its impact on construction in Germany for instance, 
the second quarter is likely to be weak. Our base line scenario is that we will have a trough in 
the  profile  of  growth  in  the  euro  area  in  the  second  and  third  quarters  of  this  year  and, 
following this, a progressive return to ongoing moderate growth. I have also said clearly that 
the  risks  for  growth  were  on  the  downside.  Amongst  these  risks  are  the  influence  of  the 
ongoing very significant financial market correction, the possible further increases in, oil and 
commodity  prices  and  the  possible  unwinding  of  global  financial  imbalances.  As  regards 
interest rates, I have nothing to add or to withdraw from what I said before on behalf of the 
Governing Council – that we trust that our decision to raise our key interest rate from 4.0% to 
4.25% will contribute to achieving price stability in the medium term in line with our definition. 
I also mentioned that we had no further indication for our future interest rates, that we are 
never  pre-committed  and  that  we  will  do  in  the  future  what  is  appropriate  to  deliver  price 
stability  in  the  medium-term  and  to  be  credible  in  doing  so,  since  this  is  essential  to 
anchoring inflation expectations. 
2.  Central  Banks,  including  the  ECB,  have  been  responsible  for  a  lot  of  monetary 
growth in the recent past. To what extent are central banks to blame for the present 
inflation, in the euro area and elsewhere? 
In the euro area we have certainly not been loose or lax! I trust that the ECB did well and 
took the right decisions in the past. Let me give you an example: you  know that when we 
decided to increase rate in December 2005 (editors note: after almost two and a half years at 
2.0%), we were advised by the IMF not to increase rates; we were advised by the OECD not 
to  increase  rates;  we  were  advised  by  a  number  of  other  eloquent  voices  not  to  increase 
rates. We did it nonetheless, because our monetary analysis in particular strongly suggested 
that  we  should.  Today  nobody  suggests  that  we  were  wrong  in  our  analysis  and  in  our 
decision, on the contrary. 
3.  Inflation  in  the  United  States  is  now  around  4%.  Would  you  say  that  the  risks  to 
price stability are now greater in the euro area than in the US? 
I certainly will not judge the policies that are pursued by other central banks. We all have our 
own responsibilities in our economies and we have to face different challenges: the shocks 
are  not  of  the  same  nature  and  the  same  amplitude;  the  economies  themselves  exhibit 
different  structural  features,  including  as  regards  their  degree  of  flexibility.  Those  different 
challenges  are  explaining  why  interest  rates  are  different  from  country  to  country.  Do  you 
know that interest rates in Britain as well as in Australia, New Zealand, Sweden and Norway 
for example are higher than in the euro area? I trust that all central banks are doing what is 
necessary to counter inflationary pressures and to be credible in the delivery of price stability 
over time. To deliver price stability in the medium term is necessary for five reasons: first, it is 
BIS Review 92/2008 
 1
what the European democracies have asked us to do when they created the ECB; second, it 
is  what  our  fellow  citizens  are  asking  us  to  do  in  the  present  circumstances;  third,  it  is 
particularly necessary for the most vulnerable and the poorest segment of society; fourth, it is 
a  necessary  precondition  for  sustainable  growth  and  job  creation  and  fifth  it  is  particularly 
important to solidly anchor inflation expectations in a period of financial market tensions and 
volatility. 
4. Why did the recent statement by the Governing Council lay so much emphasis on 
the need to suppress second-round effects in order to quell inflationary expectations? 
Indeed, our message is that we should avoid second-round effects. We cannot change today 
the  prices  of  oil  and  commodities.  But  we  must  avoid  that  prices  that  depend  on  us  –  for 
instance prices of services or the wages and salaries – would augment abnormally as if the 
present  abnormal  level  of  inflation  would  last.  We  are  there  to  tell  households  as  well  as 
enterprises, all social partners, that we will maintain price stability – less than 2%, close to 
2% – in the medium term and that they have to take that into account when they are fixing 
their own prices.  
5. What do you mean by second-round effects? 
I  mean  all  the  price  increases  that  would  be  wrongly  based  on  the  hypothesis  that  the 
inflation would remain as high as it is today in the years to come. Today price setters and 
social partners must take into account that we will be back to price stability – in line with our 
definition – say over 18 months. 
6. In what way can ECB interest rate policy curb inflationary expectations? What are 
the instruments? 
The  economists  will  tell  you  that  the  Central  Banks  are  ensuring  price  stability  through 
different  channels  of  transmission  of  their  monetary  policy  decisions:  the  interest  rate 
channel,  the  credit  channel,  the  risk  taking  channel…I  will  stress  particularly  the  decisive 
importance of the credibility of the central bank. If the Central Bank is credible in its handling 
of  monetary  policy,  then  our  fellow  citizens  as  well  as  the  corporate  businesses  will  have 
confidence that they can count on price stability in the years to come. The ECB is a credible 
anchor of stability and confidence for 320 million citizens of the euro area. We are strongly 
determined to preserve and reinforce confidence: it is our most precious asset. And it is good 
for all, households, enterprises and governments: market interest rates on a five years, ten 
years, twenty years basis are lower because the ECB is credible and inspires confidence. 
Some  governments  are  borrowing  on  a  fifty  years  basis  at  an  interest  rate  significantly 
inferior to 5%: this is only possible because the ECB inspires confidence. 
7. Core inflation in the euro area is now about 1.7%, so why should we be so worried 
about inflation? 
First, core inflation is higher than that and secondly, we do not consider core inflation as a 
good predictor of future inflation. But let me give you an example of why we see signs that 
justify our concerns. Unit Labour Costs are an important indicator of future inflation, because 
they are a major cost in the euro area economy. In recent years, we have had an increase 
rate in Unit Labour Costs of 1.0% in 2005; 0.9% in 2006; 1.5% in 2007; and 2.4% in the first 
quarter of the present year. When you try to disentangle the factors behind this development, 
about half of the increase is attributable to increases in wages and salaries and the other half 
is due to a reduction of labour productivity. The overall result is that we have observed in the 
last two years a significant rise of unit labour costs.  
8. Are second-round effects then already at work in the euro area? 
The  recent  rise  in  unit  labour  costs  is  an  indication  that  we  have  to  take  into  account.  So 
there are risks that we had to counter. I wouldn’t say at all that second-round effects are a 
generalised phenomenon at present but we see signs that we have to take seriously. From 
that standpoint I am concerned about the schemes in which nominal wages are indexed to 
2 
 BIS Review 92/2008
consumer  prices.  They  involve  the  risk  of  a  wage-price  spiral,  very  detrimental  to 
employment. 
9. Is there a risk of euro area inflation exceeding 5%? Is a sharp economic slowdown 
preferable to an inflationary spiral? 
We  are  not  pursuing  two  goals;  we  are  pursuing  one  goal,  which  is  price  stability  in  the 
medium-term.  And  price  stability  is  a  pre-condition  to  sustainable  growth  and  employment 
creation. There is no contradiction between price stability and sustainable growth. Since the 
euro was established in 1999, it has delivered both. In its first nine years, annual inflation in 
the  euro  area  averaged  2.1%  and  over  these  nine  years,  the  euro  area  has  created  15.7 
million jobs, almost three times more than in the previous nine years before the euro and one 
million  more  jobs  than  were  created  in  the  United  States  over  the  same  period.  The 
unemployment  rate  in  the  euro  area  last  year  was  the  lowest  in  25  years.  There  is  no 
contradiction  between  price  stability  and  growth:  price  stability  is  a  prerequisite  for 
sustainable job creation.  
10. Has the ECB any other responsibility other than price stability? 
We  have  a  primary  objective,  which  is  to  maintain  price  stability.  It  is  a  precondition  to 
contribute to the achievements of the objectives of the European Union. 
11. In order to achieve price stability, would the ECB raise interest rates consistently 
to break inflationary expectations? 
I have already said what I had to say on this. 
12. At present, inflation in the euro area is well above your target. Is the ECB to blame 
for this? Could we have avoided this surge in inflation? 
We are responsible for price stability in the euro area over the medium-term. We have been 
able to achieve this objective since the euro’s inception. We know the sentiment of our fellow 
citizens.  The  latest  surveys  suggest  that  inflation  is  now  the  major  economic  concern  of 
European citizens. They know of course that the Bank is not responsible for the increase in 
the cost of oil, commodities or food. Our 320 million fellow citizens can count on us to deliver 
price stability over the medium term, and we think particularly about the poorest and most 
vulnerable that can do the least to protect themselves from rising inflation. 
13. Should the ECB be concerned with asset price inflation as well as consumer price 
inflation in its determination of price stability? 
This is a very important question for all central banks. To sum up the sentiment of our own 
institution, we do not think that it would be possible or advisable to have a definition of price 
stability  that  would  include  in  a  single  indicator  not  only  consumer  prices  but  also  asset 
prices.  That  being  said,  through  the  “wealth”  effect  asset  prices  have  an  influence  on 
demand and therefore on future consumer prices. So asset prices are indirectly taken into 
account in the decisions of central banks. On top of that, in the case of the ECB, you know 
that  our  monetary  policy  framework  is  based  on  two  pillars:  an  economic  pillar  and  a 
monetary pillar. When we analyse the monetary situation we look also with great attention to 
credit growth which might feed asset inflation. 
14. Over the past year, the expansion of credit to non-financial corporates within the 
euro area has been very high, while in the case of households, credit growth has been 
very low. Is this a reflection of the “credit crunch” in Europe? 
There has been a big difference in the credit expansion rates for non-financial corporates on 
one hand and households on the other. Over the past twelve months, the growth in credit to 
non-financial  households  has  reached  14.2%,  which  is  an  impressive  multiple  of  nominal 
GDP  growth.  On  the  other  hand  credit  extended  to  households  has  progressively  slowed 
down since we increased interest rates in December 2005. It is also true that we are told by 
BIS Review 92/2008 
 3
banks, through our bank surveys, that they are tightening their bank lending standards. We 
will monitor these evolutions closely in the months ahead.  
15. Can you explain the 14% growth in credit to non-financial corporates? 
We are working on that. What is sure is that there is still a very dynamic growth in the overall 
financing  of  the  productive  sector  which  is  not  offset  by  a  diminution  of  stocks  and  bonds 
issuance.  
16.  What  is  your  feeling  about  the  capital  adequacy  and  the  solvency  of  the  euro 
banking system at present? 
I think that the process of accounting and of recapitalisation is a process that is taking place 
both in Europe, the euro area and the USA. At the present moment, all the information we 
have  suggests  that  recapitalisation  of  banks  in  the  euro  area  is  in  line  with  the  amount  of 
losses displayed. That being said, we have to be constantly alert. There is no room at all for 
complacency. 
17. Is the worst behind us in this credit crisis? 
My assessment is that we are experiencing, since the month of August last year an ongoing 
very  significant  market  correction  with  episodes  of  turbulence,  episodes  of  a  high  level  of 
volatility and of hectic market behaviour. Again, it is an ongoing process. 
18. Are conditions today comparable to the oil shock of the 1970s? 
The  situation  is  not  identical.  The  structure  of  the  global  economy  has  changed  with  the 
increasing  influence  of  emerging  economies.  There  have  been  major  breakthroughs  in 
science and technology. Much progress has been made in energy saving technologies. But, 
that being said, I trust that there are also important similarities. Today as in 1973-1974, there 
is a major transfer of resources from oil consumers to oil producers. Trying to deny that there 
is such a transfer of resources to oil producers is and would be a major mistake. Because 
there  are  only  two  ways  to  isolate  the  households  from  this  real  transfer  which  is 
unavoidable: either you ask the enterprises to pay for it and you weaken considerably the 
productive  sector;  or  you  ask  the  budget  to  pay  for  it  and  you  weaken  dramatically  the 
situation of public finances; or you do both! But, this has been – on the occasion of the first 
oil shock – and would be so in the present circumstances a recipe for high spiralling inflation, 
high unemployment and stagnation. We must take into account the lessons from the past.  
19. How do you protect productive sectors in the face of such external shocks? 
As I said, avoid second-round effects. 
20. Is it the role of the ECB to prevent a recurrence of the stagflation of the 1970s? 
We have a very clear mandate: achieving price stability in the medium-term. It is totally in line 
with the lessons of the first and second oil shocks of 1973 and 1980.  
21.  One  of  the  challenges  the  ECB  has  to  deal  with  is  that  the  cycles  in  the  euro-
countries  are  different.  What  can  be  said  to  those  countries  like  Ireland,  Spain  and 
Portugal who are in a difficult position now and for which the rate hikes are painful? 
The ECB has to care for the superior interest of the euro area. My  message to the fellow 
citizens  is  that  they  share  a  common  destiny  with  an  entire  continent  as  populated  as  the 
United  States  of  America.  When  we  look  at  the  differences  in  growth  between  states  and 
countries in the US and in Europe, we have approximately the same level of differences. A 
large vast continental economy has necessarily to give breathing space to its components. 
And our monetary policy must be optimal at the level of the whole euro area; exactly like the 
Fed would not look what is in the interest of Missouri, California or Texas. That being said, 
there are numerous aspects of economic policies which are under the responsibility of the 
countries  themselves:  in  particular  the  fiscal  polices,  the  structural  policies  and  the 
surveillance of the evolution of unit labour costs.  
4 
 BIS Review 92/2008
22. Portugal, for instance, has quite a low level of inflation. When the rate rises, people 
look at the ECB, but should they be looking at what their governments have done in 
the past in order to put them in a better position to cope with the difficulties that arise 
from the single monetary policy?  
Firstly,  in  anchoring  solidly  inflationary  expectations  the  ECB  is  preserving  a  financial 
environment  which  is  favourable  for  sustainable  growth  and  job  creation.  Because  all 
medium and long term market rates are lower, all things being equal, if inflation expectations 
are in line with our definition: less than 2% but close to 2%. Secondly, as I said governments, 
parliaments and social partners have important responsibilities also because a lot of policies 
are within the competence of national authorities. 
23. You intend to go to Peking after the Olympic Games. What will be the message to 
China? 
We will see with our Chinese partners, for whom I have great esteem, whether we meet in 
China  or  in  Europe.  As  regards  our  message  it  is  well  formulated:  as  we  said  in  the 
communiqué of the last G-7 meeting, we appreciate the rise of the Yuan but we consider that 
an acceleration of the appreciation will be in the interest of all parties concerned. 
24. To what extent does the appreciation of the real euro exchange rate and the future 
impact on euro area growth cause you disquiet? 
I  have  said  publicly  that  it  is  very  important  in  my  eyes  that  the  President  of  the  United 
States, the Secretary of the Treasury and the Chairman of the Federal Reserve have said 
that a strong dollar is in the interest of the United States of America. 
25.  The  difference  between  the  interest  rates  in  Europe  and  the  US  makes  it  more 
difficult to have a strong dollar compared to the euro. Would you expect some help in 
that? 
I have nothing to add to what I just said. 
26. The European economy is hurting because the Chinese constantly intervene in the 
currency market in order to promote their export. Shouldn’t the ECB intervene itself 
and try to push the euro down? 
In my eyes, the acceleration of the appreciation of the Yuan would be in the interest of the 
Chinese partners themselves, because it will help to diminish inflationary tensions in China. It 
would also be part of a rebalancing between domestic consumption and exports, which are 
an important element in the strategy of China, and it would be part of the modernisation of 
the policy instruments available in the Chinese economy. But we have also always said that 
this  is  the  responsibility  of  the  Chinese  authorities.  We  will  continue  to  discuss  with  our 
partners, respecting their own responsibilities and explaining our own positions. 
27. How worried are you by the performance and the behaviour of hedge funds and 
their destabilising effects on the financial markets? 
Firstly,  I  think  it  was  very  important  that  we  could  have  an  agreement  at  the  level  of  the 
international community on the 67 recommendations of the Financial Stability Forum. Work is 
also being done by the private sector itself and I trust that it is always important to ask the 
professionals themselves and the industry to reflect on best practices, to work out codes of 
conduct  and  set  up  benchmark  principles.  This  is  work  in  progress  in  particular  for  highly 
leveraged institutions and hedge funds. We will see if this work is satisfactory from the stand 
point of financial stability. Should this not be the case, then there is always the possibility to 
involve the public authorities. In any case transparency is of the essence. 
28. Is it clear to you that we can no longer live in a world with such a huge shadow 
banking system? 
We have to draw all the lessons and not single out a particular element but rather try to be as 
systematic as possible. It is clear that the “originate and distribute” model has to be reviewed 
BIS Review 92/2008 
 5
to be compatible with financial stability. A very important part of the Basel’s committee work 
is precisely to see how to improve the behaviour of commercial banks. In any case, much 
more transparency of the institutions, the instruments and of the market will be necessary. 
That is not only because when pertinent information is available, the economic agents can 
make  better  decisions  and  engineer  a  better  allocation  of  capital  –  but  also  because 
transparency is an important protection against “herd behaviour” and the propagation of any 
crisis.  One  of  the  lessons  we  learned  from  the  Asian  Crisis  ten  years  ago  was  the  strong 
need  to  improve  transparency  in  the  emerging  economies  as  regards  in  particular  their 
reserve  assets  and  their  monetary  and  fiscal  policies.  In  the  financial  markets  of  the 
industrialised world we have exactly the same lessons to be learned. 
29.  How  healthy  is  the  banking  system  in  Europe?  Some  argue  that  some  banks, 
namely the Spanish ones, are too addicted to the ECB’s lending and collateral policy, 
a signal of little health? 
Since the very beginning of the market turmoil we had a framework which proved to be more 
adapted  to  the  unforeseen  new  environment  that  was  associated  with  the  financial 
turbulences. Our framework appeared as an interesting example for other central banks that 
had to change their own framework. We are permanently examining and applying our rules 
with great care. If it would be useful to refine elements in our scheme, as we did in the past, 
two and four years ago, we would do it.  
30. So you don’t think the banks are too dependent on your instruments? 
We have a framework that has proved to serve us well and we are caring continuously for it 
to be correctly applied. 
31. Do you think the Irish no to the Lisbon Treaty has any impact on the euro area or 
on the ECB’s behaviour? 
As the President of the ECB, I would like to say that the Lisbon Treaty does not affect the 
EMU  framework  and  therefore  the  present  difficulty  of  ratification  does  not  affect  in  any 
respect our work. We have a very clear policy objective – price stability in the medium term – 
and a very inspiring road map: achieving the integration of the single market with a single 
currency and progressively enlarging the euro area according to the criteria of the Treaty of 
Maastricht.  As  a  citizen,  I  hope  very  much,  and  I  am  confident,  that  we  will  find  a  way  to 
overcome the current difficulties. 
32. You shelved plans for the ECB headquarters. Your budget was 500 million euro, 
but the promoter wanted 1,2 billion. What are the plans ahead: will you increase the 
budget  –  and  who  decides  that  –  will  you  start  a  new  plan  or  stay  in  the  current 
premises? 
We are responsible for public money. The Governing Council is the body which decides on 
the  proposal  made  by  the  Executive  Board.  We  are  examining  the  situation  in  view  of 
optimizing the present situation without altering our cost estimates. 
33. Would you be surprised and accept it if the political leaders decided to change the 
ECB’s mandate to a dual one, with price stability and growth? 
That  is  a  highly  theoretical  question.  We  have  a  primary  mandate  enshrined  in  a  Treaty 
which has been negotiated, signed and ratified – either by Parliaments or by the people – by 
27 exemplary democracies, 25 without an opting-out clause. This is the mandate that was 
given to us by our fellow citizens! The people of Europe gave us this mandate because they 
rightly trust that price stability is a prerequisite for sustainable growth and job creation so that 
there is no contradiction but complementarity between the two. 
34.  Given  that  mandate,  do  you  think  all  the  political  leaders  are  helping  you  by 
explaining exactly your mission to their fellow citizens? Would you expect more help 
from some leaders? 
6 
 BIS Review 92/2008
We are fifteen countries today in the euro area and sixteen as soon as next year. One very 
important message for our 320 million fellow citizens is: “We share a destiny in common!” I 
see  more  and  more  political  leaders  and  opinion  leaders  aware  of  the  necessity  of  this 
message. 
35.  What  answer  do  you  have  to  pressures  for  instance  from  Mr.  Sarkozy  or 
Mr. Berlusconi? 
Let me make three remarks. First, the ECB is fiercely independent. And the Treaty says, very 
explicitly that governments shall not try to influence the Governing Council of the ECB. This 
independence  is  key  to  our  credibility,  which  is  in  turn  essential  for  confidence  in  Europe. 
And confidence is our most precious asset, as I said. 
Second, the most vulnerable and poorest of my fellow citizens have the biggest stake in price 
stability which is now the main concern of all according to the surveys. 
Third, as regards the organisation of the relationship with authorities, whether government or 
Parliament,  we  have  probably  the  best  organised  and  the  most  frequent  relationships  that 
exist at the global level. This is not sufficiently known. I invite the president of the Eurogroup 
Jean-Claude  Juncker  and  the  Commissioner  Joaquin  Almunia  to  all  our  meetings  twice  a 
month. I am invited to all Eurogroup meetings once every month. That makes occasions of 
contacts three times a month. As regards the Parliament, I am invited five times a year and 
members of the Executive Board are invited on other issues as well. On top of these official 
hearings  I  participate  in  a  number  of  informal  gatherings  with  members  of  European 
Parliament. I attach great importance to these relationships with the European Parliament. 
BIS Review 92/2008 
 7
