John Gieve: The return of the credit cycle – old lessons in new markets 
Speech by Sir John Gieve, Deputy Governor of the Bank of England, at the Euromoney Bond 
Investors Congress, London, 27 February 2008. 
The  original  speech,  which  contains  various  links  to  the  documents  mentioned,  can  be  found  on  the  Bank  of 
England’s website.  
 Introduction 
The turmoil in credit markets since August has been novel in some ways; but in others, the 
longer it has gone on the more familiar it has seemed. It has been looking less and less like 
the crystallisation of a “tail” risk – the “unprecedented and unforeseeable” event described by 
Northern  Rock  directors  –  and  more  and  more  like  the  unwinding  of  a  wider  credit  boom 
during which risk premia had become unsustainably compressed. The excesses may have 
been most obvious in the complexities of structured credit and the sub-prime sector but they 
have not been confined to them.  
As  in  previous  banking  cycles,  a  period  of  strong  growth,  low  interest  rates  and  rapid 
increases  in  asset  prices  lead  to  over  confidence  and  bad  lending  at  the  top  of  the  cycle; 
defaults, deleveraging and retrenchment follow in the downswing. But the way this old story 
has  unfolded  through  the  new  credit  markets  has  sprung  some  unpleasant  surprises, 
including the speed with which losses in just one market in one country – the housing market 
in the US – have disrupted wider credit markets in all advanced economies.  
The upswing – a new structure of banking 
The roots of the problem lay in the so-called “great stability” of steady growth and inflation 
and in particular the last five years of persistently low nominal interest rates.  
The confidence born of that stability was combined with an increased institutional demand for 
fixed income and heightened international competition among the largest banks to develop 
scale. That led to a remarkable decline in corporate investment yields which was matched, 
and for a while seemed justified, by declining volatility (see Chart 1 which shows the fall the 
spreads and volatility of high yield bonds).1 And it put pressure on investors to find new ways 
of generating returns from credit. At the same time advances in IT and financial modelling 
allowed  the  development  of  new  derivatives,  and  the  slicing,  dicing  and  recombining  of 
credits in new structured credit instruments.  
The search for yield would have made the US sub-prime mortgage market attractive to many 
investors. What made it irresistible was the financial engineering that offered high yields with 
high credit ratings.  
The  success  of  structured  credit  created  a  huge  demand  for  the  raw  material  of  these 
products in particular sub-prime mortgages (Chart 2). It allowed banks to move increasingly 
from the traditional “lend and hold” model towards an “originate and distribute” model. This 
boosted the supply of credit and allowed risk to be more widely dispersed across the system 
as a whole. But it also involved a long chain of participants from the original lenders to end-
investors.  Investors  at  the  end  of  this  chain,  who  bore  the  final  risk,  had  less  information 
about the underlying quality of loans than those at the start and became very dependent on 
rating agencies and their models. It also reduced the incentives on originators to assess and 
monitor credit risk carefully.  
                                                 
1   The dotted line represents the end of 2006. 
BIS Review 24/2008 
 1
The downswing – how the crisis unfolded  
Growing  problems  in  the  sub-prime  market  started  the  downswing.  Chart  3  compares  the 
path of US housing prices with the price of the triple-B ABX index (which captures the cost of 
insuring against default losses on sub-prime mortgages) and bank equity prices:  
• 
As you can see, the US housing market began to turn down in mid 2006; and banks 
holding sub-prime loans on balance sheet began to make provisions at that point.  
But  it  wasn’t  until  early  in  2007  that  rising  defaults  led  to  markdowns  in  even  the 
riskier tranches of sub-prime backed securities.  
Last  summer,  problems  at  Bear  Stearns,  IKB  and  BNP  Paribas  brought  home  to 
investors  the  market  risks  they  were  running  and  led  to  an  “investors’  strike”  on 
mortgage-backed securities and asset-backed commercial paper.  
That  in  turn  led  banks  to  hoard  liquidity;  inter-bank  markets  spreads  rose  and 
volumes fell beyond the very short term; Northern Rock ran out of road, and bank 
equity prices began to drop. 
For  a  few  weeks  in  October  the  market  thought  the  worst  was  over  but  the 
publication  of  Q3  results  renewed  fears  about  the  scale  of  bank  losses  which 
sparked a new squeeze in the money markets and a further sharp fall in bank share 
prices towards the end of the year.  
Co-ordinated  action  by  central  banks  helped  to  ease  the  short-term  funding 
pressures at the year end (Chart 4); and hopes rose that the acute phase was over 
as  banks  declared  their  losses  and,  where  necessary,  managed  to  attract  new 
capital including from sovereign wealth funds. 
Where we are now 
But  markets  have  remained  difficult  in  the  New  Year.  While  LIBOR  spreads  have  not 
returned  to  the  levels  of  early  December,  money  markets  are  sticky.  Corporate  bond  and 
credit default swap rates have continued to climb, leveraged loan prices are dropping quickly, 
securitisation  markets  remain  largely  closed  and  the  CDS  and  equity  prices  for  banks 
continue to deteriorate.  
This continuing strain reflects three main factors.  
First, it reflects fears about the future path of the economy especially in the US and the scale 
of new losses that may bring – not just in housing, but also in other forms of lending.  
Second, however, there is continuing uncertainty about the scale and distribution of losses 
that have already occurred: 
• 
To illustrate the uncertainty on overall scale, Chart 5 sets out different estimates of 
sub-prime losses based on different estimation methods. First, given the length of 
the foreclosure process, realised losses on the sub-prime mortgages which underpin 
securities  may  not  total  much  more  than  $30  billion  so  far.  Second,  if  projecting 
forward the rate at which delinquencies are cumulating on recent vintages of sub-
prime  mortgages,  we  can  estimate  that  losses  on  the  securitised  loans  might 
ultimately exceed $150 billion. Thirdly, using the sub-prime ABX indices to “mark-to-
market”  sub-prime  securities,  can  produce  figures  of  $300  to  400  billion.  Against 
these  figures,  international  banks  have  so  far  announced  writedowns  (net  of 
hedging) of $100 to $150 billion.  
Although these are huge numbers, they amount to less than 1% of the total assets 
of the Large Complex Financial Institutions (LCFIs) in the US and Europe. In relation 
      2 
 BIS Review 24/2008
 to  GDP,  even  the  higher  estimates  would  be  comparable  to  the  losses  in  the 
Savings and Loans crisis.2  
But the securitisation model has not just made it difficult to scale the problem; it has 
added a large measure of uncertainty and opacity to the distribution of losses and 
that is a key factor in the continued reluctance to lend and the closure of most ABS 
markets. The current worries on the future of the monoline bond insurers reflected in 
their  CDS  prices  in  Chart  6  are  exacerbating  the  uncertainties  about  individual 
banks’ exposures.  
The third factor is the dislocation of the investor base for ABS. Since the summer many of 
the main buyers of ABS have withdrawn from the market. The conduits and SIVs are greatly 
diminished where they are not being wound up altogether. And the money market and other 
funds that stepped away from these off-balance-sheet vehicles are not willing at least yet to 
buy ABS directly. Finding new homes for these securities is bound to take time. So long as 
there are known to be reluctant holders, even long term real money investors will tend to hold 
back to see whether prices are driven lower in coming months by forced sales. On the other 
side many issuers are reluctant to accept the prices on offer today since they could become 
benchmarks for the future.  
Lessons from the crisis 
The  story  is  far  from  over  but  it  is  still  possible  to  identify  some  lessons.  The  past  seven 
months  have  taught  market  participants  a  lot  about  the  risks  and  limitations  of  the  new 
markets  and  their  business  models;  their  responses  will  be  the  most  powerful  force  for 
change. On the official side, a recent consultative document has set out proposed responses 
by  the  UK  tripartite  authorities.3  Internationally,  the  Financial  Stability  Forum  (FSF),  which 
draws  together  central  banks,  supervisors  and  finance  ministries  from  the  main  financial 
centres,  is  co-ordinating  an  action  plan  for  authorities  to  develop  and  implement 
recommendations across a number of areas (Chart 7).4  
Among the key lessons are:  
• 
the  critical  importance  of  liquidity,  alongside  capital,  in  managing  and  regulating 
banks; 
the limitations of the models which underpin the valuation and rating of structured 
products;  
the  importance  of  disclosure  on  risk  exposures  and  valuation  practices  for  the 
maintenance of confidence and effective market functioning in times of stress;  
the need to alter the adverse incentives that had developed in the distribution chain 
for  mortgages  including  for  originators  to  maximise  the  volume  of  loans,  for  the 
                                                    
2   Arguably the cash flow projection of losses of $150 billion comes closest to the sort of provisions banks would 
be making if the loans had been held on their banking books rather than securitised and sold on. On that basis 
the losses currently projected would be only 50% of the Savings and Loans losses as a share of US GDP. 
3   See  “Financial  stability  and  depositor  protection:  strengthening  the  framework”,  Consultation  Document, 
January 2008. http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/financialstabilityanddepositorprotection080130.pdf  
4   Private sector initiatives have also been launched. There are European industry plans to compile information 
on  a  variety  of  instruments  including  ABCP,  ABS  and  CDO  and  to  disseminate  this  to  investors  and  other 
interested  parties  on  a  regular  basis.  See  “Summary  of  European  Industry  Commitments  to  the  European 
Commission 
Market” 
(www.europeansecuritisation.com/Industry-letter-08Feb08.pdf). The Institute of International Finance (IIF) also 
has an active agenda of work, covering risk management, liquidity, valuation, ratings, and transparency. (See 
http://www.iif.com/press/press+releases+2007/press+46.php). 
Transparency 
Securitisation 
European 
regarding 
the 
in 
BIS Review 24/2008 
 3
rating agencies to expand their scope as widely as possible, and for banks to use 
off-balance-sheet vehicles; and  
improving  crisis  management  arrangements,  including  the  process  for  providing 
liquidity to institutions under stress and for restructuring weak and failing banks.  
 Measuring and adjusting for risk 
The  focus  of  this  work  is  the  recent  structural  changes  in  banking  and credit  markets  and 
ways  to  prevent  those  making  the  financial  system  more  prone  or  less  resilient  to  large 
cyclical swings.  
That is important. But we have been here before. It is not so long since a vast amount of 
work  was  set  in  train  in  the  wake  of  the  LTCM  crisis  in  1998  and  again  after  the  dotcom 
boom blew out. While each crisis has its own idiosyncrasies there are common elements and 
they too need to be addressed. 
In my view the key lies in the measurement of risk and the repeated inclination to underprice 
risks  at  the  top  of  the  cycle  and  thus  take  comfort  from  exaggerated  estimates  of  risk 
adjusted returns; and the corollary, a tendency to overprice risk as the cycle swings down. 
At the macro level it is hard to assess what is a warranted rise in asset prices and what an 
unsustainable  boom;  in  regulation  it  has  proved  hard  to  design  systems  which  adjust 
appropriately for the cycle, never mind which effectively lean against it; and at the micro level 
firms  find  it  difficult  to  measure  the  risks  in  their  strategies  and  to  base  their  targets  and 
incentive systems on risk adjusted returns.  
We must try to align incentives between actual risk and return by improving risk management 
practices  (for  example  on  off-balance  sheet  activities)  and  rectifying 
the  revealed 
weaknesses  in  the  originate-to-distribute  model  whether  in  the  US  mortgage  market,  in 
valuation practices or in the use of rating agencies. But we know that many of the incentive 
problems  are  deeply  embedded  –  after  all,  asymmetry  is  inherent  in  any  limited  liability 
arrangement. The protection of depositors is well established. And it is hard for firms to take 
account of the collective implications for the credit cycle of their individual behaviours.  
Of course there is a role for monetary policy in smoothing the cycle but it has to address the 
whole economy and not just the financial sector. So we need also to consider again how far 
we can make our regulatory regime for capital and liquidity counter cyclical – that is create a 
system which raises requirements as the boom gathers pace in order to dampen the upswing 
and create additional headroom for losses as the cycle turns. Basle II is a step in the right 
direction  in  many  ways,  particularly  in  its  treatment  of  off-balance  sheet  vehicles  and  in 
stimulating  improved  risk  management  systems,  but  it  still has  known pro-cyclical features 
which we need to address. If we cannot do so effectively an alternative may be to require 
larger capital and liquidity buffers across the whole cycle.  
The past seven months have been testimony to Mark Twain’s comment that “history doesn’t 
repeat itself but it does sometimes rhyme.” The structured credit markets and the growth of 
“originate  and  distribute”  banking  have  amplified  the  turmoil  in  credit  markets  in  recent 
months. But under the new clothes, the old credit cycle is still recognisable. It is important we 
learn  the  lessons  about  the  new  credit  instruments  and  markets.  But  we  also  need  to 
address again the roots of the credit cycle. 
4 
 BIS Review 24/2008
 Chart 1: Credit spreads: levels and 
volatility(a)  
Basis points
300
Spread (rhs)
Volatility (lhs)
Basis points
1600
(b)
250
200
150
100
50
0
 
U
98 99 00 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08
1400
1200
1000
800
600
400
200
0
 Sources: Merrill Lynch and Bank calculations. 
(a) Option-adjusted spreads over government bond yields 
and 90-day annualised historical volatilities. 
(b) 31 Dec. 2006. 
 
 
 
Chart 3: Housing problems spread to 
banks(a)  
 
Index
104
102
100
98
96
94
92
90
Price / Index
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
ABX index (BBB 2006H1) (rhs)
Global bank equity index (rhs)
Case Shiller US property index (lhs)
Jan. Apr. Jul. Oct. Jan. Apr. Jul. Oct. Jan.
08
2006
2007
Source: Datastream and JP Morgan Chase & Co. 
(a) Equity and property indices rebased to Jan. 06 = 100. 
 Chart 2: Global RMBS, CMBS and ABS 
issuance  
US$ billions
ABS excluding MBS
RMBS Non Prime
RMBS Prime
CMBS
3,000
2,500
2,000
1,500
1,000
500
0
1999
1998
1997
2000
Source: Dealogic 
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
 Chart 4: 3-month LIBOR spreads over 
expected policy rates(a)(b) 
Basis points
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
-20
United States
United Kingdom
Euro area
 Jan.
Apr.
Jul.
Oct.
Feb. May. Aug.
2007
08
Source: Bloomberg. 
(a) 3-month LIBOR spreads over 3-month overnight 
index swap (OIS) rates. 
(b) Solid lines show 3 month historical data, with dotted 
lines derived from forwards. 
 BIS Review 24/2008 
 5
 Chart 5: Sub-prime mortgage losses 
 US$ billions
Chart 6: Monoline CDS prices(a) 
 
Sources: Bank of England, Barclays Capital, Goldman 
Sachs, IMF and Moodys. 
(a) Average of bid and offer premia of five-year senior 
debt CDS contracts. 
 
  350
300
250
200
150
100
50
0
Default
losses to
date
(a)
Projected
Projected
Writedowns
losses
(cashflow
method)
losses
(market
prices)
to date
(b)
Sources: Bloomberg, Banks' financial statements and 
Bank calculations. 
(a) Estimated default losses to date on subprime 
securities based on cumulative delinquency rates.  
(b) Net of hedging. 
 
 
 
Chart 7: Key strands of FSF work  
•  Supervisory framework and oversight 
−  Capital arrangements 
−  Liquidity buffers 
−  Risk management practices 
−  Off balance sheet activities 
•  Underpinnings of the originate and distribute 
model 
•  Uses and role of credit ratings 
•  Market transparency 
•  Supervisory and regulatory responsiveness 
to risks 
•  Authorities’ ability to respond to crises 
 
 6 
 BIS Review 24/2008
