Caleb M Fundanga: Trends in central bank governance  
Opening remarks by Dr Caleb M Fundanga, Governor of the Bank of Zambia, at the official 
opening  of 
in  Central  Bank  Governance”,  Livingstone, 
28-29 February 2008.  
the  seminar  on 
“Trends 
 His Honour the Vice President 
Her Grace the Mayor of Livingstone 
The Chairperson 
Central Bank Governors and Deputy Governors 
Board Members of Central Banks 
Resource Persons 
Distinguished International Participants 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
On behalf of the Bank of Zambia and indeed on my own behalf, I would like to extend a very 
warm  welcome  to  you  all  to  this  important  seminar  on  “Trends  in  Central  Bank 
Governance.” To our colleagues from outside Zambia, I wish to extend a special welcome to 
you to Zambia, in particular to Livingstone, our tourist capital especially at this time of the 
year. Like the rest of Zambia, Livingstone is a city of tranquility with an easy-going African 
charm. Apart from the famous Victoria Falls, there are many other tourist spots such as the 
Mukuni  Cultural  Village,  curio  markets,  the  Game  Park,  the  National  Museum,  railway 
museum,  e.t.c.  I  therefore  urge  you  to  find  time  or  indeed  stay  an  extra  day  or  more  to 
sample this special menu that Livingstone can offer. 
Like other participants, I am glad to be part of this rare gathering of imminent experts. Ladies 
and  Gentlemen,  this  seminar  comes  at  a  time  when  the  economic  performance  of  our 
country  has  significantly  strengthened  as  partly  reflected  in  the  developments  in  the  gross 
domestic product (GDP), inflation, interest rate and exchange rate. At a preliminary estimate 
of  5.7%  in  2007,  growth  in  real  GDP  has  been  above  5%  for  the  fifth  consecutive  year. 
During the month of January 2008, inflation remained in single digit at 9.3%, from 8.9% and 
8.2%, in December 2007 and December 2006, respectively. Commercial banks lending rates 
have also exhibited an investment-supportive trend while the Kwacha has remained relatively 
stable.  Further,  we  have  observed  an  improvement  in  the  fiscal  operations  of  the 
Government,  which  is  supportive  of  the  country’s  inflation  and  growth  objectives.  The 
financial sector has also been very stable and registering appreciable growth in the recent 
years. 
Nevertheless,  Mr.  Chairman,  despite  these  achievements,  our  country  like  so  many  other 
developing countries, still faces some challenges. Notable among these, is the urgent need 
to consolidate and build the gains so far attained. In particular, the need to attain sustained 
price  and  financial  systems  stability  can  hardly  be  over-emphasised.  This  is  even  more 
pronounced given the recent electricity outages experienced across the country and floods 
that have ravaged some parts of Zambia. 
Chairperson, it is also pleasing to note that, in the recent past, there has been recognition of 
the  need  to  adopt  economic  and  structural  reforms  in  most  African  countries  and  some 
benefits are already evident in this regard. Inflation rates have been falling in most countries 
and  they  have  registered  appreciable  expansion  in  economic  activities  with  GDP  growth 
rates  averaging  at  about  5%  in  2007.  In  addition,  most  countries  have  become  more 
democratic in political circles, giving more say to the public on the running of governments 
and their institutions. 
Distinguished Participants, allow me now to turn to the subject we are gathered here for, that 
is,  “Central  Bank  Governance”.  Good  corporate  governance  is  generally  acknowledged  as 
BIS Review 26/2008 
 1
important  in  economic  management.  In  this  regard,  Central  bank  governance  is  arguably 
defined by a number of key-concepts or pillars, which together should form the basis of an 
effective legal framework governing a central bank and on which central bank governance 
should rest, that is, operational independence, democratic accountability and transparency. 
Despite  its  common  usage,  it  is  not  always  very  clear  what  central  bank  transparency 
amounts  to.  Generally,  two  definitions  of  transparency  can  be  distinguished  in  the  policy-
oriented  literature.  Firstly,  central  bank  transparency  is  referred  to  as  the  activities  of  the 
central bank in providing information. Thus, in this case, transparency has been defined as 
the degree to which information on policy actions is available. However, a somewhat broader 
approach to transparency includes the public’s understanding of the decisions taken by the 
monetary authorities and the reasoning behind it. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, the mere fact that a central bank has to conduct monetary policy in a 
transparent manner at best results in the availability of the information necessary in order to 
judge  the  bank’s  performance.  Discussions  of  this  information  are  not  only  done  by  the 
government but also most importantly, the public at large. The latter’s perception of what the 
central bank does and how it is done may have an impact on the central bank performance. 
Furthermore, Mr. Chairman, our contribution therefore should set out to develop the pillars on 
which  central  bank  governance  must  rest.  These  include  operational  independence, 
accountability  and  indeed  transparency  which  are  complementary.  Yet,  certain  tensions 
between these elements of governance cannot be ignored and have to be observed when 
establishing a code of good governance. 
With respect to operational independence, there seems to be consensus among academics 
and  central  bankers  that  central  banks  must  be  given  a  charter  which  includes  a  strong 
commitment to price stability, and the freedom and sufficient scope to pursue it. This means 
that while central banks may not have goal independence, they should have operational or 
instrument  independence  to  effectively  pursue  their  primary  objectives.  In  a  democratic 
society,  transparency  and  accountability  are  essential  if  central  bank  independence  is  to 
remain “acceptable to the public”. Providing for a sufficient degree of transparency can help 
not only to increase the understanding of monetary policy which ultimately enhances central 
bank credibility. 
Your  Honour,  This  conference  follows  a  similar  one  held  in  Botswana  hosted  by  the 
Botswana Central Bank from 5 to 6 February, 2007 and supported by the BIS Governance 
Forum and the IMF. It also comes shortly after our very successful conference held at this 
same venue in November last year on the theme, “Central Bank Independence, Does It Hurt 
the Treasury?” 
All  these  activities  are  part  of  the  building  blocks  to  a  bigger  project  we  have  been 
undertaking in the SADC region aimed at developing a Model Central Bank Act. 
For us in Zambia, efforts at perfecting the governance as well as the operational efficiency of 
the financial sector are being done through the Financial Sector Development Plan (FSDP). 
Under  the  Plan  we  have  already  developed  Corporate  Governance  Guidelines  for  the 
financial sector as a whole. Many of these have a lot of relevance to the Central Bank as 
well.  Through  the  FSDP,  even  issues  such  as  who  should  chair  the  Board  of  the  Central 
Bank are being discussed. 
Lastly, let me say that we expect to learn from what other central banks have done, and what 
challenges they have faced in their quest for enhanced central bank governance. However, it 
should  be  noted  that  each  country  should  establish  a  legal  framework  for  its  central  bank 
governance, which best fits that country’s own history and institutional evolution. This should 
also take into account international best practice. 
Your  Honour,  apart  from  Zambian  delegates,  this  international  seminar  has  drawn 
participation  from  several  other  countries  including:  Angola,  Ghana,  Kenya,  Lesotho, 
Madagascar,  Malawi,  Mauritius  and  Mozambique.  Other  participants  are  from  Namibia, 
2 
 BIS Review 26/2008
Nigeria, Sweden, Tanzania, Swaziland and Uganda. With this wide participation, I have no 
doubt that the seminar will be thought-provoking and highly participatory, given also the high 
calibre of resource persons from institutions such as the International Monetary Fund and the 
Bank  of  International  Settlements.  I  therefore  wish  all  of  you  good  deliberations  and  a 
memorable stay in Livingstone and Zambia in general. 
It is now my privilege to call upon His Honour the Vice President of the Republic of Zambia, 
Mr Rupiah Banda to deliver the official opening speech for the seminar. Your Honour Sir! 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 26/2008 
 3
