X P Guma: The South African economy and financial markets – outlook, 
risks and policy responses 
Address by Dr X P Guma, Deputy Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, to the South 
Africa Economic Conference ”Business Unusual”, Johannesburg, 4 September 2008. 
 Introduction 
1.  
Our  meeting  here  today  occurs  during  a  period  of  considerable  uncertainty:  financial 
turbulence in the major industrialised economies being the proximate cause of international 
uncertainty;  with  a  variety  of  factors  impacting  upon  the  short-term  indicators  of  domestic 
economic  performance.  It  is,  therefore,  appropriate,  I  think,  to  attempt  to  place  recent 
economic developments in some perspective as this may go some way towards piercing the 
veil of gloom which appears to have descended over this and other economies. And, for this 
reason,  I  thank  the  organisers  of  this  Conference  for  according  to  me  the  opportunity  to 
participate in these discussions. 
Overview of key economic indicators: South Africa 
2.  
In order to assess the South African economy’s performance over the medium-term, I have 
chosen to divide the period from 1990 to 2007 broadly into five-year segments, as indicated 
in Tables 1A and 1B: namely, the periods 1990-1994; 1995-1999; 2000-2004 and finally, the 
most recent period 2005-2007. 
As these Tables show, real gross domestic product grew at progressively increasing rates 
throughout this period: from an average rate of 0.2 per cent during 1990-1994 to an average 
rate of 5.2 per cent during the most recent period. The strongest sectoral growth occurred in 
the secondary and tertiary sectors, with growth reaching levels, on average, of 5.8 per cent 
and 5.7 per cent, respectively, over the period 2005-2007. 
The  economy  has  become  more  open  with  the  sum  of  exports  (X)  and  imports  (M)  as  a 
percentage of gross domestic product (GDP) increasing progressively, from 40.6 per cent on 
average, between 1990 and 1994 to 61.6 per cent on average during the period 2005-2007. 
And inflation, as measured by the Consumer Price Index (CPI), had decreased progressively 
from an average annual rate of 12.5 per cent in the early period, to an average rate of 5.1 per 
cent during 2005-2007.1
Developments  in  the  financial  markets  have,  in  general,  been  consistent  with  those 
described above regarding the real sectors of the economy. Stated briefly, the assets of the 
banking  sector  have  increased  substantially;  from  a  nominal  value  of  R281  billion  on 
average, between 1990 and 1994 to an average of R2 100 billion on average between 2005 
and 2007. The average market capitalisation of the bond market has increased, in nominal 
terms, from an average of R374 billion between 1995 and 1999 to an average of R860 billion 
between  2005  and  2007.  And  the  average  market  capitalisation  on  the  JSE  Limited  has 
increased from an average of R920 billion during the first of our time periods to an average 
nominal value of R5 697 billion in the last period. 
                                                 
1   Data for CPIX became available only during the year 2000. 
BIS Review 106/2008 
 1
Moreover, as has been noted elsewhere2, growth in South Africa’s securitisation market has 
remained relatively healthy since its emergence in 2000. However, this market is subject to 
cyclical variation to a far greater extent than are others. 
In  the  fairy  tale  from  which  the  description  “Goldilocks”  is  derived,  experimentation  by  the 
heroine leads to temporary bliss: not all the plates of porridge were of a temperature that was 
just right. But one was. And that plate was licked clean – finished, exhausted of its contents. 
So too, some would have us believe, with the South African economy: it could, apparently, 
have  been  described  as  approximating  a  Goldilocks  economy,  with  most  of  the  key  ratios 
being “just right”; neither too strong nor too weak; neither too hot nor too cold. Just right or on 
the way to being just right. Until March 2007. 
As explained by Dr M Mnyande3, Chief Economist of the South African Reserve Bank (the 
Bank),  the  first  sign  of  a  possible  turning  point  in  the  business  cycle  indicator,  which  is 
calculated  by  the  Bank,  is  usually  when  the  composite  leading  business  cycle  indicator 
changes direction clearly for a period of at least six months. And, in March 2007, the leading 
indicator reached its most recent peak, whereafter it has been following a downward trend. It 
was also in March 2007 that CPIX, the measure of the rate of inflation that is of interest to the 
monetary authorities was last within the target range of 6 to 3 per cent which is specified as 
being  the  inflation  target.  Then,  global  food  and  fuel  price  shocks  intensified,  employment 
growth abated, real value added in manufacturing contracted as production was hampered 
by strike activity in the motor industry and slowing demand, inter alia. Household debt started 
to edge higher, the deficit on the current account of the balance of payments widened to 8.1 
per cent of gross domestic product in the third quarter of 2007 – the highest ratio since the 
9.2  per  cent  registered  in  the  first  quarter  of  1982.  And  then  in  January  2008  power  cuts 
disrupted  output  and  exports,  taking  the  public  by  surprise.  Or  stated  in  such  a  way  as  to 
complete the analogy, at some time during or around March 2007 Goldilocks jumped up and 
ran away … and has not yet returned. 
The International financial environment 
3.  
According to the Quarterly Review of the Bank for International Settlements (BIS) issued on 
1 September 2008; 
“…  During  the  period  from  end-May  to  late  August  2008,  global  financial  markets 
adjusted to growing signs of a broad-based cyclical deterioration.  
While  markets  continued  to  display  signs  of  fragility,  worries  about  the  economic 
outlook and related uncertainties gained prominence, weighing on valuations across 
asset classes. 
Credit markets came under renewed pressure over the period, as spreads widened 
to  reflect  the  implications  of  the  ongoing  cyclical  adjustment  for  loss  expectations 
and financial sector balance sheets. This was despite retreating oil and commodity 
prices,  government  action  in  support  of  the  US  housing  market  and  continued 
recapitalisation efforts by banks and other financial firms. Equity markets reflected 
similar  concerns,  as  valuations  adjusted  to  reflect  disappointing  earnings  data, 
including  in  the  financial  and  other  cyclical  sectors.  Against  this  background, 
pressures  in  interbank  money  markets  persisted,  prompting  further  central  bank 
action to ease financial sector access to funding.” (p.2) 
                                                 
2   A.D.  Mminele.  (2008)  “Benefits  and  Risks  of  New  Instruments:  Derivatives  and  Securitisation;  the  case  of 
South Africa”, Berlin, 4 July 2008. Conference on Financial Innovation and Emerging Markets. 
3   Dr  Monde  Mnyande  (2008)  “Keynote  address  at  the  4th  Convention  of  the  South  African  Institute  of  Black 
Property Practitioners (SAIBPP)”, Helderfontein Conference Centre, July 31. 
2 
 BIS Review 106/2008
The origins of this turbulence, turmoil and distress in the international financial markets are 
well known and need not detain us unduly.4 As summarised in the Annual Report 2007 of the 
Bank  Supervision  Department  of  the  Bank,  the  episode  began  with  credit  concerns  in  the 
United  States  (US)  sub-prime  mortgage  market,  in  2007;  and  developed  into  concerns  in 
global  credit  markets  as  the  extent  of  exposures  and  potential  losses  from  the  sub-prime 
market were not known. 
Then, 
“…  The  ongoing  boom  in  the  US  housing  market  attracted  clients  who 
would not normally have qualified for loans. Loans granted to these clients 
are  commonly  known  as  “sub-prime  mortgage  loans”.  In  some  instances 
the sub-prime loans were offered at initial low “teaser” rates, which reset to 
higher  rates  after  a  few  years.  As  these  loans  began  to  reset  and  the 
housing market began to cool off during 2006 (i.e., growth in house prices 
decreased),  these  clients  found  themselves  unable  to  meet  the  higher 
payment  obligations  and  were  not  able  to  refinance  their  loans.  It  was 
during this period that non-performing sub-prime mortgage loans increased 
rapidly.” 
“Concurrent  with  the  granting  of  sub-prime  mortgage  loans,  certain 
institutions  securitised  their  mortgage  loans.  Numerous  methods  and 
instruments were developed to facilitate this process, and the instruments 
became  increasingly  complex.  Instruments  such  as  mortgage-backed 
securities and collaterised debt obligations offered tranches of risk, ranging 
from  high-risk  equity  tranches  to  low-risk  senior  tranches.  As  a  result,  a 
wide range of banks and investors faced significant exposure, directly and 
indirectly, to the US sub-prime mortgage market.” (p.3) 
At  the  time  of  writing,  the  impact  of  the  US  sub-prime  crisis  on  the  prospects  for  the 
international  economy  are  difficult  to  assess:  not  least  because  of  the  rate  at  which  the 
losses which have been incurred by major financial institutions are being reported. However, 
from  media  reports,  it  would  appear  that  Bloomberg’s  calculations  of  write  downs  by  and 
credit  losses  of  banks  related  to  the  sub-prime  crisis,  at  approximately  US$400  billion, 
provide a plausible threshold. These estimates are reproduced in Table 2, below. 
What is clear is that prolonged financial-market turmoil in the major industrialised economies 
of  the  world  would  impact  adversely  on  economic  and  financial  stability  generally,  making 
prospects for a resumption of robust and sustained economic growth in South Africa more 
uncertain.  So  too  with  an  attenuation  of  the  processes  currently  underway  to  reduce  the 
imbalances  which  are  extant  in  the  global  economy  through  unchanged  or  increased 
protectionism,  reluctance  to  permit  currencies  to  appreciate  (or  depreciate)  in  accordance 
with economic fundamentals. 
In short, prospects for the international economy are served poorly by a generalised failure 
by  policy  makers  to  acknowledge,  by  praxis,  a  simple  fact:  namely,  that  a  globalising 
economy is, was and will remain a closed system. Its imbalances cannot, as yet, be exported 
(or transported) elsewhere. 
                                                 
4   See, for example: 
Bernanke, B.S. (2007) “Housing Finance and Monetary Policy”, Speech at the Federal Reserve Bank of 
Kansas Economic Symposium, Jackson Hole, Wyoming: 31 August. 
IMF (2008) Global Financial Stability Report, Washington D.C. 
BIS Review 106/2008 
 3
Some considerations regarding policy 
4.  
My discussion of policy will be brief for two reasons. First, because the bulk of the effort of 
this  Conference  will  be  devoted  to  this  matter:  and  second,  because  the  subtitle  of  the 
Conference is: “Business Unusual”. 
According  to  President  Thabo  Mbeki,  to  whom  authorship  of  this  phrase  is  ascribed, 
“Business Unusual” does not refer “… to any changes in our established policies…”; rather it 
refers  to  “…  the  speedy,  efficient  and  effective  implementation  of  these  policies  and 
programmes, so that the lives of our people should change for the better, sooner rather than 
later.” So, to use the idiom of the contemporary policy analyst, we can assume that the policy 
thing has been parameterised: in the form of the RDP (1994); GEAR (1996); the Growth and 
Development Summit (2003) and the Asgisa (2005). 
My only caution is that in proceeding, sight should not be lost of the fine balance that needs 
to  be  maintained  between  the  state  and  the  market  as  the  primary  allocator  of  resources. 
For,  as  Schumpeter  observed5,  when  the  state  is  pre-eminent  and  its  shortcomings  are 
highly visible, economists and others seem to swoon over the charm of the market. But when 
the  market  is  in  the  ascendancy  and  its  drawbacks  are  evident,  then  the  state  may  be 
idealised. Both extremes should be resisted. 
Conclusion 
5.  
Let  me  conclude  by  making  the  following  observations.  First,  fairy  tales  have  a  useful 
function  to  perform  in  entertaining  children  –  but  are  of  dubious  value  in  enhancing 
discussions of economics. Goldilocks and her kindred spirits should, please, be allowed to go 
away from the pages of economic analysis. 
Second, any notion that the South African economy is soon to enter a recession6 must be 
rejected, firmly. The current growth rate of the economy may be somewhat lower than had 
come to be expected but is still strongly positive and will remain so. The so-called “tsunami” 
of adverse economic outcomes in the period subsequent to March 2007 will lose momentum 
as  inflation  abates,  the  balance  between  aggregate  saving  and  investment  improves,  the 
process of financial deepening intensifies and better use is made of the potential for capture 
of resource rents in the current commodity cycle. 
Third,  whilst  South  Africa  has  been  spared,  along  with  many  other  emerging  markets,  the 
worst  of  the  financial  market  turmoil,  the  authorities  have  not  become  complacent. 
Adherence  to  a  clearly  articulated  macro-economic  framework,  which  includes  an  explicit 
inflation-target,  provides  the  first  line  of  defence  –  in  particular,  against  capital  flight.  A 
second  line  is  drawn  by  ensuring  adherence  to  international  best  standards  on  laws, 
regulations,  practices  and  policies  in  the  financial  sector;  monitoring  proven  financial 
soundness indicators for early warning of potential problems. And a third line is drawn by the 
Financial  Sector  Contingency  Forum  –  which  I  currently  chair.  This  is  a  forum  which 
facilitates inter-agency coordination and preparedness for addressing crises. 
Finally,  I  think  that  South  Africa  should  continue  to  participate  fully  in  international  fora  in 
order to make the case for multi-lateral adjustments in the interests of systemic stability in 
our  closed  system.  Continued  myopia  by  national  governments  will,  likely,  prolong  the 
                                                 
5   See Schumpeter, J.A. (1949) “English Economists and the State-Managed Economy”, Journal of Political 
Economy, 57, no. 5. 
and also 
Klitgaard, R. (1991) Adjusting to Reality: Beyond “State versus Market in Economic Development, San 
Francisco, I CE G. 
6   “Recession”  here  means  a  classical  recession:  i.e.,  a  period  of  economic  contraction  or  negative  growth 
sustained for 2 quarters or more. 
4 
 BIS Review 106/2008
adjustment  process  which  needs  to  be  completed  if  the  current  turbulence  in  financial 
markets is to be resolved. 
And on that note, I end: thank you for your attention. 
References: 
1.  Bernanke,  B.S.  (2007)  “Housing  Finance  and  Monetary  Policy”,  Speech  at  the  Federal 
Reserve Bank of Kansas Economic Symposium, Jackson Hole, Wyoming: 31 August. 
2. BIS (2008) Quarterly Review, Basel. 
3. IMF (2008) Global Financial Stability Report, Washington D.C. 
4.  Klitgaard,  R.  (1991)  Adjusting  to  Reality:  Beyond  “State  versus  Market  in  Economic 
Development, San Francisco, I CE G. 
5.  Mminele,  A.D.  (2008)  “Benefits  and  Risks  of  New  Instruments:  Derivatives  and 
Securitisation;  the  case  of  South  Africa”,  Berlin,  4  July  2008.  Conference  on  Financial 
Innovation and Emerging Markets. 
6. Mnyande, M. (2008) “Keynote address at the 4th Convention of the South African Institute 
of Black Property Practitioners (SAIBPP), Helderfontein Conference Centre”, July 31. 
7. Schumpeter, J.A. (1949) “English Economists and the State-Managed Economy”, Journal 
of Political Economy, 57, no. 5. 
8. South African Reserve Bank (2008) Annual Report 2007: Bank Supervision Department, 
Pretoria. 
 
BIS Review 106/2008 
 5
 6 
 BIS Review 106/2008
BIS Review 106/2008 
 7
 8 
 BIS Review 106/2008
