Paul Tucker: Remarks on “Making Monetary Policy by Committee” 
Discussant  remarks  by  Mr  Paul  Tucker,  Executive  Director  and  Member  of  the  Monetary 
Policy  Committee  of  the  Bank  of  England,  on  “Making  Monetary  Policy  by  Committee”  by 
Alan Blinder, at the Bank of Canada Conference “International experience with the conduct 
of monetary policy under inflation targeting”, Ottawa, 22-23 July 2008. 
 Central  banking  involves  a  lot  of  learning  –  by  doing,  by  thinking,  researching,  and  by 
comparing  ourselves  with  our  peers.  At  the  core  of  that  learning  process  is  exchanges 
amongst  central  bankers  themselves,  much  of  it  in  Basel.  The  other  rich  seam  is  the 
academic literature. But relatively few turn (or return) to scholarly reflection after periods of 
alternatively practising and theorising about central banking.  
Alan Blinder has therefore provided a signal service, since stepping down as Vice Chairman 
of the Federal Reserve Board, through his series of papers on monetary policy practice and 
how it both draws on and fuels theory.  
Today’s paper, on the role of committees in the making of monetary policy1, places central 
banks into categories Blinder first set out a few years ago: single decision taker; autocrat-led 
college; genuinely-collegial; individualistic. It is especially interesting to the Bank of England, 
where for just over a decade we have operated a one-member/one-vote system for deciding 
our  policy  rate.  As  Blinder  rightly  says,  comparatively  speaking,  this  is  clearly  at  the 
‘individualistic’ end of the spectrum, and is a rare example of the species.  
I have comments in three areas: the political economy genesis of the UK’s system; how it 
bears  on  the  communication  of  monetary  policy  or  what  Blinder  called  the  ‘cacophony 
problem’; and a plea for Blinder to widen his enquiries beyond interest-rate setting.  
Political economy and one-member/one-vote 
Modern  Britain  has  no  tradition  of  non-elected  officials  taking  major  executive  decisions 
affecting the whole of the nation. This is in marked contrast to say the US where, at Federal 
level, the President is the only member of the executive to have reached office via the ballot 
box. Nor in the living memory of the UK people have we had any crises of democracy, so we 
have  not  developed  national  institutions,  such  as  Germany’s  Bundesbank,  whose  place  in 
society  was  not  mediated  via  our  democratic  processes.  In  consequence,  when  debates 
about  the  possibility  of  central  bank  independence  got  underway  in  earnest  from  the  mid-
1980s, a widely perceived stumbling block was that central bank officials could not account 
personally  for  their  decisions  on  the  Floor  of  the  House  (of  Commons).  There  was  a 
democratic deficit.  
Resolution came via the political cost of the failure of other approaches to monetary policy, in 
which Ministers running for re-election decided rates; the happenstance of the development 
during  the  1980s  and  1990s  of  influential  committees  of  Parliament,  before  which  central 
                                                 
1   See http://econ2008.bankofcanada-conference.ca/wp-content/blinder.pdf 
BIS Review 96/2008 
 1
bankers  could  (and  frequently  do)  appear;  and  specific  design  features  of  the  monetary 
regime itself.2 Those included 
- 
Parliament, in legislation, enshrining the goal of price stability, and requiring the Bank to 
publish a quarterly report on the outlook for stability 
the  executive  arm  of  government  deciding  the  definition  of  price  stability  (2%  CPI 
inflation  target)  and  setting  out  requirements  for  the  Bank  to  explain  publicly  what  is 
going on if the target is missed on either side by more than 1pp 
the  Committee  comprising  four  ‘external’  members  as  well  as  five  internal  (or 
‘executive’) members.  
  The external members were necessary to legitimise giving such an important function to the 
Bank. ‘One person/one vote’, with transparency, was a mechanism for attracting high-quality 
‘externals’ and for ensuring that the introduction of ‘new blood’ made a difference – that it did 
let  in  ‘fresh  air’  and  bring  useful  expertise  to  the  table.  And,  of  course,  the  system  of 
individual  voting  had  to  carry  across  to  the  ‘internals’  too.  Indeed,  as  most  studies  show, 
there is no difference between internal and external members in our decision-taking.  
The  burden  of  that  rehearsal  of  some  UK  institutional  history  is  this:  that,  in  comparing 
central bank practices, we should not think of our various decision-taking structures solely as 
technical solutions to the shared technical problem of deciding a path for rates. Rather, our 
varying structures are efforts to solve that shared technical problem in the context of varying 
histories  and  social  and  political  structures.  We  should  understand  each  other,  and  adopt 
and adapt what could usefully travel across borders, but not proselytise. 
Communications, and forecasts  
If,  adapting  Mike  Woodford,  monetary  policy  is  nearly  all  about  expectations,  then 
communication  matters  hugely  in  real-world  policy  making  (a  world  in  which  rational 
expectations  don’t  hold  and  so  one  in  which  we  cannot  passively  rely  on  households  and 
firms  just  getting  it  right  by  observing  our  actions).  I  agree  entirely  with  Blinder  that  what 
kinds  of  communication  are  feasible  and  effective  will  vary  according  to  the  type  of 
decision-taking structure a central bank employs.  
In the Bank of England’s case, given one member/one vote, the challenge is how to achieve 
a sensible balance of centripetal and centrifugal forces. How this plays out varies across the 
different  dimensions  of  monetary  policy:  the  objective,  ‘model’  of  the  economy,  reaction 
function, month-by-month decisions, and forecasts, and so on. 
As already noted, the objective is laid down by the Chancellor of the Exchequer. As well as 
helping to fill the democratic deficit, this coheres with a one person/one vote committee. The 
structure would not work well if different members were free to form our own views on the 
objective.  Amongst  other  things,  that  would  mean  that  as  the  composition  of  the  MPC 
changed,  the  objective  could  change.  This  also  underpins  the  utility  of  the  UK  MPC’s 
objective  unequivocally  giving  primacy 
is 
lexicographic,  with  ‘avoiding  unnecessary  volatility  in  output  and  employment’  occupying  a 
subsidiary role. This means that we can and do make judgments about the period over which 
we should return inflation to target in the wake of a cost shock, notably at present. But we are 
not in a position where individual members could choose to subordinate the achievement of 
price stability to that of stabilising output.  
the  objective 
inflation; 
jargon, 
the 
to 
in 
                                                 
2   For  a  more  extended  discussion,  see  Tucker  P  M  W  (2007)  ‘Central  Banking  and  Political  Economy:  the 
example of the UK’s Monetary Policy Committee’ speech at Inflation Targeting, Central Bank Independence 
and Transparency Conference, Cambridge, Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin Q3 2007, pp 445-452. 
2 
 BIS Review 96/2008
At the other end of the spectrum, our month-by-month votes on Bank Rate are individualistic 
in precisely Blinder’s sense. And, as he says, that has clear implications for how we convey 
those decisions. The minutes take primacy. That is partly because it is more difficult for us 
than for some of our peers to release an informative statement immediately after the policy 
meeting: if you don’t know what you’re going to decide, it is pretty hard to prepare a draft in 
advance! Each individual member is obviously in a position to summarise their views. But we 
could  not  sensibly  have  nine  individual  statements  without  risking  what  Alan  Blinder  calls 
cacophony.  Also,  such statements  would  have  to  be  prepared  in  advance,  so  there  would 
probably be less listening and engagement at the policy meeting itself. At the other end of 
the spectrum, finding ‘the average’ for a collective Committee statement is tough in the short 
time  available,  except  where  a  majority  has  decided  to  change  Bank  Rate,  or  where  ‘no 
change’ is driven by some clear common factors that it would be unreasonable to withhold 
from the public sphere until publication of the minutes a fortnight later. 
‘Individualism’ is also reflected in our public speeches and appearances before Parliament. 
Those  individual  exercises  range  widely  –  from  assessments  of  the  conjuncture,  through 
examinations of particular parts of the transmission mechanism, to reflections on monetary-
policy making more generally.3 But whatever the subject or scope, we are each speaking for 
ourselves, not for the Committee as a whole. 
Taken together, all this plainly sets up centrifugal forces, or Blinder’s ‘cacophony problem’. 
As put that matters, since it is of course the systematic component of monetary policy that is 
doing the work in stabilising nominal trends. Households, firms, the financial markets need to 
figure out what the Committee – or, somehow, its marginal member(s) – thinks is going on in 
the economy and how it will react in setting Bank Rate (‘our’ reaction function).  
But there are centripetal influences too. I shall highlight two. 
First, the aim of each member is not to be in a minority but for their preferred level of Bank 
Rate  to  be  that  chosen  by  a  majority  of  the  Committee.  This  means  that,  in  addition  to 
clarifying our own thoughts, we are up to a point in the business of persuasion. Ours is not a 
system of postal voting. It is a system of listening to and learning from each other.  
Second,  with  qualifications,  some  of  the  MPC’s  communications  are  relatively  more 
collective. In particular, our communications on a broadly shared ‘model’ of how the economy 
works, and our forecasts of the outlook for growth and inflation. 
In 1998, the (then) Committee published a paper on the Monetary Transmission Mechanism; 
and, in a 2007 paper to the Treasury Select Committee of Parliament, we described our view 
of material changes in the workings of the economy during the Committee’s first ten years. 
Both were agreed, collegiate-like documents, while not committing every member to every 
proposition. 
Much  the  same  can  be  said  of  our  quarterly  forecasts  and  Inflation  Reports,  which  play  a 
central role in the MPC’s system. Our forecasts are the projections of the policymakers not 
the supporting analytical staff. It is striking that the ‘individualistic’ MPC publishes a common 
forecast, whereas the somewhat more-collegial FOMC has long published information (the 
central  tendency  and  range)  about  the  forecasts  of  its  individual  members  (without  the 
names). The FOMC’s approach allows the range of central projections to be transparent. It is 
                                                 
3  
See  Tucker,  P  M  W,  ‘Reflections  on  operating  inflation  targeting’,  speech  at  the  Graduate  School  of 
Business, University of Chicago, July 2006, Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin Q2 2006, pp 212-224. 
Kate Barker, ‘Monetary Policy in the UK – The Framework and current issues’ delivered at the National 
Association  of  Business  Economics  Policy  Conference,  Washington  DC,  March  2005,  Bank  of  England 
Quarterly Bulletin Q2 2005, pp 276-282. 
Rachel Lomax ‘The MPC comes of age’, a speech delivered at De Montford University, February 2007, 
Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin Q1 2007, pp 106-111. 
Charlie  Bean  ‘Inflation  Targeting:  the  UK  experience’,  speech  at  the  Annual  Congress  of  the  German 
Economic Association, October 2003, Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin Q4 2003, pp 479-494. 
BIS Review 96/2008 
 3
quite  different  in  kind  from  the  fan  charts  we  publish  in  the  UK,  showing  the  band  of 
uncertainty around central projections for output growth and inflation. Our ‘fans’ are not, as is 
sometimes suggested, a way of encompassing the central view of each of the nine individual 
members; they reflect collective discussion and agreement. Mutual engagement would not 
be needed if we were in the business of publishing nine individual fan charts. Frequently, we 
do  indicate  in  the  Inflation  Report  that  different  members  assign  different  weights  to  the 
various  risks  around  the  central  projection.  And  to  be  clear,  individual  members  are  not 
constrained to be part of the collective forecast; if our differences were sufficiently material, 
we could make that clear quantitatively in the Inflation Report. But, if at any point, all nine 
members did so, the centrifugal elements of our individualistic system could, it seems to me, 
lead  to  genuine  cacophony.  In  the  interests  of  effective  policy,  the  Committee  as  a  whole 
therefore  has  an  interest  in  setting up  some  centripetal  influences,  without  making  them  a 
binding constraint on individual members.  
Thus, the publications on the transmission mechanism and on the economic outlook provide 
a  broad,  common  platform  for  readers  to  use  when  making  sense  of  our  individual 
pronouncements. My hunch is that this gives us greater scope for articulating our individual 
views without creating misleading impressions. For example, a paper I delivered last year on 
Money and Credit4 went into more detail on those parts of the transmission mechanism than 
any collective statement, or than my colleagues might wish to go.  
I have found that helpful in recent months, as a few comments on the current conjuncture 
might illustrate. My take at our recent July meeting was, broadly, that since the May Inflation 
Report, the near-term outlook for inflation had deteriorated, underlining the risk that the rise 
in commodity prices will feed through to wage and price setting. The outlook for demand and 
output had also deteriorated, which in degree should help to contain those upside risks to 
inflation.  Going  forward,  a  key  judgment  will  be  whether  the  prospective  slowdown  will  be 
sufficient  to  bring  inflation  back  to  target  with  the  current  level  of  Bank  Rate,  taking  into 
account the tightening in some broader measures of monetary conditions. The final point is 
what I want to highlight in the context of my remarks today. Given a marked increase in credit 
rationing in capital markets and bank lending, the conventionally measured short-term risk-
free real rate may not be the same summary statistic of monetary conditions as before the 
turmoil.  It  is  currently  necessary  to  undertake  a  richer  analysis  of  monetary  and  credit 
conditions, which had been the broad theme of my earlier paper. But those remarks about 
money  and  credit  were  nested  within  a  broadly  common  approach  to  the  transmission 
mechanism and policy.  
To recap, the MPC’s more collective statements make us free to do our duty in revealing our 
individual  thoughts  without  creating  a  misleading  perception  of  cacophony  when  it  is  not 
really there.  
The challenge for central banks with different decision-taking structures would seem to  be 
the  opposite:  (i)  how  to  allow  a  range  of  views  to  be  explored  seriously  so  as  to  avoid 
intellectual or analytical inertia – or how to let in fresh air; and (ii) in terms of communications, 
how  to  demonstrate  that  there  is  true  debate  without  individual  pronouncements  being 
confused with the collective pronouncements on policy made typically by the Chair.  
I think forecasts are central to this. And I would encourage Alan Blinder and his collaborators 
to  extend  their  work  on  the  production  and  role  of  forecasts  in  the  decision-making  of 
different  central  banks;  and  how  the  communication  of  forecasts  interacts  with  the 
communication of other elements of the policy process.  
                                                 
4   See Tucker, P M W, ‘Money and credit: banking and the macroeconomy’, speech at the Monetary Policy and 
the Markets Conference, 13 December 2007, Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin Q1 2008, pp 96-106. 
4 
 BIS Review 96/2008
Other bits of central banking  
Finally,  and  briefly,  I  would  observe  that  Blinder’s  work  on  decision-taking  processes  and 
structures has so far focused entirely on the setting of interest rates. We have been living 
through a decade or more in which, at many although not all central banks, other decisions 
affected the financial landscape and risks to stability. Again drawing on his experience as the 
Vice Chairman of the Fed Board and again comparing and contrasting different approaches, 
I think we would all benefit enormously if Alan Blinder took his scholarly apparatus and spirit 
of enquiry into other corners of central banking and how they fit together.  
BIS Review 96/2008 
 5
