 Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Growing significance of Islamic finance 
Opening remarks by Dr Zeti Akhtar Aziz, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, at the 
Malaysian Islamic Finance 2008 Issuers and Investors Forum – ISSUER'S DAY (Launch of 
the MIFC Global Communications campaign), Kuala Lumpur, 11 August 2008. 
 Bismillahir Rahmanir Rahim 
It is my pleasure to be here this morning at this third Malaysian Islamic Finance (MIF) 2008 
Issuers and Investors Forum. It was at the first MIF Forum in August 2006 that the Malaysia 
International Islamic Financial Centre or MIFC initiative was launched. This was part of our 
efforts to strengthen further our economic and financial linkages with the rest of the world. It 
is our firm conviction that as an international Islamic financial hub this will be an important 
element  facilitating  the  realisation  of  this  aspiration.  Since  our  launch,  other  traditional 
financial  centres  such  as  Hong  Kong,  Singapore,  Dubai  and  London  have  also  intensified 
their participation in the Islamic financial system. 
As  one  of  the  fastest  growing  segments  in  the  international  financial  system,  there  is  a 
growing number of Islamic financial institutions and an increasing range of innovative Islamic 
financial products. Of importance is that this progress has been supported by a rigorous and 
well  developed  legal,  regulatory  and  Shariah  framework,  thereby  ensuring  its  stability  and 
sustainability.  
The operating environment for Islamic finance 
With the internationalisation of Islamic finance and the rapidly changing international Islamic 
financial landscape, Islamic finance is becoming increasingly integrated to the international 
financial system. This development has taken place in all segments of the Islamic financial 
system  including  the  Islamic  banking  and  takaful  industry,  and  in  the  Islamic  money  and 
capital markets.  
There  are  now  a  large  number  of  diverse  players  and  institutions  in  the  Islamic  financial 
system. There has also been a growing range of products and services being offered. The 
pace of product innovation has intensified with more sophisticated Islamic financial products 
including  the  structured  and  investment-linked  products.  These  products  have  become 
competitive both in terms of product structure and pricing. There has also been enhanced 
depth of the Islamic financial markets. This has increased the attractiveness of the Islamic 
financial instruments as an asset class for investment.  
The Prudential standards are developed by the Islamic Financial Services Board (IFSB) to 
govern the operations of Islamic financial institutions. The IFSB has, not only, an important 
role in the harmonisation of prudential standards, but also contributes towards the consistent 
development  of  Islamic  finance  across  different  jurisdictions.  Several  parts  of  the  world, 
including in Malaysia, have implemented the prudential standards issued by the IFSB. These 
prudential  standards  which  have  been  designed  to  take  into  account  the  unique  features 
specific to Islamic finance will contribute towards ensuring its soundness and stability. 
Developments in the sukuk markets 
The  year  2007  saw  an  exceptional  growth  of  the  global  sukuk  market  which  expanded  by 
more than 70 percent during the year. New issues during the year reached a record high to 
about  US$47  billion  and  the  outstanding  global  sukuk  market  has  now  surpassed  the 
US$100 billion mark. Despite the more challenging international financial environment arising 
from  the  financial  crisis  that  has  occurred  in  a  number  of  the  advanced  economies  in  the 
BIS Review 97/2008 
 1
 recent twelve months, the sukuk market while also affected, it has been to a lesser extent. 
Up until June 2008, it has held its ground with a total global issuance now exceeding US$10 
billion. With greater recognition of the sukuk market as a competitive and attractive form of 
financing, the global sukuk market is expected to continue its growth going forward. 
The International Islamic financial hub evolving in Malaysia is supported by five pillars. 
Pillar 1: sukuk origination 
Following the first ever sukuk in the world that was issued in Malaysia in 1990, Malaysia has 
now  developed  a  deep,  liquid  and  vibrant  sukuk  market.  Recently,  the  largest  sukuk  ever 
was raised in the Malaysian sukuk market in 2007. The magnitude was approximately RM15 
billion or about USD5 billion equivalent. Despite being issued during the height of the sub-
prime  crisis,  it  attracted  huge  demand  and  was  oversubscribed  by  more  than  two  times. 
Sukuk origination has thus been identified as one of the important pillars of the Malaysian 
Islamic  financial  system.  As  of  the  end  of  2007,  more  than  60  percent  of  the  outstanding 
global sukuks originated from Malaysia. It has been increasing by an annual rate of about 20 
percent and it accounts for about 56 percent of the outstanding bond market in Malaysia.  
Several foreign multilateral development banks, quasi sovereign agencies and MNCs have 
received  the  approval  of  the  authorities  for  the  issuance  of  sukuks  in  our  domestic  sukuk 
market.  The  Malaysian  foreign  exchange  administration  rules  have  been  extensively 
liberalised  to  enable  non-resident  corporations  to  raise  ringgit  and  foreign  currency 
denominated  funds  from  our  market.  International  issuers  may  thus  issue  multi-currency 
sukuks  in  addition  to  having  the  flexibility  to  swap  domestic  currency  funding  into  other 
currencies.  
Pillar 2: Islamic fund and wealth management 
The  sukuk  market  has  been  an  important  source  of  financing  for  productive  investment 
activities,  while  for  investors it provides potential for diversification into new asset  classes. 
The  second  pillar  in  the  Malaysia  Islamic  financial  hub  is  the  Islamic  fund  and  wealth 
management  industry.  Malaysia  is  centrally  located  in  the  ASEAN  region  that  has  a 
population of 570 million. It is also positioned centrally between the major Asian economies 
of India, China, Japan and Korea. Malaysia has always been a highly open economy in trade 
and investment activities and has been a major recipient of foreign direct investment for more 
than a hundred years.  
As a destination for financial investment, the Malaysian capital market offers a wide range of 
world  class  financial  products.  More  than  85  percent  of  the  listed  companies  in  the  equity 
market are Shariah compliant, representing about 60 percent of total market capitalisation. 
Other  investment  opportunities  include  in  Shariah-compliant  real  estate  investment  trusts 
(REIT),  in  unit  trusts  and  in  the  Islamic  exchange  traded  fund  (ETF).  The  capital  market 
intermediaries  in  Malaysia,  that  is,  the  investment  banks  and  Islamic  fund  management 
companies  have  had  a  key  role  in  supporting  the  development  of  this  industry.  Both  retail 
and wholesale products are being offered in ringgit and non-ringgit currencies. There is also 
no  restriction  in  investing  100  per  cent  of  the  funds  abroad.  The  foreign  exchange 
administration  rules  now  allow  for  the  free  mobility  of  inward  and  outward  movement  of 
funds.  
Pillar 3: international Islamic banking 
The Islamic financial system has also been extensively liberalised to allow for the entry of 
foreign  Islamic  financial  institutions  that  offer  both  domestic  and  international  banking 
business.  In  addition,  the  foreign  equity  ceiling  in  Islamic  financial  institutions  has  been 
raised to a maximum of 49 percent as part of the effort to promote strategic alliances. The 
Islamic  banking  business  in  foreign  currencies  can  be  conducted  by  the  international 
2 
 BIS Review 97/2008
 currency business units (ICBUs) that may be set up within existing financial institutions and 
the  international  Islamic  banks.  Such  international  Islamic  banks  may  be  established  as 
either a branch or a subsidiary. Currently, about 16 percent of total assets in the Malaysian 
banking system is Shariah compliant. 
Pillar 4: international takaful business 
The  fourth  pillar  is  takaful  and  retakaful  business.  There  are  now  eight  takaful  operators, 
several of which are joint ventures with foreign shareholding that conduct both domestic and 
international takaful business. In addition, licences have been granted to three reinsurance 
players to undertake retakaful business in Malaysia. Several existing takaful operators have 
set  up  international  currency  business  units  (ICBUs)  and  one  new  international  takaful 
company has been licensed as an international takaful operator to conduct foreign currency 
takaful business.  
Pillar 5: human capital and thought leadership 
The  fifth  pillar  is  human  capital  and  thought  leadership.  Several  important  human  capital 
development  projects  have  been  implemented  to  foster  Islamic  finance  thought  leadership 
and to create a supply of talent for the Islamic finance industry. Having a sufficient pool of the 
talent  and  expertise  has  been  key  to  the  development  of  the  Islamic  financial  hub  in 
Malaysia. The International Centre for Education in Islamic Finance (INCEIF) which has an 
international faculty and students from more than 40 countries, is focused on programmes for 
Islamic finance professionals and specialists to meet the human capital requirements of the 
global Islamic financial services industry. The first group of students for the Chartered Islamic 
Finance Professional, or CIFP, offered by INCEIF is expected to graduate at the end of this 
year  after  completing  a  three  year  programme  that  includes  an  internship  with  an  Islamic 
financial institution. 
Strengthening the MIFC initiative 
Let  me  turn  to  today's  event.  Malaysia's  Islamic  financial  hub  has  been  built  on  the 
foundation  of  a  comprehensive  and  progressive  Islamic  financial  system  that  has  been 
developed in the recent three decades. Activity in the Islamic financial system has become 
vibrant,  in  particular,  in  the  sukuk  market  and  in  the  other  wholesale  Islamic  financial 
transactions.  Going  forward,  Malaysia  will  collaborate  with  other  financial  centres  with  the 
aim of strengthening the international interlinkages in the global Islamic financial system. 
Today,  Malaysia  is  taking  another  step  forward  and  launching  a  global  communication 
campaign to the world. The campaign is part of our efforts to strengthen our connectivity with 
the rest of the world. The MIFC global communication campaign highlights the opportunities 
and offerings – here in Malaysia – for investors, issuers, industries in the economic sectors 
and for professionals and practitioners with interest in the Islamic financial services industry. 
Malaysia presents itself as a meeting place for those with surplus funds and those who seek 
to raise funds from any part of the world. As an Islamic financial hub, the Islamic financial 
intermediaries  are  supported  by  institutions  of  learning  for  human  capital  development  in 
Islamic finance.  
It  is  Malaysia's  aspiration  to  participate  in  this  exciting  journey  at  the  frontier  of  Islamic 
finance as it progresses as the fastest growing segment in the global financial industry today. 
In conjunction with the opening session of the MIF 2008, it gives me great pleasure to launch 
the MIFC Global Communication Campaign. To all the participants, I wish you a successful 
and productive conference. Thank you. 
BIS Review 97/2008 
 3
