Martín Redrado: A convincing strategy 
Article  by  Mr  Martín  Redrado,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Argentina,  published  in  La 
Nación newspaper on 18 May 2008. 
 In Argentina we have overcome a week of financial turmoil. However, those focusing on the 
ghosts of our troubled history are looking at our country through the rear-view mirror. There 
is currently no relationship, not even remote, to the conditions that led to the critical events of 
the past. 
The Central Bank has proven that it is in a position to play for the first time in decades its 
fundamental role: ensuring monetary and financial stability to all Argentineans. 
Our strategy in the foreign exchange market is the most eloquent proof of the robustness of 
our policies. This resilience of our system is not by chance but causal, since it derives from 
the existence of multiple preventive mechanisms built throughout recent years so as not to 
jeopardize stability even in situations like the current one. 
Preventing the use of reserves in times of dollar demand by the public would be as absurd as 
not using an umbrella when it rains. In this case, the stock of foreign reserves would not be a 
“cushion” to buffer financial ups and downs but a “bedrock” with no absorption capacity. 
The strengths of our monetary and financial system are evident. Foreign reserves reached a 
record-high level for Argentina: they currently account for almost 100% of demand deposits 
plus  cash  held  by  the  public  (45%  in  2001).  In  addition  to  providing  resources  to  face 
possible shocks, foreign reserves are also a deterrent: they limit the chances of success of 
any speculative movement against the peso. 
Likewise,  a  trade  surplus  close  to  12  billion  dollars  this  year  ensures  a  structural  foreign 
exchange  supply  that  may  more  than  offset  any  temporary  dollar  demand,  making  any 
nominal devaluation speculation irrelevant. 
Exports dynamics in general, and industrial exports in particular growing at an annual rate of 
18%, show that there is no competitiveness problem today, which was the main cause for 
past crises.  
In turn, the current managed floating regime proves to be the right one for an economy in 
transition  like  ours.  That  is,  it  provides  predictability  and  prevents  excessive  volatility  from 
affecting economic decisions. What would have happened in these circumstances under a 
pure  floating  exchange  rate  regime?  Our  strategy  curbed  depreciation  expectations  and, 
thus, the potential pressure on prices. 
Moreover, thanks to a sound financial system we are not facing a run on deposits as in the 
past. It is natural to witness an upward trend in the interest rate. The facts show that private 
sector deposits have remained unchanged in the past month. 
The  structural  conditions  we  have  built  leave  no  room  for  speculation  and  reflect  on  the 
banks’ solvency and liquidity after three years of positive systemic profitability, also involving 
an  unprecedented  Central  Bank  balance  sheet.  This  allowed  us  to  adopt  a  decisive 
preventive action in the peso market. 
The use of instruments devised to that end injected liquidity through a lower primary issue of 
our notes, the early repurchase of those bills in the secondary market and the full availability 
of  repos  (one-,  seven- and  sixty-day  credit  lines  to commercial  banks in  need  of liquidity), 
both at fixed and variable rates.  
Our  scheme  is  based  on  what  is  known  as  risk  management  approach  applied  to  the 
monetary  policy  in  economic  theory.  It  entails  not  focusing  any  longer  on  the  short  term, 
BIS Review 66/2008 
 1
combining  technical  tools  with  the  policymaker's  judgment,  evaluating  risks  associated  to 
each  circumstance  without  being  limited  by  dogmatic  prejudice  or  betting  on  excluding 
scenarios. 
All in all, the objective probability of a crisis similar to those of the past is virtually zero in 
Argentina  now.  This  reality  is  not  fortuitous  but  the  result  of  implementing  a  robust  and 
consistent agenda. 
The Central Bank has enough tools – patiently designed in recent years – to use in situations 
like this week’s. The big difference is that, this time, Argentineans may trust that these tools 
will protect their savings and jobs. 
2 
 BIS Review 66/2008
