Glenn Stevens: Economic conditions 
Address by Mr Glenn Stevens, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, to the American 
Chamber of Commerce in Australia Business Luncheon, Melbourne, 13 June 2008. 
 Thank you for the invitation to address you in Melbourne today. I read that AmCham is the 
largest international chamber of commerce operating in Australia, and has been working to 
promote  trade,  investment  and  general  business  links  between  the  United  States  and 
Australia  since  1961.  Over  that  period  of  nearly  five  decades,  the  US  and  Australia  have 
enjoyed a mutually beneficial trade relationship, enshrined most recently in the Free Trade 
Agreement. 
During that time, a lot of other shifts have occurred, of significance to us both. In 1961, nearly 
a quarter of Australian exports went to the United Kingdom, our number one trading partner. 
Trade with China was of inconsequential size. Japan had become a prominent destination for 
exports by then, but would go on to become by far our largest trading partner by the end of 
that decade, due to the expansion in the mining sector. In 2007, the UK was number six as a 
destination. The US was number three (little changed from 40 years earlier). China equalled 
Japan in first place for two way trade, and will easily outstrip Japan this year. 
Of course, the United States is still far and away the largest economy in the world, and will 
remain so for quite a while. Nonetheless, the change in the trade experience of Australia – 
and we are hardly alone in that – is an indicator of the way the weight in the world economy 
is gradually shifting to the Asian region. 
On the financial front, in contrast, Asia remains in many respects underdeveloped, especially 
in terms of the prominence of its local-currency capital markets. US capital markets remain 
the  largest,  deepest  and  most  influential,  driving  developments  in  stock,  bond  and  money 
markets, and their various derivative offshoots, around the world. 
That  contrast  –  the  increasing  economic  weight  of  Asia  and  the  continuing  dominance  of 
American  behaviour  in  financial  markets  –  is  in  many  ways  at  the  centre  of  the  set  of 
challenges facing Australia, and I suspect other countries, right now. Before coming to that, 
however, it is fitting to begin with some remarks about the US economy. I will then talk about 
the global economy more broadly, and particularly the effects of the US slowdown on the rest 
of the world before focusing particularly on Australia and the current challenges of economic 
management that we face. 
The United States economy 
As  you  well  know,  the  US  economy  is  struggling  with  a  period  of  weakness  at  present. 
Growth has slowed to a very subdued pace, and confidence is well down. There continues to 
be debate as to whether or not what we are witnessing can be called a recession. In some 
respects,  this  is  a  rather  silly  preoccupation  because  there  is no  doubt  that  conditions  are 
weak, and it is not worth spilling much ink over whether the growth rate is just above or just 
below zero. That said, the US economy has, thus far, done a little better than many people 
had feared. 
Of course the episode is not yet over; a period of adjustment still lies ahead. The epicentre of 
this  adjustment  is  the  housing  sector,  where  deteriorating  lending  standards  and  a 
speculative boom in parts of the country a few years ago led to a build-up of excess physical 
stock and over-stretched borrowers. Subsequently, the need to work off this overhang has 
seen construction rates for new homes fall by half, and prices for established homes in many 
major cities decline for the first time in many years. Rising defaults and foreclosures are likely 
to  dampen  prices  further.  The  non-recourse  nature  of  mortgages  in  some  US  states  is 
BIS Review 77/2008 
 1
potentially a destabilising factor as well, since even people who can service a loan have an 
incentive  to  walk  away  once  their  equity  falls  to  zero.  Tighter  credit  conditions  are  a 
dampening factor for the US economy more generally, as lenders work to limit risk in order to 
repair their own balance sheets. 
So the real question is when the preconditions for a renewed expansion will come into place. 
It  is  perhaps  a  bit  soon  to  conclude  that  we  have  reached  that  point.  There  are  certainly 
some helpful dynamics at work: the worst fears of a serious financial collapse have abated 
somewhat  over  the  past  couple  of  months,  the  process  of  balance  sheet  repair  for  key 
institutions  is  well  under  way,  macroeconomic  policies  have  been  put  into  expansionary 
mode  and  initiatives  to  offer  some  modest  support  to  the  housing  market  are  in  train. 
Considerable uncertainty, nonetheless, surrounds the outlook for the United States over the 
next year or so. 
The global economy 
What is the effect of this on the rest of the world? In a previous response to this question,1 I 
suggested that there are two key channels to consider. The first is trade spillovers, as the fall 
in US income means that the US demands less in the way of products from other countries. 
The  decline  in  the  US  dollar  also  works  in  this  direction.  The  second  potential  channel  is 
financial  contagion,  with  the  possibility  that  other  countries  may  experience  the  same 
financial dynamics as those which have been at work in the United States. 
My  view  was  that  this  second  channel  was  likely  to  be  the  more  important  one  in  this 
episode. The trade channel certainly is working – lower US demand is being felt in weaker 
exports to the United States from most parts of the world. But other forces are also at work, 
and  the  strength  of  some  other  regions  has  meant  that  many  export-driven  economies, 
certainly those in Asia, have continued to record quite solid growth into the early months of 
2008. Some of these countries have also developed a good deal of momentum in domestic 
demand. So to date, trade per se has not been the major issue. 
But financial exposures to the problem assets were spread around the global system. Credit-
related  losses  that  have  been  disclosed  by  financial  institutions  around  the  world  to  date 
amount  to  something  approaching  US$400  billion,  of  which  about  half  is  in  institutions 
domiciled outside the United States. More losses reside in entities outside the core financial 
system. So the pressure on balance sheets arising from the decline in credit standards in the 
middle of the current decade has extended beyond the US itself, at least to Europe and the 
UK.  Given  the  integrated  nature  of  financial  markets  in  the  developed  world,  moreover, 
pressure  on  term  borrowing  costs  for  banks  has  been  seen  in  many  places  over  the  past 
nine months, even if in a less acute way than observed in the countries at the centre of the 
crisis. 
These  forces  are  contractionary  in  nature,  and  so  global  growth  is  widely  expected  to  be 
lower in 2008 than the very strong result in 2007. According to the IMF, global GDP growth 
will moderate to about 3¾ per cent in 2008 and 2009, with slowing concentrated among the 
developed economies of North America, Europe and Japan. This forecast embodies a mild 
US recession during 2008. 
But while this outcome for global growth would be well below the exceptional pace of about 5 
per cent seen in 2006 and 2007, it is actually in line with the average rate of growth for the 
world  economy  over  the  past  15  years.  And  although  the  IMF  suggested  in  April  that  the 
short-term risks surrounding this forecast were concentrated on the downside, with a 25 per 
cent chance of global recession (which it defines to be global growth at or below 3 per cent), 
                                                 
1  
Prospects 
in 
‘Economic 
Antipodean 
http://www.rba.gov.au/Speeches/2008/sp_gov_190108.html). 
2008: 
An 
View’, 
January 
2008 
(available 
at 
2 
 BIS Review 77/2008
recent developments do not suggest that those risks are any more likely to be realised than 
was the case a couple of months ago. 
To date, in fact, the financial developments that have so occupied the minds of developed 
world policy-makers have not been as big an issue for many countries in the emerging world, 
at least not those most important to Australia. Banks in those cases have not had serious 
funding  problems,  perhaps  in  part  because  their  own  exposures  to  the  bad  assets  were 
minimal.  Capital  markets,  which  are  less  important  as  avenues  of  funding  than  in  many 
developed  economies,  have  not  been  a  source  of  significant  disruption.  Admittedly,  share 
markets  in  the  emerging  economies  have  declined  noticeably,  but  credit  expansion  has 
continued unimpeded and, as I indicated a moment ago, economic growth appears to have 
remained pretty solid. 
In fact, around much of the emerging world at the moment, the bigger problem seems to be 
neither the near or actual recession of the United States, nor the credit crunch about which 
we hear so much in the discussion of the major countries, but inflation. From Asia to Latin 
America to Africa, as well as in many of the industrial countries, we are hearing a lot more 
about inflation now. 
Food  price  rises  loom  large  in  developing  countries’  consumer  basket,  so  the  big  rises  in 
grain prices over the past year have been very prominent. Several potential drivers of these 
increases have been nominated. One is the change towards a more protein-intensive diet as 
developing countries’ incomes rise, which increases demand for grain to feed animals kept 
for meat. This is no doubt a factor, but it is a long run trend and there is no evidence that 
meat  consumption  has  exploded  just  in  the  past  year.2  Another  is  the  diversion  of  some 
grains  towards  production  of  bio  fuels,  with  up  to  half  the  increase  in  the  consumption  of 
some  crops  in  2006-2007  going  to  this  source,  thus  constraining  supply  available  for 
additional  food  production.3  But  while  this  has  played  a  role  at  the  margins,  supply 
disruptions have arguably been the most important cause of big price rises in the past year. 
In  particular,  supply  has  been  disrupted  by  adverse  weather  conditions  in  key  production 
areas, for example, the drought in Australia. To the extent that those effects are temporary, it 
could be expected that food prices will not continue to rise at the same pace.  
Temporary supply factors may, at the margin, also have been at work in pushing up oil prices 
of  late.  In  addition,  the  inflow  of  financial  capital  into  energy  derivatives  markets  as  funds 
have expanded their asset universes to include commodities has been a source of demand. 
This  seems  to  be  what  people  have  in  mind  when  they  suggest  that  oil  prices  have  been 
subject to speculative pressure. 
But it is surely impossible to avoid the conclusion that most of the trend rise in oil prices over 
a number of years now has been due to rising demand by end users. Supply has risen too, in 
contrast  to  what  occurred  in  the  OPEC  shocks  of  the  1970s,  but  it  has  struggled  to  keep 
pace and the cost of supplying the marginal unit has risen. 
The same can be said, moreover, about other resource commodities, including thermal and 
metallurgical  coal  and  iron  ore  –  commodities  that  are  very  important  to  Australia  as  a 
producer.  Chinese  demand  for  these  resources  to  construct  first-world  standard  cities  has 
been extremely strong, and has accounted for a large share of the increase in demand over 
the past several years. Anyone who visits a Chinese city can see the results. Such visitors 
also  tend,  more  often  than  not,  to  get  a  sense  that  this  demand  could  continue,  as  a 
structural phenomenon, for quite a long time. 
                                                 
2  
in 
prices, 
Indeed, food demand in emerging economies began to increase strongly in the 1990s, long before the current 
run-up 
at: 
http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/weo/2007/02/pdf/text.pdf). 
Outlook, 
http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/weo/2008/01/pdf/text.pdf). 
IMF  World  Economic  Outlook,  October 
Economic 
(available 
(available 
World 
2008 
2007 
April 
IMF 
see 
at: 
3   See 
BIS Review 77/2008 
 3
At present, there is a strong sense of overheating in the Chinese economy. It would be even 
clearer in the statistics were it not for the administrative controls over many prices. As it is, 
China’s official CPI is rising at close to 8 per cent per annum. 
The effect of China on the rest of Asia, moreover, is expansionary. Coupled with fairly easy 
monetary  policy  settings  in  much  of  the  region,  which  tends  to  occur  in  many  emerging 
economies when US policy rates are very low because of the importance of exchange rate 
considerations to Asian policy-makers, this is likely to limit downside risks to growth in the 
short term.  It does pose the risk, though, that inflation will continue to pick up. This is not 
confined to Asia, either: inflation pressures are evident in much of Latin America and South 
Africa,  both  regions  where  higher  resource  prices  have  delivered  a  terms  of  trade  gain  of 
substantial proportions. I would venture a guess, in fact, that the number of countries where 
inflation is the major problem greatly exceeds, at present, the number where the predominant 
concern is inadequate growth. 
It may be that the slowing in growth in train in the major countries will lead to energy prices 
and some other commodity prices moderating. On the other hand, the forecast moderation in 
global growth is taking it back only to about average pace. With the bulk of new demand for 
energy  and  resources  coming  from  countries  which  are  yet  to  show  much  sign  of  cyclical 
slowdown,  and  whose  energy  intensity  of  demand  is  continuing  to  increase  secularly,  any 
near-term softening in these prices might only be modest. 
Hence the fact that the low level of interest rates in the major countries results, de facto, in 
the setting of monetary conditions being pretty easy in many developing countries as well, is 
starting  to  raise  warning  flags  among  observers  who  can  see  inflation  pressures  already 
building.  This  could  pose  some  quite  difficult  choices  for  policy-makers,  particularly  in  the 
emerging  world,  over  the  next  year.  Longer  term,  of  course,  the  likely  ongoing  growth  in 
demand for energy by developing countries will surely pose major adjustment challenges for 
the rest of us. 
The Australian economy 
The external environment certainly poses some big, and very immediate, challenges for an 
Australian  economy  which  has  experienced  a  long  expansion  and  largely  used  up  its 
reserves of spare capacity. The forces at work from abroad pull in different directions, to an 
extent seen on few occasions in the past. 
On  the  one  hand,  the seriousness  of  the  sub-prime  credit  crisis,  and the  associated  weak 
outcomes being experienced in the US, and thought to be in prospect in the UK and some 
parts of Europe, are well understood by Australian households and businesses. The financial 
turmoil  of  the  past  nine  months  has  also  seen  a  market-driven  tightening  of  financial 
conditions in addition to that which resulted from the tightening of monetary policy.  
Combined,  these  developments  are  having  a  dampening  effect  on  demand.  Households 
have, over recent months, adopted a more cautious attitude to borrowing and spending, the 
evidence for which is a string of flat results for retail sales, and a significant decline in the 
flow of new loan approvals for housing. Credit approvals to businesses have also declined 
significantly. While this partly reflects the winding down of a process of rapid reintermediation 
that had been occurring as businesses turned to their banks and away from capital markets 
around the turn of the year, total business funding has slowed. In short, things are happening 
that suggest a moderation in growth in domestic demand is occurring, signs of which were 
beginning  to  appear  in  the  national  accounts  data  released  last  week.  At  this  stage, 
inevitably, the extent and likely duration of the moderation remains uncertain. 
There is not much uncertainty, though, about the need for a moderation. Inflation increased 
over 2007, and in underlying terms reached the highest rate for 15 years or more. It is true 
that it was boosted by the international rise in oil and other commodity prices, but Australia’s 
inflation rate has risen more than most of those in our usual peer group when measured on a 
4 
 BIS Review 77/2008
comparable  basis.  It  is  also  pretty  clear  that  strong  domestic  factors  were  at  work,  with 
growth in local demand at a pace exceeding, by a large margin, any plausible estimate of the 
economy’s  long-run  potential  growth  rate  for  output,  at  a  time  when  capacity  was  already 
tight. Had not the rise in the exchange rate occurred over the past couple of years, moreover, 
the  Australian  dollar  prices  of  energy  and  other  raw  materials  (as  well  as  other  tradeable 
goods and services) would be even higher.  
So  inflation  has  picked  up,  and  needs,  over  time,  to  be  reduced.  Reductions  of  inflation 
usually require a period of slower demand growth, and this episode is no different. 
At  the  same  time  as  we  are  seeking  this  moderation  in  domestic  spending,  the  rise  in 
resource prices that is occurring courtesy of strong demand abroad has complex effects on 
the Australian economy. Since Australians pay world prices for their petroleum products, the 
rising global oil price adds to costs for businesses and consumers. This is inflationary in its 
immediate impact, though it also acts as a brake on spending on other goods and services, 
unless  people  are  prepared  to  reduce  saving  or  borrow  to  sustain  that  other  spending  at 
previous  levels.  Other  things  equal,  this  brake  dampens  inflation  impulses  in  those  other 
areas. 
Terms of Trade - Selected Countries 
Percentage change, 2002-2007 
_____________________________________ 
Chile 
Russia* 
Australia 
forecast for Q3 2008 
Norway 
Argentina 
Canada 
South Africa  
Mexico  
Turkey 
Indonesia 
United Kingdom  
France 
Germany 
Italy 
United States  
Korea 
Japan 
* 2003-2007 
Sources:  ABS;  Badan  Pusat  Statistik;  Banco  Central  de  Chile; 
INDEC;  OECD;  RBA;  South  African  Reserve  Bank;  State 
Statistical Office (Russia) 
 
78 
64 
42 
67 
38 
21 
19 
13 
4 
4 
1 
0 
-2 
-2 
-2 
-6 
-13 
-22 
BIS Review 77/2008 
 5
But other things are not equal. Australians also receive higher incomes as a result of higher 
resource prices. As shareholders they experience higher profits. Employees in the resource 
sector,  as  well  as  in  the  construction  sector  or  the  various  areas  that  supply  goods  and 
services  to  mining,  are  receiving  larger  pay  packets.  Governments  are  receiving  higher 
revenue flows, which in some cases they will spend, at least in part. So in net terms, this 
terms of trade effect is expansionary. In the normal course of events, it would add more to 
demand than the higher commodity prices would take out. 
With the rises in bulk commodity prices taking effect now, Australia’s terms of trade will rise 
by  about  20  per  cent,  on  top  of  the  very  substantial  lift  that  has  occurred  over  the  past 
several years. Since 2002, the total rise in the terms of trade will, by the end of this year, be 
of the order of 65–70 per cent. Some other countries are also experiencing significant terms 
of trade rises. But few will have seen anything bigger than Australia’s over a five-year period.  
There  is  an  obvious  contrast  with  the  United  States,  whose  terms  of  trade  have  fallen  by 
about 6 per cent over the same period, owing to the importance of energy imports to that 
country.  The  strongest  contrast,  though,  is  with  countries  such  as  Japan  or  Korea,  which, 
unlike the US, have no significant resource endowments of their own. 
Turning back to Australia, the effect of the 65–70 per cent increase in the terms of trade over 
five years has been to lift the purchasing power of our GDP by around 13 per cent. In the 
terminology of the national accounts, this is the boost to real gross domestic income or real 
GDI. Of course, our resources sector has significant foreign ownership, so a significant part 
of the gains accrue to foreigners and the boost to the real income of Australian residents is 
not as large. Over 2008, the boost to real GDI is estimated at around 4 per cent, with the 
boost to national income somewhat less than this, but still substantial. 
The  expansionary  terms  of  trade  shock  occurring  now  obviously  would  have  the  potential, 
absent some other adjustment, to be seriously destabilising. 
By design, certain features of our macroeconomic policy framework help to handle the shock. 
A higher exchange rate plays a very valuable role in dampening the expansionary impact, 
lowering prices for traded goods and services and spilling some demand abroad. In the year 
ahead,  the  Government  has  said  that  the  so-called  “automatic  stabilisers”  in  the  Federal 
Budget,  which  refers  to  the  feature  that  the  tax  system  withdraws  more  income  from  the 
economy the faster it grows, will be allowed to operate, which is also helpful. 
It  falls  to  monetary  policy  to  play  its  proper  restraining  role  as  well,  dampening  private 
demand  not  only  because  inflation  has  already  picked  up,  but  seeking  to  head  off  further 
problems that could easily emerge given the expansionary effects of the terms of trade. This 
is  why  a  tight  monetary  policy  setting  is  essential.  It  is  why  the  Reserve  Bank  has  lifted 
interest rates, even as the Federal Reserve was reducing them. 
Not only does the overall pace of demand growth need to slow, but we are having to accept 
a change in its composition. There is a major process of investment going on, by businesses 
as well as by governments. Business investment is at very high levels relative to GDP, and 
businesses  in  aggregate  say  they  intend  to  increase  investment  further  next  year. 
Governments at the State level intend a substantial infrastructure spend as well, though the 
experience  of  the  current  year  is  that  they  are  having  trouble  implementing  their  plans 
because of the demands already being made on the engineering construction sector.  
In  most  economies,  it  is  usually  not  possible,  and  certainly  not  prudent,  to  try  to  have  a 
consumption boom at the same time as an investment boom. Of course, Australia can and 
does access the savings of foreigners to fund additional investment – a process of running a 
current account deficit – so we do not have to finance the totality of the additional investment 
ourselves. This is something not unknown to the US economy either (in fact, it has been a 
common feature of most of the Anglophone market economies over the past decade). 
But  even  so,  there  are  probably  sensible  limits  here.  Practically  speaking,  domestic 
consumption,  together  with  housing  demand,  and  some  areas  of  business  investment  not 
6 
 BIS Review 77/2008
linked to the resource sector, is being asked to make some room, for some period of time, for 
the rise in other forms of investment that will sustain higher incomes and living standards in 
the  future.  Given  that  the  economy  is  pretty  fully  employed,  total  investment  levels  are 
already high, the nation’s call on net capital inflow from abroad is over 6 per cent of our GDP 
and inflation is already 4 per cent, it is difficult to see any serious alternative to an adjustment 
of this nature.  
To try to absorb the expansionary terms of trade impact without any macroeconomic policy 
restraint is not really an alternative at all. In such an inflationary scenario, I expect that we 
would  still  find  that  the  resources  sector  and  the  parts  and  regions  of  the  economy  that 
benefit most directly from its flow-on effects would attract additional labour and capital, and 
become proportionately larger in the national economy over time. Other sectors and regions 
would, proportionately, still diminish in size. The process would simply be less efficient: the 
price signals for resource allocation that are pretty clear at present would be more difficult to 
detect under conditions of higher inflation. Indeed, that is one of the problems high inflation 
brings. This course would also leave the rest of the economy with the legacy of embedded 
high  inflation,  commensurately  higher  nominal  interest  rates  and  so  on.  That  would  be 
harmful  for  living  standards  over  time.  As  such,  allowing  it  to  occur  would  be  a  policy 
mistake. 
Conclusion 
Both  the  United  States  and  Australia  face  significant  economic  challenges.  For  the  US, 
dealing with the fall-out of the financial excesses of the earlier years looms large at present. 
This is not made any easier by the simultaneous lift in global commodity prices, which raises 
consumer prices but, in the US, also dampens economic activity. For Australia, the financial 
fall-out has been less severe, mainly because participation in the earlier excesses was so 
much smaller, while the very large change in prices for mineral and energy resources is the 
most  expansionary  external  shock  to  affect  the  economy  for  50  years  or  more.  It  has 
occurred at a time when the productive capacity of the economy has already been stretched 
by  the  long  expansion.  Hence,  the  prospect  of  inflation  has  presented  a  larger  and  more 
immediate danger to us than it has, thus far, to the US. 
One  way  or  another,  the  near  term  continues  to  present  challenges  on  both  sides  of  the 
Pacific, as the two respective economies adjust to the shocks hitting us. But both of these 
economies are pretty adaptable. There is no reason why, with sensible policy frameworks, 
competitive  and  innovative  firms,  and  capable  and  industrious  workforces,  they  should  not 
continue to prosper over the long term.  
BIS Review 77/2008 
 7
