Thomas Jordan: Central banks in action – financial market turbulences 
and policy measures 
Speech by Mr Thomas Jordan, Member of the Governing Board of the Swiss National Bank, 
at the 36th General Assembly of the Association of Foreign Banks in Switzerland, Geneva, 
6 June 2008. 
The author thanks Caesar Lack for very helpful comments and suggestions. 
 Introduction 
1.  
It is a pleasure and honour for me to have the opportunity to speak at the Annual Meeting of 
the Association of Foreign Banks. The foreign banks are the fastest growing group of banks 
in Switzerland. This demonstrates the attractiveness of Switzerland as a financial centre. At 
the  same  time  it  also  shows  how  important  the  foreign  banks  are  for  Switzerland.  I  am 
therefore  very  much  looking  forward  to  interesting  interaction  with  my  distinguished 
audience. 
In my talk, I will focus on the financial market crisis and the policy measures taken by central 
banks in response to the crisis. I will also try to identify some preliminary lessons that central 
banks have learned through applying these measures. 
In  recent  weeks,  financial  markets  have  improved,  to  some  extent,  from  the  situation  that 
prevailed at the height of the turmoil in mid-March: risk premia have fallen on most assets, 
and equity prices have recovered. Even money markets, although still tense, have improved 
somewhat. These developments have given rise to the hope that the worst of the financial 
crisis might have passed by now. However, it may be too early to give the all-clear. There 
could  still  be  a  number  of  setbacks;  we  have  already  witnessed  periods  of  apparent 
improvements  in  recent  months,  only  to  see  the  crisis  return  in  full  force.  Thus  it  is  still 
difficult, at this point of time, to draw conclusive lessons for the future. 
Objectives and instruments of monetary policy 
2.  
Before I delve into the subject of the financial market crisis, let me begin by reminding you of 
the objectives and instruments of monetary policy. These will be important things to keep in 
mind later on. 
The  objectives  of  monetary  policy  can  be  neatly  summarised  as  stability,  stability  and 
stability. To be more precise – the objectives of monetary policy are price stability, economic 
stability, and financial stability. We can order these three stability objectives according to the 
time  lag  between  the  specific  monetary  policy  action  and  the  effects  of  that  action  on  the 
particular  objective.  The  longest  lag  between  action  and  reaction  is  to  be  found  in  the 
transmission of monetary policy to prices. Thus, monetary policy should aim at price stability 
in the long run. Under long run, I understand a horizon of up to a number of years. In the 
medium term, with a horizon of one to two years, monetary policy can be used for smoothing 
economic  cycles.  And  in  the  short  run,  immediate  action  may  sometimes  be  required  to 
safeguard the stability of the financial system. 
We can also order the three stability objectives according to the degree to which monetary 
policy is responsible for the eventual outcome. Regarding price stability, monetary policy is 
fully  responsible  for  prices  in  the  long  run.  Or  to  put  it  more  simply  –  a  broad-based  and 
sustained  rise  in  prices  is  always  attributable  to  monetary  policy.  As  for  economic 
BIS Review 71/2008 
 1
fluctuations, monetary policy can affect them, but it cannot control them entirely.1 Concerning 
the stability of the financial system, the role of monetary policy measures is mostly limited to 
crisis management, through reacting to increased liquidity demand and providing support to 
the  banking  system  in  times  of  crisis.  In  the  longer  term,  central  bank  action  does  not 
determine financial stability directly, it is other factors, such as regulation, supervision, and 
incentive structures which determine the stability of the financial system.2
I  would  also  like  to  say  a  few  words  on  the  hierarchy  of  these  objectives.  It  is  sometimes 
argued that only one objective can be pursued – on the assumption that a central bank has 
only one instrument, usually a short-term interest rate. Some objectives must therefore be 
subordinate to other objectives. In theory, this view is certainly correct. 
However,  practice  is  more  complex  than  theory.  In  practice,  the  problem  of  having  more 
objectives  than  instruments  in  monetary  policy  is  less  severe  than  theory  might  suggest. 
There are three reasons for this. 
First,  the  three  objectives  are  not  necessarily  contradictory.  On  the  contrary,  they  are 
mutually conditional: A policy that ensures price stability in the long run also contributes to 
stabilising the economy and the financial system. 
Second,  even  if  the  objectives  sometimes  appear  to  require  a  contradictory  stance  for 
monetary  policy,  it  is  possible  –  even  with  one  instrument  only  –  to  successfully  pursue 
several objectives. This is due to the fact that the impact of monetary policy on the different 
objectives occurs with different lags. To give an example: Monetary policy action aimed at 
ensuring financial stability in the very short run or aimed at stabilising the business cycle over 
the medium term does not necessarily endanger price stability in the long run if the stimulus 
is  removed  in  time  and  compensated  for  by  a  more  restrictive  monetary  policy  stance 
afterwards. In other words, there are several paths for the monetary policy instrument that 
are consistent with the long-term objective of price stability.3
Third, and most importantly, monetary policy is not restricted to one instrument alone. Price 
stability and economic stability do indeed rely on the same instrument. However, the financial 
market  crisis  has  clearly  shown  that  central  banks  have  a  battery  of  other  instruments  at 
hand, with which they can manage liquidity during times of financial market turmoil. 
This  leads  me  to  the  second  part  of  my  introduction,  namely,  the  central  bank’s  main 
monetary  policy  instrument  and  the  transmission  mechanism.  For  most  central  banks  in 
developed countries with floating exchange rates, the main monetary policy instrument is a 
short-term  interest  rate,  referred  to  generally  as  the  “policy  rate”.  While  in  many  other 
countries  the  policy  rate  is  an  overnight  rate,  the  SNB  has  an  operating  target  for  the  3-
month Swiss franc LIBOR (London Interbank Offered Rate). 
Without  going  into  detail,  I  would  like  to  stress  two  important  points  with  respect  to  the 
transmission  from  the  monetary  policy  instrument  to  the  economy.  First,  monetary  policy 
works primarily through financial markets. By setting the policy rate, monetary policy affects 
exchange  rates,  interest  rates,  risk  premia  and  asset  prices  in  general,  and  is  thus 
                                                 
1   This is due, first, to uncertainties about the current state of the economy and its future evolution, and second, 
to long and variable lags in the transmission from monetary policy to the real economy. Therefore, monetary 
policy can and should only react to large and persistent deviations from equilibrium. Attempts at fine-tuning the 
economic cycle may even be counterproductive, in that they are procyclical. 
2   Obviously,  central  banks  also  have  some  long-term  influence  on  financial  stability,  first  because  of  moral 
hazard induced by actual or expected central bank action, second, by affecting asset prices, and third, due to 
the involvement of central banks in banking regulation and banking supervision. Furthermore, one can also 
argue that price stability and economic stability are also conducive to financial stability. 
3   To  the  best  of  my  knowledge,  this  idea  was  first  put  forward  by  J.  Niehans  (1978),  The  Theory  of  Money, 
chapter 12, and was designated the “three frequency approach to monetary policy”. 
2 
 BIS Review 71/2008
transmitted  via  financial  markets  to  the  real  economy  and  to  prices.4  Monetary  policy 
therefore strongly relies on well-functioning and liquid markets. The tensions in the money 
markets  in  recent  months  therefore  posed  a  serious  headache  to  most  central  banks.  Not 
only did money market tensions indicate potential problems for financial stability, but it also 
threatened the smooth functioning of the transmission mechanism of monetary policy. 
The second important point concerning the transmission of monetary policy is the fact that it 
is not the current value of the policy rate that matters. Rather, it is the expected future path of 
that  rate  that  determines  the  stance  of  monetary  policy.  For  example,  a  central  bank  can 
have an impact on the economy simply by signalling that its own view about the future path 
of the monetary policy rate is different from the current market view. If the central bank is 
credible, market expectations will adjust correspondingly and financial prices will henceforth 
reflect the new view communicated by the central bank.5
Chronology of the crisis 
3.  
After these preliminaries, I will now turn briefly to the origins and the course of the financial 
market crisis, and in particular, the liquidity tensions brought about by the turmoil. 
The US housing market stands at the epicentre of the financial market crisis. After rising for 
several years, US house prices peaked in 2006. In the ten years between mid-1996 and mid-
2006, house prices in the US almost tripled, growing on average at an annual rate of 11%.6
An  important  development  during  the  house  price  boom  was  the  deterioration  of  lending 
standards, which  can  be  traced  back  to  the  “originate-to-distribute”  financial  intermediation 
model.  Originate-to-distribute  (as  opposed  to  originate-to-hold)  is  a  process  whereby  new 
loans are not held by the bank, but bundled, sliced, repackaged, and sold to investors. While 
the incentives in the originate-to-hold process favour the origination of good loans which can 
be  expected  to  be  serviced  and  paid  back,  the  incentives  in  the  originate-to-distribute 
process favour the origination of as many loans as possible, in order to profit from the fees 
involved  in  the  underwriting  and  securitisation  process.  It  is  thus  not  surprising  that  credit 
standards decreased during the boom. 
After house prices had peaked in 2006, it became more and more obvious to some market 
participants  that  many  sub-prime  borrowers  would  soon  be  unable  to  service  their  debt. 
Prices  of  sub-prime-backed  securities  started  easing  in  2007.  As  2007  progressed,  the 
deteriorating sub-prime market began affecting the confidence in related structured finance 
products  and,  in  August  2007,  led  to  a  general  repricing  of  risk  and  the  deterioration  of 
liquidity in many market segments, not least in the money market. As banks became more 
concerned about their own liquidity and more cautious about counterparty risk, they became 
less willing to lend, especially on the unsecured money market, at maturities longer than a 
few days. 
As a central banker, I would date the outbreak of the financial market crisis to the beginning 
of August, when overnight interbank rates increased sharply. The first central banks to react 
were  the  ECB  and  the  SNB  on  9  August,  when  both  banks  conducted  extraordinary  fine-
tuning  operations.  Soon  afterwards,  other  central  banks  followed  suit,  also  injecting 
additional liquidity. 
                                                 
4   For  a  discussion  of  the  transmission  of  monetary  policy  to  financial  markets  see  Ph.  Hildebrand  (2006), 
“Monetary  Policy  and  Financial  Markets”,  speech  given  to  the  Annual  Conference  of  the  Swiss  Society  for 
Financial  Market  Research,  7  April  2006,  or  Th.  J.  Jordan  (2007),  “Globalisierung  und  Finanzmärkte: 
Herausforderungen und Chancen”, speech given at the ETH Zurich, 13 November 2007. 
5   Of course, to retain credibility, the central bank must refrain from deceiving the markets, i.e. from announcing 
future action without actually intending to act. 
6   As measured by the Case Shiller Composite Index. 
BIS Review 71/2008 
 3
So far, there have been three waves of money market strains. After subsiding somewhat in 
late  September,  the  strains  increased  again  in  November,  exacerbated  by  year-end 
pressures. The third wave started in March. The worst peak of the financial market crisis so 
far  was  attained  in  mid-March,  when  Bear  Stearns  was  taken  over  by  JPMorgan.  The 
takeover,  which  was  facilitated  by  the  Federal  Reserve,  resulted  in  a  calming  of  markets. 
Since mid-March, financial markets have improved somewhat, with the exception of money 
markets, which are still rather tense. 
Action by central banks 
4.  
I  would  now  like  to  discuss  in  more  detail  the  ways  in  which  central  banks  reacted  to  the 
financial  market  crisis.  Given  that  operational  frameworks  differ  from  one  central  bank  to 
another,  and  given  the  highly  technical  nature of  the  subject,  I  will  restrict  myself  to  some 
stylised facts relating to the actions taken by central banks in general and those taken by the 
Swiss National Bank in particular. 
Central banks responded to the financial market turmoil gradually, by progressively shaping 
and  expanding  their  instruments.  At  the  outset,  central  banks  tried  to  counter  rising  short-
term  money  market  rates  by  applying  their  existing  instruments  in  a  more  flexible  way,  by 
adjusting  the  size,  frequency,  and  the  conditions  of  their  discretionary  open  market 
operations. For example, in order to react to the fluctuations in the demand for reserves, the 
SNB now conducts more frequent fine-tuning operations than in the past. 
Although the enhanced use of fine-tuning operations managed to stabilize overnight rates, 
term  spreads  remained  high.  Central  banks  felt  that  it  was  necessary  to  address  this 
situation, because it not only reflected an increase in credit risk but was also a sign of a lack 
of liquidity in these markets. 
Central  banks  therefore  introduced  new  facilities  with  longer  maturities  and  offered 
exceptional long-term financing operations. For example, in September, the SNB carried out 
a CHF 5 billion repo auction with a three-month maturity. Until then, the maturity of its daily 
repo  auctions  had  usually  been  one  week.  In  an  internationally  coordinated  effort,  longer-
term  operations  of  this  kind  were  intensified  in  December,  in  order  to  meet  heightened 
demand  surrounding  year-end  pressure.  In  December,  the  SNB  conducted  several  repo 
transactions with maturities between three and four weeks to cover year-end requirements. 
In March, there were three auctions of three-month Swiss franc repos. 
A consequence of tensions in the money markets was an inefficient distribution of liquidity. 
While some institutions tended to hoard liquidity, other institutions found it hard to come by. 
Some  central  banks  therefore  enlarged  the  range  of  counterparties  for  their  liquidity 
management  operations.  A  good  example  of  this  is  the  Term  Auction  Facility  (TAF) 
introduced  by  the  Federal  Reserve  in  December,  which  provides  28-day  term  loans.  This 
facility  functions  essentially  like  an  open  market  auction,  but  is  open  to  depository 
institutions,  while  access  to  the  Fed’s  regular  open  market  operations  is  restricted  to  20 
primary dealers. Furthermore, some central banks broadened the range of eligible collateral 
for  their  operations.  This  allowed  the  banks  to  keep  their  best  collateral  for  the  money 
market. 
Another problem during the crisis was the dollar liquidity shortage of European banks. This 
resulted  in  additional  uncertainty  and  in  a  high  intraday  volatility  of  dollar  rates.  In  an 
internationally coordinated effort, the Federal Reserve therefore, in December, established a 
US dollar swap line for the ECB and the SNB. On December 17, the SNB, for the first time 
ever,  conducted  a  repo  auction  in  foreign  currency  and  provided  four  billion  US  dollars  of 
liquidity for 28 days to its counterparties. Due to the persistent strains in the money market, 
the swap lines were increased in March and again in May. Currently the SNB is providing a 
total of 12 billion US dollars of liquidity to its counterparties through bi-weekly auctions of six 
billion  dollars  each.  These  repo  transactions  will  continue  to  be  renewed  until  conditions 
4 
 BIS Review 71/2008
improve. For Switzerland, the motivation for participating in this coordinated action is twofold. 
First, our counterparties obtain easier access to dollar liquidity. Second, money markets in 
different  currencies  are  highly  interrelated.  Fewer  tensions  in  the  dollar  market  also  mean 
fewer tensions in the Swiss franc market. 
The  Federal  Reserve’s swap  line is  only  the  most  visible  result  of  the intense cooperation 
between  central  banks  that  has  taken  place  since  the  outbreak  of  the  crisis.  In  general, 
international  consultation  among  central  banks  has  proved  very  useful  in  managing  the 
financial market crisis. 
A further important action taken by central banks was the introduction of facilities that allow 
banks  to  swap  collateral  that  is  less  liquid  for  securities  that  are  highly  liquid,  such  as 
government  bills.  In  March,  the  Federal  Reserve  introduced  a  Term  Securities  Lending 
Facility (TSLF), which allows to lend up to USD 200 billion of Treasury securities to primary 
dealers  in  exchange  for  a  broad  range  of  collateral,  including  asset-backed  securities.  In 
April,  the  Bank  of  England  introduced  its  “Special  Liquidity  Scheme”,  a  new  facility  which 
allows  banks  to  temporarily  swap  their  mortgage-backed  and  other  securities  for  UK 
Treasury Bills. The aim of these collateral swap facilities is twofold: first, balance sheets of 
financial  institutions  become  more  liquid,  and  second,  the  prices  of  the  collateral  are 
indirectly supported, as fire-sales of such assets accepted as collateral become less likely. 
An attractive feature of collateral swaps is that they leave the amount of central bank money 
unaffected.  They  support  liquidity  in  the  banking  system  without  driving  short-term  money 
market  rates  below  the  policy  target.  Furthermore,  the  size  of  these  operations  can, 
potentially, be very large, since there are almost no limits as long as the Treasury provides 
the securities or the central bank can issue its own bonds. 
The single most far-reaching action by a central bank in the crisis so far, however, was the 
Federal Reserve’s decision to facilitate the takeover of Bear Stearns by JPMorgan, in that it 
took over risky assets in significant quantities. By stepping in, the Federal Reserve put an 
end  to  a  disorderly  de-leveraging  process  on  the  part  of  highly  interconnected  financial 
institutions, and probably made a crucial contribution to defusing the third and most recent 
wave of the financial market crisis. 
Given its open access policy with respect to counterparties and the broad collateral base, it 
was not necessary for the SNB either to increase its range of counterparties or to expand its 
list of collateral.7 Neither has it been necessary to introduce a facility for swapping illiquid for 
liquid assets, so far. 
How should we assess the impact and success of central bank actions so far? Although they 
have  helped  to  limit  tensions  in  the  money  market,  the  situation  is  still  far  from  normal. 
Despite all the liquidity measures that have been taken, term premiums in the money market 
remain elevated. This provides further evidence of the fact that the lack of confidence in the 
market cannot easily be removed by central bank action alone. Market participants have to 
undertake the necessary steps themselves to restore market confidence. 
                                                 
7  
In October 2007 (unrelated to the financial market crisis), the SNB expanded the list of eligible collateral by 
around 50%, including in its list securities from issuers domiciled in the European Union and the European 
Economic Area denominated in Swiss francs and other major currencies. 
BIS Review 71/2008 
 5
Lessons and consequences for liquidity management operations 
5.  
What  lessons  can  we  learn  from  the  financial  market  crisis?  There  are,  of  course,  many 
lessons  to  be  learned.  However,  I  would  like  to  concentrate  on  those  that  are  related  to 
central bank liquidity management operations.8
Liquidity management vs. changes in the stance of monetary policy 
The first lesson concerns the distinction between liquidity management and monetary policy. 
The  crisis  has  made  clear  to  financial  markets,  but  also  to  central  banks,  that  in  order  to 
safeguard financial stability during financial market turbulence, central banks do not depend 
solely  on  the  monetary  policy  rate,  but  have  a  broad  arsenal  of  liquidity  management 
instruments at their disposal. To illustrate this point: Lowering the policy rate is not the only 
thing a central bank can do to ensure financial stability in the short run; a central bank has 
other  efficient  instruments  at  hand,  which,  depending  on  the  situation,  may  be  equally  or 
even better suited to safeguarding financial stability. Also, these instruments do not affect the 
stance of monetary policy and thus the economic stability and price stability objective, or only 
do so to a lesser degree. 
The  difference  between  liquidity  management  operations  and  changes  in  the  stance  of 
monetary policy has been poorly understood by many observers. Liquidity injections, as large 
as  they  may  have  appeared,  have  in  general  not  resulted  in  significantly  higher  levels  of 
reserve  money,  because  they  were  only  of  a  temporary  nature.  The  liquidity  management 
operations have thus not resulted, as is sometimes claimed by analysts, in huge amounts of 
excess  liquidity,  nor  can  they  necessarily  be  equated  with  a  more  expansionary  monetary 
policy  stance.  Many  of  the  recent  central  bank  liquidity  management  operations  have  not 
affected the monetary policy stance. 
However,  there  have  of  course  been  changes  in  the  monetary  policy  stance  during  the 
financial market crisis: the Federal Reserve has significantly lowered interest rates, and in 
some other countries, the path of the (partly realised, partly expected) monetary policy rate is 
lower  now  than  last  August,  which  is  equivalent  to  an  expansion  in  the  monetary  policy 
stance.  However,  changes  in  the  stance  of  monetary  policy  must  not  be  viewed  as  an 
immediate reaction of monetary policy to the financial market crisis, but rather as a reaction 
to  the  expected  effects  of  that  crisis  on  economic  growth  and  on  inflation.  This  view  also 
explains the apparent hesitation of some central banks to lower rates, in spite of the serious 
financial  market  turmoil.  The  precise  way  in  which  the  financial  market  crisis  will  affect 
economic growth and inflation has not been obvious – and is still not obvious. 
Operational target and the stance of monetary policy 
The second lesson concerns the setting of the stance of monetary policy in times of financial 
turbulence. The financial market crisis led to a tightening of credit conditions and to higher 
risk  premia,  which  is  tantamount  to  a  more  restrictive  monetary  policy  stance.  In  order  to 
offset tighter credit conditions and higher risk premia, an adjustment of the policy rate may be 
appropriate. Such an adjustment is not necessarily synonymous with a more expansionary 
monetary policy and does not necessarily increase inflation risks. The concept of the Swiss 
National Bank implicitly takes into account changes in certain risk premia: by steering and 
stabilising the 3-month Libor, which includes a risk premium, the SNB is constantly adjusting 
the repo rate in order to offset changes in the risk premium. 
                                                 
8   The report on “Enhancing Market and Institutional Resilience” by the Financial Stability Forum (2008) presents 
an extensive list of lessons from the financial crisis. 
6 
 BIS Review 71/2008
Appropriate liquidity facilities 
The third lesson concerns appropriate liquidity facilities. In order to react quickly and flexibly, 
central banks must be capable of injecting and withdrawing large amounts of liquidity at short 
notice. In order to distribute liquidity to banks when the money market is impaired, central 
banks must also be able to conduct operations with a maximum set of counterparties and 
against a broad range of collateral. In order to address liquidity premia, central banks should 
be able to intervene in  maturity ranges which are longer than the maturities at which they 
usually  operate.  Central  banks  may  also  need  to  enlarge  the  basket  of  eligible  collateral 
during a crisis. Furthermore, the crisis has made it clear that the effectiveness of a standing 
loan facility in times of crisis may be reduced if there is stigma attached to its use. 
Moreover, central banks should also have alternative plans up their sleeves on how to deal 
with severe and persistent illiquidity in the money market. The collateral swap facilities are 
not  traditional  liquidity  management  operations  aimed  purely  at  injecting  liquidity.  They 
provide a temporary relief of banks' balance sheets and therefore indirectly support liquidity 
in  the  money  market.  However,  central  banks  should  use  such  drastic  measures  only  in 
exceptional cases. Central banks also need exit strategies for such eventualities. 
Finally,  the  crisis  has  also  shown  that,  in  order  to  successfully  address  financial  market 
turmoil, central banks need enough room to manoeuvre and a liberal legal framework. A tight 
legislative corset hampers flexible and innovative reactions to the different contingencies a 
financial crisis might throw up. 
The financial market crisis has demonstrated that the SNB’s liquidity management framework 
is  up  to  its  task.  The  SNB  repo  auctions  allow  for  quick  and  flexible  action,  at  different 
maturities, and facilitate both the provision of and withdrawal of liquidity. The secured repo 
market  in  Swiss  francs,  which  was  introduced  in  1998,  has  proved  very  useful  in  recent 
months, as it has granted access to liquidity in the secured money market to banks with good 
collateral. The SNB conducts its auctions with a large group of counterparties and regularly 
encourages eligible banks to participate in the repo auctions. The SNB even permits banks 
domiciled abroad to participate in its repo auctions. Shortly before the financial market crisis, 
the SNB expanded its repo baskets by including more currencies. Nevertheless, the lessons 
from  the  financial  market  crisis  will  be  taken  as  an  opportunity  to  review  the  tool  box  of 
instruments and, if necessary, improve it. 
The  crisis  has  also  demonstrated  the  limits  of  central  bank  intervention.  Only  in  the  short 
term  can  central  bank  intervention  safeguard  financial  stability  .  Ultimately,  it  is  market 
participants  themselves  who  must  overcome  the  crisis,  by  enhancing  transparency,  re-
establishing markets for illiquid assets, rebuilding confidence among banks, writing off bad 
debt,  recapitalising  balance  sheets  and  running  down  excessive  leverage.  Central  bank 
action is a first-aid kit to ensure that the patient does not die on the site of the crash from a 
loss of blood, but the subsequent healing process is up to the patient. 
Taking moral hazard into account 
The  final  lesson  concerns  the  moral  hazard  problem  arising  from  liquidity  management 
operations. Roughly speaking, moral hazard is the name we give to the situation in which, 
financial institutions and investors incur higher risks than they would otherwise because they 
expect  the  central  bank  to  intervene  in  times  of  crisis.  This,  in  turn,  may  increase  the 
likelihood of future crises. 
Moral hazard is relevant both at the level of systemically relevant market players and at the 
level  of  markets  as  a  whole.  Market  participants  that  are  “too  big  to  fail”  or  “too 
interconnected to fail” may automatically factor in the help from central banks when deciding 
about their business strategy. However, smaller players and investors that cannot count on 
individual help may also take the expected central bank reaction to financial market crises 
into account in their investment decisions. 
BIS Review 71/2008 
 7
Because of moral hazard, central bank intervention in order to safeguard financial stability in 
the short term may be destabilising in the long term. Therefore, when reacting to a financial 
crisis,  the  benefits  of  central  bank  intervention  in  terms  of  short-term  stabilisation  must  be 
weighed against the long-term cost in terms of moral hazard. This is no easy task, because 
the future cost is unknown and far away, while an ongoing financial market crisis is a clear 
and present danger. 
Recent events have clearly shown that moral hazard is not just a textbook phenomenon, but 
is in fact a serious problem. Market players do indeed rely on the implicit insurance granted 
by central banks and other authorities, and central banks and authorities, having no choice, 
do indeed step in to support markets in a crisis. 
There is no easy way to address the moral hazard problem. However, the right time to tackle 
it is probably not primarily during a financial crisis, but during the preceding calm. Since a 
strict  declaration  of  no  intervention  by  a  central  bank  may  not  be  fully  credible,  regulation 
must  aim  to  neutralise  the  distortion  of  incentives  which  financial  market  participants  face 
because  of  moral  hazard.  Larger  capital  and  liquidity  requirements  are  probably  a  robust 
means of countering that distortion. Larger capital and liquidity requirements do not eliminate 
moral hazard, but they limit the risk of an accident and thus the cost to the public in the event 
of a rescue. 
Related to the moral hazard issue is also the issue of the risk-bearing capacity of a central 
bank. A central bank can only act as a lender of last resort if it has the means to act as one. 
This  is  especially  important  if  the  banking  system  has  relatively  large  liabilities  in  foreign 
currency.  While  a  central  bank  can,  in  principle,  create  an  unlimited  amount  of  domestic 
currency,  its  foreign  currency  reserves  are  limited.  Recent  events  have  highlighted  the 
importance of an adequate level of foreign reserves for financial stability. 
Conclusions 
6.  
I would like to close today by stating that, in my opinion, extraordinary central bank action 
was  indeed  justified  to  counter  financial  market  turmoil,  and  that  it  was  also  successful  in 
halting the developments in mid-March, which threatened to develop into a vicious circle of 
fire sales and falling asset prices. 
However,  central  bank  action  cannot  resolve  the  underlying  problems.  It  can  only  provide 
temporary relief. The solution to the crisis must come from market participants themselves. 
Central  bank  action  appears  to  have  been  relatively  successful.  But  there’s  one  thing  that 
every economist knows only too well, and it is that there is no such thing as a free lunch. So 
the question naturally arises, what has been the cost of the recent extraordinary central bank 
interventions? 
The first potential cost of recent central bank action is in terms of moral hazard. One of the 
biggest challenges that lie ahead of central banks and regulators, once the crisis has settled 
down, is to consider how to reduce moral hazard in financial markets, in order to prevent this 
factor from becoming the reason for the next – and potentially even bigger – financial crisis. 
The second potential cost of recent central bank action could be in terms of inflation. The 
financial  market  crisis  affects  inflation  in  various  ways.  On  the  one  hand,  the  crisis  has 
resulted  in  a  more  expansionary  monetary  policy  stance  in  some  countries.  This  has 
probably  contributed  to  the  rise  in  commodity  prices  in  recent  months,  and  to  the  rise  in 
energy prices, in particular. On the other hand, the expected economic slowdown associated 
with  the  crisis  should  dampen  inflationary  pressure.  However,  the  aggregate  effect  of  the 
crisis  on  inflation  is  far  from  obvious.  The  crisis  has  thus  increased  the  uncertainty 
surrounding the inflation outlook. Consequently, central bankers are currently challenged not 
only on the financial stability front; they also need to be extremely alert to developments on 
the price stability front. 
8 
 BIS Review 71/2008
