Ben S Bernanke: Risk management in financial institutions 
Speech  by  Mr  Ben  S  Bernanke,  Chairman  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  US  Federal 
Reserve System, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago's Annual Conference on Bank Structure 
and Competition, Chicago, Illinois, 15 May 2008. 
The  original  speech,  which  contains  various  links  to  the  documents  mentioned,  can  be  found  on  the  US  Federal  Reserve 
System’s website.  
 The  financial  and  credit  market  turmoil  that  began  last  summer  has  raised  a  number  of 
significant  issues  of  public  policy,  including  questions  concerning  the  maintenance  of 
financial stability, the supervision and regulation of financial institutions, and the protection of 
consumers  in  their  financial  dealings.  Obviously,  I  cannot  hope  to  address  all  the  relevant 
issues today; moreover, events continue to unfold. Still, some of the implications of what has 
transpired since August are becoming clearer. My remarks today will focus on the lessons of 
the recent experience for risk-management practices in financial institutions as well as the 
supervisory oversight of those practices. My comments are based on the experiences and 
observations  of  supervisors  in  both  the  United  States  and  other  countries  and  thus  are 
intended to be fairly general, applying across regulatory structures and to financial firms of 
varying scope and size.  
Origins of the current turmoil 
To provide some background, I will begin with a brief discussion of the origins of the financial 
turmoil. Although many factors played a role, to a considerable extent, the financial stress we 
continue to experience arose from the problematic implementation of the so-called originate-
to-distribute  approach  to  credit  extension.  In  principle,  and  indeed  often  in  practice,  the 
originate-to-distribute  model  spreads  risk  and  reduces  financing  costs,  offering  greater 
access to capital to a wide range of borrowers while allowing investors greater flexibility in 
choosing and managing credit exposures. 
However,  weaknesses  in  the  application  of  the  originate-to-distribute  model  became 
increasingly  apparent  last  year,  resulting  ultimately  in  a  broad  retreat  from  this  method  of 
credit extension last summer. A report released just this March by the President's Working 
Group on Financial Markets (PWG), of which I am a member, and an even more recent study 
issued  in  April  by  the  international  Financial  Stability  Forum  (FSF),  in  which  the  Federal 
Reserve  plays  an  active  role,  document  the  nature  of  these  weaknesses.1  These  reports 
emphasize  that  substantial  improvements  in  the  originate-to-distribute  model  as  practiced 
over the past few years are necessary if its potential benefits are to be realized.  
The reports pointed out that problems occurred at each step of the credit-extension chain. 
First, at the point of origination, underwriting standards became increasingly compromised in 
recent  years.  The  most  notorious  example  is,  of  course, U.S.  subprime  mortgages.  In  this 
case,  as  in  others,  the  incentives  faced  by  originators  were  an  important  source  of  the 
breakdown  in  underwriting.  The  revenues  of  the  originators  of  subprime  mortgages  were 
often tied to loan volume rather than to the quality of the underlying credits, which induced 
some originators to focus on the quantity rather than the quality of the loans being passed up 
the chain. However, the problems with subprime mortgage underwriting were disguised for a 
time  by  the  continued  appreciation  in  home  values.  As  long  as  house  prices  kept  rising, 
                                                 
1   President's  Working  Group  on  Financial  Markets  (2008),  "Policy  Statement  on  Financial  Market 
Developments",  March  13;  Financial  Stability  Forum  (2008),  “Report  of  the  Financial  Stability  Forum  on 
Enhancing Market and Institutional Resilience", April 7. 
BIS Review 60/2008 
 1
the  credit 
rating  agencies.  Unfortunately, 
subprime  borrowers  saw  their  home  equity  increase  and  were  often  able  to  refinance  into 
more-sustainable mortgages. But when house prices began to stagnate and then fall, many 
subprime borrowers found themselves trapped in mortgages they could not afford. Because 
subprime  loans  were  frequently  securitized  and  incorporated  into  complex  structured 
products, the resulting losses spread throughout the financial system.  
Although subprime mortgages are the most well-known instance of underwriting failure and 
were in some sense the trigger of the turmoil, the loosening of credit standards and terms 
occurred  more  broadly,  even  as  market  risk  premiums  contracted.  For  example,  investors 
were willing to purchase so-called leveraged loans – used to finance mergers or buyouts – 
with  few  covenants  or  other  protections.  The  PWG  concluded  that  investors  often  took 
insufficient  care  in  evaluating  the  risks  of  credit  products,  in  part  because  they  relied  too 
much  on  evaluations  provided  by 
the 
methodologies, data, and assumptions the agencies used to rate structured credit products 
proved deficient in many cases. When rising delinquencies and losses on mortgages forced 
the  agencies  to  sharply  downgrade  many  of  these  products,  investors  lost  confidence  in 
those  ratings  and  became  unwilling  to  provide  new  funds.  As  financing  disappeared,  the 
markets for structured credit products and for related investments seized up.  
Another  significant  factor  contributing  to  the  financial  turmoil  was  risk-management 
weaknesses  at  large  global  financial  institutions  that  created  and  held  complex  credit 
products. I will return to this topic shortly, but for now, suffice it to say that a result of poor risk 
management  at  some  financial  institutions  was  that  the  spreading  of  risk,  one  of  the 
purported benefits of the originate-to-distribute model, proved to be much less extensive than 
many  believed.  When  investors  were  no  longer  willing  or  able  to  finance  new  structured 
credit products, many of the largest financial institutions had to fund instruments they could 
not  readily  sell  or  had  to  meet  contingent  funding  obligations  for  which  they  had  not 
adequately  planned.  The  combination  of  unanticipated  losses,  which  ate  into  capital 
cushions,  and  severe  liquidity  pressures  has  reduced  the  ability  and  willingness  of  some 
large financial institutions to make markets and to extend new credit, with adverse effects for 
the financial system and for the economy. 
Both  the  PWG  and  the  FSF  reports  highlighted  the  important  role  played  by  financial 
regulators  in  overseeing  and  helping  to  strengthen  risk-management  practices  in  the  firms 
they supervise, and the reports recommended that the regulators review their own policies, 
guidance, and supervisory practices to identify areas in which improvements could be made. 
I will discuss some regulatory and supervisory responses to the recent developments later in 
my remarks.  
Lessons for risk management at financial institutions 
With that brief diagnosis of our financial market turmoil as background, I turn now to some of 
the lessons learned thus far regarding the risk-management practices of financial institutions. 
The  financial  turmoil  presented  difficult  challenges  that  were  not  fully  anticipated  by  either 
financial institutions or regulators, but firms did vary in how well they were able to deal with 
those challenges. By comparing how some key firms fared during the recent period, we can 
better understand what worked well and what did not work so well.  
Many of the points I will make are drawn from a report published in early March by a group of 
supervisory  agencies  from  France,  Germany,  Switzerland,  the  United  Kingdom,  and  the 
United States – including the Federal Reserve – known as the Senior Supervisors Group, or 
SSG.2 This report employed a methodology similar to that used in the so-called horizontal 
                                                 
2   The report, "Observations on Risk Management Practices during the Recent Market Turbulence”, provides a 
summary and analysis of a joint survey and review, initiated this past autumn, of risk-management practices 
during the recent financial stress. 
2 
 BIS Review 60/2008
reviews regularly conducted by U.S. bank supervisors. We begin these reviews by identifying 
particular activities or practices that merit study. We then gather comparable information from 
a core set of institutions, with the objectives of identifying the principal differences in practice 
across firms and determining how those differences are related to subsequent performance. 
Finally, we provide feedback to the institutions involved and often share the insights gained 
with other institutions not in the study. Horizontal reviews can involve major commitments of 
time and resources, but they help both managers of financial institutions and supervisors by 
revealing the range of practice in the industry and by providing useful information about the 
strengths and weaknesses of alternative approaches. When focused on large, internationally 
active organizations, as was the case with the SSG report, these reviews can offer insights 
that  bear  not  only  on  the  safety  and  soundness  of  individual  companies  but  also  on  the 
maintenance  of  overall  financial  stability.  Although  the  SSG  report  covered  a  group  of  the 
largest banking and securities firms, based on our own supervisory experience at the Federal 
Reserve, I believe the lessons of that report have relevance for financial organizations of all 
sizes and scope.  
In  reviewing  these  lessons,  I  will  concentrate  on  four  categories  of  risk-management 
practices: 
risk 
management, and senior management oversight. 
identification  and  measurement,  valuation  practices, 
liquidity 
risk 
in  highly  stressed  environments.  This 
Risk identification and measurement 
For  risks  to  be  successfully  managed,  they  must  first  be  identified  and  measured.  Recent 
events  have  revealed  significant  deficiencies  in  these  areas.  Notable  examples  are  the 
underestimation by many firms of the credit risk of subprime mortgages and certain tranches 
of structured products. Other firms did not fully consider the linkages between credit risk and 
market  risk,  leading  to  mismeasurement  of  their  overall  exposure.  Firms  differed  in  their 
susceptibility to these problems; however, some were more disciplined in their approaches to 
identifying  and  measuring  risks  and  thereby  gained  a  better  understanding  of  the  risks  of 
some  complex  securities,  particularly 
fuller 
appreciation of the risks involved led these firms to limit their purchases of such securities or 
to provide additional capital and liquidity backstops.  
The SSG report notes that some institutions took an excessively narrow perspective on risk 
with  insufficient  appreciation  of  the  need  for  a  range  of  risk  measures,  including  both 
quantitative and qualitative metrics. For example, some firms placed too much emphasis on 
the mechanical application of value-at-risk or similar model-based indicators. Sophisticated 
quantitative tools and models play an important role in good risk management, and they will 
continue to do so. But no model, regardless of sophistication, can capture all of the risks that 
an institution might face. Those institutions faring better during the recent turmoil generally 
placed  relatively  more  emphasis  on  validation,  independent  review,  and  other  controls  for 
models  and  similar  quantitative  techniques.  They also  continually  refined  their  models  and 
applied a healthy dose of skepticism to model output.  
Stress tests and related exercises are a good way to augment models and other standard 
quantitative  techniques  for  risk  management.  They  can  provide  a  valuable  perspective  on 
risks falling outside those typically captured by statistical models, such as risks associated 
with extreme price movements and those associated with scenarios not reflected in what are 
sometimes very short data series. Stress testing forces practitioners to step back from daily 
concerns to think through the implications of scenarios that may seem relatively unlikely but 
could pose serious risks to the firm if they materialized. For stress tests to be useful, they 
should be relevant to the business at hand, change with market and risk positions, and, of 
course,  have  an  impact  on  management's  decisionmaking.  In  an  encouraging  finding,  the 
SSG  report  noted  that  the  surveyed  institutions  already  broadly  recognize  the  need  to 
enhance their stress-testing capabilities. 
BIS Review 60/2008 
 3
Recent  events  illustrate  the  potential  usefulness  of  stress  tests.  For  example,  several 
institutions made what proved to be optimistic assumptions about the correlation of returns 
between  tranches  of  collateralized  debt  obligations.  Appropriate  stress  testing  might  have 
allowed  a  better  understanding  of  how  these  instruments  would  perform  under  extreme 
market  conditions.  Applying  stress  tests  to  several  business  lines  at  the  same  time  is 
operationally  challenging,  but  for  several  firms,  exercises  of  this  type  could  have  revealed 
previously  undetected  firmwide  risk  concentrations  that  cut  across  the  banking  book,  the 
securities  portfolio,  and  counterparty  exposures.  Some  institutions  successfully  applied 
stress  testing,  with  corresponding  benefits  for  the  bottom  line.  For  example,  some  risk 
managers recognized the risk that certain off-balance-sheet exposures might present should 
they  need  to  be  brought  back  on  the  balance  sheet  and  tested  scenarios  to  evaluate  the 
potential  firmwide  impact.  This  work  allowed  their  firms  to  be  better  prepared  when  the 
scenarios became reality.  
Valuation 
Valuation  practices  are  a  second  area  that  supervisors'  comparative  reviews  identified  as 
critical. The SSG report indicates that those firms that paid close attention to the problems 
associated  with  the  valuation  of  financial  instruments,  particularly  those  for  which  markets 
were  not  deep,  fared  better.  These  more-successful  institutions  developed  in-house 
expertise to conduct independent valuations and refrained from relying solely on third-party 
assessments. They also tested their estimated valuations in various ways, for example, by 
selling  a  small  portion  of  the  asset  in  question  to  test  the  market  or  by  undertaking  an 
extensive review of the market prices of similar products. Some more-successful firms also 
consistently embedded market liquidity premiums in their pricing models and valuations. In 
contrast,  less-successful  firms  did  not  develop  adequate  capacity  to  conduct  independent 
valuations and did not take into account the greater liquidity risks posed by some classes of 
assets. 
Liquidity risk management 
Another crucial lesson from recent events is that financial institutions must understand their 
liquidity  needs  at  an  enterprise-wide  level  and  be  prepared  for  the  possibility  that  market 
liquidity may erode quickly and unexpectedly. 
Weak liquidity risk controls were a common source of the problems many firms have faced. 
For  example,  some  firms'  treasury  functions  were  not  given  information  from  all  business 
lines  about  either  expected  liquidity  needs  or  contingency  funding  plans,  in  part  because 
managers  of  individual  business  lines  had  little  incentive  to  compile  and  provide  this 
information.  As  is  now  widely  recognized,  many  contingency  funding  plans  did  not 
adequately prepare for the possibility that certain off-balance-sheet exposures might have to 
be  brought  onto 
firm's  balance  sheet.  Unexpected  balance  sheet  expansions 
subsequently  added  to  funding  pressures  as  well  as  to  pressures  on  capital  ratios.  In 
contrast, the more-successful institutions worked to develop firmwide strategies for liquidity 
risk  management  that  incorporated  information  from  all  business  lines.  In  the  best  cases, 
firmwide  strategies  included  consideration  of  the  liquidity  risks  associated  with  structured 
investment vehicles, which led to more limited involvement in these activities.  
the 
Senior management oversight 
Effective  oversight  of  an  organization  as  a  whole  is  one  of  the  most  fundamental 
requirements  of  prudent  risk  management.  The  SSG  report  highlighted  solid  senior 
management  oversight  and  engagement  as  a  key 
firms' 
performance  during  the  recent  events.  Senior  managers  at  successful  firms  are  actively 
involved in risk management, which includes determining the firm's overall risk preferences 
and creating the incentives and controls to induce employees to abide by those preferences. 
that  differentiated 
factor 
4 
 BIS Review 60/2008
To  manage  risk  at  an  enterprise-wide  level,  successful  senior  managers  also  ensure  that 
they  have  the  necessary  information,  which  in  turn  requires  appropriate  policies  and 
information systems as well as robust methods for identifying and measuring risks.  
The  failure  to  appreciate  risk  exposures  at  a  firmwide  level  can  be  costly.  For  example, 
during  the  recent  episode,  the  senior  managers  of  some  firms  did  not  fully  appreciate  the 
extent  of  their  firms'  exposure  to  U.S.  subprime  mortgages.  They  did  not  realize  that,  in 
addition  to  the  subprime  mortgages  on  their  books,  they  had  exposures  through  the 
mortgage holdings of off-balance-sheet vehicles, through claims on counterparties exposed 
to  subprime,  and  through  certain  complex  securities.  Successful  senior  managers  also 
worked to ensure that critical information was transmitted horizontally as well as vertically; 
the  SSG  report  noted  that,  at  some  firms,  business  lines  did  not  share  vital  information 
relevant to risk positions and business tactics, with adverse implications for profitability.  
Culture and governance affect the quality of risk management. The leaders of well-managed 
institutions of all sizes generally seek to have strong and independent risk functions. Such 
functions support clear, dispassionate thinking about the entire firm's risk profile. In addition, 
the  institution  benefits  when  senior  managers  encourage  risk  managers  to  dig  deep  to 
uncover latent risks and to point out cases in which individual business lines appear to be 
assuming too much risk.  
Supervisory responses 
Supervisors too have learned from the recent experience, including the need for careful self-
assessment,  and  the  PWG  and  the  FSF  reports  offer  some  helpful  recommendations.  We 
are still conducting such an assessment, but I can offer some preliminary conclusions. 
Given the central role of effective, firmwide risk management in maintaining strong financial 
institutions,  it  is  clear  that  supervisors  must  redouble  their  efforts  to  help  organizations 
improve  their  risk-management  practices.  Accordingly,  we  have  increased  supervisory 
attention to this issue. We have focused on the institutions in most need of improvement, but 
we will continue to remind the stronger institutions of the need to remain vigilant, particularly 
in light of the ongoing fragility of market conditions. 
We are also considering the need for additional or revised supervisory guidance regarding 
various  aspects  of  risk  management,  including  further  emphasis  on  the  need  for  an 
enterprise-wide  perspective  when  assessing  risk.  Much  of  our  work  is  being  conducted  in 
close consultation with supervisors in other countries. For example, we are working through 
the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision  to  develop  enhanced  guidance  on  the 
management of liquidity risks. We are also seeking to promote better disclosures by banking 
institutions with the goal of increasing transparency, thereby strengthening market discipline. 
As you know, a major ongoing development is the implementation of the international Basel 
II  capital  accord  in  the  United  States.  Basel  II  is  intended  to  enhance  the  quality  of  risk 
management by tying regulatory capital more closely to institutions' underlying risks and by 
requiring strong internal systems for evaluating credit and other risks. Although Basel II will 
by  no  means  eliminate  future  episodes  of  financial  turbulence,  it  should  help  to  make 
financial institutions more resilient to shocks and thus enhance overall financial stability. At 
the same time, we must ensure that the Basel II framework appropriately reflects the lessons 
of  recent  events.  The  Basel  Committee  has  been  evaluating  how  the  framework  might  be 
strengthened  in  areas  such  as  the  capital  treatment  of  off-balance-sheet  vehicles  and  the 
use of credit ratings to determine capital charges. The relatively lengthy transition to Basel II 
will allow more opportunity to absorb the lessons of the financial turmoil and make necessary 
adjustments to the framework.  
BIS Review 60/2008 
 5
Conclusion 
To summarize, the turmoil in credit markets underscores some important principles for bank 
risk  management,  including  the  value  of  proper  risk  identification  and  measurement,  the 
need  for  robust  and  objective  valuation  methods,  the  importance  of  preparing  for  liquidity 
disruptions,  and  the  critical  role  of  strong  oversight  by  senior  managers.  With  renewed 
attention  to  these  principles  and  the  restoration  of  strong  incentives  for  sound  risk 
management,  institutions  should  be  able  to  overcome  the  difficulties  we  have  seen  in  the 
recent application of the originate-to-distribute model and begin to use it successfully again. 
Equally  important,  improvements  in  banks'  risk  management  will  provide  a  more-stable 
financial  system  by  making  firms  more  resilient  to  shocks.  Supervisors  must  insist  on 
effective risk management and provide as much support as possible for the implementation 
of needed changes. 
Recent  events  have  also  demonstrated  the  importance  of  generous  capital  cushions  for 
protecting  against  adverse  conditions  in  financial  and  credit  markets.  I  have  been 
encouraged  by  the  recently  demonstrated  ability  of  many  financial  institutions,  large  and 
small,  to  raise  capital  from  diverse  sources.  Importantly,  capital  raising  and  balance  sheet 
repair allow for the extension of new credit, which supports economic expansion. I strongly 
urge financial institutions to remain proactive in their capital-raising efforts. Doing so not only 
helps the broader economy but positions firms to take advantage of new profit opportunities 
as conditions in the financial markets and the economy improve. 
6 
 BIS Review 60/2008
