Timothy F Geithner: Systemic risk and financial markets 
Testimony of Mr Timothy F Geithner, President and Chief Executive Officer of the Federal 
Reserve  Bank  of  New  York,  before  the  Committee  on  Financial  Services,  US  House  of 
Representatives, Washington DC, 24 July 2008. 
 Good  morning,  Chairman  Frank,  Ranking  Member  Bachus  and  other  members  of  the 
Committee. Thank you for giving me the opportunity to testify today. 
I  very  much  welcome  the  opportunity  to  appear  before  you  with  Chairman  Cox  of  the 
Securities and Exchange Committee (SEC). The Federal Reserve and the SEC are working 
very closely together in navigating through the present challenges, and my colleagues at the 
Fed and I very much appreciate his, and his colleagues’, support and cooperation. 
The  U.S.  and  global  financial  systems  are  going  through  a  very  challenging  period  of 
adjustment. The critical imperative today is to help facilitate that adjustment and to cushion 
its impact on the broader economy. The forces that made the system vulnerable to this crisis 
took  a  long  time  to  build  up,  and  the  system  will  need  some  time  to  work  through  their 
aftermath. 
Looking  forward,  the  United  States  will  have  to  undertake  substantial  reforms  to  the 
framework of policy, regulation and oversight of the financial system. There was a case for 
reform before this crisis. The regulatory framework in the United States was designed in a 
different  time  for  a  very  different  type  of  financial  system  than  the  one  we  have  today. 
Nonetheless,  many  observers  believed  that  this  framework,  although  messy  and  complex, 
worked reasonably well. It is harder to make that case today. 
The financial system plays a vital role in long-term economic growth by helping to efficiently 
allocate the resources of savers to those individuals and firms with ideas and the capacity to 
put those ideas into action. And the financial system plays a critical role in economic stability 
by  affecting  the  capacity  of  the  real  economy  to  withstand  shocks  and  the  ability  of 
macroeconomic policy to mitigate the impact of those shocks. 
The challenge is in achieving the right balance between efficiency and resilience, between 
innovation and stability. Our financial system has many strengths, and we need to examine 
ways to build on those while making the system more resilient to future shocks. Achieving 
this balance will involve a very complicated set of policy choices. Until we get through this 
crisis, it will be hard to make definitive judgments about the appropriate scope and nature of 
the changes that will be necessary. 
Any  reform  must  offer  the  prospect  of  a  substantial  improvement  in  outcomes  relative  to 
potential costs. And those trade-offs will have to be evaluated against, among other things, 
the  potential  distortions  created  by  differential  treatment  across  regulated  and  unregulated 
entities, the magnitude of the tax imposed on the overall level of financial intermediation, and 
the extent of the safety net and the potential for moral hazard. 
I would like to offer some observations, from my perspective at the Federal Reserve Bank of 
New York, on some of the broad considerations that should guide this process. 
Changes to the structure of the U.S. financial system 
It is useful to start with a brief review of the changes in the structure of the financial system 
that should motivate reform. 
Our  system  was  once  organized  around  banks—defined  narrowly  as  institutions  that  take 
deposits and make loans. Over time there has been a gradual but pronounced decline in the 
BIS Review 95/2008 
 1
share of financial assets originated and held by banks, and a corresponding increase in the 
share of financial assets held across a variety of non-bank financial institutions, funds and 
complex financial structures. 
The lines between banks, investment banks and other institutions have eroded over time, as 
have the lines between institutions and markets. Loans made by both banks and non-banks 
were increasingly sold by the originating institution and packaged into securities. And these 
securities  were  repackaged  into  even  more  complex  instruments  and  products,  many  of 
which resided off the balance sheets of the major financial institutions. 
Innovations in credit derivatives over this period made it easier to trade and hedge credit risk. 
Access to credit was extended on a dramatic scale to less creditworthy borrowers, without a 
commensurate increase in the risk premiums on the securities that embedded this more risky 
credit. Risk accumulated in institutions that operated at the margin of the explicit safety net, 
such as mortgage affiliates of thrifts, structured investment vehicles and the GSEs. 
These changes within U.S. financial markets were complemented by a rise in global financial 
integration  as  technology  and  deregulation  made  it  easier  for  savings  to  flow  across 
international borders. 
As a consequence of this basic evolution of our financial system, a large share of financial 
assets  ended  up  in  institutions  and  vehicles  with  substantial  leverage,  and  in  many  cases 
these assets were being funded with short-term obligations. And just as banks are vulnerable 
to a sudden withdrawal of deposits, these non-banks and funding vehicles are vulnerable to 
an erosion in market liquidity when confidence deteriorates and concerns about default risk 
increase. 
These changes in the structure of the financial system were probably not the only causes of 
the financial boom that preceded this crisis, but they may have amplified the dimension of the 
boom and they were important to how the crisis unfolded and to how policy has responded. 
In  many  respects,  financial  innovation  over  this  period  outpaced  the  system’s  capacity  to 
measure and limit risk, to manage the incentive problems in the securitization process and to 
provide for an appropriate degree of transparency through meaningful disclosure. Once the 
performance of the underlying assets began to deteriorate, these weaknesses in the system 
magnified  the  uncertainty  about  the  scale  of  potential losses  and  added  to  the  intensity  of 
pressures that accompanied the crisis. 
The growth in leverage and liquidity risk outside of banks made the system vulnerable to a 
sharp  erosion  in  liquidity,  but  without  the  protections established  to  limit  the  risk  of  classic 
bank runs. The large share of financial assets held in institutions without direct access to the 
Fed’s traditional lending facilities complicated the ability of our traditional policy instruments 
to contain the damage to the financial system and the economy. 
This  crisis  provides  a  stark  illustration  of  how  hard  it  is  for  a  supervisory  and  regulatory 
framework designed principally around banks to contain the impact of financial shocks in a 
manner that mitigates the risks to the broader economy. 
Elements of reform 
What broad principles and objectives should guide reform? 
I would like to outline some of the key elements of a stronger framework of regulation and 
oversight, and identify some of the harder questions we will need to answer to implement this 
framework.  These  questions  are  more  fundamental  than  questions  of  the  allocation  of 
responsibility  across  supervisors,  market  regulators  and  central  banks  and  thus  must  be 
resolved  before  turning  to  those  questions.  I  focus  here  on  the  issues  related  to  financial 
stability,  and  do  not  try  to  address  the  equally  important  areas  of  consumer  and  investor 
protection, market integrity or the role of the government-sponsored entities in housing. 
2 
 BIS Review 95/2008
I believe the most important imperative is to build a financial system that is more robust to 
very bad outcomes and more resilient to shocks. This means (1) a system in which the major 
institutions  are  less  vulnerable  to  shocks;  (2)  a  system  that  is  less  vulnerable  to  margin 
spirals  and  a  generalized  pull-back  in  liquidity  and  funding;  and  (3)  a  system  that  is  more 
able to withstand the effects of failure of a major financial institution. 
Looking  past  the  immediate  crisis,  a  more  resilient  system  must  be  built  on  stronger  and 
better designed shock absorbers, both in the major institutions and in the infrastructure of the 
financial system. 
At  the  level  of  the  financial  institution,  the  key  financial  shock  absorbers  are  capital  and 
reserves,  margin  and  collateral,  liquidity,  and  the  risk  management  and  control  regime. 
Financial stability starts with ensuring that individual institutions in periods of expansion and 
relative stability hold adequate resources against the losses and liquidity pressures that can 
emerge in economic contraction or instability. 
For the infrastructure of the financial system, these shock absorbers include the resources 
held against the risk of default by a major market participant across the set of private sector 
and cooperative arrangements for the funding, trading, clearing and settlement of financial 
transactions. 
Simplifying and consolidating the regulatory architecture will be instrumental to these efforts 
by  establishing  a  common  framework  of  rules,  clear  responsibility  and  authority,  and  by 
reducing  opportunities  for  arbitrage.  Through  close  coordination  across  central  banks, 
supervisors and market regulators, we need to adopt an integrated approach to the design 
and  enforcement  of  capital  standards  and  other  prudential  regulations  critical  to  systemic 
stability.  In  this  context,  prudential  supervisors,  working  with  those  responsible  for  setting 
accounting  standards  and  capital  market  regulations,  need  to  systematically  examine  the 
interaction among capital, accounting, tax and disclosure requirements to assess their effects 
on the overall levels of leverage and risk across the financial system. 
As we change the framework of regulation and oversight, we need to find ways to strengthen 
market discipline over financial institutions, and to limit the moral hazard that is present in a 
range of different forms in any regulated financial system. 
The  liquidity  tools  of  central  banks  and  the  emergency  powers  of  other  public  authorities 
were created in recognition of the fact that individual institutions, including those central to 
payments  and  funding  mechanisms,  cannot  protect  themselves  fully  from  an  abrupt 
evaporation of access to liquidity or ability to liquidate assets. The existence of these tools 
and their use in crises, however appropriate, creates moral hazard by encouraging market 
participants to engage in riskier behavior than they would have in the absence of the central 
bank’s  backstop.  To  mitigate  this  effect  on  risk-taking,  strong  supervisory  authority  is 
required over the consolidated financial entities that are critical to a well-functioning financial 
system. 
A more resilient financial system will also require a framework for dealing with the failure of 
financial institutions. For entities that take deposits, we have a formal resolution framework in 
place. As Secretary of the Treasury Henry M. Paulson, Jr., Federal Reserve Chairman Ben 
S.  Bernanke  and  others  have  stated,  we  need  a  companion  framework  for  facilitating  the 
orderly  unwinding  of  other  types  of  regulated  financial  institutions  where  failure  may  pose 
risks to the stability of the financial system. 
The elements I just outlined need to be accompanied by a clearer structure of responsibility 
and  authority  over  the  payments  system.  Payment  and  settlement  systems  and  central 
counterparties play a critical role in financial stability. Our current system is overseen by a 
patchwork of authorities, with responsibilities diffused across several agencies in a manner 
that leaves significant gaps. We need a more formal and integrated framework of oversight, 
one  that  establishes  and  enforces  standards  and  continuously  monitors  the  conditions  in 
these markets. 
BIS Review 95/2008 
 3
And finally, as we adapt the U.S. framework, we have to work to bring about a consensus 
among  the  major  economies  on  a  complementary  global  framework.  Given  the  level  of 
financial  integration  globally,  we  cannot  achieve  a  reasonable  balance  at  home  between 
efficiency  and  stability,  without  a  complementary  framework  of  supervision  and  regulation 
across the other major financial centers. 
To make it operational, the framework I just laid out will require a complicated set of choices. 
What  level  of  conservatism  should  be  built  into  future  prudential  regulations  over 
• 
capital and liquidity?  
Which types of institutions should be subject to these requirements?  
Can direct regulation over a limited set of institutions effectively protect the system 
from distress among the unregulated?  
How  should  responsibility  for  different  dimensions  of  financial  regulation  be 
allocated, and how centralized or decentralized?  
What  institutions  should  have  access  to  central  bank  liquidity  under  what 
conditions?  
   The role of the Federal Reserve 
The  Congress  gave  the  Federal  Reserve  broad  authority  to  address  risks  to  financial 
stability.  Because  the  financial  landscape  has  changed  so  substantially,  many  observers 
have  pointed  out  the  need  to  revisit  the  scope  and  nature  of  Federal  Reserve’s  authority. 
Secretary Paulson has outlined a number of important proposals for reform, many of which 
would broaden the responsibility and the authority of the Federal Reserve. I want to identify 
some issues that are critical to our current responsibilities and will be important in defining an 
appropriate  role  in  the  future,  with  the  most  effective  mix  of  responsibility  and  authority. 
There is more continuity than change in these suggestions, and they assume, as is the case 
today, that we will have to work closely with other functional supervisors to make the system 
work. 
First, the Fed has a very important role today, working in cooperation with bank supervisors 
and the SEC, in establishing the capital and other prudential safeguards that are applied on a 
consolidated  basis  to  the  institutions  that  are  critical  to  the  proper  functioning  of  financial 
markets. 
Second, the Fed, as the financial system’s lender of last resort, should play an important role 
in the consolidated supervision of those institutions that have access to central bank liquidity 
and play a critical role in market functioning. Our ability to directly oversee the risk profile of 
these institutions is essential to our capacity to make the judgments necessary for using our 
lender  of  last  resort  tools,  including  critical  judgments  about  liquidity  and  solvency  for 
individual institutions and for the system as a whole. Those judgments require the knowledge 
that can only come from a direct, established role in supervision. And replacing our ongoing 
role  as  consolidated  supervisor  with  stand-by,  contingent  authority  to  intervene  would  risk 
exacerbating moral hazard and adding to uncertainty about the rules of the game. 
Third, the Federal Reserve should be granted explicit responsibility and clear authority over 
systemically  important  payment  and  settlement  systems,  and  the  ability  to  continue  to 
encourage broader improvements in the over-the-counter derivatives markets.  
Fourth, the Federal Reserve Board should have an important consultative role in judgments 
about official intervention where there is potential for systemic risk, as is currently the case 
for bank resolutions under FDICIA. 
And, finally, the responsibilities for market and financial stability that are accorded the Fed in 
current  and  any  future  legislation  will  require  that  the  Fed  adopt  a  more  comprehensive 
4 
 BIS Review 95/2008
approach to financial supervision and market oversight. Given the changes in the structure of 
the financial system, maintaining financial stability requires us to look beyond just the stability 
of  individual  banks.  It  requires  us  to  look  at  market  developments  more  broadly,  at  the 
infrastructure that is critical to market functioning, and at the role played by other leveraged 
financial institutions. 
Over  the  past  four  years,  the  Federal  Reserve  has  led  a  number  of  initiatives  with  our 
supervisory  colleagues  in  the  United  States  and  in  the  other  major  financial  centers  to 
improve the OTC derivatives infrastructure, to strengthen the systemically important payment 
and settlement systems, to improve counterparty risk-management practices with respect to 
hedge funds, and to place greater emphasis on ensuring robustness to low probability, high 
severity  instances  of  stress.  This  forward-looking,  cross-institution  approach,  integrating 
prudential supervision with market oversight and payment system expertise, offers the best 
model of broad financial oversight focused on systemic risk. 
I  want  to  emphasize  in  conclusion that  we  are  working  now,  in  close cooperation  with  the 
SEC, other U.S. bank supervisors, our international counterparts and market participants to 
improve the capacity of the financial system to withstand stress. These initiatives include joint 
efforts with the SEC to bolster consolidated oversight of the investment banks, formalized in 
our  recent  Memorandum  of  Understanding.  These  institutions  have  made  substantial 
changes  over  the  past  several  months  to  bring  down  overall  leverage  and  risk-weighted 
assets and to reduce liquidity risk. In addition, we have undertaken a broad based program 
of  initiatives  to  build  a  more  robust  over-the-counter  derivatives  infrastructure  through, 
among other measures, a central clearing house for credit default swaps; to strengthen the 
financial cushions held by central counterparties against the risk of default by a participant; 
and to reduce vulnerabilities in secured funding markets. 
These initiatives will take time, but we expect to see substantial progress over the next two 
quarters. 
I look forward to your questions today and working with you as we move ahead in building a 
more effective financial regulatory framework for the United States. 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 95/2008 
 5
