Jürgen Stark: Contribution to the session on “Implications for the 
conduct of monetary policy” 
Speech by Mr Jürgen Stark, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
at the International Symposium on “Globalisation, Inflation and Monetary Policy”, organised 
by the Bank of France, Paris, 7 March 2008. 
 John Taylor has discussed a number of challenges to monetary policy-making in an era of 
globalisation. In my remarks, I will focus on the implications of globalisation specifically for 
monetary policy-making in the euro area.1  
Globalisation may change the environment for monetary policy-making 
We all agree that globalisation offers great opportunities. It increases the scope for efficiency 
gains  through  specialisation  since  it  allows  economies  to  make  better  use  of  their 
comparative  advantage  in  international  production.  This  reduces  production  costs  and 
expands the production frontier, generating gains which are passed on to consumers through 
lower prices for many goods.  
Globalisation thus fosters economic prosperity and raises living standards. At the same time, 
the  gains  from  globalisation  may  not  be  distributed  evenly,  as  globalisation  can  affect 
differently the returns to different factors of production. 2  
To monetary policy-makers, globalisation is important mainly for two reasons:  
• 
financial  markets, 
First,  the  process  of  globalisation  itself  can  occasionally  lead  to  economic 
disruptions,  especially  if  markets  lack  transparency.  Increasingly-globalised  and 
internationally-integrated 
if  not  sufficiently 
transparent,  can  at  times  be  conducive  to  excessive  risk-taking  and  contagion 
effects – a theme that rings particularly true in light of the current financial turmoil.  
Second,  and  more  importantly,  increasing  global  integration  induces  structural 
changes in goods markets and financial markets alike. As a result, foreign shocks 
may  have  a  greater  impact  on  domestic  inflation,  and  the  transmission  of  other 
impulses to the euro area economy can change. This also applies to the impact of 
monetary policy on inflation. 
for  example, 
 Let me briefly elaborate on how structural changes, which are driven by globalisation, can 
affect the process of inflation.  
• 
There  is  good  reason,  for  instance,  to  believe  that  globalisation  increases 
competitive  pressures,  both  worldwide  and  in  domestic  markets.  An  increase  in 
competition may – relative to previous periods – put downward pressure on wages 
and prices and thus contain inflation for a period of time.3 A structural intensification 
                                                 
1   For  stylised  facts  about  trade  globalisation  and  its  likely  effects  on  euro  area  inflation,  see  also  the  ECB 
Monthly Bulletin article entitled “Globalisation, trade and the euro area macroeconomy”, (January 2008). 
2   Trade theory (Stolper-Samuelson theorem) would e.g. suggest that trade integration should place downward 
pressures on the relative return to lower-skilled labour. However, real wage developments have been similar 
across all skill groups in the euro area. See ECB (2008), op. cit. 
3   While  globalisation  and  the  disciplining  impact  that  it  exerted  on  pricing  and  cost  control  is  likely  to  have 
facilitated disinflation around the globe in the past ten years or so, globalisation per se cannot permanently 
reduce inflation. The main reason for the observed spread of low inflation around the globe in recent years is a 
BIS Review 28/2008 
 1
 of competition would also induce firms to work harder to increase productivity, and 
this would translate into an increase in the growth rate of the natural level of output.4  
Beyond  this  effect,  the  increasing  use  of  international  production  opportunities 
based on comparative advantage may lead to a change in the production structure 
of our economy, which would in turn alter the relative scarcity of production factors, 
and  thus  the  response  of  their  prices  and  the  prices  of  final  goods  to  economic 
shocks. 
Thus, globalisation  
• 
• 
is of importance to monetary policy  
and it is likely to have a lasting effect on our economy and on the environment for 
monetary policy-making.  
An initial conclusion therefore is that central banks need to continue to commit resources to 
analyse and closely monitor the structural changes and the shocks caused by globalisation, 
and need to build an increasing awareness of economic and financial developments outside 
their home countries.  
Globalisation does not change rules of monetary policy-making 
Although  globalisation  is  challenging  monetary  policy,  I  fully  agree  with  John  Taylor’s 
assessment  that  globalisation  does  not  fundamentally  alter  the  rules  for  monetary  policy-
making.  Nowadays  as  ever,  over  the  medium  to  longer  term,  inflation  is  a  monetary 
phenomenon. This means price stability is for us to achieve. 
Let me stress the obvious here, namely that central banks cannot permanently determine the 
relative  prices  of  specific  goods.  In  referring  to  price  stability,  we  mean  stability  of  the 
purchasing power (of the domestic legal tender) as measured by the cost of a representative 
basket of goods. 
While  international  liquidity  conditions  may  influence  market  interest  rates  and  thus  the 
transmission of monetary policy to real activity and inflation, central banks retain the ability to 
control short-term interest rates by appropriately influencing the supply of the domestic legal 
tender. Short-term rates in turn work their way into the domestic cost of credit and into long-
term interest rates.  
Therefore,  central  banks  can  ensure  price  stability  in  the  medium  to  long-term,  even  in  a 
financially-integrated world in which production factors and goods move freely, and even if 
the size of the world economy increases relative to that of the domestic economy.5  
But, as I said earlier, as a precondition for successful monetary policy central banks need to 
properly  adapt  their  analyses  to  the  changing  environment.  In  such  an  environment,  it  is 
clearly important for stability-orientated monetary policy to analyse developments in external 
prices, in international trade flows and in international financial flows.  
This said, I agree with John Taylor that developments in exchange rates per se should not be 
given  any  special  status  but  should  be  taken  into  account  by  monetary  policy  only  to  the 
                                                                                                                                                      
change in monetary policymaking in many countries, and, more in particular, the change towards a credible 
commitment to price stability. 
4   That  is,  it  would  lead  to  an  increase  in  the  rate  at  which  the  economy  can  grow  without  jeopardising  price 
stability. 
5   See,  e.g.,  M.  Woodford  (2007),  “Globalization  and  Monetary  Control,”  NBER  Working  Paper  No.  13329,  to 
appear in Galí, J. and M. Gertler eds., The international dimensions of monetary policy, University of Chicago 
Press. 
2 
 BIS Review 28/2008
extent  that  they  have  a  medium-term  influence  on  price  stability.  This  is  because  another 
fundamental law of monetary economics is alive and well in the globalised economy: flexible 
exchange rates are a sine qua non for price stability.  
Does a globalised world call for more international monetary coordination? 
With  a  growing  set  of  prices  and  asset  valuations  being  determined  internationally, 
information on international developments is crucial for monetary policy-making. In this light, 
the  financial  turmoil  in  particular  has  shown  the  value  that  growing  financial  globalisation 
places on a timely and open international exchange of information among central banks and 
regulators.  
Central  banks  should  therefore  cooperate  by  exchanging  information  and  by  designing  a 
solid international financial architecture.  
Beyond that, however, the scope for monetary policy-makers to coordinate is limited. This is 
the case as each central bank has just one policy instrument, and this instrument can only 
achieve a single domestic objective, price stability. As a consequence, each central bank is 
well  advised  to  react  to  foreign  developments  only  if  these  become  relevant  for  domestic 
price stability. I therefore fully agree with John Taylor’s conclusion that central banks should 
not mechanically follow other central banks’ policy decisions.  
Not least as a result of this consensus, I question the strong conclusions that John Taylor 
draws from some of his empirical analysis.  
In brief, John Taylor finds that a simple monetary policy rule, also widely referred to as the 
“Taylor rule”, when applied to the euro area, has residuals that correlate positively with the 
US federal funds rate. He interprets this finding as implying a leader-follower structure in the 
sense that US monetary policy induces the ECB to deviate from its objective of price stability 
out of concern for the exchange rate.  
This is not the case. Indeed, a more reasonable explanation for John Taylor’s findings is the 
following:  
Central  banks  which  are  concerned  with  domestic  price  stability  seek  to  offset  potentially 
destabilising shocks. In a globalised world, though, different central banks naturally respond 
in  part  to  similar  global  factors.  And,  as  we  know,  a  number  of  these  factors  are  not  well 
captured by a mechanical policy rule of the type which John Taylor takes as a benchmark for 
good monetary policy-making. Adequate policy reactions to global factors, and to the risks 
that they pose for domestic price stability, will thus show up – within the context of a simple 
rule – in the residual term.  
Some observers, John Taylor included, interpret this residual as a measure of the monetary 
stance.  It  may  indeed,  in  some  cases,  be  possible  to  interpret  the  residual  in  this  way. 
However,  often  the  residual  is  a  measure  of  the  lack  of  explanatory  power  of  the  simple 
policy rule itself. 
Now,  to  the  extent  that  economies  are  structurally  different  and  are  hit  by  shocks  with 
different timings,  
• 
• 
global factors affect these economies with different lags. 
As a result, the measures of inflation and the output gap used in John Taylor’s policy 
rule are also affected with different lags.  
In such a context, monetary policy has to react in a pre-emptive manner to current 
and future likely developments to ensure domestic price stability over the medium to 
longer term.  
 BIS Review 28/2008 
 3
 However,  such  a  behaviour  might  generate  a  spurious  correlation  between  the 
residuals of a simple Taylor type policy rule for the euro area and interest rates in 
other economies.  
I suspect that this is what lies behind John Taylor’s result concerning the deviations from a 
euro area “policy rule” and the US federal funds rate.  
Having inside knowledge, I can in fact rule out that John Taylor’s results constitute any sign 
of a leader-follower structure or any sign of a focus on the side of the ECB on the dollar-euro 
exchange rate, or in fact on any exchange rate, as a target of policy. Neither is the case. I 
agree  with  John  Taylor,  however,  that  any  development  in  that  direction  would  be  deeply 
worrying. 
Only a clear assignment of responsibilities ensures clarity about the central bank’s objective, 
which is at the heart of successful monetary policy. Yet international complementarities exist 
in  monetary  policymaking,  to  the  extent  that  an  international  architecture  which  has  each 
central bank keeping its own house in order is also conducive to an environment of global 
monetary stability.  
Such  architecture  provides  the  best  basis  for  a  friendly  and  open  exchange  of  views  and 
information at an international level. Today there is frequent interaction as, for example, the 
BIS provides a much-appreciated forum for discussion among central bankers. In addition, 
there are further occasions for fruitful exchanges – this very symposium being one of them. 
The role of the monetary policy strategy in an increasingly globalised world 
I have argued that the best international monetary architecture is one in which each central 
bank  focuses  on  achieving  domestic  price  stability.  In  practice,  even  more  is  needed  to 
guarantee  a  successful  monetary  policy.  A  clear  mandate  for  price  stability  and  a  well-
defined monetary policy strategy based on this mandate are essential for coping successfully 
with the analytical and practical challenges which lie ahead. Fortunately, both conditions are 
in place in the euro area.  
A clear mandate for price stability  
• 
ensures  that  a  central  bank  is  fully  accountable  for  achieving  price  stability.  The 
commitment to price stability which such a mandate generates is, in turn, conducive 
to  anchoring  private  sector  expectations  in  a  lasting  way.  This  anchoring  is 
particularly  important  if  globalisation  causes  sequences  of  one-sided  shocks  to 
inflation.  
prevents  central  bank  policy  from  going  astray.  While  John  Taylor  expresses 
concerns that central banks may be increasingly tempted to stabilise exchange rates 
at the expense of price stability, a clear mandate for price stability guarantees that a 
central bank will not fall into this trap. Instead price stability-orientated central banks 
do  not  assign  any  special  role  to  exchange  rates,  important  as  they  are  as 
information variables in the economic analysis.  
 supports accountability.  
ensures a transparent and systematic response to risks to price stability  
guides an effective communication policy,  
and enhances the predictability of monetary policy over the medium to longer term. 
Building on a clear mandate, a successful strategy  
• 
• 
• 
• 
In this context, any measure of price stability used by central banks must adequately reflect 
the evolution of the purchasing power of money. Price stability is therefore best defined in 
terms of the cost of a representative, i.e. broad, basket of goods. An example which provides 
4 
 BIS Review 28/2008
in  situations 
in  which  globalisation  might 
a  clear  and  assessable  yardstick  of  price  stability  is  the  basket  underlying  the  euro  area 
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices.  
This  encompassing  definition  of  the  underlying  basket  contrasts  with  partial,  or  so-called 
“core” measures of inflation. While these measures can be useful for assessing risks to price 
stability,  they  –  if  put  front  and  centre  –  risk  providing  a  distorted  view  of  underlying  price 
developments which would jeopardise the anchoring of inflation expectations. This would be 
particularly  detrimental 
induce  sustained 
movements of prices of certain categories of goods.  
A broad, transparent and widely accepted yardstick instead creates the necessary clarity to 
ensure a firm anchoring of inflation expectations. It is this clarity which allows a central bank 
to  adopt  a  medium-term  orientation  within  which  policy-makers  can  appropriately  discount 
short-term price volatility and transitory movements in inflation. 
As mentioned, globalisation is likely to change the structure of the euro area economy both 
with  regard  to  goods  markets  and  financial  markets.  A  strategy  which  monitors  structural 
changes both from a goods market angle and from a financial or monetary point of view is 
therefore  well-suited  to  cope  with  the  challenges  brought  about  by  globalisation.  The 
complementary  perspectives  of  the  economic  analysis  and  the  monetary  analysis,  which 
underlie the ECB’s “two-pillar strategy”, are conducive to appropriately adapting our policies 
to the changing environment. At the same time, the two-pillar strategy keeps minds focused 
on the fundamental laws of monetary economics. 
In  particular,  having  an  explicit  monetary  pillar  guarantees  that  the  ECB  always  has 
considerable  expertise  in  the  analysis  of  monetary  and  credit  developments  and  in  the 
analysis  of  their  impact  on  price  stability.  The  close  link  between  monetary  developments 
and evolving imbalances in asset and credit markets implies that monetary analysis enables 
central banks to detect such imbalances at an early stage and to respond to the implied risks 
to price and financial stability in a timely and forward-looking manner. This has, in the past, 
proved an invaluable asset for the ECB, notably in times of global financial turbulence.  
Just as the two-pillar strategy structures the discussion within the ECB, it also provides the 
basis for communicating our understanding of the economy to the outside world. By adhering 
to transparency, the ECB has achieved a high level of predictability for its monetary policy 
decisions. Our strategy therefore improves our policy effectiveness.  
Let me conclude.  
1. 
Especially in an environment of ongoing globalisation, monetary policy must aim to 
robustly anchor inflation expectations. This requires a permanent alertness to risks 
to  price  stability  on  the  side  of  the  central  bank,  as  shocks  to  inflation  must  not 
translate into second-round effects in price-setting and wage-setting.  
That being said, an efficient adjustment of the economy to macroeconomic shocks 
can be best facilitated by monetary policy-makers if they keep a firm focus on their 
domestic  price  stability  objective.  In  particular,  there  will  be  no  external  stability 
without domestic price stability. 
Domestic price stability is a precondition for global monetary stability. Globalisation 
therefore does not expand the need for international monetary co-operation beyond 
an open exchange of views and information. The best international architecture is 
one  in  which  each  central  bank  has  a  clear  mandate  to  focus  on  domestic  price 
stability. 
Greater  microeconomic  flexibility  would  not  only  allow  our  economy  to  take  better 
advantage  of  the  opportunities  provided  by  globalisation,  but  would  also  facilitate 
macroeconomic adjustment in the wake of shocks and improve the resilience of the 
economy. Globalisation therefore intensifies the need for more flexibility in product 
and labour markets.  
2. 
3. 
4. 
BIS Review 28/2008 
 5
5. 
that  a  monetary  policy  strategy  which  carefully  monitors 
I  have  argued 
developments in domestic, as well as international, financial and goods markets is 
well-equipped to cope with challenges that globalisation brings for monetary policy. 
Such a strategy is in place in the euro area. At the same time, price stability is the 
best  contribution  monetary  policy  can  make  to  enable  the  euro  area  economy  to 
take the full advantage of the opportunities offered by globalisation. 
6 
 BIS Review 28/2008
