Svein Gjedrem: Economic perspectives  
Address by Mr Svein Gjedrem, Governor of Norges Bank (Central Bank of Norway), at the 
meeting of the Supervisory Council of Norges Bank, Oslo, 14 Thursday 2008. 
Please note that the text below may differ slightly from the actual presentation. 
 Introduction 
Henrik Wergeland was born 200 years ago. He worked in the vicinity of the central bank in 
periods.  His  plays  were  performed  at  the  Christiania  Theatre,  which  was  located  at 
Bankplassen, and as national archivist his office was located at Akershus fortress, a stone's 
throw from the central bank. 
Wergeland  lived  near  Grønlia  below  Ekeberg.  He  travelled  to  town  by  rowing  across 
Bjørvika. He moored his boat near Bekkevold’s pub on Skippergata, which is today known as 
"Grei Kafé". That is also where he met the proprietor’s daughter, Amelia Sofie, who became 
his wife.1  
Wergeland wrote a poem “Follow the Call”, which includes a well known verse: 
“But our world must still be young, 
Saga of each race must be 
still merely its cradlesong 
and its childhood fairy tale. 
Creatures from the age of chaos […]”2  
Chaos and fear exploded with full force in the financial markets last autumn. We are again 
witnessing that market participants suffer from a short memory span.  
Crises, imbalances and bubbles 
House prices in the US started to fall in 2006. There were reports of defaults on mortgage 
loans, but it was generally believed that the loans at risk were confined to a small segment of 
the market.  
The first warning of more severe problems came in winter last year. In the course of summer, 
it became clear that the losses had spread, and in the first instance to state-owned German 
banks. Other banks, funds and financial establishments in Europe, Asia and the US also felt 
the turbulence and gradually losses emerged where we perhaps least expected them.  
A European colleague compared the financial turbulence to a film production: It was shot in 
the US, premiered in Germany and is now playing all over the world. As you know, it also 
came to small-town cinemas in Norway last autumn.  
In addition to German banks, a small Danish bank and a fairly large British mortgage bank 
were faced with serious problems. At St James’ Park in Newcastle, advertisements for the 
crisis-hit British bank Northern Rock shine towards us. We are indeed witnessing crises at 
banks in neighbouring countries.  
                                                 
1   Yngvar Ustvedt (1994) “Henrik Wergeland – En Biografi”, Gyldendal Norsk Forlag A/S. 
2   Source: www.dokpro.uio.no. Text from “Henrik Wergeland – Samlede skrifter”, ed. Herman Jæger, Didrik Arup 
Seip,  Halvdan  Koht  and  Einar  Høigård,  published  by  Steenske  Publishers,  1918-1940.  Poem  translated  by 
Anne Born, published in "The Army of Truth", The University of Wisconsin Press. 
BIS Review 18/2008 
 1
The turmoil spread to money and credit markets in August. Few knew who was exposed to 
losses,  and  banks,  funds  and  financial  establishments  started  to  question  counterparties’ 
financial situation, and held on to their money. This resulted in a surge in banks’ premia on 
short-term interbank rates.  
Moreover,  banks  had  to  bring  back  on  their  books  loans  from  companies  they  had 
established,  which  further  reduced  their  capacity  and  willingness  to  provide  new  loans. 
Several large foreign banks have received capital infusions from sovereign-wealth funds in 
the Middle East and Asia to bolster their financial strength.  
What began as isolated losses in a small segment of the US home mortgage market led to a 
confidence crisis, which spread to money and  credit markets in many countries in autumn 
2007. In the US, there is a risk that the losses will increase in other segments of the property 
market and on ordinary consumer and business credit. Many of the new financial instruments 
which were forged to diversify risk have proved to be non-viable. It is now difficult for many 
companies to raise new capital or procure long-term funding. There are also signs that prices 
and activity in property markets have reversed and are falling in many European countries. 
Around  the  turn  of  the  year,  doubts  were  raised  as  to  the  financial  strength  of  some  US 
banks. The new year was ushered in amid fears of a setback in the US and a sharp decline 
in global equity prices. So far this year, the market capitalisation of the Oslo Stock Exchange 
has declined by more than 15 per cent, or more than NOK 300 billion.  
When the interbank market seized up, many central banks injected extra liquidity. In periods, 
Norges  Bank  has  also  provided  additional  loans  to  banks.  This  has  reduced  swings  in 
interbank rates.  
Norwegian  banks  borrow  dollars  short  in  the  European  market  for  their  interbank  trading. 
Banks  also  borrow  in  foreign  markets  to  finance  lending  in  NOK.  The  banks  raise  foreign 
currency loans, which are exchanged into NOK. The premia on such loans are passed on to 
customers  that  borrow  in  NOK.  This  is  why  the  increase  in  US  and  European  premia  has 
quickly fed through to Norwegian interest rates even though Norwegian banks are profitable, 
retain confidence and have limited loss exposures.  
In  recent  years,  debt  accumulation  among  Norwegian  businesses  and  households  has 
increased markedly. At the same time, Norwegian banks’ foreign short-term liabilities have 
tended  upwards.  The  banks  hedge  against  the  exchange  and  interest  rate  risk  associated 
with these loans. But the turbulence in the latter half of last year showed that banks cannot 
as readily hedge against liquidity risk.  
Norges  Bank  supplies  NOK  to  the  Norwegian  banking  system.  In  that  respect,  we  can  be 
generous when the markets are seized by fear and uncertainty. But when banks borrow in 
foreign currency, they are more on their own.  
Crises  and  turbulence  are  built  into  the  workings  of  the  market.  The  search  for  yield  and 
market shares may at times become too intense. A common feature of financial crises is that 
they are accompanied by considerable changes in the pricing of risk in many markets. Prices 
for equities and other securities are determined by economic agents’ income expectations. 
On occasion, these expectations turn out to be unrealistic. Unexpected events can change 
the economic outlook. When confidence and optimism shift to fear and uncertainty – and this 
can happen overnight – prices can rapidly plummet.  
The  current  turbulence  has  deep  roots.  US  household  saving  fell  markedly  in  the  1990s. 
When the dotcom bubble burst after the turn of the millennium, the Federal Reserve cut its 
key rate to low levels. Interest rates in Europe also showed a considerable decline. House 
prices and investment in real property then rose sharply through most of the Western world, 
and saving in the US and other Western countries showed a renewed fall.  
Low government and personal saving in the US has given rise to large trade deficits. The 
saving of the rest of the world is financing the US deficit. In isolation, such a large supply of 
2 
 BIS Review 18/2008
capital would have pushed up interest rates. But even though the US increasingly had to rely 
on  foreign  financing,  long-term  interest  rates  fell.  At  the  same  time  inflation  remained  low, 
partly thanks to cheap Asian imported goods.  
The low level of long-term interest rates can be attributed to the high level of saving in Asia 
and  oil-exporting  nations.  Surpluses,  particularly  on  China’s  foreign  trade  balance,  have 
soared.  
Interest  rates  are  again  moving  down  in  the  US  and  a  number  of  other  countries.  Interest 
rates are being cut to address weaker economic growth prospects. However, in view of the 
high level of unsold homes and properties, it is uncertain whether the interest rate weapon 
will be as powerful as in the past.  
Thus, there is a risk that the US economy will enter into a prolonged downturn in spite of the 
interest  rate  cuts,  drawing  with  it  large  parts  of  the  world  economy.  In  the  event,  the 
surpluses in Asia will decline as the value of exports falls.  
Moreover, there is a risk that low interest rates may in the next round sow the seeds of new 
bubbles, restrain saving in the US and extend the period of large US current account deficits.  
The optimal solution would be to redress this imbalance through an increase in US saving. In 
order  to  buoy  up  growth  in  the  world  economy,  Asia  and  Europe  must  then  replace  US 
consumers as the engine of global growth. The prospects for achieving this are perhaps not 
the best. Inflation is on the rise in both Europe and Asia, and this will necessarily be reflected 
in economic policy, at least for a period ahead. Moreover, the absence of a social safety net 
in China creates a strong incentive for Chinese consumers to save rather than spend.  
Is the Norwegian economy also at a turning point? 
Household saving has also been low in Norway in recent years and corporate earnings have 
been offset by high investments. Excluding government financial and oil sector surpluses – 
which are redeployed abroad – Norway recorded a current account deficit of an estimated 
NOK 150 billion in 2007, or close to 10 per cent of mainland GDP.  
The  corollary  to  the  deficit  on  the  basic  balance  is  that  Norwegian  businesses,  as  well  as 
Norwegian  banks,  borrow  in  foreign  markets.  It  is  the  interaction  between  high  household 
credit  demand  and  an  ample  supply  of  credit  that  has  resulted  in  low  saving  and  large 
deficits.  
The banks now have to put more effort into procuring deposits and a little less into selling 
loans. Such a change in banks' behaviour may contribute to curbing growth in demand and 
output in the period ahead.  
There  are  now  signs  of  a  cooling  housing  market  throughout  the  country.  House  price 
inflation  peaked  about  a  year  ago  when  the  housing  market  was  marked  by  euphoria. 
Several large residential construction projects are now being shelved.  
Should weaker developments in the US lead to a broad-based pause in global growth, there 
may be various repercussions for the Norwegian economy: 
First, a downturn in the world economy may adversely affect activity and profitability in export 
industries and perhaps even the oil sector. It may be more difficult to sell goods in a falling 
market, and prices for domestically produced goods may fall. 
Second,  turbulence  and  weaker  growth  prospects  may  increase  uncertainty  among 
Norwegian households and businesses. As a result, new projects and investments may be 
postponed, or enterprises may be reluctant to recruit new employees.  
Third,  the  financial  market  turbulence  has  a  more  direct  impact  on  the  business  sector. 
Banks and investors now apply a higher premium and higher prices for providing capital for 
BIS Review 18/2008 
 3
acquisitions, restructuring and investment, and highly leveraged companies have to pay high 
loan risk premia.  
We still do not know what the full impact of the turbulence will be. The US authorities have 
taken measures. It remains to be seen whether they will have an impact. At the same time, 
growth in Norway has been strong and inflation is on the rise. 
Monetary  policy  in  Norway  is  oriented  towards  keeping  inflation  low  and  stable.  The 
operational target is annual consumer price inflation of close to 2.5 per cent over time. The 
inflation  target  is  an  anchor  for  expectations  in  the  foreign  exchange  market,  the  social 
partners and price-setters in NOK. Buyers and sellers of NOK, businesses and households, 
price-setters and wage-earners can expect inflation to be close to 2.5 per cent over time. 
There is a division of responsibility in economic policy: 
• 
Monetary policy steers inflation in the medium and long term and can also contribute 
to smoothing fluctuations in output and employment.  
The  government  budget  –  growth  in  public  spending  –  influences  the  real  krone 
exchange  rate  and  the  size  of  the  internationally  exposed  business  sector  in  the 
long term.  
Wage formation and economic structures and  incentives determine how efficiently 
labour and other economic resources are used.  
  Even if inflation fluctuates somewhat from one year to the next, inflation has remained fairly 
close  to  target  over  time.  Inflation  was  particularly  low  in  the  years  around  the  turn  of  the 
millennium  when  cheap  goods  flowed  from  Asia  into  our  country  while  productivity  in  the 
business  sector  grew  sharply.  The  rise  in  prices  for  domestically  produced  goods  and 
services was also low.  
Interest  rates  were  cut  in  response  to  lower  inflation.  Economic  agents  could  then  expect 
inflation to gradually move up to target over time. Growth could also remain high for a period 
without a rapid rise in inflation. Low interest rates made it possible for us to make use of the 
potential for higher consumption and investment.  
There are now signs that price and wage inflation is on the increase. Higher food and energy 
prices  are  fuelling  inflation  in  other  countries.  Thus,  we  cannot  assume  that  prices  for 
imported  goods  will  continue  to  fall.  Moreover,  domestic  productivity  does  not  seem  to  be 
improving as quickly as earlier. The rise in prices is therefore likely to quicken for goods and 
services produced in Norway. Since summer 2005, the key policy rate has gradually been 
raised again to a more normal level in order to prevent inflation from becoming too high. 
As mentioned, external interest rates are again moving down and the interest rate differential 
against other countries has widened recently. This may lead to a stronger krone, but there 
are also opposing forces in the foreign exchange market.  
In the long run, the krone exchange rate is determined by changes in the terms of trade and 
permanent  differences  between  domestic  and  external  inflation  and  productivity.  But  the 
krone  exchange  rate  also  shows  monthly  and  yearly  fluctuations.  The  krone  was  strong 
towards  the  end  of  the  previous  cyclical  expansion,  but  depreciated  when  interest  rates 
declined  in  2003.  Thereafter,  the  krone  appreciated  again  as  growth  in  the  Norwegian 
economy recovered.  
Over  the  past  two  years,  the  krone  has  appreciated  by  close  to  5  per  cent.  Inflation  has 
nevertheless picked up and is now fairly close to 2½ per cent.3  
                                                 
3   Norges Bank uses different measures of underlying inflation. In January, the twelve-month rise in the CPI-ATE 
was 1.9 per cent, a weighted median showed a rise of 2.4 per cent and a trimmed mean 2.9 per cent. The 
twelve-month rise in the CPI was 3.7 per cent following a sharp increase in energy prices. 
4 
 BIS Review 18/2008
The sizeable basic balance deficit may result in a renewed depreciation of the krone. If the 
bleak  prospects  for  the  world  economy  translate  into  lower  prices  for  oil  and  other  export 
goods,  this  may  also  lead  to  a  depreciation  of  the  krone.  We  have  already  observed  that 
investors  sell  NOK  in  periods  of  turbulence.  If  the  krone  depreciates,  the  interest  rate  will 
then  have  to  be  set  higher  to  keep  inflation  at  bay  unless  a  slowdown  in  activity  has  a 
dampening impact on inflation.  
The opening of the labour market to the new EU countries has provided us with access to a 
reserve of labour. There has been a substantial flow of labour into Norway. Labour migrates 
to locations where potential earnings are highest. Growing numbers of workers are moving to 
Norway  and  establishing  residence  here.  Many  workers  are  only  here  on  short-term 
assignments and will perhaps move on when the job is done and when there is an economic 
turnaround. 
In 2007, Norway’s population increased by about 55 000, with net inward migration coming to 
35 000. This is the highest population increase ever registered.  
Employment has grown rapidly over the past two years, the highest rate recorded over the 
past few decades. Even though there has been an ample supply of labour, unemployment is 
low and the number of job vacancies is record high. The labour market is tight. 
High pay increases have often been awarded in the late phase of an expansion, and been 
followed  by  rising  inflation.  Employees  and  businesses  have  at  times  looked  backwards  – 
and  may  not  recognise  that  the  outlook  has  changed  –  when  determining  wages  and 
conditions that influence employment and profitability. This was the case in 1974 and 1975 
and again in 1986 and 1987. It was the case in 1998 and also in 2002. In each case, the 
result was high interest rates, stagnating production and rising unemployment.  
Should  the  recent  sharp  rise  in  employment  result  in  unexpectedly  high  wage  growth,  the 
interest rate will again have to be set at a high level to keep inflation subdued. We may again 
experience  a  high  interest  rate  level  in  Norway  relative  to  other  countries  over  a  longer 
period. This could translate into a pronounced setback in production and employment.  
The  Norwegian  business  sector  has  become  increasingly  efficient,  inducing  companies  to 
increase their workforces. During the recovery after the turn of the millennium, productivity 
growth jumped up again. This resulted in strong growth and low inflation. 
Rising imports from low-cost countries and high prices for many of our export goods resulted 
in a substantial improvement in Norway’s terms of trade from the end of the 1990s. Norway’s 
situation  differs  from  that  of  our  neighbouring  Nordic  countries  in  that  both  Sweden  and 
Finland have recorded a deterioration in their terms of trade. They sell large volumes of high-
tech products but at falling prices. Productivity and terms-of-trade gains have provided the 
Norwegian economy with a historically strong income boost. National income increased by a 
little more than 30 per cent in real terms between 2003 and 2007.  
The real krone exchange rate measures developments in the value of the Norwegian krone, 
adjusting for inflation differentials between Norway and its trading partners. This provides an 
indication of the relationship between the level of external and domestic prices, which in turn 
reflects developments in cost levels. In real terms, the krone has appreciated by about 10 per 
cent since the mid-1990s, while labour costs in a common currency have risen by close to 30 
per cent more than among our trading partners. This may be partly ascribable to the cyclical 
expansion and the low level of household saving. But most likely the strong krone reflects the 
substantial  improvement  in  the  terms  of  trade  and  productivity.  Public  spending  growth  is 
fuelling demand for goods and services and draining labour from the business sector, albeit 
not  faster  than  planned.  Even  though  the  cost  level  in  Norway  has  increased  and  is  high, 
there is full employment. Thus, it seems that our business sector will have to live with – and 
can  live  with  –  the  real  value  of  the  krone  and  the  current  cost  level  unless  a  possible 
downturn has a particularly severe impact on the Norwegian economy.  
BIS Review 18/2008 
 5
Sharing the benefits 
There  was  a  fundamental  shift  in  Norwegian  economic  policy  in  the  1980s  and  1990s.4 
Capital and credit markets were liberalised. It became easier to establish and build up new 
businesses. The EEA and WTO agreements resulted in stronger competition and increased 
flows  of  goods  and  services,  labour  and  capital.  As  a  result  of  the  1992  tax  reform,  the 
welfare  state  could  be  funded  with  reduced  impact  on  wealth  creation.  The  framework 
conditions  for  the  electricity  market,  telecom  market,  aviation  and  broadcasting  were 
changed. Trade was liberalised. State-owned companies were listed on the stock exchange 
and new forms of managing public agencies were developed. Industrial policy no longer kept 
unprofitable enterprises afloat. And last but not least, in Norway as in other countries, norm-
based or rule-based monetary and fiscal policy was introduced. 
The shift gave a boost to the economy, but in recent years it has been accompanied by a 
change in the distribution of income between labour and capital. This is probably a result of 
structural changes in the global economy. A rising share of the global production of goods 
and  services  is  moving  across  the  Pacific.  Cheap  Asian  labour  has  changed  industry 
structures and trading patterns in many Western countries, including Norway.  
New  producer  countries  are  fuelling  competition,  but  are  also  creating  new  markets  and 
producing  cheap  consumer  goods.  There  has  been  a  sustained  rise  in  employment  and 
wealth creation in the West. China, India and other emerging economies have doubled the 
supply of labour on the global market.5 This has helped paved the way for strong growth, but 
has also curbed wages in many occupations in a number of industrialised countries.  
Norwegian households have enjoyed lower prices and a broader range of goods. It has been 
easy to find employment. Norwegian owners and shareholders have also fared very well. 
Although  the  share  of  value  added  accruing  to  wage  earners  has  decreased  since  the 
beginning of the 1990s, real wage growth has been high. On average, today’s wage earners 
earn real wages that are 50 per cent higher than in 1990. This corresponds to annual growth 
of over 2 per cent. At the same time, employment has risen. 
Business  and  labour  market  conditions  have  been  unusually  favourable  in  recent  years. 
Should  export  prices  fall,  productivity  growth  slacken  and  foreign  workers  return  to  their 
home country, the wage share and unemployment will increase and business sector profits 
will fall. Even in the absence of these developments, low unemployment and high profits may 
be difficult to sustain. Developments will depend on how far businesses – in their search for 
qualified labour – will bid up wages. 
The  economic  policy  reforms  of  the  1980s  and  1990s  set  the  stage  for  invention  and 
innovation and the development of a market for equity capital and loans in Norway. This has 
resulted in restructuring in the business sector, increased productivity, real wage growth and 
a high level of job creation, but also very high earnings for successful businesspeople and 
entrepreneurs.  We  will  probably  have  to  learn  to  live  with  our  entrepreneurs  and  capital 
owners, and they must live with the society that has provided them with favourable business 
conditions.  
In Norway, there is a relatively even distribution of income, as illustrated in the chart. In the 
chart, we compare the second-highest decile of wage earners with the lowest decile. Wage 
differentials are smaller in Norway than in any other OECD country. In the US, the group of 
                                                 
4   From Jon E. Dølvik, T. Fløtten, G. Hernes and J.M. Hippe (2007): “Hamskifte – Den norske modellen i endring 
(Fundamental shift – the Norwegian model in flux”, p.15, Gyldendal Norsk Forlag A/S. Norwegian only. 
5   Richard  B.  Freeman:  “Labor  Market  Imbalances:  Shortages,  or  Surpluses,  or  Fish  Stories?”,  at  the  Boston 
Federal Reserve Economic Conference, June 14-16, 2006. 
6 
 BIS Review 18/2008
wage  earners  in  the  second  highest  decile  earn  almost  five  times  as  much  as  the  lowest 
decile while in Norway that group only earns twice as much.  
Thus, the fundamental shift in economic policy and sharp income growth in Norway have not 
resulted in substantial wage disparities.  
When the EU assesses income distribution, low income is defined as less than 60 per cent of 
median income.6 Compared with other European countries, the low-income group is small in 
Norway and the other Nordic countries. In Norway, 11 per cent of the population is defined 
as low-income earners, while the average for the EU is a good 15 per cent. In addition, the 
Nordic countries provide a high level of government-financed welfare services. 
Analyses of low income do not take into account that income levels in Norway are very high. 
The threshold for low income in Norway is shown by the line in the chart. It is almost as high 
as median income in the EU, and not that far from the level in Sweden. 
Nor does the EU definition of low income capture the considerable rise in median income in 
Norway over the past 15 years. In relation to the 1994 low income threshold, measured in 
real terms, the low income group has decreased by more than half, falling particularly sharply 
in the 1990s when unemployment also exhibited a sharp decline.  
In addition, turnover is high in the low income group. Around a fourth of the group comprises 
those aged 16-24, while one fifth are aged 64 and over. Many of those with low incomes are 
students or old age pensioners. 
Thus, low income only becomes a social problem when people remain economically inactive 
for much of their lives. Both labour market developments and short-term financial incentives 
can lead to this kind of social exclusion. Social security schemes can also over time become 
poverty traps, locking in many people who would have been unemployed for a period in other 
countries. A cause for particular concern is the rising number of young people that receive 
benefits on a permanent basis. 
I  will  now  turn  from  today’s  income  distribution  across  groups  to  the  distribution  across 
generations in Norway. 
The  Norwegian  national  insurance  scheme  is  a  pay-as-you-go  system.  This  means  that  a 
given  year’s  pension  payments  from  the  scheme  are  covered  by  government  budget 
revenues  that  year.  When  the  national  insurance  scheme  was  introduced  in  1967,  a  fund 
was established to provide for an expected reduction in private saving. However, pensions 
were still included in the central government budget at an early stage and financed by current 
tax revenues. Transfers to the National Insurance Fund were soon discontinued.  
Nevertheless, confidence in the pension system has actually remained intact, reflected in a 
low  level  of  household  saving,  primarily  through  home  investment.  Perhaps  there  is  some 
element  of  miscalculation  here.  A  fall  in  value  may  occur  if  many  homeowners  free  up 
housing capital to cushion old age.  
It was only when transfers to the Petroleum Fund were introduced in 1996 that funds were 
accumulated that could also be used to cover future pension payments. The Fund, which has 
later changed its name to the Government Pension Fund – Global, has grown to well over 
NOK  2000  billion.  Its  rapid  growth  was  neither  expected  nor  planned  and  was  due  to  the 
abrupt improvement in government finances during the economic upturn in the 1990s. After 
the turn of the millennium, the rise in oil prices also provided a boost.  
The size of the Fund is now equivalent to approximately one year’s GDP and may double in 
the next five to ten years. Total public expenditure is equivalent to less than half of total GDP. 
If the government spends 4 per cent of the Fund annually – the expected real return – this 
                                                 
6   Median income is the income level at the middle point of the income distribution. 
BIS Review 18/2008 
 7
will  finance close  to  20 per  cent  of public  expenditure  ten years  ahead.  The  return  on  the 
Fund  will  by  then  have  become  such  an  important  source  of  funding  that  it  is  difficult  to 
imagine that the government authorities would find any sound arguments for drawing on the 
accumulated capital. It is also a flow of revenues that does not have an adverse effect on 
private sector production capacity, unlike taxes.  
Irrespective, only a share of future pension payments will be matched by revenues from the 
Government  Pension  Fund.  Government  old-age  pension  obligations  are  estimated  to 
increase from around 250 per cent of mainland GDP today to approximately 350 per cent in 
the  course  of  a  few  decades.  As  a  result  of  the  pension  reform,  the  increase  will  be 
somewhat smaller. 
As  a  major  shareowner  and  bondholder,  Norway  has  received  increasing  international 
attention. Many countries have established funds similar to the Government Pension Fund – 
Global, with substantial assets under management.  
We are open about the Fund’s objectives, organisation and investments. This is necessary in 
Norway  because  the  funds  are  public  funds  and  because  transparency  enhances 
management. Moreover, the transparency of the Fund is also viewed in a favourable light by 
those countries in which we invest. Internationally, the Government Pension Fund – Global is 
therefore  often  cited  as  a  best  practice  fund.  But  perhaps  we  should  add  that  the 
transparency competition between funds could be enhanced. 
The underlying motivation of these investors and whether the investments may be politically 
motivated have been called into question. Some fear strategic acquisitions of companies that 
are of considerable national importance. There have been calls for these funds’ investments 
to be monitored closely. 
The management of the Fund is based on two ethical commitments: 
First,  there  is  the  consideration  relating  to  future  generations.  The  Fund  must  ensure  high 
capital  returns  at  a  moderate  risk,  by  means  of  professional  management  with  effective 
control of operational risk.  
Second, the Fund must respect the fundamental rights of those affected by the companies in 
which  the  Fund  has  invested.  The  instruments  used  here  are  the  exclusion  of  companies 
from the Fund’s investment universe and the active exercise of ownership rights.  
The Ministry of Finance excludes companies that produce certain types of weapons. They 
also  exclude  companies  when  they  identify  an  unacceptable  risk  of  contributing  to  gross 
corruption, severe environmental degradation, and serious violations of human rights and of 
fundamental ethical norms. Norges Bank exercises its ownership rights by voting at general 
meetings and through direct contact with companies. Moreover, priority is given to combating 
child  labour  and  we  look  critically  at  how  companies  influence  the  authorities  in 
environmental issues.  
Over time, engaging in dialogue with companies is probably a more constructive approach 
than  exclusion.  Irrespective,  perseverance  and  patience  are  required  if  we  are  to  achieve 
results. We should not allow the management of the Fund to be ruled by the impulsive and 
changing priorities that beleaguer so many public programmes and sectors. 
When  we  invest  the  Pension  Fund’s  assets,  we  are  guests  in  our  neighbour’s  house.  The 
requirements  for  the  exercise  of  ownership  rights  cannot  therefore  be  based  solely  on 
Norway’s values and culture. We must acknowledge that the dividing lines between politics, 
ethics  and  management  may  be  different  in  other  countries.  When  we  point  a  finger  at  a 
company,  we  are  also  pointing  a  finger  at  the  laws,  regulations  and  practices  of  countries 
where  the  company  is  based  and  operates  –  and  we  are  pointing  that  finger  as  a 
representative of the Norwegian state.  
8 
 BIS Review 18/2008
When other countries look at Norway, they may agree with another Norwegian poet whose 
100th  anniversary  we  are  celebrating  this  year,  Olav  H.  Hauge,  when  he  wrote  that  “self-
esteem grows with the size of your bank account”.7  
We  have  enjoyed  great  economic  prosperity  over  the  past  10-15  years.  But  perhaps  a 
warning can be found in one of Hauge’s poems. Allow me to recite: 
“Too happy by half –  
the pot’s boiling over, 
the scale arm is pointing sky-high! 
I must do something contrary, 
throw cold water on the pot, 
hang a stone on the scales, 
fell the biggest pine I’ve got.8  
Thank you for your attention! 
 
 
 
                                                   
7   Text from Olav H. Hauge (2002): “Lagnaden gjer mange til heltar. Aforsimar i utval”, Det Norske Samlaget. 
Translated by Helle Snellingen and Veronica Harrington, staff translators, Norges Bank. 
8   From Olav H. Hauge (1988): ”Mange års røynsle med pil og boge – 99 dikt av Olav H. Hauge”, Det Norske 
Samlaget. Translated by Helle Snellingen and Veronica Harrington, staff translators, Norges Bank. 
BIS Review 18/2008 
 9
    10 
 BIS Review 18/2008
    BIS Review 18/2008 
 11
    12 
 BIS Review 18/2008
    BIS Review 18/2008 
 13
    14 
 BIS Review 18/2008
    BIS Review 18/2008 
 15
    16 
 BIS Review 18/2008
    BIS Review 18/2008 
 17
    18 
 BIS Review 18/2008
    BIS Review 18/2008 
 19
    20 
 BIS Review 18/2008
   BIS Review 18/2008 
 21
