José Manuel González-Páramo: “Whither liquidity? Developments, 
policies and challenges” 
Speech  by  Mr  José  Manuel  González-Páramo,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the 
European Central Bank, at the 28th Nomura Central Bankers Seminar, Tokyo, 14 April 2008. 
 Introduction1  
1.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is a great pleasure for me to be here in Tokyo. I would like to thank the organisers of this 
important event, the 28th Nomura Central Bankers Seminar, for giving me the opportunity to 
share with such a distinguished audience some considerations about the role of liquidity in 
the recent market turmoil.  
The  current  turmoil  in  financial  markets  has  been  to  a  very  large  extent  about  “liquidity”. 
Since  august  2007  the  different  phases  of  the  turmoil  have  been  marked  by  repeated 
disruptions to the traditional mechanisms of liquidity creation and transmission, both at the 
aggregate and at the individual level.  
Indeed, from the start of the turmoil we have experienced several episodes of contraction in 
the  degree  of  liquidity  of  a  variety  of  money  and  credit  markets.  Some  of  these  episodes 
have been experienced in the market for inter-bank unsecured loans, a key component of the 
money  market  and  the  starting  point  of  the  monetary  transmission  mechanism.  Moreover, 
liquidity  has  also  dried  up  in  the  market  for  mortgage-backed  securities  and  commercial 
paper  as  well  as  for  structured  credit  products.  And,  occasionally,  poor  liquidity  conditions 
have  been  reported  in  markets  for  securities  historically  regarded  as  very  liquid  and  safe, 
such  as  the  market  for  banks’  secured  covered  bonds  or,  even,  the  government  bonds  of 
some developed economies.  
Indeed, at some points in time over the last few months we have observed rises in order-
based measures of liquidity risk for a variety of money and credit markets and declines in 
traded volumes that could be explained only by the existence of severe stress. 
At the individual level, liquidity shortages have taken a toll on a limited number of financial 
institutions. 
In my intervention, I would like to first recall some of the main issues related to liquidity and 
banks’ liquidity management that have played a central role during the recent market turmoil. 
Second, I will briefly review developments in liquidity in credit and money markets from the 
start  of  the  turmoil.  Third,  I  will  describe  some  of  the  actions  that  central  banks  (and, 
particularly, the ECB) have undertaken to mitigate disruptions to the traditional channels of 
liquidity provision from the start of the turmoil. Finally, I will attempt to draw some preliminary 
lessons on liquidity management and present some of the public and private initiatives that 
are currently under discussion in order to reinforce the industry and regulatory framework for 
liquidity risk management.  
                                                 
1  
I am very grateful to Samuel López, Philippe Molitor, Romana Peronaci, Valia Rentzou, Ralph Weidenfeller 
and Alessandro Calza for their valuable inputs and contributions, and to Ulrich Bindseil and Fatima Pires for 
their useful comments. 
BIS Review 43/2008 
 1
2.  
Liquidity issues 
The multi-faceted nature of liquidity 
Before  moving  on,  it  may  be  worth  agreeing  on  a  working  definition  of  the  term  “liquidity”. 
Indeed, this term is often used to indicate many different things. This is a problem that has 
been pointed out by several contributors to a recent volume of Banque de France’s Financial 
Stability Review on liquidity issues.2 For instance, Charles Goodhart notes in his contribution 
that the difficulty to define liquidity clearly is due to the multi-faceted nature of liquidity itself. 
Less charitably, Jean Tirole blames the problem on the “unfortunate habit of economists” to 
use this term to cover different concepts.  
While some economists may argue that the specific meaning of the term becomes clear once 
it  is  put  into  context  (particularly  whether  it  is  used  in  relation  to  macroeconomic 
developments, financial markets or single agents), it is worth striving for more clarity in the 
use  of  the  notion  of  liquidity.  Since  I  realise  that  this  may  sound  like  a  criticism  to  the 
profession’s practice, let me come clean by admitting to the same unfortunate habit of using 
the same term for different purposes. Indeed, I have to acknowledge that at the ECB we refer 
to  liquidity  to  describe  conditions  and  notions  at  different  levels  (individual,  market  and 
economy-wide)  that  are  distinct  from  each  other.  So,  as  a  sign  of  repentance,  let  me  try 
attempt to clarify these different notions and to make the firm resolution to stick to them, at 
least until the end of this speech.  
In  the  context  of  the  properties  of  an  individual  financial  instrument,  the  notion  of  liquidity 
typically refers to the ability of trading such instrument (i.e. purchasing or selling it) without 
unduly  affecting  its  price.  In  particular,  an  asset  is  described  as  liquid,  thereby  entailing 
limited liquidity risk, if it is reasonable to assume that it can be easily sold without incurring a 
loss of value. 
The notion can also be used to characterise an entire market, also to reflect co-movement in 
liquidity across assets. In this case, we refer to the ability to trade or liquidate positions in a 
market without significantly affecting the prevailing market prices. The degree of liquidity of 
the market for a financial asset is a function of a variety of factors, including: its outstanding 
size; the relative size, frequency and modalities of transactions; the number and quality of 
market participants; the relevance of transaction costs; the amount and quality of information 
on  prices,  traded  volumes  and,  more  fundamentally,  on  the  security  of  the  asset  and  the 
credit-worthiness  of  counterparties.  Thus,  a  market  in  which  trades  can  be  smoothly 
executed thanks to the stable presence of numerous buyers and sellers willing to undertake 
large transactions at narrow bid-offer spreads is generally regarded as highly liquid.  
When  talking  about  the  market  liquidity,  it  is  also  customary  to  distinguish  between 
exogenous and endogenous market liquidity.3 Exogenous liquidity is related to the ability of a 
market  participant  to  execute  a  trade  at  little  or  no  cost.  By  contrast,  endogenous  liquidity 
refers to the fact that large sales over a given time period may affect market prices, thereby 
giving  rise  to  valuation  losses.  The  degree  of  exogenous  liquidity  of  a  market  very  much 
depends on many of the factors that I have just mentioned, notably its size and degree of 
completeness. However, whether or not a market is exogenously liquid may vary over time 
and  some  times  dramatically.  Indeed,  markets  that  normally  present  some  desirable 
properties  ensuring  a  high  degree  of  liquidity  may  become  highly  illiquid  under  stress,  as 
illustrated by the experience of the very short-term money market in recent months. 
Going back to the issue of the different notions of liquidity, from the start of the turmoil we 
have also heard reports about liquidity (or, to be more precise, lack of liquidity) of specific 
                                                 
2   Banque de France, Special Issue Liquidity, Financial Stability Review, February 2008. 
3   See for instance Box 15 in the ECB Financial Stability Review, December 2007. 
2 
 BIS Review 43/2008
individual financial institutions. In these reports, liquidity problems at specific individual banks 
are usually referred to as equivalent to difficulties in funding their business activities. Indeed, 
an additional notion of liquidity refers to the ability of a firm (not necessarily from the financial 
sector):  
• 
to convert its assets into cash by disposing of them or borrowing against their value 
in order to meet expected and unexpected obligations, or 
to issue liabilities in order to raise funds.  
• 
The  degree  of  funding  liquidity  of  a  firm  may  depend  on  a  number  of  factors,  notably  the 
amounts of liquid assets it holds and the liquidity of the credit and securities markets it relies 
on for its external financing.  
The  last  observation  points  to  the  fact  that,  while  the  different  notions  of  liquidity  (notably, 
market  versus  liquidity  funding)  are  conceptually  distinct,  they  are  in  practice  interrelated. 
Indeed, some authors have developed models in which market and funding liquidity reinforce 
each  other,  leading  to  the  emergence  of  positive  or  negative  “liquidity  spirals”  that  may 
account  for  some  of  the  declines  in  the  liquidity  of  markets  and  individual  institutions 
observed in recent months.4  
Aggregate liquidity  
Before  closing  the  subject  of  defining  liquidity,  let  me  briefly  recall  that  there  is  a  more 
aggregate notion – that should be fairly familiar to this audience of experts on the Japanese 
economy  and  Bank  of  Japan’s  Quantitative  Easing  Policy  –  that  is  often  used  to  describe 
monetary  developments  at  the  macroeconomic  level.  Indeed,  liquidity  is  often  used  as  a 
synonymous for money supply. In particular, at the ECB we use the term “excess liquidity” to 
indicate the existence of a stock of money relative to income in excess of the level needed to 
finance non-inflationary growth in the medium term (as in the quantity theory of money).  
Of  course,  even  this  notion  of  liquidity  is  not  entirely  unrelated  to  those  mentioned  above, 
since  money  supply  measures  are  derived  from  the  consolidated  balance  sheet  of  the 
banking sector. However, it is important not to confuse references to liquidity in the context of 
liquidity management (that refer to the overall liquidity needs of the banking sector) with the 
aggregate money holding behaviour of agents other than banks.  
Market and funding liquidity risks 
As  I  mentioned  above,  the  liquidity of  a  financial  instrument  may  vary  over  time,  and  may 
become severely impaired under conditions of stress. Uncertainty about liquidity implies that 
market participants face the risk that it may not be possible to execute a transaction when 
they wish to do so due to the lack of counterparties. For instance, a market participant may 
not be able to sell a security or liquidate a position due to lack of buyers.  
Similarly, firms (but also households) face the risk of being unable to obtain enough cash to 
meet their obligations. This funding liquidity risk is particularly relevant for banks since their 
core business involves the maturity transformation of funds. Indeed, the traditional activity of 
banks consists of providing liquidity transformation services, by collecting short-term deposits 
in order to finance the provision of loans with longer maturities. As a result, banks intrinsically 
face a maturity mismatch in their balance sheets that exposes them to funding liquidity risks.  
Under  supposedly  extreme  circumstances  (that  the  experience  of  Northern  Rock  suggests 
may not be that extreme), the maturity mismatch may even imply the risk of a bank run. This 
                                                 
4   Brunnermeier,  M.K.  and  L.H.  Pedersen,  “Market  liquidity  and  funding  liquidity”,  forthcoming  in  Review  of 
Financial Studies. 
BIS Review 43/2008 
 3
may happen if large numbers of depositors perceive liquidity conditions (or solvency, for that 
matter) at a specific institution as untenable and rush to withdraw their deposits in waves. 
Several  mechanisms  and  policies  have  been  developed  over  time  for  prevention  and 
resolution  of  bank  runs.  These  include  deposit  insurance  schemes  (whether  privately  or 
publicly 
funded),  regulatory  and  supervisory  policies  (e.g.  on  reserve  and  capital 
requirements) and the possible recourse to emergency liquidity assistance from the central 
bank (the “Lender of Last Resort” classic policy prescription).  
The “originate and hold” vs. “originate and distribute” models 
The characterisation of the liquidity risks faced by banks I have made so far conforms to that 
of the so-called “originate and hold” business model, according to which banks create loans 
to  firms  and  households  and  hold  them  to  maturity  in  their  balance  sheets.  However,  in 
recent  decades,  many  banks  have  taken  advantage  of  financial  innovation  and  of 
developments  in  securitisation  to  progressively  shift  towards  the  so-called  “originate  and 
distribute”  model.  Under  this  new  model,  banks  originate  loans  but  sell  them  to  structured 
investment vehicles (often set up by themselves) to be repackaged and subsequently sold as 
asset-backed securities.  
In  principle,  this  business  model  is  attractive  for  banks  since  it  provides  them  with  a  new 
source  of  financing  to  expand  lending,  thereby  mitigating  their  funding  liquidity  risks,  while 
also allowing them to economise on costly capital requirements. Indeed, it has been argued 
that regulatory capital arbitrage has been one of the main reasons why banks have adopted 
the “originate and distribute” model. 
Also from the point of view of the economy as a whole, the “originate and distribute” model 
could be viewed as having many advantages. First, being capital costly, the ability to sustain 
a given level of credit with a lower volume of capital enables the banking sector to reduce the 
costs of credit for borrowers and favours financial development. Moreover, it may be seen as 
representing a step towards more complete credit markets, thereby contributing to enhancing 
the  efficiency  of  the  economic  system.  In  addition,  the  securitisation  of  loans  in  principle 
could reduce a secular source of vulnerability of the economies, by taking risk concentrations 
associated  with  loan  portfolios  away  from  the  banking  sector  and  spreading  them  more 
broadly across other sectors. As a result, the “originate and distribute” model may potentially 
diminish  the  likelihood  of  the  credit  busts  and  banking  crises  that  have  historically  been  a 
major source of macroeconomic and financial instability in many economies.  
It should be noted though that, even before the outbreak of financial market turmoil, some 
commentators  have  voiced  doubts  about  some  of  the  welfare-enhancing  effects  of  the 
“originate  and  distribute”  model.  For  instance  it  has  been  argued  that,  while  securitisation 
certainly  spreads  existing  risks,  it  may  in  fact  encourage  the  creation  of  further  risks, 
particularly by relaxing the incentives for banks to screen and monitor borrowers in order to 
alleviate  the  informational  asymmetries  associated  with  credit  contracts.  More  generally,  it 
has  been  questioned  whether  the  securitisation  of  loans  may  not  perversely  shift  risk 
concentrations to sectors potentially more vulnerable than those that originated them.  
In this regard, I remember reading a few years ago in the Bank of Japan’s Financial Stability 
Review that in Japan credit derivatives based on loans originated by large and relatively well-
capitalised commercial banks had been acquired by small regional financial institutions with 
significantly weaker balance sheets. Also in the course of the current turmoil, we noticed that 
some  of  the  individual  European  banks  affected  by  exposures  to  the  sub-prime  mortgage 
market were relatively small institutions without the necessary technical expertise or balance 
sheet strength to withstand them. In addition, for many banks all over the world, risks do not 
seem to have travelled farther away than the balance sheets of their own conduits, and have 
been re-internalised once the market turmoil has erupted. 
While this certainly does not mean that securitisation is not welfare-enhancing, it suggests 
that – in the environment of historically low returns on traditional securities and an implied 
4 
 BIS Review 43/2008
imprudent hunt for yield that preceded the turmoil – the markets for asset-backed securities 
and  credit  derivatives  may  have  failed  to  spread  risks  as  effectively  as  expected  and 
exacerbated  information  asymmetries,  probably  as  a  result  of  their  opacity  and  the 
complexity of contracts. 
More generally, the events of the last few months have revealed that, while the adoption of 
the “originate and distribute” model relieves banks from traditional funding liquidity risks and 
“liquefies” the underlying assets, it increases their exposure to the risk of market illiquidity. 
Indeed, this model relies on the assumption that banks are able to dispose of mortgage loans 
in  the  form  of  repackaged  asset-backed  securities,  which  requires  the  existence  of  highly 
liquid  wholesale  markets.  As  I  will  explain  in  the  next  section,  over  the  last  few  months 
liquidity  has  become  severely  limited  in  a  number  of  markets  playing  a  key  role  for  the 
execution  of  the  liquidity  risk  management  strategies  of  the  banking  sector.  This  has 
particularly  affected  banks  pursuing  very  aggressive  strategies  of  maturity  transformation, 
relying on the continuing issuance of asset-backed commercial paper at short maturities. 
To  illustrate  this  point,  we  only  need  to  recall  the  start  of  the  current  market  turmoil.  The 
deterioration  of  the  US  sub-prime  mortgage  market  led  to  the  drying  up  of  liquidity  in  the 
markets  for  mortgage-backed  securities.  These  developments  led  to  liquidity  funding 
difficulties at the structured investment vehicles (SIVs) specialised in purchasing mortgage 
loans  from  banks  and  transforming  them  into  mortgage-backed  securities  for  their 
subsequent sale to investors. Liquidity funding problems at SIVs translated into analogous 
problems at banks as they were no longer able to dispose of their stocks of mortgage loans, 
while facing unexpected obligations arising from contingent credit lines and, in some cases, 
also from the prospects of being forced to incorporate struggling in-house SIVs into their own 
balance  sheets.  Uncertainty  about  future  obligations  among  individual  banks  led  to 
significantly increased precautionary demand for liquidity, which – together with asymmetric 
information – resulted in severely diminished liquidity in the money market. 
How has liquidity been affected by the turmoil 
3.  
I have anticipated already some of the developments in liquidity from the start of the current 
market turmoil. Let me now review them more in detail in the remainder of this section. 
As you are well aware, in July and early August a series of events led to an intensification of 
the tensions in the US sub-prime mortgage market and a sharp decline in the degree of risk 
appetite  of  global  investors.  Market  volatility  increased  across  almost  all  financial  asset 
classes. Stock prices declined as investors sold equities and moved funds into safe-haven 
investment  assets,  such  as  government  bonds.  In  this  context,  several  investment  funds 
holding asset-backed securities suspended withdrawals from their clients. At the same time, 
a  number  of  European  banks  made  public  their  direct  or  indirect  exposures  to  the  US 
mortgage market, particularly to its sub-prime component. 
In this environment, market liquidity declined for a number of assets. This was most obvious 
for the markets directly related to the core of the current turmoil, namely the market for sub-
prime  asset-backed  securities  (ABS).  During  the  turmoil,  the  problem  of  illiquidity  however 
spread much further, first affecting other ABS and asset-backed commercial paper (ABCP), 
then mortgage-backed securities (MBS) and basically all structured credit instruments, such 
as collateralised debt obligations (CDO). 
The  market  for  government  bonds  is  the  only  fixed  income  market  in  which  liquidity  has 
remained  fairly  good.  It  should,  however,  be  noted  that  within  the  euro  area  there  has 
certainly  been  a  differentiation  among  different  government  bonds:  while  German  Bunds 
have generally remained quite liquid, the liquidity of bonds issued by countries with weaker 
public finances, such as Italy and Greece, has at certain point in time been heavily impaired. 
This has also had an impact on the yield spreads between these government bonds and the 
BIS Review 43/2008 
 5
benchmark  Bunds,  which  in  some  cases  have  widened  to  their  highest  levels  since  the 
introduction of the euro. 
In  money  markets  the  impact  of  the  turmoil  was  initially  felt  mainly  in  the  longer-dated 
unsecured inter-bank market. It can be said that liquidity in the unsecured deposit markets 
almost completely dried-up in maturities beyond 1-month (although it should be noted that 
these were not the most liquid ones even in “normal” times). These frictions eventually spilled 
over  to  the  very  short-term  money  markets  (i.e.  below  one-week),  at  first  in  the  US  dollar 
market  where  banks  –  particularly,  from  Europe  –  encountered  difficulties  in  raising  short-
term liquidity.  
Early in the morning of Thursday 9 August, the tensions spread to the short-term euro money 
market  (and  also  to  other  money  markets  such  as  the  British  pound  and  the  Swiss  franc 
markets) triggering an exceptional fine-tuning operation of the ECB. Important factors driving 
these  adverse  liquidity  developments  in  the  unsecured  market  were  general  uncertainty 
about  banks’  sub-prime  exposures  and  the  scope  for  related  write-downs  resulting  in  ever 
increasing lack of mutual confidence within the banking community. Indeed, rising adverse 
selection  together  with  increased  precautionary  demand  for  liquidity,  nearly  led  in  august 
2007  to  the  euro  money  market  providing  a  real-life  illustration  of  Akerlof’s  “market  for 
lemons”  prediction  of  how  information  asymmetries  in  a  market  with  uncertainty  about  the 
quality  of  goods  (in  this  case  of  credit  claims)  may  lead  to  a  decline  in  trading  and, 
potentially, to the collapse of the market.  
Interestingly, also the liquidity in the secured non-government repurchase agreement (repo) 
markets  was  heavily  impacted,  as  many  banks  no  longer  wanted  to  accept  the  types  of 
securities  mentioned  above  (ABS/MBS/CDO)  as  underlying  collateral  in  repo  transactions. 
As  a  result,  only  the  repo  markets  based  on  government  bonds  remained  fairly  liquid,  but 
even in these markets the degree of price differentiation across repos secured with different 
types of government bonds was larger than normal. 
Another market segment that saw a partial (temporarily even severe) deterioration of liquidity 
conditions is the foreign exchange swap market, which is very important for banks managing 
liquidity  in  different  currencies.  In  particular  at  times  when  many  banks  were  keen  on 
obtaining USD liquidity, most market participants tried to swap other currencies into dollars, 
while  hardly  any  bank  was  willing  to  provide  the  USD  funds  to  the  extent  that  the  market 
became dysfunctional for maturities beyond 1 week.  
4.  
Actions of central banks: What has the ECB done? What have other central 
banks done? 
From  the  start  of  the  market  turmoil,  the  ECB  has  undertaken  a  variety  of  liquidity 
management operations – in some cases in coordination with other major central banks – in 
order to mitigate the disruptions to those segments of the money market that are under its 
direct influence.  
The  ECB’s  liquidity  interventions  have  been  accompanied  by  an  intensification  of  its 
communication policy in order to stress the separation between monetary policy and liquidity 
management policy.  
In addition, given the rather technical nature of issues related to liquidity management and 
the relative lack of familiarity of the general public with them, more intense communication 
has been needed to prevent and correct occasional misunderstandings in the financial press 
about the scale, modalities and objectives of our liquidity operations. In fact, observers often 
fail  to  notice  that  the  magnitude  and  nature  of  a  central  bank’s  liquidity  management 
interventions is very much conditional on the structural features of its operational framework. 
Therefore,  impressionistic  comparisons  among  interventions  from  different  central  banks, 
abstracting from the structural differences in their frameworks, do not necessarily serve well 
the public’s interest in assessing policy responses to the market turmoil. 
6 
 BIS Review 43/2008
The Eurosystem’s operational framework  
Thus, before explaining what the ECB has done, let me briefly outline some elements of the 
Eurosystem’s  operational  framework  that  have  proved  crucial  to  enable  it  to  continue 
influencing  short-term  money  market  rates  in  spite  of  the  difficult  situation  in  financial 
markets.  
The operational framework of the Eurosystem has been chosen with great care to function 
both in normal and stressful times.5 It aims at steering short-term money market rates close 
to  the  main  policy  rate  in  a  smooth  and  efficient  manner,  with  the  primary  aim  of 
implementing the monetary policy decisions of the Governing Council of the ECB.6 It consists 
of  elements  that  are  regularly  employed  and  those  that  can  be  activated  should  the  need 
arise. In particular, this framework comprises three categories of instruments: 1) open market 
operations, 2) minimum reserve requirements and 3) standing facilities.7  
Even  though  open  market  operations  include  several  different  operations,  the  Eurosystem 
has  so  far  almost  exclusively  conducted  two  types:  refinancing  operations,  through  which 
liquidity is temporarily lent to counterparties against eligible collateral and at a minimum bid 
rate  which  signals  the  monetary  policy,  and  the  collection  of  fixed-term  deposits  (  use  of 
reverse  transactions)  for  fine-tuning  purposes,  which  are  used  to  temporarily  absorb 
(provide) liquidity from (to) counterparties.  
Moreover, banks must hold a certain amount of liquidity to fulfil their reserve requirements 
(calculated as a ratio of their short-term liabilities). This requirement needs to be fulfilled on 
average over each reserve maintenance period, which is approximately one month long.  
The Eurosystem offers on each operating day two standing facilities which can be accessed 
at the discretion of individual banks, namely a deposit facility and a marginal lending facility. 
At their own initiative, banks can place liquidity in the deposit facility on an overnight basis, at 
a  rate  which  is  decided  by  the  Governing  Council  and  is  normally  one  percentage  point 
below the policy rate (the minimum bid rate in main refinancing operations), while they can 
borrow overnight liquidity against eligible collateral via the marginal lending facility at a rate 
which is normally one percentage point above the policy rate.  
With  these  instruments,  the  Eurosystem  implements  the  monetary  policy  decisions  of  the 
Governing Council of the ECB. More precisely, by using these instruments the Eurosystem 
manages liquidity conditions in the euro area money market so as to steer very short-term 
interbank money market rates as close as possible to the policy rate – the minimum bid rate 
– decided by the Governing Council.  
Eurosystem’s open market operations during the financial market turmoil  
At times of increased liquidity risk at longer maturities, a key concern of central banks is to 
support the re-establishment of the smooth functioning of the very short-term money market. 
This is a precondition for ensuring the transmission of the monetary policy impulses to the 
economy.  
In  the  context  of  the  current  market  turmoil,  the  primary  aims  of  the  ECB’s  liquidity 
management policy have been: (1) as in normal times, to keep the overnight rate as close as 
                                                 
5   For  a  more  detailed  description,  see  the  following  articles  in  the  ECB  Monthly  Bulletin:  The  role  of  the 
operational framework of the Eurosystem: description and first assessment, May 1999; and Changes to the 
Eurosystem’s operational framework for monetary policy, August 2003. 
6   See Manna, M., H, Pill and G. Quirós (2001), The Eurosystem’s operational framework in the context of its 
monetary policy strategy, International Finance 4(1). 
7   For an analysis of the role and properties of the different categories of instruments see Bindseil, U. (2004). 
Monetary Policy Implementation: Theory, Past and Present, Oxford University Press. 
BIS Review 43/2008 
 7
possible  to  the  minimum  bid  rate;  (2)  the  ECB  has  endeavoured  to  ensure  the  smooth 
functioning of the money market, also at term maturities, by facilitating access to liquidity to 
solvent  credit  institutions,  thereby  helping  them  to  meet  their  liquidity  needs  in  a  smooth 
manner.  By  doing  so,  the  ECB  has  intended  to  contribute  to  re-establishing  confidence 
among market participants and to safeguard financial stability and the appropriate functioning 
of the monetary policy transmission mechanism.  
In line with these aims, during the recent period of financial market volatility, the Eurosystem 
has supported banks’ access to liquidity and the general functioning of the money market by 
implementing various measures, which can be summarized as follows.  
First  it  has  made  some  relatively  small  adjustments  to  the  modalities  of  its  supply  of  euro 
liquidity by adjusting 
• 
the  distribution  of  liquidity  supplied  to  the  market  within  the  reserve  maintenance 
period  without,  however,  increasing  the  average  quantity  of  the  liquidity  supply 
(front-loading policy), and  
the way in which the liquidity is allotted to the banking system, i.e. it has increased 
the maturity of its refinancing operations, it has augmented the frequency of its fine-
tuning operations, and it has occasionally applied different tender specifications.  
 8 
 BIS Review 43/2008
Box 1  
Adjustments to open market operations during the recent turmoil  
Distribution of liquidity supply 
The main reason for adjusting the distribution of liquidity supply during the turmoil was the 
perceived change in the pattern of the demand for liquidity within the maintenance periods. 
The financial turmoil showed that interest rates were no longer necessarily linked to liquidity 
conditions on the last day of the maintenance period, as banks did no longer regard reserve 
holdings  on  different  days  of  the  maintenance  period  to  be  substitutes  (contrary  to  the 
martingale  hypothesis).[a]  Indeed,  in  the  first  days  of  the  turmoil,  interest  rates  rose 
significantly because they were driven mainly by precautionary motives. Counterparties were 
not  only  reluctant  to  lend  on  unsecured  terms,  but  they  also  feared  being  confronted  with 
unexpected  liquidity  needs  and,  as  a  consequence,  preferred  having  liquidity  buffers. 
Therefore,  to  avoid  upward  pressure  to  overnight  rates,  the  supply  of  liquidity  had  to  be 
brought forward within the maintenance period. 
As a result, the ECB accommodated banks’ preference for front-loading their reserves during 
the  reserve  maintenance  period,  by  increasing  the  liquidity  supply  at  the  beginning  of  the 
period and reducing it later in the period.  
More  specifically,  since  the  start  of  the  turmoil  and  after  the  first  “fire-fighting”  fine-tuning 
operations  conducted  in  August,  the  ECB  has  achieved  this  frontloading  by  adjusting  its 
regular provision of liquidity in the regular main refinancing operations so as to provide larger 
amounts at the beginning of the maintenance periods, while it has provided correspondingly 
less towards the end of the maintenance period, so that in total, over an entire maintenance 
period,  the  supply  of  liquidity  has  remained  unchanged.  In  addition,  since  November, 
whenever  notable  downward  pressure  on  the  overnight  rate  started  to  appear,  it  has  also 
conducted liquidity-absorbing fine-tuning operations with maturities of between two and five 
days.  
Through  this  policy  of  front-loading,  the  ECB  has  allowed  credit  institutions  to  fulfil  their 
reserve requirements relatively early in the maintenance period, but, at the same time, it has 
kept  unchanged  its  average  supply  of  liquidity over  the  maintenance  period.  Such  an 
approach is in line with the Eurosystem’s aim to provide to the banking system, over each 
maintenance period, the exact amount of liquidity needed to fulfil their liquidity deficit, which 
is given by the reserves requirements and the net liquidity-absorbing autonomous factors.  
Adjustment in the allotment of liquidity over the reserve maintenance period 
In  order  to  support  a  normalisation  of  the  conditions  of  the  money  market,  the  ECB  has 
adjusted  the  way  in  which  the  liquidity  is  allotted  to  the  banking  system.  This  has  been 
achieved though several actions.  
First, as just mentioned, the ECB has made more frequent use of fine-tuning operations than 
in  “normal”  times  (both  in  order  to  inject  liquidity  in  addition  to  that  provided  in  the  main 
refinancing operations (MROs) and to absorb excess liquidity), as needed in order to keep 
the  very  short  term  interest  rates  close  to  the  minimum  bid  rate  in  the  light  of  the  highly 
unstable and unpredictable liquidity demand.  
Second,  the  Eurosystem  has  increased  the  share  of  refinancing  provided  via  three-month 
longer-term  refinancing  operations  (LTROs),  and  reduced  the  share  provided  via  the  one-
week  MROs.  Accordingly,  the  total  amount  of  outstanding  refinancing  has  remained 
unchanged,  while  the  average  maturity  has  been  extended,  thereby  contributing  to  reduce 
BIS Review 43/2008 
 9
the future liquidity needs of the banking system.  
- 
More  specifically,  in  addition  to  the  regular  monthly  LTROs,  two  supplementary 
LTROs with a maturity of three months were carried out in August and September 
2007.  The  Governing  Council  decided  to  renew  these  operations,  with  slightly 
amended sizes, when they matured in late 2007 and in early 2008, and has since 
announced the renewal of the upcoming maturities in May and June 2008.  
Besides,  on  28  March  2008  the  Eurosystem  decided  to  further  enhance  the 
provision  of  supplementary 
two 
supplementary six-month LTRO of a pre-set amount of EUR 25 billion, to be settled 
in April and July 2008.  
refinancing,  and  announced 
longer 
term 
  As a result, the share of the total refinancing provided through LTROs is currently 66%, more 
than double the share (30%) prior to the financial turmoil. 
Third, a special tender procedure with full allotment has been applied on two occasions.  
- 
Such procedure was first applied for the fine-tuning operation on 9 August, when it 
was deemed more efficient to leave it to the market to determine the exact allotment 
amount, given the large degree of uncertainty.  
A  more  muted  variant  of  a  fixed  rate  tender  with  full  allotment  was  applied  in  the 
MRO on 18 December. This operation had an exceptionally prolonged maturity of 
two weeks so that banks could cover their liquidity needs over Christmas and the 
days  around  the  year-end  in  advance  of  this  difficult  period.  This  muted  variant 
consisted of pre-announcing a commitment on the ECB’s side to satisfy all bids at or 
above the weighted average rate of the previous MRO (4.21%). As a result, the ECB 
allotted  €348.6  billion.  Large  amounts  of  this  significant  additional  liquidity  were 
subsequently absorbed via several fine-tuning operations, mostly with an overnight 
maturity,  to  avoid  an  excessive  downward  pressure  on  the  overnight  rate.  This 
measure significantly reversed the increasing trend in the Euribor/OIS spread and 
the  EONIA  remained  somewhat  below  the  minimum  bid  rate,  reflecting  banks’ 
comfortable liquidity positions.  
[a]  Evidence  in  support  of  the  martingale  hypothesis  in  normal  times  is  presented  in  Cassola,  N.  (2008),  The 
reserve fulfilment path of euro area commercial banks: Empirical testing using panel data, ECB Working Paper
869. 
 
Second, the ECB has agreed with the Federal Reserve System to grant loans in dollars to 
euro area banks in connection with the FED US dollar Term Auction Facility, in the context of 
coordinated central banks’ actions. The Eurosystem’s loans have been financed through a 
currency arrangement (swap line) between the FED and the ECB.  
Box 2  
Operations in connection with the US dollar Term Auction Facility  
In  order  to  address  the  concerns  of  euro  area  banks  on  the  availability  of  their  funding 
denominated  in  US  dollars,  the  ECB  agreed  with  the  Federal  Reserve  System  a  currency 
arrangement  (swap  line)  in  connection  with  their  US  dollar  Term  Auction  Facility.  The 
Eurosystem provided the US dollar funding received via this swap line to its counterparties 
with access to the marginal lending facility, against collateral eligible for Eurosystem credit 
operations  (i.e.  euro  denominated  collateral),  in  two  operations  settling  on  20  and  27 
December 2007. These operations were renewed on 17 and 31 January 2008 and again on 
10 
 BIS Review 43/2008
25 March and 7 April 2008. The USD liquidity-providing operations did not have an effect on 
the supply of euro liquidity. Similar operations were also carried out by the Swiss National 
Bank. 
At each of the first four operations, the volumes of US dollar loans provided with a maturity of 
one month totalled USD 10 billion, while at the last two operations, US dollar loans for a total 
of USD 15 billion were offered. The operations were conducted at a fixed rate equal to the 
marginal rate of the simultaneous Federal Reserve tenders.  
 
Boxes 1 and 2 explain in greater detail these measures, let me point out that, in fact, they are 
all only rather minor adjustments to the existing operational framework for monetary policy 
implementation, which, has so far, proved to be sufficiently flexible to cope with the recent 
tensions in the market.  
Third, throughout the period of financial market turmoil, the ECB has promptly communicated 
to  the  market  its  liquidity  policy  intentions  and  explained  its  actions  via  press  releases, 
statements  on  newswire  services  and  other  communications  channels  (e.g.  speeches, 
articles  in  the  Monthly  Bulletin,  etc.).  These  communication  efforts  have  supported  the 
monetary policy implementation operations by reassuring the market on the readiness of the 
ECB to take adequate measures when necessary.  
to 
to  respond 
the  challenges 
the  Eurosystem 
Eurosystem’s collateral framework 
The  ability  of 
for  monetary  policy 
implementation posed by the recent period of financial market volatility, that in many senses 
represents  its  most  difficult  test  from  the  start  of  Monetary  Union  in  1999,  has  to  a  large 
extent depended on its collateral framework. 
Indeed, the collateral framework is considered to have played an important role in supporting 
the functioning of the money market and effectively addressing the asset refinancing needs 
of counterparties, without requiring ad-hoc changes.  
In order to understand the role of the collateral framework in the current turmoil, let me recall 
a key principle of the Eurosystem’s operational framework stating that all credit operations 
need to be based on adequate collateral.8 The concept of adequacy implies, first, by statute 
that the Eurosystem should be protected from incurring losses in its credit operations and, 
second, as a policy consideration that sufficient collateral should be available to a wide set of 
counterparties,  so  that  the  ability  of  the  Eurosystem  to  provide  the  amount  of  liquidity  it 
deems necessary for both its monetary policy and payment systems operations should not 
be  impeded  by  a  shortage  of  collateral  in  the  banking  sector  as  a  whole,  or  even  in  a 
significant  part  of  the  banking  sector.  To  ensure  that  this  is  not  the  case,  the  Eurosystem 
accepts  a  broad  range  of  debt  instruments  as  collateral,  ranging  from  government  bonds, 
bonds  issued  by  supranational  institutions,  covered  and  uncovered  bank  bonds,  corporate 
bonds  and  asset  backed  securities  (ABS)  to  non-marketable  instruments,  such  as  credit 
claims.  
This wide list of eligible assets – together with the sizeable number of counterparties and the 
large size of its refinancing operations – has helped the Eurosystem to implement its liquidity 
management policies during the recent period of decline in market and banking liquidity. 
                                                 
8   For an analysis of the role of the collateral frameworks in the Eurosystem’s monetary policy operations see 
Bindseil, U. and F. Papadia (2006), Credit risk mitigation in central bank operations and its effects on financial 
markets: The case of the Eurosystem, ECB Occasional Paper 49. 
BIS Review 43/2008 
 11
More specifically, by allowing the refinancing of ABS at a large scale at rates close to ECB 
policy rates, the collateral framework may have also contributed to financial stability, at least 
in the short term, by avoiding forced sales of ABS, which would have intensified the liquidity 
crisis in the ABS market.  
Two  significant  developments  have  been  observed  during  the  turmoil  with  respect  to  the 
Eurosystem collateral framework. 
The  total  amount  of  collateral  held  with  the  Eurosystem  by  counterparties  has  increased 
significantly, the main reason being that banks have increased their collateral buffer, i.e. the 
amount of collateral held with the Eurosystem in excess of the amount of collateral needed 
for  monetary  policy  operations  (over-collateralization).  This  amount  has  increased  from 
around EUR 600 billions in the first half of 2007 to around EUR 800 billions. The increase in 
over-collateralization during the turmoil might reflect a natural preference of banks to expand 
their  liquidity  buffers  –  in  order  to  get  maximum  access  to  intraday  liquidity  and  to  the 
marginal lending facility in case of need. In addition to this, banks have had to collateralise 
temporarily  higher  amounts  of  outstanding  Eurosystem  credit  because  of  the  frontloading 
policy.  Finally,  regulatory  incentives  might  have  played  a  role,  as  regulators  may  have 
allowed banks to apply better liquidity ratios to assets held with the Eurosystem. Despite the 
significant rise in collateral held with the Eurosystem, there are no developments indicating a 
shortage of eligible collateral. 
The share of asset-backed securities (ABS) in the total collateral held with the Eurosystem 
has  risen  to  more  than  one-fifth  in  December  2007.  As  liquidity  in  ABS  primary  and 
secondary  markets  (including  ABS-based  repo  markets)  has  dried  out  almost  completely 
during the turmoil, counterparties have intensified the use of ABS as Eurosystem collateral. It 
should  however  be  noted  that  assets  held  as  collateral  with  the  Eurosystem  are  not 
refinanced  by  the  Eurosystem  on  a  one-to-one  basis,  given  the  high  degree  of  over-
collateralization of Eurosystem credit that I have mentioned above.  
Actions of other central banks 
As regards other central banks, in general their primary response to the market turmoil has 
been  to  intervene  to  keep  short-term  money  market  rates  near  target  rates,  through  more 
active  liquidity  management.  Moreover,  central  banks  have  aimed  to  ease  the  increasing 
pressure in term money markets by: (1) increasing the viability of standing loan facilities as 
backstop funding options; (2) boosting the share of longer-term operations in total refinancing 
provided  to  banks;  and  (3)  expanding  the  range  of  acceptable  collateral  and  eligible 
counterparties, in those countries where it was needed. 
Central  banks  have  also  gradually  increased  their  mutual  cooperation,  initially  through 
enhanced communication and collective monitoring of market developments, and later on by 
undertaking  coordinated  actions  to  provide  funds  over  the  year-end.  These  actions  have 
included the establishment of the earlier-mentioned foreign exchange swaps.  
Box 3  
Operations by other central banks  
More  in  detail,  the  actions  undertaken  by  other  central  banks  in  response  to  the  market 
turmoil have included the following: 
In  order  to  steer  short-term  market  rates,  central  banks  have  conducted  operations  that 
were either outside their regular schedule or provided amounts larger than usual, and have 
taken further steps to equilibrate demand and supply for central bank reserves at the policy 
12 
 BIS Review 43/2008
rate.  
- 
      The Federal Reserve on 17 August 2007 enhanced the attractiveness of the central 
bank’s standing loan facility by cutting the spread between the interest rate on its 
lending facility (the discount rate) and the federal funds rate target to 50 basis points 
(from  100  basis  points),  and  by  increasing  the  allowable  term  on  loans  from 
overnight to 30 days. On 16 March 2008, the spread between the discount rate and 
the Fed funds target rate was further reduced to 25 basis points and a new facility 
for  primary  dealers  was  introduced  (Primary  Dealer  Credit  Facility  –  PDCF).  This 
facility, which is very similar to the discount window for depository institutions, has 
been heavily used from the beginning. 
The Bank of England increased target ranges for the maintenance period from the 
normal ± 1% up to ± 60%, thereby greatly increasing flexibility of banks. 
Central banks have also sought to address continued pressures in term markets.  
The  Federal  Reserve  has  provided  longer-term  financing  (28  days)  to  primary 
dealers  and  introduced  a  Term  Auction  Facility  (also  28  days)  for  depository 
institutions.  The  Swiss  National  Bank  carried  out  its  first  ever  three-month 
repurchase  transaction  on  13  September.  The  Bank  of  England,  offered  in 
September  and  October  2007  a  sequence  of  additional  longer-term  refinancing 
auctions, which, in March 2008, were rolled over, with their size further increased. 
Moreover,  at  the  end  of  2007  many  central  banks  anticipated  or  expanded  the 
provision of term funds that spanned into 2008 in order to ease year-end pressures. 
Another  important  development  has  the  enlargement  of  the  range  of  eligible 
collateral  by  several  central  banks,  temporarily  or  permanently,  and  of  the  list  of 
eligible counterparties.  
The  new  Term  Auction  Facility  (TAF)  introduced  by  the  Fed  extended  the  broad 
range of discount window collateral to a series of substantial longer-term refinancing 
operations structured as loans against pools of collateral.  
The  Bank  of  England  broadened  its  relatively  narrow  range  of  collateral  for  its 
additional longer term operations.  
The  Bank  of  Canada  and  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Australia  also  widened  the  list  of 
collateral eligible for (some of) their operations.  
On 11 March 2008, the Fed introduced a new Term Securities Lending Facility under which 
market participants can swap, for periods of 28 days, certain securities with currently limited 
market liquidity (but very high credit rating) into highly liquid Treasury securities. This facility 
allows counterparties to mobilise certain types of collateral, without however having a direct 
impact  on  the  Fed’s  liquidity  management,  as  the  Fed  provides  Treasury  securities  rather 
than cash in return. 
5.  
Preliminary lessons of the turmoil and ongoing initiatives 
Lessons from an operational framework point of view 
5.1. 
Since  its  inception  the  operational  framework  of  the  Eurosystem,  which  I  have  described 
earlier on, has been tested on several occasions. One such occasion was the management 
of the cash changeover in early 2002; another test of the resilience of the framework came 
after the terrorist attacks in September 2001. The present market turmoil however has posed 
new  challenges  to  the  framework,  and  in  many  aspects  even  more  significant  than  those 
faced in the past.  
BIS Review 43/2008 
 13
I would like to stress that the ECB, with its regular set of tools, has been able to stabilise 
short-term money market rates reasonably well during the ongoing turmoil. Several features 
of the framework have been – and continue to be – important in this regard. In normal times, 
the regularity and predictability of operations (such as the conduct of weekly main refinancing 
operations with predictable allotment amounts) is useful in order to stabilise money market 
rates.  Indeed,  with  the  benefit  of  several  years  of  experience,  the  Eurosystem  and  its 
counterparties  have  learned  to  interpret  and  predict  each  other’s  actions.  This  has  led  to 
stable behaviour in banks’ participation in the ECB’s operations.  
In stressful times, some other features have proved to be very useful, including in particular 
the wide range of eligible collateral, the large number of counterparties and probably also the 
relatively  large  size  of  refinancing  operations.  The  flexibility  of  the  framework  is  another 
feature which is very valuable during turmoil. A good illustration is, for instance, the ability to 
conduct fine-tuning operations. Other examples are the introduction of supplementary long-
term  refinancing  operations  –  not  only  in  the  regular  3-month  tenor,  but  also  for  6-month 
maturities.  
Let me briefly recall the specific way in which the different features of the framework have 
proved to be important in the recent turmoil period: 
First of all, the flexibility of the operational framework has proven to be extremely valuable, 
because  it  has  allowed  the  ECB  to  adjust  its  liquidity  supply  at  any  time  in  line  with  the 
changing demand for central bank balances. 
In this regard, let me stress one particularly important feature of the framework, namely the 
strict  separation  of  actions  related  to  liquidity  policy  from  the  monetary  policy  stance.  The 
technical  measures  that  have  been  employed  over  recent  months  have  –  contrary  to 
widespread  belief  –  not  had  an  impact  on  the  overall  liquidity  provision,  defined  as  the 
banking sector’s current account holdings with us. This is because all the additional liquidity 
provided has subsequently been compensated for by means of the provision of less liquidity 
later on. What has changed has simply been the timing of the provision of liquidity to banks. 
It is important to stress this – particularly at the moment, with risks to price stability clearly on 
the upside – in order to avoid a misunderstanding regarding links between liquidity policy and 
inflation. 
The second feature of the framework that has proved to be very useful has been the large 
number of counterparties in the ECB’s operations. The ECB has been able to reach a large 
number of banks in its open market operations at a time when the money market has been 
working imperfectly. As a result, the Eurosystem has continued to be able to influence short-
term money market rates. 
Third,  several  features  of  the  collateral  framework  have  been  important,  notably  the  wide 
range of eligible collateral. First of all, this has, together with the relatively large size of the 
Eurosystem’s  refinancing  operations,  allowed  those  banks  which  faced  reduced  access  to 
the  interbank  market,  to  raise  liquidity  via  the  Eurosystem.  Moreover,  the  wide  range  of 
eligible collateral has made it possible for banks (in their operations with the central bank) to 
economise  on  those  few  assets,  such  as  government  bonds,  that  have  continued  to  be 
tradable throughout the turmoil. In this respect, the framework has supported the continued 
functioning of capital markets in general. At the same time, the single list of collateral, which 
specifies  unambiguously  the  eligible  assets,  has  facilitated  banks’  liquidity  management 
under  stress.  This  has  contributed  to  the  continued  smooth  conduct  of  open  market 
operations. 
However,  the  continued  low  marketability  of  many  assets  limits  their  use  as  collateral  in 
market transactions, and this has had implications for the markets’ willingness to lend and 
borrow on the money markets. In this regard, I would hope that capital markets will continue 
to develop further so that markets are, in the future, better equipped to cope with periods of 
stress.  
14 
 BIS Review 43/2008
In addition, we continue to observe certain reluctance by banks to use the marginal lending 
facility  for  reputational  reasons,  as  if  recourse  to  it  signalled  the  need  for  emergency 
assistance from the central bank. We need to continue thinking about how to make sure that 
the recourse to this type of facilities is unimpeded so that they can be more effectively used 
for regular liquidity management purposes by banks.  
Lessons for liquidity risk management  
5.2.  
Some observers have argued that liquidity shortages are the symptoms of major failures in 
liquidity risk management by the financial institutions involved. Indeed, there is no doubt that, 
once the turmoil subsides, important lessons will need to be drawn as regards liquidity risk 
management. 
In  response  to  the  turmoil,  there  have  been  concerted  policy  deliberations  both  at  the 
international and EU levels, by the FSF and ECOFIN respectively, with the aim of addressing 
the  weaknesses  brought  to  the  fore.  Among  the  main  areas  of  this  work,  one  of  the  most 
important  is  aimed  at  enhancing  bank’s  risk  management  practices  and  especially  those 
related to liquidity risk. 
risk  management  practices,  and 
Developments at the international level 
At the international level, the Financial Stability Forum (FSF) has put forward a number of 
short-term actions to rebuild confidence in the creditworthiness and robustness of financial 
institutions, in order to facilitate the smooth operation of the market in terms of liquidity flow 
and provision of credit. In this context, supervisors and central banks are viewed as having a 
role  in  ensuring  the  existence  of  adequate  capital  and  liquidity  buffers  of  supervised 
institutions. However, there is a clear consensus that competent authorities cannot substitute 
the private sector for the more fundamental need of the market to recover confidence in the 
ability of the financial system to manage current risks. 
In the medium term, considerations for expected policy actions concern topics pertaining to 
the current regulatory framework and practices as well as market functioning. The former aim 
to  introduce  a  number  of  measures  that  will  reinforce  the  capital  and  liquidity  buffers  of 
banks,  enhance 
improve  competent  authorities’ 
assessments,  responsiveness  and  exchange  of  information.  The  latter  will  address  issues 
relating  to  the  attributes  of  the  “originate  and  distribute”  model,  the  role  of  credit  rating 
agencies and market transparency. 
The international committee addressing liquidity risk (and one of the authorities represented 
in the FSF) is the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (BCBS). The main current focus 
of a specific substructure of the BCBS ( the Working Group on Liquidity) is the update of the 
2000 guidance on “Sound Practices for Managing Liquidity in Banking Organisations”. This 
update  will  review  the  current  practices  and  strengthen  areas  identified  as  warranting 
additional attention due to the financial market developments. The update will include further 
guidance  for  the  supervision  of  liquidity  risk  management  and  will  address  issues  that  are 
pertinent for cross-border banking groups. This updated supervisory guidance is expected to 
be issued by July 2008. 
It is also worth to note that in February 2008, the Basel Committee released a report on the 
management and supervisory challenges related to liquidity risk resulting from the structural 
changes  in  financial  markets.  The  report  reviews  different  jurisdictions’  approaches  to 
supervising  and  regulating  funding  liquidity  risk  and  assesses  preliminary  lessons  and 
implications arising from the market turmoil. 
Its main findings can be summarised in the following three points: 
First, the structural changes in the financial markets have given rise to  a significant set of 
challenges in assessing liquidity risk. In this respect, the establishment of the “originate and 
distribute”  model  as  well  as  the  growing  use  of  securitisation  and  market  –based  funding 
BIS Review 43/2008 
 15
the 
have increased the funding capacity of institutions at the price of increasing their vulnerability 
to  adverse  market  conditions.  The  increased  use  of  securitisation  has  also  engendered 
contingent  liquidity  risk,  for  instance,  through  liquidity  backstop  arrangements,  early 
amortisation  provisions,  or  through  support  of  sponsored  conduits  and  off-balance  sheet 
vehicles. Money market instruments, being much more volatile than retail deposits, require a 
prompt replacement of any loss of funding. Moreover, these instruments are difficult to price, 
as they are normally not actively traded and their short track period impinges on the reliability 
of cash-flow predictions and correlations with other financial assets.  
Second, the real-time nature of an  increasing number of payment and settlement  systems 
has  heightened 
liquidity  risk  management.  The  recent 
improvements to the design of payment and settlement systems pose increasing challenges. 
For  instance,  eventual  failures  in  time-critical  payments  and  major  liquidity  shocks  can  be 
transmitted  from  one  institution  to  another,  both  domestically  or  internationally.  Moreover, 
institutions must  ensure  liquidity  to  meet  their  obligations on  a  timely  basis  throughout  the 
business day. 
Finally,  financial  markets  are  increasingly  integrated,  which  in  combination  with  the 
aforementioned  structural  changes,  imply  that  any  event  in  one  market  can  spread  and 
reverberate more quickly than ever. On the one hand, liquidity disruptions can move faster 
across international markets. On the other hand, liquidity may not be fully transferable across 
borders due to rules from national regulators for local operations. Thus, institutions need to 
consider  the  conditions  of  overseas  markets,  as  well  as  the  time  and  restrictions  taken  to 
complete the transfer of funds or collateral across jurisdictions. 
importance  of 
intraday 
Developments at EU level 
At the same time, work has been progressing at the EU level in accordance with the ECOFIN 
mandate.  The  two  main  fora  conducting  work  in  this  area  are  the  Committee  of  European 
Banking Supervisors (CEBS) and the European Central Bank (ECB) in cooperation with the 
Banking Supervision Committee (BSC). 
The work of CEBS on liquidity risk management is covering the three following areas: 
First,  reviewing  technical  issues  such  as  collateral  management;  concentration  of  liquidity 
sources;  the  distinction  between  banking  and  trading  book;  the  relation  between  liquidity 
funding  risk  and  liquidity  market  risk;  the  use  of  internal  methodologies;  and  the  impact  of 
payment and settlement systems design.  
Second, investigating the possible differences in the regulatory and supervisory treatment of 
branches and subsidiaries and clarifying the underlying reasons and objectives that drive the 
different approaches in relation to the allocation of tasks and responsibilities for these two 
types of entities. 
Third,  assessing  the  possibility  of  achieving  further  convergence  by  developing  high  level 
principles for the use of internal methodologies in the supervision of liquidity risk. 
In  parallel  to  the  work  of  the  CEBS,  the  ECB,  in  cooperation  with  the  BSC,  is  conducting 
work aimed to investigate (i) the typology of EU banks’ liquidity stress-testing techniques and 
contingency funding plans, (ii) the performance of stress-tests during the turmoil and (iii) the 
implications of identified shortcomings for counterparties and money markets. This strand of 
work is currently progressing and is expected to be finalised before the end of 2008.  
Work in the field of liquidity risk already underway before the turmoil 
Although recently work on liquidity risk management has attracted increased attention, this 
does  not  mean  that  it  is  a  new  issue  in  the  supervisory  agenda.  Over  the  past  years 
concerns  were  voiced  over  the  divergence  of  prudential  requirements  for  liquidity  risk  and 
over  structural  changes  in  the  banking  sector,  such  as  the  increasing  reliance  of  more 
market-based and volatile sources of funding that could constitute contagion channels in the 
16 
 BIS Review 43/2008
event  of  a  stress.  As  a  result,  deliberations  and  further  work  in  the  area  of  liquidity  risk 
management were underway even before the turmoil, with the aim of ensuring that practices 
by  both  the  industry  and  the  competent  authorities  were  keeping  pace  with  the  rapid 
developments in the market. 
In this context, CEBS published in August an updated survey of the regulatory frameworks 
adopted by the Member States and the three EEA countries. The survey was conducted in 
light  of  market  developments  and  included  specific  information  regarding  any  different 
treatments provided for specific types of credit institutions and/or investment firms 
The ECB has also been performing extensive work in the field of liquidity risk management, 
focusing on three main areas, namely: 1) assessing the impact of structural changes in the 
banking landscape; 2) gauging the extent to which liquidity risk management practices have 
progressed; and 3) ascertaining the industry’s views about eventual barriers to the efficient 
management  of  liquidity  risk  across  borders.  In  October,  the  ECB,  in  cooperation  with  the 
BSC, published a comprehensive report on the organisation of liquidity risk management for 
cross-border banking groups in the EU, covering various pertinent issues, namely regulation, 
obstacles  to  the  pooling  of  liquidity  and  cross-border  use  of  collateral  and  recent  market 
developments.  
In  particular,  the  report  confirmed  the  trend  towards  the  centralisation  of  liquidity  risk 
management  policies  and  procedures  and  de-centralisation  of  day-to-day  liquidity  risk 
management. Against this background, the internal corporate governance and organisation 
of liquidity risk management varied according to the individual bank’s structure and business 
model. The use of more sophisticated internal liquidity risk approaches such as Liquidity-at-
Risk  was  not  common;  however,  cross-border  banks  were  increasingly  developing  such 
approaches for internal risk management.  
Coming to the factors affecting the liquidity risk management of cross-border banks, liquidity 
risk  regulation  was  not  considered  by  the  market  as  imposing  undue  restrictions.  Cross-
border  banks  requested  a  more  concerted  approach  by  their  supervisors  and  cited  the 
home/host arrangements and the large exposures limits as posing possible obstacles to the 
cross-border management of intra-group liquidity. 
Certain  obstacles  regarding  the  pooling  of  liquidity  and  the  cross-border  use  of  collateral 
were also identified, including the divergence in standards of access to central bank money 
outside the euro area, the non-connectivity of payment and security settlement systems and 
legal issues. In this context, the industry acknowledged the importance of the initiatives taken 
by central banks to address problems in international flows of liquidity and the cross-border 
use of collateral.  
In addition to the aforementioned issues, market developments that also affected liquidity risk 
management  of  cross-border  banks  consisted  of  the  shortening  time-horizon  for  payment 
obligations,  the  increased  reliance  on  wholesale  and  potentially  more  volatile  funding 
sources as well as the growing need for high-quality collateral.  
Let me also mention initiatives by the industry in the field of liquidity risk. For instance, the 
Institute  of  International  Finance  (IIF)  published  in  March  2007  the  “Principles  of  Liquidity 
Risk  Management”  consisting  of  a  number  of  key  recommendations  and  appropriate 
practices.  The  IIF  paper  establishes  that  the  needs  and  strategies  of  individual  institutions 
can  vary  for  a  variety  of  reasons,  suggesting  that  any  liquidity  recommendations  or 
guidelines  must  be  seen  as  describing  a  “range  of  good  practices”  and  not  necessarily 
prescribing  one  “best”  practice.  Governance  and  organisational  structure  are  identified  as 
critical  in  managing  liquidity  risk,  given  that  no  narrowly  prescribed  approaches  can  be 
followed, as liquidity issues arise in different ways for institutions with different structures and 
businesses.  Another  area  of  recommendations  from  the  IIF  concerns  the  coordination  of 
supervisor’s efforts, suggesting the harmonisation of regulations where possible in order to 
foster sound internal risk management systems. This would also include – in the view of the 
IIF  –  harmonisation  of  the  range  of  collateral  that  central  banks  and  settlement  systems 
BIS Review 43/2008 
 17
accept  and  increased  convergence  and  transparency  from  central  banks  in  their  role  as 
lender of last resort.  
Conclusions 
6.  
While the current turmoil’s ultimate cause are the substantial losses of financial assets linked 
to  the  US  housing  market,  liquidity  problems  have  driven  its  fever  curve  ever  since  its 
outbreak in the summer of 2007. Diminished liquidity in the markets that play a key role in 
enabling  banks  to  implement  their  risk  management  strategies  have  led  to  a  decline  in 
funding liquidity at individual banks and given rise to adverse liquidity spirals.  
In response to these tensions, the ECB and other central banks have undertaken a variety of 
liquidity management operations in order to support the interbank money market. However, 
some observers have argued that market tensions are partly the symptoms of major failures 
in  liquidity  risk  management  by  private  financial  institutions  in  the  past  and  that,  by 
supporting  banks  when  they  get  into  trouble,  central  banks  may  be  encouraging  moral 
hazard.  For  instance,  Goodhart  (2007)  has  warned  that  “liquidity  management  has  been 
passed from the commercial banks to the central bank”.9
There is no question that moral hazard issues need to be taken very seriously into account 
when  central  banks  decide  on  measures  to  support  the  banking  system  in  a  situation  of 
financial turmoil. Of course, any such support policy, if anticipated, will be taken into account 
when banks establish their risk management frameworks for “tail” events. Still, one should 
refrain from generalising and concluding from this observation that central banks should not 
re-act and support the financial system in the case of severe liquidity disruptions to money 
and credit markets. In fact, nobody would dispute that the entire economy can be seriously 
affected  if  we  allow  financial  market  turmoil  to  develop  into  a  credit  crunch  or  a  banking 
crisis.  
In  the  context  of  the  current  turmoil,  the  primary  objectives  of  the  ECB’s  liquidity 
management policy have been from the beginning clearly identified: (1) to steer the overnight 
rate close to its key policy rate so as implement the monetary policy stance determined by 
the Governing Council; and (2) to support the proper functioning of the money market as a 
whole by helping credit institutions to meet their liquidity needs in a smooth manner. By doing 
so,  the  ECB  has  contributed  to  safeguarding  financial  stability  and  supported  the  effective 
functioning of the mechanisms through which monetary policy is transmitted in the euro area. 
I am fully confident that, once the current turmoil subsides, we will have learned much about 
how to render the operational frameworks of central banks even more effective in providing 
access  to  liquidity  in  both  normal  times  and  under  stress.  At  the  same  time,  I  think  it  is 
legitimate to expect that banks will make substantial progress in addressing the weaknesses 
in their liquidity risk management practices that the current turmoil has revealed and that, by 
doing so, they should make it less likely that history will repeat itself. 
                                                 
9   Goodhart, C. (2007), Discussion of “Success and failure of monetary policy since the 1950s” by D. Laidler, 
Conference  on  Monetary  Policy  over  Fifty  Years  on  occasion  of  the  50th  anniversary  of  the  Deutsche 
Bundesbank, Frankfurt, 21 September. 
18 
 BIS Review 43/2008
