William R White: Some observations on the professional contributions of 
Palle Andersen 
Speech  by  Mr  William  R  White,  Economic  Adviser  and  Head  of  Monetary  and  Economic 
Department  of  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements,  at  the  opening  dinner  of  the  BIS 
Conference in Honour of Palle Andersen, Basel, 2 December 2007. 
 Elsebeth Andersen, other invited guests, ladies and gentlemen 
It is a pleasure to welcome you all here to this conference dedicated to the memory of Palle 
Andersen.  The  chosen  topic,  “Globalisation  and  population  trends:  implications  for  labour 
markets and inflation”, would have been of enormous interest to him. Sadly, this is perhaps 
the least of many reasons why we must regret that Palle is not here among us tonight. I will 
make  reference  in  a  moment  to  the  wide  range  of  topics  that  Palle  was  interested  in,  but 
supply side issues, and in particular the inflation process, were at the very core of his work 
over many years. And, of course, the topic is given heightened significance by the fact that 
we are fast approaching the 50th anniversary of the seminal paper published in that area by 
Bill Phillips. 
It  is  a  further  pleasure  to  thank  all  of  you  who  have  come  to  this  conference,  particularly 
those who have prepared papers or are discussants. But in addition, let me also thank those 
of  the  BIS  staff  who  have  put  together  this  “labour  of  love”,  and  I  do  not  think  that  is  too 
strong  a  term.  In  particular,  let  me  mention  Dubravko  Mihaljek,  Philip  Turner  and  Már 
Gudmundsson, each of whom worked closely with Palle (though in different ways) over many 
years. And finally, of course, thanks to Marcela Valdez-Komatsudani, who was in charge of 
all the logistics. 
I am pleased to have been asked to say a few words about Palle tonight. To the participants 
in this conference who were his friends, and I see there are many here tonight, some of my 
positive observations about him might seem self-evident. I hope that they are worth repeating 
nonetheless. And for those of you who did not know Palle, or knew him only by academic 
reputation, let me introduce you to a complex and endearing character who contributed a lot 
to macroeconomics, to the formulation of better economic policies, to the more harmonious 
functioning of the Monetary and Economic Department of the BIS, and to me personally. He 
was  a  big  man,  in  every  way  but  size.  Let  me  say  something  about  each  of  those 
contributions in turn. 
Contributions to economics 
A very preliminary assessment of Palle’s published work – that is, work published under his 
own name – yields a list of over 40 substantial pieces. As one who has “lived the life” of an 
international civil servant, I find this very impressive, since one has also to consider (as I will 
do  shortly)  the  hundreds,  if  not  more,  of  notes  he  drafted  for  internal  analysis  or  to  be 
published under the “brand names” of the OECD and the BIS. Moreover, the quality of that 
work is attested to by the fact that one of his products won the David Davidson Prize in 1971, 
and another was on the shortlist for the Amex Bank Review Prize in 1993. And, as a further 
sign  of  quality,  in  rereading  his  work  I  found  some  recent,  rather  good  thoughts  of  mine. 
Unfortunately, I found them in publications that predated mine by a decade and sometimes 
even more. 
Palle’s  interests  were  wide,  and  he  published  single  articles  on  the  demand  for  money, 
household  wealth  and  aggregate  savings,  macroeconomic  forecasting  performance  and  a 
whole  host  of  other  topics.  But  the  big  themes  that  engaged  him,  and  to  which  he  kept 
coming  back,  were  three  in  number.  First,  as  already  mentioned,  anything  to  do  with  the 
BIS Review 2/2008 
 1
supply side of the economy, but especially the inflation process. Second, the issue of fiscal 
policy  and  its  relation  to  external  imbalances.  And  third,  the  determinants  of  economic 
growth:  in  particular,  the  possible  effects  of  economic  openness,  macroeconomic  policies 
and, of most recent interest to him, financial reform and financial structure.  
Now, the single observation I wish to make about all three of these analytical areas is that 
they  defy  easy  conclusions.  Consider  the  inflation  process:  should  we  begin  by  assuming 
traditional Phillips curves or rather the New Keynesian approach? Further, considering that 
each  focuses  on  domestic  sources  of  inflationary  pressures,  should  we  reject  both  on  the 
grounds  that  they  have  been  overtaken  in  recent  years  by  global  forces  driving  inflation? 
Consider next the role of fiscal policy: is the effect of stimulative fiscal policy large (traditional 
Keynesian  view),  small  (reflecting  the  insights  of  Milton  Friedman),  zero  (Ricardian 
equivalence),  or  actually  negative  as  expected  future  deadweight  losses  associated  with 
higher taxes cause interest rates to rise today? And finally, consider the issue of economic 
growth.  The  fact  that  the  unexplained  element  in  regressions  continues  to  exceed  the 
explained bits, and by a hefty margin, makes one point very clear: we economists know less 
than we would like to, and probably less than we think.  
In the face of this continuing ignorance on all three fronts, Palle’s enthusiasm was boundless 
and therefore inspiring to all his colleagues, but especially the younger ones. He was always 
open to new ideas and approaches, which perhaps explains why he co-authored so many 
pieces  (including  one  with  me).  And,  to  the  end,  Palle  continued  to  maintain  the  high 
standards of a typical European academic. He loved data, but hated data mining, and was 
always suspicious of inductive rather than deductive methods. His approach is well summed 
up in a quote from a paper he once wrote with Willy Fritz: “Faced with the choice between 
using data to provide a structure for economic theory and using theory to put structure in the 
data, we lean toward the latter”.  
With this sentiment, I am wholly in agreement. 
In speaking of Palle’s contributions to economics, I would be remiss if I did not mention their 
international flavour. Having conducted research for many years at the OECD and then the 
BIS, it was perfectly natural that international comparisons would play a big role in his work. 
Of course he had his favourite countries. Being a Dane, he maintained a lifelong interest in 
the  Nordic  countries,  and  the  Governors  of  the  Norwegian  and  Icelandic  central  banks 
always tried to get his views when they were in Basel for meetings. Indeed, he was more 
than pleased, honoured even, when he was invited shortly before his retirement to act as a 
visiting professor at the University of Aarhus, where he had received his PhD. And finally, 
speaking as a Canadian, I am pleased to note that Palle had a special affection for Canada 
and Canadians and was an avid reader of the Toronto Globe and Mail (the sport section as 
well as the business section). In this context, it bothers me a lot that he freely admitted that 
he was interested in Australia even more. 
Contributions to policymaking 
Palle’s potential for contributing to policy issues was recognised early, when he left Aarhus to 
join the OECD and become head of the desk responsible for the United States, Norway and 
Denmark, and then became head of the General Economics Division not long after. In that 
capacity  he  contributed  to  innumerable  documents  and  provided  services  to  two  working 
groups known as WP2 and WP4. Palle once told me that he could have managed to service 
WP1  as  well,  but,  unfortunately,  there  wasn’t  one.  Then,  in  1983,  Palle  moved  to  the  BIS 
where, in effect, he became the General Economics Division of the Monetary and Economic 
Department, all by himself. It was, and still is, a very small shop here. 
Yet there are often misconceptions about this, as made evident by what is now a famous BIS 
story. At a dinner a number of years ago, a visiting central banker asked the BIS to write a 
paper  on  the  prospects  for  the  oil  market.  As  quick  as  a  flash,  Andrew  Crockett  (then  the 
2 
 BIS Review 2/2008
General Manager of the BIS) said he would get our oil department on it immediately. There 
was a pause, and then someone asked how many economists were in the oil department. 
Again quick as a flash, Andrew said “about 40”. And then there was another pause as those 
at the dinner seemed by their silence to accept this as fact. Astonished, Andrew then had to 
point  out  that  there  were  hardly  40  economists  in  the  entire  BIS,  and  they  had  to  cover 
everything: real, nominal, financial and, not least, oil. 
How could such a misconception arise? In part, it was because of the enormous output of 
Palle, and of course other colleagues, over the course of the years. I could not begin to count 
the ad hoc notes he prepared for meetings of Governors, Deputy Governors and economists. 
But I would draw attention to one of the last things that Palle did. A few years ago, he and 
Karen  Johnson  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Board  held  the  pen  for  a  study  into  global 
imbalances, and the particular role of Asia in that regard. It was a sensitive issue, given our 
new  shareholders  from  emerging  market  countries,  and  had  to  be  treated  in  a  sensitive 
manner.  And  it  was.  That  paper,  in  fact,  provided  the  basis  for  a  number  of  discussions 
among central bank officials where analysis was kept central and finger-pointing was wholly 
avoided. I am particularly pleased to say that this paper will now be published, along with the 
other documents from this conference.  
Palle  was  also  personally  responsible  for  the  principal  macroeconomic  monitoring  paper 
given  to  the  Governors  at  their  regular  meetings  in  Basel.  This  paper,  now  bimonthly, 
describes what has been going on in the world economy, asks why, and always finishes with 
pertinent questions to promote discussion. Its quality was attested to by Mervyn King, who 
went over to Palle at the end of one meeting to say, “I am really impressed by how much 
insight you can compress into only six pages”. That was quite a compliment from a man who 
is known to be both very smart and very demanding. And perhaps even more astonishing, 
Palle produced more than 80 such papers, over more than a decade, and I cannot recall one 
case where a Governor found a factual error.  
Finally, and this ties back into my earlier comments about Palle’s research findings, he was 
never dogmatic in his policy analysis. He could always see the two sides of every argument 
and  the  way  changing  circumstances  might  alter  the  balance  between  them.  This  was  a 
great quality to have in working for a cooperative institution like the BIS. Our mission, after 
all, is not to tell people what to do but rather to help our clients understand better both their 
own options and the options open to other central banks. Palle did this splendidly. 
Contributions to how MED functioned 
I want to finish with a few words about Palle’s personal qualities, qualities which contributed 
materially to the functioning of MED and to the pleasure that I took personally in the work that 
I did at the BIS. For all of the praise that I have heaped upon him, Palle was not an easy 
man. He could be overtly intolerant of those he considered as too big for their boots, time 
wasters,  or  interested  in  their  own  advantage  at  the  expense  of  the  best  interests  of  the 
department.  And  his  disdain  for  modern  management  methods,  consciousness-raising, 
performance  appraisals  and  the  like  presented  a  problem  for  those,  like  me,  who  were 
responsible for such processes. 
But  Palle  got  away  with  it,  because  everyone  knew  that  he  was  both  extraordinarily 
conscientious  about  his  work  and  extraordinarily  kind  to  almost  everyone.  On  many 
occasions Palle came to me to tell me that someone on the staff was ill, or overworked, or 
needed a talk for motivation. And I know for a fact that he often offered such help himself, 
and sometimes to the most unlikely persons. It was characteristic of him that the last note he 
ever prepared for the BIS was one for the Global Economy Meeting in January – a meeting 
that Palle (having just retired) would not attend. His rationale was simple: the note had to be 
prepared  over  the  Christmas  season,  and  the  much  younger  member  of  staff  who  would 
otherwise have to do it would be much better occupied at home with his family. 
BIS Review 2/2008 
 3
Well, that is all I wish to say. I hope you all now understand better why we are having this 
conference in Palle’s honour. And I hope you will find it a fruitful occasion professionally as 
well, as Palle would certainly have wanted. 
4 
 BIS Review 2/2008
