Martín Redrado: Globalization and the determinants of domestic inflation  
Remarks  by  Mr  Martín  Redrado,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Argentina,  at  the 
International Symposium on “Globalisation, Inflation and Monetary Policy”, organised by the 
Bank of France, Paris, 7 March 2008. 
 Globalization  has  grown  as  a  natural  evolution  of  our  era,  not  only  incorporating  more 
countries  into  the  process,  but  also  increasing  their  mutual  interdependence.  there  are 
reasons to believe that this phenomenon is not harmless for domestic prices; therefore, the 
critical question to discuss is: to what extent does globalization affect domestic prices and 
what  are  the  channels  through  which  they  are  affected?  This  session  –  enriched, 
undoubtedly,  by  Bill’s  paper1  –  aims,  at  least,  to  make  headway  in  some  aspects  of  this 
question. 
My comments are divided in three parts. First, let me introduce some general remarks on the 
paper.  Second,  I  bring  up  some  specific  and  constructive  comments  with  the  view  of 
complementing the approach of the study. And, before concluding, I focus on the prospects 
for inflation in the light of current financial turbulences. I put special emphasis on the impact 
of key factors for emerging market economies such as food inflation and commodity prices. 
Bill’s appealing work presents a detailed overview of the main potential and not necessarily 
excluding explanations for the dramatic and persistent diminishing of inflation over the last 20 
years. It also poses challenging policy dilemmas that arise from these trends and from the 
recent developments in  the world economy.  As he correctly stresses, domestic and global 
factors seem to have complemented to explain the decline of inflation worldwide. 
The paper’s central message is that the different mechanisms that have been proposed to 
explain the alleged impact of globalization on domestic inflation should be seen as working 
together rather than be perceived as alternative hypothesis. 
And, we can hardly argue against this view. In fact, I notice a trend, mainly in this type of 
seminars,  to  try  to  find  a  single  preeminent  explanation  for  each  economic  phenomenon 
under  study.  But  it  will  not  be  a  fruitful  approach  in  this  case,  given  the  complexity  of  the 
issue and the special historical context in which it takes place, which makes it more difficult 
to find a single ultimate explanatory factor. Indeed, all the offered explanations are plausible, 
even though the empirical evidence is often mixed. 
The author reviews the literature and underlines the limitations faced by each hypothesis to 
confront the so-called “puzzles”. The concept is that, even though each of the explanations is 
individually unsatisfactory, the aggregate effect of all of them fits the facts and removes all 
the puzzles. 
It may be so, but it is difficult not to feel that this “combined” explanation lacks some sort of 
quantitative support. As the author correctly points out, “the character of the shocks hitting 
the  global  economy  has  changed  over  time  and  some  forces  affecting  inflation  have  been 
more  important  at  some  times  than  others”,  which  clearly  makes  it  a  complex  task  to 
advance into modeling the study. 
Perhaps,  as  the  author  says  in  the  introduction,  macroeconomics  is  not  really  a  science, 
although  even  that  is  debatable  as  science  are  mostly  considered  so  for  their  analytical 
models rather than solely for their ability to forecast. 
                                                 
1   Forthcoming  BIS  Working  Paper  No  250  “Globalisation  and  the  determinants  of  domestic  inflation“  by  Mr 
William White. 
BIS Review 28/2008 
 1
Nevertheless, based upon Bill’s thoughtful piece of analysis, any attempt of further research 
to  quantify  the  magnitude  of  the  impact  of  each  factor  in  diminishing  inflation  will  be  very 
much  welcomed.  It  will  definitely  provide  additional  light  on  this  issue,  empowering  the 
author’s work. 
Let me turn now to the more specific points I find worth bringing up about this work. 
- 
The  author  seems  to  agree  that,  to  assess  the  relative  power  of  the  different 
explanations, it is sensible not to put much faith in output-gap measures or Phillips 
curve  estimations  (domestic  gaps  are  difficult  to  estimate  and  global  ones  even 
more so, disregarding the fact that it is not obvious that they can be meaningfully 
defined).  Indeed,  the  robustness  of  the  findings  in  the  literature  is  too  low  not  to 
attempt a different approach. 
In  my  view,  the  definition  of  output  gap  may  vary  when  we  refer  to  economies  that  are 
normally relatively close to their production frontier. Countries where incipient restructuring 
processes are under way may allow them to grow above the average for a few years. Those 
processes would be underestimating productive capacity and, therefore, the growth of supply 
will  happen  without  any  overheating.  If  we  add  economies  of  scale  into  the  equation,  it  is 
likely that prices will not increase when output is above its empirical potential (or its potential 
as estimated against a historical trend). 
Furthermore,  in  emerging  countries  with  somewhat  informal  sectors,  it  is  already  hard  to 
determine  the  effective  output  level,  before  even  beginning  to  consider  potential  output.  I 
always  recall  the  provocative  work  of  Robert  Hall  (2005),  where  it  is  argued  that  we, 
monetary policy makers, should not pay any attention whatsoever to neutral values for real 
variables  (such  as  the  output  gap).  In  my  view  we  should  look  at  output  gap  but  do  not 
consider them as the “bible”. 
- 
While pointing to evidence of a decline in the devaluation pass-through in emerging 
market economies, White writes that it is remarkable that inflation stayed so muted 
after the Brazilian and Argentine devaluations. 
Regarding  the  latter  episode,  it  must  be  emphasized  that  this  was  mainly  due  to  massive 
unemployment  before  and  during  the  crisis,  after  three  and  a  half  years  of  a  continuous 
decline in output. The significant excess supply of labor was by far the main factor explaining 
the  low  pass  through.  Yet,  during  the  following  12  months,  inflation  exceeded  40  percent, 
mainly  as  a  result  of  realignment  in  the  relative  prices  of  tradable  goods.  When 
unemployment began to be reabsorbed, inflation pressures resumed their upward trend. 
- 
A widespread hypothesis holds that lower headline inflation is due to lower imported 
prices  or  larger  imports  of  cheaper  goods,  as  a  result  of  lower  production  costs 
arising  from  higher  competition  in  the  face  of  production  factor  globalization. 
However,  this  essentially  microeconomic  explanation  of  such  an  essentially 
macroeconomic  phenomenon  is  suspicious.  Let  me  borrow  a  term  coined  by 
Cecchetti,  who  calls  this  the  “accounting”  theory  of  inflation.  The  problem  arise 
because  prices  affected  by  trade  are  “relative”  prices.  The  import  of  a  foreign 
product  that  is  cheaper  than  the  domestic  one  produces  a  change  between  this 
price and the other prices in the economy, while inflation is actually the aggregate 
change in general nominal prices. what is fallacious is to take these two notions the 
same  way.  This  is  better  appreciated  when  taking  into  account  that,  by  definition, 
when the relative price of a certain good falls, there should be a rise in the price of 
the other goods against which it is compared. 
The  authors  points  out  as  a  “puzzle”  that  inflation  should  have  dropped  so 
dramatically  in  many  countries  with  very  different  institutional  arrangements, 
different  monetary  policy  and,  above  all,  different  exchange  rate  regimes.  In 
BIS Review 28/2008
 2 
 particular, he stresses that, during much of the period under review, many of these 
countries had fixed exchange rate regimes.2 
However,  calling  it  a  puzzle  seems  exaggerated.  Lower  inflation  in  my  opinion  is  the 
consequence of a more “responsible” management of fiscal, monetary and wages policies, 
which might be a result of a growing awareness of the costs of inflation. These policies can 
be put into effect by diverse means and through different institutional setups. There isn’t a 
one-size-fits-all sort of recipe for implementing a more responsible economic policy. 
In  the  paper,  the  role  played  by  monetary,  fiscal  and  wage  policies  seems  to  be  rather 
underestimated.  In  my  view,  the  contribution  of  better  and  sounder  policies  to  explain  the 
trend of domestic inflation in both industrial countries (ICs) and emerging markets economies 
(EMEs) over the last 20 years has been crucial. The empirical literature has provided vast 
evidence, particularly for the united sates, that changes in policy objectives and management 
have been important to explain the decline of inflation since mid 80’s. 
In developing countries, where fiscal imbalances were a main source of monetary instability 
and inflation, improvements in tax and expenditure policies contributed significantly to explain 
the decline of inflation since the early 90’s. 
- 
Bill also mentions that it is strange for inflation to remain so low given that monetary 
conditions seem to have been particularly lax for a rather long period of time. This is 
a true puzzle. However, considering the recent trend in certain variables related to 
the opportunity cost of keeping money, as well as the high global growth in the past 
years. 
We  cannot  rule  out  that,  in  real  terms,  the  demand  for  money  has  genuinely  increased. 
Conclusive evidence to make this point is hard to find yet. Further research on the subject 
should add some light on this issue. 
- 
White remarks the low cost of buying protection against corporate bankruptcies until 
the outbreak of the August crisis. he compares the cost as of mid July 2007 with the 
cost  in  the  recessions  of  1981  and  1991.  However,  the  comparison  is  not  totally 
valid  because  the  depth  and  liquidity  of  the  cds  market  in  2007  was  enormously 
higher than in 1981 and 1991. 
Let me emphasize though, that financial integration should be given a larger role in 
the discussion between globalization and inflation. In particular, when assessing the 
effectiveness, credibility and commitment of monetary policy in emerging market to 
deal with inflation and inflation expectations. In my opinion, the depth of the financial 
system and its integration with capital markets has a powerful disciplinary effect on 
monetary policy as it reduces incentives to pursue expansionary policies as foreign 
capital would flow out to other markets with more predictable returns. 
 Also,  financial  development  allows  agents  to  substitute  assets  in  local  currency  to  protect 
themselves  against  inflation,  restraining  again  the  discretionary  use  of  monetary  policy. 
Moreover, financial integration allows financing current accounts deficits, weakening the link 
between  domestic  output  and  demand.  Then,  an  increase  in  domestic  demand  would 
translate into larger imports and not necessarily into higher prices. 
My opinion is that “financial integration” measure (like the sum of foreign assets and liabilities 
over  GDP)  seem  to  be  better  indicators  of  globalization  as  a  “price  container”  than  “real 
economy” measures (such as the trade to GDP ratio). 
                                                 
2   Actually, another way of looking at the phenomenon is that it does nothing but providing an additional reason 
to  understand  why  lower  inflation  was  so  widespread.  In  fact,  since  countries  that  peg  their  currencies  to 
another, in this case the US dollar, actually lack an independent monetary policy and borrow it from the Fed. 
As the Fed has pursued relatively prudent policies, in a forty-year term it can be expected that all countries 
with currencies pegged to the US dollar will have a lower inflation. 
BIS Review 28/2008 
 3
   White  mentions  the  possible  re-emergence  of  inflation  as  one  of  the  two  main 
problems going forward (the other being an unwinding of the various “imbalances”). 
But he does not discuss one very interesting aspect of this development: the recent 
pick up in inflation at the international level is to a great extent, a consequence of 
the process of catching up of billions of people in the developing countries to levels 
of consumption closer to those in developed countries, including changes in dietary 
patterns. Let me hypothesize that we are approaching a true law of one price, with 
developed countries converging top-down and emerging countries bottom-up. 
There is a risk that the insolvency that lies at the base of the current crisis (although 
manifested until now largely in a lack of liquidity) may impart an inflationary bias to 
the system  and that the unwinding of the imbalances leads to more inflation. The 
hypothesis  that  states  that  globalization  may  reduce  policymakers’  ability  (and, 
consequently, incentives) to temporarily stimulate output was perhaps never heeded 
by policymakers. Certainly, they do not seem to be acting in accordance to it now. 
Also,  we  should  not  forget  that  there  is  an  additional  “insolvency”  looming  in  the 
horizon:  the  unfunded  liabilities  of  social  security  systems  in  developed  countries. 
There be a temptation to inflate that burden away. Thus, there are both short-term 
and long-term reasons to expect a higher inflation rate in the future than during the 
“great moderation” period. 
Let me turn now to my last comments. 
Regarding commodity prices and their impact on inflation, the increasing trend is largely due 
to its own fundamentals, including above all the major growth in emerging countries over the 
past few years, biofuel development and structural changes in livestock feeding. 
Nevertheless,  seasonal  factors  are  also  influential;  among  them,  it  is  worth  mentioning 
supply shocks from climate hazard and geopolitical conflicts, and the increase in speculative 
demand to protect against us dollar depreciation and financial asset loss, and inflation. 
Agricultural  commodities  in  my  view  are  more  resilient  to  a  recessionary  outlook  by  their 
lower income elasticity and the relative strong fundamentals of emerging economies, where 
demand increased substantially. 
Soft commodities accumulate increases ranging from 100% to 150% since the beginning of 
the  century  with  an  acceleration  in  2007-2008  that  is  leading  to  historically  low  stock  to 
consumption ratios. 
In  the  cases  of  soy  and  corn,  where  Argentina  is  a  world-class  producer,  demand  is 
consistently outpacing supply due to a hike in demand for food in the emerging world and a 
growing demand for biofuels in the industrial countries. While supply stays in historically high 
levels  it  cannot  keep  up  with  the  demand  forces.  Just  to  give  you  an  example,  corn 
inventories are 30% below the average of the last ten years. The outlook of financial volatility 
will continue to be a source of speculative demand for commodities as hedge for inflation. In 
addition, the continuity of monetary policies aimed at reducing reference rates would likewise 
aid speculative demand for commodities. 
As the paper points out, food and energy impacted on the acceleration of consumer prices, 
especially  in  emerging  countries,  where  foodstuffs  have  a  significant  weight  in  the 
consumption  basket.  However,  the  prices  of  other  goods  and  services  remained  relatively 
contained. insofar as structural factors prevail over temporary ones, food and energy prices 
would  more  likely  have  second-round  effects  on  other  goods  and  services  through  cost 
pressures. While by the end of 2007 headline inflation accelerated in close connection with 
the behavior of core price indices, these second round effects have not materialized yet. 
Food  prices  can  potentially  lead  to  wage  demands  which,  given  the  stickiness  of  this 
component of the cost structure of the private sector, would result in subsequent increases in 
general  level.  However  the  risk  is  more  evident  in  emerging  countries  than  in  developed 
4 
 BIS Review 28/2008
ones. For example, the average wage in China increased by 26.9 percent year-over-year in 
the third quarter of 2007, significantly above the average of the past five years (16.8 percent) 
and well above the consumer price index increase. So, there might be some evidence that 
the downward pressures in consumer goods that come from china are reaching an end. 
To sum up, we central bankers around the globe face significant dilemmas and challenges. 
In spite of the opposing forces on inflation prospects, I expect that the slowdown in global 
economy  will  ease  excess  demand  pressures  and  at  the  same  time  it  will  contribute  to 
moderate marginally the increases in commodity prices. 
However, due to the structural factors in the agri-bussiness sector worldwide, I do not expect 
this scenario to change significantly. 
Emerging markets economies seem to be better prepared to face this new scenario and the 
slight  acceleration  in  prices.  This  is  mainly  due  to  sound  macroeconomic  policies  and  a 
favorable international context with commodity prices facing a long favorable cycle. And, in 
my view, policy makers in emerging markets are well prepared to face some social tensions 
that could come as a result of the higher commodities prices. 
In a nutshell, the challenges that globalization poses due to its impact on domestic prices are 
significant. But, now policy makers around the globe seem to understand that recipes vary 
from one case to the other in this complex scenario. This progress is, obviously, welcomed. 
Especially for us, emerging markets’ policy makers, as we have to catch up with growth and 
macroeconomic stability, deal with the tensions derived from buoyant economies and, most 
importantly, build credible institutions. 
In fact, it is more a synchronic than a sequential two-fold challenge: advancing towards the 
development  of  our  economies  and  constructing  solid  institutions  simultaneously.  To 
implement these policies effectively, the only possible way is to be firm in the implementation 
of  consistent  (I  mean  consistent  with  the  history  and  idiosyncrasies  of  each  economy), 
flexible and gradualist approach that has guided us in recent years. 
References 
-  Ball,  Laurence  (2006),  “Has  globalization  changed  inflation?,  NBER  working  paper  no. 
12687, November. 
- Hall, Robert (2005) “Separating the business cycle from other economic fluctuations, in the 
Greenspan era: lessons for the future”, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, pp. 133-179, 
August 2005. 
- Ihrig, Jane, Steven B. Kamin, Deborah Lindner and Jaime Marquez (2007), “Some simple 
tests  of  the  globalization  and  inflation  hypothesis”,  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal 
Reserve, International Finance discussion papers, number 891, April. 
-  International  Monetary  Fund  (2006),  “How  has  globalization  affected  inflation?”,  World 
Economic Outlook, chapter iii, April. 
-  International  Monetary  Fund  (2005),  “Globalization  and  external  imbalances”,  World 
Economic Outlook, chapter iii, April. 
-  Kroszner,  Randall  S.  (2007),  “Globalization  and  capital  markets:  implications  for  inflation 
and  the  yield  curve”,  speech  at  the  Center  for  Financial  Stability  (CEF),  Buenos  Aires, 
Argentina, May. 
-  Wynee,  Mark  A.  and  Erasmus  K.  Kersting  (2007),  “Openness  and  inflation”,  Federal 
Reserve Bank of Dallas, staff papers, no. 2, April. 
BIS Review 28/2008 
 5
