Ajith Nivard Cabraal: Foreign exchange reserve management 
Inaugural address by Mr Ajith Nivard Cabraal, Governor of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka, at 
the SAARCFINANCE seminar on Foreign Exchange Reserve Management, organised by the 
Centre for Banking Studies of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka, Colombo, 15 August 2008. 
 Deputy Governors, Director of the CBS, 
My dear friends,  
1. 
in 
training  and  developing 
I  am  pleased  to  participate  at  the  opening  ceremony  of  this  SAARCFINANCE 
seminar  on  foreign  exchange  reserve  management. 
I  also  welcome  all 
participants to this course and extend to the participants from the central banks of 
our  neighboring  countries,  our  resource  persons  from  BIS,  Deutsche  Bank  group, 
Citigroup and Reserve Bank of India, a very warm welcome to our country as well.  
At the 17th SAARCFINANCE Governors’ meeting held in Washington in April 2008, 
it was decided to organize a seminar in foreign exchange reserve management. It 
was also decided that the Centre for Banking Studies (CBS) in Sri Lanka, with its 
over  26  years  of  experience 
financial  sector 
professionals, together with the International Operations Department of the CBSL, 
should host this seminar, so as to provide a forum within the region to discuss 
the latest challenges facing the managers of sovereign reserves at present.  
My dear friends, foreign exchange reserve management has gained increased 
importance in Central bank activities in the recent past, due to two factors.  
Firstly, due to the phenomenal rise in reserve holdings of central banks, in our 
region,  and  secondly,  due  to  the  intensive  public  scrutiny  that  reserve 
management  has  attracted  as  a  result  of  the  significant  increase  of  foreign 
reserves in the national wealth of countries in our region. 
The drivers of this sharp rise in reserves are many. High commodity prices, increase 
of exports of natural resources, and increased remittances, have been among the 
main contributors to this situation.  
Consequently,  many  countries  have  been  able  to  systematically  accumulate  large 
foreign  exchange  reserves  over  the  past  few  years,  and,  in  a  way,  reserve 
accumulation is now possible, not only for the wealthy industrialized countries, but 
for the so-called developing countries as well. 
However,  these  reserve  accumulation  has  not  been  without  pain.  In  fact, 
developing  countries,  being  those  still  requiring  improvements  in  their 
domestic infrastructure and other systems, have found that the increasing of 
their foreign exchange reserves has resulted in a huge opportunity cost. This 
is particularly so because the funds collected in the form of foreign exchange have 
been  generally  applied  to  acquire  low  risk,  low-return  investments,  mostly  in  fixed 
income securities in industrialized countries. This situation has indirectly led to such 
funds being used to fund the huge fiscal deficits of several Western countries, or the 
expansion  plans  of  their  large  corporations,  instead  of  being  utilized  for  domestic 
infrastructure, which, on most occasions have been funded with high cost loans from 
those very same countries. 
This situation therefore, suggests that there must be now some innovative re-
thinking, about this process of reserve management. It should also prompt the 
reserve managers of the reserve accumulating countries to look beyond their 
2. 
3. 
4. 
BIS Review 99/2008 
 1
traditional  methods,  and  intensely  search  for  new  avenues  for  performance 
enhancement.  
The  philosophy  in  reserve  management  in  our  region  has  been  historically  based 
upon a very conservative approach which focuses on managing foreign exchange 
reserves,  by  limiting  investment  decisions  to  very  low  risk,  very  low  return,  high-
grade instruments.  
Perhaps,  as  a  result,  there  has  been  no  significant  cross  investments  of 
foreign exchange reserves within the countries in the South Asian Region. Of 
course,  there  is  evidence  of  mostly  concessional  loans  or  similar  types  of  direct 
investments, but not in the case of traditional financial investments, issued by our 
respective countries. 
It  may  therefore,  be  useful  for  those  of  us  in  the  South  Asian  Region, 
particularly  in  the  context  of  SAARC,  to  explore  the  possibilities  of  cross 
investment  in  financing  instruments  within our  own  Region.  In  that  way,  we 
would  be  able  to  shift  and  retain  capital  in  this  Region,  which  can  then  be 
applied in the development of our own Region. 
My dear friends, we speak of regional cooperation in lofty terms. We speak of our 
historical ties. We speak of our shared destinies. We speak of our common culture. 
But,  we  have  still  not  been  able  to  truly  cooperate  in  this  field  of  reserve 
management,  and  it  is  perhaps  time  for  us  to  take  the  preliminary  steps  to  move 
towards  such  practices  in  the  foreseeable  future.  It  may  be  controversial.  It  may 
pose some new challenges. But, explore, we must. So, I hope you would also start 
thinking about this new philosophy as well. 
My dear friends, achieving higher returns, given the current financial turmoil 
and  other  factors  associated  with  it,  is  a  challenge  faced  by  many  central 
banks today. The manner in which central banks respond to this challenging task of 
reserve  management  has  also,  had  to  change  rapidly  to  meet  with  these  new 
conditions.  In  fact,  it  is  seen  now  that  central  banks  have  started  to  gently  move 
away  from  traditional  asset  classes  like  the  government  Treasury  Bills  to  more 
sophisticated asset classes. With this development, we now witness changes in 
the  asset  portfolios  of  central  banks  in  the  current  context,  since  Central 
Banks  have  moved  into  more  dynamic  instruments  to  achieve  its  return 
objective  within  certain  acceptable  risk  parameters.  Consequently,  gold  and 
Treasury bill holdings traditionally held by central banks are now being challenged 
by investments like derivative products, securities lending and securitised products, 
and this trend opens out a new canvas for the reserve managers of central banks.  
The experience of the financial market turmoil has led to fresh new challenges as 
well, which are quite formidable. At one time, mortgage backed and asset backed 
securities  of  government  owned  or  government  sponsored  agencies,  were 
considered good alternatives for the generation of added spreads for central banks. 
However, today, the market fluctuations and credit concerns arising from the 
mortgage  and  housing  market  crises  due  to  overall  market  downturns  and 
increased  mortgage  defaults  in  developed  countries,  has  exposed  new 
vulnerabilities and risks attached to such investment avenues. As a result, the 
vital importance of managing risks associated with reserve management have been 
increasing exponentially in recent times. 
That development will lead us to another important aspect in this discussion. In the 
past,  measuring  risk  was  mostly  based  on  credit  ratings.  For  this  purpose,  the 
yardstick for measurement was usually provided by the rating agencies who were 
supposed  to  rate  countries  and  institutions  in  accordance  with  certain  pre-
determined norms. However, it is now clear that the rating agencies on whom 
we relied heavily to provide us with independent assessments of the standing 
BIS Review 99/2008
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
2 
 5. 
6. 
of  institutions  and  instruments,  have  obviously  failed  to  warn  of  possible 
weaknesses  in  the  balance  sheets  of  such  institutions  and  investment 
houses. In fact, perhaps unwittingly, they may have even contributed to the turmoil, 
by their ratings of pooled assets with large vulnerabilities, as assets of prime class. 
This may have been due to the weaknesses in their approaches, the lack of proper 
skills or the weaknesses of their governance frameworks. But, whatever may be the 
reasons  behind  these  failures,  the  challenge  that  we  now  face  is  as  to  how  to 
manage risks optimally in this even more challenging environment, knowing that the 
opinions provided by the rating agencies may not be too accurate, after all.  
Let  me  now  highlight  another  couple  of  recent  developments.  One  such 
development is the greater significance of the sovereign wealth funds in the 
context  of  the  phenomenal  rise  in  reserves  in  non-Western  countries.  In  the 
midst of the recent sub prime crisis, these funds have injected significant amounts of 
long term funds to the large ailing institutions to resurrect them or to prevent them 
from continuing with poor financial health. In that sense, the sovereign funds have 
acted as an immensely useful stabilizing force during the financial crisis. However, 
the injection of such funds has been received with mixed feelings in the geo-political 
context. I would think the debate on this development is just beginning and it would 
be useful for all of us to carefully watch the movement of this issue in time to come. 
Another important development in reserve management is the extensive use 
of  external  fund  managers.  External  fund  managers  are  being  increasingly 
engaged by central banks, as many central banks are yet to acquire the technical 
skills  and  competencies  required  to  manage  the  new  asset  classes  that  are 
developing in these dynamic market conditions. I would think this factor too, would 
be one that we would have to give a lot of attention in the future, and as to how we 
make  use  of  such  expertise  without  compromising  central  banks’  core  objectives, 
would be a challenge for all of us. 
My  dear  friends,  given  the  importance  of  reserve  management,  it  is  timely  to 
organize a seminar on this subject. When reading through your program, I realized 
that the organizers and the resource persons have done remarkably well in selecting 
the topics to be covered. In my view, the topics and presentations are just the 
right  blend  that  a  reserve  manager  would  wish  to  focus  on,  in  this  day  and 
age.  
Finally,  let  me  take  this  opportunity  to  sincerely  thank  the  resource  persons  who 
have accepted our invitation to share their knowledge and experiences on various 
subjects  relating  to  reserve  management,  the  Central  banks  of  our  member 
countries for showing high interest in this program, our own CBS for organizing this 
event, and I wish that all of us could benefit significantly from the program. 
I wish this seminar all success. 
BIS Review 99/2008 
 3
