Tarisa Watanagase: Mitigating fraud risk in financial institutions 
Keynote  address  by  Dr  Tarisa  Watanagase,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Thailand,  at  the 
seminar on “Mitigating Fraud Risk in Financial Institutions”, Bangkok, 29 April 2008. 
 Khun Kaisri, 
Distinguished Guests, 
It  is  my  great  pleasure  to  join  you  at  this  seminar  on  “Mitigating  Fraud  Risk  in  Financial 
Institutions”, hosted by KPMG Thailand. I would also like to thank the host for giving me this 
important opportunity to share the views of the Bank of Thailand on this topic. 
The  globalization  of  the  financial  services  industry,  the  increased  sophistication  and 
complexity  of  financial  institutions  and  their  services,  and  the  ongoing  advancement  of 
technology  continue  to  introduce  new  risks  and  opportunities  for  fraud.  The  pace  and 
complexity  of  these  advances  have  vastly  accelerated  beyond  the  risk  associated  with 
traditional  credit  and  market  risk  activities.  One  of  those  emerging  risks  in  financial 
institutions  is  fraud  risk,  which  needs  to  be  effectively  controlled  through  effective 
governance and sound operational risk management processes. 
Fraud  risk  in  financial  institutions  has  increased  as  perpetrators  use  advanced  innovation 
and  technology  to  identify  and  exploit  weaknesses  in  banks’  IT  systems,  databases,  and 
delivery channels, including ATMs and the Internet. Financial institutions must take care to 
ensure that system security measures are effective as a means to combat fraud. 
Fraud  can  occur  in  a  variety  of  ways:  the  inappropriate  actions  of  a  rogue  employee  can 
cause huge losses; hackers can access a bank’s mainframe or databases, which in the past 
few  years,  has  resulted  in  increasing  losses  due  to  the  theft  of  confidential  customers’ 
information. Depositors affected by ATM or Internet banking fraud also continue to increase. 
Although fraud is impossible to fully prevent, financial institutions can reduce the probability 
of  fraud  occurrence  and  minimize  losses  with  stronger  oversight  and  tighter  controls.  This 
leads me to the Bank of Thailand’s views on the critical elements for fraud prevention. 
There are three critical elements that all institutions must possess to most effectively combat 
fraud:  Strong  corporate  governance,  up  to  date  systems  and  processes,  and  effective 
internal controls and risk management. 
The  first  and  most  important  element  is  strong  corporate  governance.  Today,  more  than 
ever,  boards  of  directors  and  senior  management  must  provide  close  monitoring  and 
oversight as the business activities of their institutions are increasingly complex and as the 
level of sophistication of their customers continues to increase. In almost every case where 
fraud has resulted in huge losses, ineffective corporate governance was identified as one of 
the primary causes. 
Boards  and  top  management  must  set  the  “tone  at  the  top”  by  creating  an  organizational 
culture  that  places  high  priority  on  risk  management,  compliance  with  policies  and 
regulations,  and  high  standards  of  ethical  behavior  at  every  level.  This  is  done  through 
ensuring  that  comprehensive  policies,  procedures,  limits  and  controls  are  in  place  for  all 
activities and ensuring that expectations for compliance are fully communicated throughout 
the organization. 
Secondly, financial institutions’ IT systems and operational risk management processes must 
be up to date to reduce the risk of fraud due to system breakdowns, hackers, and processing 
errors. As you all are probably aware, customer information theft is rapidly increasing around 
the world. Technology is one area where perpetrators can often get ahead of under-prepared 
BIS Review 52/2008 
 1
institutions, gaining access to databases and  mainframe  systems, and accessing sensitive 
information including confidential customer data. 
Key  preventive  measures  include  ensuring  that  IT  systems  and  software  are  updated 
frequently to defend against hacking attempts, viruses, and other breaches. Robust system 
controls that carefully grant and monitor system access are equally important. 
Sound  operational  risk  management  goes  beyond 
technological  controls.  Financial 
institutions should have well defined policies, procedures, and limits related to all transaction 
processing. In particular, those units responsible for executing cash or other transactions on 
behalf  of  their  companies  must  ensure  that  controls  include  a  segregation  of  duties  that 
allows for an appropriate check and balance process. 
The lack of segregation of duties is usually a driving factor in fraud from trading activities. In 
both  the  Barings  episode  in  the  1990’s  and  the  most  recent  losses  at  Société  Générale, 
fraudulent  transactions  occurred  as  the  traders  found  a  way  to  control  the  execution  and 
reconciliation of their trades. 
That leads to the third and final critical element of fraud avoidance: sound risk management 
and internal controls. Financial institutions must be able to effectively identify and assess risk 
across their entire organization and ensure that process are in place to ensure compliance 
with internal policies and limits, laws, and regulations. 
In addition to the systems controls and the segregation of duties I have already mentioned, 
financial  institutions  need  to  have  effective  physical  control  of  assets,  clearly  defined 
authorization limits and exception processes, and comprehensive risk management reporting 
to management and the board of directors. 
After management and the board of directors, the institutions’ internal audit and compliance 
units should be the first line of defense in preventing and identifying fraud. 
Those are the key responsibilities for institutions in the fight against fraud; however, one of 
the Bank of Thailand’s key mandates is to ensure the safety and soundness of the financial 
system.  An  essential  part  of  this  is  to  make  certain  that  each  financial  institution  has  an 
effective  risk  management  system  in  place  to  identify,  measure,  monitor,  and  control  the 
risks  to  which  the  institution  is  exposed.  To  assist  financial  institutions  in  their  efforts,  the 
Bank  of  Thailand  has  provided  sound-practice  guidelines  to  local  banking  industry  in  a 
number  of  important  areas  such  as  corporate  governance  expectations,  operational  risk 
management, operational loss event collection, and security of electronic financial services. 
We  will  continue  to  provide  guidance  to  assist  our  institutions.  In  addition,  through  the 
supervisory process, we will continue to look for weaknesses in our supervised institutions 
that expose them to potential fraud. 
While the Bank of Thailand is here to support institutions in this manner, please keep in mind 
that the primary responsibility for fraud prevention remains with the board of directors and 
management. 
I  would  be  remiss  in  not  addressing  the  upcoming  launch  of  the  revised  Basel  Capital 
Accord.  Basel  II,  as  it  is  more  commonly  known,  establishes  expectations  for  financial 
institutions’  risk  management  processes.  In  addition  to  requiring  an  explicit  calculation  of 
capital  requirements  for  credit  and  operational  risk,  Basel  II  requires  institutions  to  have 
robust  consolidated  risk  management  processes.  Institutions  are  expected  to  ensure  that 
they  have  adequate  capital  for  all  other  risks  as  well.  Through  the  supervisory  process, 
regulators  may  also  require  additional  capital  for  institutions  whose  risk  management 
processes are not fully compliant. Institutions can best address the expectations of Basel II 
by maintaining or establishing sound risk management processes. 
In  Thailand,  the  implementation  of  Basel  II  will  start  at  the  end  of  this  year,  and  the 
preparation for its implementation is progressing on schedule. As our institutions complete 
2 
 BIS Review 52/2008
the implementation of Basel II, I firmly believe that we will see a commensurate improvement 
in the quality of risk management among our banks, particularly in the operational risk area. 
To conclude, I would like to reiterate the importance of preventive measures to combat fraud, 
and I applaud your efforts in holding a conference on this topic as it shows that you place a 
high degree of importance in this area. 
While  no  institution  can  ever  be  expected  to  be  completely  fraud  proof,  institutions 
maintaining key elements I discussed will have taken a big step towards fraud mitigation and 
avoidance. 
I wish you great success for this seminar. I hope you accomplish your objectives and I know 
you will all take a lot of valuable information from this timely and meaningful event. 
Thank you again for inviting me to join you today and thank you very much for your attention. 
BIS Review 52/2008 
 3
