Hermann Remsperger: Fundamental issues of stabilising the financial 
system 
Keynote speech by Professor Dr Hermann Remsperger, Member of the Executive Board of 
the  Deutsche  Bundesbank,  at  the  conference  on  “Determinants  and  implications  of  the 
financial  crisis”  of  the  Frankfurt  School  of  Finance  &  Management  –  Bankakademie,  HfB, 
Frankfurt am Main, 17 September 2008. 
 Ladies and gentlemen 
What I was afraid of has occurred. There is hardly anything more difficult than speaking after 
Michael Heise. Actually, he has already said all there is to say. But since I cannot simply stay 
silent, I would like to discuss with you some fundamental issues of stabilising the financial 
system.  And  I  hope  that  my  thoughts  will  perhaps  have  some  small  value  added,  even 
though  I  quite  deliberately  do  not  wish  to  go  into  the  very  recent  events.  My  topic  will 
therefore not be crisis management but the long-term prevention of crises. I would certainly 
be missing the point of the topic I am dealing with if I were now to list the whole wealth of 
existing  proposals  on  stabilising  the  financial  system.  There  isn’t  enough  time  for  that 
anyway. Therefore, instead of going into details, I shall try to highlight the fundamental issues 
that underlie many of the recommendations for action.  
I have chosen to take this approach not least because I am also constantly concerned with 
fundamental issues precisely as a result of my work and involvement in the Financial Stability 
Forum.  For  example,  one  of  the  questions  that  arises  for  me  this  morning  is  how  the 
institutional structure for maintaining the stability of the financial system should be configured 
in the long term, especially in the United States. Or, even more basically: how much freedom 
should  the  market  participants  have  in  the  financial  system  and  in  what  areas  are  the 
degrees of freedom to be limited?  
These  questions  are  the  reason  why,  for  my  talk,  I  finally  chose  a  matrix  with  keyword 
headings which feature all those recommendations for action that we encounter almost every 
day  in  the  media.  These  headings  include  “enhancing  transparency”,  “refining  Basel  II”, 
“reforming  deposit  guarantee  schemes”,  “regulating  rating  agencies”,  and  “modifying 
monetary  policymakers’  operational 
such 
recommendations  relate  to  three  sets  of  fundamental  and  interconnected  stability  issues, 
namely  
1 
2 
3 
To put it quite plainly, in setting the individual topics against the fundamental issues, it has 
again become very clear to me that a lasting stabilisation of the financial system calls for a 
holistic,  system-oriented  policy  approach,  which  is  based  on  institution-oriented  banking 
supervision but which also goes beyond it. 
Let me start with the fundamental issues in the area of regulation.  
key issues in the area of regulation  
questions about the institutional structure for financial stability, and 
fundamental issues with regard to procyclicality.  
framework”.  Under 
these  headings, 
Fundamental issues in the area of regulation 
I 
Put in a nutshell, fundamental issues in the area of regulation relate to the tension between 
the  poles  of  self-regulation  and  sovereign  regulation.  In  other  words,  where  are  market 
solutions possible and where is sovereign regulation necessary? Another question is about 
the  political  level  at  which  this  fundamental  decision  is  to  be  taken.  Is  it  the  national,  the 
BIS Review 115/2008 
 1
European or the international level? This adds a further, complex dimension to the underlying 
tensions and strains between self-regulation and sovereign regulation. I shall return to this 
point in a moment. 
But allow me first to emphasise that, in a market-based system, approaches involving self-
regulation are the obvious course to take. Put in simple terms, the state in this case relies 
mainly on the fact that the market participants, first, set the standards themselves; second, 
that they will commit themselves to complying with these standards and, third, that they will 
organise  an  effective  means  of  monitoring  this  compliance.  Now,  given  the  backdrop  of 
current  events,  I  probably  do  not  need  to  over-emphasise  the  fact  that,  with  regard  to  the 
necessary stability of the financial system, we cannot trust self-regulation alone. Sovereign 
regulation that “orders” the financial system is also part of the market economy. 
I take the view that sovereign regulation is particularly appropriate where the market players 
are unable or unwilling to set effective rules or where there are overriding reasons why the 
regulatory power of government has to be brought to bear. Banking supervision is a prime 
example of this: not only do banks have a key position in the financial system and, therefore, 
in the economy as a whole. They also have access, albeit a conditional one, to central bank 
money. As a result, there is unanimous agreement that self-regulation is not an option.  
A  fundamental  decision  in  favour  of  sovereign  regulation  in  banking  supervisions  by  no 
means settles the question of whether such regulation necessarily has to set detailed and 
prescriptive  rules.  Indeed,  regulation  can  also  be  organised  in  a  principle-oriented  way.  In 
this  case,  the  state  demands  that  the  market  players  follow  certain  principles  in  their 
transactions and monitors compliance with these principles. This approach should therefore 
not  be  confused  with  simple  laissez  faire.  Rather,  it  places  high  demands  on  all  those 
involved.  Above  all,  principle-based  regulation  is  predicated  on  the  supervisors  and  the 
supervised having a shared understanding of the prudential aims.  
If, with these principles, I now look closely at Basel II – the regulatory framework which has 
applied to our banks since January – I find both: rules, on the one hand, and principle-based 
provisions with room for manoeuvre, on the other. For example, Pillar 1 of Basel II contains 
clear provisions on how much capital has to be maintained for what credit risks. And, from 
the Bundesbank’s perspective, I would add that these regulations should be partially refined 
given the experience of the financial market turbulence. Among other things, we are in favour 
of higher capital cover for re-securitisations. This includes CDOs on asset-backed securities, 
for  example.  In  addition,  we  advocate  higher  capital  requirements  for  credit  risks  in  the 
trading  book  and  some  adjustments  in  the  area  of  qualified  liquidity  facilities  in  the 
standardised approach for securitisation. 
Pillar  2  of  Basel  II  contains  qualitative  requirements  for  risk  management  in  financial 
institutions, which are specified for Germany in the principle-based Minimum Requirements 
for  Risk  Management.  The  disclosure  obligations  in  Pillar  3  also  fall  into  the  category  of 
principle-oriented regulation. They leave the credit institutions scope in determining the type 
and scale of the information they provide.  
In  my  view,  all  of  this  shows  that,  although  the  question  of  “rules  or  principles?”  is  a 
fundamental  decision  of  sovereign  regulation,  it  is  not  necessarily  an  “either-or”  decision. 
Perhaps that also explains why, in reality, we regularly encounter a combination of principles 
offering fixed rules and flexibility. I believe that, on the whole, this is likely to be the best way 
to  serve  the  requirements  of  a  stable  financial  system  as  we  now  understand  it. 
Nevertheless, I can see an approaching debate in which the flexibility of the second pillar of 
Basel II is at least partially called into question by supplementary provisions. I would warn 
against this.  
As  you  are  aware,  however,  fundamental  issues  of  regulation  for  stabilising  the  financial 
system  arise  not  only  in  banking  supervision  but  also,  say,  in  securitisation  business,  the 
hedge funds and, as an especially pressing issue, in the case of the rating agencies.  
2 
 BIS Review 115/2008
In  the  United  States,  rating  agencies  have  to  be  registered  with  the  SEC.  Furthermore,  it 
should be borne in mind that Basel II relies on ratings for classifying bank loans. In Europe 
there is therefore a procedure with which agencies are authorised for the use of their ratings 
in determining a bank’s minimum capital.  
Following  the  experience  with  ratings  in  the  recent  financial  crisis,  the  current  practice  of 
having only a non-binding IOSCO code of conduct is generally perceived to be in need of 
reform.  The  rating  agencies  themselves  are  in  the  process  of  reviewing  their  internal 
procedures and rating methods.  
In addition, in May the Committee of European Securities Regulators (CESR) proposed the 
establishment of an international Standard Setting and Monitoring Body (SSMB) at IOSCO, 
in which the agencies are to set up standards together with the regulators. Compliance with 
these standards should then be monitored by the SSMB, albeit without the involvement of 
the  agencies.  This  approach  is  claimed  to  be  virtually  a  midway  solution  between  self-
regulation and sovereign regulation.  
As  you  are  aware,  the  European  Commission  has  now  put  forward  a  proposal  for 
consultation  which  envisages  an  authorisation  procedure  and  the  supervision  of  rating 
agencies  –  in  other  words,  sovereign  regulation.  I  would  like  to  make  three  fundamental 
comments on this. 
First of all, every effort should be undertaken to ensure that solutions at the European level 
are consistent with a level playing field internationally. The crucial point on which everything 
hinges should be the IOSCO code of conduct since anything else might result in competitive 
disadvantages in Europe.  
Second, emphasis should be placed on the investors’ own responsibility when using ratings. 
EU registration must not lead to “rubber-stamped in Brussels” being interpreted as a seal of 
quality for individual ratings.  
Third, an EU registration procedure would have to be decentralised in structure; in particular, 
no new authority should be created. The Basel II authorisation procedure is a good reference 
point in this respect.  
In  making  this  comment,  I  have  now  basically  arrived  at  the  fundamental  question  of  the 
suitable  sovereign  level  for  regulation.  National  and  international  regulations  are  in 
competition, with a third way existing in Europe in the form of regulation at the EU level. The 
more  decentralised  regulation  is,  the  better  it  can  be  adapted  to  the  characteristics  of  the 
financial  system  in  question.  The  more  centralised  regulation  is,  the  more  the  same 
regulatory conditions prevail. 
Deposit guarantee schemes are a good example of how the tensions between national and 
cross-border  regulation  can  be  resolved.  In  Europe  we  have  a  minimum  level  of 
harmonisation in the form of the Deposit Guarantee Schemes Directive. In Germany, besides 
this statutory deposit protection at the minimum European level, there exist additional, private 
protection schemes operated by the various categories of banks.  
Not  least  in  the  wake  of  the  bank  run  on  Northern  Rock  last  summer,  the  European 
Commission is considering a revision of the Deposit Protection Directive. It is aiming for a 
greater  degree  of  harmonisation.  In  particular,  this  concerns  a  higher  level  of  minimum 
protection and the abolition of the co-insurance. As the discussion in the EU now stands, this 
would  mean  that  the  principle  of  subsidiarity  would  be  basically  retained.  We  at  the 
Bundesbank attach great importance to this. Deposit protection has to be consistent with the 
specific features of the national banking systems.  
BIS Review 115/2008 
 3
Fundamental institutional questions  
II 
With the distribution of powers among the sovereign regulatory levels, I am now very close to 
the  second  set  of  fundamental  issues.  I  would  now  like  to  talk  about  a  number  of 
fundamental institutional questions about the stabilisation of the financial system. I am doing 
this because, during the financial crisis, it has become clearer to me than ever before how 
much  institutions  matter.  I  am  therefore  concerned  with  the  institutional  framework  for  the 
monetary, supervisory and regulatory infrastructure.  
In the USA, the shortcomings of governance in the financial system have been revealed for 
all  to  see  in  the  crisis,  at  the  same  time  posing  two  major  challenges.  The  first  challenge 
arises from the fragmented structure of financial supervision. In some cases, however, quite 
new institutional arrangements – that is, institutions – have to be put in place. 
With its “Blueprint”, the US Ministry of Finance has now presented an ambitious but cogent 
overall  strategy  for  a  longer-term  reform  of  financial  supervision.  It  envisages  a  radically 
overhauled  institutional  structure  with  a  complete  change  of  design  in  its  tasks.  I  see  one 
particularly important aspect of this blueprint in that fact that the Fed in the role of a “market 
stability  regulator”  would,  for  the  first  time,  institutionalise  a  primarily  macro-oriented 
perspective on the financial system. I await with keen interest how this debate will proceed.  
With  regard  to  the  second  institutional  challenge  in  the  USA,  namely  the  review  of  the 
monetary policy instruments, a lot has already happened. To begin with, the Fed was not so 
well  equipped  with  instruments  for  the  liquidity  policy  action  necessitated  by  the  subprime 
crisis.  The  Fed  was  very  quick  to  create  efficiently  functioning  instruments  in  the  crisis, 
however. 
When  I  now  look  at  the  institutional  structure  for  financial  stability  in  Germany  and  in  the 
Eurosystem, I would like to highlight the synergy effects between operational money market 
management and banking supervision. The financial market turbulence has shown us quite 
clearly  that these  synergy  effects can  indeed  be  very  large.  As  the  Bundesbank is  closely 
integrated  into  banking  supervision,  we  can  also  fully  exploit  such  synergy  effects.  Our 
deliberations  on  the  time  profile  of  liquidity  provision  and,  hence,  our  stance  in  the 
Eurosystem  benefit  from  general  information  from  banking  supervision.  Conversely,  the 
insights  gained  in  contact  with  the  banking  industry  in  the  practical  conduct  of  refinancing 
operations and in payments are helpful to the banking supervisors.  
These  synergy  effects  quite  certainly  played  a  part  in  the  Eurosystem  being  able  to  take 
early, resolute and successful countermeasures when the distribution of liquidity among the 
banks was no longer functioning as normal. In terms of the distribution of powers among the 
institutions, it is therefore sensible to have the national central banks closely integrated into 
banking supervision. 
And  I  am,  of  course,  also  glad  to  say  that  the  success  of  central  bank  operations  since 
August 2007 has certainly not been due just to the efficient division of labour among various 
institutions. Rather, the Eurosystem’s monetary policy framework has played a crucial part in 
this.  
As  I  can  report  from  my  own  experience,  but  without  giving  too  many  secrets  away,  the 
Eurosystem  has  earned  a  great  deal  of  respect  in  the  international  institutions  and  bodies 
which  are  dealing  in  depth  with  the  financial  crisis  and  the  lessons  and  implications  to  be 
drawn  from  it.  A  key  role  in  this  institutional  structure  of  bodies  is  being  played  by  the 
Financial Stability Forum, which our former Bundesbank President, Hans Tietmeyer, had the 
foresight to initiate within the G7 in 1999. The FSF demonstrated its great value in the crisis 
as  an  agency  of  informal  cooperation  between  national  bodies,  international  organisations 
and  standard-setters.  The  list of  recommendations  reached  by  consensus  and  adopted  by 
the  FSF  is  now  at  the  heart  of  the  international  response  to  the  turbulence.  The 
recommendations are being worked through in stages. A progress report on this will appear 
in just over three weeks. 
4 
 BIS Review 115/2008
Even  so,  it  is  undoubtedly  no  surprise  that  the  international  governance  of  the  financial 
system – as after every global crisis – is now being subjected to critical scrutiny again. If we 
are thinking about changes, I believe we should strengthen those institutional structures that 
did their job well during the financial market turbulence. For me, this means that, first and 
foremost, the FSF should continue to a play key role in terms of responsibility for financial 
stability. Its widely drawn membership from central banks, ministries of finance, supervisors, 
regulators  and  international  institutions  means  that  the  holistic  assessment  of  the  financial 
system is one of the key strengths of the FSF.  
The International Monetary Fund should engage all its forces in the FSF, above all, with an 
in-depth  analysis  of  the  way  the  financial  system  interacts  with  the  real  economy.  For  the 
analysis  of  these  interactions,  the  IMF  can  draw  on  decades  of  experience  in  Article  IV 
consultations and a decade of assessments of the financial sector [FSAP]. The IMF therefore 
has almost ideal conditions for this in place. Despite the financial crisis, however, I do not 
see any compelling reasons for additional financing facilities at the IMF, which would bring it 
quite close to performing the tasks of a central bank.  
Fundamental issues of procyclicality 
III 
After  outlining  some  fundamental  issues  in  the  area  of  regulation  and  the  institutional 
structure for safeguarding stability in the financial system, let me now turn to my third key 
issue, which, internationally, is right at the top of the agenda and, in my view, will also be 
under discussion for some time to come. Mario Draghi, the governor of Banca d'Italia, made 
this  very  clear  yesterday  evening  at  our  Bundesbank  Lecture  in  Berlin.  Basically,  the 
question  is  whether  the  regulatory  framework  for  the  financial  system,  as  well  as  the 
provisions for accounting, act procyclically – and, if so, what can be done to counter that.  
To reduce the complexity, I shall interpret the term “procyclicality” quite narrowly for once, 
namely as a reinforcement of the natural cycle of the financial system. Procyclical policy and 
procyclical elements of regulation would amplify the natural upswings and downswings of the 
financial  system.  If  this  leads  to  boom-bust  cycles,  the  functional  viability  of  the  financial 
system is jeopardised.  
Naturally, considerable caution is called for when dealing with the topic of procyclicality as 
we still don’t know enough about the cyclical effects of regulatory provisions. Added to this is 
the fact that the potential means against any procyclicality have not yet been researched and 
tested in detail, such as components that dampen procyclicality or even automatic stabilisers 
in  the  regulatory  framework  which  are  anticyclical  in  effect.  My  concern  today  is  therefore 
quite  a  modest  one.  I  merely  wish  to  raise  even  further  your  awareness  of  all  the  issues 
associated with the proposition that the regulatory framework is procyclical.  
To  avoid  any  misunderstanding,  I  do  now  wish  to  stress  once  more  that  the  regulatory 
framework with the risk-sensitive minimum capital requirements under Basel II and the use of 
fair value accounting under IRFS (or US GAAP) does contain cyclical elements. It is unclear, 
however,  how  far  these  built-in  elements  can  also  develop  procyclical  potential.  Other 
experts  argue,  in  turn,  that  the  cyclicality  of  these  two  frameworks  is  a  side  effect  of  their 
desired  characteristics.  It  is  claimed  that  the  potential  procylicality  has  been  deliberately 
condoned  in  order  to  make  the  capital  requirements  risk-sensitive  and  make  capital 
requirements  consistent  with  market  conditions.  And,  just  like  you,  I,  too,  have  become 
familiar from this debate with the proposition that the traditional micro view of regulation has 
gained the upper hand over the macro or systemic perspective.  
What is generally agreed in all of this is that the risk-sensitive minimum capital requirements 
under Basel II are based on probabilities of default, which fluctuate over the economic cycle. 
In  a  downturn,  probabilities  of  default  increase  –  along  with  the  minimum  capital 
requirements.  Buffers,  which  are  designed  to  dampen  the  procyclical  potential,  have  now 
been built into Basel II. For example, long-term averages are to be used for the probabilities 
BIS Review 115/2008 
 5
of default and the assigned loss given defaults are also to take due account of scenarios with 
a potential economic downturn. 
So far, it is unclear – and how could it possibly be otherwise so soon after the introduction of 
Basel  II?  –  whether  the  cyclical  fluctuations  of  the  minimum  capital  requirements  actually 
impact  on  the  propensity  to  lend  –  in  other  words,  whether  they  really  have  a  procyclical 
effect. The extent to which this happens hinges on a large number of factors – for example, 
on  how  far  the  capital  buffers  exceed  the  regulatory  minimum,  on  the  willingness  of  the 
banks to let these buffers “breathe”, and, naturally enough, on the use of alternatives, such 
as  raising  additional  capital.  Moreover,  not  all  the  fluctuations  in  actual  lending  are  on  the 
supply side; demand, too, can fluctuate considerably over an economic cycle.  
Furthermore, my cautious attitude to the question of procyclicality also has to do with the fact 
that  empirical  studies  on  the  impact  of  risk-sensitive  minimum  capital  requirements  need 
longer  time  series.  Less  than  one  year  after  the  introduction  of  Basel  II  in  Germany,  the 
database is still very narrow. It is not yet possible to make a detailed assessment of whether 
the minimum capital requirements are becoming binding and therefore acting in a procyclical 
manner. Knee-jerk responses, such as the general introduction of additional general capital 
buffers by means of Pillar 2 are therefore, as we see it, not appropriate. 
What is, in fact, called for is a close monitoring of developments and a careful analysis of the 
incoming  data.  It  is  important,  first  of  all,  to  gain  a  deeper  understanding  of  the  complex 
mechanisms of banks’ capital management and of Basel II’s impact over an adequate period 
of  time.  The  banking  supervisors  are  working  very  hard  on  this.  Their  findings,  as  well  as 
others, can then be used to assess any systemic effects of the prudential requirements. If 
procyclical effects exist on a significant scale, they should then be taken into account in a 
system-oriented supervisory approach.  
Now,  I  have  already  indicated  that  the  fundamental  issues  concerning  procyclicality  also 
have to do with accounting. Fair value accounting leads to valuations fluctuating along with 
market  prices.  This  evidently  heightened  the  financial  market  turbulence.  With  a  mark-to-
market valuation of the paper, losses result in falling asset values, making the reduction of 
risk positions seem advisable, thus triggering a further wave of selling. Computer-controlled 
procedures  for  automatically  limiting  losses  can  give  further  impetus  to  this  procyclicality. 
Conversely,  rising  asset  values  in  an  upswing  make  additional  investment  possible,  which 
can drive market prices up even further. 
Nevertheless,  by  means  of  “prudential  filters”  the  banking  supervisors  have  ensured  that 
these  fluctuations  in  the  balance  sheet  items  do  not  impact  fully  on  the  regulatory  capital. 
This  means  that  the  nexus  of  falling  market  prices  for  assets,  declining  own  funds  and 
restricted  ability  to  lend  in  a  downswing  is  dampened.  In  an  upswing  the  reverse  applies. 
This  prudential  correction  mechanism  therefore  limits  only  part  of  the  effects  of  fair-value-
based accounting, namely its impact on the potential supply of credit.  
IV 
Conclusion 
Ladies and gentlemen 
In conclusion, let me return once more to the beginning. After well over a year of financial 
market  turbulence  and  following  the  experience  of  the  past  few  days,  I  firmly  believe  that 
stabilising the financial system cannot consist solely in working through “to do” lists with their 
recommendations  for  action,  however  positive  and  correct  they  may  be.  Rather,  a  lasting 
stabilisation  of  the  financial  system  calls  for  a  holistic  policy  approach  which  links  the 
microprudential base – in other words, the perspective on the individual institutions – with the 
macroprudential  perspective  and  which  simultaneously  integrates  the  macroeconomic 
background and developments in the financial markets.  
6 
 BIS Review 115/2008
Realising such as a holistic approach is certainly not an easy task. But I regard it as the right 
course for arriving at a lasting stabilisation of the financial system.  
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 115/2008 
 7
