Erkki Liikanen: The tenth anniversary of the euro – a time to reflect 
Speech  by  Mr  Erkki  Liikanen,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Finland,  at  the  Professor  Ragnar 
Nurkse seminars, Bank of Estonia, Tallin, 10 September 2008. 
 It was only ten years ago, in May 1998, when European leaders decided to launch the third 
stage of Economic and Monetary Union.  
The European Central Bank was founded a month later, in June 1988. Under the Maastricht 
Treaty,  the  new  monetary  institution  was  granted  full  independence  to  conduct  monetary 
policy,  with  price  stability  as  its  primary  objective.  The  task  of  defining  price  stability  was 
given  to  the  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB,  in which  the  Governor  of  the  Bank  of Finland 
was, and is, a member.  
At  the  same  time,  an  informal  discussion  forum,  the  Euro  Group,  was  created  by  the 
Ministers  of  Finance  and  Economic  Affairs  in  the  euro  area  countries  to  discuss  issues 
related to EMU, such as the economic situation, coordination of economic policies, structural 
reforms, enlargement of the euro area and the external representation of EMU. 
Introduction of the common currency and common monetary policy had been preceded by 
four years of very intensive legal, regulatory and logistical preparations. It was necessary that 
the  infrastructure  for  the  common  monetary  policy  was  fully  operational  from  the  first  day. 
These preparations had remained largely unnoticed by the public at large.  
The  creation  of  Economic  and  Monetary  Union  was  also  preceded  by  a  great  number  of 
sceptical remarks from many commentators, including academic economists. Many experts 
in international macroeconomics doubted that a single monetary policy could suit countries 
whose economies diverged in many respects.  
The second major milestone, and the biggest one for euro area citizens, was January 2002, 
when the changeover from national notes and coins to euro notes and coins took place in 12 
EU member states.  
The euro area has since expanded by a further three countries, and, at the beginning of next 
year, the area will welcome another new member.  
Three months ago, in June, we had the tenth anniversary of the European Central Bank. The 
coming New Year will mark the tenth anniversary of the common currency, the euro. Today 
everybody,  including  the  vocal  critics,  agree  that  EMU  and  the  euro  have  been  a  great 
success.  
But there is no doubt that many important challenges still remain. In the rest of my talk, I will 
reflect  on  the  successes  and  challenges  of  EMU  from  both  a  European  and  a  Finnish 
perspective.  
European perspective  
Monetary stability 
Monetary  stability  is  the  greatest  achievement  of  EMU.  By  monetary  stability,  I  mean  the 
absence  of  tensions  on  the  money  and  currency  markets.  These  tensions  diminished  and 
practically disappeared on the road to EMU. The launch of EMU then made such tensions 
impossible between the participating countries.  
BIS Review 108/2008 
 1
But  EMU  has  also  contributed  to  monetary  stability  in  non-participating  countries.  Many  of 
these countries have the objective to join EMU and are therefore committed to conducting 
stability-oriented policies to make participation possible at a later date.  
EMU has contributed to the monetary stability of floating exchange countries as well. This is 
because  these  countries  have  also  conducted  stability-oriented  policies  aiming  at  low 
inflation and sound government finances.  
Two forces have contributed to this effect. Firstly, there is a size effect. Smaller neighbours 
have  an  incentive  to  conduct  stability-oriented  policies  as  long  as  they  have  a  large 
neighbour with predictable monetary policy aiming at low and stable inflation. Deviation from 
such a policy would hurt the smaller neighbours, not the large currency area. The cost would 
be higher risk premia and higher real interest rates. We only have to recall that in the 1970s 
and  1980s  Germany  had  lower  real  interest  rates  than  its  neighbours,  which  were  less 
successful in maintaining monetary stability.  
Secondly, there is a political-economy argument. The existence of a large area of monetary 
stability makes it easier, or at least less difficult, for the political leaders of smaller neighbours 
to resist in situations where special interest groups are calling for more inflationary policies. 
They  might  sometimes  think  that  they  suffer  from  too  high  interest  rates  or  too  strong  an 
exchange rate. The risk of time inconsistency is thereby reduced.  
European  history  has  witnessed  repeated  episodes  of  monetary  instability.  Typically,  the 
instability has been caused by an economic slowdown or recession. This was the case at the 
beginning of the 1980s and the 1990s, as well as in the mid-1970s. The ultimate trigger for 
instability was the different policy reactions to the shocks that occurred at these times. 
Europe  is  now  going  through  a  challenging  period.  Economic  activity  is  weakening  due  to 
higher commodity prices, which dampen consumption and investment, and also due to the 
uncertainty  the  recent  financial  market  turbulence  is  causing  for  the  growth  outlook.  Had 
EMU not been a reality, we would probably now be experiencing a similar, or even worse, 
monetary mess than Europe experienced at the beginning of the 1990s.  
Price stability 
Monetary  stability  and  price  stability  are  inseparable.  We  cannot  have  monetary  stability 
without  price  stability.  Price  stability,  in  turn,  is  a  precondition  for  sustainable  growth.  It 
reduces  uncertainty,  which  is  reflected  in  lower  real  interest  rates,  thus  supporting 
investment. It also promotes competition, which accelerates productivity growth. Productivity 
growth, in turn, has always been, and will continue to be, the primary source of increasing 
prosperity.  
Average Inflation in the euro area in the period 1999 to 2007 has been slightly above 2%. 
This is low compared with 4% in the early 1990s and 8% in the 1980s, not to mention the 
double digit inflation of the 1970s.  
It is not true that lower inflation would imply higher real interest rates, as some people today 
still  seem  to  think.  On  the  contrary,  inflation  risk  premia  diminish  as  inflation  uncertainty 
diminishes, and  nominal  interest  rates  decline as  low  inflation  becomes  firmly  anchored  in 
expectations.  This  is  illustrated  by  the  fact  that  the  real  long-term  interest  rate  in  the  euro 
area countries (EMU12) has been 2.4% since 1999, compared with 4.7% in the period 1989 
to 1998.  
 
2 
 BIS Review 108/2008
Inflation and inflation volatility by decade
EU12 
% p.a.
Average inflation
Standard
deviation
Long-term real 
interest rate
1989–98  4.7%
1999–08  2.4%
Source: European Commission, EMU@10 (2008)
SUOMEN PANKKI | FINLANDS BANK | BANK OF FINLAND
2
 The  ECB's  definition  of  price  stability  is  the  rate  of  increase  in  the  Harmonised  Index  of 
Consumer Prices being close to but below 2% in the medium term. Against this benchmark, 
the  inflation  performance  of  the  euro  area  has  not  been  entirely  satisfactory.  But  the 
deviation is understandable, given the repeated upward shocks in the relative price of oil.  
 
Monetary policy and inflation in the euro area
 6
5
4
3
2
1
0
Monetary policy rate
Inflation
1999
2005
Sources: European Central Bank and Eurostat.
2001
2003
2007
SUOMEN PANKKI | FINLANDS BANK | BANK OF FINLAND
20058
3
 The  recent  resurgence  of  inflation,  however,  is  a  far  more  serious  concern  than  the  small 
deviation of the inflation outcome from the price stability objective. The latest figures on euro 
area inflation now stand at a level which is almost twice as high as the ECB's definition of 
price stability.  
BIS Review 108/2008 
 3
Admittedly, much of this acceleration in inflation is, once again, attributable to relative price 
shocks,  that  is,  to  increased  commodity  prices.  The  central  bank  cannot  (and  should  not 
attempt to) affect relative prices. There is a risk, however, that relative price shocks of this 
kind can raise longer-term inflation expectations and affect price and wage-setting behaviour, 
creating a price-wage cycle and finally disanchoring inflation expectations.  
The  euro  area  is  not  the  only  region  which  has  been  able  to  enjoy  low  inflation  for  an 
extended period of time. Most OECD countries had similar experience of disinflation in the 
1980s, and they achieved a similar degree of price stability as the euro area by the end of 
the 1990s. Average inflation in Sweden, for example, has since 1999 been half a percentage 
point lower, and in the US half a percentage point higher, than in the euro area on average.  
Low inflation – a global 
achievement
♦ Low inflation and low 
inflation volatility achieved 
in most developed 
countries
♦ Institutions matter:
– central bank independence
– well-defined target for 
monetary policy
– transparency and 
accountability
♦ Monetary stability in the 
euro area has made it 
easier for neighbours to 
maintain stability
10,0
9,0
8,0
7,0
6,0
5,0
4,0
3,0
2,0
1,0
0,0
10,0
9,0
8,0
7,0
6,0
5,0
4,0
3,0
2,0
1,0
0,0
10,0
9,0
8,0
7,0
6,0
5,0
4,0
3,0
2,0
1,0
0,0
Euro area
1960s
1970s
1980s
1990s
2000s
Average 
inflation
Sweden
1960s
1970s
1980s
1990s
2000s
Standard
deviation
USA
1960s
1970s
1980s
1990s
2000s
Source: European Commission, EMU@10 (2008)
SUOMEN PANKKI | FINLANDS BANK | BANK OF FINLAND
4
 The role of institutions 
Why this similarity?  
Globalisation  has  no  doubt  increased  competition  and  lowered  the  prices  of  manufactured 
goods  worldwide.  Globalisation  and  the  enlargement  of  the  EU  have  contributed  to  wage 
moderation, because of the threat of competition coming from low-wage countries.  
Globalisation in itself, however, cannot be the cause of low inflation. But it has made it easier 
for central banks to maintain low inflation at comparatively low interest rates. This, in turn, 
may have contributed to (sometimes excessive) asset price inflation in different parts of the 
world.  
A more fundamental factor contributing to low inflation worldwide was the institutional reform 
that profoundly changed the role of the central bank in most countries. The innovations of the 
early 1990s were central bank independence, price stability (or low inflation) as the primary 
objective of the central bank, and an emphasis on the accountability of central banks.  
These  cornerstones  were  written  into  the  blueprint  for  EMU,  the  report  of  the  Delors 
Committee. The Maastricht Treaty made the institutional reform obligatory for all EU central 
banks.  Many  other  countries  outside  the  EU,  and  outside  the  European  continent,  have 
implemented similar institutional reforms. This proves that such a reform has been judged to 
serve the national interest in a wide variety of countries. The central banks of those countries 
4 
 BIS Review 108/2008
have in most cases been successful in meeting their inflation targets, which has contributed 
to monetary stability worldwide.  
Central  bank  independence  and  accountability  alone  are  not  a  sufficient  guarantee  of  the 
happy  coexistence  of  price  stability  and  sustainable  growth.  In  addition,  we  need  fiscal 
restraint  to  prevent  a  widening  of  public  deficits  so  that  they  put  upward  pressure  on  real 
long-term  interest  rates  and  crowd  out  private  spending.  In  the  worst  case,  they  could 
ultimately lead to the removal of central bank independence, with central banks being forced 
to rescue governments. That would signal the end of monetary and price stability.  
Economic performance 
While inflation performance since the start of EMU has been satisfactory – excluding recent 
months – we have no reason to be happy with growth performance.  
Economic  growth  in  the  euro  area  since  the  launch  of  the  euro  has  averaged  2.1%, 
compared  with  2.6%  growth  in  the  United  States  and  2.7%  on  average  in  the  three  non-
participating member states: Denmark, Sweden and the UK. Labour productivity growth has 
been very modest, at 0.8%, which is only half the average productivity growth in the above-
mentioned benchmark countries.  
 
Growth performance
Employment growth
GDP growth
Productivity growth
SUOMEN PANKKI | FINLANDS BANK | BANK OF FINLAND
5
 But we must admit that employment growth in the euro area has been impressive. Since the 
launch  of  the  euro,  16  million  new  jobs  have  been  created  in  the  area,  compared  with  13 
million  new  jobs  in  the  United  States  in  the  same  period.  Unemployment  has  come  down 
from a peak of 11% in the mid-1990s to 7% today.  
This  strong  labour  market  performance  tells  us  that  labour  market  reforms  –  where  such 
reforms have been introduced – have brought about the desired results. These reforms have 
contributed  to  a  rise  in  employment  among  less-skilled  workers,  which  partly  explains  the 
slow rate of labour productivity growth.  
Despite  the  improvement,  the  situation  on  the  labour  market  is  far  from  satisfactory. 
Employment rates are low compared with the US or, for example, the Nordic countries.  
BIS Review 108/2008 
 5
These observations could, however, be turned into a more positive story. A low employment 
ratio  tells  us  there  is  a  lot  of  potential  for  growth  in  the  labour  force.  International 
comparisons have shown that the euro area lags behind the US in the use of ICT in services. 
More  investment  in  ICT,  and  especially  in  reorganisation  of  the  work  which  ICT  enables, 
would help to close the productivity gap and would raise per capita GDP closer to the US 
level.  
This can be seen as a promise for the future: There is plenty of room for improvement with 
better use of existing resources and better utilization of existing technologies. On top of this, 
there is plenty of room for innovation and upgrading our human capital.  
Employment rates would increase and the productivity gap would close, albeit gradually, if 
there  were  proper  incentives  in  place.  These  incentives  can  be  created  by  implementing 
structural reforms in product and labour markets.  
Structural  reforms  typically  increase  competition  in  both  these  markets.  Competition 
increases  entry  and  exit  of  firms,  a  phenomenon  which  is  sometimes  called  “creative 
destruction”. This requires greater adaptability and mobility than many people are willing to 
accept, which explains why it is so often politically difficult to introduce structural reforms. To 
reduce the resistance to change, social safety nets and positive adjustment support may be 
necessary.  
Model  calculations  show  that  increased  competition  may  bring  about  significant  positive 
effects.  A  study  by  Bayomi,  Laxton  and  Pesenti  from  2004  suggests  that  increasing 
competition in the euro area to the US level could boost output by no less than 12%.  
A  Bank  of  Finland  study  from  2006  examined  the  effects  on  the  Finnish  economy  of  a 
general increase in competition both in product markets and in labour markets. The increase 
in competition is defined as a reduction of excess rents in these markets by just a fifth – in 
other words, monopoly profits in the economy are reduced by 20%.  
This  assumed  reduction  in  rents  is  rather  modest,  and  the  model  does  not  assume  the 
increased competition to have any effects on the rate of technological change, so the total 
impact on output is not huge, at only about 3%. But more interestingly, real wages, which 
initially fall, as wages are brought closer to the labour market equilibrium, soon rise again, 
and end up also 3% above their initial level. Moreover, employment increases by almost 2%.  
Much of the early debate on structural reforms in Europe focused on the labour market. The 
product  market  has  been  in  the  focus  more  recently.  There  are  obvious  interconnections 
between the two markets. If the product market is characterised by full competition, there are 
no  rents  (extra  profits)  on  the  distribution  of  which  the  workers  could  negotiate.  There  is 
simply no room for any wage mark-ups.  
Frictions in the capital market are a less debated area. Yet they play an important role not 
only in financing the investments of existing firms, but also in the reallocation of capital from 
less productive to more productive uses. This is a part of the “creative destruction” by which 
the economy adapts to changes in the environment and raises its total factor productivity.  
There has been a lot of debate and analysis of financial integration. We know the euro has 
catalysed substantial integration in markets closely linked to monetary  policy. In particular, 
the interbank markets are well integrated – or at least they were, and hopefully will be again, 
once the turmoil passes – as are the government bond markets and, increasingly, also the 
corporate bond markets.  
However,  much  still  remains  to  be  done  in  other  areas.  The  infrastructure  supporting  the 
bond and equity markets is fragmented and hinders competition. Retail banking continues to 
be mainly national, except in our two countries and some others.  
We  know  from  experience  that  protected  sectors  seldom  develop,  because  they  lack 
incentives.  And  so  it  is  also  in  financial  services:  it  is  the  pressure  of  cross-border 
competition  that  will  motivate  innovation  and  productivity  improvement  within  the  financial 
6 
 BIS Review 108/2008
sector.  The  best  way  to  guarantee  a  high  level  of  financial  services  for  EU  citizens  is  to 
remove the remaining obstacles to competition.  
Financial development goes hand in hand with financial integration. Financial development 
is, in turn, an important determinant of competition, innovation and, thereby, productivity in 
the whole economy.  
Without well-functioning financial markets, economic power would be in the hands of those 
who have liquid wealth, collateral and connections, not in the hands of those who have ideas. 
That would be a recipe for stagnation.  
Financial  markets  create  the  opportunities  for  newcomers  to  dislodge  the  incumbent,  to 
leapfrog  them  by  innovating.  Competition  increases,  monopoly  rents  fall  and  productivity 
rises.  
The Finnish perspective  
Finland's road to EMU 
Finland was among the first group of countries that moved to the third stage of EMU at the 
beginning of 1999. Finland had been a member of the EU for three and a half years at that 
time. The currency had been part of ERM2 for less than two years.  
At the time of Finland's accession to the European Union in 1995 it was not yet certain that 
EMU  would  become  a  reality.  The  likelihood  that  Finland  would  be  in  the  first  group  of 
countries was even lower, as could be read from poll results and from the financial market 
data.  
Like most other countries, Finland did not meet the EMU entry criteria in 1995. The general 
government deficit was not projected to reach 3% any time soon. At that time, the Finnish 
markka was not participating in the ERM.  
The floating exchange rate (since September 1992) and inflation targeting (since February 
1993)  had  served  the  country  well.  In  the  course  of  1994,  short-term  interest  rates  came 
down rapidly, the currency appreciated, and the foreign exchange reserves of the Bank of 
Finland were restored.  
The inflation target of 2%, which was to be achieved by1995, was met one year in advance. 
The financial market's confidence in the Finnish economy started to return in spring 1995, 
and  this  was  reflected  in  a  sharp  drop  in  the  long-term  interest  rate  differential  vis-à-vis 
Germany. 
 
BIS Review 108/2008 
 7
Finland’s road to EMU: Inflation and long-term 
interest rate differential
Long-term interest rate differential, FIM-DEM, 10 y govt. bonds
Underlying inflation
SUOMEN PANKKI | FINLANDS BANK | BANK OF FINLAND
6
 The decision to participate in the ERM was taken in October 1996. In January 1997, there 
was short-lived speculation about a revaluation of the markka, and the Bank of Finland had 
to  intervene  heavily.  Otherwise,  the  currency  markets  remained  tranquil.  The  government 
finances improved more rapidly than anticipated, with the deficit having disappeared entirely 
by 1998.  
Effects of EMU on the Finnish economy 
A  frequently  asked  question  is:  How  much  has  Finland's participation  in  EMU  affected  the 
performance of the Finnish economy?  
There is no obvious answer to this question. Furthermore, any answer would be impossible 
to verify empirically, simply because we cannot repeat history with Finland remaining outside 
monetary union.  
There are, however, at least two ways to approach this question. One is to compare actual 
experience since 1999 with the expectations that prevailed before monetary union became a 
reality.  The  second  is  to  compare  Finland's  experience  with  that  of  a  comparable  country 
which decided not to participate.  
Expectations and outcome 
One  area  where  the  expectations  have  been  fulfilled,  or  even  exceeded,  is  monetary  and 
price stability. For Finland’s citizens this has meant historically low and stable interest rates 
and low (or no) inflation for most of the time.  
Since 2002 until very recently consumer price inflation in Finland was the lowest or one of 
the lowest in the whole euro area. With short-term interest rates being equal across the euro 
area, this implied higher real short-term interest rates in Finland than in the rest of the euro 
area. Apparently this did in no way affect consumer sentiment in a negative direction. Rather, 
on the contrary, consumers’ confidence in their own economic situation has remained high 
throughout the period.  
8 
 BIS Review 108/2008
In the late 1990s, there was a lot of debate about the possibility of asymmetric shocks. In 
Sweden  they  had  a  similar  debate.  The  fears  of  adverse  asymmetric  shocks  never 
materialised. 
It is ironic that the first asymmetric shock turned out to be a positive one. The worldwide ICT 
boom in 1999-2000 had a disproportionately large impact on Finland given the importance 
the sector had gained in the 1990s.  
This favourable asymmetric shock would have been expected to cause a real appreciation of 
the  currency.  Outside  EMU  and  under  floating  exchange  rates  and  inflation  targeting,  the 
currency  would  most  likely  have  appreciated  in  nominal  terms,  hurting  non-ICT  industries. 
Employment development would have been weakened.  
With a less than fully credible fixed exchange rate (as in the 1980s) the likely outcome would 
have been higher inflation and increased exchange rate uncertainty and higher interest rates 
later on.  
In  reality,  inflation  did  accelerate  somewhat  in  1999–2000,  but  inflation  expectations 
remained  constant.  Participation  in  EMU  had  a  stabilising  effect  in  the  face  of  a  positive 
asymmetric shock.  
The expectation in the mid-1990s was that accession to the EU and eventual participation in 
EMU would enhance competition, with a favourable impact on productivity growth. There is 
no  doubt  that  competition  has  increased  in  many  areas.  EU  membership  was  particularly 
important because it opened the borders for imported food to flow in, as a result of which 
retail food prices declined by about 10% in 1995-6.  
In other areas, the effects of EU membership or EMU participation are difficult to separate 
from  other  influences,  such  as  the  “creative  destruction”  process  sparked  by  the  deep 
recession and the rapid rise of the ICT sector. There is anecdotal evidence that EMU had an 
anticipatory effect on productivity: once the option to devalue is taken away permanently, it is 
better to adjust early and pay attention to productivity.  
Comparison: Finland and Sweden 
The macroeconomic performance of Finland has been rather favourable since 1999: that is, 
the  period  of  Finnish  participation  in  monetary  union.  Annual  economic  growth  has  been 
[above 3%] on average, which is high by European standards. Consumer price inflation has 
been below 2% on average, one of the lowest in Europe. Employment has been growing and 
the  unemployment  rate  has  declined  steadily  during  all  these  years.  Government  finances 
have  shown  surpluses  in  each  year,  and  the  general  government  debt  ratio  has  declined 
rapidly and is currently one of the lowest in the euro area. 
 
BIS Review 108/2008 
 9
GDP growth: Finland and euro area
Finland
Euro area
 SUOMEN PANKKI | FINLANDS BANK | BANK OF FINLAND
7
 Inflation (HICP): Finland and euro area
SUOMEN PANKKI | FINLANDS BANK | BANK OF FINLAND
8
 A  frequently  asked  question  is:  How  much  did  Finland's  participation  in  EMU  contribute  to 
this favourable development?  
Again  there  is  no  simple  answer  to  this  question.  Membership  of  EMU  by  itself  cannot 
explain 
the  above-average  economic  growth.  Above-average  performance  must  be 
attributable to something that is country-specific.  
Participation  in  EMU  has  no  doubt  contributed  a  lot  to  the  favourable  macroeconomic 
performance  by  boosting  competition  and  productivity  and  lowering  transaction  costs.  But 
that  is  not  a  sufficient  explanation  on  its  own.  The  causes  must  be  found  elsewhere.  A 
comparison  with  a  structurally  similar  country  outside  EMU  might  help  to  identify  these 
essential conditions. Sweden is an obvious candidate for such a comparison.  
Sweden joined the EU at the same time as Finland, but decided not to link its currency to the 
ERM  and  thus  did  not  fulfil  one  of  the  entry  criteria  for  EMU.  Sweden  has  conducted  an 
independent  monetary  policy  based  on  a  floating  exchange  rate  and  a  numerical  inflation 
target of 2%, with a tolerance range of +/- 1%.  
10 
 BIS Review 108/2008
The macroeconomic performance of Sweden has been very similar to that of Finland over 
the  past  ten  years.  Economic  growth  has  been  about  the  same  as  in  Finland  and  clearly 
above the euro area average. Inflation has been below 2% most of the time. Employment 
has developed favourably. Open unemployment has been somewhat lower than in Finland. 
Government  finances  have  shown  surpluses  [in  each  year].  The  general  government  debt 
ratio is, along with Finland, one of the lowest in the euro area.  
 
 GDP growth differentials vis-à-vis the euro area
 SUOMEN PANKKI | FINLANDS BANK | BANK OF FINLAND
9
 BIS Review 108/2008 
 11
Inflation differentials vis-à-vis the euro area
SUOMEN PANKKI | FINLANDS BANK | BANK OF FINLAND
10
 Thus, a quick comparison of macroeconomic performance does not provide an answer to the 
question of whether participation in EMU has been beneficial for Finland.  
The  fact  that  Finland's  macroeconomic  performance  has  been  favourable  proves  only  that 
participation in EMU has not been harmful to Finland. It does not prove that participation has 
contributed to this favourable performance.  
The fact that Sweden's macroeconomic performance has been favourable proves only that 
Sweden has not suffered from non-participation in EMU. But it does not prove that the non-
participation has contributed to this favourable performance.  
The  popularity  of  monetary  union  was  not  particularly  high  in  Finland  on  the  eve  of  EMU. 
According to a Eurobarometer survey conducted in autumn 1997, only one third of Finnish 
citizens  supported  the  idea  that  EMU  with  one  single  currency  would  be  “a  good  thing”. 
Finland was clearly an EMU-sceptic country at that time, together with the UK, Denmark and 
Sweden.  
Moreover, the support of Finnish citizens for membership of the EU was surprisingly low in 
1997.  Less  than  40%  regarded  membership  as  “a  good  thing”.  The  Swedes  were  equally 
sceptical,  while  the  Danes  were  much  more  favourable,  with  55%  of  citizens  regarding 
membership of the EU as “a good thing”.  
By 2005, Finns’ support for the EU was still low, but support for EMU had surged and was 
the fourth highest in the EU with a score of 80%. Swedish perceptions had changed much 
less, but still favourably.  
The  final  question  then  is:  What  explains  the  favourable  macroeconomic  performance  of 
Finland and Sweden?  
The answer might be: Both countries have sound public finances. Inflation expectations have 
been  well  anchored  in  both  countries  (at  least  until  recently).  Both  have  comparatively 
flexible  product  and  labour  markets.  Both  countries  are  open  economies  and  they  are  in 
favour of free trade.  
To put this briefly: both countries have had modern economic policies.  
12 
 BIS Review 108/2008
Popularity of EU and the euro
The EU is a good thing
Finns have remained
sceptical on the EU
The euro is a good thing
The Finns were euro-
sceptical in 1997, but 
now are one of the most
pro-euro in Europe!
1997
2005
SUOMEN PANKKI | FINLANDS BANK | BANK OF FINLAND
11
 Conclusions: Nurkse would not disagree 
Ragnar Nurkse had great experience of a broad range of economic issues such as monetary 
instability and financial disorder as well as trade wars and competitive devaluations – and, 
finally,  of  macroeconomic  and  political  instability  culminating  in  military  conflicts  and 
ultimately war.  
Nurkse was more than an observer; he was a top-ranking scholar in international monetary 
economics.  He  was  also  a  policy  adviser  with  an  ambition  to  design  rules  to  improve 
international coordination as well as better coordination of domestic economic policies. He 
prepared  a  study  for  the  League  of  Nations  entitled  International  Currency  Experience 
(1944). This report was distributed to delegates at the United Nations Monetary and Financial 
Conference at Bretton Woods in July 1944. His study contained many of the seeds of the 
Bretton Woods Agreement, although he was not among its architects.  
Ragnar Nurkse was in favour of fixed but adjustable exchange rates. He understood that a 
precondition  for  such  an  arrangement  is  an  agreement  with  the  major  powers  on  the 
coordination of economic policies. For it to function smoothly, the major powers would have 
to  pursue  disciplined  monetary  and  fiscal  policies  with  the  objective  of  price  stability. 
Interestingly, price stability was not among the objectives of the Bretton Woods Agreement.  
Many  modern  elements  were  present  in  the  thinking  of  the  economists  at  the  League  of 
Nations.  Nurkse  was  one  of  those  modernists.  Endres  and  Fleming  (1998)  mention  that 
Nurkse's  colleagues  at  the  League  of  Nations  had  recommended  rules-based  monetary 
policy  and  central  bank  independence  already  before  him  (Nurkse  joined  the  League  in 
1934).  
Disciplined monetary and fiscal policies in major countries continue to be a prerequisite for 
international monetary stability. Nurkse would not disagree.  
Central  bank  independence,  a  monetary  policy  strategy  based  on  the  objective  of  price 
stability,  central  bank  transparency  which  makes  monetary  policy  predictable,  and  the 
elimination of excessive deficits are the cornerstones of macroeconomic policies in Europe 
today. Nurkse would not disagree.  
BIS Review 108/2008 
 13
