Joseph Yam: Competition and cooperation among global and regional 
financial centres 
Speech  by  Mr  Joseph  Yam,  Chief  Executive  of  the  Hong  Kong  Monetary  Authority,  at  the 
Concurrent Panel Sessions of the Lujiazui Forum, Hong Kong, 9 May 2008. 
 There are two points that I would like to make. 
First, given that many jurisdictions claim to be or wish to develop as international financial 
centres, we need to be clear about what actually defines an international financial centre. We 
in Hong Kong have given much thought to this, principally because Article 109 of the Basic 
Law of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region requires that "The Government of the 
Hong Kong Special Administrative Region shall provide an appropriate economic and legal 
environment  for  the  maintenance  of  the  status  of  Hong  Kong  as  an  international  financial 
centre". We obviously do not wish to fail in this legal responsibility. 
I do not believe that being the nth largest foreign exchange trading centre or the presence of 
many of the largest international financial institutions are good definitions for an international 
financial  centre.  Indeed,  with  the  advancement  of  information  technology,  there  may  be  a 
tendency  for  the  market  place  to  migrate  into  cyber  space.  In  my  opinion,  an  international 
financial  centre  is  a  centre  in  which  the  function  of  financial  intermediation,  which  is  so 
important for supporting economic growth and development, takes place on an international 
dimension. In other words, an international financial centre is an international meeting place 
between  those  with  surplus  funds  and  those  in  need  of  funds.  Thus  when  Hong  Kong 
provides a significant platform for investors from, for example, Europe and America to invest 
their money in financial instruments issued by fund raisers from the Mainland of China, or 
provides the window for investors on the Mainland to access investment opportunities in the 
rest of the world, we qualify for the status of an international financial centre.  
With this definition in mind, the crucial pre-requisites for an international financial centre are 
first  the  existence  of  sizeable  overseas  demand  for  international  financial  services  –  the 
mobilisation  of  savings  overseas  and  the  attraction  of  foreign  capital  –  and  secondly  the 
willingness  for  such  demand  to  be  satisfied  there.  Of  course,  there  are  also  the  ability  to 
provide  those  financial  services  and  the  many  attributes  that  go  along  with  that  ability, 
including  the  protection  afforded  by  the  rule  of  law,  an  efficient  financial  infrastructure,  a 
quality  environment,  and  so  on.  But  I  think  it  is  the  existence  of  substantial  demand  for 
financial  services  from  a  large  hinterland  that  comes  first.  New  York,  of  course,  has  the 
largest economy in the world that is free and open to support its status as an international 
financial centre, providing financial services that mobilise US savings to the rest of the world 
and  attracting  foreign  investments,  and  servicing  domestic  financial  intermediation  at  the 
same time. London, of course, has much of the European economy in addition to the United 
Kingdom economy. Hong Kong has the Mainland of China, the third largest trading partner, 
the fourth largest economy, the largest foreign reserve holder and home to participants in the 
key financial markets that collectively form the largest player in the world. 
The second point I wish to make is that, under "One Country, Two Systems", there are two 
financial systems in China, both in a position to serve the interests of the country in the all-
important  function  of  financial  intermediation.  This  is  unique  and  there  are  no  relevant 
precedents  in  the  financial  history  of  the  world.  Because  of  the  uniqueness  of  this 
arrangement, there is understandably considerable scepticism both internationally and within 
China  on  how  it  might  work.  Let  me  tell  you.  The  two  financial  systems  are  different  in  a 
variety  of  ways,  with  the  financial  system  on  the  Mainland  operating  in  the  developing 
environment  of  a  socialist  market  economy  and  the  one  in  Hong  Kong  operating  in  the 
familiar environment of a capitalist free market economy. We all know that where there are 
BIS Review 58/2008 
 1
differences,  there  are  opportunities  for  exploiting  relative  strengths,  addressing  relative 
weaknesses and maximising synergies between the two systems, remembering always the 
national interest of making financial intermediation more efficient for the country as a whole. 
In  other  words,  there  is  a  need  to  develop  a  complementary,  mutually-assisting  and 
interactive relationship between the two financial systems. This incidentally is national policy, 
articulated by Premier Wen on the occasion of the National Finance Working Meeting held 
early last year. 
Given, however, that there are considerable controls in the financial system on the Mainland, 
including capital controls, and that the financial system in Hong Kong is among the freest in 
the  world,  to  develop  the  complementary,  mutually-assisting  and  interactive  relationship 
between the two financial systems there is a need first to establish channels to promote the 
mobility in an orderly manner between the two financial systems of (1) money, (2) investors 
and  fund  raisers,  (3)  financial  instruments  and  (4)  financial  intermediaries.  Given  also  the 
increasing use and the clear prospects of the renminbi as a medium for international financial 
transactions there is also a need secondly to develop the ability of the financial system in 
Hong  Kong  to  handle  financial  and  other  economic  transactions  denominated  in  the 
renminbi. Thirdly, as the mobility of money, investors, borrowers, financial instruments and 
financial intermediaries between the two financial systems grows, there will be rapid growth 
of financial traffic between the Mainland and Hong Kong. Consequently there is a need for 
robust links between the financial infrastructures of the two financial systems. This then is 
our  strategy.  In  terms  of  actual  measures  –  something  that  Antony  also  wants  me  to  talk 
about – I would refer you to the eighty recommendations in the Report of the Focus Group on 
Financial Services published in January 2007 as Hong Kong's response to the Eleventh Five-
Year Plan of the country published in 2006 and as Hong Kong's input to the National Finance 
Working Meeting in 2007. 
As you may be aware, the implementation of our overall strategy and many of the detailed 
recommendations involve the relaxation of controls in the financial systems on the Mainland. 
While the benefits of financial liberalisation are clear, so are the risks to financial stability, as 
the  Asian  financial  crisis  of  1997-98  and  the  current  turmoil  in  the  developed  financial 
markets  demonstrate  so  vividly.  Here  there  should  be  a  strong  emphasis,  to  quote  the 
Premier again, on gradualism, controllability and the ability to take initiatives at the right time. 
And  in  the  context  of  pursuing  the  complementary,  mutually-assisting  and  interactive 
relationship between the two financial systems, financial liberalisation should not be seen as 
helping  Hong  Kong.  We  welcome  support  from  the  Mainland  in  discharging  our  legal 
responsibility in maintaining the status of Hong Kong as an international financial centre, but I 
hope  I  have  convinced  you  that  in  developing  our  strategy  and  our  recommendations,  we 
very much have the national interest foremost in our minds. 
As  to  Antony's  question  on  whether  Shanghai  is  a  threat  to  Hong  Kong's  status  as  an 
international financial centre, I hope my description of our strategy will bring you around to 
the  view  implicit  in  that  strategy  that  we  see  a  complementary,  mutually-assisting  and 
interactive  relationship,  where  relative  strengths  are  exploited,  relative  weaknesses  are 
addressed  and  synergies  maximised;  and  not  a  relationship  characterised  by  cut-throat 
competition, as some may have portrayed it. 
2 
 BIS Review 58/2008
