L Wilson Kamit: Role of internal auditors in the Bank and supervised 
institutions  
Keynote address by Mr L Wilson Kamit, CBE, Governor of the Bank of Papua New Guinea, 
for the 5th annual conference “Harnessing internal auditors for today’s challenges”, hosted 
by the Institute of Internal Auditors – PNG, Port Moresby, 12 June 2008. 
 Mr  Bernard  Kisekol,  President  of  IIA-PNG,  Directors,  Distinguished  Guests,  Ladies  and 
Gentlemen. 
Thank you for inviting me to deliver the keynote address at the 5th Annual Conference of the 
Institute  of  Internal  Auditors,  PNG.  The  theme  of  the  conference  ”Harnessing  Internal 
auditors for today’s challenges” could not have come at a more opportune time. In our stride 
towards ensuring sound corporate governance, the role of internal audit has become more 
critical. The thrust of my presentation today will be on the Role of internal audit in the Bank 
and the institutions that we supervise. 
The  internal  audit  function  is  one  of  the  fundamental  “checks  and  balances”  for  sound 
corporate governance. Now more than ever, a robust and objective internal audit function, 
with  the  skills  to  identify  risk  control  problems  and  the  authority  to  pursue  its  concerns,  is 
essential to the proper discharge of directors’ responsibilities. It is, as well, a firm ally of the 
prudential  regulatory  authority.  For  this  reason,  I  welcome  the  opportunity  to  offer  a 
regulatory  perspective  on  the  role  of  internal  audit  in  our  supervised  institutions,  and  for  a 
growing relationship between the Institute and the Regulatory Authority. 
Corporate governance, as we all know, has been under a strong and critical public scrutiny in 
recent years, in the wake of a succession of blows to market confidence and integrity. The 
community’s  expectations  of  boards  and  senior  management,  and  of  those  charged  with 
providing  an  independent  review  of  a  company’s  operations  and  financial  accounts,  have 
been raised. To meet those expectations, governments and regulatory authorities around the 
globe  have  mounted  a  concerted  effort  to  improve  standards  of  corporate  behaviour  and 
transparency through the international harmonisation of accounting standards, strengthening 
the  principles  of  corporate  governance,  lifting  the  bar  on  the  “fitness  and  propriety”  of 
directors and managers and introducing improved market disclosure standards. 
It is in the interest of Bank’s, financial institution and corporate business entities for standards 
of  corporate  governance  to  be  raised  and  thereafter  maintained,  as  effective  corporate 
governance ensures that long-term strategic objectives and plans are established, and that 
proper  management  and  management  structure  are  in  place  to  achieve  those  objectives; 
while at the same time making sure that the structure functions to maintain the organization's 
integrity,  reputation,  and  accountability  to  its  relevant  constituencies.  Enforcement  alone 
cannot guarantee good corporate governance. 
Whilst  measures  to  enhance  corporate  governance  are  primarily  aimed  at  boards  of 
directors,  who  are  seen  as  the  agents  responsible  for  protecting  shareholder  value,  the 
internal audit fraternity is another industry group that is of particular importance. It is evident 
that  the  significance  of  internal  auditing  as  a  key  contributor  to  corporate  governance  has 
emerged as a theme. 
This  new  paradigm  in  internal  auditing  will  see  the  profession  becoming  a  front  player  in 
ensuring good corporate governance structures. 
BIS Review 89/2008 
 1
In  this  demanding  environment,  boards  and  senior  management  need  quality  advice  from 
sources that can be trusted and that can offer an objective viewpoint. Much of the focus of 
Sarbanes-Oxley in the United States and Basle Committee has been on the external audit 
function. 
Equally, however, there is a need to ensure that internal audit is organised, resourced and 
empowered  so  that  it  can  provide  competent,  impartial  and  fearless  advice.  In  contrast  to 
external  auditors,  however,  our  sense  is  that internal  audit is  still  evolving  as  a  profession 
and has further to go in promoting its own professional standards and profile in Papua New 
Guinea. We in BPNG observe that internal audit in our supervised institutions is not based on 
widely utilised standards, recognised by Audit Committees for example, and it is not always 
focused on the same set of issues. Internal audit functions vary from a narrow concern with 
compliance or financial accounts to a broader remit reviewing efficiency and effectiveness or 
acting as an internal consultant. 
My address today offers a prudential perspective on the role of internal audit. It starts with 
the  separate  roles  of  internal  audit  in  the  corporate  governance  framework.  Specific 
references will be made to the internal audit setup in the Bank of PNG. It then sets out the 
expectations of internal audit held by prudential regulators at the international level and how 
the  regulator  assesses  whether  internal  audit  in  the  institutions  it  supervises  meets  these 
expectations.  Finally,  I  discuss  some  regulatory  issue,  the  problems  and  challenges.  My 
comments are offered in a constructive spirit to encourage debate within the internal audit 
profession. 
I will start by borrowing the definition of internal audit approved by the Board of Directors of 
your Institute: 
“Internal auditing is an independent, objective assurance and consulting activity designed to 
add value and improve an organisation’s operations. It helps an organisation accomplish its 
objectives  by  bringing  a  systematic,  disciplined  approach  to  evaluate  and  improve  the 
effectiveness of risk management, control, and governance processes.” 
As we see it, the basic function of internal audit is independent appraisal of an institution’s 
internal controls, including controls over financial reporting. Simply put, it is about reviewing 
activities to ensure that they are carried out as intended. Of course, a by-product of internal 
audit will be recommendations on internal control and process improvements that could be 
made,  an  important  role  for  internal  audit  at  large  and  complex  financial  institutions  in 
particular. 
The  Bank  of  PNG  Internal  audit  charter  was  drawn  up  with  the  assistance  from  the  IMF 
Technical  Advisor  and  reviewed  periodically  –  by  the  internal  audit  department;  it  was 
approved  by  senior  management  (Governor)  and  subsequently  confirmed  by  the  board  of 
directors as part of its oversight role. 
In the charter, the bank’s senior management gives the internal audit department the right of 
initiative  and  authorises  it  to  have  direct  access  to  and  communicate  with  any  member  of 
staff, to examine any activity or entity of the bank, as well as to access any records, files or 
data of the bank, including management information and the minutes of all consultative and 
decision-making bodies, whenever relevant to the performance of its assignments. 
The charter states the terms and conditions according to which the internal audit department 
can be called upon to provide consulting or advisory services or to carry out other special 
tasks and the charter is communicated throughout the organisation. 
To  perform  their  role  effectively,  internal  audit  requires  organizational  independence  from 
management to enable unrestricted evaluation of management activities and personnel. To 
ensure independence, Manager Internal Audit reports directly to the Governor and also has 
direct access to the Audit Committee on matters considered of significant importance to the 
functioning of the BPNG. 
2 
 BIS Review 89/2008
Audit  committees  require  the  help  of  internal  auditing  departments  in  order  for  them  to  be 
able  to  effectively  fulfill  their  obligations  to  the  board,  the  shareholders,  and  other  outside 
parties  who  have  a  stake  in  the  organisation.  The  contribution  of  internal  auditors  as 
business  advisors  or  consultants  to  the  organisation  and  their  role  in  ensuring  compliance 
with various statutes, policies and procedures cannot be overemphasized. 
These  new  challenges  that  are  faced  by  internal  auditors  require  them  to  acquire  the 
necessary skills and competencies on a continuous basis. This makes it necessary for them 
to  place  them  on  a  learning  path  so  that  they  could  update  themselves  with  new 
developments.  He/she  should  know  all  aspects  of  the  operations  in  order  to  perform  an 
effective job as an internal auditor. In this respect, the work done by the Institute of Internal 
Auditors in developing a wholesome internal auditor is laudable. 
An  internal  audit  function  within  a  bank  that  is  organised  along  the  principles  set  forth  in 
Basel  Committee  paper  on  Banking  Supervision  (BIS  August  2001)  facilitates  the  work  of 
bank  supervisors.  Strong  internal  control,  including  an  internal  audit  function,  and  an 
independent  external  audit  are  part  of  sound  corporate  governance  which  in  turn  can 
contribute to an efficient and collaborative working relationship between bank management 
and bank supervisors. An effective internal audit function is a valuable source of information 
for bank management, as well as bank supervisors, about the quality of the internal control 
system. 
Bank  supervisors  should  evaluate  the  work  of  the  bank’s  internal  audit  department  and,  if 
satisfied, can rely on it to identify areas of potential risk. Supervisory authorities have issued 
various regulatory provisions covering banks’ internal control systems. Although the extent of 
this regulation may vary across countries, it generally includes some basic principles aimed 
at promoting an adequate system of controls as well as a regulation with regard to adequate 
capital. 
To evaluate the quality of internal controls, supervisors can take a number of approaches. 
One approach is for supervisors to evaluate the work of the internal audit department of the 
bank, including its testing of senior management’s processes that identify, measure, monitor 
and  control  risks.  If  satisfied  with  the  quality  of  the  internal  audit  department’s  work, 
supervisors can use the reports of internal auditors as a primary mechanism for identifying 
control problems in the bank, or for identifying areas of potential risk that the auditors have 
not recently reviewed. 
The Basel II Accord has stipulated that the internal audit would have to capture in a larger 
way the application and effectiveness of risk management procedures and risk assessment 
methodology and critical evaluation of the adequacy and effectiveness of the internal control 
systems.  The  banks  and  other  supervised  institutions  will  be  required  to  introduce  and 
implement Risk Focused Internal Audits and Self Audits. The implementation of risk based 
auditing  would  mean  that  greater  emphasis  is  placed  on  the  internal  auditor's  role  of 
mitigating risks. By focusing on effective risk management the internal auditor would not only 
offer remedies for current trouble areas but also anticipate problems and play an important 
role in protecting the bank and regulated institutions from risk hazards. 
The financial institution should create an effective audit program to monitor the operation of 
internal controls against self-dealing, conflict of interests and other violations of the Code of 
Conduct, identify weaknesses, and ensure corrective action is taken. 
Financial institutions work in a highly regulated environment. The Board of Directors/Trustees 
should  ensure  that  bank  /  regulated  institution’s  management  and  relevant  employees  are 
aware of all applicable laws and regulations. 
The  Code  of  Conduct  should  contain  specific  and  appropriate  consequences  that  would 
serve to deter wrongdoing and unacceptable business practices, and promote accountability 
amongst  employees  and  others  to  the  Code.  Let  me  conclude  by  saying  that  the 
BIS Review 89/2008 
 3
achievement of good corporate governance will ultimately be the result of cooperative efforts 
between regulators, internal audits and parties subject to such regulation. 
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS Review 89/2008
