Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Recent economic developments – challenges 
and policy implications 
Remarks  by  Mr  Amando  M  Tetangco,  Jr,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  the  Philippines 
(Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas), at the Fund Managers Association of the Philippines’ Induction 
of Officers, Makati, 13 February 2008. 
 President PJ Garcia, other officers and members of the Fund Managers Association of the 
Philippines, friends, ladies and gentlemen, good afternoon. 
I am pleased to join you today during your general membership meeting. The FMAP has a 
unique  role  in  mobilizing  investments  of  institutional  investors,  particularly  at  this  time  of 
ample liquidity in the system. The BSP continues to look forward to your support in helping to 
channel these resources to funds that will support economic development. 
I also welcome from you initiatives that would enhance and promote professional standards 
of fund management in ensuring that the funds are managed in accordance with the tenets of 
fairness, accountability and transparency. As fund managers, you play  a significant role in 
the development of the domestic capital market.  
I have been requested to share with you today our macroeconomic outlook for 2008. In the 
process, I will try to provide policy insights on the current domestic and global developments, 
what  their  implications  are  for  the  BSP’s  monetary  policy,  and  how  these  will  affect  the 
country’s economic outlook. 
Recent economic developments 
2007  was  marked  by  what  I  have  called  as  the  “convergence  of  high  growth  and  low 
inflation.” The Philippine 7.3 percent growth rate for 2007 is the highest growth achieved in 
31  years.  At  the  same  time,  this  broad-based  economic  expansion  was  realized  in  an 
environment of low and stable inflation, with full year inflation at 2.8 percent, the lowest in 21 
years.  Meanwhile,  foreign  investment  was  strong  due  to  upbeat  investor  sentiment  on  the 
country’s improving macroeconomic fundamentals. 
There  was  also  positive  news  coming  from  the  external  sector.  The  country’s  balance  of 
payments posted a record surplus of US$8.6 billion in 2007, buoyed by the sustained strong 
remittance of overseas Filipinos as well as higher net services receipts, and capital inflows.  
The country’s gross international reserves (GIR) also continued to post record highs. At the 
end of January 2008, it amounted to US$34.4 billion, which could cover 6.0 months’ worth of 
imports of goods and payment of services and income.  
The external debt situation has likewise improved and remained manageable. 
The peso remains firm, providing a mitigating effect on inflation, while broadly maintaining its 
external competitiveness.  
The  banking  sector  has  remained  fundamentally  sound.  The  banking  system  sustained  a 
steady asset expansion for the last seven years supported by continued growth in deposit 
base.  The  continued  asset  clean-up  of  banks,  accomplished  through  market-oriented 
schemes  and  without  the  use  of  public  funds,  boosted  the  banking  system’s  overall  asset 
quality. The banking system’s NPL ratio is now closer to the pre-crisis level of around 4.0 
percent.  
Banks also remained capitalized at levels above both the BSP-regulatory requirement and 
the  BIS  standard.  The  banking  system’s  capitalization  is  expected  to  improve  further  with 
banks’ increased issuance of hybrid financial instruments to strengthen their capital base.  
BIS Review 17/2008 
 1
As  a  footnote  to  banking  performance  last  year,  I  would  like  to  mention  that  the  banking 
system  was  not  significantly  affected  by  US  subprime  mortgage  market  problems.  First, 
because  Philippine  bank  exposure  to  the  CDO  market  was  only  0.2  percent  of  total  bank 
assets as of mid 2007, and none of these have subprime mortgages as underlying assets. 
Second,  the  country  has  been  less  dependent  on  external  borrowing  and  has,  therefore, 
become less vulnerable to external shocks. Third, there is ample liquidity in the system and 
hence, any credit squeeze could be manageable. 
The fiscal sector likewise performed well, with the National Government posting a P9.4 billion 
budget deficit in 2007, its lowest in ten years. This was achieved through enhanced revenue 
collections and privatization efforts.  
Moreover, for the first time in more than a decade, the consolidated public sector financial 
position registered a surplus in 2006. This continued on in the first nine months of 2007 with 
the public sector posting a surplus of P52.7 billion. 
Gains  brought  about  by  the  government’s  fiscal  consolidation  efforts  were  evident  in  the 
material reduction in the public debt burden.  
All in all, one could say, 2007 has been marked by an auspicious alignment of the stars – 
what should be going up, went up, what should go down, went down. 
Key challenges ahead 
While we have implemented in recent years prudent macroeconomic policies and structural 
reforms, which allowed us to achieve these important milestones in the previous year, the 
Philippine economy continues to face challenges from both the global and domestic fronts. 
These include: (1) the US economic slowdown; (2) further disruptions in the global financial 
markets; and (3) continued volatility in oil prices and the uptrend in non-oil commodity prices. 
One of the major challenges is the slowdown of the US economy. 
There  is  consensus  that  the  US  economy  is  poised  for  a  downturn  in  2008.  The  current 
tightening of credit conditions in the US could exert downward pressure on investment and 
consumption.  The  sharp  decline  in  US  real  estate  market  could  also  weigh  in  on 
consumption via wealth effects.  
What does this mean for the Philippine economy? 
A slowdown of the US economy could directly impact the Philippines via two key areas: (1) 
the country’s export receipts; and (2) remittances from overseas Filipinos. 
The Philippines is not immune to a US slowdown, although there are factors that may limit 
any  adverse  impact.  For  instance,  although  the  US  is  still  one  of  the  country’s  top  trading 
partners, US dominance in Philippine trade has diminished. The share of Philippine exports 
to the US decreased from 30 percent in 2000 to 17 percent in 2007.  
The IMF has also found that the sensitivity of Philippine growth to US growth has declined 
overtime.  However,  the  sensitivity  is  still  palpable.  The  IMF  estimates  that  a  1  percentage 
point reduction in US growth reduces Philippine growth by 0.5-0.6 percentage points. 
Moreover, the persistent reliance of the Asian region on US trade and the increasing relative 
dependence  of  the  Philippines  on  Asian  trading  partners,  indicate  the  absence  of  full 
decoupling. The net impact of a US downturn on Philippine growth will depend on how the 
Philippines’ other major trading partners are affected by developments in the US.  
Remittances are another important channel through which the US economic slowdown could 
manifest itself in the Philippines. Latest data show that about 1/3 of our land-based workers 
are in the US.  
2 
 BIS Review 17/2008
The diversification in deployment in terms of destination and quality of skills, could temper 
any expected slowdown in remittances from a weakening of the US economy.  
A second major concern for us is the possibility of further global financial market turbulence.  
The  IMF  has  noted  that  while  coordinated  credit  operations  by  the  major  central  banks, 
together with rate cuts, have helped ease liquidity tensions, wider problems in the financial 
system  still  persist.  These  include  problems  in  the  valuation  of  complex  products,  credit 
deterioration, counterparty mistrust, and balance sheet pressures.  
Of  great  concern,  however,  is  that  a  possibly  deeper  economic  slowdown  in  the  US  or 
elsewhere  could  serve  to  widen  the  crisis  beyond  the  subprime  sector.  Problems  in  the 
financial sector have started to spill over to the real sector via reduction in domestic demand 
particularly in the advanced economies. 
The  third  key  challenge  is  the  continued  volatility  in  oil  prices  and  the  uptrend  in  non-oil 
commodity prices.  
The elevated price of oil, particularly if this continues for a protracted period of time, would be 
a concern as this could threaten our currently within-target inflation outlook. 
However,  crude  oil  price  forecasts  indicate  a  moderate  downtrend  in  prices  in  2008-2009, 
albeit to levels higher than the average seen in 2007. In addition to the forecast of tapering 
oil prices in the second half of this year, a more structural shield against a surge in high oil 
prices is the country’s reduced dependency on imported oil. Our dependence on imported oil 
has  steadily  declined  from  over  50  percent  in  the  mid-1990s  to  37.3  percent  of  the  total 
energy consumption as of 2006. 
Meanwhile,  the  increase  in  global  food  prices  could  continue  due  to  a  number  of  factors, 
such as the rising incomes in China, India, and other emerging market economies that could 
drive up further the demand for food products, and increased biofuel production.  
Implications for monetary policy 
Against  these  risks,  monetary  policy  will  need  to  maintain  the  right  balance  in  order  to 
address inflationary risks while allowing the economy’s growth momentum to continue.  
With  the  BSP’s  adoption  of  the  inflation  targeting  framework,  the  achievement  of  price 
stability  becomes  its  ultimate  objective  in  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy.  An  inflation-
targeting central bank, therefore, should not be bound by multiple objectives unless these are 
necessary to achieve the goal of price stability. Nonetheless, the BSP is firmly committed to 
promoting price stability that is conducive to a balanced and sustainable economic growth.  
In  particular,  monetary  policy  needs  to  be  watchful  of  the  emerging  risks  to  inflation  and 
inflation  expectations.  The  BSP  needs  to  be  on  the  lookout  for  second-round  effects  of 
supply-side pressures, particularly on wages, utility rates and transport fares.  
BSP’s policy thrusts 
Against these major developments and challenges, the BSP will continue to pursue initiatives 
aimed at maintaining sound macroeconomic fundamentals supportive of a vibrant economy.  
We  will,  thus,  remain  focused  on  our  inflation  target.  As  you  are  aware,  a  low  and  stable 
price environment allows economic agents to plan better. It also allows us to maintain a low 
interest rate environment that would help support domestic demand.  
Relative to the external sector, our policies are: to ensure the sustainability of the country’s 
external debt; maintain a market-determined exchange rate with scope for occasional action 
in  cases  of  extreme  movements  in  the  exchange  rate;  maintain  a  comfortable  level  of 
reserves; and improve further the foreign exchange environment.  
BIS Review 17/2008 
 3
On  the  financial  sector,  our  policy  thrust  shall  be  to  continue  our  reform  efforts  towards 
further strengthening the banking system. Our banking sector reforms shall focus on: further 
enhancing the regulatory framework through the implementation of the BASEL II roadmap; 
improving corporate governance by promoting compliance with international accounting and 
financial  reporting  standards;  accelerating 
implementation  of  risk-based  supervision 
technology; encouraging the development of the domestic capital market; and strengthening 
ties with other financial regulators. 
In line with these thrusts, you may recall that towards the end of last year, the BSP approved 
two important reform packages:  
The further liberalization of outward investments of residents. Highlights that may be relevant 
to  the  FMAP  are:  (1)  allowance  of  outward  investments  by  residents  funded  with  foreign 
exchange  purchased  from  the  banking  system  not  exceeding  US$30  million  per  year  no 
longer  need  prior  BSP  approval;  and  (2)  qualified  investors  may  now  apply  for  a  higher 
annual  outward  investment  limit.  QIs  include,  among  others,  insurance  and  pre-need 
companies,  collective/pooled  funds  such  as  mutual  funds,  unit  investment  trust  funds  and 
variable insurance. 
The  amendments  to  BSP  regulations  governing  derivatives  activities  of  banks  and  trust 
entities, including guidelines on risk management and sale and marketing of derivatives.  
Both these reform packages are intended to help make the domestic market more able to 
quickly adapt to any further changes in the global financial markets. 
Philippine economic outlook 
On the basis of these policy directions, the outlook for the macroeconomy continues to be 
favorable.  
Average inflation is expected to be within target in 2008 and 2009. The volatility in world oil 
prices  and  uptrend  in  non-commodity  prices  remain  the  key  risks  to  the  inflation  outlook. 
Nevertheless, these potential risks to inflation are seen to be tempered by some downside 
risks such as the firm peso and reduced dependence on imported energy sources.  
Meanwhile, the fiscal positions of the National Government and the entire public sector are 
expected to continue to improve, taking off from their performance in 2007.  
Finally, we expect the BOP to continue to be in surplus although at a level that is smaller 
compared to the previous year. The liquidity impact of the external surplus will have to be 
managed such that the amount of money in the system remains consistent with the inflation 
objective. 
Concluding remarks 
Ladies and gentlemen, the Philippine economy’s current fundamentals are at the strongest 
they  have  been  over  the  past  two  –  three  decades,  providing  us  reasons  to  be  optimistic 
about the future.  
But there are headwinds, mainly coming from external developments.  
This time around, we believe that the Philippines is better able to withstand the shocks due to 
the  following  reasons…”buffers”  as  I  would  like  to  refer  to  these:  the  underlying  growth 
momentum due to improving fundamentals; we have a stronger external liquidity position; we 
have  gained  dividends  from  our  structural  reforms  in  the  areas  of  fiscal  policy,  power, 
banking, and capital market; and we have better information disclosure, which encourages 
markets to look at Philippine-specific risks and not be prone to herding behavior. 
But we cannot afford to be complacent.  
4 
 BIS Review 17/2008
Even  as  we  have  built  up  “buffers”,  we  must  continue  to  be  mindful  of  the  potential  risks, 
particularly the possibility of unforeseen ones that could impede our path to further progress. 
The primary task ahead of us is to focus on strengthening the economy while also preserving 
the momentum for economic reforms to ensure sustained growth in the long run.  
The implementation of appropriate reforms by the government and active participation of the 
private sector, in promoting economic development will be powerful forces in the fulfillment of 
this challenging task. 
In this endeavor, the BSP looks forward to FMAP’s continued support. 
Maraming salamat at magandang hapon sa inyong lahat! 
BIS Review 17/2008 
 5
