Ben S Bernanke: Remarks on historically black colleges and universities 
Speech  by  Mr  Ben  S  Bernanke,  Chairman  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  US  Federal 
Reserve  System,  at  the  2008  National  Historically  Black  Colleges  and  Universities  Week 
Conference, Washington DC, 9 September 2008. 
 Good morning. I am very pleased to join you at this conference. As an economist, but also as 
a former professor, one-time school board member, spouse of a teacher, and parent of two 
young adults pursuing higher education, I am always glad to have an opportunity to speak 
about the importance of education to our nation's economy and our society. This morning I 
am  especially  pleased  to  highlight  the  past  and  continuing  importance  of  the  nation's 
historically black colleges and universities. Given my audience, I may be "preaching to the 
choir," so to speak, on this topic, but I trust that you will appreciate the sermon.  
Education is vital to our prosperity. It fundamentally supports advances in productivity, upon 
which our ability to generate continuing improvement in our standard of living depends. As 
our  economy  becomes  more  and  more 
technologically  advanced  and  globally 
interconnected,  the  skills,  knowledge,  and  analytical  ability  that  education  develops  are 
becoming  ever  more  crucial  to  each  individual's  success.  A  substantial  body  of  research 
demonstrates  that  investments  in  education  –  higher  education,  certainly,  but  also  lifelong 
education,  from  preschool  to  mid-career  training  and  adult  education  –  pay  high  rates  of 
return both to individuals and to our society as a whole. Moreover, the benefits of education 
are more than economic. By providing us with a broader view of the world, education helps 
each  of  us  become  the  most  complete  person  we  can  be.  Research  suggests  that  more-
highly-educated  individuals  are  happier  on  average,  make  better  personal  financial 
decisions, suffer fewer spells of unemployment, and enjoy better health. Educated individuals 
also  are  more  likely  to  participate  in  civic  affairs,  volunteer  their  time  to  charities,  and 
subscribe to personal values – such as tolerance and an appreciation of cultural differences 
– that are increasingly crucial for the healthy functioning of our diverse society. 
Given our responsibilities at the Federal Reserve as a central bank and financial institution 
regulator,  we  see  financial  education  in  particular  as  a  vital  part  of  our  mission.  In  our 
increasingly complex financial marketplace, choosing a credit card, saving for education and 
retirement, and buying a home now require more financial savvy than ever before. To help 
meet  these  needs,  the  Federal  Reserve  supports  a  variety  of  programs  and  initiatives  to 
increase financial literacy. At the regional level, many of our economic education specialists 
offer training seminars to help educators teach economic and personal finance topics in their 
classrooms. 
In general, higher education is one of the strong points of the U.S. educational system. We 
must work diligently to maintain the quality of our educational system where it is strong and 
strive  to  improve  it  where  it  is  not.  In  particular,  we  must  find  ways  to  move  more  of  our 
students,  especially  minorities  and  those  from  disadvantaged  backgrounds,  into  education 
after high school. 
The historically black colleges and universities have long played a vital role in this regard. 
They have proud record of accomplishment, dating back to 1837 with the founding of what is 
now Cheyney University of Pennsylvania. Slavery and segregation cast long dark shadows 
on  our  nation's  history  and  our  society,  and  the  historically  black  colleges  and  universities 
served as beacons of knowledge in the darkness. Today, they are no longer the only places 
a  young  African  American  woman  or  man  can  obtain  an  education,  but  they  are  very  fine 
choices  for  many  students,  and  not  just  African  Americans  –  indeed,  90  four-year  and  13 
two-year institutions enroll more than 300,000 students, including more than 50,000 who are 
not African Americans. In 2006, these institutions conferred more than 30,000 undergraduate 
BIS Review 106/2008 
 1
degrees  and  nearly  9,000  advanced  degrees.  They  have  maintained  their  relevance  by 
building on their tradition of educational excellence and by harnessing the loyalty and support 
of  alumni.  There  are  indeed  many  distinguished  alumni  of  HBCUs,  including  media 
personality and philanthropist Oprah Winfrey, professor and Nobel Prize-winning author Toni 
Morrison, former U.S. Surgeon General David Satcher, Brown University President Ruth J. 
Simmons, and Major General Dennis Via, among many others. 
I wish you a very successful conference. You have much to celebrate and, doubtless, much 
to  discuss  as  you  strive  to  find  ways  to  carry  the  rich  heritage  of  the  historically  black 
colleges and universities into the future. 
2 
 BIS Review 106/2008
