Radovan Jelašić: Start of the ECB/ESCB needs analysis programme in 
Belgrade 
Introductory statement by Mr Radovan Jelašić, Governor of the National Bank of Serbia, at 
the press conference on the occasion of the signing of the protocol between the European 
Central Bank, the National Bank of Serbia, the European Agency for Reconstruction and the 
Delegation of the European Commission to the Republic of Serbia, Belgrade, 1 September 
2008. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, our honorable guests, 
I would like to express a special gratitude to Ms. Gertrude Tumpel-Gugerell, a Member of the 
Executive  Board  of  the  ECB,  Mr.  Josep  Lloveras,  Head  of  Delegation  of  the  European 
Commission to the Republic of Serbia, Mr. Daniel Giuglaris, Head of the EAR Operational 
Centre in Serbia, as well as to the representatives of the ECB and 9 national central banks of 
the European System of Central Banks (ESCB), out of 17 participating in the project, being 
present here and taking part in this, for us, a very historical event. 
Signing  the  Protocol  today  among  the  parties  mentioned  above  marks  a  beginning  of  the 
realization of the “Needs Analysis for the National Bank of Serbia” project aimed to identify 
the gap that the National Bank of Serbia needs to cover in order to meet the standards of 
European  System  of  Central  Banks.  The  subject  of  analysis  will  be  six  work  areas  in  the 
competence  of  the  National  Bank  of  Serbia.  They  will  be  thoroughly  examined  by  experts 
from the European Central Bank and 17 partner central banks involved in the project over the 
next nine months, by the end of May of 2009. This project will lay down the roadmap for the 
National Bank of Serbia to the ESCB.  
The road to the EU is not an event but a process that, among all else, requires us to build up 
strong and efficient institutions and to strengthen administrative and human capacities. The 
National Bank of Serbia has so far been positively proactive and I can assure you that we will 
continue to be the engine of the Serbian transition process in the future as well. 
This is the first project ever between the ECB / ECSB and the NBS and it is a direct proof of 
the strong determination of our institution to meet the European standards of central banking. 
Actually,  as  early  as  during  its  incorporation  in  1884,  the  National  Bank  of  Serbia  showed 
strong commitment to the European values, and in that very same year incorporated the best 
European practices into the first Law on the National Bank. The creators of our central bank 
law  wanted  to  “Bring  Europe  to  Serbia”,  by  changing  –  or,  as  we  would  say  it  today  –  by 
harmonizing our legislation with Europe’s. 
At the end, please let me remark that for me personally, and for my colleagues as well, being 
here today is a privilege as this is a historical moment for the National Bank of Serbia and all 
its employees. And I can assure you that we will continue to do our very best to make sure 
the NBS stays at the forefront of the economic transition process in all areas it is in charge 
of: monetary policy, supervision of the financial sector, payment, etc. I wish the length of the 
road  of  Serbia  and  the  NBS  to  the  European  Union  and  the  European  System  of  Central 
Banks depended on our performance because then we would get there in a record time! 
BIS Review 103/2008 
 1
