Masaaki Shirakawa: Technological innovation and central banks  
Speech by Mr Masaaki Shirakawa, Governor of the Bank of Japan, at the Graduate School 
of Economics of Nagoya University, Nagoya, 2 September 2008. 
 Introduction 
I  am  very  honored  to  have  the  opportunity  to  speak  here  at  the  Graduate  School  of 
Economics  of  Nagoya  University.  My  speech  today  deals  with  the  topic  of  technological 
innovation  and  central  banks.  The  choice  of  the  topic is influenced  in  part  by  the  fact  that 
Nagoya is known as a center of manufacturing and technological innovation. Another reason 
is that, for central banks to make appropriate policy judgments, it is increasingly important to 
take  account  of  changes  brought  about  by  technological  innovation  and  to  actively  take 
advantage of such innovation.  
I.  
Functions and business operations of a central bank 
Functions of a central bank 
A.  
Before  discussing  the  topic  of  technological  innovation,  let  me  first  provide  you  with  an 
overview of central bank functions.  
The  term  "central  bank"  will  probably  remind  you  of  banknote  issuance.  Textbooks  on 
macroeconomics and banking and finance describe central banking operations such as the 
conduct  of  monetary  policy  and  the  "lender  of  last  resort"  function.  This  may  raise  the 
questions  of  why  a  single  institution,  a  central  bank,  is  responsible  for  these  wide-ranging 
activities, and also why a bank, instead of a government office, is responsible for them. 
To find the answers to these questions, we should first understand that issuing money, or 
banknotes  to  be  precise,  is  the  most  fundamental  function  of  a  central  bank.  The  Bank  of 
England, one of the oldest central banks in the world, was established in 1694 as a private 
bank.  In  those  days,  banknotes  were  issued  by  several  private  banks.  However,  through 
competition among banks, the function of issuing banknotes was gradually monopolized by 
the Bank of England. In 1844, it was legislated that the Bank of England be the sole issuer of 
banknotes,  and  it  gradually  established  itself  as  a  present-day  central  bank.  Similarly  in 
Japan, private banks issued their own banknotes in the early Meiji Period (around 1870). But 
to  solve  the  complexities  involved  in  having  multiple  currencies,  the  Bank  of  Japan  was 
established in 1882 as the only institution to issue banknotes.  
As  history  shows,  the  most  basic  central  bank  function  is  to  issue  banknotes,  which  are 
recorded as its liabilities. To enable the public to use with confidence and convenience the 
banknotes it issues, public confidence in the currency must be secured. And to secure such 
confidence, the following two conditions must be met. First, circulation of the currency and 
the functioning of the settlement and financial systems that support it must be reliable and 
efficient. The "lender of last resort" function that I mentioned at the beginning is one of the 
functions  of  a  central  bank  to  maintain  financial  system  stability.  Second,  the  value  of  the 
currency must be stable, that is, price stability must be maintained. A central bank conducts 
monetary policy to fulfill this condition.  
As  I  have  discussed  thus  far,  various  central  banking  operations  work  to  secure  public 
confidence in the currency, with the function of banknote issuance as the starting point. As I 
will describe in greater detail later, these central banking operations are carried out through 
banking activities.  
BIS Review 104/2008 
 1
B.  
1.  
Central banking operations 
Provision of cash and settlement services 
Settlement via Bank of Japan (BOJ) Current Accounts
Chart 1
Individual X
Goods/Services
Firm Y
Deposits
Deposits
X’s Account
Bank A
Bank  A’s  Current 
Account
Funds 
transfer
BOJ
Withdrawals
Y’s Account
Bank B
Withdrawals
Bank  B’s  Current 
Account
 Let  me  explain  central  banking  operations  in  detail.  I  will  start  with  the  central  banking 
operations  of  supplying  cash  and  providing  settlement  services.  The  Bank,  through  its 
network  consisting  of  the  Head  Office,  branches,  and  local  offices,  arranges  that  cash  is 
circulated throughout the country. In addition to cash, the Bank provides current accounts to 
private financial institutions, whose balances can be exchanged for banknotes at any time 
(Chart 1). Just as in the case of an individual holding an account with a private  bank and 
obtaining loans, private banks and securities companies hold current accounts with the Bank 
and  borrow  funds  from  the  Bank.  Many  of  you  may  pay  utility  bills  or  pay  for  items  you 
purchased by using funds transfer or remittances through private banks. Banks that receive 
such  requests  settle  these  payments  among  themselves  by  transferring  funds  via  their 
current accounts with the Bank. The amount of funds settled via the current accounts with 
the Bank is increasing steadily and currently totals around 120 trillion yen per business day 
(Chart 2). Moreover, the amount of funds settled also fluctuates very much within a day. For 
the  efficiency  and  safety  of  such  settlement  via  the  Bank's  current  account,  the  Bank 
operates a computer network system called the Bank of Japan Financial Network System, or 
BOJ-NET for short.  
Let us now see how a central bank supplies funds (Chart 3). When the Bank extends loans 
to financial institutions or buys securities such as Japanese government bonds (JGBs) from 
them, funds are credited to these institutions' current account with the Bank. Such operations 
are called "funds-supplying operations." When cash becomes necessary at these institutions 
to  meet  customers'  withdrawals,  financial  institutions  obtain  cash  by  withdrawing  deposits 
from  their  current  account  with  the  Bank.  This  is  the  overall  picture  how  cash  is  put  into 
circulation.  
These funds-supplying processes can be outlined and explained by changes in the balance 
sheet of the Bank (Chart 3). When the Bank, as in the example I have just given, supplies 
funds  by  extending  loans  to  financial  institutions  or  buying  JGBs,  such  loans  or  JGBs 
represent  an  increase  in  its  "assets."  At  the  same  time,  though,  the  funds  thus  supplied 
represent an increase in its "liabilities," while for the financial institutions they represent an 
increase in their "assets" in the form of increased current account deposits with the Bank or 
2 
 BIS Review 104/2008
tril. yen
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
banknotes. What should be stressed here is that the money is supplied through the banking 
activities of the central bank, in other words, the execution of transactions as a bank. 
Chart 2
Value Settled via BOJ Current Accounts
Average Daily Value Settled
Distribution of Value
Settled on June 30, 2008
tril. yen
20
15
10
5
0
9:00
11:00
13:00
15:00
17:00
2001
02
03
04
05
06
07
08
Note: Data for 2008 are the average for the January-July 2008 period.
Note: Value settled in each ten-minute period.
Funds-Supplying Operation by the BOJ
Chart 3
Supply of 30 billion yen by the BOJ through outright purchase of Japanese government bonds (JGBs)
BOJ
30 billion yen in cash
JGBs worth 30 billion yen
Bank A
BOJ’s balance sheet
Bank A’s balance sheet
(Assets)
bil. yen
(Liabilities)
bil. yen
(Assets)
(Liabilities)
JGBs 0     30
BOJ current account 0     30
BOJ current account 0     30
30       0
JGBs
Withdrawal of 10 billion yen by Bank A from BOJ current account after the operation
BOJ’s balance sheet
Bank A’s balance sheet
(Assets)
bil. yen
(Liabilities)
(Assets)
(Liabilities)
bil. yen
JGBs
30
Banknotes                    0     10
BOJ current account  30 
20
Banknotes                   0     10
BOJ current account 30      20
0
JGBs
  BIS Review 104/2008 
 3
Maintenance of financial system stability 
2. 
I would now like to discuss the second item on my list of central banking operations, which is 
the  maintenance  of  financial  system  stability.  As  I  mentioned  earlier,  means  of  payment 
familiar  to  households  and  firms,  besides  cash,  include  funds  transfers  between  bank 
accounts. A part of private bank deposits, such as ordinary deposits, is also called "deposit 
money," and they function as currency based on the assurance that such deposits can be 
exchanged for banknotes issued by the Bank at any time.  
Before proceeding further, let me briefly define terms such as "cash" and "money," since they 
have been used so far without a strict definition (Chart 4). "Cash," which consists of Bank of 
Japan notes and coins in circulation, amounts to around 80 trillion yen. The sum of current 
account balances at the Bank and Bank of Japan notes in circulation is called "central bank 
money." The amount of "deposit money" such as demand deposits held by households and 
firms  is  around  400  trillion  yen,  significantly  larger  than  the  outstanding  amount  of  cash. 
Money  stock,  which  is  the  total  of  cash,  deposit  money,  and  "quasi-money"  such  as  time 
deposits, all held by households and firms, is around 1,000 trillion yen.  
Classification of “Money”
Chart 4
Central Bank Money
(yen, average amounts outstanding in July 2008)
Monetary 
Base
87.9 tril.
BOJ Current Account Balances
7.6 tril.
Bank of Japan Notes in Circulation     75.7 tril.
Coins in Circulation 
4.5 tril.
----------------------------------------------------------------
80.2 tril.
Total: Cash in Circulation
Deposit Money*
Quasi-Money*
----------------------------------------------------------------
Total: Private Bank Deposits* 
966.5 tril.
Demand Deposits, etc.
Time Deposits, etc.
408.5 tril.
534.2 tril.
Money Stock*
(M3) 
1,038.7 tril.
Nominal GDP of Japan in fiscal 2007: 515 tril. yen
* Deposits of financial institutions and the
central government are not included. 
 The  present-day  currency  system  is  built  on  a  complex  network  consisting  of  the  central 
bank, financial institutions that provide deposit money, and financial markets where financial 
institutions carry out their activities. Therefore, to secure the ease of use of money and its 
value,  maintenance  of  financial  system  stability  –  the  stable  functioning  of  financial 
institutions and financial markets – is essential. Failure of one financial institution to meet its 
payment  obligations  may  lead  to  problems  for  other  financial  institutions  that  had  been 
expecting  the  transfer  of  funds  from  the  troubled  institution,  and  this  may  lead  to  a  chain 
reaction  of  defaults,  that  is,  the  materialization  of  "systemic  risk."  In  order  to  prevent  the 
materialization of such systemic risk, central banks may temporarily extend necessary funds 
to  financial  institutions  facing  funds  shortages.  This  is  called  the  "lender  of  last  resort" 
function of the central bank. In the period from the latter half of the 1990s to the early 2000s, 
when Japan's financial system was in turmoil, the Bank extended such emergency loans, the 
so-called  Nichigin  Tokuyu,  to  financial  institutions.  This  is  an  example  of  the  central  bank 
assuming the role of lender of last resort.  
4 
 BIS Review 104/2008
In  addition,  to  prevent  the  materialization  of  systemic  risk,  central  banks  should  always 
monitor  whether  activities  of  financial  institutions  and  the  functioning  of  the  payment  and 
settlement  system  are  sound,  and  provide  advice  as  necessary.  To  this  end,  the  Bank  is 
continually monitoring the situation in financial institutions and in financial markets. The Bank 
also conducts on-site examinations of financial institutions, in which the Bank's staff visit the 
premises  of  these  institutions  to  examine  in  detail  their  financial  soundness  and  risk 
management.  
Conduct of monetary policy 
3.  
The  last  item  on  my  list  of  central  banking  operations  is  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy, 
which aims at maintaining stability in the value of the currency, in other words, at maintaining 
price  stability.  Central  banks  maintain  price  stability  through  controlling  the  amount  of 
currency they supply and the level of interest rates, that is, the price of money. If the Bank 
supplies  abundant  funds  to  the  market,  the  market  interest  rate  –  the  uncollateralized 
overnight call rate – will decline, reducing the funding costs of financial institutions. This will 
influence other interest rates such as those on loans to households and firms. Through the 
change in interest rates, the cost of funds necessary for the economic activities of firms and 
households will change, and this will stimulate overall economic activity. As a result, this will 
alter the economy's supply and demand balance of goods and services, and will in turn affect 
prices.  
Monetary policy is not enforced by legislation or through administrative discretion. Rather, as 
I have explained, it is conducted through the central bank's banking operations, with private 
financial institutions as its counterparts.  
As we have seen so far, the various roles played by the central bank are conducted through 
its  banking  operations,  and  this  is  the  very  reason  why  they  are  undertaken  by  a  bank 
instead of a government office.  
II.  
Technological innovation and the Bank of Japan 
Changes brought about by technological innovation 
A.  
Central bank functions, which we have just looked at, have differed from country to country 
and  from  time  to  time,  but  are  now  well  established  in  the  major  countries.  However,  the 
specifics of central banking operations enabling central banks to fulfill their role have been 
changing continually. Especially in recent years, the environment surrounding central banks 
has  altered  significantly  and  rapidly  through  economic  globalization,  the  globalization  of 
financial markets, and advances in financial engineering techniques such as those in the field 
of  derivatives.  These  changes  have  been  driven  by  technological  innovation  particularly  in 
information and communications technology. In view of such changes in the environment, the 
Bank has been making efforts to properly conduct central banking operations that proactively 
pursue the achievement of its mission. Let me introduce to you the efforts that the Bank has 
been making with regard to its three central banking operations that I described earlier. 
B.  
Technological innovation and central banking operations 
Provision of cash and settlement services 
1.  
My  first  topic  with  respect  to  central  banking  operations  is  the  provision  of  cash  and 
settlement services. 
a.   Provision of cash 
BIS Review 104/2008 
 5
What is most important in securing the public's confidence in the use of money is to ensure 
their confidence in cash. The issuance of paper money, that is, of banknotes, in itself is the 
result of technological innovation. The oldest paper money in Japan is said to be the Yamada 
Hagaki,  which  was  circulated  near  Nagoya,  in  the  Ise  Yamada  area  (now  Ise  City,  Mie 
Prefecture) around the 1600s [References 1 and 2]. The history of paper money can also be 
said  to  be  the  history  of  anti-counterfeiting,  and  at  the  Bank  we  continually  examine  the 
authenticity  of  cash  and  carry  out  research  and  development  on  anti-counterfeiting 
technologies. Banknote counterfeiting increased rapidly in the 2000s: the annual number of 
counterfeit notes detected surged from previously several hundreds to approximately 26,000 
in 2004. This is due to the wider use of digital imaging devices such as color copiers and 
printers,  and  counterfeit  notes  have  become  even  more  sophisticated  with  the  further 
technological development of such devices. 
Technological innovation is partly responsible for the increase in counterfeit banknotes, but 
at  the  same  time  it  also  contributes  to  providing  anti-counterfeiting  measures.  Banknotes 
incorporate  many  security 
features  such  as  meticulous  designs,  watermarks,  and 
luminescent ink that prevents the reproduction by color copiers or similar devices. The new 
series  banknotes  issued  since  2004  are  equipped  with  state-of-the-art  security  features 
(Chart  5)  [References  3  and  4]:  one  is  a  hologram  at  the  lower  left  corner  of  5,000  and 
10,000  yen  notes,  which  changes  its  color  and  pattern  when  the  notes  are  tilted.  Another 
feature is intaglio printing, and the ink on the new series notes is raised higher than the ink 
on the previous ones. The number of counterfeit banknotes has clearly decreased due to the 
issuance of the new series notes equipped with such high security features. Only one out of 
one million banknotes in circulation is counterfeit in Japan, which is very low compared to 
one out of 10 thousand in the United States. This is attributable to the high sophistication of 
banknote  production  technologies  in  Japan.  However,  the  Bank  needs  to  make  persistent 
efforts  to  deal  with  the  rapid  progress  in  technologies  that  make  counterfeiting  possible. 
Given  the  globalization  of  currency  counterfeiting,  the  Bank  has  been  conducting  joint 
research  on  anti-counterfeit  technologies  with  other  central  banks,  law  enforcement 
agencies, and manufacturers of cash handling machines. 
Security Features of the Bank of Japan Notes 
Chart 5
Security Features of 10,000 Yen Note
Luminescent ink
The Governor’s seal on the 
front side and some parts of 
the background pattern 
fluoresce under ultraviolet light.
Intaglio printing
Raised printing is used for 
some features of the note.
Pearl ink
When viewed from different 
angles, a semi-transparent 
pattern printed with pink 
pearl ink appears in the 
blank areas of the left and 
right margins of the front of 
the note.
Hologram
When the banknote is tilted, the color and 
pattern of the design change.
Latent image
When the banknote is viewed from a 
certain angle, the number “10000”
appears on the bottom left of the front 
side, and the word “Nippon” on the 
top right of the back side.
Watermark-bar-pattern
When the banknote is 
held up to the light, 
three vertical 
watermark bars 
become visible. This 
feature is more difficult 
to reproduce with 
personal computers or 
color copiers than the 
traditional watermark. 
6 
  BIS Review 104/2008
Various types of electronic money have been introduced and used as a new means of retail 
payment.  However,  these  types  of  electronic  money  cannot  immediately  replace  cash  in 
terms of general acceptability and anonymity, both of which are characteristics of cash, as 
evidenced by the fact that their use is restricted mainly to small-value retail payments and 
closed networks. A recent survey conducted by the Bank shows that the outstanding value of 
electronic  money  is  approximately  77  billion  yen,  equivalent  to  only  0.1  percent  of  the 
outstanding value of cash (notes and coins) and 1.7 percent of that of coins [Reference 5]. 
With the recent rapid increase in its use, however, electronic money seems to have become 
widely  established  as  a  means  of  small-value  payments.  The  Bank  has  been  working  on 
research and analysis on electronic money, paying due attention to how such a new means 
of  payment  will  change  the  concept  of  money  and  the  design  of  payment  and  settlement 
systems, and how these changes may affect the Bank's policy and business operations in 
the future. In addition, the Bank, as the secretariat of Japan for the Technical Committee for 
Financial Services of the International Organization for Standardization (ISO), participates in 
the  standardization  of 
technologies  such  as  cryptography  and 
biometrics,  and  the  coding  of  message  transmissions  among  financial  institutions.  Making 
use  of  the  results  of  these  efforts,  the  Bank  supports  Japan's  financial  industry  to  take 
advantage of new information technologies. 
information  security 
b.   Enhancement of settlement services 
Reflecting  the  progress  in  information  processing  technology  and  the  increase  in  financial 
institutions' need for more advanced settlement services, the Bank has also been working to 
improve  the  safety  and  efficiency  of  settlement  via  current  accounts  at  the  Bank,  which  is 
another means of settlement the Bank offers. I will briefly explain the history of large-value 
interbank  funds  settlement  as  a  good  example  of  how  technological  innovation  has 
contributed to the evolution of financial transactions. 
Most central banks, including the Bank of Japan, used to conduct interbank settlements on a 
net  basis  at  designated  times  during  the  day.  The  settlements  between  private  financial 
institutions are completed by transferring funds between current accounts that they hold with 
the Bank. In this settlement mode, called "designated-time net settlement," funds transfers 
were made at designated times of the day, four times per day in Japan. At each designated 
time, the net settlement position of each financial institution was calculated simultaneously 
and  its  account  at  the  Bank  was  credited  or  debited.  With  this  settlement  mode,  financial 
institutions  need  only  the  funds  equivalent  to  their  net  debit  positions  at  the  time  of 
settlement, and thus, it is an efficient mode from the viewpoint of the management of liquidity 
and  business  operations.  Under  this  mode,  however,  if  a  single  financial  institution  in  the 
system were to fail to meet its obligations, all payments would inevitably be suspended. In 
the worst case, this would lead to a chain of defaults at financial institutions. Since the total 
daily value of settlement via the current accounts at the Bank is substantial, reaching around 
120 trillion yen, the effects of this risk could be grave. 
In order to reduce such risk, in 2001, the Bank converted the designated-time net settlement 
to a settlement mode in which funds transfers are made immediately and individually. This 
mode is called "real-time gross settlement (RTGS)." In RTGS, each payment instruction sent 
by financial institutions for a funds transfer through current accounts at the Bank is settled 
immediately  and  individually  upon  receipt.  Therefore,  negative  effects  of  one  financial 
institution's failure to pay would be limited to counterparties to that institution and would be 
minimized  for  other  institutions  and  the  overall  settlement  system.  While  this  is  a 
considerable  advantage,  there  is  an  issue  specific  to  RTGS  that  need  to  be  addressed. 
Namely,  it  requires  financial  institutions  to  prepare  larger  amounts  of  intraday  liquidity  for 
settlement compared with the designated-time net settlement. In the current RTGS mode, if 
each and every financial institution holds back its payments until it receives payments from 
others,  there  is  a  possibility  that  all  system  participants  would  end  up  short  of  funds  and 
BIS Review 104/2008 
 7
settlements would not be processed (Chart 6). If such behavior became widespread, it could 
lead to gridlock, and smooth settlement, the aim of RTGS, would not be achieved. 
The  breakthrough  in  addressing  this  issue  was  the  substantial  progress  in  information 
processing  technology.  The  Bank  has  been  working  on  the  implementation  of  the  next-
generation RTGS (RTGS-XG) project, and is planning to introduce new functions, "queuing 
and  offsetting  mechanisms,"  into  the  BOJ-NET  Funds  Transfer  System  in  October  2008 
[Reference  6].  The  "queuing  mechanism"  will  place  payment  instructions  in  the  BOJ-NET 
central queue. The "offsetting mechanism" will then identify sets of payment instructions in 
the queue that can be offset simultaneously and settle these individually, as in RTGS. The 
"offsetting  mechanism"  will  carry  out  bilateral  offsettings  continuously  throughout  the  day, 
and  multilateral  offsettings  four  times  a  day.  The  RTGS-XG  project,  therefore,  aims  to 
achieve  efficient  settlement  by  maintaining  the  advantage  of  the  RTGS  mode,  its  stability, 
while reducing the liquidity necessary for settlement. The results of running tests of RTGS-
XG, in which many financial institutions participated, show that the aim of the project, that is, 
improving the efficiency of settlement and minimizing the liquidity necessary for settlement, 
will  be  achieved  with  the  introduction  of  the  above  mechanisms  (Chart  7).  RTGS-XG  was 
made  possible  with  the  increase  in  information  processing  capacity,  and  this  is  a  good 
example  of  how  technological  innovation  has  contributed  to  improving  the  safety  and 
efficiency of financial transactions. 
Gridlock in the BOJ-NET RTGS System
Chart 6
Payment instruction
Current BOJ-NET RTGS System
- In order to send a payment instruction, each bank needs 
to have a sufficient balance in its BOJ current account. 
- All three banks in this example do not have sufficient 
balances.
30
Bank A
Balance: 10
Bank B
Balance: 0
- If each bank waits for the other to pay first, gridlock 
occurs, and none of the payment instructions will be 
settled.
40
20
Bank C
Balance: 20
New BOJ-NET RTGS System
- If a bank does not have a sufficient balance in its BOJ 
current account, the payment instruction will be stored in a 
centralized queue.
- The system will identify sets of payment instructions in the 
queue that can be settled when taking into account 
incoming payments as a source of liquidity, and will settle 
them simultaneously.
- Gridlock will not occur in this example, because payment 
instructions will be settled simultaneously. 
 8 
 BIS Review 104/2008
Chart 7
Safety and Efficiency Achieved under the New BOJ-NET RTGS System
Value-weighted 
average time of 
settlement
12:30
Curve AB shows the possible 
combinations of total required 
balances and average settlement 
times under the new BOJ-NET 
RTGS system
A
Combination achieved on 
May 12, 2008 under the 
current BOJ-NET RTGS 
system
Low
12:00
Safety
11:30
High
11:00
10:30
Combination achieved in the 
running test for the new 
BOJ-NET RTGS system
5
Efficiency
10
Low
High
B
20
15
Value of total balances required to settle 
payments on a given day (tril. yen)
Note: Under the new BOJ-NET RTGS system, payments that are currently cleared in the Foreign Exchange 
Yen Clearing System and settled at 14:30 on a net basis in the current BOJ-NET RTGS system will be
settled on a gross basis.
 Maintenance of financial system stability 
2.  
Technological  innovation  has  also  posed  a  great  challenge  to  central  banks'  efforts  to 
maintain  financial  system  stability.  Advances  in  information  processing  have  facilitated 
financial  innovation  and  created  new  financial  instruments  such  as  derivatives  and 
securitized  products.  These  have  enabled  financial  institutions  to  unbundle  and  reallocate 
risks of various kinds, such as credit and interest rate risks, based on diverse and complex 
methods for analyzing and managing risks.  
Let us take securitization of mortgages, the root of the U.S. subprime mortgage problem, as 
an example. Mortgages involve various risks. For instance, a lender or an investor may face 
credit  risk,  the  risk  of  loss  resulting  from  the  counterparty's  failure  to  perform  its  financial 
obligations, as well as interest rate risk, the risk of loss from a rise in interest rates during the 
loan  term.  Needless  to  say,  regular  bank  loans  entail  similar  risks;  however,  mortgages 
present  larger  risks  due  to  their  extremely  long  maturity,  and  the  risk  management  of 
mortgages  is  more  difficult.  Securitization  is  an  example  of  the  enhancement  of  risk 
management techniques achieved through advances in information processing. 
When  mortgages  are  securitized,  a  number  of  mortgages  are  packaged  together  and 
securities  backed  by  these  mortgages  (mortgage-backed  securities,  [MBSs])  are  issued 
(Chart 8). Because interest payments on, and redemptions of, the securities are covered by 
the payments of interest and principal on a large number  of mortgages, there is a greater 
diversification of risk when compared with individual mortgages. For example, creating MBSs 
by  packaging  a  number  of  mortgages  whose  borrowers  are  scattered  over  a  wide 
geographical  area  can  diversify  risks,  such  as  the  catastrophe  risk  associated  with  a 
particular area, and risk quantification becomes easier because of the law of large numbers. 
Securitization  also  allows  financial  institutions  to  restructure  the  packaged  mortgages  into 
multiple securitized products with different risk profiles that meet specific investor needs with 
various degrees of risk acceptance and preference and to sell these products. What is more, 
as the financial intermediary function of the mortgage market becomes more efficient through 
these  schemes,  there  are  greater  opportunities  for  borrowers  to  obtain  mortgages  on 
favorable terms. 
BIS Review 104/2008 
 9
Securitization of Mortgages
Issuer
Mortgage 1
Mortgage 2
Mortgage 3
Mortgage 4
Mortgage 5
 Securitized 
Product A
Securitized 
Product B
Securitized 
Product C
Securitized 
Product D
Chart 8
Investor V
Investor W
Investor X
Investor Y
Investor Z
A large number of mortgages are 
packaged to diversify risks.
Securitized  products  are  created  by 
unbundling and reallocating cash flows 
and risks.
 On  the  other  hand,  if  we  fail  to  properly  understand  new  financial engineering  techniques, 
this will lead to a failure in risk management. For example, even when a securitized product 
is backed by a large number of mortgages for the purpose of risk diversification, the law of 
large numbers will not work if the economy as a whole is experiencing a housing bubble and 
the individual loans backing such securities as a result take on similar risk profiles. Global 
financial markets have been in turmoil stemming from the U.S. subprime mortgage problem 
since summer 2007, and one of the causes was the excessive risk-taking arising from the 
false  assessment  of  such  risks  amid  the  rapid  expansion  of  the  market  for  securitized 
products. I hasten to add, however, that just blaming securitization will not solve the problem. 
Providing financial services is difficult, and this can be understood if you put yourself in the 
position  of  mortgage  loan  suppliers.  For  an  economy  to  prosper,  someone  has  to  provide 
credit while managing the risks involved, namely, the credit, interest rate, and liquidity risks. 
Just  like  manufacturing,  the  provision  of  financial  services  requires  specialized  skills,  and 
financial institutions need to adapt their services to changes in the financial environment.  
At  the  same  time,  central  banks  and  supervisory  authorities  around  the  world  face  new 
challenges in their quest to maintain the financial system stability as a result of such changes 
in the financial environment. While such challenges span various areas, a key prerequisite is 
a proper understanding of the risks involved in individual financial transactions. In this regard, 
the  Bank  has  been  conducting  surveys  and  research  on  ways  to  properly  assess  and 
analyze the risks involved in new financial engineering techniques and financial instruments, 
and  has  made  use  of  the  findings  in  its  market  monitoring  and  discussions  with  financial 
institutions in on-site examinations. At the same time, it is important to identify risks in the 
financial system as a whole in a cross-sectoral manner. These are indeed very extensive and 
difficult  issues,  and  central  banks  and  supervisory  authorities  around  the  world  have  been 
deliberating  on  how  to  improve  financial  regulation  and  supervision  by  making  use  of  the 
lessons learned from the U.S. subprime mortgage problem. 
Issues regarding the conduct of monetary policy 
3.  
I will now move on to the last topic in the area of central banking operations, the conduct of 
monetary policy, which covers a wide range of issues. Today, I will focus on two of them: 
first, how the Bank makes use of the fruits of technological innovation in the development of 
10 
 BIS Review 104/2008
monetary  policy  tools;  and  second,  what  challenges  technological  innovation  poses 
concerning the Bank's assessment of the economic and price situation.  
a.   Advancement of monetary policy tools 
Let  me  begin  with  changes  in  the  ways  in  which  the  Bank  supplies  funds  to  financial 
institutions by extending loans and executing money market operations. Currently, the whole 
process of the Bank's funds-supplying operations, involving notification by the Bank of such 
operations,  financial  institutions'  application  for  such  operations,  the  transfer  of  funds  to 
financial institutions' current accounts at the Bank, and their repayment of funds to the Bank, 
are executed electronically. Swift processing of transactions and settlements is essential as 
prices  in  financial  markets  change  by  the  second  in  response  to  various  news,  and  the 
Bank's  processing  system  is  now  an  indispensable  infrastructure  for  conducting  money 
market operations flexibly so as to maintain stability in financial markets.  
Financial  institutions  put  up  collateral  when  they  receive  loans  from  the  Bank,  and  the 
management  of  such  collateral  has  been  carried  out  under  an  integrated  online  system 
called the "pooled collateral" system since 2001. The system made possible a more efficient 
use  of  collateral  by  financial  institutions  and  improved  significantly  the  administration  of 
collateral  by  the  Bank  and  financial  institutions.  The  Bank  started  to  accept,  in  addition  to 
conventional financial assets such as JGBs and corporate bonds, new, innovative financial 
assets, such as securitized products and dematerialized commercial paper, as collateral from 
financial institutions. These changes are technological innovations in monetary policy tools, 
achieved through the progress in information processing and financial engineering. 
b.   Challenges with respect to the assessment of the economic and price situation 
Next, I will discuss the last issue, the challenges technological innovation poses regarding 
the  assessment  of  the  economic  and  price  situation,  which  forms  the  basis  for  the 
appropriate conduct of monetary policy by the Bank. 
Monetary  policy  aims  to  contribute  to  the  sustainable  growth  of  the  economy  through  the 
maintenance  of  price  stability.  Technological  innovation  raises  practical  issues  when  an 
accurate  measurement  of  the  price  level  using  price  indexes,  such  as  the  consumer  price 
index  and  the  corporate  goods  price  index,  becomes  difficult  as  a  result  of  technological 
progress  itself.  Let  me  explain  this  issue  from  three  aspects.  First  of  all,  to  grasp  price 
developments accurately, new products and services, continuously introduced as the fruit of 
technological innovation, need to be incorporated swiftly among the items comprising these 
price indexes. Second, quality improvements need to be considered when measuring prices. 
The  quality  of  a  product  improves  with  technological  innovation,  but  often  its  price  is  kept 
unchanged, and this can be taken as a price decline in real terms. Price indexes take this 
point into account, but it is difficult to assess quality improvements and to what extent this 
should  be  considered  as  a  change  in  prices.  Let  me  take  computers  as  an  example. 
Statistically,  an  increase  in  memory  capacity  is  regarded  as  a  decline  in  price.  From  a 
consumer's  viewpoint,  however,  it  is  difficult  to  judge  whether  the  increase  in  memory 
capacity  should  be  regarded  as  a  reduction  in  the  price  of  computers,  because  this 
assessment will depend on the consumer's individual taste and requirements of a computer. 
And third, identifying the most typical sample price for a good or service has become more 
difficult with the progress in technological innovation. For example, recently, there have been 
an increasing number of services that award benefits to the customer after certain conditions 
are satisfied, such as loyalty cards and mileage services. These are examples of so-called 
"nonlinear pricing" systems. As a result of such highly distinct price setting, a particular good 
or service has various prices, making it difficult to determine the most typical sample price for 
each item when compiling price indexes.  
Effects  of  technological  innovation  are  also  significant  in  the  assessment  of  economic 
activity. Measurement of real GDP or productivity is based on the assumption that nominal 
values  can  be  broken  down  accurately  into  price  and  volume.  Naturally,  however,  if  price 
BIS Review 104/2008 
 11
measurement  through  indexes  becomes  difficult,  it  is  also  difficult  to  assess  volumes.  In 
addition  to  these  measurement  problems,  there  are  also difficult  conceptual  problems.  For 
example, making judgments with regard to what effects technological innovation is having on 
productivity  in  the  overall  economy,  in  other  words,  the  potential  growth  rate,  is  crucial  in 
assessing the tightness of supply and demand conditions, the so-called output gap. Let me 
take  an  example  to  illustrate  this  point.  Beginning  in  the  early  1990s,  the  U.S.  economy 
experienced a long phase of expansion and the  unemployment rate fell significantly, while 
prices remained stable. It has often been argued that this expansion was attributable to a rise 
in productivity brought about by the IT revolution heralding the arrival of the so-called "new 
economy."  Under  such  circumstances,  a  central  bank  should  examine  carefully  whether 
productivity of the economy is indeed rising, because if productivity growth is real, the central 
bank should not raise interest rates unnecessarily so as not to hamper the opportunity for 
economic growth. On the other hand, if productivity growth is overestimated, the central bank 
might  miss  the  opportunity  to  implementing  a  necessary  raise  in  interest  rates,  and  as  a 
result, inflation or an economic bubble might occur. For this reason, it is essential that, in its 
conduct of monetary policy, the Bank grasps accurately developments in productivity. 
Closing remarks 
As I have discussed, technological innovation is ongoing, and just as for private firms and 
financial  institutions,  the  environment  in  which  central  banks  operate  is  continuously 
changing.  I  would  like  to  close  my  speech  by  noting  a  few  points  that  I  believe  to  be 
important for central banks in confronting these changes.  
First, central banks must strive to clearly understand changes in the environment and make 
constant efforts to review their operations. Central banks are decidedly practical institutions 
that perform banking operations. As I said at the outset, in order to enable the public to use 
money  with  confidence  and  convenience,  central  banks  must  strive  to  provide  high-quality 
central banking services by making full use of the fruits of technological innovation. Although 
monetary  policy  does  not  directly  contribute  to  raising  the  productivity  of  the  economy, 
central banks' banking services, such as settlement, do.  
Second,  technological  innovation  may  bring  about  various  uncertainties  regarding  the 
assessment of the economic and price situation as well as the conduct of monetary policy on 
the  basis  of  such  assessment.  In  order  to  make  appropriate  policy  decisions  under  such 
circumstances, central banks must continuously improve information gathering methods and 
analytical tools. Looking back at cases both in Japan and abroad where central banks were 
accused  of making  monetary  policy  mistakes,  such  mistakes  arose  when  the  central  bank 
failed to properly understand major changes in the environment and their significance.  
With  regard  to  both  of  these  points,  central  banks  must  continue  to  make  efforts  to 
continually grasp changes in the environment surrounding them and examine their actions in 
light of these changes. That is to say, central banks must constantly be willing to learn. It is 
my  belief  that  to  this  end,  interaction  between  theoretical  research  in  academia  and  our 
practical experience plays an important role. Of course, I understand that the standpoint of 
an  academic  and  that  of  a  policymaker  differ.  For  an  academic,  what  is  important  is  to 
present  new  points  of  view  and  be  prepared  to  examine  the  persuasiveness  of  his  or  her 
theories.  And  on  occasion,  it  may  be  necessary  to  propose  bold  hypotheses  or 
interpretations. Good theories are likely to be those that, as the result of such efforts, have 
stood  the  test  of  time.  In  contrast,  a  policymaker  cannot  wait  until  a  theory  regarding  a 
particular  issue  has  been  confirmed,  nor  can  he  or  she  put  all  eggs  in  one  basket  and 
embark on an untested policy course. A policymaker must make use of the various theories 
available at the time in making judgments and must sometimes deal with situations where 
conventional theories do not apply. For this reason, a policymaker must be willing to continue 
to learn and take every opportunity to exchange views and opinions with academics. At the 
same time, there may be cases where issues faced by central banks and their experiences 
12 
 BIS Review 104/2008
may offer new perspectives for academic research. Therefore, it is important that academics 
and  policymakers  recognize  the  differences  of  their  roles  and  respect  each  other's  work.  I 
think it is this interaction between theory and practice that will stimulate further evolution in 
central banking operations.  
I hope my speech today will serve to facilitate this interaction. Thank you very much for your 
attention.  
References 
[1] Mari Ohnuki, "Yamada Hagaki, Japan's First Paper Money," Monetary and Economic 
Studies, 17 (1), Institute for Monetary and Economic Studies, Bank of Japan, 1999 (available 
at http://www.imes.boj.or.jp/cm/hmls/feature_gra2-1.htm). 
[2] Morio Seno'o, "Yamada Hagaki and the History of Paper Currency in Japan," IMES 
Discussion Paper No. 96-E-25, Institute for Monetary and Economic Studies, Bank of Japan, 
1996 (the Japanese version is available at http://www.imes.boj.or.jp/cm/pdffiles/chosa55-
2.pdf). 
[3] Bank of Japan, "Security Features of the New Bank of Japan Notes," 2004 (available at 
http://www.boj.or.jp/en/type/release/zuiji/kako03/bnnew3.htm). 
[4] Bank of Japan, Nagoya Branch, "Morizo Kiccoro no Osatsu World – Atarashii Osatsu no 
Hanashi Dagane (A Story of New Banknotes, Narrated by Morizo and Kiccoro, the Official 
Mascots of the 2005 World Exposition, Aichi, Japan)," 2004 (available only in Japanese at 
http://www3.boj.or.jp/nagoya/kaisatsu/world.pdf). 
[5] Bank of Japan, Payment and Settlement Systems Department, "Saikin no Denshi Money 
no Doko ni Tsuite (Recent Developments in Electronic Money)," 2008 (available only in 
Japanese at http://www.boj.or.jp/type/ronbun/ron/research07/data/ron0808b.pdf). 
[6] Bank of Japan, Payment and Settlement Systems Department, "Japan's Next-Generation 
RTGS," 2006 (available at 
http://www.boj.or.jp/en/type/ronbun/ron/research/data/ron0610a.pdf). 
BIS Review 104/2008 
 13
