Glenn Stevens: The director’s cut – four important long-run themes  
Address by Mr Glenn Stevens, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, to the Australian 
Institute of Company Directors Luncheon, Sydney, 17 September 2008. 
 Thank you for the invitation to speak to you today. 
We are living through challenging times for decision-makers in both private and public roles. 
The past year has seen a major change in international economic and financial conditions. 
Global economic growth, having been well above average for a string of years, has slowed 
noticeably, especially in the major industrial countries – yet inflation rates remain a concern. 
Large  losses  have  been  incurred  by  major  international  financial  institutions.  Several 
household names in global investment banking have disappeared. Appetite for risk – which 
had been strong to the point of recklessness in some areas – has given way to risk aversion. 
Credit is harder to obtain, and more expensive. Australia has been affected by these forces, 
but  much  less  than  the  countries  at  the  epicentre.  Our  financial  system  is  weathering  the 
storm well. 
Amid all that excitement, it is useful occasionally to step back from the high-frequency detail 
to focus on the bigger picture. Today, I propose to talk about four low-frequency, big-picture 
themes – all of which are nonetheless amply demonstrated in the course of events over the 
past year or two. 
The themes are: 
• 
• 
• 
the emergence of China; 
the economics of a fully employed economy; 
the end – perhaps? – of the long period of households leveraging up their finances; 
and 
shifting perspectives about the regulation of the financial sector in the economy. 
 China 
I  am  not  talking  here  about  the  notion  of  “de-coupling”  and  so  on.  That  term  is  actually 
unhelpful – nothing is ever really de-coupled; everything is connected. But the connections 
are complex, various forces are at work and reasonable people will have differing opinions 
about how things will play out over a year or two. At present, China is slowing, partly as a 
result  of  the  slowdown  in  the  United  States  and  Europe,  but  partly  by  design  of  domestic 
policy.  The  Chinese  policy-makers  have  been  seeking  some  slowing  because  of  evident 
overheating, and are now in the position to be removing some of that restraint. 
But  the  emergence  of  China  as  an  industrialised  economy  is  a  fundamental  long-term 
change to the economic, financial and political landscape whose full consequences I suspect 
we can barely appreciate as yet. This has been happening for a couple of decades now, but 
the nature of its impact is gradually changing. For some years, it was too small to notice – 
even  a  country  with  a  lot  of  people  is  small  economically  if  their  per  capita  incomes  and 
productivity  are  very  low.  Then,  some  time  in  the  1990s,  China  became  quantitatively 
important  enough  for  the  rest  of  the  world  to  enjoy  the  disinflationary  effects  of  added 
Chinese production capacity, as millions of low-cost workers turned out manufactures, in the 
process lowering global prices. 
More recently, we have been experiencing a new effect of that growth, namely the effect of 
higher Chinese living standards on the price of energy and natural resources. f course, this is 
BIS Review 111/2008 
 1
not confined to China – it is happening around the developing world to a greater or lesser 
extent. But China is the biggest example. 
Commodity prices are coming off their peaks at present, though key prices for Australia are 
still very high. Even if this marks a cyclical turn for such prices, in the longer term this new 
claim on energy and other resources will not go away. Other countries are having to adapt to 
that. The rise in prices for energy and raw materials has made it harder for those countries to 
combine the steady growth and low inflation that had characterised the period from the early 
1990s until about the middle of this decade. 
At the same time, this extraordinary increase in the demand for natural resources and energy 
has raised Australia’s terms of trade by close to two-thirds in the space of five years – the 
largest shock of its kind for five decades. So the economics of this for Australia are therefore 
a bit different from those for the “average” industrial country. Like others, in the energy-using 
parts of the economy, we find it more difficult to combine steady growth and low inflation. But 
in  addition,  we  have  had  to  absorb  a  massive  income  boost.1  Of  course,  there  are  worse 
problems to have! Nonetheless, significant adjustments are occurring – to the structure of the 
economy,  to  where  the  population  lives  and  how  the  national  income  is  earned  and 
distributed. Unless resource prices reverse a long way, these trends will continue. 
China’s emergence is surely far from complete. China, like all economies, will have cycles. 
But its average growth rate is likely to be pretty high for years ahead, even if not as high as it 
has been recently. This is an opportunity and a challenge for Australian business and policy-
makers, and not just in the resource sector. 
Economics of full employment 
Over recent years, the Australian labour market has been as tight as at any time seen in a 
generation. The rate of unemployment in the past 12 months, at about 4 per cent, has been 
as  low  as  at  any  time  since  1974.  In  surveys  and  our  discussions  with  firms,  difficulty 
securing labour has been a common problem. The term “capacity constraint” has been a part 
of  the  Australian  economic  lexicon  over  recent  years  in  a  way  not  seen  for  a  long  time. 
Survey  measures  of  capacity  utilisation  have  been  very  high,  and  fixed  investment  to 
increase capacity is running strongly. 
Let’s be clear that full employment is a good thing. It is one of the statutory objectives given 
to  the  Reserve  Bank  in  our  Charter  (though  interestingly  the  authors  of  the  Act  never 
quantified  what  they  meant  by  full  employment,  nor  for  that  matter,  by  “stability  of  the 
currency”). 
But the economics of full employment are different from the economics of trying to get to full 
employment. This is a simple point, but an important one. When the economy has too much 
spare  capacity  –  say,  in  the  aftermath  of  a  business  cycle  downturn  –  the  aim  of 
macroeconomic policies is to push up demand so that it catches up to supply potential. There 
may be several years in which demand growth exceeds the normal pace as it eats into the 
spare capacity. 
Once the spare capacity has been wound in, however, actual growth in demand and output 
has to slow, to match the growth rate of potential supply. That growth in potential supply is 
given by the growth in the labour force, the capital stock and the productivity of those factors 
of production. Typically we think of “potential GDP” in Australia rising by something like 3 per 
cent a year, give or take a bit. 
                                                 
1   For  those  of  you  who  are  interested,  I  have  set  out  my  views  on  this  in  an  earlier  address.  See 
http://www.rba.gov.au/PublicationsAndResearch/Bulletin/bu_jul08/com_prices_macro_pol_aus_perspectiv 
e.html 
2 
 BIS Review 111/2008
This,  as  my  predecessor  Ian  Macfarlane  remarked  a  few  years  ago,  means  that  once  the 
reserves of spare capacity are pretty much used up, we should expect to be accustomed to 
growth rates for GDP starting with a 2 or a 3. There will not be many with 4s or 5s, as we had 
for  some  years  through  the  1990s  and  earlier  this  decade.  Periods  of  growth  noticeably 
above about 3 per cent will be roughly matched in frequency and duration by periods below – 
as we are having now. If we set our aspirations higher than that – if we try for above-average 
performance all the time – we will just get inflation. That is the economics of full employment. 
Now you may feel that a growth rate for real GDP of something like 3 per cent on average is 
not that high. Is that the best we can do? Can’t we lift it? 
The only way the potential growth rate can be lifted is by adding more factors of production – 
more labour and capital – or raising the growth rate of productivity. Over the long term, the 
key is productivity. On that front, productivity growth does seem over the past several years 
to have settled at a lower average rate than we had seen since the early 1990s. This may 
have  several  causes,  and  the  experts  debate  them.  But  over  the  years  ahead,  as  a 
community we must be sure not to let up on our efforts to keep productivity growing. I have 
no specific policy prescriptions here – only general ones – trying to sustain competition, to 
keep  markets  open,  to  maintain  flexibility  and  so  on.  But  those  general  values  are  worth 
recounting from time to time. 
Household balance sheets 
A  feature  of  the  economic  landscape  of  the  past  decade  and  a  half  has  been  the  long 
gearing up of households. In the early 1990s, household gross debt in Australia was equal to 
about  50  per  cent  of  average  annual  household  disposable  income.  This  year,  it  reached 
about 160 per cent. Households’ assets rose generally in parallel, though not quite as fast, 
with total assets rising from about 460 per cent of income in 1990 to over 800 per cent at the 
end of 2007. (Assets have fallen somewhat since then, with the decline in the share market 
and some softening in housing prices.) The ratio of debt to assets rose from under 10 per 
cent  in  1990  to  about  18  per  cent  in  2008.  The  ratio  of  housing  debt  to  housing  assets 
reached about 27 per cent. 
Very similar trends have been seen in a number of comparable countries around the world, 
so in thinking about the causes, we should not look exclusively for domestic causes. But in 
summary,  the  main  factors  behind  this  big  increase  in  the  size  of  the  household  sector’s 
balance sheet were: 
• 
the  general  tendency  for  financial  activity  and  wealth  to  grow  faster  than  income, 
which  has  been  a  feature  of  most  economies  since  at  least  as  far  back  as  the 
1950s; 
an increased pace of financial innovation – and, in particular, a lot more credit has 
been available, particularly over the period since the mid 1990s, to households. In 
recent years around the world, anyone who was creditworthy – and some who were 
not – have been able to access ample amounts of credit;  
the  big  decline  in  inflation.  This  lowered  nominal  interest  rates  dramatically.2  This 
happened in all countries, though the timing differed. In Australia it was a big factor 
after 1992; 
                                                   
2   With the fall in nominal interest rates, a big front end loading problem in servicing the conventional mortgage 
was eliminated. See http://www.rba.gov.au/PublicationsAndResearch/Bulletin/bu_oct97/bu_1097_6.pdf. 
BIS Review 111/2008 
 3
  a period of pretty low long-term interest rates globally, which encouraged borrowing 
around  the  world,  though  this  was  a  bigger  factor  in  the  United  States  than  here. 
This had a lot to do with the build-up of savings relative to investment in Asia; 
a desire to devote a higher share of a rising income to acquiring housing services. 
As people’s income increases, certain goods and services will take a declining share 
of  total  spending  –  food,  for  example,  or  products,  such  as  electrical  goods  or 
clothing, which have large falls in their relative prices over time. But other types of 
products  take  an  increasing  share  of  income.  Housing  has  tended  to  be  in  that 
category.  As  we  have  become  wealthier,  our  aspirations  for  housing  in  terms  of 
position, quality and size have naturally enough increased. But for various reasons 
the supply is not very elastic – there is only so much well-located land, and other 
factors have affected the supply price of dwellings more generally. In the end, a lot 
more of our income is devoted to housing, acquired by servicing mortgages, than 
was once the case. 
The  question  is  whether  this  long  period  of  gearing  up  by  households  might  now  be 
approaching an end. Certainly household credit growth is much slower at present than it has 
been  for  some  years,  running  roughly  in  line  with  income  growth.  Might  we  see  this 
conservative approach to debt among households persist? 
It is hard to know the answer to this question. There is much more of the household balance 
sheet that could, in principle, be turned into collateral, so gearing up might resume once the 
current turmoil has passed. 
But  there  is  also  a  good  chance  that  households  will  for  some  time  seek  to  contain  and 
consolidate  their  debt,  grow  their  consumption  spending  at  a  pace  closer  to  income,  and 
perhaps look to save more of their current income than in the recent past. It is possible that 
we  are  witnessing  the  early  part  of  a  new  phase  where  the  household  spending  and 
borrowing dynamic is different from the past decade and a half. 
Time will tell. But if that is the trend of the next several years, the growth opportunities for 
businesses  and  financial  institutions  will  be  different.  And  whereas  the  household  balance 
sheet has been the big financial story of the past 15 years, some other financial trend will 
probably be the bigger story of the next decade. There are some developments that suggest 
the balance sheets of governments might well be expected to expand a good deal. The need 
for support of the finance sector in countries like the United States and the United Kingdom is 
one.  The  build-up  in  public  infrastructure  in  Australian  cities  and  regions  may  point  in  the 
same direction, though to a lesser extent. If the sudden aversion to these sorts of assets by 
private investors continues for any length of time, governments may have to choose whether 
to  fund  the  projects  themselves,  or  defer  them.  Fortunately,  public  balance  sheets  in  this 
country are in a very much stronger starting position than those in most other countries. 
Financial stability and regulation 
All the issues surrounding the use, or not, of the government’s balance sheet to support the 
financial  system  have  been  on  prominent  display  over  recent  months.  We  have  seen  the 
actions  by  the  US  Treasury  to  take  over  the  running  of  the  two  large  entities  known  as 
“Fannie”  and  “Freddie”.  As  Secretary  Paulson  commented,  the  ambiguity  about  who  was 
bearing  risk  in  these  entities  has  been  a  problem  for  a  long  time,  and  it  needed  to  be 
resolved. The US Government has shouldered the burden that investors always assumed it 
would, but has, quite appropriately, done so in a way that minimises the extent of bail-out for 
private shareholders who had been profiting from the risk-taking behaviour. 
Facing  up  to  these  problems  where  the  entities  concerned  were  regarded  as  effectively 
guaranteed by the government was one thing. The question of support has also arisen for 
entities which have always been seen as purely private, and hitherto not, at least explicitly, 
4 
 BIS Review 111/2008
regarded as so central to systemic stability that failure could be costly. The events of the past 
few days illustrate how difficult these issues have become. 
In all these cases though, in the final analysis there was not enough capital behind the risks 
that were being taken. The sophisticated financial system of the 21st century was supposed 
to  spread  risk,  but  a  lot  of  the  risk  ended  up  being  concentrated  on  the  books  of  highly 
leveraged institutions. High risk and high leverage proved to be a fatal combination. It always 
does. 
Some significant questions arise from all this. The main one, put at its broadest and simplest, 
is  whether something  can  and should  be  done  to  dampen  the  profound  cycles  in  financial 
behaviour,  with  associated  swings  in  asset  prices  and  credit,  given  the  damage  they  can 
potentially do to an economy. 
This debate has been going on for quite some years. There are several points of view. 
One is that counter-cyclical regulatory measures using the power of the prudential regulator 
should be taken to dampen the so called “financial accelerator”. This is the process where 
confidence  boosts  asset  prices,  which  then  provides  additional  collateral  for  further 
borrowing, which then boosts asset prices further and so on – until at some point the whole 
process  goes  into  reverse  and  there  is  a  fall  in  asset  values  and  de-leveraging,  as  is 
occurring  now.  Use  of  prudential  tools  to  work  against  these  tendencies  would  be  a 
departure  from  the  way  prudential  supervision  is  conducted  at  present,  where  the  goal  is 
soundness of individual institutions, rather than managing the dynamics of system stability 
through time. 
A counter view is that it is not feasible to do this, for various reasons. One is difficulties with 
tax and accounting rules. Another is that some of the key players are outside the regulatory 
net  –  hedge  funds  for  example.  This  view  holds  that  an  effective  response  against  the 
financial cycles almost certainly involves monetary policy. This would mean raising interest 
rates in times of booming asset and credit markets, even if goods and services price inflation 
was  contained,  in  order  to  provide  a  stabilising  influence  over  the  swings  in  financial 
behaviour. Some argue that this could be reconciled with standard inflation targeting, though 
only if the central bank had a very long time horizon or a great deal of flexibility. 
A third view is that it is not possible, with policy-makers’ current state of knowledge, to know 
whether  it  is  correct  to  lean  against  such  booms,  and  that  in  fact  it  could  turn  out  to  be 
destabilising to try. On this view, the only thing that can be done is to respond to asset and 
credit collapses if and when they occur, protecting where possible the financial system and 
the  economy  generally.  That  is,  to  clean  up  the  mess  afterwards,  so  to  speak.  This  has 
tended to be the US official view, at least up until now. 
This debate was quite active in the period following the collapse of the dot-com boom in the 
early 2000s. But those in favour of policy action aimed at moderating financial cycles did not 
carry the day, I think mainly because the US economy recovered pretty quickly from what 
was  a  quite  mild  downturn  in  2001.  I  sense  now,  however,  that  among  many  thoughtful 
people this question is once again up for discussion. It will be fascinating to watch how the 
debate unfolds. 
Conclusion 
In the barrage of information with which we must all cope day by day, it is often hard to stand 
back and see the big forces at work. But those forces – and our responses to them – will 
ultimately do more to shape the course of our economy and financial system than the short-
term news. Hopefully, we can still find some time for reflection about such matters, even in 
the volatile conditions in which we all find ourselves at present. It is in that spirit that I offer 
these remarks today. 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 111/2008 
 5
