Paul Jenkins: How trade and impediments to internal trade affect the 
Canadian economy 
Opening statement by Mr Paul Jenkins, Senior Deputy Governor of the Bank of Canada, to 
the Standing Senate Committee on Banking, Trade and Commerce, Ottawa, 12 March 2008.  
 Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for the opportunity to appear before this committee. With me is 
John Murray, a deputy governor at the Bank of Canada and member of the Bank's Governing 
Council. 
Let me start by saying that the issue of internal trade barriers is critically important, and I'm 
very pleased, Mr. Chairman, that your committee is examining it. We have reviewed previous 
submissions to this committee, and you will see that our focus will be slightly different. Rather 
than address the details of any given restrictions to internal trade, I'd like to focus on how 
trade  and  impediments  to  internal  trade  affect  the  overall  performance  of  the  Canadian 
economy. 
In these remarks, I'd like to address two important issues from that perspective: the need for 
flexibility in adjusting to economic change, and the need for economic policies that promote 
flexibility in markets for goods, services, capital, and labour. 
Economic flexibility refers to the ability of an economy to adjust to changing circumstances. 
Changes in economic conditions often relate to movements in relative prices, which in turn 
send important signals to markets. A flexible economy is one that adjusts to these signals 
and returns to its production potential as quickly, and with as little cost, as possible. Over the 
past decade or so, economic expansion in Canada and around the world has been robust, 
despite a series of major shocks. These shocks included: 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
the 1997-98 financial crisis in Asia, which spread to Russia and Latin America  
the worldwide collapse of the high-tech bubble 
the 9/11 terrorist attacks in the United States 
SARS and BSE 
intensified competition from China and India 
and,  since  2003,  a  sharp  increase  in  commodity  prices  and  an  associated  sharp 
increase in the external value of our currency. 
More  recently,  of  course,  we  have  been  faced  with  the  fallout  of  credit  market  turbulence 
associated with problems in the American subprime-mortgage market and the increased use 
of  structured  financial  products.  It's  important  to  note  that  all  of  these  shocks  were 
international in origin and/or in dimension. 
Many of these shocks – notably, the Asian crisis and the recent sharp run-up in commodity 
prices – involved large movements in relative prices, that is, in the prices of energy and non-
energy  commodities,  as  well  as  large  movements  in  the  exchange  rate  for  the  Canadian 
dollar. And these movements have in turn triggered important shifts in economic activity, as 
well as reallocations of production resources across sectors and regions of the country.  
All of this underscores the fact that we live in an era of rapid change, and we operate in a 
global  environment  that  is  constantly  shifting.  Uncertainty,  risks,  and  shocks  are  constant 
features  of  the  economic  landscape.  For  Canada,  it  is  particularly  important  that  we 
recognize this reality, given how open our economy is to international trade and capital flows. 
The  best  approach  to  dealing  with  risks  and  sudden  developments  is  to  constantly  ask 
ourselves what steps we can take to make our economy and domestic markets more flexible, 
BIS Review 30/2008 
 1
and thus better able to adapt to changing circumstances. And we need to recognize that this 
is a shared responsibility among firms, workers, and policy makers. 
Firms and their workers need to be able to respond quickly to technological advances and to 
shocks  that  require  changes  in  the  way  they  conduct  business,  the  kinds  of  goods  and 
services they produce, and the markets they choose to develop. A well-functioning market-
based economy that sends clear relative price signals is critical in this context.  
At the same time, policy-makers need to be wary of barriers to adjustment, such as labour 
regulations that inhibit the movement of workers from one type of job, or from one sector or 
region, to another. To enhance flexibility, to raise the growth potential of the economy, and to 
increase  its  resilience  to  shocks,  we  need  policies  that  encourage  structural  reforms.  For 
Canada,  structural  reform  has  a  broad  context,  with  priorities  across  a  number  of 
jurisdictions. 
The financial system, with its vital role in supporting a healthy modern economy, has been 
and will continue to be one priority. An efficient and sound financial system enhances overall 
economic flexibility by helping to redirect capital and resources to the most productive uses, 
in a cost-effective way, following a shock.  
Removing internal barriers to the free movement of goods, services, and labour is another 
priority.  These  barriers  are  rightly  attracting  attention  in  Canada  as  differences  in  regional 
economic performance and shortages of skilled labour are becoming more pronounced, and 
as demographic challenges intensify.  
A number of initiatives to remove internal barriers have been undertaken over the years, but 
with mixed and generally modest results. The Red Seal Program was introduced more than 
45 years ago to help standardize and recognize workers' trade qualifications. The Agreement 
on  Internal Trade  (AIT),  signed  by  First  Ministers  in  1994, aimed  to  reduce  barriers  to  the 
movement of goods, services, investment, and labour. One very important recent example is 
the  Trade,  Investment  and  Labour  Mobility  Agreement  (TILMA)  reached  in  April  2006 
between British Columbia and Alberta to strengthen enforcement and dispute resolution and 
to harmonize labour credentials and business regulations and standards by early 2009.  
Considerably more needs to be done to enhance the flexibility and functioning of our internal 
markets  from  coast  to  coast.  Business  regulations  and  standards,  including  those  of  the 
financial sector, need to be harmonized across Canada. Dispute resolution and enforcement 
under  the  AIT  need  to  be  strengthened.  And  to  make  our  labour  markets  more  flexible, 
trades and professional designations should be recognized and fully transferable across the 
country. A significant step forward would be for others to adopt the British Columbia-Alberta 
accord. 
The Bank of Canada also has an important role to play in helping the economy to adjust to 
economic  change.  The  Bank's  monetary  policy  aims  at  keeping  inflation  low,  stable,  and 
predictable,  which  in  turn  helps  Canadian  businesses  to  read  price  signals  more  clearly, 
respond to relative price movements more promptly, and allocate production resources more 
efficiently.  
I'll conclude by saying that uncertainty, risks, and shocks will be as much a part of tomorrow's 
economic picture as they have been in the past. We all have a stake in Canada's economic 
well-being, and we all have a role to play in improving our flexibility and adaptability. From 
that perspective alone, this committee's study of issues related to internal barriers to trade is 
timely and important. 
Thank  you,  Mr.  Chairman.  John  and  I  would  be  happy  to  respond  to  your  questions  and 
comments. 
2 
 BIS Review 30/2008
