Mark Carney: Summary of the latest Monetary Policy Report 
Opening  statement  by  Mr  Mark  Carney,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  at  a  press 
conference following the release of the Monetary Policy Report, Ottawa, 24 April 2008.  
 Today, we released our April Monetary Policy Report, which discusses current economic and 
financial trends in the context of Canada's inflation-control strategy. 
Growth  in  the  global  economy  has  weakened  since  the  January  Monetary  Policy  Report 
Update,  reflecting  the  effects  of  a  sharp  slowdown  in  the  U.S.  economy  and  ongoing 
dislocations  in  global  financial  markets.  Growth  in  the  Canadian  economy  has  also 
moderated. Buoyant growth in domestic demand, supported by high employment levels and 
improved terms of trade, has been substantially offset by a fall in net exports. Both total and 
core CPI inflation were running at about 1.5 per cent at the end of the first quarter, but the 
underlying trend of inflation is judged to be about 2 per cent, consistent with an economy that 
is running just above its production capacity. 
The  U.S.  economic  slowdown  is  projected  to  be  deeper  and  more  protracted  than  in  the 
January Update. The projection reflects a more pronounced impact on consumer spending of 
the contraction in the U.S. housing market and significantly tighter credit conditions.  
The deterioration in economic and financial conditions in the United States will have direct 
consequences for the Canadian economy. First, exports are projected to decline, exerting a 
significant  drag  on  growth  in  2008.  Second,  turbulence  in  global  financial  markets  will 
continue to affect the cost and availability of credit. Third, business and consumer sentiment 
in Canada is expected to soften somewhat. Nevertheless, domestic demand is projected to 
remain strong, supported by firm commodity prices, high employment levels, and the effect of 
cumulative easing in monetary policy.  
The Bank projects that the Canadian economy will grow by 1.4 per cent this year, 2.4 per 
cent  in  2009,  and  3.3 per  cent in 2010.  The emergence  of  excess supply  in  the  economy 
should  keep  inflation  below  2  per  cent  through  2009.  Both  core  and  total  inflation  are 
projected to move up to 2 per cent in 2010 as the economy moves back into balance. There 
are  both  upside  and  downside  risks  to  the  Bank's  new  projection  for  inflation;  these  risks 
appear to be balanced. 
In line with this outlook, some further monetary stimulus will likely be required to achieve the 
inflation  target  over  the  medium  term.  Given  the  cumulative  reduction  in  the  target  for  the 
overnight  rate  of  150  basis  points  since  December,  including  the  50-basis-point  reduction 
announced  on  22  April,  the  timing  of  any  further  monetary  stimulus  will  depend  on  the 
evolution  of  the  global  economy  and  domestic  demand,  and  their  impact  on  inflation  in 
Canada. 
BIS Review 50/2008 
 1
