Nigel Jenkinson: Strengthening regimes for controlling liquidity risk – 
some lessons from the recent turmoil 
Speech by Mr Nigel Jenkinson, Executive Director, Financial Stability, Bank of England, at 
the  Euromoney  Conference  on  Liquidity  and  Funding  Risk  Management,  London, 
24 April 2008. 
I am very grateful to Emily Beau for her collaboration on this speech, and to Adrian Chiu, Andrew Bailey, John 
Gieve, Laurie Roberts and Forrest Capie for help and comments. 
 Section I: Introduction 
Commercial  banks  play  a  pivotal  role  in  the  economy.  They  facilitate  payments  and  the 
smooth  transfer  of  goods  and  services,  and  they  match  savers  who  may  lack  detailed 
knowledge of borrowers and who (generally) want to be able to withdraw their money at short 
notice, with borrowers who often wish to repay their loans over a longer term horizon. This 
“maturity transformation” performed by banks is essential to allow capital to be invested in a 
productive  way  to  support  economic  growth.  But  by  offering  such  maturity  transformation, 
banks  are  inherently  exposed  to  liquidity  risk  –  the  risk  that  a  bank  is  unable  to  meet  its 
commitments should depositors attempt to withdraw their funds ahead of the bank’s capacity 
to repay them.  
As  many  bankers  through  the  ages  have  found  to  their  cost,  the  key  objective  for  the 
management of liquidity risk is the retention of confidence. A bank may be well-capitalised 
and profitable with a sound loan book, but if depositors lose confidence in the bank’s ability 
to provide their funds as and when they request them, the crystallisation of liquidity risk can 
bring down an otherwise viable institution in short order. Once underway, a liquidity crisis can 
be very hard to stop. Adverse dynamics may feed back on themselves as the limited offer of 
immediate,  full  repayment  awaits  those  first  to  the  exit.  Moreover,  liquidity  risk  can  be 
triggered  through  the  realisation  of  other  risks,  such  as  the  disclosure  of  large  and 
unexpected trading losses, or the discovery of fraudulent activity within the bank. But it is just 
as likely to develop independently through the simple combination of an inherently vulnerable 
funding position and a sudden (and not necessarily rational) turn in market sentiment. 
These  considerations  illustrate  why  it  is  of  crucial  importance  to  build  strong  defences 
against this risk, particularly as the macro-economic and financial market developments of 
the past few years have in my view led to an increase in many banks’ overall vulnerability to 
liquidity risk. And whilst this changing environment has led to distinct improvements in banks’ 
efficiency and management of other risks, liquidity risk management and supervision have 
not always  kept pace. Recent events have clearly demonstrated that the current defences 
have proved wanting, with banks insufficiently prepared for a period of severe liquidity strain. 
The  experience  of  the  past  few  months  already  suggests  a  number  of  key  lessons  for 
liquidity  risk  management  and  supervision  which  I  will  cover  later.  But  I  would  first  like  to 
review the impact of market developments in recent years for liquidity risk management.  
Section II: Changing environment and business models  
How then has the financial environment changed in the past few years, and why has this led 
to  a  greater  vulnerability  to  liquidity  risk?  The  decade  leading  up  to  July  2007  has  been 
described  as  a  period  of  great  stability:  around  the  world,  economic  conditions  were 
dominated by low inflation, low nominal yields, and lower volatility of the economic cycle. The 
benign  macro  background  was  associated  with  a  fall  in  financial  market  volatility.  And 
advances in technology spurred a wave of financial innovation and the development of new 
products  offering  improvements  in  the  tailoring  and  matching  of  risks  to  investors’  risk 
BIS Review 50/2008 
 1
appetite. This combination of factors encouraged investors to seek out riskier investments in 
search of higher returns – the “search for yield”.  
One  feature  of  this  “search  for  yield”  was  the  rapid  expansion  of  structured  financial 
instruments; for example, where individual loans are packaged into tradable securities, such 
as residential or commercial mortgage-backed securities (RMBS/CMBS), or where the risk of 
a pool of loans is packaged into complex securities offering different levels of exposure to the 
potential losses in the pool (a collateralised debt obligation – CDO). Moreover, new products 
emerged which also supported the transfer, hedging and dispersion of risks, such as credit 
derivatives. And the use of these instruments strengthened the inter-relationships between 
financial  market  participants  across  the  globe:  greater  integration  of  markets  went  hand  in 
hand with the acceleration of financial innovation and rapid growth of market activity.  
These  developments  helped  stimulate  important  changes  in  banks’  business  models. 
Constraints on growth were eased as funding sources widened. Many banks took advantage 
of new sources of wholesale funding available from securitisation – the packaging of loans 
into  instruments  which  could  be  sold  on  in  financial  markets.  In  many  cases,  assets  were 
routinely transferred into off-balance sheet vehicles which funded themselves through asset-
backed  commercial  paper,  with  the  sponsoring  bank  providing  a  back-up  liquidity  line.  By 
applying  this  “originate and  distribute”  model,  banks  tapped  a  new  source  of  funding  on  a 
large scale. More traditional and stable sources of funding, such as retail deposits, declined 
in importance (Chart 1). In addition, many banks saw opportunities to generate new sources 
of  revenue  and  fee  income  by  developing  and  deepening  their  activities  in  international 
capital markets.  
Innovation  has  provided  banks  with  greater  opportunities  to  hedge  and  diversify  risks.  For 
example,  a  regionally-based  bank  in  country  A  can  easily  lower  its  geographical 
concentration,  for  example  by  selling  credit  risk  to  other  investors  who  had  not  previously 
been  able  to  access  such  exposures,  and/or  by  purchasing  exposure  to  credit  risk 
elsewhere. The resulting dispersal of risk allows banks to diversify their risk profile as well as 
their sources of revenue. Providing that the gain from diversification outweighs the increased 
cost of credit assessment, as banks take on exposure to entities where they have no banking 
relationship, and that risks are priced fully and appropriately, such innovation should improve 
market efficiency and lower the cost of intermediation and of capital.  
These  changes  in  the  financial  environment,  however,  resulted  in  banks  increasing  their 
exposure  to  liquidity  risk.  Banks  originated  large  volumes  of  long-term  loans  in  the 
expectation that they could be quickly and readily sold on, but leaving them with additional 
funding risks if they could not. Contingent liquidity lines to securitisation conduits and special 
purpose vehicles rose rapidly with little expectation that they would be drawn. Exposures to 
higher yielding complex structured products rose, with market participants failing to recognise 
sufficiently that the high yields offered by such products were in part compensation for higher 
liquidity  and  market  risk  and  that  prospective  risk-adjusted  returns  were  much  lower  than 
might  first  appear  from  their  short  historic  track  record.  Moreover,  in  buoyant  market 
conditions, the compensation for liquidity risk itself was bid down to negligible levels by early 
2007 (Chart 2). By that stage, many  market participants recognised that compensation for 
risk-taking  was  too  low,  but  judged  that  the  business  risks  of  exiting  lines  outweighed  the 
financial  risks  of  continuing  to  write  new  business.1  Firms  became  over-confident  in  their 
ability  to  hedge  or  exit  positions  if  conditions  changed,  failing  to  recognise  that  many 
participants  would  be  attempting  to  do  the  same  and  that  market  liquidity  would  then 
evaporate.  Indeed,  given  a  change  in  sentiment,  the  increased  integration  of  financial 
markets transmits risks just as much as it disperses them. 
                                                 
1   See Bank of England Financial Stability Reports July 2006 and April 2007. 
2 
 BIS Review 50/2008
Banks’  funding  thus  became  increasingly  vulnerable  to  a  sudden  shift  in  financial  market 
conditions. As covered extensively elsewhere,2 the crystallisation of this risk in August 2007 
led  to  a  sharp  decline  in  liquidity  across  a  wide  range  of  markets  (as  shown  in  Chart  3). 
Funding  pressures  intensified  as  asset  managers  lowered  demand  for  asset-backed 
securities and complex products more broadly, to lower risks and to guard against pressures 
from their investors for early redemption. And as banks attempted to fund contingent claims, 
liquidity in wholesale term markets dried up – adding to the strain. A number of institutions 
across  the  globe,  such  as  Northern  Rock,  IKB  and  Bear  Stearns  have  succumbed  to  the 
pressure, necessitating public sector intervention to support financial stability. 
Section III: Defences against liquidity risks 
Banks have a range of defences to a sudden decline in the availability of wholesale funds. 
Recent  developments  have  highlighted  a  number  of  limitations  in  these  defences  in 
addressing the recent system-wide liquidity shock. 
One potential counter-measure to liquidity pressures is to transform illiquid assets into cash. 
So  in  the  event  of  increased  funding  pressures,  a  number  of  banks  had  planned  to  use 
securitisation  techniques  more  intensively  to  liquefy  assets  such  as  mortgages.  Such  a 
counter-measure may well succeed if a single firm faces a liquidity problem on its own. But of 
course this approach fails completely when the source of the change in market conditions is 
a  lowering  of  global  demand  for  securitised  products  and  a  widespread  closure  of  term 
lending markets. 
Another  approach  is  to  bid  for  higher  retail  deposits.  That  is  likely  to  take  time  as  many 
individual retail savers react only slowly to changes in relative interest rates and as banks 
offer higher rates on term deposits to limit their movement. More importantly, this approach 
can only succeed by offering rates above those of competitors, thereby eroding margins. And 
in  an  environment  of  general  liquidity  strain,  competitors  are  likely  to  follow  suit  to  protect 
their market share. So the impact on each bank in the medium term is likely to be limited to a 
share in any rise in aggregate retail savings. 
Faced  with  restrictions  on  raising  liquidity,  a  bank  must  respond  to  a  funding  shortfall  by 
acting on the asset side of its balance sheet to lower its financing need: in other words, by 
slowing or even reducing its lending to households and corporate customers. This policy will 
ease funding pressures and boost liquidity, but it has two major drawbacks. The first is that it 
takes time to take effect. Many lending decisions are agreed weeks or months in advance 
and  cannot  be  readily  reversed.  So  the  approach  will  not  stem  a  very  fast  drainage  of 
liquidity. Moreover, as one bank tightens lending conditions to restrict balance sheet growth, 
other  banks  facing  similar  pressure  will  react  to  limit  any  additional  diversion  of  funding 
pressure onto their own balance sheets. The second is that a retrenchment in lending can 
have  significant  implications  for  the  wider  economy,  as  fewer  funds  are  available  to 
companies  and  households  to  support  long-term  investment  and  consumption.  We  are 
seeing  some  signs  of  that  beginning  to  occur  as  highlighted  in  the  most  recent  Bank  of 
England Credit Conditions Survey.  
These  defences  suffer  from  a  common  shortcoming.  While  they  may  work  well  when  one 
bank is facing funding pressure on its own, when liquidity pressures are widespread every 
bank will attempt to use them at the same time. The actions of one bank will work to negate 
those of a competitor in these circumstances as gains and losses of market share will net 
out.  That  implies  an  increase  in  the  economy-wide  costs  of  adjustment,  posing  increased 
risks to financial stability during the adjustment process. 
                                                 
2   See, for example, Bank of England: Financial Stability Report October 2007. 
BIS Review 50/2008 
 3
There is, however, one last line of defence left. A bank holding a buffer of reliable high quality 
liquid  assets,  such  as  Treasury  bills  or  other  government  securities,  can  draw  on  them 
immediately  and  directly  in  the  event  of  a  sudden  withdrawal  of  market  liquidity  or  an 
unexpected  increase  in  its  funding  requirement.  Of  course,  safe,  liquid  assets  offer  lower 
returns  than  other  types  of  assets,  so  there  is  an  opportunity  cost  in  maintaining  such  a 
liquidity cushion on the balance sheet. But such assets nevertheless provide the most readily 
available and reliable provision against a crystallisation of liquidity risk. 
Unfortunately, banks’ reserves of reliable liquid assets have proved insufficient to meet the 
recent  funding  shock.  With  hindsight,  incentives  to  raise  the  efficiency  of  maturity 
transformation have lowered this safety valve in the system too far. 
I would like to examine in a little more detail the UK experience in this respect. In the mid- 
nineteenth century, UK banks held on average sixty percent of liquid assets as a proportion 
of total deposits, an extremely high ratio explained by the frequency of liquidity crises around 
that time. Shortly after the 1866 Overend and Gurney crisis, the Bank of England accepted a 
role  as  lender  of  last  resort,  leading  banks  to  relax  their  extremely  conservative  (and 
inefficient) approach to liquidity. The average liquidity ratio dropped to around thirty percent 
of total deposits. The first agreement on liquidity between the Bank of England and private 
banks occurred in 1947, and involved a requirement to hold a minimum liquid assets ratio of 
thirty-two percent (lowered to twenty-eight percent sixteen years later). The regime prevailed 
until  1971,  when  the  Competition  and  Credit  Controls  Act  (CCC)  introduced  a  minimum 
reserve ratio of twelve and a half percent. The CCC had two objectives: first it was intended 
to  strengthen  control  over  monetary  policy,  by  creating  a  solid  money  base  to  underpin  it; 
second, it aimed to unify restrictions on banks to strengthen competition in the industry. The 
minimum reserve ratio was designed with this aim in mind, and this perhaps took priority over 
any desire to impose prudential liquidity reserves.  
While CCC undoubtedly liberalised the UK banking sector and thus supported improvements 
in competition and efficiency, it led to a fall in very high quality sterling liquid asset holdings of 
UK banks, as shown in Chart 4. After twice lowering the minimum requirement, the Bank of 
England finally replaced the reserve ratio regime with the cash ratio deposit regime in 1981, 
which did not directly require a minimum level of liquid assets. The Sterling Stock Liquidity 
Regime (SLR) in 1996 focused on holding sufficient liquidity to meet a particular severe cash 
flow funding stress. It is calibrated to ensure that a bank has enough highly liquid assets to 
meet  its  outflows  for  the  first  week  of  a  liquidity  crisis  without  recourse  to  the  market  for 
renewed wholesale funding, in order to allow the authorities time to explore options for an 
orderly resolution. It was designed as one component of a wider crisis management regime, 
and  not  as a  means  for  a  bank  to manage  its  precautionary  buffer  for  addressing  liquidity 
strain on a going concern basis3. 
Chart 4 shows how actual liquid reserves fell in line with minimum requirement levels until 
1981, and continued to decline afterwards, albeit more slowly. Clearly, over this same period, 
banks  also  diversified  their  liquid  asset  holdings  to  include  other  currencies,  and  started 
using  repo  markets  extensively.  So  the  chart  may  exaggerate  the  decline  somewhat. 
Nonetheless, the overall historical pattern has clearly been one of a marked secular decline 
in cushions of high quality liquid assets. Similar trends also prevailed in countries other than 
the  UK,  such  as  the  US,  Canada  and  Sweden.4  And  focusing  on  the  past  decade,  whilst 
holdings  of  very  high  quality  liquid  assets  have  remained  relatively  stable,  they  have  not 
increased to match banks’ rising vulnerability to liquidity risk described above.  
                                                 
3   See  Financial  Services  Authority:  “Review  of  the  liquidity  requirements  for  banks  and  building  societies” 
Discussion Paper 07/7. December 2007. The UK regime is under review.  
4   See  Goodhart,  C.A.E.  (2008),  “Liquidity  and  Money  Market  Operations:  A  Proposal”,  London  School  of 
Economics, mimeo.  
4 
 BIS Review 50/2008
Section IV: Lessons  
The recent turmoil has highlighted clear deficiencies in banks’ liquidity risk management. And 
it has also demonstrated that these deficiencies pose serious risks to financial stability and 
thus to the economy more broadly. 
To address this risk in the near term, central banks globally have provided additional liquidity 
to the banking system and emergency operations have been conducted to support Northern 
Rock and Bear Stearns. Additional liquidity has been provided at longer-term  maturities to 
address  the  problem  of  funding  an  unexpected  overhang  of  illiquid  assets.  The  Bank’s 
recently launched Special Liquidity Scheme is enabling UK banks to liquefy a proportion of 
their outstanding stock of illiquid assets by swapping them for high quality liquid government 
securities,  while  ensuring  that  credit  risks  remain  very  clearly  with  the  banks.  That  should 
ease current funding pressures. 
But in the medium term, it is clear that action is needed to strengthen the financial system’s 
defences  to  liquidity  risk  to  limit  the  likelihood  of  any  recurrence  of  the  recent  problems. 
Central banks globally are reviewing the lessons of the episode for their market operations, 
for example, to ensure that the usefulness of facilities is not undermined by perceptions of 
stigma  that  may  be  attached  to  a  bank  that  uses  them.  But  it  is  clear  that  primary 
responsibility for bolstering the defences lies with the banks themselves and that supervisory 
regimes for liquidity risk need reinforcing to support that process. 
I would like to highlight four emerging lessons from the current crisis that should help prevent 
future  problems.  First,  we  need  to  understand  better  the  various  sources  of  liquidity  risk, 
particularly  under  stressed  conditions.  Second,  banks  need  to  develop  more  effective 
contingency  funding  plans.  Third,  banks  should  support  improved  market  functioning  and 
stricter  market  discipline  through  better  disclosure.  And  finally,  supervision  should  ensure 
that banks’ liquidity risk management is undertaken to a more robust standard, in order to 
internalise  some  of  the costs  of  a  bank  failure on  the  wider  financial  system.  I  shall  cover 
these briefly in turn. 
Banks  and  public  authorities  alike  need  to  develop  a  more  in-depth  and  more  complete 
understanding  of  the  various  forms  in  which  liquidity  risk  can  arise.  That  requires  both  a 
careful analysis of the various potential sources of liquidity risk, and of how such risks may 
crystallise  under  stressed  market  conditions.  As  outlined  earlier,  in  today’s  financial 
environment, it is not just the simple maturity transformation between deposits and loans that 
generates  liquidity  risk  for  banks.  To  this  must  be  added  contingent  risks,  such  as  the 
potential activation of liquidity lines to off-balance sheet vehicles, or the drawing of committed 
facilities  extended  to  corporate  customers.  Contingent  risks  may  also  arise,  in  a  variety  of 
forms,  from  complex  trading  instruments,  as  detailed  well  by  the  Institute  for  International 
Finance (IIF) last year.5 Yet more sources of potential funding pressure have emerged from 
greater activity in capital markets, such as the pipeline risk that arises from being unable to 
offload leveraged loans and warehouses of loans awaiting securitisation when unfavourable 
market  conditions  prevail.  And  banks  are  also  subject  to  the  risk  of  exposures  previously 
passed  on  to  third  parties  flowing  back  to  them,  for  example  when  sub-prime  residential 
mortgage-backed securities are “put back” to the originator should they be found to breach 
certain credit criteria. Finally, banks are also exposed to the risks of a decline in asset market 
liquidity  and  falls  in  market  prices  through  the  potential  for  higher  collateral  or  margin 
requirements. These may substantially raise the level of funding a bank requires on a day-to-
day basis.  
                                                 
5  
Institute for International Finance: “Principles of Liquidity Risk Management” March 2007. 
BIS Review 50/2008 
 5
As emphasised in a recent report by the Senior Supervisors Group,6 banks need to develop 
a comprehensive approach to the management of liquidity risk to ensure that it is in line with 
the  bank’s  overall  risk  appetite.  One  strong  recommendation  in  the  report  is  that  financial 
organisations develop and apply a systematic policy of internal charging for liquidity risk. In 
particular,  banks  need  to  ensure  that  risk  decisions  made  by  front  office  traders  price 
appropriately  the  liquidity  risk  generated  by  new  products  and  business  lines,  rather  than 
treating  it  as  a  “free  good”  or  overhead  to  be  managed  centrally  by  the  treasury  function. 
Furthermore, banks and supervisors should analyse in far greater depth how the wide range 
of liquidity risks may crystallise, separately or conjointly, in a stressed market environment. 
Rigorous stress testing should span individual, group-wide and market-wide scenarios. There 
is  considerable  scope  for  much  better  consideration  of  likely  system-wide  interactions, 
including the potential impact of “crowded trades” being unwound, the dynamics of liquidity 
hoarding,  and  the  risks  of  signalling  weakness  and  thus  losing  market  confidence  and 
funding  lines.  Stress  scenarios  should  test  properly  for  the  outright  closure  of  funding 
markets,  and  explore  the  possibility  of  several  markets  being  shut  concurrently.  Finally, 
testing should consider longer horizons, to cater for the possibility that a liquidity crisis could 
persist for some time. These are just some of the areas which could be considered in more 
detail – clearly banks, supervisors and central banks all have much to learn with regards to 
the design of appropriately demanding and comprehensive stress scenarios.  
Recent  events  have  also  highlighted  the  need  to  devise  considerably  tougher  contingency 
plans.  Closer  integration  with  stress  tests  will  help  firms  develop  more  reliable  and  robust 
responses  to  future  episodes  of  strain.  Experience  has  highlighted  the  need  to  improve 
resilience to a sharp decline in market liquidity and to demonstrate that firms can survive the 
closure of one or more funding markets by ensuring that finance can be readily raised from a 
variety of sources. Consideration should clearly be given to boosting holdings of very high 
quality liquid assets that can provide reliable reserves under all conditions. And it is important 
that plans are legally robust and that they are regularly tested. 
Another lesson from the recent episode is that disclosure practices in relation to liquidity risk 
management objectives, controls and metrics vary significantly. In some cases banks go as 
far as providing information on stress tests and contingency funding plans; in others there is 
a  relative  paucity  of  information.  That  hampers  market  functioning:  in  times  of  heightened 
uncertainty  a  lack  of  information  can  lead  to  defensive  reactions  by  market  counterparties 
that  provision  of  additional  information  could  prevent.  There  are  some  risks  from  greater 
disclosure.  For  example,  a  bank  revealing  a  weak  funding  position  could  precipitate  an 
adverse  reaction,  although  that  should  of  course  lead  to  stronger  risk  management  as  a 
precaution against that risk. There are also measurement challenges. It is difficult to present 
a simple, representative summary measure of liquidity risks run by a given bank – any single 
definition of such a complex array of risks will necessarily be approximate. But that does not 
seem a sufficient reason not to disclose any measure – indeed there may be some parallels 
with market risk where a single metric such as a firm’s overall value-at-risk is not viewed as 
encapsulating all dimensions of such risk. Nonetheless, the degree of disclosure on market 
risks which banks are now providing under Pillar 3 of the Basel II Accord marks a definite 
improvement  in  this  area.  While  liquidity  risk  metrics  remain  complex  and  challenging,  I 
believe  that  there  is  scope  over  time  to  achieve  some  degree  of  enhanced,  consistent 
disclosure across institutions. 
The  final  lesson  is  the  need  for  stronger  oversight  of  banks’  liquidity  risk  management 
practices. The authorities’ role is to preserve financial stability by lowering the probability and 
impact  of  bank  failures  that  could  threaten  the  functioning  of  the  financial  system  more 
broadly through contagion, spillover and damage to financial networks. There is no incentive 
                                                 
6   Senior  Supervisors  Group:  “Observations  on  Risk  Management  Practices  during  the  Recent  Market 
Turbulence” March 2008. 
6 
 BIS Review 50/2008
for  private  banks  to  bear  this  cost  spontaneously,  as  their  responsibility  is  to  their 
shareholders  rather  than  to  users  of  the  financial  system  more  broadly.  The  objective  of 
prudential supervision is to correct this misalignment between private incentives and public 
policy goals, by forcing banks to deliver higher standards of liquidity risk management and to 
build stronger defences than they would naturally provide of their own volition. 
That leaves open the formidably difficult question of the level of resilience to liquidity stress 
that the authorities should seek from individual banks. An answer to this question requires a 
balance to be struck between the risks to financial stability if resilience is set too low, and the 
risks  of  inefficiency  of  financial  intermediation  if  buffers  are  set  too  high.  Moreover,  in 
addressing  this  question  the  authorities  also  need  to  take  into  account  that  some  actions 
taken today to limit the likelihood and costs of financial instability if risks do crystallise may 
lead  agents  to  underinsure  again  future  risks.  They  may  thus  raise  the  probability  and 
amplitude of future problems.  
Resolving  these  issues  raises  major  challenges  for  the  global  regulatory  community  given 
the  strong 
in 
internationally active banks. Action is underway internationally7 as well as domestically8 to 
improve  and  strengthen  the  management  and  supervision  of  liquidity  risk  and  to  promote 
greater consistency of approach. The Basel Committee on Banking Supervision is working 
on producing revised Sound Practices for the management and supervision of liquidity risk. 
These  will  be  released  for  consultation  in  the  early  summer.  The  Committee  of  European 
Bank Supervisors is undertaking work in parallel. The aim is to strengthen the platform for 
the  management  and  oversight  of  liquidity  risk.  Among  other  areas  for  improvement, 
supervisors  are  driving  higher  standards  for  stress  testing  and  subjecting  contingency 
funding plans to more rigorous cross-examination before they are validated. 
the  substantial  growth 
financial  market 
integration  and 
increase 
in 
Section V: Conclusion 
To  conclude,  developments  in  financial  markets  have  increased  the  importance  and 
complexity  of  liquidity  risk  management  over  the  past  decade.  That,  in  turn,  increased  the 
vulnerability of banks to a system-wide liquidity shock. Preparations for such a shock proved 
inadequate  and  insufficient.  But  the  recent  experience  already  provides  us  with  important 
lessons both for banks and for public authorities and points to a clear need for action by both. 
 
                                                 
7  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision:  “Liquidity  Risk:  Management  and  Supervisory  Challenges”. 
February 2008. 
8   Financial Services Authority: “Review of the liquidity requirements for banks and building societies” Discussion 
Paper 07/7. December 2007. 
BIS Review 50/2008 
 7
 Chart  1:  Major  UK  Banks  Customer 
Funding Gap(a) 
 
Customer funding gap
Customer funding gap adjusted for
securitisation(b)
£ billions
700
600
500
400
300
200
100
+
0
 -
100
200
01
02
03
04
05
06
07
08
Sources:  Dealogic,  published  accounts  and  Bank 
calculations. 
(a) Data exclude Nationwide. 
(b)  Customer  funding  gap  less  securitised  debt. 
Where  not  available,  stocks  of  securitisations  are 
estimated from issuance data. 
 8 
 Chart 2: Decomposition of sterling high-yield 
corporate bond spreads(a) 
Res id ual (includ ing  co mp ens atio n fo r illiq uid ity)
Co mp ens atio n fo r uncertainty ab o ut d efault lo s s es
Co mp ens atio n fo r exp ected  d efault lo s s es
To tal
Basis points
1,200
1,000
800
600
400
200
+
 -
200
0
98
99
00
01
02
03
04
05
06
07
08
 Sources:  Bloomberg,  Merrill  Lynch,  Thomson  Datastream 
and Bank calculations. 
(a)  Bank  of  England  (2007),  'Decomposing  corporate  bond 
spreads', Quarterly Bulletin, December, pages 533-37. 
BIS Review 50/2008
Chart 4: Sterling liquid assets relative to total 
asset holdings of UK banking sector 
Definition of liquid assets:
Broad ratio: Cash + BoE balances + Money at call + Eligible bills + UK gilts
Reserve-ratio eligible assets
Narrow  ratio: Cash + BoE balances + Eligible bills
35
30
25
20
15
10
i
)
s
e
c
n
e
r
r
u
c
 
l
l
a
(
s
t
e
s
s
a
 
l
a
t
o
t
 
f
o
 
e
g
a
t
n
e
c
r
e
P
Competition 
and Credit 
Control 
(1971)
Cash ratio 
deposits 
(1981)
Sterling 
Stock 
Liquidity 
Regime 
(1996)
5
0
1967 1971 1975 1979 1983 1987 1991 1995 1999 2003 2007
Year
Sources: Bank of England data and calculations.  
 Chart 3: Financial market liquidity(a) 
 
Liquidity index
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
 -
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
 92
94
96
98
00
02
04
06
08
Sources:  Bank  of  England,  Bloomberg,  Chicago 
Board  Options  Exchange,  Debt  Management  Office, 
London  Stock  Exchange,  Merrill  Lynch,  Thomson 
Datastream and Bank calculations. 
(a) The liquidity index shows the number of standard 
deviations  from  the  mean.  It  is  a  simple  unweighted 
average of nine liquidity measures, normalised on the 
period  1999-2004.  Data  shown  are  an  exponentially 
weighted  moving  average.  The  indicator  is  more 
reliable after 1997 as it is based on a greater number 
of underlying measures.  
 BIS Review 50/2008 
 9
