Jean-Claude Trichet: A unique perspective 
Speech  by  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the 
celebration  of  the  publication  of  Otmar  Issing’s  book  “Der  Euro”,  Frankfurt  am  Main, 
15 April 2008. 
 Meine sehr geehrten Damen und Herren, 
es  ist  mir  eine  große  Freude,  heute  anlässlich  der  Veröffentlichung  von  Professor  Otmar 
Issings Buch über den Euro zu Ihnen zu sprechen. Der Zusammenschluss von jetzt 15 EU-
Mitgliedstaaten in der Europäischen Wirtschafts- und Währungsunion, mit dem Euro als der 
gemeinsamen  Währung  für  rund  320  Millionen  europäische  Bürgerinnen  und  Bürger,  ist 
einer der größten Erfolge der Währungsgeschichte. Otmar hatte als Direktoriumsmitglied der 
EZB  in  den  ersten  acht  Jahren  ihres  Bestehens  und  als  Direktoriumsmitglied  der 
Bundesbank in den acht Jahren davor maßgeblichen Anteil an der erfolgreichen Einführung 
und  Etablierung  des  Euro.  Sein  Buch  bietet  damit  eine  einzigartige  Perspektive  auf  die 
Erfolgsgeschichte unserer gemeinsamen europäischen Währung. 
Why has the creation of the euro been a success story? Of paramount importance is the fact 
that, right from the beginning, the ECB was able to establish, and then maintain, a high level 
of credibility to effectively safeguard price stability in the euro area. During the transition to 
the euro, market interest rates on instruments denominated in euro became aligned all along 
the yield curve with the lowest – and not with the average – rates prevailing in the euro area 
prior to the euro. This demonstrated that the ECB had managed to inherit the high level of 
credibility that had been achieved by the most successful national central banks joining the 
monetary union, in particular the Deutsche Bundesbank. You know how proud I was myself 
to have run a monetary policy that had given my own national currency the same level of 
credibility as the DM before the euro. The ECB has fully maintained this achievement during 
the  now  more  than  nine  years  since  the  start  of  EMU.  Despite  a  large  number  of 
unprecedented adverse macroeconomic and geopolitical shocks during this period, inflation 
expectations have been firmly anchored, which testifies to the success of the ECB’s stability-
orientated monetary policy, and vindicates the public’s initial confidence in the stability of the 
euro.  
The high credibility and success of the single monetary policy in the euro area rests on two 
cornerstones: the institutional framework of the ECB enshrined in the Treaty establishing the 
European  Community,  and  the  ECB’s  stability-orientated  monetary  policy  strategy.  The 
constituent features of the ECB’s institutional architecture are a clear mandate to safeguard 
price stability in the euro area, and full independence in the pursuit of this mandate. These 
institutional  provisions  reflect  the  key  insights  gained  by  academic  research  and  policy 
experience over the past decades that price stability is a necessary condition for sustainable 
growth and job creation and that monetary policy decisions are best placed in the hands of 
an  independent  central  bank.  Central  bank  independence is  key  for  monetary  policy  to  be 
credibly and effectively geared to price stability. The credibility of the single monetary policy, 
and  the  continued  success  of  the  euro,  are  therefore  fully  based  upon  the  ECB’s 
independence, guaranteed by the Treaty. 
The  ECB’s  monetary  policy  strategy,  which  comprises  a  quantitative  definition  of  price 
stability  and  a  two-pillar  framework  involving  economic  and  monetary  analysis  for  the 
assessment  of  the  risks  to  price  stability,  provides  a  comprehensive  and  consistent 
framework for conducting our monetary policy, and for communicating with the public. Our 
strategy ensures that we take all information relevant to price stability in the euro area duly 
into  account  and  pursue  our  mandate  in  a  steady  and  forward-looking  manner,  thereby 
helping  us  to  take  sound  and  timely  policy  decisions.  In  being  fully  transparent  about  the 
BIS Review 44/2008 
 1
ultimate goal of our monetary policy and how we go about achieving it, our monetary policy 
strategy also makes an important contribution to the credibility and predictability of our policy. 
This  ultimately  facilitates  the  fulfilment  of  our  mandate,  as  it  enhances  our  ability  to  guide 
price  and  wage  setters  and  financial  markets  in  a  way  that  is  consistent  with  our  price 
stability objective. 
The beneficial effects of the euro are reflected in the much-improved performance of the euro 
area  economies  over  the  last  nine  years.  I  have  already  mentioned  the  stabilisation  of 
inflation  expectations  in  the  euro  area  at  unprecedentedly  low  levels,  in  line  with  our 
definition of price stability. A particularly noteworthy development is the marked improvement 
in the performance of the euro area labour markets. Since the start of EMU, 15.7 million new 
jobs  have  been  created  in  the  euro  area  during  the  first  nine  years,  in  comparison  to 
approximately  five  million  in  the  nine  preceding  years.  At  the  same  time,  the  euro  area 
unemployment rate has fallen to its lowest level since the early 1980s.  
However,  these  quite  remarkable  developments  should  not  give  rise  to  complacency.  The 
euro area could and should do much better, particularly as regards the level of productivity 
growth.  Monetary  policy  can  make  an  important  contribution  to  economic  performance  by 
maintaining price stability, and thereby eliminating distortions arising from high and volatile 
inflation. Yet, the development of growth and employment are ultimately determined by the 
structural  features  of  an  economy.  More  determined,  well-designed  structural  reforms 
promoting flexibility in euro area product and labour markets are, therefore, crucial in order to 
fully reap the benefits and support the continued success of the euro. 
Otmar Issing has contributed to the euro’s success in many important ways. When he was a 
Board member at the Bundesbank he was one of the most fervent advocates of the absolute 
necessity of sustainable convergence as a precondition for EMU, in order to ensure that the 
new  currency  would  be  at  least  as  credible  as  the  most  credible  currencies  joining  the 
monetary union. As a member of the Executive Board of the ECB, Otmar played a crucial 
role  in  designing  the  ECB’s  monetary  policy  strategy  and  in  the  successful  conduct  of  the 
single monetary policy in the uncharted territory of the early years of EMU. He has been the 
living symbol of the continuity between the most credible national currencies and the euro. 
His  outstanding  career  as  a  central  figure  in  European  monetary  policy  in  times  that  were 
decisive for EMU makes Otmar Issing’s book on the euro indeed a remarkable book written 
from  the  unique  perspective  of  a  unique  actor  and  a  unique  witness  of  this  historical 
endeavour. 
2 
 BIS Review 44/2008
