Rundheersing Bheenick: How does a small open economy faced with 
unprecedented capital flows conduct monetary policy? 
Talk  delivered  by  Mr  Rundheersing  Bheenick,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Mauritius,  at  the 
Reserve Bank of India, Mumbai, 14 March 2008. 
 It is a great honour and privilege for me to be invited by the Governor of the Reserve Bank of 
India to address this distinguished audience at the seat of this august institution this morning. 
Allow  me  to  place  on  record  my  deep  appreciation  for  the  invitation  extended  to  me  by 
Governor Reddy. I had the immense pleasure of welcoming him to Mauritius in December 
last when he delivered a Memorial Lecture as part of the 40th Anniversary Celebrations of 
the Bank of Mauritius. India and Mauritius have enjoyed a very special relationship spanning 
over  several  centuries  and  cutting  across  vast  swathes  of  human  endeavour  in  the 
economic,  social,  cultural,  linguistic  and  political  fields.  I  cannot  think  of  anything  that 
symbolises this more eloquently than the plain simple fact that our currency - like its more 
famous cousin issued by your institution - also goes under the name of “Rupee”. But then a 
central banker would say that, wouldn’t he? 
The  theme  of  my  talk  today  is:  “How  Does  A  Small  Open  Economy  Faced  With 
Unprecedented Capital Flows Conduct Monetary Policy?” I  believe this subject, or at least 
some aspects of it, will be of interest to both the Bank of Mauritius and the Reserve Bank of 
India  in  the  context  of  current  economic  developments  in  our  two  countries  against  the 
backdrop of the international economic environment confronting all of us.. The structure of 
my  talk  today  will  be  as  follows:  In  the  first  part,  I  begin  with  a  thumb-nail  sketch  of  the 
Mauritian economy to provide some context. In the second part of my presentation, I focus 
on  some  of  the  important  financial  and  economic  reforms  that  Mauritius  is  now  embarked 
upon.  The  third  part  addresses  some  of  the  challenges  emerging  from  globalization  for  a 
small  country.  Finally,  I  touch  upon  the  monetary  policy  challenges  stemming  from 
unprecedented capital flows for a small open economy. This is a subject which is exercising 
my mind considerably, causing sleepless nights and swallowing in large gulps the reserves 
at  my  disposal  as  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Mauritius.  You  will  discover  that  I  have  more 
questions than answers. 
Part I: General background on the Mauritian economy 
As most of you are no doubt aware, Mauritius is a small island economy in the South–West 
Indian  Ocean.  It  has  been  independent  since  12  March  1968  and  became  a  Republic  in 
1992. A couple of days ago, we celebrated our 40th Anniversary as an independent nation. In 
spite of several handicaps like limited natural resources, remoteness from major markets, a 
small  domestic  market  and  vulnerability  to  cyclones  and  man-made  external  shocks  alike, 
Mauritius has achieved one of the highest per capita GDP in Africa. In 1968, Mauritius was, 
by all measures, a poor country with per capita income of less than US$200. Prospects were 
so  gloomy  that  Nobel-prize-winning  economist  James  Meade,  who  headed  an  Economic 
Commission sent by the British colonial administration in the aftermath of one of the most 
devastating  cyclones  in  the  country’s  recorded  history,  recommended  emigration  as  a  key 
part of the solution to the island’s problems. One of the first World Bank missions to visit the 
country, led by Jean Baneth, opined “… this country exudes an air of hopelessness.” Another 
Nobel  prize-winner,  V.S  Naipaul,  titled  an  analytical  piece  on  Mauritius  “The  Overcrowded 
Barracoon.”  And  a  French  writer  followed  suit  with  a  book  entitled  “Maurice  –  Quelle 
Independence?” 
BIS Review 31/2008 
 1
stabilization  and 
It  will  take  me  too  long  to  take  you  down  the  road  we  have  travelled  over  the  last  four 
decades. I have been part of the journey, occasionally as an observer, but mostly as a doer, 
a mover or “agent provocateur.” Suffice it to say that the prophets of doom and gloom have 
been proved utterly wrong, that the Malthusian nightmare has been exorcised, that Mauritius 
is now the poster boy of the IMF and the World Bank when it comes to successful economic 
development in Africa. By 2007, for a population of nearly 1.3 million, per capita GDP has 
increased to nearly US$6,000. Real GDP has grown, on average, by about 5 per cent per 
annum over the last two decades. For 2008, real GDP growth is estimated at 6 per cent, up 
from 5.6 per cent in 2007. This has been one of the most remarkable policy-driven economic 
transformations in modern history. 
The Bank of Mauritius has played a key role in this economic transformation. The modalities 
of conducting monetary policy in Mauritius have evolved from strong reliance on controls and 
directives  to  more  market-based  mechanisms.  The  1970’s  were  turbulent  years  for  the 
conduct  of  monetary  policy:  external  price  shocks,  together  with  expansionary  domestic 
policies, led to an acceleration of inflation to an all-time record of 42% in 1979. I played a key 
role in devising, marketing and implementing appropriate adjustment policies as part of IMF- 
and  World-Bank-supported 
structural  adjustment  programmes. 
Macroeconomic  stability  was  regained  in  the  early  1980’s  and  maintained  successfully 
thereafter.  The  monetary  authorities  pursued  sound  monetary  and  exchange  rate  policies, 
which contributed to foster an environment favourable to sustained growth. 
The  Bank  has,  since  its  establishment  in  1967,  given  prominence  to  the  objectives  of 
diversifying the economy and fostering growth and employment through supportive actions. 
Freshly liberated from the tight corset of the Currency Board system - and here, let me add 
for those of you who do not know it, the Currency Board of Mauritius is the very first one of its 
kind  on  record,  just  as  Mauritius  is  also  the  first  known  customer  for  the  noted  banknote 
printing company Thomas De La Rue - it was natural for the Bank of Mauritius to strike out in 
new  directions.  An  expansionary  policy  was  followed  by  keeping  interest  rates  low  and 
providing concessional credit to what were called “priority sectors”. Concessional credit was 
provided  to  industrial  enterprises,  which  were  being  supported  to  promote  growth, 
diversification  and  employment.  Export  Processing  Zone  companies  and  manufacturing 
companies  were  the  targeted  beneficiaries,  along  with  the  sugar  sector  which  then 
constituted the backbone of the economy. 
As part of our colonial heritage, the Mauritian rupee was pegged to the Pound Sterling until 
1976, when we gave up the link in the face of continued depreciation of the British currency. 
We  then  achieved  a  world  first  by  pegging  our  rupee  to  the  IMF’s  Special  Drawing  Right, 
which  turned  out  to  be  an  unmitigated  disaster.  In  1983,  after  a  period  of  political  and 
economic turmoil, accompanied - if not caused - by currency devaluation, we moved from a 
fixed  to  a  managed  exchange  rate  regime.  Over  the  next  few  years,  exchange  rate  policy 
was  aimed  at  protecting  competitiveness,  and  the  real  effective  exchange  rate  steadily 
depreciated  until  1987.  As  the  net  international  reserves  situation  improved  and  became 
more  comfortable,  policy  aimed  more  at  achieving  a  stable  real  effective  exchange  rate. 
Exchange controls which were the bread and butter of the Bank of Mauritius at its creation 
were gradually liberalized. In September 1993, Mauritius accepted the obligations of Article 
VIII  of  the  Articles  of  Agreement  of  the  IMF  and  all  current  account  transactions  were 
liberalized.  Within  a  year  we  fully  liberalized  the  capital  account.  An  interbank  foreign 
exchange  market  was  established  with  a  greater  role  assigned  to  market  forces  in  the 
determination of the exchange value of the Mauritian rupee. 
The  long  and  the  short  of  it  is  that  Mauritius,  which  at  independence  was  a  monocrop 
economy depending entirely on sugar, has over the intervening years diversified successfully 
by  adding  such  new  pillars  of  economic  activity  as  export  manufacturing  (mainly  textiles), 
tourism and financial services. Information and Communication Technology and the seafood 
hub are two emerging sectors of the economy with very promising prospects for the future.  
2 
 BIS Review 31/2008
Part II: Financial and economic reforms 
Today, Mauritius can boast of having a sound and dynamic financial system. The banking 
industry  is  highly  profitable,  underpinned  as  it  is  by  a  sound  regulatory  framework  and  a 
supportive monetary policy geared to macroeconomic stability. The entry of new banks, and 
the expansion of the local and regional branch network of existing banks, has combined to 
instil a new dynamism in the industry. We are in the final stages of rolling out Islamic banking 
and  financial  services  which,  we  believe,  represent  a  new  window  of  global  business 
opportunity  for  Mauritius.  Since  April  2007,  a new  era  of  monetary  policy-making  has  also 
dawned  at  the  Central  Bank  with  the  establishment  of  an  independent  Monetary  Policy 
Committee, which comprises members from outside the country. 
Let  me  add  some  comments  on  how,  in  the  wake  of  the  continued  development  and 
increasing  sophistication  of  the  banking  industry,  the  Bank  of  Mauritius  has  relentlessly 
pursued  its  efforts  to  strengthen  its  supervisory  arm.  The  regulatory  framework  was 
reinforced  with  the  promulgation  of  the  Banking  Act  2004  and  the  Bank  of  Mauritius  Act 
2004. From a regulatory perspective, the change in the licensing regime stemming from the 
Banking  Act  2004  has  also  contributed  to  the  new  dynamism  which  characterises  the 
banking sector. This legislation provided for the integration of domestic and offshore banking 
business  and  eliminated  the  previous  distinction  between  Category  1  “domestic”  and 
Category  2  “offshore”  banks.  Offshore  banks  had  been  generally  perceived  as  being  less 
regulated  and  more  prone  to  money-laundering  and  other  illegal  activities.  The  new 
legislation  served  to  dissipate  such  misapprehensions  regarding  the  regulation  of  offshore 
banks and has enhanced the image of our financial sector. 
Under the single banking licence approach, banks are free to undertake the whole range of 
banking  business.  According  to  the  “Guideline  on  Segmental  Reporting  under  a  Single 
Banking Licence Regime,” issued by the Central Bank and which became effective in July 
2005,  banking  business  in  the  country  is  divided  into  two  categories,  Segment  A  and 
Segment  B.  Segment  B  activities  encompass  banking  business  conducted  essentially  with 
non-residents and Global-Business-Licence-holders. Segment B is thus essentially directed 
to the provision of international financial services generating “foreign source income,” which 
is taxed under a special preferential regime. All other banking business is classified under 
Segment A. This favourable tax treatment of foreign source income has acted as a catalyst in 
the expansion of the regional and international banking business of banks. The unification of 
the banking licence has subjected banks to increased competition in both Segments of their 
activity. The challenge for banks which are now operating under the same single regime, is 
to  be  innovative  in  order  to  be  able  to  tap  specific  and  niche  markets,  both  locally  and 
overseas.  
To give you a better picture of the monetary challenges confronting a small open economy 
like  Mauritius,  I  believe  it  would  be  useful  if  I  dwell  a  little  on  the  new  framework  for  the 
conduct of monetary policy that was introduced by the Bank in December 2006, that is just a 
few weeks before I joined. Under this new framework, the Bank established a “corridor” that 
would effectively provide a ceiling and a floor for overnight interbank interest rates. Effective 
18 December 2006, when this framework was introduced, the Repo Rate was set at 8.50 per 
cent.  In  order  to  manage  the  overnight  interbank  interest  rate  in  an  effective  manner,  the 
Bank stated that it would supply, or absorb, liquidity against collateral at its discretion and in 
whatever  volume  was  required  to  hold  the  overnight  interbank  interest  rates  close  to  the 
Repo Rate. The Bank initially established a “corridor” that was symmetrical around the Repo 
Rate. Thus, the Bank was expected to lend money to banks at the ceiling of the “corridor” 
which was set at 50 basis points above the Repo Rate. In a similar manner, the Bank was 
expected  to  absorb  excess  funds  at  the  floor  of  the  “corridor”  which  was  set  at  50  basis 
points  below  the  Repo  Rate.  The  ceiling  and  the  floor  of  the  “corridor”  were  expected  to 
move in the same direction, and with the same magnitude, as the changes in the Repo Rate. 
Currently, the Repo Rate stands at 9.00 per cent.  
BIS Review 31/2008 
 3
The experience so far with the new monetary policy framework has been a mixed one. While 
banks’ deposit and lending interest rates have generally moved in tandem with changes in 
the key Repo Rate, market interest rates at the short-end of the yield curve have tended to 
move away from the key Repo Rate. This has been particularly evident since last November. 
This phenomenon has been caused by the excess liquidity on the interbank money market 
and partly by the sizeable reduction in the primary issues of bills mainly by the Government 
relative  to  maturing  bills.  The  Central  Bank’s  absence  in  the  reverse  repurchase  market 
reflected  our  concern  not  to  mop  up  any  “hot  money”  or  money  just  transiting  through 
Segment  B  activities  –  which  I  detailed  earlier.  We  attempted  to  address  systemic  excess 
liquidity by introducing a Special Deposit Facility whereby banks were invited to place special 
deposits with the Central bank for a period of 14 days at a rate of 125 basis points below the 
key Repo Rate.  
The  “disconnect”  between  the  key  Repo  Rate  and  short-term  market  interest  rates  is  a 
source of concern to us. The Bank is contemplating a widening of the corridor as the ± 50 
basis points might be too narrow for a small open economy like ours which is vulnerable to 
shocks  and  subject  to  volatility  in  international  capital  markets.  We  are  also  currently 
debating  internally  whether  the  corridor  should  be  “symmetric”  or  “asymmetric.”  Moreover, 
there are issues relating to “discretionary” as opposed to “automatic” conduct of repurchase 
operations by  the  Bank  which  need  to  be  addressed.  These  technical  issues  have  been 
taken  up  with  the  recent  IMF  Article  IV  Mission  that  visited  Mauritius  during  the  last  two 
weeks. Obviously, we are looking for a solution that fits more comfortably with the Mauritian 
situation, characterized as it is by a highly-concentrated banking structure.  
Let  me  also  make  a  point  about  our  legal  mandate.  In  terms  of  the  Bank  of  Mauritius  Act 
2004, the primary object of the Bank is to maintain price stability and to promote orderly and 
balanced economic development. In this respect, real sector issues are duly weighed up in 
our monetary policy decision-making process. As part of our other objectives, we must also 
ensure the stability and soundness of the financial system in Mauritius. 
The  process  of  fiscal  adjustment  in  Mauritius  has  been  set  in  a  medium-term  framework. 
Corrective  measures  to  address  fiscal  imbalances  and  restore  fiscal  discipline  have  been 
initiated. The budget deficit, as a percentage of GDP at market prices, declined from 5.3 per 
cent in Financial Year 2005-06 to an estimated 4.3 per cent in FY 2006-07. For the current 
financial year, it is estimated at 3.8 per cent. I should perhaps also mention here that there is 
a separation of debt management from monetary management. Government Securities are 
issued  only  for  purposes  of  financing  the  Government’s  borrowing  requirement  whereas 
Bank  of  Mauritius  Bills  are  issued  for  purposes  of  monetary  management.  The  policy  of 
issuing  central  bank  bills  to  mop  up  any  excess  liquidity  thrown  up  by  incoming  foreign 
exchange flows has a direct relevance to the main theme of this talk. 
Faced as it is today with the triple shocks stemming from the erosion of trade preferences in 
the sugar and textile sectors and the surge in oil prices on the international market, Mauritius 
has no choice but to embark on bold structural reforms. This is precisely what we are doing. 
Efforts at fiscal consolidation with a view to maintaining medium-term fiscal sustainability, the 
achievement  of  a  stable  macroeconomic  environment  and  the  maintenance  of  social 
consensus  are  some  of  the  key  ingredients  for  ensuring  the  success  of  these  economic 
reforms. The achievement of higher job-creating growth remains a central policy challenge 
for Mauritius now and in the years ahead. To make any significant dent in the unemployment 
rate, standing at around 8.8 per cent, Mauritius needs to move to a higher growth path of at 
least  7  to  8  per  cent  per  annum.  In  developing  new  growth  poles,  we  must  take  care  to 
consolidate the existing pillars of the economy, a consideration not without implications for 
the conduct of monetary policy.  
The erosion of trade preferences for its main exports, coupled with the challenges stemming 
from globalization, make it imperative for Mauritius to raise productivity and become globally 
competitive. As the country shifts progressively toward a service-dominated and knowledge-
4 
 BIS Review 31/2008
based  economy,  labour-market  flexibility  has  become  vital.  The  central  wage-setting 
framework that characterized the labour market since before independence allowed for little 
wage  moderation,  did  not  favour  wage  differentiation  across  sectors  and  enterprises,  and 
focused  more  on  job  preservation  than  on  job  creation.  The  recent  establishment  of  the 
National  Pay  Council,  which  aims  at  broadening  practices  in  wage  agreements  to  reflect 
better  sector-  and  firm-specific  conditions,  represents  a  breakthrough  in  labour  market 
reform.  It  will  enable  us  to  link  wage  growth  to  productivity  gains.  This,  together  with  the 
implementation  of  the  proposed  changes  in  labour  regulations,  will  give  the  much  needed 
flexibility in the labour market.  
As regards the external accounts, the deficit on the current account represented 8.1 per cent 
in FY 2006-07, compared to 5.2 per cent of GDP in FY 2005-06. This deterioration reflected 
mostly  the  worsening  merchandise  account  deficit  which  was  itself  due  largely  to  the 
purchase of two aircraft. This was however offset to some extent by the combined surpluses 
on  the  services,  income  and  current  transfers  accounts.  If  we  exclude  the  purchase  of 
aircraft,  the  current  account  deficit  for  FY  2006-07  represented  5.0  per  cent  of  GDP,  or  a 
slight  improvement  on  the  preceding  year.  For  the  current  fiscal  year,  the  current  account 
deficit, including the purchase of aircraft, is estimated at 4.8 per cent.  
Policy  must  now  reckon  with  some  evolving  fundamentals  emanating  from  the  external 
sector,  particularly  in  the  capital  and  financial  account  of  the  balance  of  payments.  The 
fundamentals  of  the  balance  of  payments  are  no  longer  determined  by  the  trade  balance 
alone. The overall balance of payments posted a surplus of Rs 6.6 billion in FY 2006-07 and 
a  surplus  of  Rs  13.5  billion  in  calendar  year  2007,  as  against  a  deficit  of  Rs  4.6  billion  in 
calendar year 2006. Gross total tourist earnings amounted to Rs 40.7 billion in calendar year 
2007, up from Rs 31.9 billion in 2006. Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) is estimated to have 
reached an unprecedented peak of Rs 11 billion in 2007, up from Rs 7.2 billion in 2006.  
FDI  is  growing  rapidly  in  response  to  reform  efforts,  and  there  are  good  prospects  for 
attracting still more significant FDI flows to Mauritius in the medium term on account of the 
numerous mega projects in both the public and private sectors. These relate mainly to the 
tourism  Integrated  Resort  Scheme  projects,  a  Chinese  integrated  industrial  project,  and 
some  real  estate  development  projects.  Coping  with  these  unprecedented  capital  inflows 
remains  a  major  challenge  for  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy  for  the  Bank  of  Mauritius. 
Today, the Bank of Mauritius finds itself confronted with the important challenge of reducing 
the rate of inflation, which stood at 9.0 percent at the end of February 2008, and preserving 
the competitiveness of the export-oriented sectors, given the tendency for the capital inflows 
to generate pressures for exchange rate appreciation of the rupee. 
There  is  a  tendency  in  some  quarters  to  think  of  exchange  rate  adjustment  as  an  easy 
solution  to  the  type  of  problems  that  we  are  currently  facing.  Unfortunately,  currency 
appreciation or depreciation cannot be a panacea for our economic ills. We should not forget 
that  both  appreciation  or  depreciation  of  a  currency  are  at  best  a  mixed  blessing.  While 
appreciation  may  help  us  to  contain  inflation,  it  may  also  lead  to  a  loss  of  international 
competitiveness.  Similarly,  a  depreciation  of  the  currency,  while  being  beneficial  to  the 
export-oriented sectors, would also have potential inflationary consequences for the rest of 
the  population  and  for  the  wider  economy.  In  terms  of  macroeconomic  policies,  there  is  a 
policy trade-off between the extent of exchange rate adjustment and the inflation rate. The 
way  forward  for  a  small  open  economy  like  Mauritius  is  for  it  to  aim  to  become  more 
competitive  through  the  achievement  of  real  productivity  gains.  Long-term  competitiveness 
depends not on exchange rate changes but on productivity growth. Short-term exchange rate 
accommodation can only serve to postpone the need to address the real issues relating to 
productivity improvement and good management.  
Mauritius has a managed floating exchange rate regime with no pre-announced path for the 
exchange rate. As a matter of policy, the Bank has allowed the free play of market forces to 
determine the exchange rate. Intervention by the Bank of Mauritius in the domestic interbank 
BIS Review 31/2008 
 5
foreign  exchange  market  aims  at  smoothing  out  volatility  in  the  rupee  exchange  rate  and 
improving  the  functioning  of  the  market.  It  is  not  aimed  at  offsetting  market  forces  or  at 
targeting any specific exchange rate as the Bank does not have any exchange rate target. 
The policy approach used by the Bank of Mauritius in the face of incoming capital inflows has 
also  been  validated  by  the  recent  Article  IV  Mission  of  the  IMF.  The  conduct  of  monetary 
policy has to be freed from sectoral considerations. It is not the role of the Central Bank to 
support a particular sector at the expense of other sectors. Policy should aim at promoting 
the general interest of the country and that is what we have been trying to do. 
Part III: Challenges emerging from globalization 
After these remarks relating to the specific context of Mauritius, what can we say about the 
implications of globalization for the conduct of monetary policy in this kind of situation?  
But, more generally, some of us are beginning to wonder whether globalization should lead 
to a reassessment of central banks’ primary objective of price stability. Especially now, in the 
light of the recent actions by the US Federal Reserve which seems to be more concerned 
about  staving  off  recession  and  kick-starting  the  economy.  Should  we  revisit  the  entire 
framework  of  economic  and  monetary  analyses  in  central  banks?  How  do  we  react  to  a 
range of variables that have now assumed greater importance in global markets? 
Has globalization altered the way monetary policy influences inflation and output? In other 
words,  has  it  affected  the  transmission  mechanism  of  monetary  policy?  Not  that  we  knew 
much about this in the first place, as some people would have you believe! 
Should monetary policy react directly to exchange rate movements or should it only focus on 
inflation and real GDP? 
It is often asserted that the more we integrate global markets, the more we have to sit back 
and  let  markets  work.  Can  central  bankers  in  small  open  economies  faced  with 
unprecedented capital flows afford to do just that? How interventionist should a central bank 
be under such circumstances? 
How resilient are our monetary policy frameworks? 
Do  we  need  more  sophisticated  economic  and  monetary  models  to  address  the  monetary 
policy challenges stemming from globalization? 
With  globalization,  small  open  economies  receiving  unprecedented  capital  flows  face  the 
daunting  task  of  managing  these  external  flows  in  order  to  ensure  macroeconomic  and 
financial stability. Monetary management has to contend with the vicissitudes of capital flows 
and the increased volatility in exchange rates. While the distinction between short-term and 
long-term capital flows may be conceptually clear, from an operational viewpoint, there are 
severe problems in distinguishing between the two. At any given time, some of the inflows 
could be of an enduring nature whereas others could be temporary and, hence, reversible. In 
the face of such uncertainty in determining the temporary or permanent nature of inflows, is it 
justified  to  blame  your  central  banker  if,  out  of  prudence,  he  assumes  that  the  flows  are 
temporary until their permanent nature can be established? 
There are some underlying similarities in the challenges faced by India and Mauritius in the 
face of capital inflows. There is also, however, a very significant difference in that. India does 
not  have  full  convertibility  of  the  capital  and  financial account  of  the  balance  of  payments. 
This  difference  translates  into  some  additional  leeway  for  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India  in 
managing  capital  flows.  Mauritius  with  its  open  capital  and  financial  account,  since  the 
abolition of all capital controls in July 1994, does not have some of the tools which RBI has at 
its disposal. Introducing capital controls under any guise is certainly not an option for us.   
6 
 BIS Review 31/2008
Part IV: Challenges for monetary policy 
What, then, are the challenges faced by a small open economy in the conduct of monetary 
policy when confronted by unprecedented capital flows? As I said in my opening remarks, 
this  is  a  question  which  has  been  troubling  me  ever  since  I  took  the  helm  of  the  Bank  of 
Mauritius one year ago. 
As  most  of  you  are  no  doubt  aware,  in  economics,  simultaneously  targeting  an  exchange 
rate  and  maintaining  an  independent  monetary  policy,  with  an  open  capital  account,  is 
considered  an  impossible  trinity. This  famous  trilemma  follows  from  the  Mundell-Fleming 
model,  which  states  that  countries  cannot  simultaneously  fix  their  exchange  rate,  have  an 
open capital account, and pursue an independent monetary policy. Only two of these three 
objectives are mutually consistent. Even with a fully floating exchange rate, it has become 
more  difficult  for  a  small  open  economy  facing  unprecedented  capital  flows  to  run  an 
independent monetary policy. And, boy, don’t I know it!  
Governor Reddy, in his recent address last week, in Paris at the International Symposium of 
the  Banque  de  France  on  “Globalization,  Inflation  and  Monetary  Policy”,  underlined  the 
simultaneous challenges, from several angles, to the conduct of monetary policy arising from 
recent financial market turbulence, the growing importance of global factors relating to abrupt 
and  large  policy  shifts  in  monetary  policy  measures  of  the  major  economies,  and  the 
unprecedented  inflationary  pressures  due  to  food  and  energy  prices.  I  fully  endorse 
Governor’s  Reddy’s  view  that  these  developments  certainly  warrant  significant  and 
innovative ways of cooperation among central bankers.  
Interventions by the Central Bank to purchase large amounts of foreign exchange from the 
market have an expansionary impact on the domestic money supply and pose challenges for 
the conduct of monetary policy. Just to illustrate the point I am trying to make, only yesterday 
we at the Bank of Mauritius had to intervene to purchase Rs 1.8 billion of foreign currency in 
dollars  and  Euros  from  the  domestic  forex  market  to  prevent  this  market  from  seizing  up 
altogether as major players reached their foreign currency exposure limits. This was a new 
record, improving on the previous record for a single transaction of Rs 1.6 billion which we 
conducted  just  before  Christmas  2007  when  we  purchased  Euros  40.5  million  from  the 
market. I suspect the present record will not stand for long either. To appreciate the relative 
enormity  of  these  transactions,  remember  that  the  Bank’s  capital  base  is  currently  Rs  1 
billion and our general reserves stand at Rs 23.5 billion. 
To sterilize the excess liquidity stemming from these capital inflows, the Central Bank has to 
issue Government or Central Bank securities. In the case of Mauritius, where we now have a 
separation of debt management from monetary management, this entails the issue of a huge 
amount  of  Bank  of  Mauritius  Bills for  monetary  policy  purposes,  with a  potentially  adverse 
impact on the Central Bank’s balance sheet and its profit and loss account. It is instructive to 
recall  here  that  in  the  recent  past,  more  precisely  in  FY  2003-04,  the  Bank  of  Mauritius 
incurred a loss accruing largely from its monetary operations at a time when its returns on its 
foreign exchange reserves were also at a very low point, with rates on the US dollar hovering 
around 1 per cent.  
With  the  current  apprehension  of  an  imminent  recession  in  the  United  States  and  the 
aggressive  easing  of  interest  rates  by  the  US  Federal  Reserve,  conducting  such  levels  of 
monetary  operations  to  sterilise  the  projected  volume  of  capital  inflows  would,  in  all 
likelihood, move the Central Bank into negative territory. Such an outcome becomes a near 
certainty  given  the  significant  interest  rate  differential  that  exists  between  the  yields  on 
Central Bank securities, currently around 8.0 per cent, and placements in US dollars which 
stand at around 3.0 per cent. 
Globalization  has  indeed  complicated  the  task  of  monetary  management  .With  globalized 
capital markets, a small open economy, faced with such unprecedented capital flows, must 
grapple with a potentially very serious challenge of keeping inflation under control, if it is to 
prevent  exchange  rate  appreciation  from  undermining  external  competitiveness.  There  are 
BIS Review 31/2008 
 7
clearly  costs  for  the  Central  Bank  in  running  monetary  policy  that  have  to  be  explicitly 
recognized. I believe that the instruments and operating procedures of monetary policy have 
also to be constantly refined to meet the challenges that arise from unprecedented capital 
inflows.  
Moreover, central banks are required to strengthen their balance sheets in order to manage 
the  shocks  impacting  on  the  economy.  A  central  bank’s  capital  and  reserves  have  to  be 
strong enough to be able to sustain repeated intervention in the money market. Given the 
uncertainty surrounding the nature of capital inflows, it would also be prudent for the central 
bank in small open economies to build up reserves as a cushion against a possible change 
in  investor  sentiment,  leading  to  a  sudden  stop  syndrome  and  the  even  mare  dreaded 
reversal of capital flows. In these circumstances, should the Governor sound the alarm bell 
and  seek  help  from  the  Minister  of  Finance?  To  offset  the  strong  impulse  on  aggregate 
demand from the large capital flows, isn’t a hefty dose of fiscal consolidation just what the 
doctor  ordered?  Or  will  the  Governor  be  accused  of  being  a  spoilsport  in  such  good  and 
buoyant times?  
To sum up then, I would say that central bankers are indeed living in very interesting times. It 
is taken for granted that they are a smart bunch. But being smart is no longer enough. We 
must also be lucky. I have tried to demonstrate that, at the present juncture, the conduct of 
monetary  policy  is  nothing  short  of  a  gargantuan  task  for  the  lilliputian  economy  that 
Mauritius is.  
To  meet  some  of  the  emerging  and  unprecedented  challenges  of  the  financial  sector,  the 
Bank of Mauritius, which as I said earlier celebrated its 40th anniversary last year, is pursuing 
with  renewed  vigour  and  determination  the  exciting  journey  of  modernization.  We  have 
enlisted  the  support  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India  in  the  area  of  bank  supervision,  thus 
renewing with a tradition going back to the early years of our existence when RBI officers 
helped to establish the Bank of Mauritius. We are now engaged in a major restructuring of 
our internal organisation with the help of resource persons from Bank Negara Malaysia. The 
structure is now flatter, with the creation of Divisions within the Bank that are responsible for 
particular focused areas of activity. The Bank has adopted an open and transparent staffing 
strategy,  with  the  promotion  of  fifty-five  existing  staff  and  recruitment  of  twenty-three 
additional staff from outside the Bank. To appreciate how fundamental is this transformation, 
just remember that our total staff strength adds up to only 250 persons. We are enhancing 
our  skills  and  knowledge  base  to  add  value  to  the  organisation  and  contribute  directly 
towards the attainment of our organisational goals. 
8 
 BIS Review 31/2008
