Jean-Claude Trichet: Interview with Hospodárske noviny 
Interview with Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, conducted 
on  21  September  2008  in  Bratislava  by  Ms  Ľubomíra  Raková  (Hospodárske  noviny),  and 
published on 23 September 2008. 
 How will Slovakia’s entry to the euro area change your decisions about interest rates? 
We are working our monetary policy for the full body of the euro area. We are, as you know, 
presently 15, and we will be 16 as soon as Slovakia enters on the 1st January next year. We 
are presently 320 million and we will be 325.5 million. So it is for the sake of 325.5 million 
that we are taking our decisions. And on the bases of the integrated analysis that we have on 
the full body of the euro area, exactly like the Federal Reserve itself is looking at absolutely 
all the USA with Alaska, as well as Florida, California and Massachusetts. So, as soon as 
you  are  in,  you  are  integrated  in  this  overall  assessment  of  what  is  appropriate  for  again 
325,5  million  fellow  citizens,  for  whose,  this  fellow  citizens,  we  have  exactly  the  same 
definition of price stability, as we had since the very beginning. We started with eleven, then 
twelve, then 13, then 15, and so we clearly have the same definition of price stability in the 
medium term, which is less than 2%, close to 2% at the level of euro area as a whole. My 
colleagues  and  myself,  Governor  Šramko  with  all  the  other  members  of  the  Governing 
Council – we will be 22 to take the decision, not 21 as we are now – we will again make a 
judgement of what is good for 325,5 million citizens. 
People in Slovakia are afraid of rising prices after January 2009. Even ECB describes 
some doubts about sustainability of inflation in Slovakia in the convergence report. 
What should our government do against the inflation? 
The ECB is responsible for price stability at the level of the euro area. Price stability means in 
the medium term less than 2 percent, close to two percent as an average for the euro area. 
We  have  encouraged  Slovakia,  and  all  economies  and  countries  before  entering  into  the 
euro area, to care for price stability to be sustainable in the medium and long run. This is our 
strong message. And we have always given that message not particularly to Slovakia, but to 
all countries. We always insist on the sustainability of price stability. So we would call upon 
the authorities to prepare the changeover in the best fashion possible, with extreme care. We 
would also tell the people, the customers, the households: be vigilant, in a market economy 
prices depend on supply and demand. They depend on the vigilance of the consumers, who 
must have the maximum level of vigilance at the moment of the changeover, this is truth.  
What should our government do against the inflation? 
Again, structural reforms are absolutely of the essence, because they improve competition 
and competition is necessary to care for stable prices. It is a crucial element which permits to 
have stable prices. So we would encourage the government of Slovakia to pursue reforms. 
We  would  also  ask  all governments,  not  particularly  in  Slovakia,  but  including  Slovakia,  to 
strictly respect the stability and growth pact. It is essential for the coordination and solidity of 
the euro area. It also permits to avoid inflationary pressures.  
BIS Review 115/2008 
 1
As you look back on the two years of our current government, do you think it does 
enough in fiscal policy and structural reforms to fight against inflation? 
One  should  always  encourage  governments  to  go  in  this  direction,  so  I  would  say  yes, 
number of structural reforms has been made and that is encouraging for the future, but this is 
not a reason for complacency and it has to continue very actively. 
Slovakia just adopted a law which allows the government to regulate the prices in 
some cases. Do you think it is necessary to have such law for Slovakia because of the 
euro? 
It has to be examined very carefully. I have to say, at this stage I do not have the complete 
analysis of this legislation, we will look at it very carefully. Again, what counts essentially in a 
market economy is the level of competition, that you have between the producers, and the 
vigilance of the consumers themselves so that they exert maximum pressure on competition 
to work well. 
There was a suspicion about insider trading in Slovakia before second change of 
central parity. Did you hear about it and what do you think? 
I heard about it because it was public. I have no opinion on that. We considered in the ECB 
that it was a matter to be examined by the authorities in Slovakia. 
What impact could have the financial crisis on eurozone and what impact it would 
have on Slovakia after entering euro area? 
Slovakia is part of the global economy and Slovakia is in the global economy, as is the euro 
area  and  of  course  the  USA.  So  I  don’t  think,  that  the  financial  turbulences  that  we  are 
observing have to be analysed in connection with the transition with the entry into the euro 
area. All what I would say at this stage is that probably Slovakia, which is already in the eyes 
of all market participants in the euro area, doesn’t feel the turbulences as perhaps others, 
that are not yet considered as being in the euro area. The euro area is certainly a protection 
against  too  much  turbulences  in  the  present  universe.  But  that  being  said,  we  are  looking 
very  carefully  in  the  ECB  at  the  situation.  We  have  said  since  the  very  beginning  of  the 
financial turbulences that we would have the monetary policy stance, that would be designed 
to deliver price stability in the medium term and we would implement that monetary policy 
and refinance the banks on the money markets in order for the short term interest rates in the 
money  market  to  be  as  close  as  possible  to  our  policy  rates.  This  is  what  we  have  been 
doing  since  the  very  beginning.  We  just  published  recently  staff  projections  and  they  are 
incorporating all information that was coming, not only from the USA but also from Asia, from 
Latin  America,  from  the  emerging  markets  of  the  other  continents  and  from  Central  and 
Eastern Europe in order to have the best possible projections. We have to take into account 
absolutely everything at a global level when we are doing our own staff projections. 
Some analysts say the crisis may be over in one year. What would you think about it? 
I would say that it is an ongoing process. It is a market correction of great dimension which is 
ongoing with this episode of turbulences, of hectic behaviour of the markets. 
You mentioned already your definition of price stability, but the inflation in euro area 
is higher. What are the dangers? 
The  present  headline  CPI  is  at  a  level  which  incorporates  the  price  of  oil,  the  price  of 
commodities, the shocks at the global level we have to cope with. And we have to deliver 
2 
 BIS Review 115/2008
price  stability  in  the  medium  term,  which  means  less  then  two,  close  to  two  percent.  That 
being said, in order to deliver price stability in the medium term, in line with our definition, we 
must avoid any second round effects of both price setting as well as wage negotiations. To 
the contrary, we will do all what is necessary for inflation to go down, back to our definition of 
price stability. As our mandate is requiring, and as our fellow citizens are asking us, and they 
are very keen on asking us to deliver price stability. This is necessary for sustainable growth 
and sustainable job creation. And that is the reason why we recommend not only towards the 
social partners but also price setters to strictly avoid those second round effects. 
BIS Review 115/2008 
 3
