Jean-Claude  Trichet:  Remarks  on  the  recent  turbulences  in  global 
financial markets 
Keynote address by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, at the 
Policy  Discussion  "Global  Economic  Policy  Forum  2008",  New  York  University,  New  York, 
14 April 2008. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is a great pleasure and honour for me to speak at the invitation of the prestigious New York 
University and to address the issue of the recent financial market correction and its episodes 
of turbulences and volatility. 
At the risk of pointing out the obvious, let me start by noting that we are still some way away 
from having the full benefit of hindsight on the issues that I will touch upon today regarding 
the ongoing turmoil in global financial markets. As we gather here today, no effort is being 
spared either by the financial industry or the official sector – including central banks – across 
the  globe  in  tackling  the  adverse  consequences  on  the  money  markets  of  the  ongoing 
process  of  financial  deleveraging,1  while  at  the  same  time  considering  a  set  of  possible 
measures for preventing the present situation from repeating itself in the future. 
This  notwithstanding,  it  is  with  pleasure  that  I  share  with  this  distinguished  audience  of 
government,  economic  and  academic  leaders  my  thoughts  on  the  nature  of  the  current 
market  turmoil,  and  in  doing  so  clarifying  the  rationale  behind  the  response  of  the  central 
banking community – and the European Central Bank in particular – since its outset early in 
the summer of 2007. I trust that in the process of characterising the nature of the turmoil it 
will  also  become  clear  how  the  consensus  is  being  built  on  the  key  policy  lessons  and 
initiatives, so that we have a clearer picture of which efforts market players, central bankers 
and government agencies need to take. 
Factors underlying the recent financial market turmoil 
As the turmoil has progressively spread across the global financial system, it has become 
increasingly accepted that there were several vulnerabilities present beforehand and that no 
single  factor  or  culprit  can  be  pointed  to  as  the  cause  of  it.  It  is  generally  agreed  that  the 
trigger for the turmoil was a myriad of problems associated with the US housing market 
correction.  However,  the  sharpness  and  speed  of  the  contagion  to  unrelated  market 
segments has made it clear that there were significant vulnerabilities present in the system, 
the nature and complexity of which was not always well understood. The challenges facing 
the sub-prime market were part of a much broader problem. Now we are in a situation of high 
uncertainty – where risks are very difficult to quantify – and, as a result, confidence in the 
functioning  of  the  financial  system  itself  among  market  participants  has  been  severely 
undermined. Underlying the deterioration of confidence has been a constellation of – in my 
view – three broad factors which, although already individually known to market participants 
and policy makers alike well in advance of the turmoil, have reinforced one another in a way 
                                                 
1   The dynamics of liquidity and financial cycles have been conceptually analysed, for instance, by Tobias Adrian 
and Hyun Song Shin in “Liquidity, Monetary Policy, and Financial Cycles”, Federal Reserve Bank of New York 
Current  Issues  in  Economics  and  Finance,  volume  14  number  1,  February  2008;  and  in  “Liquidity  and 
Leverage”,  paper  presented  at  the  BIS  Annual  conference,  June  2007.  In  related  work,  Hyun  Song  Shin 
together with David Greenlaw, Jan Hatzius and Anil Kashyap “Leveraged Losses: Lessons from the Mortgage 
Market Meltdown”, paper for the 2008 US Monetary Policy Forum, February 2008, have assessed the current 
episode in some detail. 
BIS Review 44/2008 
 1
that almost nobody could have foreseen. These factors included an abundance of liquidity 
that underpinned a build up of leverage in the financial system, an increasingly interwoven 
and complex financial system the growth of which was fed by financial innovation and some 
financial agents’ incentives that were aligned against prudent practices. With the benefit of 
hindsight, it is worth recalling that public authorities – and the ECB in particular through its 
semi-annual Financial Stability Review – issued clear warnings on the under-pricing of risks 
in  some  segments  of  the  market  already  in  early  2007.  Equivalent  warnings  were  largely 
communicated  by  other  central  banks,  and  I  had  myself,  as  Chairperson  of  the  global 
economy meeting of Central Bank Governors, regularly expressed the view, on behalf of my 
fellow Governors that our judgement was that there was a significant under-pricing of risks in 
general in global finance.  
We should not lose sight of the fact that the first factor – and the driving force behind the 
substantial rise in financial leverage – was a significant ex-ante excess of savings over 
investment  in  the  global  economy.2  In  time,  this  abundance  of  capital  chasing  investment 
drove an increasingly aggressive “hunt for yield” which was reflected in a surge of demand 
for and supply of, among other assets, highly complex financial products.3
Financial leveraging processes of the type we have just witnessed are not new. As has been 
argued  by  many  in  the  international  community,  the  period  preceding  the  current  financial 
turmoil  shares  many  of  the  characteristics  of  previous  historical  episodes  –  a  so-called 
“Minsky moment” whereby there is a sudden recognition and recoil from underlying credits 
whose quality was in fact worsening for years.4 According to this view, the financial system 
may  have  inherently  pro-cyclical  characteristics  including  proneness  for  asset  price 
misalignment. If we accept this view, the possibility is real that just as the real and financial 
sectors  interacted  on  the  way  up,  they  might  well  do  so  on  the  way  back  down,  and  this 
would have implications for what the optimal response from the public authorities should be. 
We are clearly concerned about the real impacts of the financial market turmoil, as it impacts 
also on the policy options of central banks, including monetary policy. 
Clearly, however, there has been much more to the current episode than simply a surge of 
asset prices in an environment of steadily rising financial market liquidity. A second element 
in  the  constellation  of  vulnerabilities  was  the  greater  complexity  of  interlinkages  both 
within and across financial systems.5 Testimony of this evolution, even when compared to 
                                                 
2   Even though both the traditional liquidity mechanism of low interest rates and the less known (L. Chen, D. A. 
Lesmond and J. Zhanshun Wei “CorporateYield Spreads and Bond Liquidity”, preprint, April 2005) between 
securities’  liquidity  and  spreads  were  well  understood,  it  remained  surprisingly  difficult  prior  to  the  crisis  to 
make the (indirect) linkage between low interest rates and low yields across securities. Also the converse – 
the  impact  of  the  absence  of  liquidity  on  asset  prices  –  received  substantial  attention  of  academics 
(highlighted  by  the  liquidity-adjusted  asset  pricing  model  of  Acharya  and  Pedersen,  “Asset  Pricing  with 
Liquidity  Risk”,  Journal  of  Financial  Economics,  vol.  77,  pp.  375-410,  2005)  but  less  so  by  market 
practitioners. 
3   There is empirical evidence that shows that the cost of liquidity influences the credit risk-taking of banks (G. 
Jiménez, S. Ongena, J.-L. Peydró and J. Saurina, “Hazardous Times for Monetary Policy: What Do Twenty-
Three Million Bank Loans Say About the Effects of Monetary Policy on Credit Risk?” CEPR DP No 6514). In 
particular, when the cost of liquidity is low (and the level of liquidity is high), banks take on higher credit risk. 
This high credit risk could materialize in defaults once the cost of the liquidity stars climbing back to its normal 
levels. 
4   Hyman  Minsky’s  model  of  the  credit  system,  which  he  dubbed  the  “Financial  Instability  Hypothesis”  has 
recently become very topical. In short, unusually long periods of economic stability lull investors into taking on 
more risk. This leads them to borrow excessively and to overpay for assets. A Minsky moment is the point in 
the cycle when investors have cash flow problems due to spiraling debt they have incurred in order to finance 
speculative investments. 
5   Raghuram  Rajan  in  “Has  Financial  Development  Made  the  World  Riskier?”,  NBER  working  paper,  11728, 
November  2005;  presents  one  of  the  first  accounts  of  how  the  growing  complexity  of  the  financial  system 
determines its fragility. 
2 
 BIS Review 44/2008
just  a  decade  ago,  are  the  speed  and  degree  of  complexity  of  today’s  capital  flows;  the 
relative  variety,  obscurity  and  interrelationship  of  many  classes  of  financial  instruments  – 
often with large levels of embedded leverage; and the intertwined relationship of a growing 
variety of financial institutions. This clearly placed a heavy burden on the risk management 
procedures of large financial intermediaries. 
The evolution of the financial system not only facilitated an expansion of the array of financial 
assets  available  to  investors  but  it  also  seeded  the  fragility  that  later  materialised  in  the 
unprecedented  speed  and  reach  of  contagion  during  the  unwinding  of  leverage.  So  as  to 
avoid  the  risk  of  any  misinterpretation  of  my  views  on  financial  development,  let  me  be 
crystal clear on this: I share the view that modern financial intermediation has proven that it 
has  the  potential  to  effectively  spread  risk  and  it  has  undoubtedly  promoted  economic 
efficiency and provided cheaper capital to productive sectors that would have otherwise not 
had  access  to  any.  The  challenge  for  all  of  us  today  lies  in  preventing  the  system  from 
feeding on itself through a spiralling process of leveraging.6 Financial complexity – preferably 
complemented with the necessary checks and balances – is but an inevitable consequence 
of the increasingly complex global economic and financial system, and we must find ways of 
taming it and turning it to our favour. 
Abundant  liquidity  and  financial  complexity  embody  in  my  view  the  driving  force  and  the 
scene underlying the process of financial leveraging and its unwinding, but the full picture of 
the  weaknesses 
financial 
intermediation  model  is  not  complete  without  saying  something  about  financial  players’ 
incentive  structures.7  Strictly  speaking  the  purpose  of  the  financial  system  is  to  write, 
manage and trade claims on future cash flows for the rest of the economy, a purpose that 
increasingly fell victim to a game for fees, very short-term apparent profits, and arbitraging 
regulation.  The  “shadow  banking  system”  that  rapidly  emerged  as  an  excrescence  of  the 
formal banking sector – unlike its more understood and regulated sibling – rested on a poorly 
understood system of credence (provided by rating agencies) and the (false) perception that 
the only way for asset prices was upward. Indeed, most remarkably ex-post, it did not have 
to lay capital against things going wrong, as eventually they did when euphoria turned into 
sobriety.  Time  and  again  we  need  to  be  reminded  of  NASA’s  safety  Director  Jerome 
Lederer’s contention, equally valid for aeronautics as for finance, that “of the major incentives 
to  improve  safety,  by  far  the  most  compelling  is  that  of  economics.  The  moral  incentive, 
which  is  most  evident  following  an  accident,  is  more  intense  but  is  relatively  short  lived.” 
Supervisors  and  regulators  clearly  need  to  take  a  careful  assessment  of  the  incentive 
structure  underlying  financial  intermediation,  in  particular  in  light  of  the  ever-changing 
landscape that characterises it.8
that  have  been  unearthed 
the  “originate-to-distribute” 
in 
                                                 
6  
It has been recognised in the academic literature that such episodes, could emerge, bringing to the fore the 
inherent  trade-off  between  financial  stability  and  the  efficiency  of  the  financial  system.  See  for  instance  A. 
Perez, P. Gai, S. Kapadia and S. Millard “Financial Innovation, Macroeconomic Stability and Systemic Crises”, 
preprint, February 2006. 
7   This problem with incentives in securitization was also well known in the academic literature, at least as early 
as C. Calomiris and J. Mason “Credit Card Securitization and Regulatory Arbitrage”, Federal Reserve Bank of 
Philadelphia, working paper no. 03-7, April 2003. 
8   There  is  empirical  evidence  that  securitization  lead  to  softer  lending  standards  and  higher  defaults.  For 
instance, B. Keys, T. Mukherjee, A. Seru and V. Vig (“Did Securitization Lead to Lax Screening? Evidence 
From  Subprime  Loans  2001-2006,  GSB  Chicago,  2008)  show  that  conditional  on  being  securitized,  the 
portfolio that is more likely to be securitized defaults by around 20% more than a similar risk profile group with 
a lower probability of securitization. A. Mian and A. Sufi ("The Consequences of Mortgage Credit Expansion: 
Evidence from the 2007 Mortgage Default Crisis", GSB  Chicago, 2008) show that a rapid expansion in the 
supply  of  mortgages  driven  by  disintermediation  explains  a  large  fraction  of  recent  U.S.  house  price 
appreciation and subsequent mortgage defaults. 
BIS Review 44/2008 
 3
Prior  to  the  July  2007  rude  awakening  of  financial  markets  participants,  observers  and 
regulators at large, these three broad factors contrived a convergence of mechanisms that 
resulted in the upward spiralling of asset prices, further leveraging, increasing complexity and 
shrinking  transparency.  In  closer  immediacy,  they  together  also  shaped  the  particular 
mechanisms  that  unleashed  the  turmoil:  it  took  one  substantial  shock  to  a  single  market 
segment (US sub-prime related credit) to trigger a broad-based drive to re-price credit risk 
across all classes of financial instruments and involving a wide range of financial institutions. 
Even though this in itself may not be a new phenomenon – similar episodes were observed 
with  some  regularity  over  the  last  few  years  –  the  much  higher  degree  of  contagion  that 
followed also stemmed from and was reinforced by the factors above. First, the process of 
adjusting risk positions in the financial sector was hindered by a – in some cases complete – 
breakdown  in  the  price  discovery  process  across  instruments  owing  to  the  lack  of 
understanding  of  the  distribution  and  magnitude  of  risks  underlying  the  various  financial 
instruments.  Second,  the  unprecedented  system-wide  dry-up  of  liquidity  that  resulted  from 
reductions  in  position-taking  by  major  financial  intermediaries  fed  back  into  the  overall 
uncertainty, thus escalating measured risk and frustrating the very same efforts towards risk 
reduction.9
I will come back to my thoughts on what key lessons we have learned later, but I would first 
like to turn to the response of the central banking community to the turmoil that was possible 
once the severity of the shock we were facing became clear to us. 
The response of the central banking community to the turmoil  
The central bank community responded to interbank markets strains in various ways. At an 
early  stage,  the  Eurosystem  made  very  clearly  the  point  that  we  were  strictly  making  the 
distinction between setting the monetary policy stance to maintain price stability, and liquidity 
decisions taken in the course of implementing this stance. This distinction serves to isolate 
signals of the monetary policy stance from the impact on very short-term interest rates of the 
noise  introduced  by  liquidity  movements.  At  times  of  market  stress,  underlining  this 
distinction is even more important than in “normal times”. In circumstances of market stress, 
liquidity management may need to be more active in order to contribute to the functioning of 
the money market and steer very short-term money market rates close to the minimum bid 
rate of the Eurosystem’s main refinancing operations. 
I will now focus on the liquidity operations the Eurosystem conducted during the turmoil and 
also the joint actions that took place by several central banks. 
After  the  start  of  the  financial  market  turmoil,  it  appeared  that  credit  institutions  had 
developed  a  preference  for  fulfilling  their  reserve  requirements  relatively  early  in  the 
maintenance  period.  Liquidity  on  different  days  of  a  reserve  maintenance  period  were  no 
longer  perfect  substitutes,  and  therefore  short-term  interest  rates  did  no  longer  follow  the 
celebrated “martingale hypothesis”.10 Using the baseline model of Poole 1968,11 they tended 
rather to behave as if each individual bank perceived their distribution of liquidity shocks to 
                                                 
9   One  can  understand  the  current  situation  with  a  model  of  adverse  selection  in  the  interbank  market  (M. 
Flannery, “Financial Crises, Payment System Problems, and Discount Window Lending”, Journal of Money, 
Credit, and Banking, 28, 1996). Following a large shock in the financial system, banks may become uncertain 
about  the  borrowing  banks’  credit  quality.  As  they  feel  less  able  to  distinguish  between  “good”  and  “bad” 
banks, lenders may either raise interest rates or not to supply liquidity to the higher adverse selection costs. 
10   See J. D. Hamilton “The Daily Market for Federal Funds”, Journal of Political Economy, vol 104 (1996), pp. 26-
56. 
11   See  W.  Poole  ‘Commercial  Bank  Reserve  Management  in  a  Stochastic  Model:  Implications  for  Monetary 
Policy’, Journal of Finance, vol. 23 (1968), pp. 769-791. 
4 
 BIS Review 44/2008
to 
these 
In  addition 
fine-tuning  operations, 
be strongly biased to the tight side, even if this was of course not the case at an aggregate 
level. 
As  a  result,  the  ECB  adjusted  the  distribution  of  liquidity  supply  over  the  course  of  a 
maintenance period, by increasing the supply at the beginning of the period and reducing it 
later  in  the  period  (the  so-called  frontloading),  so  that  the  average  supply  of  liquidity 
remained unchanged over the whole reserve maintenance period. This policy is in line with 
the Eurosystem’s aim to provide to the banking system over each maintenance period the 
exact  amount  of  liquidity  they  need  to  fulfil  their  liquidity  deficit.  The  average  size  of  the 
Eurosystem’s  refinancing  operations  for  the  maintenance  periods  since  August  2007 
remained at around €450 billion, as in the first semester 2007. 
When  overnight  interbank  rates  in  the  United  States  and  Europe  came  under  upward 
pressure, the first liquidity response during the turmoil was to try to keep short-term money 
market rates near policy rates with a more active liquidity management. This became clear 
on the morning of 9 August when the overnight rate increased very sharply and significantly 
signalling a degree of disruption of the money market. The ECB therefore conducted a fine-
tuning operation with an overnight maturity, in which it injected liquidity into the market via a 
fixed rate tender with full allotment of all bids. During the following week, the ECB carried out 
three  more  liquidity  providing  fine-tuning  operations,  each  with  an  overnight  maturity  and 
progressively  smaller  amounts. 
two 
supplementary longer-term refinancing operations with a three-month maturity, the first on 24 
August 2007 and the second on 13 September were conducted to address the sharp drop of 
activity in the longer-term money market. In this way counterparties were able to reduce their 
net need for liquidity over a longer horizon. 
A special tender with full allotment of all bids occurred again on 18 December 2007, when, 
due to year-end liquidity tensions, it was deemed efficient to leave to the market to determine 
the exact allotment amount. This overall allotment amounted to EUR 349 billion (USD 503 
billion at the exchange rate prevailing at the date).  
In general, the ECB made more frequent use of fine-tuning operations than in “normal times”, 
both in order to inject further liquidity in addition to the one provided in the main refinancing 
operations  but  also  to  absorb  excess  liquidity,  in  order  to  steer  the  EONIA  close  to  the 
minimum bid rate. 
These measures, both fine-tuning and LTRO operations have allowed the ECB to maintain 
control  over  short-term  money  market  rates  and  to  ensure  orderly  conditions  in  the  euro 
money  market,  without  requiring  a  structural  change  of  the  Eurosystem’s  operational 
framework for monetary policy implementation. All these measures have been supported by 
prompt communications, which helped reassuring the market on the readiness of the ECB to 
take adequate measures. 
Some  central  banks  conducted  also  other  actions,  which  mainly  included  expanding  the 
range  of  eligible  collateral  and  of  counterparties.  The  Bank  of  Japan  and  the  ECB,  which 
already accepted relatively broad ranges of collateral, were amongst the central banks that 
did not need to adjust their collateral framework. Indeed, owing to its acceptance of a broad 
range of collateral as well as the large number of eligible counterparties, the Eurosystem’s 
collateral  framework  has  been  well  equipped  to  support  the  implementation  of  monetary 
policy during the ongoing market turbulence. The share of deposited collateral not used to 
cover  credit  from  monetary  policy  operations  continued  to  be  high.  This  suggests  that 
availability of collateral has not been a constraint on the Euroystem’s counterparties in the 
wake of the turmoil. 
It  is  important  to  recall  that,  as  the  turmoil  went  on,  central  banks  strengthened  their 
co-operation, first through communications and collective monitoring of market developments 
and later on by coordinated steps to provide liquidity. 
BIS Review 44/2008 
 5
As  an  example  of  joint  actions  between  central  banks  during  the  turmoil,  the  ECB  agreed 
with the US Federal Reserve to grant loans in dollars to euro area banks in connection with 
the  FED  new  Term  Auction  Facility  (TAF)  in  US  dollar.  This  was  a  response  to euro  area 
banks that were reported to be particularly concerned about the availability of their funding 
denominated  in  US  dollars.  The  Eurosystem  loans  were  financed  through  a  currency 
arrangement (swap line) between the FED and the ECB. The Eurosystem provided the US 
dollar funding received via this swap line to its counterparties against collateral eligible for 
Eurosystem credit operations in two operations settling on 20 and 27 December 2007, which 
were renewed on 17 and 31 January 2008. Similar operations were also carried out by the 
Swiss National Bank. The same day, other central banks as Bank of England and Bank of 
Canada announced specific measures to provide directly term funding to a larger number of 
financial institutions and against a broader set of eligible collateral. Bank of Japan and the 
Riksbank joined in the announcement, indicating their support. 
In the Eurosystem’s operations, US dollar funding of USD 10 billion each was provided to 
counterparties with access to the marginal lending facility, for a maturity of one month. The 
four operations were conducted at a fixed rate equal to the marginal rate of the simultaneous 
Federal Reserve tenders, which was 4.65%, 4.67%, 3.95% and 3.12% respectively. These 
operations did not have a direct effect on euro  liquidity conditions, but aimed at improving 
global funding conditions. 
Since  these  coordinated  actions  taken  in  December  and  January,  the  G-10  central  banks 
have  continued  to  work  closely  together  and  to  consult  regularly  on  liquidity  pressures  in 
funding  markets.  As  continued  pressure  was  observed  in  the  money  market,  the  ECB 
announced on 11 March 2008 that it would resume carrying out US dollar liquidity providing 
operations in connection with the Term Auction Facility and would increase their amounts to 
USD 15 billion every second week for as long as needed. The same day, other central banks 
announced specific measures to cope with these continued tensions.  
It is important to stress that the action in connection with the TAF marked the first multilateral 
central  bank  co-operation  in  the  money  market  field,  a  market  which  is  central  to  the 
implementation of a central bank’s monetary policy.  
Key lessons and policy initiatives  
The present very significant market correction with its episodes of turbulences, high level of 
volatility and overshooting on a number of markets has revealed substantial weaknesses in 
the functioning of financial institutions and markets. In many respects we are witnessing the 
first  “real  magnitude”  stress  of  today’s  global  finance  incorporating  recent  financial 
innovations, including new complex structured finance instruments, a very rapid increase of 
highly-leveraged  institutions,  and  an  incredibly  recent  increase  of  derivatives  of  all  kinds  – 
including  credit  derivatives.  It  appears  now  that  the  shock  with  which  the  global  financial 
system  had  to  cope  with  after  the  burst  of  the  internet  bubble  was,  all  things  considered, 
quite modest and that the resilience of the system at that time had probably been wrongly 
attributed to the, already largely spread, use of derivatives. Now, as I said, we have the real 
test and it is extremely important that we do not miss any of the lessons that should be drawn 
from the present financial turmoil.  
It  is  important  that  these  lessons  are  drawn  at  both  national  and  regional  levels.  Worth 
noting,  in this  respect,  the  streams of  work  co-ordinated  at  the  EU  level  by  the  Council  of 
Ministers  of  Finance  (Ecofin)  towards  strengthening  the  supervisory  and  financial  stability 
arrangements, including the introduction of a European mandate to national supervisors, the 
clarification and strengthening of the functioning of the committees of supervisors at the level 
of  the  27  nations,  the wider  use  of  colleges  of  supervisors  to  re-inforce  the  supervision  of 
cross-border banking groups and the approval of a Memorandum of Understanding on cross 
border  cooperation  in  financial  crisis  situations  between  all  relevant  authorities  in  the  EU, 
namely: supervisory authorities, central banks and finance ministries. Similar initiatives have 
6 
 BIS Review 44/2008
been launched in the US, for example let me mention the recent proposals issued by U.S. 
Treasury  Secretary  Paulson  to  strengthen  the  financial  regulatory  structure,  and  are  being 
considered in other nations. 
However  even  more  important  was  to  agree  at  the  international  level  on  the  appropriate 
methodology to identify the common lessons that would be drawn on a co-ordinated basis on 
both sides of the Atlantic as well as on both sides of the Pacific. The present turbulences are 
a global phenomenon. Only a global response can be effective. After the Asian crisis, at the 
initiative of G7 Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors the Financial Stability Forum 
was  created  as  the  informal  grouping  where  a  synthetic  diagnosis  of  the  state  of  global 
finance could be carried out with a view to identifying the potential weaknesses affecting the 
international financial system and areas for improvement.  
In  this  respect  I  am  happy  to  say  that  the  “Report  on  Enhancing  Market  and  Institutional 
Resilience”  –  that  has  just  been  presented  by  the  Financial  Stability  Forum  to  the 
international  community  and  in  particular  to  the  G7  and  to  the  International  Monetary  and 
Financial  Committee  of  the  International  Monetary  Fund  –  corresponds  well  to  what  the 
international community asked for. I am happy that we have a consensus on implementing 
the  G7’s  precise  recommendations  with  determination  and  in  line  with  the  recommended 
timeline. The community of central banks will be particularly alert for these recommendations 
to enter into force.  
Having participated in the G7 discussions three days ago I will stress the recommendations 
that we consider among the immediate priorities for implementation within the next 100 days:  
Financial institutions should fully and promptly disclose their risk exposures, write-
• 
downs  and  fair  value  estimates  for  complex  and  illiquid  instruments  in  their 
upcoming mid-year reporting. They should do so consistently with leading disclosure 
practices as set out in the FSF report.  
The International Accounting Standards Board (IASB) and other relevant standard 
setters  should  take  urgent  action  to  improve  the  accounting  and  disclosure 
standards  for  off-balance  sheet  entities  and  to  enhance  guidance  on  fair  value 
accounting, particularly on valuing financial instruments in periods of stress.  
Financial  institutions  should  strengthen  their  risk  management  practices,  including 
rigorous  stress  testing,  under  the  support  of  supervisors’  oversight.  Financial 
institutions should also strengthen their capital positions as needed.  
  By mid-2008, the Basel Committee should issue revised liquidity risk management guidelines 
and IOSCO should revise its code of conduct for credit rating agencies.  
I  will  also  underline  the  main  areas  where  important  recommendations  have  to  be 
implemented  either  by  end-2008  or  at  the  latest  by  2009,  namely  revising  capital 
requirements under Pillar I of Basel II (e.g. certain aspects of the securitisation framework), 
strengthening  supervision  and  management  of  liquidity  risk  for  banks,  ensuring  effective 
supervisory  review  under  Pillar  II,  enhancing  transparency  and  valuation,  improving  the 
quality of credit ratings for structured products, strengthening authorities’ responsiveness to 
risk and enhancing robust arrangements for dealing with stress in the financial system.  
Concluding remarks 
Now,  expeditious  and  effective  implementation  is  of  the  essence.  This  should  be 
considerably facilitated by the fact that the recommendations are made, at the global level, 
by  those  authorities  and  entities  that  have  precisely  to  apply  them.  I  recommend  that  this 
implementation  exercise,  that  starts  immediately,  would  respect  as  much  as  possible  the 
following principles, which, by the way, are the underlying principles that have inspired the 
G7 recommendations of the Financial Stability Forum. 
BIS Review 44/2008 
 7
Firstly, augment transparency. The present turbulences have, once more, demonstrated that 
opacity as regards markets, financial instruments and real situations of financial institutions is 
a recipe for catastrophe. As soon as financial markets are entering an episode of uncertainty 
and  turbulence,  absence  of  transparency  triggers  contagion  and  negative  herd  behaviour. 
This spread of contagion due to opacity was at the heart of the Asian crisis. It is very much 
also  at  the  heart  of  the  present  episode.  This  is  true  both  for  the  financial  instruments  – 
sophisticated  structured  products,  asset-backed  securities,  etc.  –  and  for  the  financial 
institutions  themselves.  The  absence  of  pertinent,  credible  and  reliable  information  drives 
market participants to assume the worst possible hypothesis on those financial instruments 
or institutions at stake and to act accordingly. 
More transparency is not only necessary to make the markets more efficient and to optimise 
the  allocation  of  capital,  but  it  is  also  the  best  insurance  policy  against  irrational  herd 
behaviour and unjustified contagion in times of stress.  
Secondly, reduce pro-cyclicality. In normal times the elements of pro-cyclicality built in global 
finance  are  less  obvious.  But  in  acute  episodes  of  booms  and  busts,  these  factors  are 
particularly  visible.  Human  nature  is  probably  at  the  heart  of  the  spontaneous  pro-cyclical 
attitude  of  market  participants  triggering  successive  bipolar  phases  of  exuberance  and 
despair. But the paradox is that a number of rules, regulations, procedures and the behaviour 
of authorities very often contribute to augmenting the amplitude of the fluctuations. We find 
such  elements  of  pro-cyclicality  in  the  set  of  prudential  rules  for  banks  as  well  as  for 
insurance  companies.  We  find  pro-cyclicality  in  the  accounting  rules.  We  find  elements  of 
pro-cyclicality in the attitude of the authorities that can, paradoxically, apply more rigorously 
their  rules  and  regulations  in  times  of  difficulty  while  they  were  nonchalant  during  the 
previous boom episodes. 
This  is  also  linked  to  two  important  features of  global  finance  which I  trust  are  particularly 
adverse  from  a  financial  stability  stand  point:  the  trend  towards  short-termism  and  the 
profound asymmetry in the response which is given to booms and busts. 
Amongst the G7 measures that are recommended by the Financial Stability Forum, many will 
contribute to diminish the degree of pro-cyclicality which is embedded in the system, I will 
encourage  all  those  who  have  a  stake  in  implementing  those  recommendations  to  ask 
themselves whether their own decisions pass the test of contributing effectively to reducing 
pro-cyclicality. 
I thank you for your attention. 
8 
 BIS Review 44/2008
