Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Strengthening our fight against money 
laundering & terrorist financing 
Speech  by  Mr  Amando  M  Tetangco,  Jr,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  the  Philippines 
(Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas),  at  the  closing  ceremonies  of  the  EU-RP  Anti-Money 
Laundering Project-Philippines, Central Bank of the Philippines, Manila, 12 September 2008. 
 Ambassador  Alistair  MacDonald;  Congressman  Jaime  Lopez;  Anti-Money  Laundering 
Council Members – SEC Chairman Fe Barin and Insurance Commissioner Eduardo Malinis; 
Honorable  Members  of  the  Monetary  Board  and  the  Judiciary,  Honorable  Members  of  the 
European  Commission,  Members  of  the  Diplomatic  Corps,  Representatives  from  our 
multilateral  partners  including  the  IMF/  World  Bank  and  the  ADB,  Dr.  Ferdinando  Buffoni, 
fellow workers in government, special guests, good morning.  
Today, we celebrate a significant milestone: the successful completion of the joint program of 
the Philippine Government and the European Commission in strengthening our capacity to 
fight money laundering.  
Two years, ten months and six days ago, we launched the “Training the Trainers Program.” I 
am  pleased  to  announce  that  the  evaluation  indicated  that  this  program  accomplished  its 
objectives of strengthening the institutional capacity of agencies and institutions involved in 
the implementation of AML/CFT strategies and of raising the awareness of the Philippine civil 
society on AML/CFT issues.  
My  understanding  is  that  the  participants  took  full  advantage  of  this  training  program  and 
lived  up  to  its  challenges.  Altogether,  we  have  20  successful  trainers  from  the  Bangko 
Sentral ng Pilipinas, the Securities and Exchange Commission, the Insurance Commission, 
the Anti-Money Laundering Council Secretariat, the Philippine National Police, the Court of 
Appeals and the Regional Trial Court.  
May I request all the participants to the “Training the Trainers Program” to stand up and be 
recognized. Ladies and gentlemen, let us give them a well-deserved round of applause!  
Congratulations program participants! You have completed the first step. The next challenge 
is to use the training skills you have acquired in sharing the knowledge you have gained with 
the  stakeholders  tasked  to  implement  AML/CFT  measures.  The  objective  is  to  empower 
them  to  fully  respond  to  evolving  challenges  in  our  fight  against  money  laundering  and 
terrorist financing.  
I am also impressed by the stronger cooperation that has taken root among the agencies of 
government represented in the program: from the supervisory authorities to the judicial and 
law enforcement agencies.  
For  us  at  the  Anti-Money  Laundering  Council,  training  and  educational  programs  are 
important initiatives under the Philippines’ AML/CFT regime. The Anti-Money Laundering Act 
of 2001, as amended, mandates the AMLC to develop educational programs on the harmful 
effects  of  money  laundering,  the  methods  and  techniques  used  in  money  laundering,  the 
viable  means  of  preventing  money  laundering  and  the  effective  ways  of  prosecuting  and 
punishing offenders.  
Ladies and gentlemen. The Philippines has been making big strides in having a robust legal 
AML/CFT  framework.  Following  the  enactment  by  our  legislators  of  the  Anti  Money 
Laundering Act, we have:  
• 
criminalized money laundering  
BIS Review 113/2008 
 1
  created the Anti-Money Laundering Council as the Philippines’ Financial Intelligence 
Unit  
established  the  mandatory  obligations  for  covered  institutions  relative  to  the 
requirements  on  customer  due  diligence,  record  keeping,  and  the  reporting  of 
covered and suspicious transactions  
enforced mutual legal assistance and cooperation; and finally,  
instituted a civil forfeiture system  
• 
• 
In  addition,  the  Supervising  Authorities  have  issued  circulars  and  guidelines  to  covered 
institutions  regarding  correspondent  banking,  politically  exposed  persons,  wire  transfers, 
alternative remittance systems, as well as cross border transportation of currency, and UN 
Security Council resolutions on designated terrorist individuals and organizations.  
As of today, we have one successful money laundering conviction and 37 money laundering 
cases  pending  before  the  Regional  Trial  Courts,  the  Ombudsman,  and  the  Department  of 
Justice. And there are other charges we are preparing to file in our courts.  
However,  we  do  face  new  challenges  from  globalization  and  the  internationalization  of 
money laundering and terrorist financing techniques.  
In addition, new and evolving technologies and financial systems are being used by money 
launderers to weave a complex trail that is difficult to find and unravel.  
As money launderers continue to refine their techniques and find new avenues for their illicit 
operations,  so  must  we  work  together  to  fortify  our  defenses  to  prevent  or  stop  them. 
Otherwise, we risk having a threat to the reputation and viability of our financial system.  
It  is  in  this  context  that  we  have  been  proactive  in  the  Philippines.  The  Anti  Money 
Laundering Council, which I chair, has taken important initiatives to broaden the Philippines’ 
AML/CFT strategy, to intensify its position as a partner of the global community in the fight 
against money laundering and terrorist financing, and to align our AML/CFT regime with the 
international standards of the FATF.  
On the other hand, as the international watchdog on AML/CFT issues, the Financial Action 
Task  Force,  has  issued  the  FATF  40  +  9  Recommendations  and  continuously  monitors 
AML/CFT compliance by its member countries through peer reviews and assessments.  
Accordingly,  the  Anti  Money  Laundering  Council  submitted  for  consideration  of  the 
Congressional  Oversight  Committee  –  which  Representative  Jaime  Lopez  co-chairs  – 
proposed amendments to the AMLA in line with the Revised FATF 40 recommendations and 
9  Special  Recommendations  on  Terrorist  Financing.  These  amendments,  intended  to  give 
more teeth to the Anti Money Laundering legislation, are as follows: 
• 
the  addition  of  more  predicate  crimes  such  as  trafficking  in  persons,  bribery, 
counterfeiting, 
forgery, 
environmental crimes and terrorism and its financing;  
the inclusion of an appropriate regime for designated non-financial businesses and 
professionals, such as casinos, real estate agents, dealers in precious metals and 
stones, lawyers, and accountants;  
provision for a system of incentives and rewards; and  
retention by the AMLC of a percentage of civilly forfeited funds.  
• 
• 
I am pleased to report that our House of Representatives is similarly proactive in terms of 
strengthening  our  fight  against  money  laundering.  There  are  now  two  pending  bills  on 
proposed AMLA amendments: 
• 
House Bill 3053 sponsored by Representative Rufus Rodriguez; and  
illegal  exactions,  malversation, 
frauds  and  other 
 2 
 BIS Review 113/2008
 House  Bill  4784  sponsored  by  Speaker  Prospero  Nograles  and  Representative 
Jaime  Lopez,  who  is  the  Chairman  of  the  Committee  on  Banks  and  Financial 
intermediaries and the Co-Chairman of the Congressional oversight Committee on 
anti-money laundering.  
time. 
Implemented  with 
technical  assistance  provided  by 
Ladies  and  gentlemen.  Another  important  event  in  our  fight  against  money  laundering  is 
going to take place in a few days. From September 22 to October 6, 2008, the Philippines’ 
AML/CFT regime will be assessed by the World Bank and the Asia Pacific Group on Money 
Laundering (APG). When the assessment is finalized, we will know how we rate in terms of 
implementing our AML/CFT regime.  
In  preparation  for  this,  the  AMLC  has  been  conducting  meetings  and  consultations  with 
relevant government agencies and financial institutions to ensure that the Assessment Team 
is provided with necessary information for its on-site mission. 
The  completion  of  our  program  on  “Training  the  Trainors”  therefore  comes  at  a  most 
opportune 
the  European 
Commission, this program underscores the trust and confidence of our European allies in our 
country  as  a  capable,  reliable,  and  enduring  partner  in  the  increasingly  challenging  war 
against crimes and its financing. 
Of  course,  declaring  war  against  money  laundering  and  terrorist  financing  is  only  the 
beginning. To win this war, we must be united, committed, focused, and vigilant.  
We are fighting for security, peace, and stability of our nations, the safety of our people, and 
the future of our children. The stakes are simply too high; losing is definitely not an option. 
This is the one big fight we should invest in to win.  
On  behalf  of  my  colleagues  at  the  Anti  Money  Laundering  Council  therefore,  I  thank  the 
European Commission represented by Ambassador MacDonald (let us give them a big hand) 
for their valuable support.  
And once again, let us congratulate all the participants to the “Training for Trainors Program” 
for  their  commitment  to  broaden  the  network  of  people  fighting  money  laundering  and 
terrorist financing in our country.  
Together,  let  us  continue  to  broaden  support  and  fortify  our  position  in  the  fight  against 
money laundering and terrorist financing. 
Thank you all and good day. 
Maraming salamat and Mabuhay!  
BIS Review 113/2008 
 3
