Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Basel II implementation and the development of Asia's 
financial system – experiences, challenges and regional cooperation 
Keynote address by Dr Zeti Akhtar Aziz, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, at the 4th 
SEACEN/ABAC/ABA/PECC  Public-Private  Dialogue  for  the  Asia  Pacific  Region,  Kuala 
Lumpur, 18 August 2008. 
 It is my pleasure to be here today, to speak on the occasion of this Public-Private Dialogue 
organised by the SEACEN Centre in collaboration with the APEC Business Advisory Council 
(ABAC),  the  Asian  Bankers  Association  (ABA)  and  the  Pacific  Economic  Cooperation 
Council (PECC) on the development of Asia's financial systems and the implementation of 
Basel II. 
The  implementation  of  Basel  II  across  the  Asia  Pacific  region  is  occurring  at  a  time  of 
heightened risks, during a time in which our economies and financial systems are confronted 
with significant challenges and increased uncertainties. As the underpinnings of Basel II are 
concerned  with  enhancing  the  responsiveness  to  risk  by  banking  institutions,  there  are 
enormous  expectations  that  Basel  II  will  stand  up  to  the  test  of  capturing  the  complexities 
and the more uncertain direction of risk in the current environment. There is also enormous 
interest in assessing the pre-emptive capabilities of the framework to anticipate the direction 
of risk and thus ensure the provision of adequate capital buffers for such risk. The sharing of 
experience  on  the  implementation  of  Basel  II  in  this  region  and  the  greater  engagement 
between  the  supervisory  and  financial  communities  will  provide  further  insights  to  these 
issues.  The  ultimate  objective  of  Basel  II  is  to  achieve  more  resilient  banks,  and  thus 
preserve the broader financial stability. 
In  the  Asia  Pacific  region,  thirteen  countries  have  adopted  the  standardized  approaches 
under Basel II for credit and operational risks. A number of countries have also either already 
adopted  or  announced  plans  to  adopt  the  more  advanced  approaches  by  2010  or  earlier. 
Malaysia  adopted  the  standardised  approach  this  year  and  has  recently  issued  a  concept 
paper detailing the parameters for the implementation of the more advanced approach to be 
adopted in 2010. 
The  global  economy  has  entered  a  period  of  greater  uncertainty,  with  a  number  of 
developments that are taking place in some of the developed economies having destabilising 
implications  on  the  global  economy.  The  international  financial  markets  continue  to  be  in 
turmoil,  triggered  by  the  developments  in  the  subprime  market  in  the  United  States  and 
resulting in the tightening of liquidity in the credit markets. The impact of these developments 
on the financial position of financial institutions has affected the functioning of the financial 
markets and the financial intermediation process. This has required interventionist policies to 
contain its systemic implication. In addition, the global economy has been through a period of 
high commodity and energy prices which has not only translated into higher inflation but has 
also contributed to dampening economic growth. 
While the Asian region has experienced robust growth in the first half of 2008, the regional 
economies  will  be  affected  by  these  developments.  Although  growth  is  expected  to 
moderate,  most  economies  will  continue  to  see  a  reasonable  growth  performance.  The 
region will, however, continue to face inflationary pressures arising from high commodity and 
energy prices. This is however, expected to recede with the substantial correction that has 
recently taken place following the slower pace of global growth. 
The  Asian  region  is  expected  to  weather  this  challenging  period  with  the  growing  intra-
regional trade and the expansion of its economic links with Eastern Europe and Russia, the 
Middle  East  and  Latin  America.  At  the  same  time,  increased  infrastructure  spending  in 
several of the large economies will provide further support to domestic demand. In addition, 
BIS Review 99/2008 
 1
the strengthened economic fundamentals of the Asian economies, including the high level of 
reserves, low external debt, strengthened financial systems and improved fiscal position, will 
allow the flexibility to better manage the risks to the economy and the financial systems. 
In  this  environment,  the  implementation  of  Basel  II  presents  a  powerful  lever  for  banks  to 
significantly  enhance  both  their  long  term  resilience  and  their  competitive  advantage.  It 
promises greater financial stability through the closer alignment of risk with capital. To realise 
the full benefits from the implementation of Basel II, its multi-faceted dimensions need to be 
well understood and well integrated with the financial structures, institutional practices, and 
supervisory  systems.  Emerging  markets  in  particular  will  need  to  ensure  that  supervisory 
interpretations  of  the  framework  are  contextualised  to  the  local  conditions,  and  the 
preconditions for its effective implementation are adequately developed to avoid the potential 
market distortions. 
At  the  institutional  level,  Basel  II  provides  a  unique  opportunity  for  banks  to  integrate  risk 
considerations  with  their  business  strategies.  Indeed,  several  leading  financial  institutions 
have successfully taken Basel II beyond the narrow and mechanistic risk applications to a 
more  strategic  implementation  of  the  framework  across  the  organisation.  Such  institutions 
have leveraged on the upgraded risk infrastructures that have been established for Basel II 
to create competitive advantages through the application of new business and management 
tools. This enables the risk function to have a central role in forming strategic moves into new 
markets or products. In the process, this will ensure that the strategies are aligned with the 
bank's risk appetite and policies. 
The benefits of Basel II cannot be achieved with just a strict regulatory compliance approach. 
While Basel II serves as a powerful catalyst to reposition the role of, and the attention to, risk 
management in banking institutions, significant efforts need to be directed at strengthening 
the financial structure, corporate governance, risk management and data capabilities within 
the banking institutions. The approach adopted by Bank Negara Malaysia has been for these 
efforts to complement and reinforce the positive outcomes of Basel II. These are important 
preconditions for, and not automatic outcomes from the adoption of Basel II. 
In the wake of the sub-prime mortgage crisis in the United States, several aspects of Basel II 
have  attracted  attention.  Among  them  has  been  the  use  of  ratings  in  the  regulatory 
framework and whether this has unintentionally discouraged investors from performing their 
own due diligence. The underestimation of risk for structured credit securitisations has now 
come  under  greater  scrutiny.  There  has  also  been  increased  debate  over  the  cyclicality 
impact  of  Basel  II.  The  effectiveness  of  the  supervisory  review  process  in  ensuring  that 
additional capital buffers are provided by banks for risks not fully captured under Pillar 1 of 
the framework has also been the subject of this review by authorities. 
The relative importance of these issues will be different for different countries, depending on 
the stage of development of the financial markets and the banking system, as well as the 
supervisory  structure  that  is  in  place.  Among  Asia  Pacific  countries,  experiences  with  the 
implementation of Basel II have been varied. 
For  emerging  economies,  Basel  II  has  arguably  a  more  far  reaching  impact.  This  is  on 
account of several factors. Firstly, many emerging economies continue to depend heavily on 
the banking system to finance economic activity. With a few exceptions, commercial banks 
are the main providers of credit in most emerging economies, accounting for an average of 
90%  of  total  credit.  This  produces  a  higher  correlation  to  the  economic  sectors  where  the 
implications  on  the  banking  system  could  result  in  significant  disruptions  to  credit  supply 
which could in turn affect economic activity. 
Secondly, the more advanced approaches of Basel II are calibrated to the environment of the 
G10  countries,  with  significant  acceleration  of  capital  charges  as  the  probability  of  default 
ratings  deteriorate.  To  the  extent  that  this  inappropriately  amplifies  economic  cycles  by 
inducing the systemic misperception of risk in emerging economies, this can exacerbate a 
credit crunch during periods of weak economic performance. 
2 
 BIS Review 99/2008
Thirdly,  the  anticipation  of  lower  regulatory  capital  requirements  and  hence,  a  competitive 
cost advantage, provides a strong incentive for banks especially in the developed countries 
to move towards the more advanced approach under Basel II. This could result in an uneven 
competition between the domestic and international foreign banks operating in the domestic 
financial  system.  Capability  gaps  in  the  adoption  of  the  more  onerous  approaches  under 
Basel II may place domestic banks at a competitive disadvantage in such countries. 
These considerations have meant that for many emerging economies, the translation of the 
Basel II framework to suit the local environment needs to be approached carefully. The Basel 
II  text  provides  a  range  of  options which  can  be  considered  by  national  supervisors  to  re-
balance the calibration of Basel II to reflect the local environment. It is also important that 
Basel  II  is  implemented  as  part,  and  not  in  isolation  of,  the  overall  financial  sector 
development programme. This has been Malaysia's approach. 
The highly fragmented banking system and relatively weak risk management systems within 
the  domestic  financial  institutions  which  prevailed  in  Malaysia  prior  to  the  financial 
restructuring  and  reforms  that  were  undertaken  from  2001  would  have  rendered  the 
implementation  of  Basel  II  extremely  difficult,  if  not  impossible  to  achieve  without  risking 
disruptions  to  the  intermediation  process.  The  financial  reforms  that  were  undertaken  to 
strengthen the underpinnings of our banking system are therefore instrumental in facilitating 
the  smooth  transition  to  the  adoption  of  Basel  II  in  Malaysia  without  adverse  market 
outcomes. 
In the more recent period, the Asian region as a whole has made significant strides towards 
strengthening  market  structures  and  institutional  arrangements  for  financial  stability.  Two 
developments  deserve  mention,  in  view  of  their  important  contributions  towards  mitigating 
some of the concerns surrounding Basel II for emerging economies. 
First,  in  the  decade  following  the  Asian  crisis,  the  emerging  economies  in  Asia  have 
extensively  developed  their  bond  and  equity  markets.  Measured  in  terms  of  market 
capitalisation,  East  Asia's  equity  markets  have  more  than  trebled  since  1997.  The  bond 
markets in the East Asian region have also seen significant growth during this period with 
significantly  improved  liquidity  conditions  in  these  markets.  There  is  therefore  now  a  more 
diversified structure in the financial system. 
Second, within Asia, the regional cooperative framework has been substantially strengthened 
to  support  financial  sector  development,  surveillance,  crisis  management  and  capacity 
building. An important achievement within the EMEAP process has been the establishment 
of  a  Monetary  and  Financial  Stability  Committee,  or  MFSC,  which  is  charged  with  the 
mandate  of  facilitating  greater  regional  collaboration  in  preserving  monetary  and  financial 
stability as well as in the development of regional financial markets. Since its establishment, 
the  MFSC  has  exceeded  expectations  in  terms  of  the  commitment  towards  supporting 
regional  monetary  and  financial  surveillance,  and  in  advancing  efforts  to  institutionalize 
cross-border crisis management and resolution arrangements. 
These developments will contribute towards reducing any procyclical impact of Basel II and 
facilitating over time, refinements to the risk parameters that are more appropriate to local 
and regional experiences. The continuation of such efforts at the national and regional levels 
will reduce the prospects for potential disruptions in the regional financial systems. 
One  of  the  most  important  consequences  of  Basel  II  lies  in  the  effect  that  it  will  have  in 
sharpening the focus on corporate governance in banking institutions. While there has been 
considerable attention focused on the quantitative implications and operational aspects of the 
Basel  II  framework,  there  has  been  less  attention  given  to  the  corporate  governance 
dimensions associated with its implementation. 
The  expectations  on  the  board  and  senior  management  oversight  are  significantly  higher 
under  Basel  II.  The  board  of  directors  is  expected  to  ensure  that  a  sufficiently  strong  risk 
control framework is in place before banks can adopt the more advanced approach. Boards 
BIS Review 99/2008 
 3
and  senior  management  must  have  a  sound  understanding  of  the  risk  profile  of  the 
respective banking institution and ensure that it holds sufficient capital that is commensurate 
with that profile. This is reinforced by the greater attention being accorded by supervisors to 
the  risk  management  control  functions  within  the  banking  institutions  and  how  they  are 
effectively  governed.  Improved  market  disclosures  under  the  third  pillar  of  the  framework 
further subjects the banking institutions governance practices to closer market scrutiny. 
These developments have challenged governance practices that may have been tolerated in 
the past, but which would be grossly inadequate to provide the oversight that is demanded in 
today's  far  more  complex  business  environment.  Such  practices  have  included  vague 
reporting of risks to the board, boards that are disengaged, and boards that have no or little 
expertise in risk and financial matters. Boards and supervisors need to confront these issues 
with  firm  resolve.  This  will  entail  the  more  rigorous  scrutiny  of  board  members  and  senior 
management, both prior to their appointments and on an ongoing basis. Boards need to also 
assert themselves more actively in advocating and driving risk reforms, and demanding the 
appropriate  level  and  amount  of  information  from  management  that  would  enable  the 
oversight responsibility to be discharged effectively. 
In many respects, Basel II remains a work in progress. As we continue to ponder its broad 
and complex dimensions, platforms such as this for open and active dialogue between public 
and private interest groups are important to provide further insights on the many issues that 
will provide the direction forward for the wider and effective global implementation of Basel II. 
On that note, I wish you all productive and successful discussions. Thank you. 
4 
 BIS Review 99/2008
