Ben S Bernanke: Remarks on the economic outlook 
Speech  by  Mr  Ben  S  Bernanke,  Chairman  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  US  Federal 
Reserve System, at the International Monetary Conference, Barcelona, Spain (via satellite), 
3 June 2008. 
 As you know, financial markets in the United States and in a number of other industrialized 
countries  have  been  under  considerable  strain  since  late  last  summer.  Financial  market 
conditions have in turn affected economic prospects, most notably by affecting the cost and 
availability of new credit.  
Much  discussion  of  the  turmoil  has  focused  on  problems  that  have  arisen  with  respect  to 
specific financial markets and financial instruments. Understanding these institutional details 
is,  of  course,  essential  to  the  task  of  restoring  more  normal  functioning  to  the  financial 
system. Stepping back, however, one can see – at least in retrospect – that the turmoil has 
been  some  time  in  the  making  and  reflects  the  combined  influence  of  several  powerful, 
longer-term developments.  
Today,  I  will  briefly  discuss  some  longer-term  factors  that  underlie  recent  developments; 
trace  how  these  factors,  individually  and  in  combination,  have  affected  both  the  financial 
markets  and  the  economy;  and  describe  how  the  Federal  Reserve  has  responded  to  the 
challenges we face. 
The sources of the financial turmoil: a longer-term perspective 
Although  the  severity  of  the  financial  stresses  became  apparent  only  in  August,  several 
longer-term developments served as prologue for the recent turmoil and helped bring us to 
the current situation. 
The first of these was the U.S. housing boom, which began in the mid-1990s and picked up 
steam around 2000. Between 1996 and 2005, house prices nationwide increased about 90 
percent. During the years from 2000 to 2005 alone, house prices increased by roughly 60 
percent  –  far  outstripping  the  increases  in  incomes  and  general  prices  –  and  single-family 
home construction increased by about 40 percent. But, as you know, starting in 2006, the 
boom turned to bust. Over the past two years, building activity has fallen by more than half 
and now is well below where it was in 2000. House prices have shown significant declines in 
many areas of the country. 
A  second  critical  development  was  an  even  broader  credit  boom,  in  which  lenders  and 
investors aggressively sought out new opportunities to take credit risk even as market risk 
premiums  contracted.  Aspects  of  the  credit  boom  included  rapid  growth  in  the  volumes  of 
private  equity  deals  and  leveraged  lending  and  the  increased  use  of  complex  and  often 
opaque  investment  vehicles,  including  structured  credit  products.  The  explosive  growth  of 
subprime mortgage lending in recent years was yet another facet of the broader credit boom. 
Expanding access to homeownership is an important social goal, and responsible subprime 
lending  is  beneficial  for  both  borrowers  and  lenders.  But,  clearly,  much  of  the  subprime 
lending  that  took  place  during  the  latter  stages  of  the  credit  boom  in  2005  and  2006  was 
done very poorly. 
A third longer-term factor contributing to recent financial and economic developments is the 
unprecedented  growth  in  developing  and  emerging  market  economies.  From  the  U.S. 
perspective, this growth has been a double-edged sword. On the one hand, low-cost imports 
from emerging markets for many years increased U.S. living standards and made the Fed's 
job  of  managing  inflation  easier.  Moreover,  currently,  the  demand  for  U.S.  exports  arising 
from strong global growth has been an important offset to the factors restraining domestic 
BIS Review 69/2008 
 1
to 
the 
they 
invested 
the  recipient  countries,  provided 
demand,  including  housing  and  tight  credit.  On  the  other  hand,  the  rapid  growth  in  the 
emerging markets and the associated sharp rise in their demand for raw materials have been 
– together with a variety of constraints on supply – a major cause of the escalation in the 
relative prices of oil and other commodities, which has placed intense economic pressure on 
many U.S. households and businesses.  
In the financial sphere, the three longer-term developments I have identified are linked by the 
fact  that  a  substantial  increase  in  the  net  supply  of  saving  in  emerging  market  economies 
contributed to both the U.S. housing boom and the broader credit boom.1 The sources of this 
increase in net saving included rapid growth in high-saving East Asian countries and, outside 
of  China,  reduced  investment  rates  in  that  region;  large  buildups  in  foreign  exchange 
reserves  in  a  number  of  emerging  markets;  and  the  enormous  increases  in  the  revenues 
received by exporters of oil and other commodities. The pressure of these net savings flows 
led to lower long-term real interest rates around the world, stimulated asset prices (including 
house  prices),  and  pushed  current  accounts  toward  deficit  in  the  industrial  countries  – 
notably the United States – that received these flows.  
To be sure, the large inflows of savings and low global interest rates presented a valuable 
opportunity 
inflows  wisely. 
Unfortunately,  this  did  not  always  occur,  as  an  increased  appetite  for  risk-taking  –  a 
"reaching for yield" – stimulated some financial innovations and lending practices that proved 
imprudent or otherwise questionable. Regulators identified some of these issues in real time; 
for  example,  federal  banking  regulators  issued  new  guidance  on  nontraditional  mortgage 
lending and on commercial real estate lending. The Federal Reserve, in cooperation with the 
other supervisors, encouraged improvements in market infrastructure and conducted a series 
of  targeted  reviews  designed  to  improve  risk-management  practice  with  respect  to 
derivatives,  exposures  to  hedge  funds,  leveraged  lending,  and  other  areas.  And,  in 
preparation  for  the  new  Basel  II  capital  regulations,  supervisors  required  more-demanding 
standards for the measurement and management of risk. Despite these efforts, however, the 
risk-management systems of many financial institutions proved inadequate in the face of a 
major housing downturn and substantial disruptions in market liquidity.  
The current economic and financial situation reflects, in significant part, the unwinding of two 
of  these  longer-term  developments  –  the  housing  boom  and  the  credit  boom  –  and  the 
continuation of the pressure of global demand on commodity prices. 
The  housing  boom  came  to  an  end  because  rising  prices  made  housing  increasingly 
unaffordable. The end of rapid house price increases in turn undermined a basic premise of 
many  adjustable-rate  subprime  loans  –  that  home  price  appreciation  alone  would  always 
generate enough equity to permit the borrower to refinance and thereby avoid ever having to 
pay the fully-indexed interest rate. When that premise was shown to be false and defaults on 
subprime  mortgages  rose  sharply,  investors  quickly  backpedaled  from  mortgage-related 
securities. The reduced availability of mortgage credit caused housing to weaken further. 
The losses from subprime mortgages have been significant in themselves, but their greater 
impact was to trigger the end of the broader credit boom. Notably, as subprime losses forced 
the  credit  rating  agencies  to  downgrade  what  had  been  highly  rated  mortgage-backed 
securities,  investors  also  came  to doubt  the  reliability  of  ratings  that had  been  awarded  to 
other  highly  complex  securities.  As  a  result,  investors  became  much  more  cautious  and 
reversed  their  aggressive  risk-taking  of  the  credit  boom  period.  The  resulting  pullback 
affected  a  much  broader  range  of  securities,  including  leveraged  and  syndicated  loans, 
asset-backed  commercial  paper,  commercial  mortgage-backed  securities,  and  a  variety  of 
structured  credit  products.  Large  financial  institutions,  especially  in  the  United  States  and 
Europe, were particularly affected by these events, having reported a total of roughly $300 
                                                 
1   Bernanke (2005). 
2 
 BIS Review 69/2008
billion in writedowns and credit losses. These institutions have also been forced to bring onto 
their  balance  sheets  the  assets  of  sponsored  investment  vehicles  that  can  no  longer  be 
financed on a standalone basis. Fortunately, most financial institutions entered this episode 
with strong capital positions, and many have raised substantial amounts of new capital. Still, 
balance sheet pressures and the relatively high cost of new bank capital have reduced the 
willingness  and  ability  of  these  institutions  to  make  markets  and  extend  new  credit. 
Prospectively, financial conditions seem likely to be closely tied to both domestic and global 
economic developments, including the course of the prices of oil and other commodities. 
This brief overview makes clear that both global and domestic factors have played important 
roles  in  recent  developments  in  the  United  States.  The  housing  and  credit  booms  were 
driven to some extent by global savings flows, but they also reflected domestic factors, such 
as  weaknesses  in  risk  measurement  and  management  and  lax  standards  in  subprime 
lending.  Higher  commodity  prices  are  for  the  most  part  a  global  phenomenon,  but  U.S. 
dependence on oil imports makes this country quite vulnerable on that score. 
The outlook 
With this broader perspective as background, I turn now to a brief discussion of the current 
situation and outlook. Broadly speaking, the functioning of financial markets has improved of 
late, but conditions remain strained and some key funding and securitization markets have 
shown only tentative signs of recovery. Some borrowers, such as highly-rated corporations, 
retain good access to credit, but credit conditions generally remain restrictive in areas related 
to residential or commercial real estate. 
Residential  construction  continues  to  contract,  and  the  overhang  of  unsold  new  homes 
remains  large,  although  it  has  declined  some  in  absolute  terms.  Consumer  spending  has 
thus  far  held  up  a  bit  better  than  expected,  but  households  continue  to  face  significant 
headwinds,  including  falling  house  prices,  a  softer  job  market,  tighter  credit,  and  higher 
energy prices, and consumer sentiment has declined sharply since the fall. Businesses are 
also  facing  challenges,  including  rapidly  escalating  costs  of  raw  materials  and  weaker 
domestic demand. However, the strength of foreign demand for U.S. goods and services has 
offset, to some extent, the slowing of domestic sales. 
Overall economic growth was quite slow but apparently positive in both the fourth quarter of 
2007 and the first quarter of this year. Activity during the current quarter is also likely to be 
relatively weak. We may see somewhat better economic conditions during the second half of 
2008,  reflecting  the  effects  of  monetary  and  fiscal  stimulus,  reduced  drag  from  residential 
construction,  further  progress  in  the  repair  of  financial  and  credit  markets,  and  still  solid 
demand  from  abroad.  This  baseline  forecast  is  consistent  with  our  recently  released 
projections,  which  also  see  growth  picking  up  further  in  2009.  However,  until  the  housing 
market, and particularly house prices, shows clearer signs of stabilization, growth risks will 
remain  to  the  downside.  Recent  increases  in  oil  prices  pose  additional  downside  risks  to 
growth. 
Inflation  has  remained  high,  largely  reflecting  continued  sharp  increases  in  the  prices  of 
globally  traded  commodities.  Thus  far,  the  pass-through  of  high  raw  materials  costs  to 
domestic labor costs and the prices of most other products has been limited, in part because 
of softening domestic demand. However, the continuation of this pattern is not guaranteed 
and will bear close attention. Futures markets continue to predict – albeit with a great range 
of  uncertainty  –  that  commodity  prices  will  level  out,  a  forecast  consistent  with  our 
expectation of some overall slowing in the global economy and thus in the demand for raw 
materials. A rough stabilization of commodity prices, even at high levels, would result in a 
relatively  rapid  moderation  of  inflation,  consistent  with  the  projections  of  Federal  Reserve 
governors and Reserve Bank presidents for 2009 and 2010. Unfortunately, the prices of a 
number  of  commodities,  most  notably  oil,  have  continued  upward  recently,  even  as 
expectations  of  future  policy  rates  and  the  foreign  exchange  value  of  the  dollar  have 
BIS Review 69/2008 
 3
remained generally stable in the past few months. The possibility that commodity prices will 
continue to rise is an important risk to the inflation forecast. Another significant upside risk to 
inflation  is  that  high  headline  inflation,  if  sustained,  might  lead  the  public  to  expect  higher 
long-term inflation rates, an expectation that could ultimately become self-confirming. 
The Federal Reserve's policy response 
The  Federal  Reserve's  mandate  is  to  foster  maximum  sustainable  employment  and  price 
stability.  To  achieve  these  goals,  we  must  also  support  the  return  of  financial  markets  to 
more normal functioning. 
The Federal Reserve is pursuing its objectives through several means. First, we have eased 
monetary policy substantially and proactively to address the sharp deterioration in financial 
conditions  and  to  forestall  some  of  the  potential  adverse  effects  on  the  broader  economy. 
Our  decisive  policy  actions  were  premised  on  the  view  that  a  more  gradual  reduction  in 
short-term  rates  could  well  have  failed  to  contain  the  financial  and  economic  problems 
confronting us. For now, policy seems well positioned to promote moderate growth and price 
stability  over  time.  We  will,  of  course,  be  watching  the  evolving  situation  closely  and  are 
prepared to act as needed to meet our dual mandate.  
In  collaboration  with  our  colleagues  at  the  Treasury,  we  continue  to  carefully  monitor 
developments  in  foreign  exchange  markets.  The  challenges  that  our  economy  has  faced 
over the past year or so have generated some downward pressures on the foreign exchange 
value  of  the  dollar,  which  have  contributed  to  the  unwelcome  rise  in  import  prices  and 
consumer price inflation. We are attentive to the implications of changes in the value of the 
dollar  for  inflation  and  inflation  expectations  and  will  continue  to  formulate  policy  to  guard 
against risks to both parts of our dual mandate, including the risk of an erosion in longer-term 
inflation  expectations.  Over  time,  the  Federal  Reserve's  commitment  to  both  price  stability 
and maximum sustainable employment and the underlying strengths of the U.S. economy – 
including  flexible  markets  and  robust  innovation  and  productivity  –  will  be  key  factors 
ensuring that the dollar remains a strong and stable currency. 
Second, to improve market liquidity and functioning, we have taken a range of measures to 
ensure  that  financial  institutions  have  adequate  access  to  central  bank  liquidity.2  The 
resulting reductions in funding pressures, together with the increased confidence created by 
the  assurance  that  backstop  liquidity  is  available  to  eligible  institutions,  should  help  to 
promote  an  orderly  resolution  of  current  market  dislocations.  In  recognition  of  the  global 
nature  of  financial  markets,  we  have  also  cooperated  with  other  major  central  banks  to 
ensure that central bank liquidity is deployed where needed.  
Finally,  we  are  taking  action  in  our  role  as  regulators.  We  have  worked  with  lenders  and 
servicers to encourage appropriate modifications of distressed mortgage loans, and we have 
proposed new rules to improve disclosure and to ban unfair or deceptive acts and practices 
in mortgage lending. We are also collaborating with other regulators, both domestically and 
abroad, to put in place changes that will help make the financial system less vulnerable in the 
future. Among the changes we expect to see are strengthening of capital and liquidity rules, 
greater  disclosure  requirements,  an  increased  emphasis  on  the  measurement  and 
management of firmwide risks, and further steps to increase the transparency and resilience 
of the financial infrastructure. Our goal is to emerge from this difficult period with a financial 
system that will be more stable without being less innovative, with a more effective balance 
between market discipline and regulation.  
                                                 
2   Bernanke (2008). 
4 
 BIS Review 69/2008
References 
Bernanke,  Ben  S.  (2005).  "The  Global  Saving  Glut  and  the  U.S.  Current  Account  Deficit," 
speech delivered at the Homer Jones Lecture, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, St. Louis, 
Mo., April 14. 
Bernanke, Ben S. (2008). "Liquidity Provision by the Federal Reserve," speech delivered at 
the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Atlanta  Financial  Markets  Conference,  Sea  Island,  Ga.,  May 
13. 
BIS Review 69/2008 
 5
