Irma Rosenberg: The monetary policy decision-making process 
Speech  by  Ms  Irma  Rosenberg,  First  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Sveriges  Riksbank,  at 
Riksbanken, Stockholm, 13 June 2008. 
 The  Riksbank  is  considered  to  be  one  of  the  most  open  central  banks  in  the  world.1 
Openness  has  also  been  one  of  the  basic  principles  in  shaping  our  activities.  If  an 
independent central bank is to be perceived as credible it must be possible for outsiders to 
understand its decisions and to assess its activities. We have therefore tried to be as open 
and clear as possible about what we do and why we do it. This increases the credibility of our 
monetary policy and makes it easier to anchor inflation expectations around the target. Part 
of this openness entails clearly describing how our analyses are achieved and the processes 
for making interest rate decisions. 
I believe that most people are familiar with the way we conduct monetary policy in general. 
We look ahead and base our monetary policy on forecasts. We have held many speeches on 
this subject. But how do we go about producing a forecast that leads to a decision on the 
interest rate? This is probably not as well-known and I intend to talk about it today. In recent 
years we have changed our methods of working in a number of fields. For example, since the 
beginning of 2007 we report very clearly the future interest rate path we expect to see. Our 
forecasts of inflation and other components, like the interest rate decisions, are based on a 
forecast of the future repo rate path. These forecasts change as new information is received, 
but  we  report  our  current  views  of  the  future  every  time  we  publish  a  monetary  policy 
decision. 
The Riksbank is governed by an Executive Board 
The  year  1999  is  a  natural  starting  point  when  describing  the  process  for  monetary  policy 
decision-making.  This  was  when  the  price  stability  target  was  prescribed  by  law  and  the 
Riksbank  was  given  a  more  independent  position  with  regard  to  our  principal,  Sveriges 
Riksdag (the Swedish parliament). This entailed a major change with regard to our decision-
making and the way we work in relation to the General Council of the Riksbank.  
As you already know, the work at the Riksbank has been headed since 1999 by an Executive 
Board consisting of six members, one of whom is Governor of the Riksbank and Chairman of 
the  Executive  Board.  The  members  are  appointed  for  a  period  of  six  years  at  a  time. 
Normally  the  periods  of  office  for  the  different members  overlap  to  create  continuity  in  the 
work of the Bank. Previously it was the Governing Council of the Riksbank, whose members 
are appointed by the Riksdag, who governed the Bank together with the Governor. Today the 
General  Council  has  more  of  a  controller  function.  They  appoint  the  members  of  the 
Executive Board, but do not have any influence over, for instance, the decisions on the repo 
rate. It is the Executive Board which independently makes the decisions. 
The Executive Board is what is usually known as an individualistic committee.2 This means 
that each member has an individual responsibility. Interest rate decisions are made by voting 
and the members can then publicly express their views. The Bank of England also has this 
type  of  committee.  In  this,  we  differ  from  a  number  of  other  central  banks,  although  most 
                                                 
1   See, for instance, Dincer and Eichengreen (2007). 
2   For a review of different monetary policy decision-making models, see Blinder and Wyplosz (2004). 
BIS Review 77/2008 
 1
have a committee that makes decisions on the interest rate.3 One exception is, for instance, 
New Zealand, where the central bank governor is alone in making the decisions.  
Many  other  central  banks  instead  have  a  collegial  committee.  In  this  case  the  members 
reach  a  decision  which  they  then  all  publicly  support.  Any  differences  of  opinion  are  kept 
within the group; outwardly they speak with one voice. The way they reach a decision varies. 
In what is known as a genuinely collegial committee the decision is preceded by an internal 
discussion where each member puts forward his or her views. The ECB is an example of this 
type  of  committee.  In  an  autocratically  collegial  committee,  on  the  other  hand,  it  is  the 
chairman  who  more  or  less  dictates  the  group's  “consensus”.  Some  researchers  have 
considered the Federal Reserve’s FOMC committee under the leadership of Alan Greenspan 
to be an example of such a committee.4 The changes made recently indicate that the FOMC 
is  more  of  an  individualistic  committee.  The  Riksbank  is  one  of  the  central  banks  with  the 
most pronounced individual responsibility. 
Major changes in the way the material for the decision is produced  
During the years I have worked at the Riksbank there have been major changes in the work 
on producing the material for monetary policy decision-making.  
Six years ago our forecasts were based on the assumption that the repo rate would be held 
unchanged,  regardless  of  whether  or  not  this  was  a  realistic  assumption.  The  forecasts 
extended  two  years  ahead,  compared  with  the  current  three  years.  The  analysis  was  to  a 
great extent based on assessments and discussions. Formal models were used but did not 
play  the  same  central  role  as  they  do  today.  Although  this  functioned  fairly  well,  it  also 
involved limitations. For example, it is difficult to see how alternative scenarios – something 
that is being given greater scope in our analysis – could be used without a more coherent 
model. The fact that we are now using models more also makes it easier to explain how a 
forecast is made and to assess the forecasts. 
In recent years we have made some major changes that have had significance for the way 
we  organise  our  internal  forecasting  work.  The  main  change  being  that  we  now  base  our 
forecasts on our own view of the future repo rate path and we give this forecast relatively 
large  significance  when  communicating  our  monetary  policy.  We  have  also  worked 
extensively on bringing in new, larger models, such as general equilibrium models, into the 
forecasting work.  
The forecasts are the result of an interplay between models and assessments 
Our  toolbox  for  making  forecasts  consists  of  assessments,  theories,  empirical  studies  and 
models. These tools complement one another and have different roles in the work. They are 
all important and necessary to make as good forecasts as possible.  
As the economy is so extremely complex, we use various macroeconomic models to help us 
piece  together  a  coherent  picture  of  the  economy.  These  models  are  based  on  modern 
economic  theory,  empirical  studies  and  practical  experience  of  different  correlations  in  the 
economy. This makes it easier for us to make a consistent assessment of how the different 
parts of the economy will develop. If one merely studies individual correlations one misses 
the interdependence existing between the different parts and sectors of the economy. There 
is a considerable risk that the different parts of the analysis will not hold together.  
                                                 
3   Pollard (2004) shows that 79 out of 88 central banks have committees which make interest rate decisions. 
4   See Blinder and Wyplosz (2004). FOMC stands for Federal Open Market Committee. 
2 
 BIS Review 77/2008
But  models  are  merely  simplifications  of  the  reality.  They  must  be  supplemented  with 
analyses and assessments by experts in different fields. The experts have important insights 
into  the  real  situation  that  the  models  are  unable  to  capture.  Forecasts  based  on  models 
provide a good starting point and help to structure the discussions. The experts then adjust 
the  models’  forecasts  on  the  basis  of  their  specific  knowledge  and  assessments.  The 
assessments  become  particularly  important  when  unusual  events  and  structural  changes 
occur in the economy. Such models, which are merely based on historical correlations, may 
have difficulty dealing with these. 
Major advances in academic research regarding macro models 
In recent years models have come to play an increasingly important role in the forecasting 
work. This is also the case for many other central banks. The background is that methods 
have  developed  very  quickly  with  regard  to  the  empirical  properties  and  forecasting 
performance of large structural macro models. There have also been major advances with 
regard to time series models, that is, models focusing on regularities in data and based to a 
lesser  extent  on  economic  theory.5  Increasingly  powerful  computers  have  played  an 
important  role  in  this  context.  They  enable  us  to  make  advanced  and  time-consuming 
calculations.6  
Structural macro models have been based to a greater extent than before on micro based 
theory of household and corporate behaviour. For example it is assumed in the models that 
there are various market imperfections combined with nominal and real rigidities. The agents 
in the model also have rational expectations, that is, they use the information available in the 
best possible way when they make their decisions. This type of model is usually referred to in 
the  research  literature  under  the  generic  term  of  New  Keynesian  DSGE  models.7  The 
methods  have  been  developed  in  close  cooperation  between  academic  researchers  and 
economists at central banks who have exchanged ideas and experiences. 
The Riksbank has developed its own macro model for the Swedish economy  
At the Riksbank we have developed a dynamic macro model for the Swedish economy which 
is  known  as  Ramses.8  This  is  a  so-called  general  equilibrium  model  and  belongs  to  the 
group of New Keynesian DSGE models. General here means that it tries to explain the whole 
economy and not merely a particular section of it, such as private consumption or the labour 
market.  The  fact  that  it  is  an  equilibrium  model  means  that  it  assumes  that  market 
mechanisms create a balance between supply and demand in the different markets of the 
economy.  
Ramses  is  currently  used  to  make  forecasts,  to  interpret  economic  developments  and  to 
calculate  the  effects  of  monetary  policy,  for  example.  Some  areas  are  not  yet  very  well 
developed  in  Ramses.  This  includes,  for  example,  fiscal  policy  and  the  credit  market.  We 
therefore  use  partial  models  that  focus  on  certain  individual  variables  as  a  complement  to 
Ramses.  We  also  use  so-called  Bayesian  VAR  models.  A  VAR  model  is  a  system  of 
equations, which can be used for instance to capture the average variation in macro data.9 In 
In academic research these models are usually called models of reduced form. 
                                                 
5  
6   For a review of the results from the models and their forecasting performance see Adolfson et al (2007a). 
7   DSGE stands for Dynamic Stochastic General Equilibrium Models. 
8   RAMSES stands for the Riksbank’s Aggregated Macro model for Studies of the Economy in Sweden. For a 
more detailed description see Adolfson et al (2007b). 
9   VAR stands for vector autoregressive model. 
BIS Review 77/2008 
 3
a Bayesian VAR model some form of subjective information prior to estimation is used, for 
instance how high the long-term sustainable growth rate is.  
In general, the further ahead we look, the more importance we give to economic theory and 
the assumptions of long-term equilibrium in Ramses and the Bayesian VAR models. To gain 
an impression of the current situation in the Swedish economy we instead use different time 
series models and indicator models. These are used to make forecasts 1-2 quarters ahead. 
The forecasts are then used as starting values in the large macro models. Of course there 
are also substantial elements of assessments of what comprises a probable development for 
the economy throughout the entire process.  
Material for our assessments and forecasts comes from many sources 
On the whole, we use official statistics and the results of surveys from authorities such as 
Statistics Sweden and the National Institute of Economic Research and their counterparts in 
other  countries.  We  also  closely  follow  the  assessments  made  by  other  forecasters  in 
Sweden and abroad and regularly evaluate our own forecasting performance. We also bring 
back new impressions from the many international meetings we regularly attend. In addition, 
the Riksbank has begun to carry out its own company surveys. This involves our employees 
visiting  companies  around  the  country  and  hearing  their  views  on  the  economic  situation. 
This is a means of obtaining explanations of what we can see in the official statistics and of 
capturing tendencies before they appear in the statistics. 
The process begins with a discussion of the risks 
Before I go in greater detail into how we make forecasts, I would like to make some general 
observations. Firstly, making forecasts is a continuous process. Many of us at the Riksbank, 
both Executive Board members and employees in the different departments, closely monitor 
economic activity. The increased use of models makes it easier to some extent to update the 
forecasts when new information is received. But we only make a new, thorough and coherent 
assessment of what all the new information means for future monetary policy in connection 
with our monetary policy meetings, which are held six times a year.  
Another observation is that the Executive Board as a collective is now more involved in the 
forecasting process than it was a few years ago. This is largely because we have chosen to 
publish our forecast for the repo rate. I shall return to this shortly. 
A  third  observation  concerns  the  logic  of  the  process.  We  try  to  deal  with  that  which  is 
independent  of  our  own  monetary  policy  at  an  early  stage.  Sweden  is  a  small,  open 
economy, so the international forecasts can be settled without taking into account what may 
later  crystallise  into  a  well-balanced  Swedish  monetary  policy.  The  current  situation  in  the 
Swedish economy is also largely independent of what the Executive Board determines at the 
next meeting, in that it takes time before monetary policy has an effect on the economy and 
inflation.  
But  please  note  that  we  have  a  relatively  broad  definition  of  the  "current  situation”.  The 
National  Accounts  are  published  with  a  lag  of  almost  one  quarter.  They  are  our  most 
important source of statistics regarding the real economy. This means that we often do not 
know at the start what the outcome was for the economy during the previous quarter. This 
means  that  an  assessment  must  be  made  for  both  the  previous  quarter  and  the  current 
quarter.  We  use  various  indicators  that  are  published  on  a  monthly  basis  to  make  this 
assessment.  
So what is the actual process for making the forecasts? It usually starts around eight weeks 
before the monetary policy meeting (see Figure 1). This is the case when a Monetary Policy 
Report is going to be published; otherwise the process is slightly shorter. In total, around 30 
4 
 BIS Review 77/2008
economists are involved in some phase of the forecasting work, together with the Executive 
Board members.  
 The  material  for  the  monetary  policy  meetings  is  mainly  produced  in  the  Monetary  Policy 
Department in close cooperation with the Executive Board. The process begins with a risk 
meeting.  The  participants  at  this  meeting  are  the  Executive  Board,  employees  of  the 
Monetary Policy Department, some employees from other departments and some advisers to 
the  Executive  Board.  The  purpose  of  the  meeting  is  to  capture  at  an  early  stage  various 
types of risk and alternative sequences of events for the economy that we envisage in the 
future. The discussions at this meeting are relatively unbiased and take a broad perspective. 
It is at this meeting that the alternative scenarios begin to take shape, those that are later 
described in Chapter 2 of the Monetary Policy Report and that show how the economy might 
develop if particular events occur. The scenarios can be used as a kind of counter-example 
to  explain  why  the  Executive  Board  considers  that  the  main  scenario  is  the  one  that  at 
present gives the most well-balanced monetary policy. It can also illustrate different risks that 
an individual member wishes to illustrate or perhaps even a scenario that one person prefers 
instead of the main scenario.  
Our experience is that the work on the different scenarios makes it easier for us Executive 
Board members to agree on a main scenario that the majority of us can support. The results 
are then presented at something called the first large monetary policy group meeting. This 
meeting  is  held  in  roughly  the  third  week  of  the  eight-week  long  forecasting  process.  Of 
course,  we  also  have  the  capacity  to  produce  new  alternative  scenarios  later  on  in  the 
process if this is necessary. 
BIS Review 77/2008 
 5
Several different meetings lead up to the main scenario 
Prior to the first large monetary policy group meeting a number of meetings are held within 
the Monetary Policy Department. The Executive Board members are invited to intend these 
meetings,  but  they  are  mainly  intended  to  be  working  meetings  for  the  economists.  The 
discussions are often at a relatively detailed and technical level. It is at these meetings that 
the  forecasts  in  the  main  scenario  begin  to  take  shape.  The  main  scenario  is  the 
development we consider to be the most probable and which is described in Chapter 1 of the 
Monetary Policy Report. 
Important new statistics and new events in Sweden and abroad are presented and analysed 
at these meetings. There are also comparisons with how developments relate to the earlier 
assessments. The purpose is to gain an impression of the current status of the economy.  
For a small, open economy like Sweden the natural starting-point for the forecasting work is 
how  economic  activity  and  inflation  develop  in  the  world  around  us.  The  forecasting  work 
therefore begins with an international outlook meeting, which has the purpose of reaching a 
preliminary forecast for international events.  
Soon after this a financial market meeting is held. At this meeting there is a discussion of 
market  participants’  expectations  of  the  repo  rate  and  how  these  have  changed  since  the 
previous monetary policy meeting. These are then compared with the model forecasts for the 
repo rate and how these have changed. In addition, there are analyses and discussions of 
what has happened in the financial markets since the previous assessment. House prices, 
credits, stock market rates, exchange rates, money supply, international rates and so on are 
also discussed at this meeting. 
After this a current status meeting is held, where the focus is on the current situation in the 
Swedish economy. One particularly important aspect is to assess how much of the Swedish 
economy’s total resources in the form of labour and machinery are currently being used to a 
normal extent. Apart from new information on the current economic situation, there are also 
discussions of other new information that may be important for the forecasts in the slightly 
longer term. 
The first monetary policy group meeting with the Executive Board summarises new 
information 
After  this  it  is  time  for  the  first  large  monetary  policy  group  meeting.  The  entire  Executive 
Board and most of the members of the Monetary Policy Department take part in this meeting. 
In  addition,  a  number  of  advisers  to  the  Executive  Board  and  employees  of  the  Financial 
Stability  Department  usually  take  part.  A  summary  of  the  new  information  and  the  current 
status  of  the  economy  in  Sweden  and  abroad  is  presented  at  the  meeting.  We  also  run 
through the alternative scenarios ordered at the risk meeting a few weeks earlier and discuss 
whether they really capture the risks that we Executive Board members envisage. We also 
have  the  opportunity  at  this  meeting  to  request  more  information  on  various  issues 
considered important to the coming decision. The meeting usually takes around three hours. 
Monetary Policy Department establishes its forecasts 
At  approximately  the  same  time  as  the  meeting  with  the  Executive  Board,  the  Monetary 
Policy  Department  establishes  its  view  of  macroeconomic  developments  over  the  coming 
three years. In a preliminary stage it focuses on around ten key variables such as inflation, 
interest rates, GDP, number of hours worked, exchange rates and resource utilisation. The 
forecasts are produced on the basis of the exogenous conditions, the international forecasts, 
the  model  forecasts  for  the  Swedish  economy  conditional  on  the  current  situation  and 
assessments.  The  forecast  for  the  interest  rate  path  produced  by  the  Monetary  Policy 
Department is meant to reflect the Executive Board’s normal, historical behaviour. It is not 
6 
 BIS Review 77/2008
any  form  of  recommendation  from  the  Department.  All  of  this  is  discussed  at  a  macro 
forecasting meeting in the Monetary Policy Department. 
When  the  overall  macroeconomic  picture  has  been  established,  the  economists  chisel  out 
the  different  points  of  the  forecast  in  more  detail.  For  instance,  they  make  a  complete 
forecast of the components in the balance of resources and in the labour market. Finally they 
check the overall picture to ensure that the different parts of the forecast hold together and 
have been added up correctly. In total, the economists forecast around fifty variables. All of 
these are then compiled into an internal document that summarises the Department’s view of 
how  inflation  and  economic  activity  will  develop  in  the  future.  Another  document  is  also 
created, explaining how the forecasts are affected by model results and assessments. 
None of the Executive Board members takes part in this stage. The idea is that the product 
then  reported  to  us  will  as  far  as  possible  be  a  civil  servants’  product.  It  should  not  be 
influenced  by  the  ideas  of  the  different  Executive  Board  members.  The  civil  servants  thus 
hold a relatively strong position in the process. The Executive Board’s main contribution is 
not to get involved in all of the details of the forecasts – instead we shall highlight different 
perspectives  and  broaden  the  analysis.  The  fact  that  the  civil  servants  produce  their  own 
draft forecasts also contributes to strengthening and maintaining the internal competence. 
The Executive Board discusses the forecast at the second large meeting  
The  Monetary  Policy  Department  then  presents  its  forecast  for  the  main  scenario  to  the 
Executive  Board  at  the  second  large  monetary  policy  group  meeting.  This  takes  place  in 
week  five,  that  is,  approximately  three  weeks  prior  to  the  monetary  policy  meeting.  The 
organisation of this meeting differs from the first one. The meeting is divided into two parts. 
The first part of the meeting is open to the majority of the employees of the Monetary Policy 
Department.  The  civil  servants  then  report  their  outlook  on  the  economy  over  the  coming 
years. They present the results from any in-depth reports ordered by the Executive Board. 
There  is  now  an  opportunity  for  us Executive  Board  members  to  ask  questions  about  and 
express opinions on the forecasts to the different sector experts.  
The second part of the meeting is held in a smaller circle consisting of the Executive Board, 
senior staff at the Monetary Policy Department, a couple of advisers and representatives of 
the Communications Secretariat. It is now that the Executive Board discusses and expresses 
opinions on the main scenario on the basis of its assessments. This may sometimes mean 
giving different weight to alternative macroeconomic scenarios, that is, the risks. The main 
scenario  is  then  adjusted  in  accordance  with  the  views  of  the  Executive  Board.  In  this 
situation  the  forecasts,  including  the  interest  rate  forecasts,  may  be  regarded  as  a  well-
founded  guess  as  to  which  main  scenario  will  receive  the  support  of  a  majority  of  the 
Executive Board members a few weeks later. But there is still a possibility for the Executive 
board to make changes to the forecasts. The Executive Board can also ask the civil servants 
to provide further in-depth reports or follow up certain issues. These are then presented 1-2 
days later at a follow-up meeting with the Executive Board. 
Here I would like to take the opportunity to refer to the current round of forecasts. On Monday 
we  will  be  discussing  the  Swedish  macroeconomic  outlook  at  the  second  large  monetary 
policy group meeting. This means that we Executive Board members are entering an intense 
phase of the monetary policy process. The decision-making situation we have had during the 
spring  has  on  the  one  hand  concerned  rising  inflation  and  on  the  other  hand  signs  of  a 
slowdown in economic activity. In both respects the outcome for Sweden has been slightly 
worse than we had anticipated in the April Monetary Policy Update. The inflation figure for 
May  was  0.4  percentage  points  higher  than  we  had  forecast  in  April.  A  large  part  of  this 
deviation is due to energy prices having increased more than we had expected. At the same 
time,  growth  was  lower.  The  National  Accounts  for  the  first  quarter  of  this  year  show  that 
GDP growth was 2.2 per cent, which was 0.6 percentage points less than we had forecast in 
April. In principle, we are now facing the same type of problems in our deliberations, that is, 
BIS Review 77/2008 
 7
rising  inflationary  pressure  and  weaker  economic  activity.  The  way  we  Executive  Board 
members finally decide to balance these factors and all of the other new information we will 
receive is something we will return to at our monetary policy meeting on 2 July. We are six 
Board members and it is during the coming weeks that each person will finally form his or her 
opinion of how the economy will develop in the future and what monetary policy is required to 
attain  the  inflation  target  at  the  same  time  as  avoiding  excessive  fluctuations  in  the  real 
economy. 
Material reworked into a Monetary Policy Report 
After  the  second  large  monetary  policy  group  meeting  the  Monetary  Policy  Department 
continues its work and compiles the first draft of the Monetary Policy Report. The Department 
now has close contacts with the Executive Board. A formal Executive Board meeting is held 
the week after the second meeting with the focus being on the forecasts. The editorial work 
on the Monetary Policy Report continues and is regularly checked with the members of the 
Executive Board. A few days prior to the monetary policy meeting we have another formal 
Executive Board meeting where we go through the text of the report in detail and where the 
report is tabled. However, the forecast can be changed as late as during the monetary policy 
meeting.  It  is  not  until  the  monetary  policy  meeting  that  the  text  and  forecasts  of  the 
Monetary Policy Report are finally determined.  
The Executive Board makes interest rate decisions through a majority vote 
The Executive Board holds six monetary policy meetings a year. If necessary we can meet 
more  often.  The  number  of  meetings  is  not  stipulated  by  law,  but  is  determined  by  us 
Executive Board members.  
We make decisions on the current level of the repo rate at the monetary policy meetings. We 
also agree on which interest rate path is most appropriate at the present time. The decisions 
are made through a majority vote, where the Chairman of the Executive board has a casting 
vote, and they are announced in a press release.  
In  addition  to  the  Executive  Board  members,  a  number  of  employees  from  the  Monetary 
Policy Department and the Communications Secretariat take part in the meeting, as well as 
some  advisers  and  legal  advisers.  In  addition,  the  Chairman  and  Vice  Chairman  of  the 
General Council regularly take part in the meetings and thus obtain a good insight into the 
work  of  the Executive  Board.  They  both  have  the  right  to express  opinions,  but  not  to  put 
forward  proposals  or  take  part  in  any  decisions.  In  total,  around  20  persons  are  usually 
present at the meeting.  
What happens at a monetary policy meeting? There is an agenda which states the order in 
which we will discuss the different items. The meeting usually begins with a brief update on 
how  the  financial  markets  have  developed,  including  market  expectations  of  the  repo  rate 
with regard to our meeting, and other new, important information that has been received in 
the last few days. This is followed by a summary of the main elements in the Monetary Policy 
Report or the Monetary Policy Update.  
After these introductory words from the civil servants, I and my colleagues go on to discuss 
economic  developments  over  the coming three years. First we deal  with economic activity 
and inflation abroad and in Sweden. Each person puts forward his or her view of the current 
economic  situation  and  how  the  interest  rate  needs  to  be  adjusted  to  attain  the  inflation 
target. There is no predetermined order as to who will begin the discussion. The discussion 
is fairly free at this stage. During the course of the process each one of us has formed his or 
her own opinion, but of course the formal decision is not made until the actual meeting. The 
Chairman  of  the  Executive  Board  usually  concludes  by  summarising  the  discussions  held 
8 
 BIS Review 77/2008
and what proposals have been put forward regarding the current interest rate. After this we 
move on to the decision and vote. 
To give the general public insight into the decision-making process and to make it easier to 
assess our activities, we take minutes at the meeting which the bank then publishes. As of 
summer 2007, we also write the member’s names in the minutes. The minutes are published 
around two weeks after the monetary policy meeting. 
Interest rate decision announced on the day after the monetary policy meeting  
A press release is published the day after each monetary policy meeting. This contains the 
most  important  reasons  for  and  considerations  behind  the  majority  decision.  The  press 
release  also  contains  the  Riksbank’s  forecasts  for  economic  activity  and  inflation  and  a 
description  of  what  monetary  policy  is  currently  considered  to  be  well  balanced.  In 
connection with the publication of the interest rate decision we also hold a press conference 
where journalists are given the opportunity to ask questions.  
In  connection  with  three  of  the  monetary  policy  meetings  a  Monetary  Policy  Report  is 
published. On  the  other  occasions  a  shorter  Monetary  Policy  Update  is  published  instead. 
This contains a more limited number of forecasts for the central macro variables.  
That is to say, it is the majority view that is reflected in the press releases and the reports. 
Any  differences  of  opinion  can  be  seen  in  the  minutes  of  the  monetary  policy  meetings. 
There it is stated in detail how each of the members has argued and voted. But before the 
minutes are published it is the majority line that applies when we Executive Board members 
make speeches outside of the Riksbank. After that we members are each free to describe 
our personal differences of opinion regarding the interest rate decision.  
Constant assessment means that we are always prepared for change 
Let me round off. Today I have talked about the major changes in recent years in the way we 
produce material used as a base for our interest rate decisions. Some of these have come 
about because the methods of making forecasts in general have developed, something that 
also affects other central banks.  
Other  changes  have  been  shaped  by  the  specific  conditions  that  apply  in  Sweden.  The 
Riksbank’s  independent  position  makes  demands  on  us  to  be  open  and  clear,  what 
economists usually term transparency. The Riksbank’s decision to begin publishing its own 
forecasts  for  the  repo  rate  is  a  step  in  the  work  on  increasing  transparency  and  further 
improving our analysis.10  
The  new  assumption  for  the  repo  rate  has  led  to  the  Executive  Board  becoming  more 
involved in the forecasting process. We are constantly evaluating our forecasts to see how 
successful they are at capturing developments. This also means we are constantly striving to 
improve our ways of working. If we make any major changes that have significance for our 
forecasts we will of course let you know. 
Sources: 
Adolfson, M., M. Andersson, J. Lindé, M. Villani and A. Vredin, (2007a), “Modern Forecasting 
Models in Action: Improving Macroeconomic Analyses at Central Bank”, International Journal 
of Central Banking, vol. 3, December, pp.111-144.  
                                                 
10   For a more detailed justification of the decision to publish our own interest rate forecast, see Irma Rosenberg’s 
speech “Riksbank to introduce own path for the repo rate”, held on 17 January 2007. 
BIS Review 77/2008 
 9
Adolfson,  M.,  S.  Laséen,  J.  Lindé  and  M.  Villani,  (2007b),  ”RAMSES  –  a  new  general 
equilibrium model for monetary policy analysis”, Sveriges Riksbank Economic Review, no. 2.  
Blinder,  A.S.  and  C.  Wyplosz,  (2004),  “Central  Bank  Talk:  Committee  Structure  and 
Communication  Policy”,  Working  Paper,  prepared  for  the  ASSA  meeting,  Philadelphia, 
January 7-9, 2005.  
Dincer, N.N. and B. Eichengreen, (2007), “Central Bank Transparency: Where, Why and with 
What Effects?” National Institute of Economic Research Working Paper 13003.  
Rosenberg, I., “Riksbank to introduce own path for the repo rate”, 17 January 2007.  
Pollard,  P.,  (2004),  “Monetary  Policy-Making  around  the  World”,  Powerpoint  presentation, 
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis. 
10 
 BIS Review 77/2008
