Ranee Jayamaha: Impact of IT in the banking sector 
Speech by Dr Ranee Jayamaha, Deputy Governor of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka, at the 
Trans Asia, Colombo, 22 January 2008. 
 Introduction 
The  rapid  advancement  in  Information  and  Communication  Technology  (ICT)  has  had  a 
profound  impact  on  the  banking  industry  and  the  wider  financial  sector  over  the  last  two 
decades  and  it  has  now  become  a  tool  that  facilitates  banks’  organizational  structures, 
business strategies, customer services and other related functions. The recent “IT revolution” 
has  exerted  far-reaching  impacts  on  economies,  in  general,  and  the  financial  services 
industry, in particular. 
Within  the  financial  services  industry,  the  banking  sector  was  one  of  the  first  to  embrace 
rapid globalization and benefit significantly from IT development. The technological revolution 
in  banking  started  in  the  1950s,  with  the  installation  of  the  first  automated  bookkeeping 
machines at banks. This was well before the other industries became IT savvy. Automation 
in banking became widespread over the next few decades as bankers quickly realized that 
much  of  their  labor-intensive  information-handling  processes  could  be  automated  with  the 
use  of  computers.  The  first  Automated  Teller  Machine  (ATM)  is  reported  to  have  been 
introduced in the USA in 1968, and it was only a cash dispenser. The advent of ATMs helped 
both  to  improve  customer  convenience  and  reduce  costs,  as  before  ATMs,  withdrawing 
funds,  accounts  inquiries  and  transferring  funds  between  accounts  required  face-to-face 
interaction between bank staff and customers. 
Rapid advancement and gains to the banking sector 
1.  
1.1  Overall,  technological  innovation  has  brought  about  the  speedy  processing  and 
transmission of information, easy marketing of banking products, enhancement of customer 
access and awareness, wider networking and, regional and global links on an unprecedented 
scale.  IT  development  has  thus  changed  the  product  range,  product  development,  service 
channels  and  type  of  banking  services,  as  well  as  the  packaging  of  such  services,  with 
significant  efficiencies  not  only  in  the  banks,  but  also  the  ancillary  and  feeder  services  to 
banks.  The  financial  services  industry  has  thus  become  virtually  dependent  on  IT 
development. Most banks make visible efforts to keep up with new systems and processes. 
1.2 The development in ICT has enabled banks to provide more diversified and convenient 
financial services, even without adding physical branches. The present day ATMs are more 
sophisticated  machines  that  can  scan  the  customer  and  a  bank  teller,  accept  cash  or 
cheques, facilitate customer application for loans and allow for face-to-face discussion with a 
service representative via video. 
1.3  The  development  of  Internet  services,  which  is  an  extensive,  low-cost  and  convenient 
financial  network,  has  facilitated  banking  services  to  customers,  anywhere  and  anytime. 
Along with Internet and Web-based services, a need for changing core banking architecture 
has emerged. The introduction of new core banking systems by some banks and their links 
with the improved telecommunication network has enabled banking transactions to be done 
on-line, in contrast to the batch-processing mode used earlier. The integration of e-trading 
with internet banking and banks’ websites is also a notable feature. These IT advancements 
have enabled banks to gradually replace manual work by automated procedures with on-line 
real time processing. 
BIS Review 13/2008 
 1
Adoption of IT by banks in Sri Lanka 
2.  
2.1 The banking sector in Sri Lanka has undergone a rapid transformation with the adoption 
of  IT-based  banking  solutions.  The  widespread  usage  of  IT  in  Sri  Lanka’s  banking  sector 
began only in the late 1980s with the introduction of the first ATM by HSBC Bank in 1986. 
The  introduction  of  ATMs  and  automated  processes  has  reduced  the  cost  per  transaction 
significantly, as staff overhead costs have decreased. 
2.2  Initially,  the  banks  adopted  systems  developed  in-house  or  used  vendor  provided 
systems  on  a  decentralized  basis,  thus  transforming  manual  systems  to  automated 
processes. However, most of the core-banking systems provided by different vendors were 
ad hoc solutions and on piecemeal basis, i.e. separate modules and technology platforms for 
key operations such as deposit mobilization and lending, trade finance, treasury operations, 
and  more  recently  card  transactions.  Those  who  opted  to  implement  new  core-banking 
systems  together  with  other  sub  systems  and  integrations may  have  made  relatively  large 
investments  with  sustainable  gains  to  compensate  costs.  The  arrival  of  new  foreign  and 
private  banks  with  state-of-the-art  technology-based  services  pushed  other  banks  in  Sri 
Lanka to move towards the latest technologies so as to retain their customer base and meet 
competition.  The  increasing  competition  in  Sri  Lanka’s  banking  industry  has  widened  the 
scope of the IT infrastructure development to meet diversified demands made by numerous 
users.  Today,  customers  of  some  banks  enjoy  services  through  Internet  banking, 
Telebanking, Mobile telephone banking and Visa/Master Credit and Debit card facilities. The 
growing competition and expectations have also increased awareness amongst banks of the 
role and importance of technology in banking. 
Worldwide Outsourcing and Service Improvements 
3.  
3.1  An  even  more  recent  area  in  which  the  advancement  of  ICT  facilities  has  had  a 
significant impact is in the outsourcing of financial services. By 2010, it is projected that more 
than 20 per cent of the global financial services industry might shift offshore. In 2005, 70 per 
cent  of  world  financial  institutions  used  outsourcing  compared  to  26  per  cent  in  2003.  For 
developed countries, outsourcing financial services offer cost reductions, while IT companies 
in many developing countries, such as India, Sri Lanka, China, South Africa, the Philippines, 
Singapore and Malaysia got opportunities to use their IT skills and profit from it. Similarly, the 
outsourcing  of  business  processes,  such  as  call  centres,  general  processing  for  human 
resources, finance and accounting, back office services has also taken place. This trend has 
influenced  some  banks  in  Sri  Lanka  also  to  form  their  own  subsidiaries  to  handle  IT 
operations within the group. 
Central Bank initiatives 
4.  
4.1  In  the  interest  of  the  wider  financial  system  stability,  the  Central  Bank  of  Sri  Lanka  is 
responsible to ensure smooth, speedy and safe operations of the nation’s payment, clearing 
and settlement systems. Since 2003, the Central Bank has taken the lead to introduce an 
efficient and safe payment and settlements for both high value and time critical transactions 
by introducing the Real Time Gross Settlement (RTGS) system for interbank and third party 
customers.  The  RTGS  system  is  a  computer-based  fund  settlement  system,  which 
processes and settles each payment instruction individually and irrevocably on a real time 
basis,  using  funds  in  the  participants’  RTGS  Settlement  Accounts  or  Central  Bank  funds 
provided under an intraday liquidity facility. At present, the value of transactions settled in the 
RTGS  system  accounts  for  about  81  per  cent of  the  non-cash  high  value  payments  in  Sri 
Lanka.  The  majority  of  RTGS  transactions  are  on  account  of  the  inter-bank  call  money 
market,  the  government  securities  market,  open  market  operations,  the  Rupee  leg  of 
transactions in the foreign exchange market, urgent and time critical payments of customers 
and net obligations under the clearing system operated by LankaClear Ltd, a venture jointly 
2 
 BIS Review 13/2008
owned  by  the  Central  Bank  and  commercial  banks.  In  early  2004,  the  Central  Bank 
implemented the Scripless Securities Settlement (SSS) System for settlement of government 
debt  instruments  in  electronic  or  scripless  form  and  settlement  of  trades  of  such  scripless 
securities on a Delivery Vs. Payment (DvP) basis. This system has not only speeded up debt 
market transactions, but also reduced risks involved in paper-based government securities. 
4.2  The  Central  Bank  has  taken  the  lead  to  provide  and  facilitate  the  clearance  of  retail 
payments,  such  as  cheques,  bank  drafts  and  off-line  fund  transfers.  In  2002,  the  Central 
Bank authorized LankaClear (Pvt) Ltd to provide cheque clearing facilities as the agent of the 
Central Bank. In May 2006, the Central Bank and LankaClear jointly launched the Cheque 
Imaging  and  Truncation  (CIT)  system,  which  facilitates  electronic  presentment  of  cheque 
images, instead of the physical cheques being transported to Colombo for clearing. The CIT 
system  introduced  a  uniform  cheque  clearing  time  schedule  of  T+1  &  T+2  throughout  the 
country,  enabling  commercial  banks,  in  most  instances  to  credit  cheque  proceeds  to  their 
customers' accounts on the following or next business day. The island-wide CIT system has 
also  changed  the  technology-related  landscape  of  the  retail  segment  of  payments  and 
clearing. These state-of-the-art systems have facilitated the banking industry to perform three 
major  functions,  i.e.  access  to  and  management  of  liquidity;  provision  of  speedy  payment 
services; and mitigation of risks relating to payments and clearing. These new technologies 
have not only reduced the use of manual processes, but also brought in a number of benefits 
to the banking industry in finalizing their settlements on an on-line and real time basis. 
Business continuity plans and operational risk mitigation 
5.  
5.1 IT advancements call for operational risk mitigation by banks. More recently, the Central 
Bank has encouraged banks to draw up Business Continuity Plans (BCPs), focusing on their 
core  banking  solutions,  back-up  systems  and  Disaster  Recovery  Sites  (DRS).  The  Central 
Bank, being the owner and operator of the core payment systems, is keen to ensure that the 
banks have put in place adequate processes and systems to deal with any disruption to core 
banking and payment services. It took a considerable length of time to convince banks of the 
importance  of  having  BCPs,  back  up  systems  and  DRSs.  Evidently,  the  establishment  of 
these systems has given confidence to the customers that banks are in a position to deal 
with emergencies that could occur at any time. 
5.2 With the advancement of IT and customers becoming comfortable with new technology, 
they  demand  greater  convenience,  reduced  transactions  costs  and  higher  quality  banking 
products  and  services.  The  reliability  of  the  products  and  services  are  assured  to  a  large 
extent by the attention paid to BCPs by banks. While these have increased productivity in the 
banking sector, banks have had to spend more money for the acquisition and installation of 
new IT systems. 
5.3  Another  risk  faced  by  the  banking  industry  due  to  its  becoming  a  major  user  of 
technology, is the risk of failures to systems. The fact that “hackers” can get into banking IT 
systems, with or without inside help, demonstrates the magnitude of the problem. Specially, 
plastic card operations have been plagued with such risks. The increased IT knowledge of 
the general public and proliferation of cheap computer technology mean that weaknesses in 
card  payment  systems  are  exploited  fraudulently.  Banks  need  to  address  these  new 
operational risks through acceptable BCPs. 
Advanced technology, legal framework and regulatory compliance 
6.  
6.1  Market  discipline  is  extremely  important  to  establish  an  efficient  and  stable  banking 
system. There is no harm in banking institutions constantly looking for sound management 
and higher profitability, but the banking institutions’ behaviour is being closely watched by the 
markets, customers and investors. It is, therefore, important for the banks to disclose their 
financial  conditions  according  to  appropriate  accounting  methods,  including  International 
BIS Review 13/2008 
 3
Standards such as IAS 32, 39 and IFRS 7. Further, the banks have to enhance disclosures 
and  introduce  improvements  to  risk  management  and  the  provisioning  for  non-performing 
assets  as  per  the  Basel  II  framework.  These  requirements  call  for  advanced  infrastructure 
and technological transformation in banks. In moving towards advanced approaches under 
Basel II, “Data Warehousing” technology, along with sophisticated application programs for 
customer rating will be needed. 
6.2  From  a  regulator’s  point  of  view,  technology  has  supported  the  modernization  of  the 
supervisory approach and risk-based regulatory processes. As banking business continues 
to  grow  through  innovative  products  and  electronic  information  based  services,  it  has  also 
necessitated a more risk-focused approach to supervision. Regulators need to be alert to the 
nature of banks’ activities, compliance with regulatory requirements, and their systems and 
controls, for which a continuous flow of information is necessary. To facilitate the collection of 
information,  the  Central  Bank  has  established  an  on-line  Web-based  reporting  system 
through a central database for all licensed banks. The banks forward their periodic reports to 
the  Central  Bank  through  this  system,  which  facilitates  collation  and  analysis  of  the 
information for off-site surveillance and to pursue corrective action by banks. In this respect, 
technology  has  not  only  changed  the  way  banking  business  is  conducted,  but  also  to 
modernize the supervisory and regulatory framework in Sri Lanka and elsewhere. 
6.3  In  addition  to  spearheading  with  the  introduction  of  new  technology  platforms  for 
payments, clearing and settlements, the Central Bank also established a conducive legal and 
regulatory  framework  for  IT  related  operations  in  Banks.  During  2002  –  2006,  the  Central 
Bank  introduced  several  amendments  to  the  Registered  Stocks  and  Securities  Ordinance, 
Local  Treasury  Bills  Act  to  facilitate  RTGS  and  SSS  transactions.  In  addition,  the  Central 
Bank  also  passed  a  dedicated  law,  i.e.  the  Payments  and  Settlements  Act  to  regulate  the 
national payment system with enabling powers to the Central Bank to monitor and regulate 
new  payments  instruments,  systems  and  service  providers.  This  Act  also  includes 
appropriate  provisions  for  customer  rights.  In  the  retail  payments  area,  prior  to  the 
introduction  of  the  cheque  imaging  system  through  LankaClear,  the  Central  Bank  initiated 
amendments  to  the  Bills  of  Exchange  Ordinance,  and  Evidence  Law  to  enable  cheque 
images be recognized in courts. During the same period, the Electronic Transactions Act and 
the  Payment  Devices  Frauds  Act  have  been  passed  by  the  Government  to  authorize 
electronic transactions and to penalize fraudulent activities relating to card operations. 
These laws are intended to provide an enabling regulatory framework for banks and financial 
institutions to use IT facilities for their operations and mitigate risks that could arise from the 
abuse of systems and instruments. 
Product-centered IT development and limited customer benefits 
7.  
7.1 IT developments in the Banks have positively impacted their customers, but regrettably in 
a  limited  way.  For  example,  although  the  RTGS  system  intended  to  facilitate  third  party 
customer transactions, many have not been able to use the system for speedy settlements. 
The RTGS and SSS systems were entirely funded by the Central Bank through grants made 
available by the Ministry of Finance. While banks in Sri Lanka enjoy these highly subsidized 
clearing and settlement facilities with enormous benefits, very little effort has been made to 
offer  part  of  the  benefits  to  their  customers.  Until  recently,  some  banks  charged  their 
customers  more  than  three  times  the  charge  the  Central  Bank  levy  on  banks  for  RTGS 
transactions. Moreover, customers are not even encouraged to use the system due to rigid 
time lines imposed on third party transactions. 
7.2  In  the  case  of  retail  transactions  too,  the  benefits  are  not  always  passed  on  to  the 
customers.  In  spite  of  the  island-wide  CIT  system  introduced  by  the  Central  Bank  and 
LankaClear,  some  banks  prefer  to  send  physical  cheques  through  courier  services  to 
Colombo  from  outstation  areas,  where  LankaClear  regional  offices  operate.  We  are  not 
certain yet whether bank customers get the T+1 facility for which the system was intended. 
4 
 BIS Review 13/2008
Although the main purpose of the CIT system is to clear outstation cheque transactions, it is 
noted  that  the  full  benefits  of  this  technology  are  not  passed  on  to  customers  by  way  of 
speedy cheque clearing due to reluctance by some banks to upgrade their cheque imaging 
technologies partly because of the cost of acquiring new machines or for reasons known only 
to banks themselves. What is clear is that sophisticated and modern IT development has not 
been customer centric, aiming at reducing their transaction costs or enhancing service. The 
situation has improved after much persuasion by the Central Bank, but not through initiatives 
taken by banks. 
in 
investments 
Staying ahead 
technology,  cost 
8.  
8.1  The  banking  sector  is  being  driven  by  globalization,  consolidation  and  convergence 
across  the  world  with  the  pressure  focused  on  achieving  increased  shareholder  value 
through  measurable 
reduction  and  performance 
management.  Customers  today  require  easily  accessible  services  operating  on  a  global 
platform,  while  investors  strive  for  optimizing  and  maximizing  returns.  Successful  banking 
institutions  stay  ahead  and  set  the  trends  by  adapting  to  market  shifts,  being  proactive, 
keeping up with customer demands, and implementing change. 
8.2 In the Sri Lankan context, the implementation of new and comprehensive IT systems is 
considered to be costly and the banks tend to compromise on the use of integrated solutions 
and  advanced  technology.  Often,  they  prefer  to  adopt  partial  and  ad  hoc  solutions,  which 
may be less costly. Be it comprehensive or not, the primary objective should be to pass on 
the  benefits  of  IT  development  to  their  customers  by  way  of  more  efficient  and  speedier 
service at affordable costs. While some customers, the high networth customers in particular, 
do not consider the high cost of banking services as a deterrent, many medium and small 
scale  businesses  and  individuals  consider  banking  services  to  be  unaffordable.  In  this 
scenario, some segments of the population would not reap benefits of the advancement of 
technology due to the denial of access to finance. There are many other areas where despite 
IT  development 
facilitated  customer 
transactions at affordable costs. A classic example is the world-wide remittance flows. Due to 
the high cost of payments to banks, both at the capturing and the distribution points, nearly 
half of the world remittance flows are still in the hands of the informal systems like Hawala 
and  Undial.  Clients  tend  to  move  towards  the  informal  financial  sector,  which  is  a  form  of 
financial  exclusion.  It  is  noted  that,  in  recent  times,  banks  in  Sri  Lanka  have  made  some 
attempts to capture remittance flows through various means, by providing e-banking services 
through 
free  of  charge.  These  e-banking 
products/services  can  also  be  extended 
the  remittance  receivers  where  other 
infrastructure facilities like telecommunication facilities are available at affordable prices. 
Internet  banking,  Tele-banking  etc., 
the  associated  systems  have  not 
in  banking, 
to 
9.  
What should the strategy be? 
Upgrade core banking solutions 
9.1  
9.1.1 Although the current IT environment has brought-in favourable results for banks, they 
should  not  ignore  the  use  of  major  software  and  core  operating  system  upgrades.  It  is 
necessary to change the systems when needed, if banks are to stay ahead of the game and 
sustain  growth.  For  a  long  time,  banks  have  considered  core  banking  systems  as  a 
technology issue. Worldwide studies conducted on this subject clearly indicate that there is a 
need  for  robust  core  systems  that  link  customers  to  core  banking  products  and  provide 
consistent  information  and  services  to  them.  The  banks  need  to  retain  and  enhance  their 
credibility  by  providing  a  single  version  of  answers  to  real  time  inquiries  via  different 
channels. 
BIS Review 13/2008 
 5
9.1.2  Multi-channel  coordination,  interbank  payments,  debit  cards  and  Internet  banking  all 
drive customers to demand real time core banking services. Historically, banks have pursued 
a  product-centric  strategy  and  their  IT  architecture  tends  to  reflect  that  mindset  which  has 
resulted in the application of ad hoc and stand alone systems. Some banks appear to have 
unrealistic  fears  regarding  core  system  replacement.  Risks,  costs,  past  failures  and  other 
factors may have built up levels of apprehension. Yet, some have committed to replace core 
systems, while others have invested in extensions of all systems for short-term relief. 
9.1.3 Many banking services are now delivered over the Internet through mobile phones and 
facilities at supermarkets. Two decades ago, a bank operated with a simple set of solutions 
for  savings,  cheque  clearing  and  lending.  Today,  a  bank  may  be  offering  well  over  100 
products,  but  the  processes  and  technologies  underlying  such  advances  have  often  been 
implemented  in  piecemeal  fashion.  The  result  has  been  a  dramatic  increase  in  complexity 
that  has  caused  many  bank  efficiency  ratios  to  stagnate.  From  an  IT  perspective,  core 
banking  systems  have  come  to  resemble  an  intertwined  cats  cradle.  During  different 
business cycles, banks world over tend to be complacent. When profits are increasing and 
the  economic  environment  is  good,  banks  may  think  “Why  should  we  change  the  core 
banking  systems  at  this  stage,  when  the  existing  system  is  running  without  much 
trouble?”  If  regulators  and  vendors  put  pressure  on  them,  they  may  ask  the  question 
“Haven’t we heard this story before?” But it is necessary to remember that sooner or later 
and those who have not attended to as yet, will be required to replace or integrate their core 
banking systems, given the rapid changes that are taking place in banking services as well 
as IT developments. 
9.1.4 A core banking system replacement as part of a business transformation is not a minor 
task. However, the potential benefits include doubling of revenue growth owning to increased 
differentiation, cross sales, retention of high value customers, improved credit quality, speedy 
product creation and through enhancement of access to finance by vulnerable groups. It will 
also  reduce  annual  IT  costs  including  simpler  application,  optimization  of  hardware 
configuration and back office automation. Moreover, it would enhance reputation with clients 
and  investors  with  exact  regulatory  compliance  and  better  results  in  risk  and  financial 
management. 
9.1.5 The effects of using ageing core banking systems were revealed by several surveys 
conducted  on  banks  in  Europe,  Asia/Pacific  and  North  America  in  2001.  Given  heavy 
reliance on manual processes that hamper productivity, banks in the Asia/Pacific region have 
indicated  that  they  spend  48%  of  their  time  on  back  office  activities.  North  American  and 
European banks spend a significantly lower amount of time on back office activities, ranging 
from  34-36%,  respectively.  Although  the  survey  results  are  fairly  old  and  things  have 
changed  dramatically  since  then,  there  is  a  clear  call  for  modernized  and  integrated  core 
banking solutions. The more encouraging news is that a significant number of banks around 
the  world  are  planning  major  core  banking  replacements  over  the  next  few  years.  Banks, 
which have done comprehensive changes can relax, at least in the near future. 
Use common or shared systems instead of propriety systems 
9.2  
9.2.1 It is also noted that, currently, an overwhelming majority of large banks in Europe and 
the Asia/Pacific region are running propriety systems. This percentage is expected to decline 
over the next few years, as banks tend to move towards vendor provided common solutions. 
Many Sri Lankan banks take pride in operating their own propriety systems, which may not 
be sustainable in the future. There appears to be reluctance on the part of the banks to move 
to  common  switches,  common  platforms  or  shared  systems.  This  is  partly  because  of  the 
inordinate fear of one bank peeping into another’s operations, huge sums already spent on 
propriety  systems  or  due  to  pressure  from  the  staff  or  management  to  retain  existing  and 
workable  systems.  As  long  as  these  reservations  exist  and  there  is  reluctance  to  use 
common  or  pooled  infrastructure  or  shared  technology,  customers  will  continue  to  have 
limited  or  no  benefits  with  no  reduction  in  transaction  costs.  This  is  not  to  suggest  that 
6 
 BIS Review 13/2008
propriety systems and bespoke solutions should be discarded altogether. But, it is important 
to  realize  that  many  more  benefits  can  be  achieved  and  the  same  can  be  passed  on  to 
customers with integrated core banking solutions. 
Design a customer-centric business vision 
9.3  
9.3.1  To  begin  with,  banks  should  have  a  clear  vision  for  future  business  directions  and 
operating  models  and  they  should  align  IT  processes  accordingly.  With  respect  to  core 
banking solutions, they should use flexible, robust and future-oriented IT architecture based 
on  a  customer-centric  approach.  The  benefits  of  such  a  transformation  would  result  in:  (i) 
significant  and  sustainable  reduction  in  total  cost  of  IT  systems;  (ii)  consistent  customer 
information  across  core  channels;  (iii)  dramatic  shortening  of  time  to  market  new  and 
innovative  products  without  new  coding;  (iv)  straight-through  processing  capability  with 
improved service standards and a reduction of risks due to greater automation; (v) increased 
scalability  and  cost  reductions  due  to  speedy  and  more  efficient  systems  being  freed  for 
additional  capacity;  (vi)  integration  due  to  open  communication  standards  with  new 
applications; and (vii) ability for expansion as and when needed. A product-centric strategy, 
however,  is  vulnerable  due  to  changing  tastes  of  customers  and  the  types  of  commodity, 
whereas  a  customer-centric  strategy  would  allow  the  bank  to  differentiate  itself  on 
dimensions that are harder to replicate. In other words, customer-centric IT enhancement will 
enable  superior  customer  service  and  understanding  to  meet  specific  needs.  Customer 
layers  as  well  as  preferences  too  can  change,  but  there  will  always  be  a  new  set  of 
customers to replace each layer. 
Shared or common IT platforms and close coordination 
9.4  
9.4.1 Banks cannot engage in a significant IT transformation by themselves or in a very short 
time. They need partners with long experience and proven track records who can help set 
businesses  and  IT  targets  and  lay  out  roadmaps.  Banks  can  phase  this  type  of 
industrialization  in  several  ways  by  streamlining  existing  systems  through  unification.  For 
example, 3 or 4 core collection systems can be integrated into one and rolled out to other 
areas. A gradual approach would work best, reduce risk and enable incorporation of known 
future trends and customer requirements. A customer-centric approach would help to reduce 
transaction costs to them through pooled or shared platforms. To avoid inordinate fears of 
using common platforms it is desirable to have a set of self-regulations and ethical practices 
agreed upon by all stakeholders. Banks also need to coordinate with the telecommunication 
service providers to link bank IT systems with those of the telecommunication services. The 
Telecommunication  has  been  a  popular  mode  of  accessing  financial  services.  Banking 
through  SMS  has  made  virtual  money  transactions  popular  in  recent  times.  Some  banks 
have already started link ups with telecommunications and others need to follow suit. 
Conclusion 
10.  
10.1 IT development has undoubtedly brought-in enormous benefits to banks, particularly in 
terms  of  productivity  increases,  cost  reduction  through  labour  saving  and  increased 
profitability. Consequently, IT development in banks has become more product centric and 
retail  and  wholesale  IT  products  have  positively  influenced  productivity  and  profitability.  IT 
use has increased outputs and reduced costs as both IT capital investments and IT human 
resources have a positive relationship to productivity. Banks should stay ahead of the game 
and sustain growth by taking bold decisions to survive and beat competition. The time has 
come  to  move  towards  a  customer-centric  approach,  as  customers  should  be  given  an 
opportunity  to  enjoy  their  share  of  benefits  stemming  from  IT  development.  This  would 
increase banks’ competitiveness through differentiation and customer service improvement, 
reduced  transaction  costs,  better  risk  avoidance,  and  maintaining  a  stable  customer  base 
and market share. 
BIS Review 13/2008 
 7
10.2 It is possible to extend the capabilities of existing systems at a lower cost rather than by 
increasing  mainframe  capacities,  if  core  banking  and  related  legacy  systems  can  be 
modernized by exploring a more service-oriented customer centric architecture. Discussions 
should be held with vendors and service providers to use Web service and service-oriented 
architecture that are technology and platform-neutral. Banks’ new IT strategy should not only 
be  based  on  a  customer  centric  approach  but  it  should  also  enable  transaction  cost 
reduction, financial inclusion and speedy and efficient services to customers. Banks should 
also aim to pass on concessions and benefits that the government or regulators have given 
them, or at least share such benefits with customers. To make a real impact, banks should 
change  their  mind  set,  better  utilize  their  IT  human  resources  and  capabilities  and  move 
towards  more  cost-effective  common  or  shared  IT  platforms,  which  will  help  improve 
customer services and financial inclusion. 
Thank you. 
8 
 BIS Review 13/2008
