Bandid Nijathaworn: The pursuit of monetary and financial stability in 
emerging market economies1  
Speech  by  Dr  Bandid  Nijathaworn,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Thailand,  at  a  Public 
Lecture  at  the  Centre  for  Banking  Studies  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Sri  Lanka,  Colombo, 
23 July 2008. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I am delighted to be here today in Colombo, and am honoured by the invitation that has been 
extended to me by the Centre for Banking Studies of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka to give 
this evening’s public lecture. The Bank of Thailand and the Central Bank of Sri Lanka has a 
long history of mutual friendship and cooperation. So, I am deeply touched by the invitation, 
and am privileged to join the long list of eminent speakers and scholars who have previously 
participated in this prestigious lecture series. 
The  topic  of  my  lecture  this  evening  is  the  Pursuit  of  Monetary  and  Financial  Stability  in 
Emerging Market Economies. The lecture is drawn from the research done at the Bank of 
Thailand on the same topic. The research paper was first presented last year at a seminar at 
the Bank of England, and the lecture today is an updated version of that paper. What the 
research attempts to do is to examine the challenge faced by emerging market economies in 
the pursuit of monetary and financial stability. The key hypothesis of the research is that the 
context in which monetary and financial stability is pursued in emerging market economies is 
different to that of developed economies, and so the challenge and the implications for policy 
are different. 
My lecture this evening is organized into two parts. In the first part, I will talk about the unique 
context of emerging market economies compared to developed economies in the attainment 
of monetary and financial stability, and discuss the underlying cause of the difference. In the 
second  part,  I  will  highlight  the  key  implications  of  these  differences  for  the  pursuance  of 
monetary and financial stability in emerging market economies, both in the context of short-
term  stabilization  challenge  and  the  longer-term  structural  challenge  in  implementing 
structural reforms. The lecture will be brief, so that we will have time for a Q and A session 
afterward.  
First, the unique context of emerging market economies. 
1.  
As a general statement, one can begin with the notion that the attainment of monetary and 
financial  stability  is  something  that  policymakers  everywhere  place  at  the  forefront  of  their 
agendas. And, monetary and financial stability are desirable because they are prerequisites 
for  welfare-enhancing  macroeconomic  outcomes.  Along  this  line,  the  context  in  which 
monetary  and  financial  stability  is  pursued  in  emerging  market  economies  is  quite  distinct 
from that in developed economies. For emerging markets, there are two stylized facts that 
are unique to its policy setting. The first is the greater income and consumption volatility that 
have been observed in emerging markets, both in terms of the level and in terms of growth 
relative  to  developed  economies.  And  the  second  is  the  fact  that  economic  agents  in 
                                                 
1   The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent those of the Bank 
of  Thailand  or  Bank  of  Thailand  policy.  I  would  like  to  thank  Piti  Disyatat,  Ashvin  Ahuja,  Sarawan 
Angklomkliew, Jaturong Jantarangs, Nawaporn Maharagkaga, Don Nakornthab, Kobsak Pootrakool, Mathinee 
Subhaswadikul  and  Supradit  Tangprasert  of  the  Bank  of  Thailand  for  their  substantial  contribution  to  the 
drafting the original paper. 
BIS Review 98/2008 
 1
emerging markets face greater limitations in the ability to smooth consumption in response to 
shocks.  
The empirical evidence from two recent studies are summarized in Table 1. 
 
As  documented  by  Aguiar  and  Gopinath  in  2007,  consumption  is  around  40  percent  more 
volatile than income at business cycle frequencies for emerging markets, while the ratio is 
less than one for developed economies. The same is true when comparing relative volatility 
in growth rates of consumption and income. A study by Kose, Prasad, and Terrones in 2005 
also  shows  greater  income  and  consumption  volatility  in  emerging  markets  relative  to 
developed economies. Such heightened volatility in macroeconomic outcomes undoubtedly 
has adverse implications for welfare. And the fact that consumption is so volatile – in itself as 
well as in relation to income – suggests the existence of serious limitations in the ability of 
economic agents in emerging markets to smooth consumption in response to shocks. 
A  central  proposition  of  our  studies  is  that  a  large  part  of  the  explanation  for  higher 
macroeconomic  volatility  in  emerging  markets  rests  with  key  differences  in  the  nature  of 
shocks hitting emerging market economies, as well as the way in which the economic system 
of emerging markets propagate the shocks. 
Figure  1  captures  our  basic  arguments,  and  depicts  how  observed  macroeconomic 
outcomes are the result of the interaction between the nature of shocks and the structural 
features of the economic system. 
2 
 BIS Review 98/2008
  
Firstly,  the  nature  of  shocks  that  emerging  market  economies  experience  is  quite  different 
from that of developed economies. A particularly pertinent example in this context is capital 
flow  shocks.  By  virtue  of  their  limited  access  to  capital  relative  to  their  growth  potential, 
emerging  market  economies  are  natural  recipients  of  capital  inflows  from  capital-rich 
economies.  These  inflows  are  attracted  by  prospects  of  higher  return  and  provide  the 
necessary funding of investments that facilitate economic development, especially when the 
inflows are of the type that bring technological transfers and managerial expertise. 
But as shown in Table 2, capital flow shocks, especially debt and equity, are more volatile in 
emerging markets relative to developed economies, as well as relative to other developing 
economies. 
BIS Review 98/2008 
  3
Such  volatility,  which  sometimes  manifest  itself  in  “sudden  stop”,  is  linked  to  a  variety  of 
factors including the pro-cyclical nature of the flows. For example, the pro-cyclical nature with 
respect to sovereign bond ratings. On the other hand, information asymmetries in emerging 
market economies may also make the flows more susceptible to contagion effect, resulting in 
large  swings  in  capital  flows  unrelated  to  changes  in  fundamentals.  Macroeconomic 
conditions  in  developed  countries  is  another  factor  that  can  make  emerging  market 
economies more susceptible to a wide array of global shocks. 
And  lastly,  domestic  political  shock  in  the  form  of  policy  uncertainty  can  also  be  more 
pronounced  in  emerging  markets,  as  evidenced  by  more  frequent  regime  switches,  that  is 
from  fixed  to  floating  exchange  rates,  as  well  as  reversals  in  policies.  Such  shocks  can 
exacerbate capital flow volatility and manifest themselves in terms of greater macroeconomic 
volatility. 
The second key difference between emerging market economies and developed economies 
has to do with structural features of the economic system that influences how various shocks 
are propagated through the economy. While there are many key differences in this regard, 
two features are especially important in the context of monetary and financial stability. The 
first is the financial development and the second is the institutional framework of monetary 
and financial supervision policy.  
On  financial  development,  one  of  the  most  vital  foundations  of  modern  economies  is  the 
process  of  channeling  resources  to  their  most  productive  uses.  Whether  an  economy 
functions smoothly and efficiently or not depends much on the manner in which the financial 
system performs this task. A strong banking sector with highly disciplined risk management 
helps to mitigate the risks of financial imbalances while the existence of a deep and liquid 
financial market that offers a breadth of financial instruments helps improve the ability of the 
economy  to  absorb  shocks.  More  generally,  the  level  of  development  of  an  economy’s 
financial  sector  has  a  fundamental  bearing  on  social  welfare  insofar  as  it  determines  the 
ability of agents to smooth out their consumption profile in the face of fluctuations in income. 
As such, a substantial part of the observed differences in macroeconomic outcomes between 
emerging market economies and developed economies can be attributable to the disparate 
levels of financial sector development in these two groups of countries. Indeed, a number of 
empirical studies indicate that financial development, especially greater financial access, is 
associated with lower macroeconomic volatility.2
Next,  the  institutional  framework  of  monetary  and  financial  supervision  policy  also  has  an 
important  influence  on  the  extent  to  which  various  shocks  make  their  way  through  the 
economy.  Importantly,  in  a  setting  where  the  central  bank  lacks  independence,  its 
performance is likely to be more easily influenced for short-term political ends with adverse 
macroeconomic  consequences.  At  the  same  time,  a  weak  financial  supervision  framework 
increases  the  risk  of  financial  imbalances  building  up,  especially  in  situations  where 
substantial  capital  flows  drive  up  asset  prices  and  generate  favorable  conditions  for  credit 
expansion, which may ultimately lead to severe economic dislocations. In contrast, a credible 
policy  framework  and  enshrined  central  bank  independence  provide  the  necessary 
preconditions  for  alleviating  the  impact  of  shocks  on  the  economy.  For  example,  by 
anchoring the public’s long run inflation expectations to the target level, a credible inflation-
targeting framework helps to mitigate the impact of temporary supply shocks on inflation and 
                                                 
2   Cecchetti,  Flores-Lagunes,  and  S.  Krause  (2006)  provide  empirical  evidence  for  OECD  countries  that 
increased  access  to  credit  enables  households  to  smooth  their  consumption,  which  in  turn  reduces  the 
volatility  of  consumption  and  output  growth.  See  also  Larrain  (2004)  and  Raddatz  (2003).  Similarly,  the 
evidence  regarding  international  financial  integration  suggests  that  moving  towards  the  latter  ultimately  will 
bring  benefits  of  enhanced  risk-sharing  that  leads  to  reduced  consumption  volatility  (Kose,  Prasad,  Rogoff, 
and Wei (2006)). 
4 
 BIS Review 98/2008
allows the central bank more leeway to adjust its policy instrument to cushion any negative 
impact on output. 
Overall, our observation is that the unique combination of shocks and structural features of 
the economic system in emerging market economies give rise to a macroeconomic backdrop 
that  is  characterized  by  significantly  higher  output  and  consumption  volatility  than  in 
developed economies. The period leading up to and immediately following the Asian financial 
crisis is a prime example of this interaction. In that case, rapid movements of capital flows 
into  and  out  of  emerging  markets  interacted  with  financial  system  underdevelopment, 
deficient bank supervision, and balance sheet weaknesses, resulting in a boom-bust cycle. In 
contrast,  the  experience  of  developed  economies  is  more  generally  characterized  by  one 
where large shocks typically result in substantial asset price volatility and substantial financial 
losses  that  are  not  accompanied  by  significant  disruption  to  either  short  run  or  long  run 
economic growth. A rigorous assessment of the challenges of monetary and financial stability 
in emerging market economies therefore must explicitly recognize this underlying difference 
in the economic backdrop. 
Let me now turn to the second part of my lecture and discuss the implications of these 
differences on the pursuance of monetary policy and financial stability.  
In light of the unique agglomeration of factors in emerging market economies outlined above, 
the pursuit of monetary and financial stability in emerging markets has two key facets. The 
first is to address the immediate short run concerns emanating from the various shocks; and 
the  second  is  to  implement  structural  reforms  to  ensure  that  financial  stability  becomes 
embedded  in  the  underlying  economic  structure  of  emerging  markets  in  the  long  run.  The 
former  essentially  concerns  the  challenge  of  maintaining  economic  stability  through 
appropriate policy  settings  and  actions  to  offset  the  various  shocks  hitting  the  economy  at 
any  given  point  in  time.  The  latter,  on  the  other  hand,  focuses  on  strengthening  the 
institutional  framework  for  monetary  policy  and  financial  supervision  as  well  as  fostering 
financial  sector  development  that  improves  the  ability  of  the  system  to  absorb  shocks  by 
itself, in  a way  that  minimizes  the  impact  on  the  real  economy  without  the  need  for  policy 
intervention. Given the significant gap that emerging market economies have in this respect 
relative to developed economies, it becomes more crucial that the pursuit of monetary and 
financial  stability  in  emerging  markets  be  accompanied  by  a  vigilant  focus  on  making 
progress  on  structural  reforms.  In  what  follows,  I  will  discuss  some  specific  challenges  to 
monetary and financial stability in emerging markets from both the short and the longer run 
perspectives. 
Let’s begin first with the short run stabilization challenge. 
As  we  have  seen  in  past  years,  the  search  for  yield  among  international  investors  has 
resulted in a resurgence of capital inflow into emerging markets, leading to a pick-up in asset 
price volatility.3 Given the high degree of dependence on foreign trade, and the inadequate 
experience with modern financial risk-management tools particularly at the firm level, these 
asset  price  fluctuations  have  become  an  important  policy  issue  in  emerging  markets. 
Typically,  when  large  capital  flows  into  financially  shallow  markets,  it  puts  pressure  on 
emerging market central banks to lower interest rates or to increase sterilized intervention in 
                                                 
3   This global liquidity glut may have stemmed from various factors, both structural and cyclical. A few examples 
of  structural  factors  include  a  demographic  shift  from  working-age  to  older  population,  which  swells  up  the 
volume of pension funds that need to fulfill their obligation to retirees; the rise of sovereign wealth funds in the 
era of high international reserves under rigid exchange rate arrangements; technological innovation and the 
decline  in  telecommunication,  transport  and  other  financial  transaction  costs  from  credit  risk  transfer 
mechanisms;  and,  capital  account  liberalization  that  have  over  the  years  eliminated  a  significant  degree  of 
cross-border financial friction. At the same time, the liquidity glut is also due in no small part to accommodative 
monetary policy in advanced economies, whether one looks from the angle of low interest rates or high money 
growth. 
BIS Review 98/2008 
 5
the  foreign  exchange  market.  Both  of  these  actions  are  accommodative  from  a  monetary 
policy sense and tend to sow the seeds for inflation down the road. And in the case where 
capital  inflows  are  persistent,  the  flows  may  even  induce  authorities  to  make  use  of 
prudential  measures,  which  can  range  from  credit  policy  to  capital  account  restriction  on 
short-term  inflows.  The  core  issue  facing  emerging  market  central  banks  in  the  short  run, 
therefore,  is  how  best  to  contain  financial  vulnerabilities  that  accompany  the  volatility  of 
short-term capital.  
On this issue, when the challenge is on the side of managing capital inflows, there are three 
key  decisions  that  emerging  market  policymakers  must  face  in  the  short  term.  The  first  is 
how to deal with the cost and the constraint of coping with capital inflows. The second is the 
challenge  in  finding  a  set  of  tools  that  can  help  assess  the  potential  build-up  of  financial 
vulnerabilities.  And  the  third  is  how  best  to  complement  monetary  policy  with  prudential 
measures to help prevent potential financial instability. 
On  the  first  decision,  for  those  under  a  managed  float  regime,  lowering  interest  rates  to 
reduce the relative attractiveness of the country to capital inflows may be an appropriate way 
to  ensure  price  stability.  But  concerns  of  fast  appreciation  may  not  subside  as  exchange 
rates  tend  to  behave  more  like  asset  prices  than  relative  goods  prices  in  practice.  That 
means the nominal effective exchange rate can appreciate for a while in the short run, even 
after  central  banks  repeatedly  cut  interest  rates.  This  is  an  element  of  the  well-known 
exchange rate disconnect puzzle. The risk is that a central bank may cut interest rate by too 
much, and at the same time sowing the seeds for inflation and an asset price boom down the 
road. An obvious important technical challenge to emerging market central banks, then, is to 
improve  its  ability  to  forecast  inflation  and  output  and  be  more  precise  about  the  range  of 
possible natural rates of interest, which vary through time. 
Resisting the appreciating momentum of the exchange rate through interest rates alone may 
not be sufficient. A widely adopted practice that is assumed to be effective in the short run is 
through sterilized intervention. Sterilized intervention, however, entails quasi-fiscal costs from 
swaps  or  bond  issuance,  which  adds  to  the  liability  side  of  the  consolidated  public  sector 
balance  sheet.  Since  the  debt  is  in  local  currency,  there  is  an  inflation  risk  attached  to  it 
should there be future fiscal stress. There is also a potential for the market to raise doubts 
about monetary policy independence and therefore increase the risk of policy uncertainty. In 
the same vein, accumulating international reserves can also lead to a possible damage to 
central bank credibility in some countries, as they incur balance sheet losses when assets 
and liabilities are marked to market in local currencies.  
In sum, the challenge of containing the effects of capital inflows on asset prices may pose 
risks to future inflation and financial stability in emerging markets. This challenge seems to 
suggest a potential for complementing monetary policy with prudential measures. The extent 
of the challenge here depends crucially on the ability of the economy to cope with asset price 
fluctuations. Also, it depends critically on the ability of the real sector to adjust to the pace of 
the appreciation as capital inflows continue. 
Next, the second challenge in the near term concerns the ability of emerging market central 
banks or financial supervision authorities to identify and quantify risks of potential financial 
instability  in  advance.  In  this  context,  stress-testing  is  one  of  the  most  powerful  tools  to 
assess  financial  stability  ex-ante.  If  implemented  effectively  across  the  financial  industry, 
stress-testing can help curb destabilizing activities and help prepare financial institutions to 
deal  with  macroeconomic  or  financial  shocks.  Unfortunately,  financial  institutions  and 
regulators  in  emerging  economies  have  lagged  behind  their  counterparts  in  advanced 
economies on this issue, especially on the credit and liquidity risk stress-testing. 
A priority for regulators in emerging economies, therefore, is to move faster on stress-testing. 
To accomplish this, they should push financial institutions to invest in human resource and 
technology, with the aim of conducting macro stress-testing at least on an annual basis. As 
regard  implementation,  regulators  and  monetary  policy  makers  must  increase  coordination 
6 
 BIS Review 98/2008
in 
the 
form  of  potential  regulatory 
forbearance,  market  distortion, 
so  that  macroeconomic  and  financial  stability  assessment  can  be  done  in  an  integrated 
fashion, so as to arrive at a more relevant and convincing macro stress-testing scenario. 
Finally, the third challenge or decision is the use of prudential measures. While it is unclear 
how effective domestic monetary policy can be in checking excessive asset price volatility, 
the threat of financial instability has given rise to a more prominent role for macro-prudential 
measures  to  reduce  the  procyclicality  of  the  credit  market.  As  we  see  it,  the  primary 
challenge  in  this  respect  is  how  best  to  move  forward.  Combining  the  use  of  prudential 
measures  with  monetary  policy  is  a  useful  policy  option,  but  it  is  still  an  unsettling  issue 
because  of  the  concern  for  efficiency.  In  practice,  discretionary  prudential  measures  pose 
difficulty 
timing 
effectiveness,  and  the  difficulty  in  modeling  early  warning  system.  Rule-based  prudential 
measures, on the other hand, pose difficulty in policy calibration. That is to say, calibrating 
this  type  of  policy  tools  has  so  far  proven  difficult  for  emerging  markets  where  data 
availability is limited and large structural breaks are usually present.  
Let  us  now  turn  to  the  longer-term  challenge  in  the  pursuance  of  monetary  and 
financial stability in emerging markets, that is, the issue of structural reform and its 
implementation. 
From  a  longer-term  perspective,  the  attainment  of  monetary  and  financial  stability  is 
determined  predominantly  by  the  embedded  structural  features  of  the  economy.  These 
matter not only with regard to how shocks are propagated through the system but they also 
influence  the  effectiveness  that  policy  stabilization  efforts  can  cushion  the  economy  from 
such shocks. In what follows, I will discuss two key aspects of the structural features that are 
important  for  the  pursuance  of  monetary  and  financial  stability.  These  are  the  financial 
development and the policy institutions and framework.  
First, financial development. 
One  important  requirement  to  ensure  that  the  risk  management  capacity  of  the  economy 
evolves  with  the  changing  nature  of  risk  is  to  enhance  the  risk  management  ability  of 
economic agents. The key to this would be to strengthen the efficiency and the robustness of 
the  financial  system.  To  achieve  this,  the  strategy  to  enhance  economic  and  financial 
resiliency must pay attention to the following considerations:  
The first is to recognize the benefit of having a well-balanced financial structure.  
Efficient  and  well-balanced  financial  system  will  allow  the  system  to  better  manage  and 
absorb shocks as the market would be less prone to one-way market conditions and would 
posses  greater  liquidity.  A  well-balanced  financial  structure  contributes  positively  to 
information processing, price discovery, and risk management. The experience of the Asian 
crisis, for example, points to the critical importance of the development of a long-term local 
currency  debt  market,  to  increase  the  depth  and  the  breadth  of  the  financial  market.  In 
relation to this, the Bank for International Settlements, in their studies, have identified that the 
lack  of  diversified  structure  and  market  may  lead  to  increased  risk  from  concentration  of 
credit  and  maturity  risks  in  the  banking  system  as  the  lack  of  markets  may  lead  to  the 
mispricing  of  risk,  excessive  delay  in  correcting  large  exposures,  as  well  as  increased 
vulnerabilities from capital inflows. 
The  second  important  consideration  is  the  importance  of  strong  financial  market 
infrastructure. 
One of the key issues for emerging markets is the structural weaknesses which can create 
disincentive and moral hazard. The presence of such distortions contribute to a build-up of 
financial vulnerability, hinder growth of market solution for tackling risk, and complicate policy 
actions  in  events  of  crisis  management.  Progress  in  correcting  these  weaknesses  in 
emerging markets, however, may have been somewhat slowed. 
BIS Review 98/2008 
 7
Market-driven  financial  market  developments  need  the  support  of  critical  infrastructure, 
namely:  (1)  Information  that  allows  efficient  decision  making  and  pricing  on  various  asset 
markets, financial as well as related markets such as real estate market, which are still very 
lacking in many emerging markets, and may be an area of public support. (2) Legal reforms 
to ensure an enabling environment for innovation in products and business models for the 
financial system. And (3) Human resource with proper competency in modern financial and 
risk management are scarce and is becoming a bottleneck for development. The authority 
may need to step in to facilitate training and accredition of professional standards, if it has 
external benefits. 
Notwithstanding these challenges, however, notable progress has been made by emerging 
markets in the past decade, much of which is catalysed by comprehensive economic reform 
in which market-oriented economic and financial liberalization have been the main features. 
For  East  Asia,  despite  the  progress  made,  significant  gap  still  exists  in  diversification, 
efficiency  and  robustness  when  compared  to  the  role  played  by  financial  markets  in 
developed economies. Looking ahead, in addition to the pressure from globalization, the shift 
in  demographic  structure  will  also  be  an  additional  pressure.  This  is  to  say  some  smaller 
emerging  markets  will  face  an  aging  population  and  the  increase  in  demand  for  wealth 
management, while the supply of local products are limited for diversification. This will pose 
challenges  for  inter-temporal  allocation  of  resource  and  risk.  Thus,  it  is  imperative  that 
emerging markets devise a proper strategy and process to expedite reforms and develop the 
financial system. 
The second longer-term reform I want to bring up is policy institution and framework. On this, 
two policy institutions are of utmost important for attaining monetary and financial stability. 
The first is a credible monetary framework that effectively anchors the public’s expectation of 
inflation.  The  key  issue  here  is  the  importance  of  independence  and  transparency  of  the 
monetary  policy  process.  The  usual  case  is  that  the  lack  of  independence  can  come  at  a 
great cost in terms of lower central bank credibility and a less favorable trade-off between 
inflation  and  output  volatility.  Likewise,  weaknesses  in  monetary  policy  transparency  can 
contribute  to  policy  uncertainty  and  exacerbate  the  impact  of  shocks  on  macroeconomic 
volatility. 
The  second  important  policy  institution  is  an  effective  supervisory  policy  and  domestic 
financial institution’s capacity for sound risk management. The logic for this is clear. With less 
effective supervision and limited capacity to manage risk, the ability of the economic system 
to absorb volatility from global markets is significantly compromised. 
Reflecting  this,  emerging  markets  have  put  enormous  emphasis  on  building  up  the 
necessary institutions with regard to effective supervision. But the challenges are many. For 
example,  at  this  time,  many  emerging  markets  are  facing  the  challenges  in  implementing 
Basel II. 
The objective of Basel II is to strengthen the soundness and stability of the banking system 
through  more  risk-sensitive  capital  requirements  and  rigorous  internal  risk  assessment 
process.  This  has  a  direct  bearing  on  ensuring  financial  stability.  But  because  Basel  II  is 
developed  from  the  current  practice  among  banks  in  developed  countries,  some  banks  in 
emerging markets may have a large gap to fill. For example, in moving away from collateral-
based  to  credit-based  loan  approval,  banks  must  focus  more  on  the  ability  to  pay  of 
customers and to make loan decisions in a forward looking manner. This requires a different 
set of expertise that focuses on risk assessment in the environment of changing economic 
cycle and asset quality. 
Next is the information system which is the most important foundation for achieving financial 
stability through capital adequacy. Whereas developed countries generally already have in 
place the necessary infrastructure in this regard, financial institutions in emerging countries 
have  to  build  the  system  from  the  ground  up,  involving  areas  such  as  data  collection, 
storage,  analysis,  and  ways  to  effectively  embed  the  information  in  the  decision-making 
8 
 BIS Review 98/2008
process. This step may take more time and effort because it involves building a knowledge 
base  for  quantitative  analytical  skills  and  ability  to  apply  international  best  practices  to  the 
unique local settings of emerging markets. 
Another  difficulty  in  Basel  II  implementation  is  that  other  players  in  the  wider  financial 
industry  will  be  playing  more  active  roles  in  the  banking  sector’s  risk  assessment.  For 
instance,  the  simple  approach  of  Basel  II  ties  the  amount  of  required  capital  to  ratings  by 
External Credit Assessment Institutions (ECAIs) because they have the strength in both the 
wealth  of  data  and  expertise  in  credit  risk  assessment.  Unfortunately,  only  a  few  large 
companies in emerging countries are rated. Therefore, the challenge for regulators lies in the 
process of ECAI recognitions and risk-weight mapping processes as they must ensure the 
stability of the banking system while at the same time, foster the development of local ECAIs 
and the bond market. These efforts will undoubtedly take considerable time and patience, but 
it is a road that has to be taken. 
Financial development and the strengthening of policy institutions and framework, therefore, 
are  the  two  most  important  structural  features  of  emerging  markets  that  need  to  be 
promoted, developed, and strengthened in the pursuance of monetary and financial stability. 
In my view, this is the most important reform issue that need to be effectively carried out. 
For  the  remaining  part  of  my  lecture,  let  me  now  turn  to  my  last  topic,  that  is  the 
challenge of implementing structural reforms. 
While the two facets of monetary  and financial  stability discussed above are present in all 
economies, the interaction between them and the tensions that arise in terms of where the 
policy emphasis is placed are arguably more varied and more complex with greater welfare 
implications  in  the  emerging  market  context,  not  least  because  the  gains  to  be  had  from 
structural reforms are much higher in these countries. It is therefore important to focus on the 
process of implementing structural reforms and how to ensure that they remain on track. In 
what  follows,  I  will  discuss  some  of  the  complexities  that  arise  on  this  issue  and  highlight 
some of the lessons learned from many previous reform efforts. 
The most prominent conclusion obtained from the literature on structural reforms is that they 
are difficult to implement. The first problem is that the gains from reform are hard to quantify 
because  they  are  often  indirect  and  thus  rarely  fully  appreciated  by  the  wider  public.  The 
enshrinement of central bank independence, for example, helps to insulate monetary policy 
from short-term political consideration and paves the way for monetary stability in the long 
run, but making a case for this in a non-technical manner to a wide audience, with conflicting 
interest, often proves a communication challenge for central banks. 
Next,  the  fact  that  many  structural  reforms  entail  short-run  costs  compounds  the  problem. 
The opening up of the domestic banking sector to foreign competition, for example, brings 
long-run benefits in terms of improved banking services but may adversely impact domestic 
banks’  profitability  in  the  short-run.  This  time  mismatch  between  the  costs  and  benefits  of 
reforms is a prime reason why they are hard to sell. And where the costs and benefits accrue 
to different segments of the economy, as in this example, the difficulty of instilling reforms is 
exacerbated since it is hard to create satisfactory compensation schemes while those who 
lose out tend to be concentrated and thus more effective in organizing political opposition to 
the reforms. 
There are, however, general empirical regularities on the conditions that make reforms more 
likely.4 First, is the period of economic downturn or crisis that focuses the public’s mind on 
the need for reform. Second, there must be sufficient fiscal room to compensate the losers. 
Third, the success of previous reforms that may help create competitive pressure for reforms 
in other areas. Fourth, the longer the length of time remaining in office for the Government, 
                                                 
4   See OECD (2007), IMF (2004) and Rajan (2004) for a detailed discussion. 
BIS Review 98/2008 
 9
the more likely that reforms will be undertaken. And fifth, external pressure either in the form 
of foreign reform efforts that increase competitive pressure domestically or membership in an 
international economic organization that requires reform as part of the admission criteria. 
Next,  even  if  the  obstacles  to  the  reforms  have  been  overcome,  the  practical  aspects  of 
implementing them pose further challenge. One of the most important issue in this respect 
concerns  the  proper  pace  and  sequencing  of structural  reforms.  In  the  context  of  financial 
sector  reforms,  for  example,  the  underlying  challenge  is  the  proper  mitigation  of  the 
additional risks that are injected into the financial system as markets develop and become 
more sophisticated. These risks consist of both financial risks borne by market participants 
as  well  as  macroeconomic  risks  that  may  be  associated  with  greater  financial  market 
volatility.  Indeed,  the  inappropriate  setting  of  priorities  among  the  reform  measures  or  an 
overly rapid pace of change can result in financial instability in the short run. More generally, 
initiatives in the areas of financial sector development, monetary policy regime, and capital 
account liberalization are all closely related and designing appropriate reforms in one area 
requires a careful consideration of how to proceed with the others.  
On  this  issue,  suffice  it  to  say  that  the  consensus  on  the  importance  of  structural  reform 
efforts does not carry over with the same strength to the issue of the appropriate pace and 
sequencing of policy changes. Nonetheless, it should be stressed that a frequent outcome of 
the debate on this issue is excessive inertia in reaching an agreement and actually starting 
the process of change. The more protracted the transition period, the greater the eventual 
costs to the economy in terms of deferred benefits of stronger fundamentals.  
Finally, a recurrent theme that has been underlying much of the discussion in this lecture this 
evening is the intricacy of achieving monetary and financial stability while at the same time 
maintaining  the  delicate  balance  of  short-run  stabilization  efforts  and  long-run  structural 
reforms.  This  is  perhaps  the  toughest  challenge  for  emerging  markets  in  this  regard.  In 
particular, a heavy focus on maintaining immediate financial and economic stability can often 
hinder  efforts  to  deliver  these  very  same  goals  in  the  long  run.  Thus,  ensuring  that  the 
outcome  of  such  trade-offs  turn  out  favorable  to  the  attainment  of  monetary  and  financial 
stability  in  the  long  term  is  perhaps  the  toughest  challenge  for  emerging  markets  in  the 
present context. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
To  conclude,  despite  the  challenges  presented  above,  the  overall  direction  of  change  in 
emerging market countries in the past decade is fundamentally reassuring. Much has been 
achieved 
financial  system 
development, reducing vulnerability to external shocks through the establishment of sizable 
foreign  reserves  cushion  as  well  as  significant  restructuring  of  external  debt  currency 
denomination  and  maturity  profile.  These  changes  make  it  more  likely  that  the  process 
towards further global financial integration will bring substantial benefits in terms of growth 
and fewer risks, in terms of financial distress, and ultimately contribute towards a more stable 
macroeconomic outcome. 
And with that note, let me now end my lecture this evening. Thank you. 
terms  of  strengthening 
framework  and 
the  monetary 
in 
References 
Aguiar,  M.  and  G.  Gopinath  (2007),  “Emerging  Market  Business  Cycles:  The  Cycle  Is  the 
Trend”, Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 115, No. 1, pp. 69-102. 
Arbache,  J.  (2004),  “Do  Structural  Reforms  Always  Succeed?”  United  Nations  University 
Research Paper No. 2004/58. 
Bank for International Settlements. (2007) Committee on Global Financial System’s “Report 
on Financial Stability and Local Currency Bond Markets” 
10 
 BIS Review 98/2008
Borio,  C.,  C.  Furfine,  and  P.  Lowe  (2001),  “Procyclicality  of  the  Financial  System  and 
Financial Stability: Issues and Policy Options”, BIS Papers No. 1, March 2001. 
Calvo, G. and C. Reinhart (1999), “Capital Flow Reversals, the Exchange Rate Debate, and 
Dollarization”, Finance and Development, Vol. 36 (September), pp. 13-15. 
Cecchetti,  S.,  A.  Flores-Lagunes,  and  S.  Krause  (2006),  “Financial  Development, 
Consumption Smoothing, and the Reduced Volatility of Real Growth,” AEA 2007 Conference 
Papers. 
Ghosh,  S.  (2006)  “East  Asian  Finance:  The  Road  to  Robust  Markets”  World  Bank 
Conference Edition, Conference on “ East Asian Financial Markets: The Next Frontiers” June 
2006, Hong Kong. 
International Monetary Fund (2005), Independent Evaluation Report of The IMF’s Approach 
to Capital Account Liberalization, Washington D.C. 
______, (2004), World Economic Outlook, April 2004, Washington D.C. 
OECD (2007), Going for Growth 2007, OECD, Paris. 
Kose, M., E. Prasad, and M. Terrones (2006), “How do trade and financial integration affect 
the relationship between growth and volatility?” Journal of International Economics, Vol. 
69 pp. 176-202. 
______, (2005), “Growth and Volatility in an Era of Globalization”, IMF Staff Papers, vol:52, 
31-63. 
Kose, M., E. Prasad, K. Rogoff , and S. Wei (2006), “Financial Globalization: A Reappraisal”, 
IMF Working Paper 06/189, Washington D.C. 
Larrain,  B.  (2004),  “Financial  Development,  Financial  Constraints,  and  the  Volatility  of 
Industrial Output”, Federal Reserve Bank of Boston Public Policy Discussion Papers 04-06. 
Raddatz,  C.  (2003),  “Liquidity  Needs  and  Vulnerability  to  Financial  Underdevelopment”, 
World Bank Policy Research Working Paper No. 3161, November. 
Rajan, R. (2004), “Why Are Structural Reforms So Difficult?” Finance  and  Development, 
June 2004, pp. 56-57. 
Reinhart, C. (2002), “Credit Ratings, Default and Financial Crises: Evidence from Emerging 
Markets”, World Bank Economic Review (forthcoming). 
Uribe, M. and V. Yue (2006), “Country spreads and emerging countries: Who drives whom?” 
Journal of International Economics, Vol. 69 pp. 6-36. 
World Bank (2005), Financial Sector Assessment: A Handbook, Washington D.C.  
BIS Review 98/2008 
 11
