Randall S Kroszner: Mitigating the impact of foreclosures on 
neighborhoods 
Speech  by  Mr  Randall  S  Kroszner,  Member  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  US  Federal 
Reserve System, at the NeighborWorks America Symposium on Stabilizing Communities in 
the Wake of Foreclosure, Cincinnati, Ohio, 7 May 2008. 
The original speech, which contains various links to the documents mentioned, can be found on the US Federal 
Reserve System’s website. 
 Good morning. I would like to thank NeighborWorks America for inviting me to be with you 
today  to  continue  the  very  important  discussion  of  community  stabilization  in  the  wake  of 
rising  foreclosures  in  neighborhoods  across  the  country.  As  a  member  of  the  board  of 
directors of NeighborWorks America for the last two years, I am impressed that attendance 
at these training institutes continues to grow – a strong testament to the importance of the 
subject  matter  being  discussed  as  well  as  the  quality  of  the  curriculum  and  instruction. 
Today's discussion of the impact of foreclosures on neighborhoods and what can be done to 
mitigate  those  impacts  is  not  only  timely,  it  is  essential  to  promoting  local  and  regional 
economic recovery and growth.  
This  morning,  I  will  provide  an  overview  of  current  conditions  in  the  mortgage  market  and 
discuss how the disruption in this market is affecting neighborhoods. I will also outline the 
steps  that  the  Federal  Reserve  System  is  taking  to  address  these  challenges  and  assist 
communities struggling with the impact of foreclosures.  
Foreclosures continue to affect the housing market  
The  mortgage  market  continues  to  face  challenges,  especially  in  the  subprime  segment, 
which serves consumers who have imperfect or limited credit histories. The delinquency rate 
on subprime mortgages has continued to climb and has about doubled in the past year and, 
as  of  February,  one  in  four  subprime  adjustable-rate  mortgages  was  seriously  delinquent, 
meaning  the  borrower  was  either  in  foreclosure  or  ninety  days  or  more  past  due  on  a 
payment. Delinquency rates have risen on most other types of mortgages as well, but these 
increases  have  been  more  recent  and  less  dramatic  than  those  in  the  subprime  segment. 
Foreclosures  have  also  risen  appreciably.  Lenders  initiated  roughly  one-and-a-half  million 
foreclosures  last  year,  up  53  percent  from  the  previous  year.  On  the  basis  of  preliminary 
estimates published by the Hope Now Alliance, foreclosures are likely to have risen further in 
the first quarter of 2008. 
Homeowners may become delinquent on their mortgage for a variety of reasons. Historically, 
an adverse life event, such as a job loss, was often the reason a homeowner fell behind on 
his or her mortgage payments. And in the current economic environment, job losses have 
continued to contribute to the rise in mortgage delinquencies and foreclosures, particularly in 
areas of the Midwest, such as here in Ohio. Yet, other factors also explain the recent rise in 
mortgage  delinquencies  and  foreclosures.  Mortgage  underwriting  standards  slipped  in  the 
middle  of  this  decade,  resulting  in  greater  numbers  of  mortgages  that  had  high  combined 
loan-to-value  ratios  or  for  which  incomplete  documentation  was  provided.  More  than  40 
percent of the subprime loans originated in 2006 had combined loan-to-value ratios in excess 
of 90 percent, a considerably higher share than earlier in the decade. In some cases, lenders 
originated  mortgages  that  had  multiple  risk  factors  –  a  practice  often  referred  to  as  risk-
layering. Taken individually, these risk factors may not have significantly raised the likelihood 
that  a  homeowner  would  fall  behind  on  payments;  taken  together,  however,  these  risks 
materially increased this likelihood. 
BIS Review 57/2008 
 1
High  loan-to-value  ratios  at  origination,  combined  with  stagnant  and  eventually  declining 
home  prices,  are  a  key  aspect  of  the  recent  rise  in  delinquencies  and  foreclosures.  After 
rising rapidly during the early part of this decade, home prices began to decelerate in 2006 
and  are  now  declining  appreciably  in  some  areas.  As  home  prices  declined,  homeowners 
who  had  little  or  no  equity  at  the  time  of  their  mortgage  origination  saw  their  home  equity 
disappear – and with it their ability to refinance into a more-sustainable mortgage. Declining 
home equity may also reduce a stressed borrower's incentive to stay current on his or her 
mortgage or remain in a home. Recent research conducted by the Federal Reserve Bank of 
Boston  suggests  that  homeowners  who  have  experienced  a  20  percent  or  greater  fall  in 
house  prices  are  about  14  times  more  likely  to  default  on  a  mortgage  compared  with 
homeowners who have experienced a 20 percent increase in the price of their home.1 Some 
types of  mortgage borrowers appear to be particularly sensitive to home-price declines; at 
least  18  percent  of  foreclosures  started  in  the  third  quarter  of  2007  involved  non-owner-
occupied properties. 
The Federal Reserve's response to the challenges resulting from foreclosures  
The  Federal  Reserve  views  the  current  high  rate  of  mortgage  foreclosures  as  an  urgent 
problem, and we are addressing the issue on many fronts: we are contributing to initiatives 
already  underway  at  the  local  and  national  level,  as  well  as  collaborating  with  other 
regulators, community groups, policy organizations, financial institutions, and public officials 
in an effort to identify ways to prevent unnecessary foreclosures and the associated negative 
effects  on  local  communities.  We  are  also  leveraging  the  decentralized  structure  of  the 
Federal Reserve System, which consists of the Board of Governors in Washington, D.C., and 
the twelve Federal Reserve Banks that each represent a distinct region of the country. This 
structure enables us to gather information and tailor responses to foreclosure issues at the 
local  level,  while  using  our  collective  experience  to  address  regional  and  national  policy 
issues. In addition, the Federal Reserve uses its considerable analytic resources to conduct 
research at the national level, which the Reserve Banks can disseminate to local community 
groups,  counseling  agencies,  financial  institutions,  and  others  who  are  working  to  help 
troubled borrowers and communities.  
Timely  analysis  of  data  and  other  available  information  is  critical  to  crafting  appropriate 
remedies to any problem. To that end, the Federal Reserve recently helped NeighborWorks 
America identify those regions and neighborhoods throughout the country that are most at 
risk for higher rates of foreclosure and would therefore benefit from an increased capacity to 
provide  mortgage  counseling.  Using  this  analysis,  NeighborWorks  America  in  February 
awarded  $130  million  in  newly  granted  funds  from  Congress  to  thirty-two  state  housing 
finance  agencies,  eighty-two  community-based  NeighborWorks  organizations,  and  sixteen 
counseling intermediaries approved by the Department of Housing and Urban Development 
(HUD).  
The  Federal  Reserve  has  recently  made  available  on  its  public  website  detailed  reports 
identifying  neighborhoods  that  have  especially  high  concentrations  of  foreclosures.  These 
data – in the form of dynamic maps and other data – illustrate the regional variation in the 
condition  of  securitized,  owner-occupied  subprime  and  alt-A  mortgage  loans  across  the 
United States.2 Local leaders can access these reports and work with community affairs staff 
at the local Reserve Banks to more effectively address foreclosure problems. 
                                                 
1   Kristopher  Gerardi,  Adam  Hale  Shapiro,  and  Paul  Willen  (2008),  "Subprime  Outcomes:  Risky  Mortgages, 
Homeownership Experiences, and Foreclosures," Federal Reserve Bank of Boston. 
2   "Dynamic Maps of Nonprime Mortgage Conditions in the United States." 
2 
 BIS Review 57/2008
in 
the  mortgage  markets  and  study  how 
For example, a user can choose to view key  foreclosure measures such as "Foreclosures 
per  1000  housing  units,"  "Share  ARMs,"  and  other  factors.  The  maps  drill  down  from 
national-level data to zip code level. They also depict factors such as "Share of low FICO and 
high LTV" and "Share late payment in last 12 months" that may help to predict which areas 
are  most  likely  to  experience  higher  rates  of  foreclosures.  Finally,  the  Federal  Reserve  is 
providing, via downloadable files, the data supporting the maps, as well as data for scores of 
other  loan-performance  variables  at  the  state,  metropolitan  area,  and  county  levels.  By 
making  more  data  and  information  on  emerging  trends  available  to  key  local  leaders, 
financial  institutions,  and  community  organizations,  our  aim  is  to  improve  the  efficiency  of 
their efforts to rebuild neighborhoods. 
The  Federal  Reserve  System  has  also  established  a  working  group  of  economists  and 
community development experts in order to coordinate System research efforts. This working 
group  will  monitor  developments 
these 
developments  may  affect  individual  borrowers  and  neighborhoods.  Currently,  the  group  is 
assessing existing research on house prices, mortgages, and foreclosures, with the goal of 
identifying important analytical gaps. 
The  Federal  Reserve  System  conducts  outreach  and  education  efforts  through  its  regular 
contact with financial institutions and market intermediaries, as well as through its network of 
Community Affairs staff members who work with communities to identify trends and issues 
affecting low- and moderate-income neighborhoods. This communication with both financial 
markets  and  communities  allows  the  Federal  Reserve  to  act  as  a  bridge  between  the  two 
groups  and  between  local  communities  and  the  organizations  that  provide  community 
resources, such as credit counselors.  
For many borrowers who are behind on their mortgage payments, refinancing their loan is 
not  an  option.  Therefore,  the  Federal  Reserve  is  engaged  in  a  number  of  efforts  to 
encourage  the  use  of  loss-mitigation  tools  by  lenders,  servicers,  and  not-for-profit 
organizations  that  help  individual  borrowers  resolve  delinquency  issues.  The  cost  of 
foreclosure  is  high  for  everyone  involved;  estimates  of  the  direct  losses  resulting  from  a 
foreclosure range from one-fifth to one-half the principal balance of a mortgage loan.3 With 
these costs in mind, the Federal Reserve, together with the other federal banking agencies, 
has  issued  guidance  urging  lenders  and  servicers  to  pursue  workout  arrangements,  when 
feasible and prudent, as an alternative to foreclosure. In some cases, temporary adjustments 
to  payments  may  not  be  sufficient,  and  more-permanent  reductions  in  interest  rates  or  an 
extension of the loan term may be required to help a borrower. In some situations, lenders 
and servicers may want to consider using principal writedowns as a way to reduce re-default 
risk or to facilitate a refinancing.  
The  Federal  Reserve's  outreach  efforts  inform  its  policymaking.  We  recently  hosted  focus 
groups to evaluate regulatory proposals on credit disclosures and held a series of informative 
hearings  on  the  Home  Ownership  and  Equity  Protection  Act  (HOEPA)  regulations.  The 
Board then issued a regulatory proposal under HOEPA that called for stricter regulations to 
prohibit  unfair  and  deceptive  practices  in  the  mortgage  market.  By  targeting  protections  to 
borrowers who face the most risk of experiencing unfair or deceptive practices, the proposal 
seeks to protect consumers and preserve consumer choice in mortgage products. We have 
also  sought  to  provide  lenders  with  clear  standards  that,  without  being  overly  prescriptive, 
preserve access to responsible credit for qualified borrowers. The proposal covers the entire 
subprime market, not just lenders supervised by the federal banking agencies, and focuses 
attention on the areas of greatest risk – while preserving consumers' access to responsible 
credit. The proposal addresses the extension of credit without consideration of a borrower's 
                                                 
3   Liz Laderman (March 2008), "The Efficacy of Mortgage Loan Workouts," Unpublished, Federal Reserve Bank 
of San Francisco. 
BIS Review 57/2008 
 3
ability to repay, verification of income and assets relied upon to make a loan, prepayment 
penalties, and escrow accounts for taxes and insurance. The comment period ended on April 
8, and we are currently reviewing the more than 4,000 comment letters received.  
Legislative  initiatives  that  would  allow  the  Federal  Housing  Administration  to  increase  its 
scale to reach a wider range of borrowers and develop appropriate underwriting and pricing 
methodologies  to  deal  with  any  increased  risk  and  another  that  would  strengthen  the 
oversight of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac are important compliments to our regulatory efforts 
to strengthen the housing markets. 
Another  major  outreach  effort  involves  gathering  information  on  the  best  practices  for 
addressing community development issues and then disseminating that information through 
publications, meetings, and forums. Since January 2007, Community Affairs offices across 
the Federal Reserve System have sponsored or cosponsored more than 75 events related to 
foreclosures,  reaching  more  than  5,800  lenders,  counselors,  community  development 
specialists, policymakers, and others. Beginning next month, the Community Affairs function 
will host a series of System-wide forums in order to further examine the impact foreclosures 
have  on  neighborhoods  in  both  weak  and  strong  housing  markets,  as  well  as  the  tools 
available to address the impacts of foreclosures.  
The Federal Reserve continues to provide educational resources to help consumers make 
informed  personal  financial  decisions,  such  as  choosing  the  right  mortgage.  We  provide  a 
variety of materials and other resources, including websites, to help consumers understand 
mortgage-  and  foreclosure-related  issues,  and  to  help  lenders  educate  borrowers.  The 
Federal  Reserve  Banks,  through  their  Community  Affairs  offices,  are  working  to  establish 
foreclosure-mitigation  resources  on  their  websites  for  use  by  municipalities,  housing 
counselors, and community groups. 
The Federal Reserve System's partnership with NeighborWorks America 
The  Federal  Reserve's  most  recent  undertaking  to  address  foreclosure  issues  is  the 
partnership  we  are  announcing  today  with  NeighborWorks  America.  Specifically,  this 
partnership will focus on efforts to stabilize neighborhoods that have experienced high rates 
of foreclosures. This new partnership not only leverages our ability to conduct data analysis, 
research, and outreach, it builds on our existing working relationship as one of the federal 
agencies  represented  on  the  NeighborWorks  America  board  of  directors.  Together,  the 
Federal  Reserve  and  NeighborWorks  America  will  develop  and  deploy  resources,  tools, 
strategies, and best practices for mitigating the impact of foreclosures across the country. 
The  cost  of  foreclosures  is  not  limited  to  individual  homeowners.  Communities  in  which  a 
high  number  of  foreclosures  have  occurred  are  increasingly  faced  with  large  numbers  of 
properties held by lenders or servicers as "real estate owned," or "REO." REO is costly to 
hold, and many lenders are not well equipped to handle large REO inventories. As a result, 
the  number  of  vacant  homes  in  some  neighborhoods  has  increased  markedly.  After 
averaging  about  1.7  percent  starting  in  1990  through  2006,  the  home-vacancy  rate  rose 
sharply in 2006 and hit 2.9 percent in the first quarter of 2008, according to the U.S. Census 
Bureau.  
Properties left vacant for long periods have many negative effects on a community. Research 
indicates that foreclosures tend to reduce the value of nearby properties; the magnitude of 
these price declines appears to differ, depending on the presence of variables such as the 
strength of the local housing market or the distance between a foreclosed home and other 
surrounding homes.4 Moreover, neighborhoods that have significant concentrations of vacant 
                                                 
4   Dan Immergluck and Geoff Smith (June 2005), "There Goes the Neighborhood: The Effect of Single-Family 
Mortgage  Foreclosures  on  Property  Values,"  Woodstock  Institute;  William  C.  Apgar  and  Mark  Duda, 
4 
 BIS Review 57/2008
properties are not attractive to potential buyers, further challenging community-stabilization 
efforts.  
Vacant  homes  also  drain  the  coffers  of  municipalities,  who  must  secure  the  homes  from 
crime,  keep  them  clear  of  trash,  or  in  extreme  cases,  demolish  them  in  order  to  maintain 
stability in the broader community.5 For example, the chief of regional development for the 
City  of  Cleveland  estimates  that  the  city  will  spend  $65  million  each  year  for  five  years  to 
address costs related to abandoned properties.6 Not only are these costs high, they come at 
a time when tax revenues are generally decreasing because of declining home values.  
As state and local governments face diminished resources for dealing with vacant properties, 
many  nonprofit  organizations  are  likewise  struggling  with  capacity  issues.  We  have  heard 
from many nonprofit community development organizations that foreclosures, and the impact 
on the neighborhoods affected by them, limit the organizations' ability to proactively engage 
in  their  previous  development  activities.  As  a  member  of  the  board  of  NeighborWorks 
America, I am keenly aware of the resources needed to deal with community stabilization in 
the wake of foreclosures.  
I am also aware of some promising examples of programs that NeighborWorks affiliates have 
developed to address problems associated with vacant and abandoned homes. In Chicago, 
the  Neighborhood  Housing  Services  Redevelopment  Corporation,  in  cooperation  with  the 
city, has acquired hundreds of abandoned properties from several sources, such as HUD, 
REO from financial institutions, and private owners. The properties are then rehabilitated and 
sold  to  owner-occupants,  frequently  with  appraisal-gap  subsidies  provided  by  the  city  and 
federal  resources.  In  other  highly  depressed  housing  markets  across  the  country, 
municipalities  often  demolish  the  worst-quality  units  in  order  to  mitigate  safety  hazards, 
reduce the total number of vacant homes, and restore the quality of life in the community.  
The purpose of our partnership with NeighborWorks America is to support local communities 
as  they  assess  local  housing  conditions  and  evaluate  responses  to  the  challenges  before 
them. The partnership will develop and deliver training designed to help local communities 
acquire,  rehabilitate,  and  manage  foreclosed  REO.  Working  with  NeighborWorks  America, 
the Federal Reserve will develop training resources for nonprofits and local governments to 
foster  their  understanding  of  the  foreclosure  and  REO  process  and  to  help  them  develop 
specific strategies for the sale and effective use of REO in individual markets. The ultimate 
goal is to return REO to productive use, for example, to provide affordable rental housing or 
to  supply  new,  sustainable  homeownership  opportunities  in  low-  and  moderate-income 
communities. 
Research  and  analysis  will  play  a  key  role  in  the  success  of  local  efforts.  The  Federal 
Reserve System is committed to providing NeighborWorks and others with timely reports and 
information so that foreclosure-mitigation resources can be effectively targeted to local areas. 
For  example,  the  Federal  Reserve  may  map  mortgage-delinquency  rates  in  specific 
metropolitan  areas,  to  help  local  governments  and  nonprofits  develop  and  prioritize  their 
strategies for stabilizing communities.  
As  demonstrated  by  our  partnership  with  NeighborWorks  America,  the  Federal  Reserve 
System  is  committed  to  supporting  sustainable,  healthy  communities.  Bringing  nonprofits, 
local  government  representatives,  and  financial  market  participants  together  to  share 
                                                                                                                                                      
Impact  of  Today's  Mortgage  Foreclosure  Boom,"  Minneapolis, 
"Collateral  Damage:  The  Municipal 
Homeownership Preservation Foundation. 
5   William  C.  Apgar  and  Duda,  Mark,  "Collateral  Damage:  The  Municipal  Impact  of  Today's  Mortgage 
Foreclosure Boom," Minneapolis, Homeownership Preservation Foundation. 
6   Chris Warren (March 5, 2008), "Presentation to Consumer Advisory Council of the Federal Reserve Board," 
City of Cleveland. 
BIS Review 57/2008 
 5
information and develop best practices for addressing the negative impacts of foreclosures 
on  neighborhoods  is  the  next  phase  of  this  commitment.  Leveraging  the  System's  unique 
structure  of  Banks  and  Branches  and  NeighborWorks  America's  broad  local  presence  will 
allow us to make our research and outreach broadly available to nonprofits and community 
leaders.  
Conclusion 
As  the  Federal  Reserve  builds  on  its  consumer  protection  efforts  in  order  to  mitigate 
foreclosures  for  current  homeowners,  we  are  also  concerned  about  the  impact  current 
mortgage  market  problems  are  having  on  individual  communities.  The challenges of  rising 
foreclosures are significant at the state and local level and the nature of the problem varies 
by  location.  Through  its  structure,  the  Federal  Reserve  System  is  attuned  to  local  issues, 
which  both  informs  its  national  policymaking  and  allows  for  responses  tailored  to  local 
conditions.  We  are  committed  to  continuing  to  strengthen  our  relationships  with  local 
stakeholders.  Our  partnership  with  NeighborWorks  America  is  an  important  part  of  that 
commitment. A unified effort is essential to mitigating and offsetting the negative impact of 
foreclosures. 
6 
 BIS Review 57/2008
