Jürgen Stark: The agenda for the competitiveness of Europe’s economy 
and financial system 
Speech by Mr Jürgen Stark, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
at Ambrosetti Finance Workshop, Cernobbio, Italy, 5 April 2008. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
I wish to thank the organisers of this event (Ambrosetti) for their invitation, which allows me 
to speak about the competitiveness of the euro area – a topic which has even become more 
of a prime concern in many advanced countries in view of the increasing challenges resulting 
from globalisation. Given the varied facets of “competitiveness” – that I broadly define as “the 
ability of an economy to compete in international markets” – I would like to start by reviewing 
some  specific  aspects  of  economic  and  financial  performance  of  the  euro  area.  I  would 
continue thereafter with some aspects regarding the performance of the euro area banking 
sector,  including  the  link  between  financial  development  and  the  transmission  of monetary 
policy. Finally, with a view to reforms which aim at improving further the performance of the 
euro area economy and financial system, I will draw some lessons from the recent financial 
turmoil. 
Real and financial aspects of euro area competitiveness 
Starting by an assessment of the competitiveness of euro area firms and thus their capacity 
to play a leading role in world markets, losses in world export market shares over the last 
decade point to increasing challenges for the euro area. While being partly an adjustment to 
the  emergence  of  new  competitors,  and  most  notably  China  and  India,  with  lower  labour 
costs,  this  may  in  principle  also  reflect  losses  in  price  competitiveness  against  other 
advanced  competitors  or  a  more  unfavourable  export  specialisation.  Nevertheless,  it  is 
important to note that most other advanced competitors have also experienced export market 
share  losses  over  the  same  period.  On  a  more  positive  note,  recent  analyses  of  highly 
disaggregated  data,  at  the  product  and  variety  level,  further  show  that  instead  European 
firms  have  gained  market  shares  in  the  high-price  and  high-quality  segment  of  mature 
sectors.1  
However,  important  differences  remain  with  regard  to  the  export  performance  across 
individual  euro  area  countries.  Unfavourable  price  and  cost  developments  thereby  often 
seem to have been a major cause of a weaker export performance. Contrarily, the relatively 
stronger export performance of Germany appears, to a large extent, be due to very moderate 
increases in labour costs. Other factors such as differences in the export specialisation – the 
product  range  and  product  quality  –  and  the  geographical  orientation  certainly  have  also 
played a role. For example, due to its higher share of capital goods exports, Germany might 
have also benefited, to a greater extent, than both Italy and France, from the sustained world 
demand.  Italy  and  France,  by  contrast,  have  a  significantly  higher  export  specialisation  in 
consumer goods.  
In the medium-term, however, it is in particular the lower productivity growth, which weighs 
on  the  competitiveness  of  European  firms.  Since  the  mid-1990s,  productivity  has  slowed 
down substantially in the euro area, leading to a productivity gap with the US. While this gap 
is closing more recently, improvements in euro area productivity seem to be cyclical and not 
of  a  structural  nature.  At  the  same  time,  labour  markets  in  euro  area  countries  have 
                                                 
1   See Fontagné et al. (2008). 
BIS Review 41/2008 
 1
witnessed an increase in participation rate and a decline in the unemployment rate. However, 
the employment rate still falls behind the objective of 70% set by the Lisbon strategy, and 
unemployment rates remain unacceptably high in a number of euro area countries. These 
weaknesses in economic performance point to continued rigidities and imperfections in the 
euro area economy. 
To ensure that the advantage of European exporters in specific high value added varieties is 
not eroded over time, to regain price competitiveness across all euro area countries, and to 
improve  labour  market  performance  and  potential  output  growth,  the  euro  area  needs  to 
implement  structural  reforms  directed  to  boost  productivity  growth  and  enhance  the 
functioning of both labour and product markets.  
This is even more crucial in a monetary union. Since euro area countries can no longer rely 
on  monetary  policy  and  nominal  intra-euro  area  exchange  rate  adjustment  to  adjust  to 
adverse  shocks  and  the  challenges  posed  by  globalisation,  other  adjustment  mechanisms 
become even more important. In this context, wage and price flexibility plays a pivotal role. 
The smooth functioning of the price mechanism is a prerequisite for the efficient allocation of 
resources across different sectors and over time. In the same vein, the mobility of capital and 
labour across countries and regions and between different sectors is of particular importance 
in  a  monetary  union.  It  is  therefore  essential  that  governments  establish  an  institutional 
framework  which  allows  the  economic  adjustment  processes  to  function  efficiently  and 
effectively.  In  particular,  setting  appropriate  incentives  for  economic  agents  and  thus 
enhancing  the  overall  growth  performance  of  the  economy  require  further  progress  in 
following 5 main policy areas: 
• 
Policies enforcing competition in product markets and promoting further integration, 
which  will  reduce  excessive  price margins  and  set  incentives  for  entrepreneurs  to 
become more productive. 
Improving the business environment, enhancing innovation and increasing the skill 
level of the workforce play a key role in boosting labour productivity.  
Increasing  the  flexibility  of  labour  market,  which  would  ensure  that  wages  are 
aligned  with  productivity  developments  and  reflect  competitiveness  at  the  sectoral 
and firm level as well as the regional employment situation. 
Other measures devoted to human capital accumulation, through improving higher 
education systems and supporting training and life-long learning, and a higher share 
and more efficient expenditure in research and development, enhance productivity 
growth in the long-run and also increase non-price competitiveness.  
In  addition,  further  efforts  are  also  needed  to  improve  the  access  to  financing, 
especially as regards small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) and the access 
of  start-up  firms  to  venture  capital  financing.  As  most  recently  highlighted  in 
empirical work2, small successful European firms are apparently less able to grow 
than comparable US firms due to the poorer access to financing. 
    Over the past decade, progress in these areas has been uneven across euro area countries. 
Some significant efforts have been made and countries see the benefits from these reforms 
coming  in.  However,  the  reform  process  needs  to  continue  and  the  past  years  of  good 
economic performance are no reason for complacency or even a reversal of past reforms. 
There is still a long way to go if we want to attain the objective of the Lisbon Strategy to make 
the European Union “the most competitive and dynamic knowledge-based economy in the 
world”. 
                                                 
2   See, among others, Philippon and Véron (2008) and Aghion, Fally and Scarpetta (2007). 
2 
 BIS Review 41/2008
Let me now turn to the competitiveness of the euro area financial sector. Financial efficiency 
has  made  large  progress  since  the  introduction  of  the  euro  and  has  contributed  to  the 
competitiveness  of  the  euro  area,  by  accelerating  the  speed  of  capital  reallocation. 
Generally,  in  an  efficient  financial system,  information  is  accessible  and  widely  distributed. 
An  efficient  financial  system  usually  enhances  economic  growth,  whereas,  by  contrast, 
information  asymmetries  or 
financing 
constraints,  often  especially  for  SMEs.  Therefore,  a  well-functioning  financial  system  is  an 
EU  policy  priority  as  it  allows  the  economy  to  fully  exploit  its  growth  potential,  fosters  the 
accumulation of capital and the diversification of risk.  
insufficiently  developed  markets  may 
lead 
to 
Evidence on euro area financial development 
Let me start with the size of capital markets, on the basis of which financial development can 
be  assessed,  which  is  an  important  feature  also  for  the  competitiveness  of  the  financial 
system.  
The size of euro area capital markets has increased markedly since the introduction of the 
euro. On average, euro area capital markets, when measuring size including both domestic 
securities  (bonds  and  stocks)  markets  and  the  amount  of  bank  lending  to  the  non-bank 
private sector, tend to be smaller than the capital markets in the United States and the United 
Kingdom, but roughly comparable in size to Japanese capital markets.  
In the euro area, Luxembourg, the Netherlands and Ireland have the largest capital markets 
relative to their economy (GDP). In addition, some euro area countries with smaller financial 
sectors have experienced strong growth in their capital markets over the past 15 years, for 
instance Ireland, Portugal and Spain. 
This development of euro area capital markets is important as financial systems with larger 
overall  capital  markets  generally  allow  a  faster  reallocation  of  capital  and  provide  easier 
financing for real investment, thus fostering productivity. Financial development increases the 
ability of industries to exploit global growth opportunities that may arise from technological 
innovation, unanticipated demand shocks or price changes.3 In particular, industries which 
are  structurally  highly  dependent  on  external  financing,  benefit  from  better  financial 
development in the sense that they are able to grow faster compared with an environment of 
less  developed  financial  systems.4  It  is  also  important  to  note  in  this  context  that  both 
securities markets and the amount of loans granted contribute positively to economic growth. 
The sometimes cited relative share of market versus bank financing therefore appears not to 
be a key variable for the positive impact of capital markets on economic growth.5 In addition, 
with  the  “originate  and  distribute”  banking  model,  the  borders  between  bank  and  market-
based financing became blurred to some extent during recent years.  
With respect to the current turbulences, the relative advantages of traditional bank financing 
versus  market-based  financing  and  the  symbiotic  relationship  between  bank  and  market-
based  financing  may  be  re-discussed.  Generally,  traditional  relationship  banking  implies 
close  monitoring  and  a  reduction  of  information  asymmetries,  whereas  market-based 
financing (including securitisation) allows a wide (re-)distribution of risk. Some rebalancing of 
these two key features may be necessary in order to achieve both an appropriate monitoring 
and sharing of risks.  
With respect to monetary policy, more developed financial markets, such as developed bond 
markets or the availability of securitisation, tend to increase competition and the speed of the 
                                                 
3   See Fisman and Love (2004). 
4   See Rajan and Zingales (1998). 
5   See Levine (2002). 
BIS Review 41/2008 
 3
pass-through of market rates to bank rates in the banking sector for specific bank product 
segments.6 Especially in those segments, for which market-based financing is an alternative 
(for instance for long-term loans to non-financial corporations), an increase in the speed of 
pass-through seems to have occurred in the euro area during recent years.  
Overall, the monetary transmission mechanism benefits from integrated and well-developed 
financial systems in the sense that it leads to a more similar and, in part, faster pass-through 
of  market  rates  to  bank  rates.  Efforts  to  strengthen  bank  competition  and  enhancing  the 
availability  of  alternative  capital  market-based  instruments  as  well  as  access  to  financing 
should therefore be expected to improve the monetary transmission mechanism.  
At the same time, one has to acknowledge that several studies7 on the productivity of the EU 
(euro  area)  from  an  industry  point  of  view  come  to  the  conclusion  that  the  differences  in 
productivity growth between the US and the EU (euro area) may be partly due to differences 
in the financial sector. While the productivity performance of the financial intermediation and 
insurance  and  pension  funds  sub-sectors  was  comparable  between  the  EU  and  the  US, 
according to some studies the main difference was in the sub-sector “activities auxiliary to 
financial  intermediation”.8  While  productivity  measurement  is  particularly  difficult  in  the 
services  sector,  and,  hence,  also  in  the  financial  sector,  such  differences  in  productivity 
growth  may  be  partly  related  to  a  higher  development  and  integration  of  the  US  financial 
system, which may facilitate the exploitation of economies of scale. At the same time, with 
respect  to  the  current  situation,  it  is  still  too  early  to  assess  the  longer-term  effects  of  the 
current turbulences on the gap in productivity growth between the two economic regions.  
In this context, there is evidence of a considerably positive effect of financial development on 
EU  economic  growth.  Assuming  that  the  EU  would  reach  the  same  level  of  financial 
development (defined as the sum of domestic credit and stock market capitalisation to GDP) 
as the US, it is estimated that the overall effect on annual EU value added growth would be 
between 0.5 and 1.0 percent.9  
Evidence on euro area financial integration 
Let me now turn to financial integration, which is one important dimension of the efficiency of 
a financial system. Let me begin by recalling that the ECB and the Eurosystem have a keen 
interest in the progress towards financial integration in Europe as it is of key importance for 
the  conduct  of  the  single  monetary  policy,  as  it  enhances  the  smooth  and  effective 
transmission  of  monetary  policy  throughout  the  euro  area.  In  this  respect,  the  Eurosystem 
strongly  supports  the  initiatives  of  the  European  Commission  in  the  field  of  financial 
integration.10  
In  a  fully  integrated  financial  system  market  players  follow  a  single  set  of  rules  and  have 
equal  access  to  the  market  and  are  treated  equally  when  operating  in  the  market.  In  this 
                                                 
6   See Gropp et al. (2007). 
7   See several  papers and  books  written  by  Bart van Ark,  Robert Inklaar, Robert McGuckin, Mary O’Mahony, 
from the University of Groningen, The Conference Board and the National Institute of Economic and Social 
Research  and  in  particular  the  report  “EU  productivity  and  competitiveness:  an  industry  perspective.  Can 
Europe  resume  the  catching-up  process?”  office  of  Official  publications  of  the  European  Communities, 
Luxembourg, 2003. 
8   According to the OECD, this sub-sector “… includes the provision of services involved in or closely related to 
financial  intermediation,  but  not  themselves  involving  financial  intermediation.".  These  services  include  for 
instance the activities of stock exchanges and brokerage services. 
9   See Guiso, Jappelli, Padula and Pagano (2005). 
10   In December 2005, the European Commission released its “White Paper on Financial Services Policy 2005-
2010”, which shapes the current policy programme in the field of financial services. 
4 
 BIS Review 41/2008
light,  let  me  mention  some  key  achievements  which  were  reached  during  the  past  with 
respect to financial integration of the euro area. 
Generally, market segments close to the single monetary policy are very much integrated, 
especially the unsecured interbank money market.  
The high integration in the euro area money markets has been supported by the high degree 
of integration of large-value payment systems.  
TARGET 2, which was introduced in November 2007, provides now an even more uniform 
wholesale payment system infrastructure by means of a single technical platform. Besides 
the  technical  harmonisation,  TARGET  2  also  discontinued  the  differentiation  in  the  fees 
between intra- and inter-Member State payments and thus, led to a further harmonisation of 
prices. Last but not least, a reduction of average prices is also expected in TARGET 2. 
Let  me  now  turn  to  euro  area  bond  markets.  Besides  the  euro  area  government  bond 
markets which are increasingly driven by common factors since the introduction of the euro 
and the removal of the exchange rate risk, also the euro area corporate bond market is quite 
well  integrated.  In  fact,  euro  area  corporate  bond  markets  seem  to  be  largely  driven  by 
common factors, rather than by country-specific ones. In addition, cross-border holdings of 
debt  securities  increased  markedly  over  the  past  ten  years,  suggesting  that  investors  are 
increasingly diversifying their portfolios across the euro area.  
Progress  has  also  been  made  in  the  integration  of  euro  area  equity  markets.  [While  local 
shocks to equity markets continue to be important, an increasing share of the total domestic 
equity volatility can be explained by euro area-wide shocks (“variance ratios”).11] As regards 
cross-border  equity  investments,  it  can  be  noted  that  euro  area  residents  doubled  their 
holdings of equity issued in other euro area countries between 1997 and 2005 (as a share of 
their total portfolio of shares issued in their own country and elsewhere in the euro area) to 
reach around 30%, in particular on account of institutional investors. By contrast, the share of 
euro  area  equity  assets  held  outside  the  euro  area  remained  at  a  much  lower  level  and 
increased only slightly. 
The euro area banking sector – strong and weak points 
Compared with securities markets, the process of financial integration has advanced more 
slowly  in  the  banking  sector.  Against  this  background,  let  me  discuss  the  strengths  and 
weaknesses of the euro area banking sector. 
Let me start the discussion of strengths and weaknesses from a structural point of view, with 
respect to the integration and efficiency of the banking markets.  
First, on the positive side, the internationalisation of EU banking groups has increased during 
recent years. This has resulted, to a large extent, from the overall rise in terms of value in 
cross-border mergers and acquisitions in the euro area banking sector since 2004. In 2005, 
the  value  of  cross-border  bank  M&A  deals  was  particularly  high,  mainly  owing  to  the 
acquisition  of  the  Bayerische  Hypo-  und  Vereinsbank  by  UniCredito  Italiano.  Generally, 
cross-border M&A activity is one way to increase competition in the banking sector, which 
tends to contribute positively to economic growth.  
While cross-border M&A activity tends to increase competition, extensive public ownership of 
banks constitutes a possible distortion of competition in the banking sector, which also works 
against the development of capital markets.  
                                                 
11   The indicators report the variance ratios, i.e. the proportion of total domestic equity volatility explained by euro 
area and US shocks. 
BIS Review 41/2008 
 5
In addition, while the integration in the wholesale and capital-market related banking market 
has  advanced  well  during  recent  years,  the  still  fragmented  retail  banking  market  can  be 
regarded  as  a  further  weakness  of  the  euro  area  banking  sector.  This  can  be  seen,  for 
instance, in the dispersion of interest rates on loans and deposits from banks to non-financial 
corporations and households.12
In  addition,  in  contrast  to  large-value  payment  systems  (TARGET,  TARGET  2),  retail 
payment  systems  in  the  euro  area  are  still  fragmented.  However,  the  SEPA  (Single  Euro 
Payments  Area)  initiative  aims  at  achieving  a  fully  integrated  market  for  retail  payment 
services in the euro area with no distinction between cross-border and national payments, 
meaning  that  in  the  end  all  euro  payments  will  be  “domestic”.  In  fact,  since  the  end  of 
January 2008, the first step has become reality with the launch of “SEPA Credit Transfer”, 
which  allows  sending  euro  payments  quickly,  and  in  the  same  way,  to  any  beneficiary  in 
Europe. Overall, the launch of SEPA is a major step in the integration of the euro area retail 
banking sector.  
In  addition  to  a  structural  discussion  of  the  strengths  and  weaknesses  of  the  euro  area 
banking sector in the light of the performance of the financial system, one may also look at 
the banking sector in the context of the financial turmoil. 
Starting from the US sub-prime market, several reasons may lie behind the spill-over of the 
turmoil  to  other  market  segments.  A  global  macroeconomic  environment  characterised  by 
sustained  growth,  low  inflation,  muted  long-term  interest  rates,  a  long  period  of  very 
favourable credit conditions, abundant market and funding liquidity, and relatively low official 
rates may have strengthened investors’ appetite for risk and increased the “hunt for yield”. 
This, in turn, may have brought about an under-pricing of risk. In addition, the “originate and 
distribute” banking model, compounded with the proliferation of new and complex financial 
instruments, notably structured finance products has contributed to a dispersion of credit risk 
in the financial system and an increased indebtedness of non-financial sectors.13  
In this context, the loosening of credit standards and a probably riskier lending attitude may 
be identified ex post as a weakness of the banking sector. As banks were able to transfer 
part of their credit risk, they were able to extend further loans.  
In addition, there was a widespread underestimation of risks and a lack of transparency in 
the context of the extensive use of derivative products, partly related to their evaluation by 
rating agencies, leading to mistrust between market participants, an increase in the cost of 
funding and liquidity shortages in the course of the turbulences. This underestimation of risks 
may be seen as another key weakness of the banking sector. 
Against this background, let me finally discuss the need for potential reforms with respect to 
preventing and handling financial crises. It seems clear that some very important lessons can 
be drawn from the turmoil for market players as well as for public authorities.  
Let me just mention few key areas where reforms are needed. First, with respect to banks, 
the turmoil has highlighted that some risk categories have been underestimated, especially 
liquidity risks relating to banks’ commitments to structured investment vehicles and conduits. 
Second, market players seem to have relied excessively on ratings of complex assets. This 
has been the case in part due to the wide distribution of risks through the financial sector 
which  made  the  assessment  of  the  value  of  the  underlying  asset  difficult  for  the  investor. 
While, on the positive side, credit risk transfer has facilitated a widespread sharing of risk in 
the  financial  system  over  recent  years,  the  recent  financial  turmoil  made  clear  that  more 
transparency and monitoring is needed on the credit risks and where they ultimately reside in 
                                                 
12   In particular the dispersion of the interest rates on loans to households for consumption purposes remained 
relatively high. This is probably the case due to both differences in product availability and statistical issues. 
13   See Cappiello, L., Briefing for the visit of the Conseil Economique et Social (CMT/0208), 18 February 2008. 
6 
 BIS Review 41/2008
the financial system. Finally, with respect to public authorities, it seems of high importance 
that  there  is  a  smooth  and  effective  cooperation  and  exchange  of  information  between 
supervisory authorities as well as between them and central banks in the detection of threats 
to the financial system. Particularly, with respect to central banks, it is their own interest to 
contribute  to  an  orderly  functioning  of  money  markets  and  to  solidly  anchor  inflation 
expectations in order to avoid additional volatility in already highly volatile financial markets. 
Concluding remarks 
Let  me  briefly  conclude by  summing  up  what  all  of  this  means  for  the  outlook  of  the  euro 
area.  
First, from the real economic side, there are encouraging signs indicating the good potential 
of  the  euro  area  to  successfully  adapt  and  to  remain  competitive  going  forward. 
Nevertheless,  there  are  important  challenges  ahead  and  to  implement  the  necessary 
structural  reforms  will  be  decisive  to  raise  productivity  growth  and,  hence,  to  foster  the 
competitiveness of euro area firms.  
Second,  with  respect  to  the  financial  side,  the  financial  development  of  the  euro  area  has 
increased markedly since the introduction of the euro. This is particularly important as a well 
developed financial system allows economies to better allocate resources to industries with 
good growth opportunities and thus experience faster overall economic growth. In addition, 
the financial integration of the euro area has made large progress during recent years. This 
has increased the competitiveness of the euro area. Notwithstanding some reforms, which 
appear  necessary  especially  following  the  experience  of  the  recent  financial  turmoil  and 
further steps which are needed on the way to a fully integrated euro area financial system, 
the progress already achieved is highly beneficial for the efficiency and competitiveness of 
the  euro  area  financial  system  and  will  ultimately  foster  the  performance  of  the  euro  area 
economy.  
Integrating  Europe’s  Financial  Markets, 
References/background material: 
Aghion, P., Fally, T. and S. Scarpetta (2007), “Credit Constraints as a Barrier to the Entry 
and Post-Entry Growth of Firms”, IZA Discussion Paper No. 3237. 
Cappiello,  L.,  Briefing  for  the  visit  of  the  Conseil  Economique  et  Social  (CMT/0208),  18 
February 2008.  
Decressin,  J.,  Faruqee,  H.,  Fonteyne,  W., 
International Monetary Fund, 2007. 
De  Santis,  R.,  The  Determinants  of  Cross-Border  M&As:  Institutional  and  financial  forces, 
Balance of Payments Review, November 2007. 
European Central Bank, Financial Integration in Europe, March 2007.  
European Central Bank, Financial Integration in Europe, March 2008. 
European Central Bank, Monthly Bulletin, Assessing the performance of financial systems, 
October 2005. 
European Central Bank, Monthly Bulletin, The contribution of the ECB and the Eurosystem to 
European financial integration, May 2006. 
European Central Bank, Monthly Bulletin, Sectoral patterns of total factor productivity growth 
in the euro area countries, Box 6, October 2007. 
European  Commission,  White  Paper  on  Financial  Services  Policy  2005-2010,  December 
2005. 
BIS Review 41/2008 
 7
Fisman,  R.,  and  Love,  I.,  Financial  Development  and  Growth  in  the  short  and  long  run, 
National Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper No. 10236, January 2004. 
Fontagné,  L.,  G.  Gaulier  and  S.  Zignago,  Specialisation  across  varieties  and  North-South 
competition, Economic Policy, January 2008. 
Gropp,  R.,  C.  Kok  Sorensen,  J.-D.  Lichtenberger,  The  dynamics  of  bank  spreads  and 
financial structure, ECB Working Paper No. 714, January 2007. 
Guiso,  L.,  Jappelli,  T.,  Padula,  M.  and  Pagano,  M.,  Financial  Market  Integration  and 
Economic Growth in the EU, Economic Policy, 2005, 19 (40), pp. 523-577. 
Hartmann, P., F. Heider, E. Papaioannou and M. Lo Duca, The role of financial markets and 
innovation  in  productivity  and  growth  in  Europe,  ECB  Occasional  Paper  Series  No.  72, 
September 2007. 
Levine,  R.,  Bank-based  or  market-based  financial  systems:  which  is  better?,  Journal  of 
Financial Intermediation, 11, 2002, pp. 1-30.  
Maddaloni,  A.,  Gap  in  the  productivity  of  the  financial  sector  between  United  States  and 
Europe (CMT/034/0106), February 2006.  
Ottaviano, G., D. Taglioni and F. di Mauro, Deeper, wider and more competitive? Monetary 
integration, Eastern enlargement and competitiveness in the European Union, ECB Working 
Paper No. 847, December 2007. 
Papaioannou,  E.  (with  contributions  from  Maddaloni,  A.),  Review  on  the  Evidence  linking 
Financial Development and Integration to Growth and Productivity, European Central Bank, 
The  role  of  financial  markets  and  innovation  for  productivity  and  growth  in  Europe,  paper 
prepared for the Informal Ecofin Meeting in Helsinki, September 2006.  
Philippon, T. and N. Véron, Financing Europe’s fast movers, Bruegel Report, January 2008. 
Rajan,  R.  G.  and  Zingales,  L.,  Financial  Dependence  and  Growth,  American  Economic 
Review, June 1998, 88 (3), pp. 559-586. 
8 
 BIS Review 41/2008
