Nout Wellink: The role of financial imbalances in the setting of monetary 
policy – lessons from the current crisis 
Introductory speech by Dr Nout Wellink, President of the Netherlands Bank and Chairman of 
the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision,  at  the  workshop  on  “The  role  of  financial 
imbalances in the setting of monetary policy. Lessons from the current crisis”, Amsterdam, 
23 June 2008. 
 The recent financial turmoil has highlighted once again that the role of financial imbalances is 
a major challenge for central banks focusing on price stability. Most of the analyses of the 
causes  of  the  financial  turbulence  that  I  have  read  stress  the  role  of  new  financial 
developments, which make this event special. But the recent crisis is just one of a series of 
episodes over the past 30 years when the paths of asset prices – most notably equities and 
housing  –  were  a  highly  distorting  factor  that  ex  post  turned  out  to  have  disruptive 
macroeconomic effects.  
The  aim  of  this  workshop  is  to  further  our  understanding  of  the  role  of  monetary  policy  in 
addressing financial imbalances. The speakers in the panel that will follow my remarks will 
discuss whether monetary policy should be actively used to prevent the build up of financial 
imbalances,  and  what  the  optimal  monetary  policy  response  should  be  when  financial 
imbalances do occur.  
This debate hinges on the question of whether we can ex ante identify imbalances that are 
building up. In my remarks, I will address this issue based on my experience as policy maker.  
In my view, there are several, interrelated ingredients of an accumulating imbalance:  
(1) 
The  first  is  low  real  long-term  interest  rates  relative  to  a  natural  rate  of  interest, 
particularly  in  a  context  of  a  robust  economy  characterised  by  high  productivity 
growth, strong economic growth and low inflation. It is well known that the natural 
rate of interest is difficult to estimate – just think about the challenge of assessing 
changes  in  productivity  growth.  But  I  think  that  a  comparison  with  a  historical 
average of past actual rates can give an idea of whether interest rates are out of 
line.  
Low interest rates underpin the second ingredient, which the recent financial turmoil 
has brought to everyone’s attention – strong credit growth. The current intellectual 
debate highlights how standard macroeconomic theories in the Lucasian tradition – 
based on optimizing agents with rational expectations, complete markets and fully 
flexible prices – have a hard time assigning credit a relevant role. Economists are 
therefore increasingly turning for insights to the theories of Minsky or Kindleberger, 
which  were  published  in  the  1970s,  or,  even  further  back,  to  the  business  cycle 
theories dominant in England in the 1920s, and Hayek’s work from the 1930s.  
The third element relates to the high levels of debt that can result from a prolonged 
period of strong credit growth, and which make the economy vulnerable to negative 
shocks. In my view, the importance of the stock of debt is a manifestation of a more 
general  phenomenon,  whereby  in  a  context  of  disequilibrium  –  such  as  the 
accumulation  of  financial  imbalances  –  stocks  dominate  flows  as  determinants  of 
macroeconomic  dynamics.  When  critical  stock-flow  ratios  become  very  large, 
financial market players may at first become suspicious and then very rapidly flee 
into holdings of liquid assets, thus triggering a financial turbulence.  
The fourth ingredient is sharply rising asset prices – typically in equity or real estate 
markets.  While  an  asset  price  bubble  is  notoriously  difficult  to  identify,  here  again 
deviations from some form of historical trend can give some guidance.  
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
BIS Review 84/2008 
 1
(5) 
In  an  international  dimension,  sizeable  current  account  deficits  and  high  levels  of 
international debt can point to imbalances that can have disruptive effects. While we 
all know how this can play out in emerging market economies, such episodes also 
occurred in industrial economies – just think for example about the Nordic banking 
crises in the late 1980s–early 1990s. In the current context of global imbalances, it 
has been argued that the large current account deficit and rising international debt in 
the United States reflects the large decline in savings by US households during the 
housing credit bubble.  
But  how  can  we  quantitatively  verify  the  existence  and  magnitude  of  financial  imbalances 
along these five dimensions? This is a challenge for policy makers, academics and market 
participants  alike.  There  is  an  empirical  literature  that  suggests  that  financial  imbalances 
might be detected but its findings are far from undisputed.  
In my view, there is definitely a need for more in-depth research that helps us understand the 
dynamics  of  the  accumulation  of  imbalances,  even  if  this  research  comes  up  with  interval 
estimates  rather  than  point  estimates.  These  margins  (or  bands)  might  be  large  but 
exceeding them would definitely be a sign that something is going wrong. 
But even if imbalances might not be accurately assessed by empirical research, based on 
my  personal  experience  as  a  policy  maker  there  is  clearly  a  sense  in  which  they  can  be 
detected. “If it looks like a duck and quacks like a duck, chances are it is a duck”.  
To  illustrate  this,  let  me  go  through  a  list  of  episodes  that  highlight  how  a  “duck”  can  be 
recognized  by  low  interest  rates,  strong  credit  growth,  high  debt  levels  and  sharply  rising 
asset prices. Having to be selective, I will pick out four historical episodes, before turning to 
the financial turmoil that started in August last year:  
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
The housing bubble in the Netherlands in the 1970s  
the Japanese asset bubble in the 1980s  
the dot.com bubble in the United States in the 1990s  
the boom in the Dutch housing market in the 1990s. 
The housing bubble in the Netherlands in the 1970s  
(1)  
Banks  and  households  in  the  Netherlands  tend  to  forget  that  in  the  1970s  we  had  a  real 
estate bubble that burst violently. In 1975-76, the Dutch mortgage and housing markets went 
through a period of abnormal growth. Low – at some point even negative – real interest rates 
in a context of high inflation supported a sharp rise in demand for housing, while banks and 
insurance companies pushed households to take out as high as possible loans.1 Financial 
innovation,  which  created  new  forms  of  mortgages,  also  spurred  credit  growth,  as  did  the 
extension of governmental guarantees from mortgages for new houses to all types of house 
purchases. Household debt and house prices rose sharply.  
DNB was clearly worried about these developments. The explosive mortgage growth, which 
peaked at an annual rate of 29% in 1976, and the support it had received from governmental 
policies,  were  highlighted  in  1976  in  our  Annual  Report.2  An  attempt  to  introduce  credit 
restrictions  was  initially  thwarted  by  the  government.  When  they  were  finally  imposed  in 
1977, they contributed to slowing mortgage lending, but it was too late to prevent a collapse 
of the Dutch housing market. In 1976, house prices started to tumble, as interest rates rose 
                                                 
1   Groeneveld (1997). 
2   See De Haas et al (2000). 
2 
 BIS Review 84/2008
and the economy went into a recession. By 1983, house prices had fallen by around 25% 
and mortgage lending stopped growing.  
The Japanese asset bubble in the 1980s  
(2)  
The Japanese asset bubble of the 1980s is a trauma that has had an important influence on 
policy makers around the globe. In the second half of the 1980s, asset prices – most notably 
equity and housing prices – rose sharply and bank lending grew at a fast pace. These trends 
occurred  against  the  background  of  an  overheating  economy,  while  inflation  remained 
subdued,  mainly  because  of  the  rapid  appreciation  of  the  yen.3  The  aggressive  lending 
behaviour of over-optimistic banks in many ways resembled that of Dutch banks in the mid-
1970s.  Interest  rates  remained  relatively  low  until  the  Bank  of  Japan  tightened  monetary 
policy in 1987 and more substantially in 1989. Equity and housing prices collapsed in 1989, 
dragging  balance  sheets  of  banks,  firms  and  households  into  a  prolonged  crisis,  and 
eventually leading to a credit crunch.  
The dot.com bubble in the United States in the 1990s  
(3)  
US stock prices, an in particular those of the IT sector, rallied in the late 1990s in a context of 
strong productivity growth, low and stable inflation, and low interest rates. At the time, many 
observers saw this as a manifestation of a so-called “new economy”. But others pointed to 
low  or  even  negative  savings  rates  coupled  with  a  growing  current  account  deficit  as 
unsustainable imbalances. In the introduction to our Annual Report in 1998, we wrote that it 
was clear that at some point a correction had to happen but that it was hard to predict its 
trigger  and  its  timing.4  In  the  event,  the  boom  ended  in  coincidence  with  a  tightening  of 
monetary policy and was followed by a recession, with price changes in the United States 
approaching deflation in the early 2000s.  
The boom in the Dutch housing market in the 1990s.  
(4)  
In some respects, the housing market boom of the 1990s resembled the bubble of the mid-
1970s.  Between  1994  and  2000,  mortgage  lending  grew  very  rapidly  in  a  context  of  rapid 
economic growth, reaching annual rates of 15%. As a result, mortgage debt as a percentage 
of  GNP  became  one  the  highest  in  Europe.  As  house  prices  boomed,  home  equity 
withdrawals – used for home improvements but also to finance consumption or investment 
on the stock market – grew rapidly.5  
Similarly to the boom of the 1970s, credit growth was supported by low and falling interest 
rates, banks’ efforts to encourage mortgage borrowing – by relaxing their acceptance criteria 
in an effort to increase their market share – and financial innovation, in the form of new types 
of mortgages. Demographic factors or fiscal legislation also played a role.  
This said, a main difference between the 1990s housing boom and the bubble in the mid-
1970s is that supply side developments, and in particular the unusually rigid supply of new 
houses, played a much more prominent role in the 1990s (DNB, 2008a).  
                                                 
3   See  Ito  and  Mishkin  (2004).  The  influence  of  the  appreciation  of  the  yen  on  the  Bank  of  Japan’s 
accommodative monetary policy in the second half of the 1990s is discussed in Ito (1992). 
4   See DNB (1998). 
5   See DNB (1999, 2002). Data for 2003, when the growth of house prices and home equity withdrawals had 
moderated, indicated that 70% of home equity withdrawal where used for home improvement (DNB, 2003). 
BIS Review 84/2008 
 3
At  DNB  we  monitored  these  developments  very  closely  and  discussed  whether  the  strong 
growth in mortgage lending could be followed by a sudden collapse in the housing market.6 
A study was commissioned by DNB to carefully examine bank credit in the Netherlands.7 In 
the foreword, I stressed how previous experiences in the United Kingdom and Scandinavian 
countries led to a decoupling from fundamentals and to serious consequences once credit 
growth collapsed. I concluded that, “an excessive credit growth can hold risks for both macro 
and financial stability.” In contrast to the 1970s housing bubble, the boom in the 1990s did 
not  lead  to  a  financial  crisis.  In  the  early  2000s,  the  growth  of  house  prices  and  credit 
dampened against the background of falling disposable income and rising unemployment, as 
a result of slowing global growth and rising interest rates.  
The current turmoil  
(5)  
Let  me  turn  to  the  recent  financial  crisis  and  pose  the  question  of  whether  there  was 
evidence  of  excesses  in  financial markets  in  the  years  before  the  crisis  erupted  in  August 
2007.  
In the years before the crisis, low and stable consumer price inflation was accompanied by 
asset  price inflation  that  reflected  underlying  imbalances.  In  particular,  market  participants’ 
overly  optimistic  risk  assessments  contributed  to  keeping  long-term  interest  rates  at  low 
levels which – we know now – were unwarranted. The environment of low (real, long-term) 
interest rates and high credit growth in 2003-04 appears ex post to have been conducive to 
the problems that emerged last year.  
As I recently stated elsewhere, “many of the risks that crystallised in the past year were on 
our  radar  screen  long  before  the  crisis  started.”8  Over  the  past  years,  excessive  risk 
tolerance, hazardous risk transfer mechanisms and possible shortcomings of the originate-
to-distribute model were time and again analysed in Financial Stability Reports – including 
our own Overview of Financial Stability.9  
Why  we  have  not  been  fully  able  to  translate  these  risk  assessments  into  an  efficacious 
preventive action is something that we need to reflect on very carefully. Can monetary policy 
lean  against  the  wind  and  be  used  as  an  instrument  to  prevent  the  accumulation  of 
imbalances? And how should it react to the problems brought about by a sudden unwinding 
of  imbalances?  I  hope  that  the  market  participants,  scholars  and  policymakers  that  are 
joining us today for this workshop, will help us gain insights into these important issues.  
References  
Capel and Houben (1998) “Asset inflation in the Netherlands: assessment, economic risks 
and monetary policy implications”. In The role of asset prices in the formulation of monetary 
policy, BIS Papers 5, March, pp 264-279. Reprinted in DNB Reprint series 588.  
De  Haas,  Houben,  Kakes  and  Korthorst  (2000):  “De  kredietverlening  door  Nederlandse 
banken onder de loep”, DNB Monetaire Monografien  
DNB (1976) Annual Report, Algemeen overzicht.  
                                                 
6   See e.g. Groeneveld (1997) and Capel and Houben (1998). 
7   De Haas et al, 2000. 
8   Wellink (2008). 
9   The Overview of Financial Stability published in June 2005, for example, highlighted the underestimation of 
credit  risks,  and  discussed  reasons  and  consequences  of  this  phenomenon  (DNB,  2005).  See  also  DNB 
(2006, 2007a, 2007b). 
4 
 BIS Review 84/2008
DNB (1998) Annual Report, Algemeen overzicht.  
DNB (1999) Annual Report, Algemeen overzicht.  
DNB (2002) Quarterly Bulletin, June.  
DNB (2003) Quarterly Bulletin, September.  
DNB (2005) Financial Stability Overview, no.2, June.  
DNB (2006) Annual Report, chapter on financial stability.  
DNB (2007a) Financial Stability Overview, no.5, March.  
DNB (2007b) “Will the mortgage crisis in the US affect financial stability?”, Quarterly Bulletin, 
June.  
DNB (2008) “The lagging housing market in the Netherlands”, Quarterly Bulletin, March.  
Groeneveld (1997) “Een hypotheek op de toekomst”, ESB, vol.82, nr.4121, 24 september.  
Ito (1992): “Losing face”. The International Economy, May/June, pp.46-49.  
Ito  and  Mishkin  (2004):  “Two  decades  of  Japanese  monetary  policy  and  the  deflation 
problem”. NBER Working Paper 10878, October.  
Wellink (2008) “It’s the incentive, stupid!” Speech at the conference on “Integrating micro and 
macroeconomic perspectives on financial stability”, University of Groningen, 26 May 2008.  
BIS Review 84/2008 
 5
