Ben S Bernanke: Reducing systemic risk 
Speech  by  Mr  Ben  S  Bernanke,  Chairman  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  US  Federal 
Reserve  System,  at  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Kansas  City's  Annual  Economic 
Symposium, Jackson Hole, Wyoming, 22 August 2008. 
The original speech, which contains various links to the documents mentioned, can be found on the US Federal 
Reserve System’s website.  
 In choosing the topic for this year's symposium – maintaining stability in a changing financial 
system  –  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Kansas  City  staff  is,  once  again,  right  on  target. 
Although  we  have  seen  improved  functioning  in  some  markets,  the  financial  storm  that 
reached gale force some weeks before our last meeting here in Jackson Hole has not yet 
subsided,  and  its  effects  on  the  broader  economy  are  becoming  apparent  in  the  form  of 
softening economic activity and rising unemployment. Add to this mix a jump in inflation, in 
part  the  product  of  a  global  commodity  boom,  and  the  result  has  been  one  of  the  most 
challenging economic and policy environments in memory.  
The Federal Reserve's response to this crisis has consisted of three key elements. First, we 
eased  monetary  policy  substantially,  particularly  after  indications  of  economic  weakness 
proliferated around the turn of the year. In easing rapidly and proactively, we sought to offset, 
at  least  in  part,  the  tightening  of  credit  conditions  associated  with  the  crisis  and  thus  to 
mitigate the effects on the broader economy. By cushioning the first-round economic impact 
of the financial stress, we hoped also to minimize the risks of a so-called adverse feedback 
loop  in  which  economic  weakness  exacerbates  financial  stress,  which,  in  turn,  further 
damages economic prospects. 
In view of the weakening outlook and the downside risks to growth, the Federal Open Market 
Committee (FOMC) has maintained a relatively low target for the federal funds rate despite 
an increase in inflationary pressures. This strategy has been conditioned on our expectation 
that the prices of oil and other commodities would ultimately stabilize, in part as the result of 
slowing  global  growth,  and  that  this  outcome,  together  with  well-anchored  inflation 
expectations  and  increased  slack  in  resource  utilization,  would  foster  a  return  to  price 
stability in the medium run. In this regard, the recent decline in commodity prices, as well as 
the  increased  stability  of  the  dollar,  has  been  encouraging.  If  not  reversed,  these 
developments, together with a pace of growth that is likely to fall short of potential for a time, 
should  lead  inflation  to  moderate  later  this  year  and  next  year.  Nevertheless,  the  inflation 
outlook remains highly uncertain, not least because of the difficulty of predicting the future 
course  of  commodity  prices,  and  we  will  continue  to  monitor  inflation  and  inflation 
expectations closely. The FOMC is committed to achieving medium-term price stability and 
will act as necessary to attain that objective. 
The  second  element  of  our  response  has  been  to  offer  liquidity  support  to  the  financial 
markets through a variety of collateralized lending programs. I have discussed these lending 
facilities and their rationale in some detail on other occasions.1 Briefly, these programs are 
intended  to  mitigate  what  have  been,  at  times,  very  severe  strains  in  short-term  funding 
markets  and,  by  providing  an  additional  source  of  financing,  to  allow  banks  and  other 
financial institutions to deleverage in a more orderly manner. We have recently extended our 
special programs for primary dealers beyond the end of the year, based on our assessment 
                                                 
1   See,  for  example,  Ben  S.  Bernanke  (2008),  "Liquidity  Provision  by  the  Federal  Reserve",  speech  delivered 
(via satellite) at the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta Financial Markets Conference, Sea Island, Ga., May 13. 
BIS Review 100/2008 
 1
that  financial  conditions  remain  unusual  and  exigent.  We  will  continue  to  review  all  of  our 
liquidity facilities to determine if they are having their intended effects or require modification. 
The  third  element  of  our  strategy  encompasses  a  range  of  activities  and  initiatives 
undertaken in our role as financial regulator and supervisor, some of which I will describe in 
more  detail  later  in  my  remarks.  Briefly,  these  activities  include  cooperating  with  other 
regulators  to  monitor  the  health  of  individual  financial  institutions;  working  with  the  private 
sector to reduce risks in some key markets; developing new regulations, including new rules 
to  govern  mortgage  and  credit  card  lending;  taking  an  active  part  in  domestic  and 
international  efforts  to  draw  out  the  lessons  of  the  recent  experience;  and  applying  those 
lessons in our supervisory practices. 
Closely related to this third group of activities is a critical question that we as a country now 
face: how to strengthen our financial system, including our system of financial regulation and 
supervision, to reduce the frequency and severity of bouts of financial instability in the future. 
In  this  regard,  some  particularly  thorny  issues  are  raised  by  the  existence  of  financial 
institutions that may be perceived as "too big to fail" and the moral hazard issues that may 
arise when governments intervene in a financial crisis. As you know, in March the Federal 
Reserve acted to prevent the default of the investment bank Bear Stearns. For reasons that I 
will discuss shortly, those actions were necessary and justified under the circumstances that 
prevailed  at  that  time.  However,  those  events  also  have  consequences  that  must  be 
addressed. In particular, if no countervailing actions are taken, what would be perceived as 
an  implicit  expansion  of  the  safety  net  could  exacerbate  the  problem  of  "too  big  to  fail," 
possibly  resulting  in  excessive  risk-taking  and  yet  greater  systemic  risk  in  the  future. 
Mitigating  that  problem  is  one  of  the  design  challenges  that  we  face  as  we  consider  the 
future evolution of our system. 
As both the nation's central bank and a financial regulator, the Federal Reserve must be well 
prepared to make constructive contributions to the coming national debate on the future of 
the  financial  system  and  financial  regulation.  Accordingly,  we  have  set  up  a  number  of 
internal  working  groups,  consisting  of  governors,  Reserve  Bank  presidents,  and  staff,  to 
study  these  and  related  issues.  That  work  is  ongoing,  and  I  do  not  want  to  prejudge  the 
outcomes. However, in the remainder of my remarks today I will raise, in a preliminary way, 
what  I  see  as  some  promising  approaches  for  reducing  systemic  risk.  I  will  begin  by 
discussing  steps  that  are  already  under  way  to  strengthen  the  financial  infrastructure  in  a 
manner  that  should  increase  the  resilience  of  our  financial  system.  I  will  then  turn  to  a 
discussion of regulatory and supervisory practice, with particular attention to whether a more 
comprehensive, systemwide perspective in financial supervision is warranted. For the most 
part, I will leave for another occasion the issues of broader structural and statutory change, 
such as those raised by the Treasury's blueprint for regulatory reform.2  
Strengthening the financial infrastructure 
An  effective  means  of  increasing  the  resilience  of  the  financial  system  is  to  strengthen  its 
infrastructure.  For  my  purposes  today,  I  want  to  construe  "financial  infrastructure"  very 
broadly, to include not only the "hardware" components of that infrastructure – the physical 
systems on which market participants rely for the quick and accurate execution, clearing, and 
settlement  of  transactions  –  but  also  the  associated  "software,"  including  the  statutory, 
regulatory, and contractual frameworks and the business practices that govern the actions 
and obligations of market participants on both sides of each transaction. Of course, a robust 
financial infrastructure has many benefits even in normal times, including lower transactions 
costs and greater market liquidity. In periods of extreme stress, however, the quality of the 
                                                 
2   See Department of the Treasury (March 2008), Blueprint for a Modernized Financial Regulatory Structure. 
2 
 BIS Review 100/2008
financial infrastructure may prove critical. For example, it greatly affects the ability of market 
participants to quickly determine their own positions and exposures, including exposures to 
key  counterparties,  and  to  adjust  their  positions  as  necessary.  When  positions  and 
exposures  cannot  be  determined  rapidly  –  as  was  the  case,  for  example,  when  program 
trades  overwhelmed  the  system  during  the  1987  stock  market  crash  –  potential  outcomes 
include highly risk-averse behavior by market participants, sharp declines in market liquidity, 
and high volatility in asset prices. The financial infrastructure also has important effects on 
how  market  participants  respond  to  perceived  changes  in  counterparty  risk.  For  example, 
during  a  period  of  heightened  stress,  participants  may  be  willing  to  provide  liquidity  to  a 
market if a strong central counterparty is present but not otherwise. 
Considerations of this type were very much in our minds during the Bear Stearns episode in 
March. The collapse of Bear Stearns was triggered by a run of its creditors and customers, 
analogous to the run of depositors on a commercial bank. This run was surprising, however, 
in that Bear Stearns's borrowings were largely secured – that is, its lenders held collateral to 
ensure repayment even if the company itself failed. However, the illiquidity of markets in mid-
March  was  so  severe  that  creditors  lost  confidence  that  they  could  recoup  their  loans  by 
selling the collateral. Many short-term lenders declined to renew their loans, driving Bear to 
the brink of default. 
Although not an extraordinarily large company  by  many  metrics, Bear Stearns was deeply 
involved in a number of critical markets, including (as I have noted) markets for short-term 
secured  funding  as  well  as  those  for  over-the-counter  (OTC)  derivatives.  One  of  our 
concerns  was  that  the  infrastructures  of  those  markets  and  the  risk-  and  liquidity-
management  practices  of  market  participants  would  not  be  adequate  to  deal  in  an  orderly 
way with the collapse of a major counterparty. With financial conditions already quite fragile, 
the  sudden,  unanticipated  failure  of  Bear  Stearns  would  have  led  to  a  sharp  unwinding  of 
positions  in  those  markets  that  could  have  severely  shaken  the  confidence  of  market 
participants. The company's failure could also have cast doubt on the financial conditions of 
some  of  Bear  Stearns's  many  counterparties  or  of  companies  with  similar  businesses  and 
funding practices, impairing the ability of those firms to meet their funding needs or to carry 
out  normal  transactions.  As  more  firms  lost  access  to  funding,  the  vicious  circle  of  forced 
selling,  increased  volatility,  and  higher  haircuts  and  margin  calls  that  was  already  well 
advanced at the time would likely have intensified. The broader economy could hardly have 
remained  immune  from  such  severe  financial  disruptions.  Largely  because  of  these 
concerns, the Federal Reserve took actions that facilitated the purchase of Bear Stearns and 
the assumption of Bear's financial obligations by JPMorgan Chase & Co. 
This  experience  has  led  me  to  believe  that  one  of  the  best  ways  to  protect  the  financial 
system against future systemic shocks, including the possible failure of a major counterparty, 
is  by  strengthening  the  financial  infrastructure,  including  both  the  "hardware"  and  the 
"software"  components.  The  Federal  Reserve,  in  collaboration  with  the  private  sector  and 
other regulators, is intensively engaged in such efforts. For example, since September 2005, 
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York has been leading a joint public-private initiative to 
improve arrangements for clearing and settling trades in credit default swaps and other OTC 
derivatives.  These  efforts  include  gaining  commitments  from  private-sector  participants  to 
automate  and  standardize  the  clearing  and  settlement  process,  encouraging  improved 
netting  and  cash  settlement  arrangements,  and  supporting  the  development  of  a  central 
counterparty  for  credit  default  swaps.  More  generally,  although  customized  derivatives 
contracts  between  sophisticated  counterparties  will  continue  to  be  appropriate  in  many 
situations,  on  the  margin  it  appears  that  a  migration  of  derivatives  trading  toward  more-
standardized  instruments  and  the  increased  use  of  well-managed  central  counterparties, 
either linked to or independent of exchanges, could have a systemic benefit. 
The Federal Reserve and other authorities also are focusing on enhancing the resilience of 
the markets for triparty repurchase agreements (repos). In the triparty repo market, primary 
dealers  and  other  large  banks  and  broker-dealers  obtain  very  large  amounts  of  secured 
BIS Review 100/2008 
 3
financing from money funds and other short-term, risk-averse investors. We are encouraging 
firms to improve their management of liquidity risk and to reduce over time their reliance on 
triparty repos for overnight financing of less-liquid forms of collateral. In the longer term, we 
need to ensure that there are robust contingency plans for managing, in an orderly manner, 
the default of a major participant. We should also explore possible means of reducing this 
market's dependence on large amounts of intraday credit from the banks that facilitate the 
settlement  of  triparty  repos.  The  attainment  of  these  objectives  might  be  facilitated  by  the 
introduction  of  a  central  counterparty  but  may  also  be  achievable  under  the  current 
framework for clearing and settlement. 
Of course, like other central banks, the Federal Reserve continues to monitor systemically 
important  payment  and  settlement  systems  and  to  compare  their  performance  with 
international standards for reliability, efficiency, and safety. Unlike most other central banks, 
however,  the  Federal  Reserve  does  not  have  general  statutory  authority  to  oversee  these 
systems. Instead, we rely on a patchwork of authorities, largely derived from our role as a 
banking supervisor,  as well  as  on moral  suasion,  to  help ensure  that the  various payment 
and settlement systems have the necessary procedures and controls in place to manage the 
risks  they  face.  As  part  of  any  larger  reform,  the  Congress  should  consider  granting  the 
Federal  Reserve  explicit  oversight  authority  for  systemically  important  payment  and 
settlement systems. 
Yet another key component of the software of the financial infrastructure is the set of rules 
and  procedures  used  to  resolve  claims  on  a  market  participant  that  has  defaulted  on  its 
obligations.  In  the  overwhelming  majority  of  cases,  the  bankruptcy  laws  and  contractual 
agreements  serve  this  function  well.  However,  in  the  rare  circumstances  in  which  the 
impending or actual failure of an institution imposes substantial systemic risks, the standard 
procedures  for  resolving  institutions  may  be  inadequate.  In  the  Bear  Stearns  case,  the 
government's response was severely complicated by the lack of a clear statutory framework 
for dealing with such a situation. As I have suggested on other occasions, the Congress may 
wish to consider whether such a framework should be set up for a defined set of nonbank 
institutions.3  A  possible  approach  would  be  to  give  an  agency  –  the  Treasury  seems  an 
appropriate choice – the responsibility and the resources, under carefully specified conditions 
and  in  consultation  with  the  appropriate  supervisors,  to  intervene  in  cases  in  which  an 
impending  default  by  a  major  nonbank  financial  institution  is  judged  to  carry  significant 
systemic  risks.  The  implementation  of  such  a  resolution  scheme  does  raise  a  number  of 
complex  issues,  however,  and  further  study  will  be  needed  to  develop  specific,  workable 
proposals. 
A  stronger  infrastructure  would  help  to  reduce  systemic  risk.  Importantly,  as  my  FOMC 
colleague Gary Stern has pointed out, it would also mitigate moral hazard and the problem of 
"too big to fail" by reducing the range of circumstances in which systemic stability concerns 
might  be  expected  by  markets  to  prompt  government  intervention.4  A  statutory  resolution 
regime for nonbanks, besides reducing uncertainty, would also limit moral hazard by allowing 
the  government  to  resolve  failing  firms  in  a  way  that  is  orderly  but  also  wipes  out  equity 
holders and haircuts some creditors, analogous to what happens when a commercial bank 
fails. 
                                                 
3   Ben  S.  Bernanke  (2008),  "Financial  Regulation  and  Financial  Stability",  speech  delivered  at  the  Federal 
Deposit  Insurance  Corporation's  Forum  on  Mortgage  Lending  for  Low  and  Moderate  Income  Households, 
Arlington, Va., July 8. 
4   See, for example, Gary H. Stern and Ron J. Feldman (2004), Too Big to Fail: The Hazards of Bank Bailouts 
(Washington: Brookings Institution Press). 
4 
 BIS Review 100/2008
A systemwide approach to supervisory oversight 
The  regulation  and  supervisory  oversight  of  financial  institutions  is  another  critical  tool  for 
limiting  systemic  risk.  In  general,  effective  government  oversight  of  individual  institutions 
increases  financial  resilience  and  reduces  moral  hazard  by  attempting  to  ensure  that  all 
financial firms with access to some sort of federal safety net – including those that creditors 
may  believe  are  too  big  to  fail  –  maintain  adequate  buffers  of  capital  and  liquidity  and 
develop  comprehensive  approaches  to  risk  and  liquidity  management.  Importantly,  a  well-
designed supervisory regime complements rather than supplants market discipline. Indeed, 
regulation  can  serve  to  strengthen  market  discipline,  for  example,  by  mandating  a 
transparent disclosure regime for financial firms. 
Going  forward,  a  critical  question  for  regulators  and  supervisors  is  what  their  appropriate 
"field  of  vision"  should  be.  Under  our  current  system  of  safety-and-soundness  regulation, 
supervisors  often  focus  on  the  financial  conditions  of  individual  institutions  in  isolation.  An 
alternative approach, which has been called systemwide or macroprudential oversight, would 
broaden the mandate of regulators and supervisors to encompass consideration of potential 
systemic risks and weaknesses as well. 
At least informally, financial regulation and supervision in the United States already include 
some  macroprudential  elements.  As  one  illustration,  many  of  the  supervisory  guidances 
issued by federal bank regulators have been motivated, at least in part, by concerns that a 
particular industry trend posed risks to the stability of the banking system as a whole, not just 
to  individual  institutions.  For  example,  following  lengthy  comment  periods,  in  2006,  the 
federal banking supervisors issued formal guidance on underwriting and managing the risks 
of nontraditional mortgages, such as interest-only and negative amortization mortgages, as 
well as guidance warning banks against excessive concentrations in commercial real estate 
lending.  These  guidances  likely  would  not  have  been  issued  if  the  federal  regulators  had 
viewed  the  issues  they  addressed  as  being  isolated  to  a  few  banks.  The  regulators  were 
concerned not only about individual banks but also about the systemic risks associated with 
excessive 
industry-wide  concentrations  (of  commercial  real  estate  or  nontraditional 
mortgages)  or  an  industry-wide  pattern  of  certain  practices  (for  example,  in  underwriting 
exotic  mortgages).  Note  that,  in  warning  against  excessive  concentrations  or  common 
exposures across the banking system, regulators need not make a judgment about whether 
a  particular  asset  class  is  mispriced  –  although  rapid  changes  in  asset  prices  or  risk 
premiums  may  increase  the  level  of  concern.  Rather,  their  task  is  to  determine  the  risks 
imposed  on  the  system  as  a  whole  if  common  exposures  significantly  increase  the 
correlation of returns across institutions. 
The  development  of  supervisory  guidances  is  a  process  which  often  involves  soliciting 
comments from the industry and the public and, where applicable, developing a consensus 
among the banking regulators. In that respect, the process is not always as nimble as we 
might  like.  For  that  reason,  less-formal  processes  may  sometimes  be  more  effective  and 
timely. As a case in point, the Federal Reserve – in close cooperation with other domestic 
and  foreign  regulators  –  regularly  conducts  so-called  horizontal  reviews  of  large  financial 
institutions, focused on specific issues and practices. Recent reviews have considered topics 
such  as  leveraged  loans,  enterprise-wide  risk  management,  and  liquidity  practices.  The 
lessons learned from these reviews are shared with both the institutions participating in these 
reviews  as  well  as  other  institutions  for  which  the  information  might  be  beneficial.  Like 
supervisory  guidance,  these  reviews  help  increase  the  safety  and  soundness  of  individual 
institutions  but  they  may  also  identify  common  weaknesses  and  risks  that  may  have 
implications for broader systemic stability. In my view, making the systemic risk rationale for 
guidances and reviews more explicit is certainly feasible and would be a useful step toward a 
more systemic orientation for financial regulation and supervision. 
A  systemwide  focus  for  financial  regulation  would  also  increase  attention  to  how  the 
incentives  and  constraints  created  by  regulations  affect  behavior,  especially  risk-taking, 
BIS Review 100/2008 
 5
through the credit cycle. During a period of economic weakness, for example, a prudential 
supervisor concerned only with the safety and soundness of a particular institution will tend 
to  push  for  very  conservative  lending  policies.  In  contrast,  the  macroprudential  supervisor 
would recognize that, for the system as a whole, excessively conservative lending policies 
could  prove  counterproductive  if  they  contribute  to  a  weaker  economic  and  credit 
environment. Similarly, risk concentrations that might be acceptable at a single institution in a 
period  of  economic  expansion  could  be  dangerous  if  they  existed  at  a  large  number  of 
institutions simultaneously. I do not have the time today to do justice to the question of the 
procyclicality of, say, capital regulations and accounting rules. This topic has received a great 
deal of attention elsewhere and has also engaged the attention of regulators; in particular, 
the framers of the Basel II capital accord have made significant efforts to measure regulatory 
capital needs "through the cycle" to mitigate procyclicality. However, as we consider ways to 
strengthen the system for the future in light of what we have learned over the past year, we 
should critically examine capital regulations, provisioning policies, and other rules applied to 
financial  institutions  to  determine  whether,  collectively,  they  increase  the  procyclicality  of 
credit extension beyond the point that is best for the system as a whole.  
A yet more ambitious approach to macroprudential regulation would involve an attempt by 
regulators  to  develop  a  more  fully  integrated  overview  of  the  entire  financial  system.  In 
principle, such an approach would appear well justified, as our financial system has become 
less  bank-centered  and  because  activities  or  risk-taking  not  permitted  to  regulated 
institutions have a way of migrating to other financial firms or markets. Some caution is in 
order, however, as this more comprehensive approach would be technically demanding and 
possibly  very  costly  both  for  the  regulators  and  the  firms  they  supervise.  It  would  likely 
require at least periodic surveillance and information-gathering from a wide range of nonbank 
institutions. Increased coordination would be required among the private- and public-sector 
supervisors  of  exchanges  and  other  financial  markets  to  keep  up  to  date  with  evolving 
practices and products and to try to identify those which may pose risks outside the purview 
of  each  individual  regulator.  International  regulatory  coordination,  already  quite  extensive, 
would need to be expanded further.  
One might imagine also conducting formal stress tests, not at the firm level as occurs now, 
but  for  a  range  of  firms  and  markets  simultaneously.  Doing  so  might  reveal  important 
interactions that are missed by stress tests at the level of the individual firm. For example, 
such an exercise might suggest that a sharp change in asset prices would not only affect the 
value  of  a  particular  firm's  holdings  but  also  impair  liquidity  in  key  markets,  with  adverse 
consequences  for  the  ability  of  the  firm  to  adjust  its  risk  positions  or  obtain  funding. 
Systemwide stress tests might also highlight common exposures and "crowded trades" that 
would  not  be  visible  in  tests  confined  to  one  firm.  Again,  however,  we  should  not 
underestimate  the  technical  and  information  requirements  of  conducting  such  exercises 
effectively. Financial markets move swiftly, firms' holdings and exposures change every day, 
and  financial  transactions  do  not  respect  national  boundaries.  Thus,  the  information 
requirements  for  conducting  truly  comprehensive  macroprudential  surveillance  could  be 
daunting indeed. 
Macroprudential  supervision  also  presents  communication  issues.  For  example,  the 
expectations  of  the  public  and  of  financial  market  participants  would  have  to  be  managed 
carefully,  as  such  an  approach  would  never  eliminate  financial  crises  entirely.  Indeed,  an 
expectation by financial market participants that financial crises will never occur would create 
its own form of moral hazard and encourage behavior that would make financial crises more, 
rather than less, likely. 
With all these caveats, I believe that an increased focus on systemwide risks by regulators 
and  supervisors  is  inevitable  and  desirable.  However,  as  we  proceed  in  that  direction,  we 
would  be  wise  to  maintain  a  realistic  appreciation  of  the  difficulties  of  comprehensive 
oversight in a financial system as large, diverse, and globalized as ours. 
6 
 BIS Review 100/2008
Conclusion 
Although  we  at  the  Federal  Reserve  remain  focused  on  addressing  the  current  risks  to 
economic  and  financial  stability,  we  have  also  begun  thinking  about  the  lessons  for  the 
future.  I  have  discussed  today  two  strategies  for  reducing  systemic  risk:  strengthening  the 
financial infrastructure, broadly construed, and increasing the systemwide focus of financial 
regulation  and  supervision.  Work  on  the  financial  infrastructure  is  already  well  under  way, 
and I expect further progress as the public and private sectors cooperate to address common 
concerns.  The  adoption  of  a  regulatory  and  supervisory  approach  with  a  heavier 
macroprudential focus has a strong rationale, but we should be careful about over-promising, 
as  we  are  still  rather  far  from  having  the  capacity  to  implement  such  an  approach  in  a 
thoroughgoing  way.  The  Federal  Reserve  will  continue  to  work  with  the  Congress,  other 
regulators,  and  the  private  sector  to  explore  this  and  other  strategies  to  increase  financial 
stability.  
When we last met here in Jackson Hole, the nature of the financial crisis and its implications 
for  the  economy  were  just  coming  into  view.  A  year  later,  many  challenges  remain.  I  look 
forward  to  the  insights  into  this  experience  that  will  be  provided  by  the  papers  at  this 
conference. 
BIS Review 100/2008 
 7
