Donald L Kohn: Global economic integration and decoupling 
Speech by Mr Donald L Kohn, Vice Chairman of the Board of Governors of the US Federal 
Reserve  System,  at  the  International  Research  Forum  on  Monetary  Policy,  Frankfurt  am 
Main, Germany, 26 June 2008. 
The original speech, which contains various links to the documents mentioned, can be found on the US Federal 
Reserve System’s website. 
 During  the  past  decade,  one  of  the  most  prominent  themes  sounded  by  policymakers, 
observers,  and  analysts  of  international  economic  developments  has  been  "globalization." 
Based  on  rapid  advances  in  trade,  finance,  transportation,  and  communications,  the  world 
economy  has  become  increasingly  tightly  knit.  Large  numbers  of  the  world's  population  – 
including  those  in  China,  India,  and  the  former  Soviet  Union  –  have  emerged  from  their 
relative isolation to participate more fully in the global economic system. The impression has 
been that national borders and regional differences are becoming less and less relevant as 
businesses increasingly operate in a single global market.  
In the past year or so, however, especially as the housing sector in the United States slowed 
sharply  and  turmoil  erupted  in  many  financial  markets,  a  different  theme  has  come  to  the 
foreground: "decoupling." This term refers to apparent divergences in economic performance 
among different regions of the world economy. First, there has been a perception that the 
business  cycles  of  the  United  States  and  other  industrial  economies  are  becoming  less 
synchronized,  with  the  U.S.  economy  weakening  more  sharply  than  many  other  industrial 
economies over the past several quarters. Second, decoupling is often used to refer to the 
fact that economic growth in the emerging market economies is holding up, even as growth 
slows substantially in the United States and, to a lesser extent, elsewhere in the industrial 
world. Finally, and as a related point, observers point to the fact that even as the financial 
markets  of  many  industrial  countries  have  been  roiled  by  the  turmoil  that  emerged  last 
August,  conditions  in  the  traditionally  volatile  financial  markets  of  emerging  market 
economies have proved surprisingly resilient.  
In my talk today, I would like to address two questions: First, is the world economy genuinely 
experiencing  divergences  in  economic  and  financial  performance  being  described  as 
"decoupling"?  And  second,  if  true,  can  we  reconcile  the  perception  that  globalization  has 
made  economies  increasingly  interlinked  with  the  suggestion  that  the  most  recent  U.S. 
slowdown has not been matched by slowing elsewhere to the extent that we have seen in 
recent cycles?1  
Global integration through trade and finance 
Undoubtedly,  economies  have  become  more  integrated  in  recent  decades.  For  example, 
U.S. imports of goods and services have risen relative to the U.S. gross domestic product 
(GDP), from 10 percent in the second half of the 1980s to nearly 18 percent today. U.S. trade 
with  other  industrialized  countries  has  more  than  doubled  over  this  same  period. 
                                                 
1   The  views  I  express  are  my  own  and  not  necessarily  those  of  other  members  of  the  Board  of  Governors. 
Shaghil  Ahmed,  Steven  Kamin,  and  Michael  Leahy,  of  the  staff  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal 
Reserve System, and Linda Goldberg, of the staff of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, contributed to 
these remarks. 
BIS Review 82/2008 
 1
Industrialized  country  trade  with  emerging  market  economies  has  experienced  a  far  more 
dramatic increase.2  
These increases in trade are the natural result of various forces. Transport costs have been 
a  big  factor.  Air  shipping  costs  have  declined  over  time,  although  some  of  this  has  been 
eroded  recently  with  greater  security  costs  and  the  rise  in  fuel  prices.  Costs  of  ocean 
shipping  have  come  down,  due  to  containerization,  bulk  shipping,  and  other  efficiencies.3 
Policy-induced  barriers,  such  as  tariffs  and  other  means  of  restraining  international  trade, 
also  have  declined,  with  progress  especially  marked  in  developing  Asia  and  in  Eastern 
Europe after the breakup of the Soviet Union.  
Additionally,  information  about  production  opportunities  in  foreign  countries  has  become 
easier  to  attain,  promoted  in  part  by  immigrants  and  multinational  companies  facilitating 
networking  and  by  the  enhanced  availability  of  information  through  the  Internet.  These 
developments have led to expanded trade in traditional manufactured goods, but also have 
led to an expanded breadth of types of traded goods and especially services. 
As  a  consequence  of  these  developments,  internationally  integrated  production  has  risen. 
From  the  U.S.  perspective,  this  rise  has  primarily  occurred  through  growth  in  the  import 
share of intermediate inputs used across all private industries. In the last decade alone, the 
imported input share rose from around 8-1/4 percent in 1997 to 10-1/2 percent by 2006.  
The international movement of workers leads to macroeconomic consequences, particularly 
for smaller developing countries. In 2007, an estimated $240 billion in remittances went to 
developing  countries,  more  than  double  the  flow  in  2001.  These  remittances  represent  a 
significant  source  of  developing  country  income  and  broaden  the  scope  for  cyclical 
spillovers.4  
Another  area  of  impressive  growth  in  international  linkages  has  been  in  financial  services. 
We've seen increased cross-listings of stocks and more cross-border ownership and control 
of  exchanges,  banks,  and  securities  settlement  systems.  Outside  of  the  United  States,  in 
1997, 15 percent of the assets in private equity portfolios were in foreign equities. A decade 
later,  this  share  has  risen  to  24  percent.  For  U.S.  investors,  the  comparable  shares  grew 
from  9  percent  of  total  equity  portfolios  to  19  percent.  Bond  portfolios  have  also  become 
more international, especially for foreign investors. 
While  financial  integration  has  occurred  globally,  this  growth  has  been uneven.  Integration 
among industrialized countries, measured by the ratio of the sum of their foreign assets and 
liabilities  to  GDP,  has  tripled  since  1990,  while  an  analogous  measure  for  emerging  and 
developing economies has increased only about 50 percent.5  
One result of this financial integration is that the financial channels are growing in importance 
in  the  transmission  of  shocks  between  economies.6  The  extent  of  this  integration  has 
become painfully evident to investors and financial institutions during the current episode of 
financial  turmoil,  with  the  collapse  of  the  subprime  mortgage  market  in  the  United  States 
spreading losses and funding pressures to many corners of the globe.  
Recent analysis of the size and sources of spillovers between the United States, the euro 
area,  Japan,  and  other  industrial  countries  finds  a  central  role  for  international  trade.  But 
                                                 
2   Data from 1986 compared with 2007 (International Monetary Fund, 1986-2007). 
3   Hummels (forthcoming). 
4   Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta (2008); also see The World Bank (2005). 
5   Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2007). 
6  
Imbs  (2004)  shows  that  financial  integration  raises  business-cycle  synchronization  among  a  sample  of 
industrialized countries, even though financial integration leads countries to be more specialized. 
2 
 BIS Review 82/2008
spillovers also occur through commodity prices and through financial variables such as short- 
and  long-term  interest  rates  and  equity  prices.7  For  example,  when  liquidity  conditions 
tighten  in  one  country,  globally  active  banks  may  attempt  to  pull  liquidity  from  overseas 
affiliates,  reducing  the  liquidity  consequences  at  home  but  simultaneously  transmitting  the 
shock abroad.8 What is particularly interesting is that in some cases, financial linkages might 
now be more important for transmission than the traditional trade linkages.  
Decoupling during the recent U.S. slowdown 
I  turn  now  to  evidence  regarding  decoupling  during  the  recent  U.S.  slowdown.  Part  of  the 
reason the hypothesis of decoupling has gained so much traction is that the economies of 
the world had appeared particularly "coupled" during the last major downturn in the United 
States, the high-tech slowdown in 2001 and 2002. Over the two years prior, during 1999 and 
2000,  quarterly  real  GDP  growth  in  the  United  States  averaged  about  3-1/2  percent  at  an 
annual  rate;  U.S.  growth  then  slowed  sharply  to  about  1  percent  during  2001  and  2002 
before  recovering  over  the  subsequent  two  years.  In  other  major  industrialized  countries, 
average  growth  slowed  similarly,  but  the  recovery  was  slower.9  In  the  emerging  market 
world, economic growth moved in tandem with U.S. growth, falling from more than 6 percent 
to about 3-1/2 percent, then recovering to more than 6-1/2 percent.10
What  about  our  more  recent  experience?  During  the  first  three  quarters  of  2007,  the  U.S. 
economy was growing at a solid pace of about 3 percent at an annual rate. Over the next two 
quarters,  U.S.  growth  slowed  to  an  average  of  about  3/4  percent,  while  growth  in  other 
industrialized countries stayed much closer to trend rates at about 2-1/2 percent, and growth 
in the emerging market economies, at 6-1/2 percent, held up quite well.  
It is important to keep in mind, however, that we are still in the midst of the current episode. 
Financial markets remain stressed; housing markets in many countries are adjusting after a 
sharp run-up in prices; and the effects of the turmoil on economic activity in the United States 
and  elsewhere  are  still  working  themselves  out.  Accordingly,  it  is  too  early  to  tell  how 
correlated U.S. and foreign activity will have been in this period. 
One piece of research on business cycles in G-7 economies, done by staff at the Federal 
Reserve Board, shows how difficult it is to establish with any confidence that business cycles 
have become more synchronized in recent decades, despite trade and financial integration 
having clearly increased.11 Other research, which shows a modest convergence of business 
cycles  across  a  larger  group  of  industrial  economies,  fails  to  find  an  increase  in  the 
correlation of industrial country cycles with emerging market economy cycles.12
                                                 
7   Bayoumi and Swiston (2007); International Monetary Fund (2007). 
8   Cetorelli and Goldberg (2008) provide evidence of this transmission by globally active U.S. banks. 
9   The industrialized-country aggregate referred to here is a weighted average of the real GDP growth rates of 
Canada,  Denmark,  the  euro  area,  Japan,  Norway,  Sweden,  and  the  United  Kingdom.  The  weights  are 
proportional  to  U.S.  dollar-denominated  GDP  computed  at  market  exchange  rates.  Growth  in  industrialized 
countries went from about 3-1/2 percent to 1-1/2 percent, then recovered only to 1-3/4 percent. The recovery 
in the other industrialized countries took longer than in the United States, with growth picking up further after 
2004, but the pattern was broadly similar. 
10   The emerging market economies aggregate is based on the real GDP growth rates of Argentina, Brazil, Chile, 
China,  Colombia,  Hong  Kong,  India,  Indonesia,  Korea,  Malaysia,  Mexico,  Peru,  the  Philippines,  Russia, 
Singapore, South Africa, Taiwan, Thailand, Turkey, and Venezuela with the same weighting scheme as that 
used for industrial countries. 
11   Doyle and Faust (2005). 
12   Kose, Otrok, and Prasad (2008). 
BIS Review 82/2008 
 3
The other dimension of recent linkages is financial, where the evidence is clearer. First, few 
question the importance of financial linkages between the United States and other industrial 
economies,  which  is  an  area  where  decoupling  clearly  has  not  occurred  during  the  recent 
episode. While industrial country markets for stocks and bonds have displayed a high degree 
of  co-movement  for  years,  in  the  current  episode  we  are  seeing  notable  new  correlations 
across  money  markets,  with  disruptions  in  funding  markets  showing  up  in  the  euro  area, 
Switzerland, the United Kingdom, and Canada, as well as in the United States. Some of the 
effects of the U.S. subprime mortgage crisis on financial markets in these countries occurred 
as a result of direct or indirect balance sheet exposures by their financial institutions to U.S. 
securities. Other adverse consequences for foreign financial institutions occurred when entire 
markets, such as that for asset-backed commercial paper, became impaired. 
In contrast, some have pointed to the apparent resilience of financial conditions in emerging 
market  economies  during  the  past  year  as  an  example  of  decoupling.  In  particular,  the 
disruptions in the advanced economies have had only limited impacts on money markets in 
emerging  market  economies,  and  other  financial  market  indicators  in  emerging  market 
economies  appear  to  have  held  up  relatively  well.  For  example,  the  spreads  of  emerging 
market  sovereign  bond  yields  over  U.S.  Treasury  securities  have  risen  since  June  of  last 
year, but by only about 1/3 of the rise in the average U.S. corporate high-yield spread over 
U.S. Treasury securities. That rise is roughly half the average in several previous episodes of 
pressure on U.S. corporate bond prices over the period from 1998 to 2005; these episodes 
include, among others, the Russian and Long-Term Capital Management crisis of 1998, the 
2002 surge in corporate defaults and bankruptcies, and growing concerns about U.S. auto 
companies in 2005.  
In addition, while stock prices in some emerging market countries have not performed well, a 
broad  aggregate  for  these  markets  shows  stock  prices  up  over  the  past  year,  while  the 
advanced  economy  indexes  have  exhibited  double-digit  declines,  on  average.13  Certainly, 
stock  prices  in  the  emerging  market  economies  moved  downward  during  acute  periods  of 
U.S. financial stress over the past year. However, these movements were similar in scale to 
those  seen  in  industrial  country  equity  markets,  and  during  the  intervening  periods  when 
global pressures were less intense, the prices of emerging market equities rebounded more 
substantially than those of industrial countries.  
Reconciling apparent decoupling with integration 
How do we reconcile the obvious expansion of international trade, labor, and financial flows 
with the evidence, albeit mixed, of decoupling in the recent period? Three different points can 
help us achieve this reconciliation.  
The  first  point  is  purely  conceptual.  The  conventional  wisdom  is  that  greater  international 
trade  leads  demand  shocks  to  reverberate  more  intensely  across  international  markets. 
However, we need to recognize that economic theory does not predict that greater economic 
and  financial  integration  will  necessarily  result  in  increased  co-movement  of  output  across 
nations.  One  way  in  which  integration  might  lead  to  less  synchronization  is  through  the 
tendency of international trade to promote specialization of production. If economies become 
more specialized, then their economic growth, and even equity markets, may be driven more 
by developments that are specific to the industries that have taken root in each country.14  
                                                 
13   Stock price calculations are based on MSCI indexes for all emerging market economies and on the “World 
Index” for non-emerging-market economies. 
14   Catao  and  Timmermann  (2004).  The  authors  identify  high  and  low  volatility  states  over  the  past  30  years. 
They find that the country factor contribution drops markedly  when global equity market volatility rises, and 
that country-return correlations become tighter  when global and industry factors are  both in a  high-volatility 
state. 
4 
 BIS Review 82/2008
The  second  point  in  this  reconciliation  stems  from  the  observation  that  the  correlation  of 
business cycles will be specific to the shocks driving the cycles. In 2001 and 2002, the sharp 
decline in growth in the foreign countries soon after the U.S. economy slowed reflected the 
global nature of the bursting of the technology bubble and its worldwide transmission through 
equity markets and manufacturing. 
In the current slowdown, the implosion of the housing sector is playing the most prominent 
role in dragging down U.S. GDP growth. As construction utilizes local inputs and results in an 
output that is not traded internationally, its spillovers abroad are more limited. To be sure, a 
portion of the decline in domestic demand in the United States has been absorbed by foreign 
economies  as  our  imports  have  fallen  and  exports  have  risen.  However,  these  indirect 
spillovers are small compared with the more direct effects that would result from a shock in 
the tradable goods sector or from one of more global origin. Although the financial turmoil 
triggered by problems in the U.S. housing sector has been more international in scope, in 
particular with respect to other industrialized countries, its effects on the real side of foreign 
economies appears to have been limited, at least to date. 
The recent period also has been one of enhanced demand for commodities and sharp run-
ups in many commodity prices, including for fuels, metals, and food. The actual increase in 
demand is benefiting many producers of commodities and is helping to offset the effect of 
weakening  of  export  markets  in  industrial  countries,  thus  contributing  to  the  resilience  of 
output in many emerging market economies.  
The  third  and  final  point  is  that  structural  changes  in  emerging  market  economies  have 
helped  these  countries  during  the  recent  period.  One  change  in  particular  is  the 
strengthening  of  the  policy  environment.  With  improved  economic  and  financial  policies, 
emerging  market  economies  are  more  flexible  and  less  subject  to  internal  and  external 
shocks  that  scare  investors  and  disrupt  asset  markets.  Inflation  rates  have  come  down 
dramatically since 1995, in part as a result of better monetary policy, assisted in many cases 
by  more  flexible  exchange  rate  regimes  that  allowed  monetary  authorities  to  focus  more 
intensively on domestic price stability.  
In addition, structural progress has been made on the fiscal side in emerging markets. Fiscal 
balances  are  much  improved,  and  many  emerging  market  economies  are  running  current 
account  surpluses. 
the  policy  environment  have  helped  reinforce 
perceptions that emerging market assets, on average, are less risky than in the past and are 
less likely to be sold off in the event of financial disruptions and generalized retreats from 
risk, such as we have seen since August. As evidence of this, as I noted earlier, emerging 
market  credit  spreads  have  become  less  sensitive  to  movements  in  industrial  country 
corporate spreads, and this trend has been ongoing even prior to the events of the last year.  
Improvements 
in 
Inflation and decoupling 
Up until now, I have been discussing whether movements in economic activity have or have 
not decoupled from each other. But whether or not business cycles have diverged, it is clear 
that  the  sharp  increase  in  many  commodity  prices  has  given  rise  to  highly  coincident 
increases in inflation rates around the world. In industrialized economies, such as the United 
States, rising inflation has chiefly reflected the surge in energy prices, whereas in developing 
countries, for which food takes up more of household budgets, rising food costs have been a 
more important culprit. The reasons for the trajectory and persistence of increases in prices 
of  food  and  energy  this  year,  as  global  growth  has  moderated,  are  not  entirely  clear.  The 
upward trend in prices of food and energy over the past several years, however, importantly 
reflects  the  pressures  posed  by  rapidly  growing  demand  in  developing  economies  against 
relatively inelastic global supplies of commodities. 
For the moment, higher headline rates of inflation have shown only a few tentative signs of 
embedding  themselves  in  core  inflation  or  in  longer-term  inflation  expectations.  However, 
BIS Review 82/2008 
 5
policymakers  around  the  world  must  monitor  the  situation  carefully  for  signs  that  the 
increases in relative prices globally do not generate persistently higher inflation. Additionally, 
in  those  countries  where  strong  commodity  demands  are  associated  with  rapid  growth  in 
aggregate demand that outstrips potential supply, actions to contain inflation by restraining 
aggregate demand would contribute to global price stability. 
Conclusion 
To  sum  up,  the  evidence  sometimes  presented  as  indicative  of  a  divergence  in  economic 
performance, referred to as decoupling, is not definitive. It is certainly the case that in recent 
quarters, the U.S. economy slowed to a greater extent than other industrial economies, and 
economic  activity  in  the  industrial  economies,  in  aggregate,  has  slowed  more  than  in  the 
emerging  market  economies.  This  experience  contrasts  with  that  near  the  start  of  this 
decade,  when  the  economic  downturn  of  2001  through  2002  was  felt  more  uniformly 
throughout  the  global  economy.  In  addition,  financial  conditions  in  most  emerging  market 
economies  have  remained  relatively  stable,  considering  the  turmoil  that  overtook  industrial 
country financial markets over the past year. 
Even so, neither economic growth nor financial markets in the different regions of the world 
moved in lockstep in the past, nor are they expected to do so across all business cycles. It is 
far from clear that the divergences in performance we have seen of late, which are tentative 
in any event, represent distinct breaks from historical benchmarks. The recent divergences of 
economic performance reflect a particular set of shocks that have hit the global economy, as 
well as changes in the way that different economies have responded to those shocks.  
As our global economy becomes more intertwined and complex, the nature and transmission 
of  business  cycles  and  the  associated  policy  responses  will  no  doubt  continue  to  evolve. 
Economies benefit from having independent monetary policies that provide room to respond 
flexibly to alternative configurations of economic and financial shocks. These benefits could 
be  increased  if  exchange  rate  flexibility  were  to  become  more  widespread  and  monetary 
policies given greater latitude to respond to shocks wherever they originate. 
References 
Bayoumi,  Tamim,  and  Andrew  Swiston  (2007).  "Foreign  Entanglements:  Estimating  the 
Source  and  Size  of  Spillovers  Across  Industrial  Countries  (692  KB  PDF)",  IMF  Working 
Paper 07/182. Washington: International Monetary Fund, July. 
Catão,  Luis,  and  Allan  Timmermann  (2004).  "Country  and  Industry  Dynamics  in  Stock 
Returns",  CEPR  Discussion  Paper  4368.  London:  Centre  for  Economic  Policy  Research, 
April. 
Cetorelli, Nicola, and Linda Goldberg (2008). "Banking Globalization, Monetary Transmission 
and the Lending Channel (250 KB PDF)", NBER Working Paper Series 14101. Cambridge, 
Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, June.  
Corrado,  Carol,  Paul  Lengermann,  and  Larry  Slifman  (2007).  "The  Contribution  of 
Multinational Corporations to U.S. Productivity Growth, 1977-2000," Finance and Economics 
Discussion  Series  2007-21.  Washington:  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal  Reserve 
System, November. 
Doyle,  Brian,  and  Jon  Faust  (2005).  "Breaks  in  the  Variability  and  Comovement  of  G-7 
Economic Growth", Review of Economics and Statistics, vol. 87 (November), pp. 721-40. 
Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta (2008). Overview from the conference entitled "Remittances 
and the Macroeconomy," February 21-22. 
6 
 BIS Review 82/2008
Imbs,  Jean  (2004).  "Trade,  Finance,  Specialization,  and  Synchronization",  Review  of 
Economics and Statistics, vol. 86 (August), pp. 723-34. 
Hummels, David (forthcoming). "Transportation Costs and International Trade in the Second 
Era of Globalization," Journal of Economic Perspectives. 
International Monetary Fund, Statistics Department (1986-2007). Direction of Trade Statistics 
Yearbook. Washington: International Monetary Fund. 
International Monetary Fund (2007). World Economic Outlook (April). 
Kose,  M.  Ayhan,  Christopher  Otrok,  and  Eswar  Prasad  (forthcoming).  "Global  Business 
Cycles:  Convergence  or  Decoupling?"  IMF  Working  Paper.  Washington:  International 
Monetary Fund. 
Kurz, Christopher J. (2006). "Outstanding Outsourcers: A Firm- and Plant-Level Analysis of 
Production  Sharing",  Finance  and  Economics  Discussion  Series  2006-04.  Washington: 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, March. 
Lane, Philip R., and Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti (2007). "The External Wealth of Nations Mark 
II: Revised and Extended Estimates of Foreign Assets and Liabilities, 1970-2004", Journal of 
International Economics, vol. 73, pp. 223-50. 
The  World  Bank  (2005).  Global  Economic  Prospects  2006:  Economic  Implications  of 
Remittances and Migration. Washington: World Bank Publications. 
Yuskavage,  Robert  E.,  Erich  H.  Strassner,  and  Gabriel  W.  Medeiros  (2008).  "Domestic 
Outsourcing  and  Imported  Inputs  in  the  U.S.  Economy:  Insights  from  Integrated  Economic 
Accounts (172 KB PDF)", paper prepared for the 2008 World Congress on National Accounts 
and Economic Performance Measures for Nations, U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau 
of Economic Analysis, May 15. 
BIS Review 82/2008 
 7
