Ben S Bernanke: Challenges for health-care reform 
Speech  by  Mr  Ben  S  Bernanke,  Chairman  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  US  Federal 
Reserve System, at the Senate Finance Committee Health Reform Summit, Washington DC, 
16 June 2008. 
The  original  speech,  which  contains  various  links  to  the  documents  mentioned,  can  be  found  on  the  US  Federal  Reserve 
System’s website.  
 Improving  the  performance  of  our  health-care  system  is  without  a  doubt  one  of  the  most 
important  challenges  that  our  nation  faces.  In  recent  decades,  improvements  in  medical 
knowledge  and  standards  of  care  have  allowed  people  to  live  healthier,  longer,  and  more 
productive  lives.  New  medical  technologies  and  treatments  promise  more  and  better  to 
come. From a social point of view, we hope as many people as possible benefit from these 
advances. But health care is not only a scientific and social issue; it is an economic issue as 
well.  The  decisions  we  make  about  health-care  reform  will  affect  many  aspects  of  our 
economy,  including  the  pace  of  economic  growth,  wages  and  living  standards,  and 
government budgets, to name a few.  
By  any  measure,  the  health-care  sector  represents  a  major  segment  of  our  economy. 
Spending  on  health-care  services  currently  exceeds  15  percent  of  the  gross  domestic 
product  (GDP).  Indeed,  health-care  spending  is  the  single  largest  component  of  personal 
consumption – larger than spending on either housing or food. Importantly, health care also 
has long been, and continues to be, one of the fastest-growing sectors in the economy: Over 
the past four decades, this sector has grown, on average, at a rate of about 2-1/2 percentage 
points  faster  than  the  GDP.  Should  this  rate  of  growth  continue,  health  spending  would 
exceed 22 percent of GDP by 2020 and reach almost 30 percent of GDP by 2030.1
Health-related spending is also a large and growing share of government budgets. Last year, 
health  care  accounted  for  about  one-quarter  of  total  federal  spending.  The  Congressional 
Budget  Office  (CBO)  projects  that,  under  current  policies,  health  spending  will  account  for 
almost one-half of all federal non-interest outlays by 2050.2
As the public interest in these issues testifies, the stakes associated with health-care reform, 
both economic and social, are very high. But we must keep in mind that, for all its problems, 
the U.S. health-care system also has many strengths. We must take care that we do not lose 
what is good about our system as we try to address the significant concerns that certainly 
exist. 
In the remainder of my remarks, I will discuss three key challenges for health-care reform. 
These challenges are, in short, the issues of access, quality, and cost.  
Challenges for health-care reform 
Access 
Access to health care is the first major challenge that health-care reform must address. In 
2006, a total of 47 million Americans, or almost 16 percent of the population, lacked health 
insurance. Although the federal and state governments spent more than $35 billion to finance 
uncompensated  care  in  2004,  the  evidence  nonetheless  indicates  that  uninsured  persons 
                                                 
1   Congressional Budget Office (2007). 
2  
Ibid. 
BIS Review 78/2008 
 1
receive  less  health  care  than  those  who  are  insured  and  that  their  health  suffers  as  a 
consequence.  Per  capita  expenditures  on  health  care  for  uninsured  individuals  are,  on 
average, roughly half those for fully insured individuals.3 People who are uninsured are less 
likely to receive preventive and screening services, less likely to receive appropriate care to 
manage chronic illnesses, and more likely to die prematurely from cancer – largely because 
they tend to be diagnosed when the disease is more advanced.4 One recent study found that 
uninsured victims of automobile accidents receive 20 percent less treatment in hospitals and 
are 37 percent more likely to die of their injuries than those who are insured.5  
Quality 
The  second  key  challenge  is  improving  the  quality  of  health  care.  The  quality  of  medical 
research, training, and technology in the United States is generally very high. However, the 
quality of health care is determined not only by, say, technological advances in preventing 
and  treating  disease  but  also  by  our  ability  to  deliver  the  benefits  of  those  advances  to 
patients. For maximum impact, advances in medical knowledge must be widely disseminated 
and  consistently  and  efficiently  implemented.  But  evidence  suggests  a  disturbing  gap 
between  the  quality  of  health  services  that  can  be  provided  in  principle  and  the  quality  of 
health services that actually are provided in practice. For example, in 2000, the Institute of 
Medicine  issued  a  landmark  report  that  concluded  that  up  to  98,000 Americans  died  each 
year in hospitals as a result of medical errors.6 Many of the errors identified by the report – 
for  example,  errors  caused  by  adverse  drug  events,  improper  transfusions,  wrong-site 
surgery, and mistaken patient identity – could have been prevented if hospitals had adopted 
appropriate safety systems. Although hospitals have implemented a number of new safety 
practices since the time of that report, the scope for improving patient safety remains large.7
Inconsistent use of best practices by doctors and hospitals is also surprisingly widespread. 
For  example,  numerous  studies  have  pointed  to  the  lack  of  adherence  to  evidence-based 
guidelines for the treatment of heart attacks. In particular, it has long been well established 
that restoring blood flow to the heart and using aspirin, beta blockers, and ACE inhibitors at 
the  appropriate  times  significantly  reduce  deaths  resulting  from  heart  attacks.8  Yet  studies 
show  that  the  dissemination  of  these  treatments  occurred  only  slowly.9  More  widespread 
application of evidence-based medicine could help health-care workers make better use of 
the medical knowledge they already have to improve patients' outcomes.  
Although some patients do not receive the care they need, others receive more (and more 
expensive) care than necessary. Research on geographic variation in health-care practices 
and costs confirms this point. For example, Medicare expenditures per eligible recipient vary 
widely across regions, yet areas with the highest expenditures do not appear to have better 
health outcomes than those with the lowest expenditures; indeed, the reverse seems to be 
true.10
                                                 
3   Hadley and Holohan (2004). 
4  
Institute of Medicine (2002). 
5   Doyle (2005). 
6  
Institute of Medicine (2000). 
7   Leape and Berwick (2005). 
8   Beta blockers and ACE inhibitors are drugs that relieve stress on the heart. 
9   Joint Commission (2007). 
10   Skinner, Staiger, and Fischer (2006). 
2 
 BIS Review 78/2008
Cost 
This observation brings me to a third important challenge for health-care reform: controlling 
costs. The problem here is not only the current level of health-care spending (U.S. spending 
exceeds that of most other industrial countries) but, to an even greater degree, the continued 
rapid  growth  of  that  spending.  Per  capita  health-care  spending  in  the  United  States  has 
increased at a faster rate than per capita income for a number of decades. Should that trend 
continue, as many economists predict it will, the share of income devoted to paying for health 
care will rise relentlessly. A piece of wisdom attributed to the economist Herbert Stein holds 
that if something cannot go on forever, it will stop. At some point, health-care spending as a 
share of GDP will stop rising, but it is difficult to guess when that will be, and there is little 
sign of it yet. 
Although the high cost of health care is a frequently heard complaint, it is important to note 
that a substantial portion of the cost increases that we have seen in recent decades reflects 
improvements in both the quality and quantity of care delivered rather than higher costs of 
delivering a given level of care. Notably, new technologies, despite greatly adding to cost in 
many cases, have also yielded significant benefits in the form of better health. People put 
great value on their health, and it is not surprising that, as our society becomes wealthier, we 
would  choose  to  spend  more  on  health-care  services.  Indeed,  although  quantifying  the 
economic  value  of  improved  health  and  greater  expected  longevity  is  difficult,  most 
researchers who have undertaken an exercise of this type find that, on average, the health 
benefits  of  new  technologies  and  other  advances  have  significantly  exceed  the  economic 
costs.11
That  said,  the  evidence  also  suggests  that  the  cost  of  health  care  in  the  United  States  is 
greater  than  necessary  to  allow  us  to  achieve  the  levels  of  health  and  longevity  we  now 
enjoy. I have already mentioned research that finds large regional differences in the cost of 
treating a given condition, with high-cost areas showing no better results. The slow diffusion 
of the use of aspirin and beta blockers for treating heart-attack patients shows that cheap, 
effective  treatments  are  not  always  used,  potentially  leading  to  higher  costs  and  worse 
outcomes.  Moreover,  because  insurance  companies  and  the  government  play  such 
prominent  roles  in  financing  health  care,  patients  and  doctors  have  far  less  incentive  to 
consider the extra costs of optional tests or treatments. But, as we all know, although testing 
and  treatment  decisions  may  be  undertaken  on  the  presumption  that  "someone  else  will 
pay," the public eventually pays for all these costs, either through higher insurance premiums 
or higher taxes. 
The  effects  of  high  health-care  costs  on  government  budgets  deserve  special  note.  In  the 
United  States,  a  large  and  growing  portion  of  both  federal  and  state  expenditures  is  for 
subsidized health insurance. In 1975, federal spending on Medicare and Medicaid was about 
6  percent  of  total  non-interest  federal  spending.  Today,  that  share  is  about  23  percent. 
Because of rising costs of health care and the aging of the population, the CBO projects that, 
without  reform,  Medicare  and  Medicaid  will  be  about  35  percent  of  non-interest  federal 
spending  in  2025.12  This  trend  implies  increasingly  difficult  tradeoffs  for  legislators  and 
taxpayers, as higher government spending on health-care spending will, of necessity, require 
reductions in other government programs, higher taxes, or larger budget deficits.  
Rapid  increases  in  health  spending  also  portend  increasingly  difficult  access  to  health 
services for people with lower incomes.13 As health spending continues to outpace income, 
                                                 
11   Cutler and McClellan (2001). 
12   CBO (2007). 
13   For  the  purposes  of  this  speech,  "low  income"  means  those  in  the  bottom  20th  percentile  of  the  income 
distribution. 
BIS Review 78/2008 
 3
health insurance and out-of-pocket payments will become increasingly unaffordable.14 One 
way  that  society  has  addressed  this  problem  in  the  past  has  been  to  expand  government 
subsidies for health spending. The Medicare Part D program, which assists seniors with the 
costs of prescription drugs, is an example. However, to continue limiting the effects of rising 
medical  costs  on  household  budgets,  the  government  may  have  to  absorb  an  increasing 
proportion  of  the  nation's  total  bill  for  health  care,  putting  even  greater  pressure  on 
government budgets than official projections suggest. 
Taking on these challenges will be daunting. Because our health-care system is so complex, 
the challenges so diverse, and our knowledge so incomplete, we should not expect a single 
set of reforms to address all concerns. Rather, an eclectic approach will probably be needed. 
In  particular,  we  may  need  to  first  address  the  problems  that  seem  more  easily  managed 
rather than waiting for a solution that will address all problems at once. 
Thinking about solutions 
In  health-care  reform,  it  is  certainly  easier  to  pose  questions  than  to  provide  answers. 
Moreover, even putting aside the scope and technical complexities of the problems we face, 
the types of reforms we choose will depend importantly on value judgments and the tradeoffs 
made  among  social  objectives.  Such  choices  are  appropriately  left  to  the  public  and  their 
elected  representatives.  Consequently,  I  will  have  little  to  say  here  regarding  specific 
proposals.  However,  I  will  suggest  a  few  questions  and  considerations  that  those  seeking 
reform might wish to keep in mind. 
Regarding access, one important consideration is that people who are uninsured are not all 
alike.  They include  people  who  have  low  incomes,  people  who  may  not  be  poor  but  have 
costly  pre-existing  health  conditions,  those  whose  employers  do  not  offer  group  health 
insurance and who cannot afford to buy insurance in the more-expensive nongroup market, 
and people who are eligible for Medicaid or other programs but for some reason have not 
enrolled.  Some  people  who  can  afford  health  insurance  do  not  purchase  it,  presumably 
because they do not anticipate having significant medical expenses. Broadening access to 
health care may thus require us to consider a mix of policies. The following are some of the 
questions with which we will have to wrestle. 
First,  should  enrollment  in  a  health  insurance  program  be  mandated,  or  at  least  strongly 
encouraged, for example, through tax incentives? Supporters argue that mandates lead to 
better  risk  pooling  and  prevent  those  who  could  afford  insurance  but  choose  not  to  buy  it 
from "free-riding" on the public safety net. Opponents argue that mandates infringe on what 
should  be  an  individual  choice  and  may  require  a  substantial  government  budgetary 
commitment to help those who cannot afford insurance on their own to meet the mandate. 
Second,  should  we  continue  to  rely  on  employer-provided  health  insurance  as  the  key 
element of our system? The employees of large companies in particular typically constitute a 
good  risk-sharing  pool,  allowing  insurance  to  be  provided  at  a  lower  overall  cost.  But  the 
dominance of the insurance market by employer-provided plans means that the market for 
individual and small-group policies is underdeveloped and that the cost of such coverage is 
very high. Employer-based systems also reduce the portability of health insurance between 
jobs, which reduces labor mobility and the efficiency of the labor market as well as creating a 
burden for those changing jobs. 
Third, to help people with costly pre-existing conditions, should we impose requirements on 
insurance  companies  to  accept  all  applicants  and  mandate  the  conditions  that  must  be 
                                                 
14   For example, a recent study estimated that, without increases in the share of health spending that is publicly 
financed, the budget share of health spending for low-income elderly households would increase from about 
25 percent of their income today to about 35 percent by 2040 (Follette and Sheiner, 2007). 
4 
 BIS Review 78/2008
covered? Doing so would help some people obtain coverage, but the resulting increases in 
insurance  premiums  might  exclude  others.  An  alternative  approach  would  be  to  promote 
bare-bones, high-deductible policies that are affordable and attractive to healthy people while 
offering government help to those who need coverage for costly conditions. 
Finally, to what extent are we willing to use public funds to reduce the number of those who 
are  uninsured,  for  example,  by  providing  subsidies  to  low-income  people  not  covered  by 
Medicaid  or  to  people,  such  as  the  self-employed,  who  find  it  difficult  to  obtain  affordable 
coverage  in  the  non-group  market?  How  would  we  finance  additional  spending?  For 
instance, would we consider limiting the employers' tax exemption for the cost of employee 
health insurance? 
The issue of access to health care, though difficult politically, is in some sense the technically 
least  complex  of  the  three  challenges  I  have  identified;  it  is  mostly  about  financing,  and 
possibly regulation, rather than about medicine. Of course, access to health care is closely 
entwined with the other issues, notably the issue of cost. In particular, restraining the growth 
of  health-care  costs  would  increase  the  number  of  people  who  can  afford  insurance 
coverage. 
On the second challenge, improving the quality of health care, a number of private and public 
initiatives  have  been  undertaken  in  recent  years.  These  include  programs  to  monitor 
hospitals'  performance  in  ensuring  patient  safety  and  adherence  to  best  practices;  greater 
efforts  to  identify  and  disseminate  best  practices,  as  determined  from  clinical  trials;  and 
public  and  private  initiatives  to  increase  the  use  of  information  technology  in  health  care. 
Researchers  are  also  examining  how  the  structure  of  health-care  delivery  systems  affects 
the quality of care. For example, some evidence suggests that vertically integrated systems 
like  that  of  the  Veterans  Administration  are  quicker  to  adopt  health  information  technology 
and  have  been  more  successful  in  applying  it.  Some  instances  of  initiatives  that  aim  to 
encourage  quality 
incentives  or  disincentives  –  so-called  pay-for-
performance – have begun to emerge. Examples include accreditation practices that require 
hospitals to comply with established standards and best practices, and the recent decision 
that Medicare will not cover costs caused by certain medical errors.  
Efforts to improve the quality of health care are a vital component of comprehensive reform 
and are likely to yield high social returns. Additional research and experimentation can help 
us address difficult questions such as how best to measure quality and cost-effectiveness in 
health-care delivery and how to give doctors and hospitals incentives to adopt best practices 
and improved information technologies.  
The solutions we choose for access and quality will interact in important ways with the third 
critical issue – the issue of cost. Greater access to health care will improve health outcomes, 
but it almost certainly will raise financial costs. Increasing the quality of health care, although 
highly  desirable,  could  also  result  in  higher  total  health-care  spending.  For  example, 
increased patient screening may avoid more serious problems and thus be cost-saving, but it 
could also identify problems that might otherwise have gone untreated – a good outcome, 
certainly, but one that increases overall spending. These are certainly not arguments against 
increasing  access  or  improving  quality.  My  point  is  only  that  improving  access  and  quality 
may increase rather than reduce total costs. 
From  the  economist's  perspective,  the  question  of  whether  we  are  spending  too  much  on 
health care cannot ultimately be answered by looking at total expenditures relative to GDP or 
the federal budget. Rather, the question, whatever we spend, is whether we are getting our 
money's  worth.  In  general,  good  information  and  appropriate  incentives  are  necessary  to 
allocate  resources  efficiently.  In  health  care,  the  necessary  information  should  include  not 
only  the  clinical  effectiveness  of  certain  tests  or  courses  of  treatment  but  also  their  cost-
effectiveness.  As  the  regional  comparison  of  health-care  costs  illustrates,  cost-effective 
approaches may be at least as useful as more costly approaches in delivering good health 
outcomes.  
financial 
through 
BIS Review 78/2008 
 5
Knowledge of the costs of alternative approaches is likely to be insufficient by itself. Patients, 
doctors, and hospitals must also be given incentives for choosing cost-effective approaches. 
However,  the  questions  of  how  to  structure  incentives  and  monitor  performance  are  hotly 
debated.  For  example,  advocates  of  "consumer-driven"  health  care  argue  that,  given 
appropriate information and incentives, patients – or in some cases, private insurers acting 
on their behalf – can effectively impose at least some degree of market discipline on health-
care providers. Others see an inevitable role for government in setting standards of care and 
in  measuring  performance.  Professional  associations,  hospitals,  medical  researchers,  and 
other  stakeholders  may  also  have  a  role  to  play.  At  the  heart  of  the  debate  are  the 
fundamental social questions of how we determine when various medical services are worth 
their cost and how we measure and reward good performance by providers. 
Rising  health  spending  increases  stress  on  both  private  and  public  budgets,  and  thus 
stakeholders in both spheres are aiming to reduce costs. Cost-saving reforms in the private 
sector will inevitably reverberate in the public sector and vice versa. For example, the shift 
toward managed care in the private sector also resulted in more managed care in the public 
sector.  Similarly,  innovations  in  public  insurance  programs,  such  as  the  introduction  of 
reimbursement by diagnosis-related groups in Medicare, changed the way private insurance 
payments  were  structured.15  Our  health-care  system 
is,  de  facto,  a  private-public 
partnership;  as  a  result,  governments  should  not  view  health-care  costs  narrowly  as  a 
budgetary issue. Rather, they should consider how the totality of government intervention in 
the  health-care  market  –  including  tax  policies,  insurance  regulation,  and  the  structure  of 
Medicare  and  Medicaid  –  affect  the  sector  as  a  whole.  The  best  way  to  reduce  the  fiscal 
burdens of health care is to deliver cost-effective health care throughout the entire system. 
Conclusion 
Let me conclude by restating a point I made at the beginning: As we focus on the problems 
of our health system, it is easy to forget that much is good about it. Our health system has 
produced innovations in basic science, in the understanding and diagnosing of disease, and 
in pharmacology and medical technology. These advances have resulted in more-effective 
treatments  and  significant  reductions  in  mortality  across  a  wide  spectrum  of  diseases.  In 
devising policies to reform our health-care system, we must take care to maintain the vitality 
and spirit of innovation that has been its hallmark.  
References 
Congressional  Budget  Office  (2007).  "The  Long-Term  Budget  Outlook",  Washington: 
Congressional Budget Office, December.  
Cutler, David M., and Mark McClellan (2001). "Is Technological Change in Medicine Worth 
It?" Health Affairs, vol. 20 (July), pp. 11-29. 
Doyle,  Joseph  J.,  Jr.  (2005).  "Health  Insurance,  Treatment,  and  Outcomes:  Using  Auto 
Accidents as Health Shocks", Review of Economics and Statistics, vol. 87 (May), pp. 256-70. 
Follette, Glenn, and Louise Sheiner (2007). "A Microeconomic Perspective on the Evolution 
of  Health  Spending",  unpublished  paper,  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal  Reserve 
System.  
                                                 
15   Diagnosis-related  groups  are  a  system  for  classifying  cases  into  disease-related  groups  that  are  likely  to 
require the same hospital resources, on average. In the early 1980s, Medicare began reimbursing hospitals a 
fixed amount per admission based on the diagnosis-related group rather than reimbursing them for the actual 
costs incurred for each patient. 
6 
 BIS Review 78/2008
Hadley, Jack, and John Holahan (2004). "The Cost of Care for the Uninsured: What Do We 
Spend, Who Pays, and What Would Full Coverage Add to Medical Spending?" Issue Update 
No.  7804.  Washington:  Kaiser  Commission  on  Medicaid  and  the  Uninsured,  May  10, 
www.kff.org/uninsured/7084.cfm. 
Institute of Medicine (2000). To Err Is Human: Building a Safer Health System. Washington: 
National Academy Press. 
_________  (2002).  Care  without  Coverage:  Too  Little,  Too  Late.  Washington:  National 
Academy Press. 
Joint  Commission  (2007).  "Improving  America's  Hospitals:  The  Joint  Commission's  Annual 
Report  on Quality  and  Safety  2007."  Oakbrook  Terrace,  Ill.:  Joint  Commission,  November, 
www.jointcommissionreport.org. 
Leape, Lucian L., and Donald M. Berwick (2005). "Five Years After To Err Is Human: What 
Have We Learned?" JAMA, vol. 293 (May 18), pp. 2384-90. 
Skinner,  Jonathan  S.,  Douglas  O.  Staiger,  and  Elliott  S.  Fisher  (2006).  "Is  Technological 
Change  in  Medicine  Always  Worth  It?  The  Case  of  Acute  Myocardial  Infarction,"  Health 
Affairs, vol. 25 (March), pp. w34-w47. 
BIS Review 78/2008 
 7
