Guillermo Ortiz: Opening remarks for the session on “Implications of 
globalisation for the conduct of monetary policy” 
Speech  by  Mr  Guillermo  Ortiz,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Mexico,  at  the  International 
Symposium  on  “Globalisation,  Inflation  and  Monetary  Policy”,  organised  by  the  Bank  of 
France, Paris, 7 March 2008. 
      In this last session we will focus on the implications of the different issues raised in 
the previous discussions for the design and conduct of monetary policy. 
o 
The main question is: what are, if any, the monetary policy implications of 
globalization? 
In particular, we will ask ourselves whether globalization should lead or not 
to  a  reassessment  of  central  banks’  price-stability  objectives, 
their 
economic  and  monetary  analyses  or  their  degree  of  reaction  to  diverse 
variables that become more important in global markets. 
o 
In this context, the main issues that will lead the discussion will precisely be whether 
globalization has altered the way monetary policy influences inflation and output (the 
monetary  transmission  mechanism)  and,  of  most  importance,  whether  we  should 
change the degree to which monetary policy reacts to the output and inflation gaps 
or, furthermore, whether we need to redefine the set of variables to which it currently 
responds to. 
Many different arguments questioning whether we need to adjust the way monetary 
policy  is  conducted  in  a  globalized  world  have  been  set  forth.  Some  relevant 
questions are: 
o 
Should  monetary  policy  react  directly  to  exchange  rate  movements,  or 
should it only focus on inflation and real GDP? 
international 
Should 
commodities  imply  a  reassessment  of  monetary  policy  actions,  over  and 
above the response to the effects these events may have on the traditional 
variables to which monetary policy typically reacts? 
Does the flattening of the Phillips curve has any implications for the design 
and conduct of monetary policy? 
the  prices  of  diverse 
the  recent 
increases 
o 
o 
in 
Most  of  these  questions  are  related  to  the  issue  of  considering  whether  the  more 
information  we  include  in  monetary  models,  theories  and  policy  rules,  the  better 
response  we  will  have  to  different  shocks,  or  if  we  should  keep  such  models, 
theories and, especially, policy reaction functions, simple and limited in terms of the 
number of variables involved. 
The  different  ways  in  which  all  these  queries  may  be  analyzed  might  trigger  an 
interesting  debate  among  us  today.  John  Taylor’s  presentation,  along  with  the 
discussion  it  will  induce  among  the  discussants,  will  help  us  to  have  a  better 
understanding about some of these issues, as well as guiding on the right direction 
the research agenda related to the questions that are still in need of an answer. 
BIS Review 28/2008 
 1
