Yves Mersch: The recent sub-prime turbulences and their consequences 
for Luxembourg 
Speech by Mr Yves Mersch, Governor of the Central Bank of Luxembourg, at the Association 
of the Luxembourg Fund Industry (ALFI) Spring Conference, Luxembourg, 19 March 2008. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I  want  to  thank  the  ALFI  organisers’  for inviting  me  to  this  conference  and  share with  you 
some thoughts on the challenging question regarding the recent sub-prime turbulences and 
their  consequences  for  Luxembourg.  In  fact,  several  months  after  the  beginning  of  the 
financial turbulences as we experience yet another wave shock of a propagating crisis, this 
conference is now timely appropriate for such an exchange of views in order to assess, in an 
environment  still  characterized  by  vast  uncertainties,  the  impact  of  the  turmoil  and  identify 
areas for action to minimize risks and safeguard our financial system. 
Factors underlying contemporaneous financial turbulences diffusion process 
1 
Let  me  begin  by  recalling  that  until  recently,  the  valuation  of  the  impact  of  the  sub-prime 
turbulences  was  focused  on  asset-backed  securities,  and  particularly  those  backed  by  US 
sub-prime  mortgages  and  to  some  extent  leveraged  loans.  Given  that  the  origin  of  the 
turbulences is mainly linked to the US mortgage market, some experts were suggesting that 
the developments linked to this negative shock would remain to a large extent confined to 
the US Economy. However, there are several reasons to wander from this optimistic view.  
First, the process of globalization in the financial system has advanced more rapidly than in 
other  economic  sectors.  This  is  particularly  relevant  for  the  money  market,  bonds  and 
equities markets, OTC and derivatives markets. Unfortunately, as usual, one aspect of this 
process is: “there are no free lunches in the economy” which means that globalization has 
also  negative  effects  on  financial  stability.  The  outcome  of  globalization  might  certainly 
spread  risks  but  in  the  same  time  pave  the  way  for  shocks  to  propagate  rapidly  among 
markets and participants. Contagion becomes a realistic scenario. 
Secondly,  large  banking  or  financial  institutions  now  operate  internationally  either  through 
branches  and  subsidiaries  or  through  several  segments  of  the  financial  system,  thereby 
easing co-movements and exposure to common shocks. A simple measure of the intensity of 
the  geographical  scope  of  foreign  activities  is  the  total  assets  held  by  banks  outside  their 
home country and/or world-wide assets held by intermediaries in their balance sheets. In this 
respect,  the  foreign  assets  held  in  non–EU  countries  by  the  EU  key  cross-border  banking 
groups’ account on average for 29% of total foreign assets of these groups, reaching up to 
around 50% for some institutions. An additional indicator illustrates the increasing intensity 
and  scope  of  the  international  financial  activities  relative  to  the  world  trade  one.  In  this 
regards,  chart  1  shows  both  the  proportions  of  global  trade  and  cross-border  holdings  of 
assets  that are  accounted  for  by  developed  economies.  It  is  certainly  useful  to  notice  that 
over the past decade, the world trade share of these economies has declined significantly, 
while  their  holdings  of  the  cross-border  financial  assets  have  increased  substantially.  This 
indicates that foreign markets have become as important as domestic markets, and banks 
now  compete  throughout  the  world.  Indeed,  the  globalization  process  enlarges  the 
opportunity  for  banks  to  diversify  their  portfolios  and  risks  associated  with  their  financial 
decisions.  However,  while  this  may  be  true  for  individual  intermediaries,  the  system  as  a 
whole  may  become  less  diversified  if  its  exposure  to  the  same  sources  of  risks  or  shocks 
increases. 
BIS Review 38/2008 
 1
The third reason is that IT technologies and technical progress has contributed significantly 
to minimizing costs of conducting financial activities around the world. In this context, we all 
agree that the appearance of a shock in one country or financial difficulties affecting a sector 
or  an  individual  banking  group  may  spread  to  other  countries  through  numerous  channels 
which are more or less known. The US sub-prime market crisis, although not the only one, 
illustrates the speed of the spill over and its severity for other areas and asset classes. 
The recent sub-prime crisis: contagion effects and implications  
2 
I  would  now  like  to  move  to  the  development  of  the contagion process  in  relation  to  the 
recent financial turbulences. To that end, four distinguished phases can be identified: 
• 
From August 2007 until December 2007, emergence of market liquidity problems 
and  decrease  of  investors’  risk  appetite.  Individual  actions  of  central  banks 
combined  to  coordinated  liquidity  operations  since  December  have  led  to  a  short 
term easing of strains in money and interbank markets and contributed to diminish 
the risk of downward market turbulences to go forward. Without a flexible and rapid 
response by central banks, the widening of strengthened market liquidity constraints 
would  be  harmful  to  financial  stability.  Notwithstanding  the  improvement  in 
conditions  in  short  term  money  and  banking  markets,  there  are  indications  that 
funding markets continue to be a cause of concern for several banking groups.  
Given  the  magnitude  of  the  sub-prime  shock,  the  second  phase  relates  to  the 
emergence of problems closer to solvency issues. The impact was indeed less 
pronounced  in  the  EU  compared  to  the  US,  but,  we  have  to  be  conscious  that  in 
some  cases  and  without  public  interventions,  as  in  Germany  and  the  UK,  a  few 
banks  would  have  been  in  serious  trouble.  At  a  recent  conference  at  Banque  de 
France, Professor H. Rey of London Business School assigns the contagion from 
relatively  small  losses  in  the  U.S.  sub-prime  market  of  a  magnitude  of  USD  200 
billion into a global financial turmoil to three major market dysfunctionalities: 1) the 
first  one  is  due  to  the  originate  and  distribute  model;  2)  the  second  one  can  be 
explained by a process referred to as the CDS vicious circle; and the third one 3) is 
attributed to mark to market asset valuation. In fact, one of the core lessons of the 
current financial turbulences is the failure of the “originate-and distribute” business 
model. Until the sub-prime crisis, a number of experts argued that securitization had 
contributed to a stabilizing effect on the global financial system through diminishing 
the degree of risk on the banking sector by sharing it more widely. Theoretically, this 
will be the case. But, excessive recourse to securitization in reality may create a lot 
of uncertainty and increase the opaqueness of the financial market. Indeed, several 
financial  institutions  were  unable  to  give  us  their  real  exposure  to  the  sub-prime 
market. In addition, the still heterogeneous disclosure across firms raises doubts on 
the realism of the valuation provided by the industry. Many have to confess that they 
did not understand the complexity of various financial products they use. In addition, 
the  impact  of  the  US  mortgage  defaults  has  spread  to  other  asset  classes  and 
across  the  global  financial  system.  Investors  did  not  know  which  parties  were 
exposed and how big their exposures were! Uncertainty got settled and gave rise to 
both  more  market  volatility  as  we  have  seen  in  recent  months  and  to  a  sharp 
increase of investors’ risk aversion (see chart 2). 
Since December 2007, attention has been drawn to insurance companies and their 
monoline  financial  guaranty  activities.  The  monoline  insurers  became  the  next 
potential victim of both sub-prime crisis and financial market turmoil. Until the recent 
turbulences,  monoline  insurers  were  very  successful  at  avoiding  losses  and  their 
business  model  exhibited  a  very  high  operating  leverage  with  a  fairly  low  capital 
base and reserve positions compared to the amount of insured risk. This common 
practice  was  allowed  in  the  past,  but  has  become  a  major  source  of  concern  at 
BIS Review 38/2008
  2 
   present. In this context, I would just recall that monoliners activity was traditionally 
limited  to  guarantee  US-municipal  bond  issues  with  low  default  probabilities  that 
involve small capital cushions. However, extending their activities through insuring 
ABS  structures  coupled  to  current  market  conditions  are putting  pressure  on  their 
capital cushions. In fact, the loss assumptions for the bucket of structured finance 
bonds wrapped by monolines, which are partly formed by US sub-prime mortgages 
and CDOs, have been revised sharply higher. Under these new assumptions, the 
excess  capital  of  many  monoliners  is  insufficient  and  requires  fund  injections  to 
meet  their  capital  requirements  or  avoid  a  downgrading.  In  addition,  banks  may 
exhibit  numerous  types  of  exposures  to  monoline  insurers.  In  the  case  of 
materialization of these risks, banks are likely to face more provisioning or write-offs.  
As  for  the CDS  vicious  circle  (see chart  3) some  banks with  no  exposure  to sub-
prime saw a sharp rise of the spread of their traded CDS from 30 basis points in July 
2007  to  700  basis  points  during  the  recent  turbulences.  This  is  mainly  due  to  a 
pronounced increase of doubts and uncertainties. In this context, banks cannot raise 
as much funds on the market as they need because of both rising costs and fierce 
competition for collecting customer deposits. As a consequence, the balance sheets 
of  banks  deteriorate.  The  CDS  spreads  widen  further  and  downgrading  looms 
potentially  intensifying  the  negative  impact  on  capital  cost  and  balance  sheets. 
Overall, 
the 
implementation of the so called fair value accounting methodology. As we know, in 
distressed  times,  the  mark  to  market  valuation  is  even  worse  for  illiquid  and/or 
senior asset classes with long maturities. The recent experience shows that this is 
typically the case for most of the assets hold by financial intermediaries, banks and 
insurers. The impact on banks’ net worth has henceforth been more noticeable. This 
is  due  to  falling  mark  to  market  investment  values  rather  than  to  impaired  credit 
quality or defaults. 
Still,  the  impact  of  turbulences  on  the  real  economy  is  the  current  focus  of 
attention. As you know, in recent decades many countries have experienced some 
financial  turbulences  and  banking  crises.  Much  of  the  economic  literature  reveals 
that  financial  turbulences  involving  the  banking  or  financial  sectors  may  lead  to 
disruptions in the real economy. The past banking crises in the developed countries 
illustrate the importance of the damage, both in terms of direct fiscal costs relating 
mainly  to  managing  the  crisis  and  loss  of  economic  activity.  In  this  regard,  an 
academic article published in Journal of Banking and Finance in 2003, assessed the 
cumulative  consequences  of  past  banking  crises  in  terms  of  output  dip  and  fiscal 
costs  for  nine  developed  countries.  As  indicated  in  the  table  (1),  the  impact  for 
Japan,  since  1992,  amounts  to  28%  in  terms  of  GDP  and  20%  in  terms  of  fiscal 
costs.  While  the  fiscal  costs  of  the  91-94  crisis  in  Finland  reached  11%  and  the 
output dip was around 23% of GDP.  
the  procyclical  spiralling  down  of  asset  values  stems 
from 
While all of these results are consistent with the credit and exchange rate channels theories 
regarding the impact of banking instability on real economic activity, we need to explore other 
alternative  explanations  of  the  recent  financial  turbulences  before  drawing  any  hasty 
conclusion.  In  particular,  we  need  more  understanding  of  the  financial  market  channel, 
which is usually neglected in economic theory as well in empirical studies. 
In this context, let me briefly touch upon the differences between the US and the Eurozone 
financial  structure  as  illustrated  by  table  (2)  below.  While  the  US  financial  system  is  often 
described  as  a  market  based  system,  the  Eurozone  financial  system  is  recognized  as  a 
bank-based system. Given this idiosyncratic feature, the financial market channel could be 
favoured  to  assess  the  consequences  of  the  financial  turmoil  on  the  US  real  economy, 
whereas  the  credit  channel  seems  to  be  more  suitable  in  the  Euro  area.  This  means  that 
monetary policy in the euro area can more easily affect the balance sheet of banks and may 
affect  the  economy  in  a  wider  sense  compared  to  the  US.  Beside,  the  impact  of  the 
BIS Review 38/2008 
 3
Eurosystem  interventions  in  order  to  prevent  or  limit  contagion  may  materialize  in  shorter 
time-frame. So far for theory. 
Nevertheless, the views should not be confined to this divergent financial system structures. 
Indeed,  the  euro  area  financial  system  shows  a  trend  towards  more  financial  market 
activities. The growth of securitization market in the euro area has been remarkable despite 
the  recent  slowdown  owing  to  the  unravelling  of  the  credit  market  turmoil  since  mid-2007 
(see chart 4).  
Thus,  the  annualized  issuance  of  the  euro-denominated  asset-backed securities  increased 
from €50 billion in 1999 to almost €400 billion in mid-2007. It is worth noting, however, that 
securitization  activity  in  the  euro  area  despite  the  strong  growth  observed  in  recent  years 
remains well below the level of activity in the US and the UK. In fact, chart 5 shows that the 
amount of securitization in the euro area remains at a marginal level (less than 3% of GDP), 
while in the US the peak reached 16% of the GDP in 2005 and in the UK the peak reached 
11% in 2006.  
Similarly,  the  issuance  of  euro-denominated  collateralized  debt  obligation  (CDOs),  as 
illustrated by chart 6, increased from basically nil in 1999 to a peak of almost €70 billion in 
2006.  While  at  a  global  level,  the  issuance  of  CDOs  between  2004  and  2006  has  tripled 
amounting to around €330 billion in 2006. A major part of the CDOs are so-called synthetic 
securitization  instruments  and  collateralized  loan  obligations  (CLOs)  have  been  the 
predominant type of CDO in the euro area (see chart 7). However, it  is useful to note the 
substantial  drop  of  these  figures  in  the  most  recent  months.  I  draw  the  attention  to  the 
deceleration of securities issues in the euro area published one hour ago. 
These developments reveal a gradual decline during the past decades in importance of the 
traditional model of financial intermediation in the euro area whereby banks obtain funding 
mainly via deposits and use these funds to grant loans that they hold to maturity. In fact, as 
already  mentioned,  a  new  business  model  qualified  as  the  “originate-and-distribute” 
business  model  was  in  the  process  of  replacing,  if  not  complementing  the  traditional  one. 
Through the originate-and-distribute model, banks are increasingly relying on market-based 
funding and transfer a significant part of their credit risk off-balance sheet. However, this new 
model raises several issues due in particular to the loosening of the link between the debtor 
and  the  creditor.  Whereas  in  the  conventional  model,  banks  favour  customer  relationships 
meaning that banks have the necessary incentives to monitor carefully the lending activities 
and  assess  properly  credit  risks.  The  convergence  towards  the  new  business  model 
stimulates an increasing information asymmetry and uncertainty and thus affects the degree 
of market efficiency.  
Recent experience has shown the limits of this model and the opacity emerged from the use 
of  highly  complex  instruments  and  derivatives.  In  this  context,  how  strong  is  the  risk  of 
adverse  selection  underlying  this  model  in  particular  in  securitizations?  Is  the 
substitution  process  between  the  two  models  reversible?  If  not,  what  are  the 
corrective measures to be taken to promote financial stability? 
Reflections on the implications for Luxembourg  
3 
In the next part of my speech, I will try to shed light on how Luxembourg has been impacted 
by these turbulences and what we expect in the near future.  
As regards the most pressing concerns, the liquidity position of the Luxembourg banking 
sector was hardly affected according to the standard indicators which display a liquidity level 
considerably higher than the minimum required which is currently set at 30%. However, as 
central bank we follow with a great attention the liquidity needs of the Luxembourg banking 
system. As a result, during the turmoil months, we have observed the participation of 4 to 5 
additional counterparties for some MROs even if on the average the number of bidders has 
remained unchanged. Furthermore, as regards LTRO operations, we have also noticed an 
4 
 BIS Review 38/2008
increase  in  the  average  bid  amount  from  €3.9  to  €4.3  billion.  However,  the  average 
aggregate  amount  of  liquidity  provided  by  the  BCL  to  its  counterparties  has  not  risen 
compared  to  the  end  of  July.  Notwithstanding  this  fact,  an  increase  of  20  %  in  the  total 
collateral  deposited  at  the  BCL  by  our  counterparties  has  been  observed  from  July  to 
December 2007. By this, counterparties might have intended to ensure a potential access to 
liquidity  if  needed.  Finally,  the  BCL  as  a  member  of  the  Eurosystem  is  participating  in  the 
joint actions of the ECB and the Federal Reserve, providing US dollar funding to Luxembourg 
counterparties. The relative portion of central bank provision of liquidity shows, however, that 
other  national  central  banks  than  Luxembourg  have  increased  their  shares  in  the  total 
liquidity  provisions.  This  would  allow  for  two  deductions:  Either  the  Luxembourg  financial 
sector is less affected by the crisis and the stable need of domestic intermediaries for central 
bank  liquidity  may  reflect  the  net  creditor  position  and  the  soundness  of  the  aggregate 
balance sheet as well as the relative independence of these banks inside their groups. Or, as 
a consequence of the crisis, core functions of banking groups have been further centralized 
and  funding  and  liquidity  management  is  concentrated  even  more  at  headquarters  than 
before. 
Let me add that the relative share of Luxembourg banks in securitization is low relative to 
international  standards.  Therefore,  banks  in  Luxembourg  might  be  less  affected  on  the 
liquidity side of the balance sheet than on the asset side. 
As regards the impact on the economic activity, the fallout from the US housing market 
problems has provoked a downturn that proves to be more severe and more protracted than 
initially  assumed.  In  this  respect,  the  euro  area  and  the  Luxembourg  economy  can  hardly 
escape  the  ripple  effects  of  the  slowing  US  demand  and  possibly  also  the  exchange  rate 
channel.  A 
the  staff 
macroeconomic  projections,  which,  in  the  context  of  the  financial  market  turmoil,  are 
characterised by an exceptionally high level of uncertainty. Currently, the ECB staff expects 
real GDP growth to turn out at around an average of 1.7% in 2008 and 1.8% in 2009 while 
the inflation forecast has been revised upward respectively. to 2.9 and 2.1%.  
But  beyond  these  traditional  channels,  are  there  symptoms  of  impending  problems  with 
potentially more profound consequences? It is well-known that the banks have in the past 
relaxed  their  lending  standards,  by  accepting  higher  loan-to-value  ratios  or  by  lengthening 
the duration of mortgage loans, from the typically 20 years to up to 30 years or more. A more 
aggressive pricing policy via a lowering of the compensation for the incurred risk has also 
been observed. But that is still a far cry from the practices of some US banks. So-called sub-
prime loans are also not relevant for Luxembourg.  
That may actually be the direct consequence of a more conservative approach to financial 
innovation.  Though  Luxembourg  cherishes  its  position  as  an  international  financial  centre 
and  ought  to  promote  the  innovation  process,  it  should  nevertheless  be  wary  of  excesses 
and  perverse  side-effects.  Unlike  in  the  USA,  the  securitization  of  mortgage  loans  is  not 
widespread and these loans usually remain on the banks’ books. That in itself should provide 
– and it probably has provided – the necessary incentive for the banks to monitor carefully 
their lending activities and to assess properly the reimbursement capacity of the borrowers. 
the  Eurosystem  published  an  updated  set  of 
fortnight  ago, 
What were the immediate consequences of the financial market turbulences on the 
Luxembourg financial centre?  
Despite recent favourable information on the relative growth performance of the Luxembourg 
fund industry, monthly data as illustrated by chart 8, show a decreasing trend of net asset 
growth rates. This trend can be attributed to both the cyclicality of funds’ activities and their 
dependence  on  market  performance  as  well  as  to  a  strong  competition  from  other  major 
financial centres. .  
The sharp drop in financial markets prices and the ensuing prudent behaviour of customers 
has  also  impacted  on  the  banks’  trading  income.  According  to  the  banking  sector’s 
BIS Review 38/2008 
 5
aggregate profit and loss account, the net trading fees have fallen continuously, though not 
at dramatic proportions, since the beginning of 2007. These developments are also borne out 
in the National Accounts data. However, for 2008 interest income may still benefit from the 
positive impact of business inertia. Amid a sharp drop in gross value added in the financial 
services sector, real GDP growth in 2007Q3 turned out at 0.7%, below trend estimates. The 
decline of net results for 2007 by 11.5% does also not warrant optimism for the contribution 
of the financial sector to GDP in the last quarter of the year. This figure is, however, not yet 
published for Luxembourg. The renewed fall in equity markets at the beginning of the year 
coupled with a 5% drop in January of net assets of the fund industry, is also likely to be a 
further drag on economic activity in Luxembourg.  
Among  the  series  of  stress  testing  tools  and  macro-prudential  indicators  designed  by  the 
BCL, the BCL built its own index to evaluate the degree of the banking sector’s vulnerability. 
The  recent  estimates  (see  chart  9)  show  an  increase  of  the  degree  of  banks’  vulnerability 
from the end of 2006 to the third quarter of 2007. However, the index forecast for 2008 and 
2009, based on the December Eurosystem macro-economic projections, seems to indicate 
that the degree of vulnerability would tend towards its average level. Still, it remains to be 
seen how profitability in 2008 will be affected adversely by further valuation losses, increased 
funding costs, slowing credit growths, declining non-interest income. 
The  BCL’s  retail  interest  rate  statistics  reveal  that  the  banks’  response  to  the  money 
market  disruptions  and  the  increase  in  wholesale  funding  costs  falls  short  of  what  several 
observers had feared. According to the data up to December 2007, the bank lending rates 
applied  on  new  loans  (at  variable  rates)  to  households  for  house  purchase  have  in  the 
course of 2007 actually eased by 20 basis points relative to the 50 basis points increase in 
the ECB minimum rate. As regards non-financial corporations, the reference rate of loans at 
variable rates is very often the 3-month Euribor. On this segment, we have noted a strong 
impact as the lending rates rose by more than 70 basis points in 2007, hence 20 basis points 
more than the adjustment in the key central bank rates. But that is still substantially lower 
than the rise in the money market rates which, at their peak, reached more than 100 basis 
points since January 2007.  
Interest  rates  however  are  only  one  criterion  of  credit  conditions.  Banks  can  also  adapt  to 
more stringent credit standards by raising the collateral requirements for example. Our bank 
lending  survey,  which  is  part  of  the  wider  Eurosystem  bank  lending  survey,  provides  very 
useful information on issues such as the banks’ lending policies, their demand perceptions 
and their risk assessments. The September 2007 and January 2008 results highlighted the 
tightening  in  credit  conditions  on  accounts  of  the  higher  cost  of  funding.  They  were 
nevertheless  more  optimistic  than  those  of  the  euro  area,  and  banks  reported  particularly 
sustained demand by both non-financial corporations and households.  
Reminiscent of the effects of the 2001-2003 downturn on financial markets, fiscal policy in 
Luxembourg  is  not  oblivious  to  the  current  developments.  The  financial  services  sector 
accounts for about 30% of total tax receipts and complacency in the early stages can have 
dire  consequences  for  the  medium  term  policy.  After  three  years  of  significant  revenue 
windfalls,  the  development  in  2007  continued  to  be  stronger  than  what  could  have  been 
expected  on  the  basis  of  the  regular  tax  assessment  bases.  According  to  the  preliminary 
results,  the  central  government  balance  also  returned  to  a  surplus  equivalent  to  0.7%  of 
GDP, for the first time after five years. Nevertheless, the outlook for 2008 is highly uncertain, 
and, if the downturn on financial markets were to persist or to worsen, that would, akin to the 
real GDP prospects, weigh on tax receipts.  
Lessons to be drawn and concluding remarks 
4 
Let  me  now  share  with  you  some  reflections  about  lessons  that  may  be  drawn  from  the 
recent  turmoil.  There  are  a  number  of  weaknesses  that  have  been  highlighted  during  the 
recent  months  and call for  corrective  actions  by  the  private  and  public  sectors.  A  financial 
6 
 BIS Review 38/2008
sector that generates on the one hand huge revenues for some of its participants but on the 
other hand regular crises with high costs for non-participants, is in my view ripe for a hard 
look at the balance of existing incentives. 
The first issue that I would like to stress is the obvious underestimation by financial actors 
and supervisors of the actual degree of leverage in the financial system. This leverage is 
not only generated by traditional banking activities but also by highly leveraged institutions, 
SIVs, conduits, LBO-financed firms etc. Yet there has been an imperfect assessment of the 
existing risks arising from the linkage between the banking sector and all these SIVs and 
conduits. Indeed, the recent financial turbulences have pointed out that significant risks may 
be  transferred  back  to  banks  using  puts,  guarantees,  credit  lines  or  other  mechanisms. 
Hence  it  seems  urgent  for  the  financial  industry  to  improve  its  risk  management  practices 
and the transparency in this respect. These characteristics, coupled with inadequate pricing 
and valuation, were at the heart of the present liquidity turbulences, implying a high degree of 
uncertainty about the size and location of the risks in the securities market.  
Another  key  issue  of  concern  is  related  to  the  respective  responsibility  of  credit  rating 
agencies and professional investors. Banks appear to have outsourced a significant part of 
their  risk  assessment  and  due  diligence  to  rating  agencies  and  credit scoring  programs.  It 
might however be worth recalling that credit agencies only measure the probability of default 
but  with  no  responsibility  or  legal  liability  to  those  who  use  the  ratings.  In  that  sense,  the 
information provided by rating agencies to investors on structured finance products definitely 
needs  to  be  enhanced  in  order  to  increase  investors’  awareness  of  the  effective  risks 
associated with these products. Also, I believe that the market needs to find a better balance 
between  investor  due  diligence  and  agency  ratings.  Finally,  potential  conflict  of  interest 
should be raised in this context, whereby rating agencies are paid by the issuer they rate. In 
response  to  these  critics,  the  three  major  rating  agencies  have  now  taken  a  first  step  in 
announcing a set of measures intended to address these diverging interests and enhance 
their valuation methods. 
Besides self-regulatory responses to be urged in the areas of risk management, disclosure, 
asset valuation and credit rating agencies, several initiatives have been launched recently or 
are  currently  being  discussed  by  regulators,  supervisors  and  central  banks  in  order  to 
promote  a  stable  financial  system.  There  is  a  consensus  towards  the  need  to  strengthen 
EU’s prudential framework for the banking sector, in particular regarding the treatment of 
large exposures, banks’ capital requirements for securitisation including liquidity facilities for 
SPV’s  as  well  as  liquidity  management.  Do  we  need  supplementary  capital  buffers  to 
complement  risk-based  capital  measures?  Do  we  need  to  address  the  procyclicality  still 
embedded  in  the  new  Basel  II  capital  standards?  Supervisors  should  also  undergo  an 
analysis of the incentives that prompted banks to move some assets off balance sheet, even 
though they still held the risk exposure. 
As I mentioned, the new IAS/IFRS accounting standards raises some concerns regarding 
procyclicality  of  mark  to  market  valuation.  It  might  be  appropriate  from  a  financial  stability 
point of view to reflect again on the proposal of a dynamic provisioning approach.  
Let me now bring up a final area that has been recently emphasized by the finance ministers 
and  central  bank  governors  alike.  Indeed,  the  past  turbulences  have  highlighted  the 
necessity  of  adequate  cooperation  and  information  exchange  mechanisms  between 
central bankers, bank supervisors, and financial regulators at the national and international 
level. These mechanisms should ensure a timely and appropriate response to market and 
institutions in stress situations. The prominent role of recent central banks in the resolution of 
potential  financial  or  banking  crisis  by  the  provision  of  liquidity  has  again  been  underlined 
during the recent months. It seems to me that central banks have the ultimate responsibility 
for financial stability and central banks alone have the resources to serve as potential lender 
of last resort when the need arises. In order to allow for a timely decision by a central bank to 
potentially  grant  emergency  liquidity  assistance,  it  is  of  outmost  importance  that  it  has 
BIS Review 38/2008 
 7
access,  in  normal  and  in  times  of  crisis,  to  adequate  information.  And  this  includes 
supervisory information.  
Looking  at  the  Luxembourg  legal  and  institutional  framework  for  crisis  prevention  and 
management, important weaknesses need to be settled. Given the relevance of the financial 
sector, I hope that the legislator will in the end acknowledge the mission of the BCL in that 
field. I will also not repeat my concerns about the non funded depositor guarantee scheme in 
Luxembourg. 
Let me conclude by saying that the present financial crisis will probably drag on for longer 
than initially foreseen. The process of deleveraging and re-intermediation, the repricing and 
quality  deterioration  of  assets  amplify  uncertainties.  The  later  will  persist  until  the  full 
magnitude  of  losses  on  individual  financial  institutions  will  be  clear.  Given  the  size  of  our 
financial sector and its role of engine for the economy, Luxembourg authorities need to take 
a step ahead and put in place an institutional framework that allows for an effective response 
to stress situations and thus, ensures the promotion of a stable financial system.  
Thank you for your attention. 
8 
 BIS Review 38/2008
