Thomas Jordan: Repercussions of the financial markets crisis in 
Switzerland 
Summary of a speech by Mr Thomas Jordan, Member of the Governing Board of the Swiss 
National Bank, at the Zuger Wirtschaftskammer, Zug, 28 April 2008. 
The complete speech can be found in German on the Swiss National Bank’s website (www.snb.ch). 
 The  turbulence  in  the  financial  markets  that  began  in  August  2007  is  having  a  generally 
negative  impact  on  the  Swiss  economy  and  is  spreading  through  different  transmission 
channels. 
The downgraded growth prospects for the US economy are resulting in fewer imports from 
the  rest  of  the  world.  Since  net  exports  and  the  global  economic  developments  are  of 
particular  importance  for  Switzerland,  they  are  having  a  negative  effect,  which  may  be 
reinforced  by  the  appreciation  of  the  Swiss  franc.  Because  of  the  major  importance  of 
banking  in  the  industrial  structure  of  the  Swiss  economy,  falling  turnover  on  the  financial 
markets  can  also  affect  Switzerland  more  severely  than  other  countries.  Moreover,  rising 
credit risk premiums result in higher financing costs for companies, and the deterioration in 
bank balance sheets could be an additional factor in compromising the availability of credit in 
Switzerland.  Finally,  the  increase  in  commodity  prices  has  had  a  significant  impact  on  the 
inflation rate in Switzerland. 
Despite the fallout from the financial crisis, the outlook for Switzerland‘s economy remains 
good. In Europe – which is crucial for Switzerland – the economy will probably weaken only 
gradually. What is more, the Swiss franc has only seen a moderate rise against the euro. As 
Swiss households and companies are on a solid financial footing, they are shielded – so to 
speak – against a tightening in credit conditions. Lastly, the stronger Swiss franc vis-à-vis the 
US  dollar  has  limited  the  impact  of  higher  commodity  prices.  Several  other  factors,  like  a 
robust  labour  market  and  a  competitive  industrial  sector,  could  cushion  the  negative 
repercussions of the financial crisis in Switzerland. 
Against this backdrop, the SNB is expecting real GDP to grow between 1.5% and 2% this 
year. Inflation should be below the 2% mark again in the course of 2008. These forecasts still 
involve substantial uncertainties. Given the present state of the economy, the current interest 
level seems to be appropriate. However, the SNB will keep a close eye on further economic 
developments and inflation so that it is able to identify when action needs to be taken and 
react in a quick and flexible manner. 
BIS Review 51/2008 
 1
