Jean-Pierre Roth: Recent economic and financial developments in 
Switzerland 
Introductory remarks by Mr Jean-Pierre Roth, Chairman of the Governing Board of the Swiss 
National  Bank  and  Chairman  of  the  Board  of  Directors  of  the  Bank  for  International 
Settlements, at the half yearly media news conference, Geneva, 19 June 2008. 
 The Swiss National Bank (SNB) is leaving the target range for the Swiss franc three-month 
Libor unchanged at 2.25-3.25%. It intends to hold the rate in the middle of the target range 
for the time being. 
Despite a slowdown in economic activity, the global economy remains robust and the price of 
oil has continued to climb. This has led to a general increase in inflation. The situation on the 
financial markets is still uncertain, but less turbulent than it was a few months ago. Although 
the Swiss economy has also grown at a slower pace, the SNB has not changed its forecast 
of real GDP growth of between 1.5% and 2% for 2008. However, it has increased its inflation 
forecast and is now expecting an average rate of 2.7% in 2008. Nevertheless, assuming that 
the Libor remains unchanged at 2.75%, inflation should edge back down to 1.7% in 2009 and 
1.3% in 2010, as a result of the expected economic downturn.  
Considerable risks are attached to this inflation forecast. Stronger price increases are likely, 
should  energy  prices  rise  again  or  the  Swiss  franc  depreciate  on  the  foreign  exchange 
market. A more significant slowdown in the global economy might ease inflationary pressure. 
Given these conditions, the SNB is maintaining its cautious stance and leaving its monetary 
policy strategy unchanged. In view of the medium-term inflation outlook, it can afford to do 
so.  After  all,  there  is  enough  reason  to  suggest  that  the  current  inflationary  trend  is  of  a 
transitory  nature.  The  SNB  will  keep  a  close  watch  on  the  price  of  oil,  movements  in  the 
Swiss franc, the economy, and developments in the financial markets, so as to assess their 
impact  on  the  inflation  outlook  and  react  swiftly,  in  order  to  maintain  price  stability  in  the 
medium term. 
Global economic outlook 
With exports accounting for 52% of GDP, the Swiss economy has a strong global presence. 
This  is  an  opportunity,  but  it  also  means  that  the  international  environment  has  a 
considerable  impact  on  economic  developments  in  Switzerland.  The  US  economy  –  until 
recently the principal driver of global economic growth – has made scant headway over the 
last  three  quarters.  However,  the  period  of  near-stagnation  which  the  US  economy  is 
currently experiencing is not likely to be too prolonged. The resolutely expansionist nature of 
US monetary and fiscal policy, combined with a weak US dollar that favours exports, should 
help  to  reenergise  the  US  economy.  A  recovery  is  expected  towards  the  end  of  the  year, 
albeit a tentative one, given that the deterioration in the employment outlook, the erosion of 
purchasing power and the fall in property prices look set to weigh on consumer sentiment 
and income.  
Europe represents the second pole in the global economy. Although the continent enjoyed 
strong  growth  during  the  first  quarter  of  2008,  the  remainder  of  the  year  should  see  a 
slowdown. A number of factors will contribute to this loss of momentum. First, the strong euro 
and the sharp downturn in the US economy are dampening exports. The sub-prime crisis has 
led to a tightening of credit conditions, while consumer confidence has deteriorated. This will 
have  a  knock-on  effect  on  consumer  spending.  However,  the  slowdown  in  Europe  will  be 
much less pronounced than in the US, although the subsequent pick-up in economic activity 
will also probably be gradual. 
BIS Review 80/2008 
 1
The Asian economies, which constitute the third major hub, continue to exhibit strong growth 
as  a  whole,  since  they  remain  virtually  unaffected  by  the  slowdown  in  the  US  economy. 
Nevertheless, they have been hit by rising commodity and food prices, which are seriously 
reducing incomes. 
Regional  variations  aside,  it  would  therefore  be  reasonable  to  conclude  that  the  global 
economy, as a whole, is not witnessing a significant slowdown at present – as opposed to 
one of the rather more alarming scenarios that were only recently being mooted. The impact 
of the crisis in the financial sector on the rest of the economy has been felt less acutely and a 
lot more slowly than could have been expected. It is precisely the continued robust global 
growth which is the main reason for the sharp rise in food and oil prices – although market 
speculation may have accentuated this trend. In most countries, the rise in the price of oil 
has translated into an increase in consumer prices. After remaining at a moderate level for a 
long  time,  inflation  is  again  a  cause  for  concern.  This  increase  in  the  indices  risks 
destabilising inflation expectations, which have remained very stable over the last number of 
years.  
Swiss economic outlook 
Last year saw the Swiss economy still operating at a dynamic pace, but there was a distinct 
fall-off  during  the  first  few  months  of  2008.  In  the  first  quarter,  real  GDP  grew  at  an 
annualised rate of only 1.3%. This compares to growth rates in the region of 3% or even 4% 
which  we  saw  in  2007.  The  slowdown  is  attributable  to  three  major  factors.  First,  the 
economy was turning over at an exceptionally high rate last year. A slowdown was therefore 
inevitable as much as it was desirable. It reduces the likelihood of the economy overheating 
and reflects the normalisation of monetary policy which we have undertaken in recent years. 
Second, the slowdown in exports played an added role, by curbing manufacturing activity. 
Finally,  problems  on  the  financial  markets  resulted  in  a  significant  drop  in  stock  market 
transactions. This had a negative impact on added value in the banking sector.  
However,  the  slowdown  in  production  did  not  spread  to  all  sectors  of  activity.  Growth 
remained strong in the retail and wholesale business, the hotel and catering trade and the 
transportation and communication industries. This shows that domestic demand remains – 
on the whole – robust. With the first few months of 2008 seeing a steady flow of new jobs, 
the favourable climate on the job market continues to be conducive to private consumption in 
particular. 
Further growth in demand and production is likely over the next few quarters, albeit at a more 
modest pace. High prices for oil products and uncertainty related to the US real estate crisis 
will  undoubtedly  continue  to  hamper  economic  activity.  However,  growth  in  household 
consumption and equipment investment looks set to continue. The SNB continues to forecast 
GDP growth of between 1.5% and 2% for 2008. However, this average annual growth rate is 
boosted by the strong growth achieved in the second half of 2007. It therefore conceals what 
has  been  a  noticeable  slowdown  in  economic  activity,  with  quarterly  rates  below  potential 
throughout the rest of the year. 
Changes in the monetary and financial framework 
How  have  monetary  conditions  evolved  since  our  last  assessment  in  March?  They  have 
become somewhat more relaxed. This is mainly attributable to two factors.  
First, the Swiss franc has depreciated by 3% against our 26 most important trading partners, 
thereby partially offsetting the appreciation that occurred at the beginning of the year. This 
softening is having a direct impact on inflation, by increasing the prices of imports. To give an 
example, the impact of oil prices on inflation has been amplified, with the price of a barrel of 
Brent crude rising 18% by mid-May in terms of Swiss francs, but only 13% in terms of US 
2 
 BIS Review 80/2008
dollars. In the longer term, the weakening in the Swiss franc is indirectly contributing to the 
increase in prices by stimulating demand. 
Second,  real  short-term  interest  rates  have  dropped.  There  has  been  a  rise  in  expected 
inflation  for  the  near  future  and  this  means  –  for  given  nominal  interest  rates  –  lower  real 
expected yields for short maturities. 
An analysis of monetary conditions in terms of volumes leads to similar conclusions. Let us 
begin with money, which is the best indicator to use if a broad-brush and long-term outlook 
for the economy and inflation is required. The M1 and M2 monetary aggregates, which were 
declining until not long ago, have been practically stable for some months. As for M3, it is 
continuing to exhibit moderate growth.  
The sub-prime crisis has confirmed the importance of mortgage loans as an indicator of the 
degree of relaxation of monetary policy. The reason for this is simple. Because construction 
projects  are  long-term  in  nature,  real  estate  investment  reacts  particularly  sensitively  to 
interest rates. Consequently, mortgage loans were growing at a rate of 5–6% in 2003 and 
2004, when our monetary policy was firmly expansionary. These growth rates then declined 
gradually as we tightened our monetary policy in 2006 and 2007. Last April, they settled at 
around  3.3%.  The  growth  rate  of  other  loans  –  a  particularly  heterogeneous  category  – 
remains high, confirming that the underlying trend in the economy remains dynamic.  
In December, we emphasised the need to give particular attention to conditions in the credit 
market in the light of the sub-prime crisis. In order to do this, the SNB conducted a survey of 
20  banks  in  March,  in  which  they  provided  us  with  information  on  their  intentions  and 
expectations.  This  survey  completed  the  analysis  of  credit  volumes.  It  reveals,  first,  that 
banks have not significantly tightened lending conditions with respect to either households or 
companies over the course of the last few months. Second, the banks state that, in broad 
terms, demand for credit has remained unchanged. Third, they do not expect any significant 
change  in  either  supply  or  demand  in  the  months  ahead.  Thus  this  survey  confirms  the 
conclusions of the analysis of credit volumes which, as we have seen, are continuing to rise. 
Unlike  similar  surveys  conducted  in  the  US  and  the  euro  area,  it  shows  that,  for  the  time 
being, the sub-prime crisis has not led to a deterioration in credit conditions in Switzerland. 
Inflation and inflation risks 
Inflation developed in line with expectations during the first quarter of this year. Our March 
forecast was 2.4%, whereas actual inflation was 2.5%. Nonetheless – as you can see from 
the charts – we are forecasting higher and more persistent inflation for the rest of the year. 
However, it should drop back below the 2% level from the beginning of next year, although 
there are significant risks attached to this relatively favourable forecast. A more pronounced 
price  surge would  clearly  be  a  concern  should there  be  a  further  increase  in  the  prices  of 
energy  and  food.  In  addition,  it  is  possible  that  movements  in  the  Swiss  franc  will  not 
contribute to easing upward pressure on import prices. Having said that, we should also not 
underestimate  the  potential  for  movements  in  the  prices  of  raw  materials  to  reverse,  and 
inflation  pressures  to  abate  in  the  event  of  a  pronounced  global  economic  slowdown, 
especially  as  we  do  not  yet  know  the  consequences  of  the  financial  market  turbulence. 
Today’s monetary policy decision reflects our assessment of these different risks.  
Monetary policy decision 
Inflation  has  exceeded  the  2%  mark  since  December  2007.  However,  in  our  view  this 
situation is temporary and the expected slowdown in the economy should have a moderating 
effect. We are expecting that inflation will already  move back below the 2% level in 2009. 
Moreover, given the prevailing uncertainty as regards both the global economy – which could 
suffer  a  greater-than-expected  slowdown  –  and  the  fallout  from  the  international  financial 
BIS Review 80/2008 
 3
turmoil – which has hit Switzerland fairly hard compared to other industrial countries – we 
consider that a prudent attitude remains appropriate and that a change of monetary policy is 
not  called  for  in  the  current  circumstances.  Nevertheless,  we  must  remain  very  vigilant.  A 
renewed rise in energy prices, a stronger economy than expected, a weakening of the Swiss 
franc  or  an  increase  in  inflation  expectations  would  pose  a  threat  to  medium-term  price 
stability. We will therefore continue to keep a close watch on these factors, so as to be able 
to react quickly in order to maintain price stability in the medium term. 
Inflation forecast chart 
How has our inflation forecast been revised? The dashed red curve on the chart represents 
the new forecast. It covers the period from the second quarter of 2008 to the first quarter of 
2011, and maps the future development of inflation on the assumption that the three-month 
Libor remains unchanged at 2.75% over the forecasting period. For purposes of comparison, 
the dash-dotted green curve shows the inflation forecast of the March monetary assessment, 
based on a three-month Libor of 2.75%.  
The  new  forecast  shows  inflation  rising  in  the  short  term,  and  exceeding  2%  by  the  first 
quarter  of  next  year.  The  increase  is  primarily  due  to  the  rise  in  oil  prices  combined  with 
continued  robust  economic  activity.  However,  the  forecast  shows  that  the  expected 
slowdown  in  the  economy,  the  fall  in  capacity  utilisation  rates  and  a  baseline  effect  as 
regards  energy  prices  will  all  contribute  to  a  decline  in  inflation,  which  should  thus,  in  the 
medium term, arrive at a level that is fully compatible with price stability. 
 
 
 
 
 
Observed inflation June 2008 
2005
2006
2007
2008
 Inflation
 
4 
 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4
1.35 1.06 1.18 1.10 1.23 1.33 1.22 0.46 0.09 0.52 0.63 1.68 2.50
    BIS Review 80/2008
Inflation forecast of March 2008 with Libor at 2.75% and of June 2008 with Libor at 2.75% 
 
2008
2009
2010
2011
Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4
Forecast March 2008,
Libor at 2.75%
Forecast June 2008,
Libor at 2.75%
2.41 2.07 2.01 1.53 1.37 1.35 1.36 1.37 1.38 1.40 1.43 1.47  
    2.75 2.91 2.65 2.12 1.76 1.50 1.40 1.36 1.34 1.31 1.31 1.30
    BIS Review 80/2008 
 5
