Jean-Claude Trichet: Ehrenplaquette of the city of Frankfurt am Main – 
awarding ceremony 
Speech by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the ECB, at the awarding ceremony of the 
Ehrenplaquette of the city of Frankfurt, Frankfurt am Main, 15 September 2008. 
 Sehr  geehrte  Frau  Oberbürgermeisterin,  sehr  geehrter  Herr  Stadtverordnetenvorsteher, 
hochgeschätzte Vertreter des Konsularischen Corps, meine Damen und Herren, 
hier im Frankfurter Römer habe ich seit meinem Amtsantritt als Präsident der Europäischen 
Zentralbank  vor  bald  fünf  Jahren  schon  öfter  gestanden  und  zu  geladenen  Gästen 
gesprochen. Heute freue ich mich ganz besonders, das Wort zu ergreifen. Ich möchte mich 
aus  ganzem  Herzen  dafür  zu  bedanken,  dass  die  Stadt  Frankfurt  mich  mit  ihrer 
Ehrenplakette auszeichnet. Zentralbanken eine Heimat in seinen Mauern. So zunächst der 
Bank  deutscher  Länder,  dann  der  Deutschen  Bundesbank  und  seit  1998  außerdem  der 
Europäischen Zentralbank. 
Für  die  Auszeichnung,  die  mir  heute  hier  zuteil  wird,  gilt  mein  Dank  zunächst  meinen 
Kollegen im Direktorium der Europäischen Zentralbank und den Mitarbeitern. Sie alle haben 
Ihren nachhaltigen Einsatz geleistet, um die Zusammenarbeit mit der Stadt Frankfurt in so 
konstruktiver  und  professioneller  Weise  zu  gestalten  und  haben  durch  Ihr  persönliches 
Engagement den Beitrag zum Kulturleben dieser Stadt erst ermöglicht. Diese gemeinsame 
Leistung  ist  die  Grundlage  für  diese  Ehrung,  die  Verleihung  der  „Ehrenplakette  der  Stadt 
Frankfurt“. 
Ich bin glücklich, mich in die Reihe der Zentralbankpräsidenten einreihen zu dürfen, die vor 
mir die Ehrenplakette der Stadt Frankfurt erhalten haben, darunter mein leider viel zu früh 
verstorbener Vorgänger Willem F. Duisenberg. Lassen Sie mich nun kurz auf die ersten zehn 
Jahre der Existenz der Europäischen Zentralbank eingehen. 
The ECB after 10 years 
1.  
Ten years ago, on 1 June 1998, the European Central Bank was founded, together with the 
European  System  of  Central  Banks,  the  ESCB.  The  primary  mandate  of  the  ECB  and  the 
ESCB  was,  and  is,  to  preserve  price  stability  and  to  safeguard  the  credibility  of  Europe's 
single currency, the euro, which was created seven months later.  
It was the will of the democracies of Europe that led to the creation of the ECB . Its mandate 
and its independence in fulfilling its mandate were given by the people of Europe on a multi-
national and multi-partisan basis. We are faithful to our mandate because we are faithful to 
the democratic will of the Member States.  
What can we say now, after ten years? 
Since day one, the single currency has fully inherited the degree of credibility and confidence 
that was the privilege of the most credible national currencies before the euro. The credibility 
was such that the medium and long-term market rates of the euro were at the same low level 
as those experienced by the most reliable national currencies before. In spite of a series of 
global  shocks  resulting  from  the  prices  of  oil  and  commodities,  yearly  inflation  since  1 
January 1999 has been 2.1% on average. Price stability in the medium term is essential not 
only  because  it  protects  the  incomes  of  all  our  fellow  citizens  –  and  particularly  the  most 
vulnerable and poorest ones – but also because it is one of the preconditions for growth and 
job creation. Since the euro came into being about 16 million new jobs have been created, 
over one million more than on the other side of the Atlantic. 
BIS Review 110/2008 
 1
The  first  ten  years  have  been  extremely  busy  for  the  Executive  Board,  for  the  Governing 
Council,  for  the  ECB  and  for  the  Eurosystem.  The  extraordinary  motivation  of  our  staff 
members is, in my opinion, due to their awareness of, and pride in, making history.  
The single currency is the most advanced feature of European unity and in many respects its 
emblem. We owe it to the lucidity of the founding fathers and to the determination of a series 
of visionary leaders. To them we owe an immense debt of gratitude. Gratitude also to the 
leaders who maintained a steady hand during the 1990s in the run-up to the euro, in a very 
difficult environment.  
This  anniversary  is  no  time  for  complacency.  But  for  continuous  efforts,  because  the 
challenges lying ahead for Monetary Union will be numerous and demanding. As one of the 
major central banks in the industrialised world, we, like the others, have three challenges to 
cope with in our monetary policy-making: rapid technological progress, globalisation in all its 
dimensions, including the transformation of global finance, and population ageing.  
On top of those three major challenges, the ECB and the Eurosystem have to cope with two 
other  important,  self-assigned  challenges.  The  first  is  the  deepening  of  economic  and 
financial integration at continental level, the progressive completion of a single economy with 
a  single  currency;  we  are  the  only  central  bank  which  is  actively  contributing  to  a  major 
structural transformation of its own economy. The second is enlargement: we are called upon 
to extend progressively the euro area across the European Union as a whole; we are also 
the only central bank to undertake such an endeavour. 
Economic  Union  itself  has  its  own  challenges.  I  see  three  major  challenges  for  the 
Eurogroup,  for  the  governments  of  the  euro  area  and  for  the  Commission.  The  full  and 
complete implementation of the Stability and Growth Pact, which is a crucial component of 
EMU in the absence of a European federal budget. The resolute pursuit of structural reforms 
in  line  with  the  Lisbon  process,  which  are  decisive  in  order  to  raise  the  long-term  growth 
potential of Europe. And the lucid monitoring of the national competitive indicators, including 
unit labour costs.  
Europe  can  count  on  the  ECB  and  on  the  Eurosystem  to  implement  in  this  century  the 
historic task which was assigned to us at the end of the last century. We will be faithful to the 
primary mandate given to us by the Treaty. We know that our fellow citizens are asking us to 
deliver price stability. We know also that price stability is a prerequisite for financial stability, 
a very important objective at the current juncture. All the members of the Governing Council 
make their decisions taking into account the interests of the whole of the euro area, of 15 
countries. We do not consider any particular country, but all 15 of them. And as I said, in the 
current juncture there is no place for complacency but for permanent credible alertness. 
The ECB and its relations with Frankfurt 
2.  
During its first ten years the ECB has developed excellent relations with its environment here 
in Frankfurt, be it with the institutions of the city or with the population. At the beginning there 
were still some taxi drivers who did not understand immediately where to bring a passenger 
who just said: “European Central Bank, please”. Today, the situation is quite different. And 
the ECB has endeavoured to spread the knowledge of what is happening in there. We do 
that  via  our  publications  or  our  Website  but  also  by  inviting  the  public  to  come  inside  the 
ECB. Therefore, we participated in the Skyscraper festivals of 2001 and 2007, following the 
example of our forerunner, the European Monetary Institute which did so in 1996 and 1998. 
In the framework of our 10th anniversary we held an Open Day on 1 June, and about 1,000 
visitors could get first hand information of the role and functions of the ECB. In addition, we 
regularly explain our work to groups of visitors from around the world, and among them of 
course  citizens  from  Frankfurt  and  the  Rhein-Main  area.  In  2007  their  number  reached 
13,500 altogether and each visitor did not only see the ECB but also the city of Frankfurt. For 
completeness, I wish to also mention our taking part in the Osthafenfest and in the Luminale, 
2 
 BIS Review 110/2008
during which the Großmarkthalle was fantastically illuminated. Also, ECB staff participated in 
dragon boat races and got the enthusiastic support from the public and their colleagues on 
the banks of the Main. 
The  ECB  is  a  European  body,  and  its  staff  is  now  composed  of  nationals  from  the  27 
Member States of the European Union. Every day, I enjoy the multi-cultural atmosphere at 
the ECB which is stimulating as it brings fresh ideas into our professional life because of the 
different  experiences,  work  styles  and  cultural  backgrounds  only  to  name  a  few  of  the 
inspiring factors. Our daily encounter with the richness of European heritage brought us to 
the  thought  to  let  the  public  participate  in  this  understanding.  We  did  so  by  launching  the 
Cultural  Days  of  the  European  Central  Bank  which  we  have  organised  every  year  since 
2003. The basic concept is to feature each time aspects of the variety and affluence of the 
culture  of  one  of  the  Member  States  of  the  European  Union,  and  bring  it  to  Frankfurt  to 
present it to the citizens of the Rhine-Main region and beyond, with events covering music, 
literature, film, and modern dance. Furthermore, we offer lectures about different topics, art 
and  photographic  exhibitions  and  events  for  children.  After  having  started  with  Portugal  in 
2003, it was Poland’s turn in 2004, followed in 2005 by Hungary, in 2006 by Austria and in 
2007 by Greece. This year we did not focus on the culture of only one Member  State but 
presented  for  our  10th  birthday  a  kaleidoscope  of  the  culture  of  all  27  EU  countries  in  a 
combination  of  different  events.  In  2009  we  will  return  to  the  traditional  pattern  and  have 
selected Romania as the next single country.  
In  the  organisation  of  the  Cultural  Days  the  ECB  can  rely  in  particular  on  the  precious 
support  from  the  central  banks  of  the  relevant  theme  countries  which  are,  among  other 
things,  an  important  factor  in  the  selection  and  financing  of  the  programme.  However,  we 
have over the years also extremely well cooperated with the city of Frankfurt, and I wish to 
thank the Lord Mayor and the other members of the city government or parliament very, very 
much for their assistance and contributions to the Cultural Days which I hope have enriched 
the international flavour of the city. 
Closing remark 
3.  
Sehr  geehrter  Frau  Oberbürgermeisterin,  meine  Damen  und  Herren,  die  EZB,  ihr 
Management und ihre Belegschaft fühlen sich seit zehn Jahren in Frankfurt sehr wohl. Ich 
danke  Ihnen  nochmals  aufrichtig  für  die  Ehrung,  die  ich  sehr  gerne  im  Namen  des 
Direktoriums und unserer Mitarbeiter entgegennehme.  
Vielen Dank für Ihre Aufmerksamkeit. 
BIS Review 110/2008 
 3
