Emsley D Tromp: Insurance regulation in a globalizing world – 
challenges and opportunities 
Address by Dr Emsley D Tromp, President of the Bank of the Netherlands Antilles (Bank van 
de  Nederlandse  Antillen),  on  the  occasion  of  the  2008  IAC  Conference,  Willemstad, 
Curacao, 1 June 2008. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, good evening. 
It is with a great deal of pleasure that I accepted the invitation to speak at this Annual IAC. I 
would like to congratulate the NAVV for bringing this prestigious conference to Curacao. It 
makes  a  welcome  contribution  to  not  only  our tourism  sector,  but  also  our  financial  sector 
and our economy through the various presentations, which I’m sure will be of a high level. I 
am  delighted  to  see  so  many  representatives  from  the  world's  financial  and  insurance 
community here today. And I welcome the opportunity to speak to you about the important 
challenges we face in the regulation of the financial services industry in general and – the 
insurance industry in particular. In my opinion, we all play a key role in achieving our shared 
goals of keeping our world financial system strong, stable, and efficient. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  I  have  structured  my  views  along  the  following  lines:  First,  I  will 
elaborate  on  some  of  the  weaknesses  of  our  Caribbean  economies  and  the  impact  of 
globalization on our region. Next, I will elaborate on the challenges and opportunities that we 
as insurance regulators face in this globalized world. I will conclude my address with some 
remarks on the role that we all can play in preparing ourselves to meet the challenges we 
face with global competition. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  against  the  background  of  an  ever  globalizing  world,  it  is  fitting  to 
portray the road ahead of us as a journey into the future. We have to realize that because of 
their  size,  Caribbean  countries  are  very  vulnerable  to  international  developments  and 
external  shocks.  The  erosion  of  preferential  market  access  to  the  European  Union,  the 
establishment of NAFTA, the terrorist attacks on the United States, the international efforts to 
combat money laundering and terrorism financing, and natural disasters all have had a great 
impact on our economies. 
As I just noted, the high vulnerability of our economies is primarily because of our smallness, 
which  results  in  significant  diseconomies  of  scale.  Both  the  private  and  public  sectors  are 
affected by these diseconomies of scale.  
The small size of our national markets limits the international competitiveness of our goods 
and services for both export and the domestic market. Small firms are at a disadvantage in 
the  global  market  place  because  they  cannot  realize  economies  of  scale,  they  are  not 
attractive business partners, and they cannot spend significant funds on marketing, research 
and development. 
Small economies have severe constraints on their material and labor inputs both in amount 
and variety. These constraints are related to their limited land area and small populations, 
leading to high unit costs of production. For instance, the small size of the labor market limits 
the  range  of  available  skills,  pushing  up  the  price  of  scarce  skills.  On  the  supply  side, 
employment alternatives are limited, which promotes a brain drain of highly skilled workers 
and causes high social costs for low-skilled workers when industries have to restructure.  
Moreover, the small market size and limited range of resources result in a narrower range of 
domestic  and  export  production  and  tend  to  cause  high  costs  because  of  a  lack  of 
competition. 
BIS Review 73/2008 
 1
The provision of public goods and infrastructure is usually characterized by indivisibility. This 
indivisibility has two implications for small economies. First, the costs of public services per 
capita  are  higher  than  in  larger  economies.  Second,  the  government  may  be  forced  to 
provide  some  goods  and  services  –often  at  subsidized  rates.  In  larger  economies,  these 
goods  and  services  typically  would  be  offered  by  the  private  sector  thereby  lessening 
budgetary pressures. 
Besides  diseconomies  of  scale,  our  countries  are  characterized  by  high  vulnerability  to 
external  shocks.  Various  factors  that  are  largely  beyond  our  control  contribute  to  this 
vulnerability. These factors include our geographical location and high level of openness. Our 
countries  are  located  in  an  area  prone  to  natural  disasters,  particularly  hurricanes.  These 
natural  phenomena  are  recurrent  and  affect  a  large  proportion  of  our  population  and 
economies. In some cases, economic damages have exceeded annual GDP. The result is a 
long recovery time. Our high degree of openness, illustrated by levels of imports and exports 
of  goods  and  services  near  and  even  over  100%  of  GDP,  also  makes  us  extremely 
vulnerable to external shocks. This openness is aggravated by the concentration of exports 
in a narrow range of products and markets. For example, the erosion of preferential access 
of  agricultural  products  to  the  European  market  is  having  a  significant  impact  on  some 
Caribbean economies. 
To  mitigate  the  effects  of  diseconomies  of  scale  and  the  high  degree  of  vulnerability  to 
external  shocks,  broader  and  deeper  cooperation  among  the  countries  in  the  Caribbean 
region is an inevitable strategy. The need for this strategy is even more evident in light of the 
structural  changes  taking  place  in  the  world  and  the  way  they  affect  the  countries  in  the 
region. 
These  structural  changes  can  be  described  under  the  phenomenon  of  globalization. 
Globalization is a multi-dimensional process that transforms all aspects of national and global 
activities and interactions in a rapid and profound way. Inherent in the globalization process 
is  that  existing  barriers  to  international  flows  of  goods,  services,  capital,  money,  and 
information are increasingly being reduced and/or eliminated. The fact that world trade grows 
about three times faster than world output illustrates this development. The small Caribbean 
countries, which are vulnerable to external events and have limited adjustment capacity are 
particularly  exposed  to  the  effects  of  globalization,  which  brings  along  potential  risks  for 
these  nations.  Risk  permeates  all  our  lives.  Whether  as  individuals,  businesses,  or 
governments,  we  confront  a  vast  range  of  risks.  Insurance  is  the  most  basic  financial 
mechanism  for  dealing  with  risk.  Therefore,  insurance  plays  a  vital  role  in  our  economies. 
While the importance of the insurance industry far outweighs its size in terms of its relative 
share of total assets in the financial sector, its size is nonetheless impressive.  
In  this  whole  process  of  globalization,  the  importance  of  global  regulatory  cooperation  in 
ensuring  open,  competitive,  and  stable 
insurance  markets  becomes 
preeminent.  Such  cooperation  is  needed  to  strike  the  right  balance  between  protecting 
investors  and  policyholders  and  entrenching  financial  stability  on  the  one  hand  and 
encouraging innovation, foreign investment, and market efficiency, on the other. 
As the global economy goes through a period of fundamental transformation and integration, 
negotiations and regulatory decisions at the global level increasingly have a major bearing on 
the competitiveness and efficiency of our insurance markets. 
In this global environment, it is vital that a cooperative approach be adopted to achieve our 
shared goals.  
International convergence of global standards is a central theme in the prudential regulation 
of  the  insurance  market.  The  European  Union  is  creating  a  new  regulatory  framework  – 
Solvency  II  –  which  aims  to  achieve  convergence  with  emerging  global  standards  in  key 
areas, 
insurance 
supervision.  
international  accounting  standards  and 
financial  and 
frameworks 
including 
for 
2 
 BIS Review 73/2008
insurance  groups  and 
A  global  perspective  is  necessary  because  the  globalization  of  financial  services  makes 
efficient  supervision  of 
financial  conglomerates  operating 
internationally  a  key  challenge  for  all  regulators.  Global  convergence  of  international 
accounting standards can also reduce the cost of capital due to enhanced transparency and 
leveling  of  the  playing  field.  This  will  also  make  comparison  of  cross-border  investment 
decision  easier.  I  believe  that  we  all  gain  in  the  long-term  from  greater  global  cooperation 
and mutual recognition.  
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  let  me  now  turn  to  some  of  the  numerous  challenges  and 
opportunities that impact insurance regulation in a globalized world. The structural changes 
that are reshaping the global insurance market have had a major impact on the insurance 
industry. The most significant of these changes is the breakdown of traditional barriers that 
once  segmented  the  market  for  financial  services.  Driven  by  powerful  technological 
innovations and changing regulatory structures worldwide, the financial sector is witnessing a 
process of convergence in the delivery of products.  
The  rise  of  conglomerates  poses  a  special  challenge  both  for  insurers  and  regulators. 
Financial institutions such as banks, with more capital and greater opportunities to cross-sell 
insurance with traditional bank products, are a threat to non-diversified insurers. Indeed, in 
Europe, banc assurance is already a fact of life, and conglomerates will increasingly become 
the norm, rather than the exception. 
Newer threats are emerging from nontraditional competitors like retailers, finance companies, 
and Internet providers, who are using new IT platforms to circumvent traditional marketing 
and distribution channels, such as insurance agents. Together, these forces are leading to 
an unprecedented wave of consolidation in the insurance industry, both in our country and 
overseas.  
Recognizing that growth is the key to survival in a flat market, merger and acquisition activity 
among  companies  is  at  record  levels.  Insurers  have  to  adapt  to  this  fluid  business 
environment.  Failing  to  do  so  is  to  be  left  behind.  These  developments  have  also 
consequences for the regulatory framework governing the financial sector. We will have to 
transform our regimes to provide this sector with a world-class regulatory framework that will 
allow it to prosper in the face of current and future challenges. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  as  globalization  is  drawing  our  national  economies  together,  the 
importance of establishing a transparent, flexible, and growth-oriented regulatory framework 
cannot  be  overestimated.  The  growing  complexity  of  the  financial  sector,  including  the 
insurance  sector,  raises  special  challenges,  not  just  to  regulators  but  also  to  senior 
management. 
Technological  innovations,  convergence,  and  rationalization  are  undermining  the  old 
assumptions  about  how  to  do  business.  Whatever  the  developments,  one  basic  tenet 
remains unchanged – that is, the importance of good corporate governance practices to the 
success  of  companies.  Directors  might  need  new  skills  in  the  “new”  economy,  but  the  old 
fundamentals of disclosure and accountability remain unchanged. 
Ensuring that directors are aware of their fiduciary duties means they need to be informed of 
the standards required of them both by law and by best practice. Continuing education is the 
only way to achieve that. And while education is vital, it must be remembered that corporate 
governance is a dynamic and interactive process. As the supervisory authority, we strongly 
encourage  institutional  investors  to  act  in  the  best  interests  of  those  they  represent,  while 
continuing to keep a close watch on their activity. 
Ladies and gentlemen, globalization brings also with it constraints for insurance regulation. 
The question is, how should we work within these constraints arising from our international 
obligations  while  still  respecting  the  rights  of  each  nation  to  regulate  its  own  insurance 
industry against the background of its own traditions and cultures?  
BIS Review 73/2008 
 3
The recent turmoil and volatility in the financial markets demonstrates that economic systems 
can benefit from improved financial services regulation. It is in everyone's interest to have an 
optimal framework for financial services regulation. The globalization of the capital markets 
also prompts the need to revisit the current regulatory structure in our countries. Companies 
now can raise capital across the world, seeking environments that provide adequate capital 
and  liquidity  at  the  optimal  cost.  Market  participants  today  have  many  jurisdictional  from 
which  to  raise  or  invest  their  capital.  Because  of  this  dynamic,  market  participants  have 
choices  today  that  were  unavailable  as  recently  as  10  years  ago.  This  borderless  world 
pressures  regulatory  regimes  to  compete  with  each  other  because  capital  flows  to  where 
investors  expect  to  achieve  the  greatest  risk-adjusted  return.  Note  that  a  welcoming 
regulatory regime does not mean that it is ineffective or lenient. In fact, market participants 
value well-regulated markets because they foster market integrity and investor confidence.  
In  this  new  globalized  marketplace,  we  are  engaged  in  a  race-to-the-top  to  achieve  the 
optimal  regulatory  structure  for  the  financial  services  and  insurance  industry.  The  optimal 
regulatory  structure  needs  to  attract  capital  based  on  its  effectiveness  in  promoting 
innovation,  managing  system-wide  risks,  and  fostering  consumer  and  investor  confidence. 
Insurance  is  an  industry  that  is  heavily  influenced  by  external  factors  as  is  the  regulatory 
structure. The global nature of insurance is vastly different from what it was some decades 
ago. Therefore, regulatory authorities should reevaluate and adapt their insurance regulatory 
regime to reflect the changes taking place in the insurance markets.  
A  lot  has  changed  in  the  past  25  years  in  the  insurance  industry.  Some  decades  ago, 
insurance  didn’t  really  take  place  across  national  lines.  Now  we  are  concerned  about 
regulation across oceans. With the occurrence of more mergers and international ownership 
of  insurance  companies,  CEOs  are  finding  themselves  having  to  negotiate  with  insurance 
supervisors in various jurisdictions.  
These changes could not have occurred in recent years without the use of technology, which 
makes  it  easy  for  insurance  companies  to  do  business  all over  the  world.  The information 
revolution is changing the way that insurance is sold – by delivering products closer to the 
consumer  than  ever  before,  directly  in  their  homes.  This  is  giving  the  consumer  a 
considerable advantage over middlemen and agents. Consumers can use the Internet to find 
the best product at the best price, and they are using that power more than ever before to 
their  benefit.  But  there  is  another  side  to  all  of  this  change.  While  the  information  age 
empowers  the  consumer,  it  also  provides  greater  opportunities  for  the  unscrupulous 
operator. It increases the chances of insurance fraud. As supervisors, we need to be alert for 
these threats which come along with globalization and technology.  
Fraud not only inflicts losses on the insurers, but it also erodes the very foundation on which 
the industry operates and flourishes. The insurance regulation community has to match the 
threat  that  fraudulent  agents  and  companies  pose  by  staying  ahead  of  the  information 
technology curve. To do so, runs the gamut from enhancing financial solvency activities to 
educating consumers via the Internet. 
As  agents,  providers,  and  consumers  begin  to  complete  more  of  their  insurance-related 
transactions  online,  new  regulatory  issues  will  have  to  be  resolved.  Because  insurers  are 
collecting more information on customers, privacy is a greater concern. In fact, privacy will 
become  one  of  the  more  important  issues  that  we  as  insurance  regulators  deal  with, 
especially as it relates to the transfer of medical information.  
The  globalization  of  the  insurance  business  and  the  change  in  the  way  that  insurance 
products  are  delivered  via  the  Internet  puts  a  lot  of  pressure  on  insurance  regulation. 
Information on the insurance industry is of utmost importance for us insurance regulators if 
we  want  our  insurance  market  to  operate  efficiently  and  properly.  We  must,  therefore,  not 
simply focus on the collection of more information and data, but also on intelligent ways to 
use that information.  
4 
 BIS Review 73/2008
The trend is towards global regulation; however, the move towards uniformity in regulation is 
very contentious throughout the insurance industry and nations. The European Commission's 
proposed new Solvency II legislation, coupled with the Reinsurance Directive, represents a 
major  effort  to  reorient  and  modernize  insurance  regulation,  treating  insurance  firms  as 
cross-border actors.  
It  is  clear  that  the  increasing  globalization  of  the  insurance  business  requires  global 
regulation. Regulation of insurance will be threatened unless we become more uniform and 
efficient in what we do. 
Those of us involved in insurance regulation have our work cut out for us. We have to keep 
up with a transformation that is taking place all over the world. The question we must ask 
ourselves then is, how do we effectively oversee, global seamless markets when we have 
only national or local regulators? Indeed, the ideal solution to contending with global markets 
would be to have a global regulator. However, even the members of the European Union – 
who now share a common overarching legal structure and, in many cases, a common legal 
and  financial  history  –  have  not  yet  been  able  to  conclude  that  a  single  EU-wide  financial 
regulator is feasible or desirable. Instead, the issue has been reformulated to ask, how, given 
national regulation, can regulators coordinate their enforcement and regulatory activities in 
ways that reflect the global nature of our markets?  
Fortunately, organizations such as the International Organization of Securities Commissions, 
the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision,  the  International  Association  of  Insurance 
Supervisors,  the  Financial  Action  Task  Force,  and  the  Organization  for  Economic 
Cooperation and Development have done much to help answer this question. Through these 
organizations,  as  well  as  through  bilateral  networks,  financial  regulators  have  created 
channels  of  collaboration,  cooperation,  and  information  exchange  that  allow  national 
regulators to do their jobs effectively and efficiently in a world of global financial markets. 
It  goes  without  saying  that  prevention  is  better  than  cure.  Proper  legislation  and  good 
regulation  provide  the  basic  safeguards.  Cooperation  among  insurance  supervisors  is  and 
remains  a  key  element.  We  in  the  Netherlands  Antilles  recognize  the  need  for  closer 
cooperation  and  have  in  this  respect  strengthen  our  relationship  with  different  foreign 
supervisors by concluding MOU’s with these jurisdictions. Also new legislation was drafted in 
the Netherlands Antilles to modernize our regulatory framework, whereby consideration was 
given  to  what  will  best  serve  our  interests  and  the  global  economy  in  maintaining  an 
insurance marketplace that attracts capital and does not set up artificial and costly barriers. 
This  draft  Harmonization  legislation  was  submitted  to  our  Government  in  2007  and  is 
pending enactment. I am confident that this legislation will ensure that we can maintain our 
approach to insurance market regulation without imposing a disproportionate burden on the 
institutions themselves. On the other hand, external regulatory competitive pressures require 
a constant reevaluation of financial services regulatory structure.  
Ladies and gentlemen, globalization is an irreversible process. It is a reality we must learn to 
deal with. It provides opportunities as well as threats to our economies. The most effective 
way to deal with globalization is to pursue policies that reduce our vulnerabilities. By acting 
as  an  effective  and  competitive  jurisdiction,  we  can  reduce  the  threats  and  risks  of 
globalization and benefit from its challenges and opportunities. 
Coming back to the Caribbean, I have to say that on our own, we as Caribbean countries 
and our companies will fall rapidly behind and will marginalize ourselves given the current 
trends  in  globalization.  Through  regional  alliances,  cooperation,  and  integration,  we  can 
overcome  our  inherent  weaknesses  and  be  able  to  compete  successfully  in  the  global 
market.  This  process  of  strategic  global  repositioning  is  far  from  finished  and  requires 
unrelenting  efforts  by  our  governments,  business  companies,  and  other  interest  groups  to 
implement the adjustments and structural transformation necessary for sustainable economic 
development in the decades ahead.  
BIS Review 73/2008 
 5
I would like to conclude by stressing that global regulatory cooperation will continue to be key 
as we work to address the challenges facing the insurance industry today. I believe that with 
sound  macroeconomic  policies,  a  world-class  regulatory  structure,  deep  and  stable  capital 
markets, and a highly-educated workforce, all of us should be well primed for the challenges 
we are facing in this globalized world. I hope this will be the beginning of a lasting and fruitful 
cooperation among us Caribbean nations and the rest of the world – a cooperation that will 
lead  to  strong  partnerships,  creative  investment  opportunities,  and  sustainable  economic 
growth for all of us. 
I wish you a productive and interesting conference, and I hope that you will find time to enjoy 
the hospitality and beauty of our island. 
Thank you. 
6 
 BIS Review 73/2008
