Amando M Tetangco, Jr: The Philippines – addressing the challenges. 
Staying the course 
Speech  by  Mr  Amando  M  Tetangco,  Jr,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  the  Philippines 
(Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas),  at 
the  Philippine  Economic  Briefing,  Makati  City, 
17 September 2008. 
 Good morning. Thank you for joining us in this mid-year economic briefing.  
I  am  pleased  to  speak  before  you  on  the  developments  in  the  monetary,  external  and 
banking sectors. After providing you with an overview of recent economic developments, I 
will discuss the outlook for the next two years which takes into account the challenges that 
our economy is facing. Then, I will walk you through how the BSP has responded to these 
challenges. I will close with the BSP’s policy thrusts going forward. 
Let me start with the latest price developments.  
Inflation  averaged  8.8  percent  for  the  first  8  months  of  the  year,  rising  to  12.5  percent  in 
August  from  4.9  percent  in  January  2008.  Core  inflation,  which  measures  the  underlying 
trend in inflation by excluding specific food and energy prices, climbed to 7.0 percent year-
on-year in August, from 3.4 percent in January.  
Price pressures have been building up since early this year. Initially the price increases were 
due to supply-side factors, specifically from elevated international oil and non-oil commodity 
prices. However, second round price pressures subsequently became apparent, as evident 
in the rise in core inflation and the adjustments in the pricing of services as well as wages. 
These have resulted in a more challenging inflation environment.  
Meanwhile,  the country’s external payments profile remains a major source of strength for 
the  economy.  The  BOP  remained  in  surplus  for  the  first  eight  months  of  2008  at  US$2.0 
billion.  Remittances  from  overseas  Filipinos  continued  to  boost  the  BOP,  reaching  US$9.6 
billion  for  the  first  seven  months  of  2008,  higher  by  18.2  percent  relative  to  the  year-ago 
level.  
The  sustained  BOP  surplus  resulted  in  the  continued  build-up  of  the  country’s  gross 
international reserves (GIR), which stood at US$36.7 billion as of end-August 2008. At this 
level,  the  GIR  is  equivalent  to  6.0  months’  worth  of  import  cover,  2.9  times  the  country’s 
short-term external debt based on residual maturity. 
The strong external position has allowed both the public and private sectors to prepay some 
of their FX obligations, resulting in further improvements in the country’s external debt ratio. 
As of end March 2008, the external debt ratio stood at 35.6 percent, less than half its level in 
2001 of 72.9 percent.  
The  peso  has  weakened  in  recent months.  On  a  year-to-date  basis,  the  peso  depreciated 
against the US dollar by 12.3 percent as it closed at P47.09/US$1 on 15 September 2008. 
This is on account of rising risk aversion due to worries over global economic slowdown and 
credit tightening. Concerns over rising inflation further added pressure against the peso. For 
the  period  2001-2008  (to-date),  the  peso  appreciated  by  9.1  percent,  generally  in  tandem 
with most currencies in the region. 
The Philippine peso has been generally competitive against our major trading partners and 
competitors in real terms. If we take 2001-2002 as the comparator period given both good 
GDP  and  inflation  numbers,  coupled  with  the  manageable  external  payments  position,  the 
end points remain broadly on the same level. 
BIS Review 112/2008 
 1
On  the  financial  sector,  the  banking  system  remains  generally  sound  and  stable.  The 
banking system’s asset base has been expanding steadily. The continued asset clean-up of 
banks, accomplished without the use of public funds, has enhanced asset quality, bringing 
the  NPL  ratio  closer  to  the  pre-Asian  crisis  level  of  around  4.0  percent.  Banks  remained 
capitalized at levels above both the BSP-regulatory requirement and the BIS standard.  
Owing to reforms earlier instituted, the Philippine banking system has not been significantly 
affected  by  the  financial  stresses  experienced  from  the  US  subprime  mortgage  market. 
Furthermore, the Philippine domestic banks’ exposure to structured products, such as CLNs 
and CDOs, issued by investment houses like Lehman Brothers has been limited and are well 
cushioned by banks’ capital base. However, we continue to closely monitor developments in 
the  global  financial  markets,  including  further  risk  aversion  against  emerging  markets 
including the Philippines, as these may adversely impact the growth of the banking sector.  
Where are we heading? 
The inflation path is expected to be hump-shaped, with the peak around Sept/Oct this year, 
after which we expect a gradual leveling off. We expect to see the single-digit level again by 
late  Q1/early  Q2  next  year.  Nevertheless,  the  forecasts  still  indicate  that  inflation  could 
exceed the 2008 and 2009 targets. The BOP surplus by end 2008 is estimated at around 
US$2.0 billion. This would result in a GIR level of US$37 billion by the end of 2008. 
What are the challenges that we face as we try to achieve these projections? 
The  Philippines  –  like  many  emerging  countries  –  is  faced  with  the  challenge  of  rising 
inflation and slower economic growth. The slowdown in US and global growth could result in 
a deceleration of Philippine export growth and a decline in foreign investments. While global 
commodity prices have started to show some easing, world oil prices are expected to remain 
volatile  due  to  low  global  production  capacity  and  rising  demand  in  emerging  economies. 
Non-oil  commodity  prices  may  take  longer  to  unwind  because  of  strong  demand  from 
growing consumption of emerging countries and as inputs for biofuel production. The risk of 
high inflation remains present. 
Meanwhile, the strains in global financial markets continue to persist and have heightened 
risk aversion. While emerging markets, including the Philippines, have been fairly resilient to 
the global credit turmoil, they could face greater risks because of higher borrowing costs and 
reversals in capital flows 
How  has  the  BSP  addressed  these?  Consistent  with  our  primary  mandate,  we  have 
responded through policies appropriately aimed at sustaining price stability. We believe this 
is essential in ensuring sustained long-term economic growth. 
As I mentioned earlier, the BSP noted that the spikes in prices in early 2008 were supply-
side in origin. These had mainly global roots and were expected to be largely transitory. As is 
well  accepted,  such  supply-side  shocks  are  best  addressed  by  non-monetary  measures. 
Acknowledging that the impact of monetary policy under that scenario would be limited, the 
BSP  followed  a  prudent  approach  by  accommodating  these  first-round  effects.  In  other 
words, BSP treated the resulting rise in prices as a shift in relative prices, and allowed it to go 
through. Thus, BSP kept its policy settings steady during our March and April meetings. 
Subsequently,  however,  we  noted  changes  in  the  inflation  dynamics.  First,  inflation 
expectations  were  rising.  More  specifically,  consumer  and  business  expectations  surveys 
began to show more respondents expecting headline inflation to go up in the coming months. 
BSP’s survey of private sector economists/analysts showed higher inflation forecasts for both 
2008  and  2009.  Moreover,  the  term  spreads  on  secondary  market  yields  for  government 
securities were on the rise, reflecting market sentiment for a continued rise in the future.  
Second,  real  interest  rates  continued  to  be  in  negative  territory.  This  would  pose  some 
complications to making decisions on savings, investment and production, which over time 
could weigh down on capital flows, exchange rate and ultimately, inflation. 
2 
 BIS Review 112/2008
Given the new information, the BSP responded with a combination of policy rate hikes and 
careful communication of BSP’s inflation-fighting resolve. During its policy meetings in June, 
July and August, the BSP gradually raised its policy rates from 5 percent to 6 percent. The 
cumulative 100 basis points hike was a recognition that it was necessary to act promptly and 
preemptively to: 1) address price pressures that were coming more evidently from second-
round effects; 2) guide inflationary expectations, to arrest self-perpetration into higher actual 
inflation;  and  3)  rein  in  inflation  and  allow  it  to  fall  within  the  target  range  over  the  policy 
horizon.  
Latest  indicators  show  that  inflation  is  losing  speed  but  risks  remain.  Global  commodity 
prices  are  now  starting  to  show  some  easing.  However,  we  still  need  to  remain  cautious 
given the inherent volatility in commodity prices. The BSP remains confident that its current 
monetary  policy  stance  could  be  accommodated  by  resilient  demand  conditions.  The 
buoyancy  of  domestic  demand  suggests  room  for  measured  interest  rate  action  without 
causing serious effects on the real sector. 
Meanwhile, we have continued to institute reforms to further strengthen the banking system 
and deepen the domestic capital market. These reforms are focused on further enhancing 
the regulatory framework through the continued implementation of the BASEL II framework; 
accelerating the implementation of risk-based supervision; improving corporate governance, 
including  by  promoting  compliance  with  international  accounting  and  financial  reporting 
standards; continuing to promote microfinance lending to improve small businesses’ access 
to credit; and supporting the deepening of the domestic capital market. 
What can you expect from the BSP going forward? 
The policy thrusts of the BSP are aimed at ensuring that the headway that we have achieved 
in nurturing a resilient economy and a sound banking sector will continue even in the face of 
the challenges we all face. First, monetary policy will continue to be sufficiently cautious and 
vigilant to the emerging balance of risks. It will continually reassess the evolving situation as 
price pressures show initial signs of slowing down and as demand conditions moderate. This 
will ensure a responsive conduct of appropriate monetary policy. 
In  the  external  sector,  our  policies  will  continue  to  be  directed  at  maintaining  a  market-
determined  exchange  rate  with  scope  for  occasional  official  action  to  address  sharp 
volatilities  in  the  exchange  rate;  maintaining  a  comfortable  level  of  reserves  as  self-
insurance; and ensuring the sustainability of our external debt. These policies will continue to 
promote strong fundamentals that will help reduce the economy’s vulnerability against global 
economic risks and support the needs of a more dynamic and globally integrated economy. 
In  the  financial  sector,  we  remain  firmly  committed  to  sustain  key  reforms  that  will  lead  to 
greater efficiency, effective risk management, stronger capital base and improved corporate 
governance standards in the banking system. These financial and banking sector reforms will 
continue to raise savings and help boost financing for productive activities.  
In  summary,  let  me  assure  you  that  the  BSP  is  prepared  to  take  all  necessary  action  to 
address  the  threat  of  high  inflation  and  promote  price  stability.  We  stress  here  that  high 
inflation erodes the community’s purchasing power, reduces their consumption expenditure 
and slows down economic growth. We are therefore mindful of the impact of our monetary 
policy action on the economy’s growth momentum. The resiliency of our economy allows us 
to have greater flexibility in responding to the challenges that come our way.  
Thank you very much. 
BIS Review 112/2008 
 3
