Mario Draghi: How to restore financial stability 
Lecture  by  Mr  Mario  Draghi,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Italy  and  Chairman  of  the  Financial 
Stability  Forum,  at  the  5th  Bundesbank  Lecture,  Berlin-Brandenburgische  Akademie  der 
Wissenschaften, Berlin, 16 September 2008. 
 As this crisis hits its first anniversary, it has evolved into an even more complex combination 
of  rising  inflation,  declining  growth,  tightening  credit  conditions,  and  widespread  liquidity 
tensions pervading the global financial industry. Banks have raised a significant amount of 
capital to partly offset writedowns and credit losses. But they are now moving into a phase 
where credit losses in the banking book will begin to rise. And banks are entering this phase 
with weakened balance sheets. Alongside a rise in credit related losses, the outlook for bank 
profitability is poor.  
The aggregate amount of capital in the system is great enough, under reasonable scenarios, 
to prevent the system as a whole from falling below regulatory thresholds. But the distribution 
of that capital obviously matters. And, for larger banks, the capital levels demanded by the 
market have gone up in response to the greater uncertainty and reduced transparency about 
their balance sheets.  
We estimate that banks are likely to need to raise at least once again the amount of capital 
raised since the crisis began. There are various reasons why some banks will be struggling 
to reach those levels. That is especially the case for the banks that ran the debt-financed, 
highly leveraged and maturity mismatched business model that provided steady fee income 
over  the  last  several  years.  Now  their  profitability  looks  impaired,  and  their  desired  de-
leveraging is likely to be happening through a reduction of new lending. Capital increases are 
especially  difficult  in  a  situation  of  deteriorating  stock  markets  where  falling  equity  prices 
nullify  the  still  significant  efforts  undertaken  to  delever  banks’  balance  sheets.  This  has 
spurred increasing recourse to hybrid capital instruments, but these may raise in the future 
concerns about the quality of the capital raised. Let me finally observe that the situation of 
the banks in the Euro area is so far better than the one we are witnessing in the US and in 
other jurisdictions. 
As the crisis unfolds policies are taking a variety of shapes that can be grouped within two 
broad categories: emergency and structural responses. Until now, the first remained typically 
national since each crisis was unique to the financial structure of the country and so were the 
remedies.  However,  if  the  crisis  were  to  become  systemic  –  and  the  past  weekend  has 
shown  just  how  sudden  and  dramatic  the  turn  of  events  can  be  –  I  believe  that  an 
internationally coordinated effort will be necessary. 
On the other hand, it was immediately clear that the structural response that would lay out 
the foundations for a more resilient financial system in the years to come could not be other 
than internationally coordinated. It is primarily to this effort that the Financial Stability Forum 
(FSF)  has  been  called  to  respond  by  the  G7.  The  FSF  –  brought  into  being  by  Hans 
Tietmeyer in 1999 – brings together national financial authorities (central banks, supervisory 
agencies, and finance ministers) from large international financial centres as well as bodies 
such as standard setters and international financial institutions, giving it a unique capacity to 
give impetus to and facilitate coordination among these bodies.  
Our conviction is that misaligned incentives in several areas of the financial services industry 
weakened lending and underwriting standards, particularly but not exclusively in the United 
States.  At  a  more  general  level,  innovation  and  complexity  outstripped  banks’  capacity  to 
manage  key  risks  –  including  funding  and  liquidity  risks,  concentration  risks,  reputational 
risks,  legal  risks  and  warehousing  risks.  Investor  due  diligence  was  poor  and  reliance  on 
credit  ratings  unquestioning.  Institutions  accumulated  a  level  of  leverage  that  was  both 
BIS Review 112/2008 
 1
misperceived and excessive. The initial spark set off by the U.S. subprime downturn fed on 
these  much  broader  weaknesses,  causing  the  dramatic  loss  in  confidence  and  liquidity  in 
financial markets that we have seen. This explains why initial losses that might have been 
insignificant are having such meaningful consequences on the real economy in both Europe 
and the U.S. 
The financial system that will emerge from this crisis will be one that operates with less debt 
and more capital, should be immune to the set of perverse incentives that are at the root of 
the crisis, and should be such that the risks are better assessed and identified. In the end, 
while avoiding over-regulation that would stifle innovation, the reform process will re-draw the 
balance between market discipline and regulation. 
The FSF report, which was endorsed by the G7 ministers and central bank governors in April 
this  year  and  has  been  made  public,  draws  on  an  extensive  body  of  work  by  national 
authorities and the main international supervisory, regulatory, and central bank bodies. A key 
strength of this report is that it contains recommendations that have been agreed by those 
that have the authority and commitment to implement. Another key strength is that it aims at 
correcting the identified weaknesses while preserving a level playing field across countries. A 
well-defined  process  is  in  place  for  following  up  on  implementation,  comprising  who  does 
what  and  by  when,  and  how  progress  is  to  be  monitored  and  reported.  A  comprehensive 
follow-up report will be presented to the G7 next month. 
Our recommendations were in the following key areas: 
• 
Strengthening the prudential framework for banks, including with regard to capital, 
liquidity, risk management and market infrastructure; 
Strengthening the framework for transparency and valuation;  
Changing the role and uses of credit ratings; and 
Enhancing the authorities’ responsiveness to risks and our co-operation in dealing 
with weak banks. 
 Progress in taking forward implementation of these recommendations has been remarkable. 
To name a few examples: 
• 
for  sound 
Supervisors  proposed  in  July  new  capital  requirements  for  credit  exposures  in 
banks’ and securities firms’ trading books and will set out later this year adjustments 
to  capital  requirements  for  “re-securitisations”  and  the  short-term  liquidity  facilities 
that funded off-balance sheet conduits.  
In May, the Basel Committee issued revised guidance on liquidity risk management 
that  materially  raises  standards 
liquidity  risk  management  and 
measurement  –  including  requiring  banks  to  maintain  a  robust  cushion  of 
unencumbered, high quality liquid assets as a safeguard against protracted periods 
of liquidity stress.  
Over  summer,  IOSCO  and  the  SEC  set  out  fundamental  changes  to  their 
requirements on credit rating agencies to address the quality of ratings, to expand 
the information they provide, as well as proposals concerning how ratings are used 
in regulatory guidelines.  
Regarding  transparency,  the  larger  banks  have  implemented  our  recommended 
disclosures to provide expanded information on their risk exposures and valuations 
of problem assets, on and off the balance sheet.  
And the IASB is making good progress on new guidance and revised standards for 
fair valuations when markets are illiquid, and for consolidation of off-balance sheet 
entities, which we expect to see in the next few months.  
    2 
 BIS Review 112/2008
On the private sector front we welcome the recommendations that have been set out by the 
Institute of International Finance (the IIF), the Counterparty Risk Management Policy Group 
III,  and  the  American  and  European  Securitization  Forums.  The  industry’s  involvement  in 
drawing lessons from events has heightened the understanding of market participants of the 
need to redraw the balance between unfettered markets and regulation.  
Some of the regulatory changes that I have discussed will need to be phased in over time to 
avoid adding to the adjustment challenges the system faces now. However, there should be 
no uncertainty about the authorities’ determination to implement the program of actions that 
has  been  internationally  agreed.  And  there  should  be  no  stretching  of  timetables  for 
enhancing  disclosures,  including  of  off-balance  sheet  positions,  as  this  is  essential  to 
repairing market confidence.  
No financial system will be free from crisis whatever the rules of the game. The fundamental 
task for authorities is therefore to enhance the resilience of the financial system to shocks 
and  disruptions  whatever  their  source,  with  a  view  to  minimising  the  knock-on  effects 
elsewhere.  
At  the  level  of  the  financial  system  as  a  whole,  a  critical  element  is  the  infrastructure  of 
payment  and  settlement  systems,  and  the  body  of  contract  documentation  and  market 
practices  that  underpin  financial  activity.  A  resilient  infrastructure  is  one  that  is  capable  of 
withstanding  the  effects  of  the  failure  of  a  large  financial  institution.  As  we  speak  this 
objective  is  being  tested  by  reality.  By  reducing  the  centrality  of  any  one  institution  to  the 
system’s  stability,  a  stronger  infrastructure  also  contributes  to  reducing  moral  hazard.  A 
critical priority in this area is to address weaknesses in the operational infrastructure of over-
the-counter derivatives markets. The work undertaken by the NY Fed to this end should be 
commended by all the jurisdictions. The objective of this work is to move the OTC derivatives 
markets on to a platform where trades can be captured and settled in an orderly way.  
It  is  also  imperative  that  we  strengthen  national  and  cross-border  crisis  resolution 
frameworks  so that we  can allow weakened financial institutions, including large ones that 
operate across borders, to be wound down in an orderly manner. This is an area where the 
mismatch between what we need to have in place, and what is in place, is large. In addition 
to important national reform efforts in a number of countries, work is underway in the FSF 
and the Basel Committee to strengthen cross-border cooperation and contingency planning 
among authorities in responding to crisis.  
At  the  level  of  individual  institutions,  improving  resilience  means  ensuring  that  capital  and 
liquidity  buffers  are  large  enough  to  enable  firms  to  resist  external  shocks  –  without 
mandating  buffers  at  a  level  that  impedes  efficiency  and  encourages  regulatory  arbitrage. 
The issue is quite complex because both the actual and the appropriate size of a buffer shifts 
over  time  depending  on  the  market  and  systemic  environment.  Both  the  markets  and 
regulatory authorities affect the level of capital and liquidity buffers institutions maintain.  
A key issue, which is particularly relevant in the current period of adjustment, is the ability of 
banks to use capital levels above the regulatory minimum during adverse conditions. What 
we have seen is that higher cushions above the regulatory minimum become a new de facto 
market requirement. Indeed, banks’ efforts to raise new capital in the past year have been 
not just to meet regulatory minima but also to respond to the need to reassure markets. This 
is,  at  least  in  part,  because  of  festering  uncertainty  over  risk  exposures,  valuations  and 
earnings prospects. Some of this uncertainty is inevitable – for example, terminal values for 
securities  backed  by  US  housing  loans  cannot  be  determined  as  long  as  the  US  market 
continues  to  fall.  But  it  is  clear  that  we  need  a  much  more  robust  ex  ante  framework  of 
transparency  to  reduce  the  tendency  that  market  reaction  lead  banks  to  raise  capital  (or 
reduce  exposures)  to  possibly  inefficient  levels  in  a  systemic  crisis.  If  banks  can  credibly 
assure  markets  that  risks  to  their  asset  values  and  earnings  prospects  are  being  soundly 
managed  and  contained,  then  they  may  be  able  to  survive  a  temporary  decline  in  capital 
levels when needed, while still remaining above their regulatory minimum. 
BIS Review 112/2008 
 3
As  the  above  illustrates,  the  recent  turmoil  has  raised  fundamental  questions  about  the 
nature  of  procyclicality,  its  impact  on  financial  stability,  and  the  feasibility  of  policies  to 
address it. This brings me to two areas that I believe merit further attention on the part of 
policymakers going forward:  
• 
First,  is  there  a  role  for  the  official  sector  to  address  procyclicality  as  a  source  of 
financial instability?  
And second, should monetary policy embody in its objective function the health of 
the financial system? 
 Reviewing our experience of the past two or three decades, one is struck by the repeated 
tendency of financial systems to build up risk and leverage in good times, then shed it rapidly 
when  conditions  change.  While  the  assets  and  agents  involved  and  the  triggering 
mechanisms differ from one cycle to the next, the cycles have tended to produce significant 
deadweight costs and distortions in the real economy, both during the upswing and during 
the subsequent retrenchment. This is especially significant the more the financial system is 
leveraged,  as  we  have  seen  in  the  past  year.  While  we  cannot  and  would  not  want  to 
eliminate  the  bouts  of  optimism  and  pessimism  that  are  part  of  human  nature,  we  must 
address some of the pro-cyclical implications of our own policy making. 
We  decided  not  to  address  procyclicality  per  se  in  our  April  report  (although  some  of  the 
recommendations touch on it) because of the urgency of making concrete recommendations 
in other areas. But now it is time for us to return to this topic. As in the areas that I described 
earlier,  the  goal  will  be  to  strengthen  the  resilience  of  the  system  without  hindering  the 
process  of  market  discipline  and  innovation  that  are  essential  to  the  financial  sector’s 
contribution to economic growth. 
There is no shortage of ideas around for which aspect of procyclicality is most relevant for 
financial stability, and for the range of policy options that could help dampen procyclicality. 
Some of the areas that we in the FSF have decided to look at include: 
• 
The capital regime: the Basel II framework ties required capital more directly to the 
perceived riskiness of an asset, which is likely to increase during downturns and fall 
during expansions. This is not new, but because Basel II itself is new there is more 
we need to know on the mechanics – it is not clear yet, in particular, how required, 
desired and actual capital levels will evolve over a full cycle under Basel II (although 
a framework is now in place for tracking and assessing this). As we consider how to 
strengthen the regime, more thought needs to be given to how to promote higher 
buffers above the regulatory minimum in good times, which can then be dipped into 
more  flexibly  during  cyclical  downturns.  To  a  degree,  this  is  already  possible  in  a 
discretionary  way,  although  too  much  divergence  in  national  implementation  of 
Basel  II  would  raise  issues  of  transparency  and  consistency  in  international 
regulatory  arrangements  and  should 
therefore  be  constrained.  Ad  hoc, 
uncoordinated reductions in required minima could be viewed as forbearance and 
could give the wrong signal about authorities’ judgement as to the overall strength of 
the system. How we can best dampen procyclicality in bank capital is an inquiry we 
are  now  engaging  internationally  and  in  the  European  context  in  a  coordinated 
fashion.  
A related issue is sound loan-loss provisioning: these are useful tools to counter the 
effects of procyclicality, especially on new lending. However, our banking systems 
came into this crisis with historically low levels of provisions. To a degree, this can 
be  attributed  to  the  benign  recent  default  environment.  But  it  also  reflects  new 
accounting principles and prudential rules, the effects of which we need to assess in 
the light of experience. Our aim must be to create scope to promote more through-
the-cycle  provisioning  techniques  that  place  institutions  in  a  position  to  absorb 
losses rather than curtail credit during a downturn.  
 4 
 BIS Review 112/2008
  Compensation issues – these have been much in the public eye recently: do bonus-
based  pay  systems,  for  both  traders  and  senior  and  top  management  of  financial 
firms, reward short-term risk taking with little penalty for the longer-term risks taken 
to achieve profits? What are the elements of a sound compensation scheme? On 
this issue, the interests of regulators and shareholders broadly align but banks face 
a collective action problem. If there is a role for regulators and supervisors in this 
area, is it ex ante (to adjust risk taking incentives), and/or ex post (to adjust capital 
to the risks taken)? 
Valuation  and  leverage:  the  interplay  between  these  has  become  more  important 
over  time  for  a  number  of  reasons,  including  more  marketable  assets  (especially 
credit) that need to be marked to market, more market-based collateralized funding, 
more leveraged position-taking. But here too there is more we need to know about 
the mechanics involved. What effects have valuation practices and leverage had on 
the  cyclicality  of  the  financial  system?  Acting  through  which  channels?  Is  there  a 
possible or desirable course of action for the official sector? 
Coming to the issue of monetary policy and financial stability – If the market turbulence tells 
us  anything,  it  is  that  the  pace  of  financial  innovation  in  recent  years,  the  volume  of 
transaction  in  certain  markets,  the  amount  of  embedded  leverage  in  the  system,  and  the 
global  nature  of  finance,  have  transformed  the  functioning  of  the  international  financial 
system. These transformations were not fully appreciated in their implications for monetary 
policy making.  
Central banks are inherently concerned with the health of the financial system. Because of 
the  critical  role  it  performs  –  that  of  allocating  capital  and  risk  to  the  economy  –  a  well-
functioning financial sector is key for the achievement of primary macroeconomic objectives, 
such as stable prices and sustained growth; for central banks, it is also fundamental for the 
effective transmission of monetary policy decisions to the real economy. Contributing to the 
health of the financial system is, in a sense, encoded in the genes of central banks: one of 
the historical reasons for establishing a central bank was indeed to reinforce financial stability 
by having an institution that could act as a lender of last resort.  
The policy followed by the European Central Bank since the start of the turmoil is very much 
in line with this historical role. The ECB has not remained passive. It has used the tools at his 
disposal, in particular its liquidity operations, to support the smooth functioning of the money 
market  in  periods  of  acute  stress.  Its  operational  framework  has  proved  to  be  robust  and 
flexible to effectively respond to the challenge posed by the drying-up of market liquidity. 
However  –  and  this  is  a  crucial  aspect  of  the  ECB  policy  –  we  have  operated  under  the 
principle of strict separation between the liquidity provision policy and the stance of monetary 
policy.  Monetary  policy,  the  setting  of  the  level  of  interest  rates  by  the  ECB,  has  been 
directed  at  fulfilling  its  primary  goal:  maintaining  price  stability.  This  principle  is  crucial. 
Charging  monetary  policy  with  additional  objectives,  such  as  a  direct  responsibility  for 
financial stability, would risk blurring responsibilities, increasing moral hazard and creating a 
trade-off where there is none. I fully agree with the remark often made by Otmar Issing that 
there  is  no  lasting  trade-off  between  price  stability  and  financial  stability.1  Even  if,  as  he 
acknowledges,  some  short-term  conflicts  may  occasionally  arise,  this  can  be  easily 
accommodated by a monetary policy strategy that focuses on an appropriate medium term 
horizon,  as  the  one  chosen  by  the  ECB.  Over  such  horizons,  price  stability  and  financial 
stability  are  mutually  reinforcing,  rather  than  alternative,  goals.  We  should  not  forget  that 
some of the most damaging and prolonged periods of financial distress (such as the Great 
Depression,  the  Japanese  experience  in  the  90’s  and  many  of  the  currency  crises  in 
                                                 
1   O. Issing (2003), “Monetary and financial stability: is there a trade-off?” BIS paper No. 18. 
BIS Review 112/2008 
 5
emerging  markets  in  the  past  century)  have  been  associated  with  –  and  sometimes 
aggravated by – the inability to control the inflation process.  
Relying on a clear separation of roles and a correct assignment of instruments to objectives 
is particularly important at the current juncture, as we face inflationary pressures combined 
with  weaker  economic  activity  and  financial  turbulence.  It  is  precisely  in  these  difficult 
situations  that  the  benefits  of  a  sound  monetary  framework  become  apparent.  Only  by 
ensuring  a  return  to  price  stability  in  a  reasonable  time  frame  we  will  be  able  to  control 
inflation expectations, reduce uncertainty and risk premia, sustain longer-term financing and 
purchasing power and thus reinforce the prospects for real activity and financial stability. The 
risk  that  a  prolonged  period  of  high  inflation  may  destabilize  expectations  and  become 
entrenched  in  wage  and  price  setting  requires  a  resolute  stance  in  monetary  policy.  It  is 
essential  that  other  economic  actors  too  adopt  a  responsible  behaviour.  It  is  also  quite 
obvious  that  should  current  financial  instability  aggravate  and  threaten  to  lead  to  a 
deflationary situation, monetary policy would have to take this into account.  
While  the  role  of  monetary  policy  in  the  current  circumstances  should  be  clear,  it  is 
nevertheless  wise,  also  in  this  field,  to  draw  lessons  from  the  recent  experience.  An 
important one, which relates to the topic of procyclicality I just mentioned, is on the role that 
unusually easy global credit conditions over many years had in the build up of the current 
turmoil.  
There is a clear asymmetry between the two phases of boom-bust cycles. While the effects 
of the bust phase are very visible, the building-up of imbalances in the boom phase is not 
easily  detected.  This  is  because  there  are  of  course  many  other  factors  –  not  necessarily 
related  to  imbalances  –  that  contribute  to  changes  in  asset  prices  and  balance  sheet 
positions,  and  not  all  booms  end  up  in  busts.  Central  banks  are  thus  easily  forced  into  a 
situation  where  they  may  need  to  intervene  after  the  crash,  injecting  liquidity  to  avoid  a 
financial  crisis,  or  even  at  times  loosening  monetary  policy  to  avoid  deflation,  but  remain 
passive during the previous phase. The problem however is that a monetary policy that limits 
itself  to  such  a  passive  role  –  the  so  called  “mop  up  after”  policy  –  may  increase  moral 
hazard and plant the seeds for further and more acute imbalances in the future.  
The key challenge is therefore to understand whether monetary policy can or should be more 
proactive and “lean against the wind” also in periods of growing financial imbalances in a pre-
emptive manner, even in the absence of immediate threats to price stability. This is an open 
issue on which opinions diverge. I will limit myself to the following observations. 
First,  risk  premia  in  equity,  housing,  government  bonds  and  corporate  debt  markets  had 
reached  over  the  past  ten  years  –  with  different  timing  –  a  historical  minimum.  They  had 
consistently declined since the mid-eighties. There are structural reasons behind this trend: 
the deepening and broadening of global financial markets; and more stable policy regimes, in 
particular for monetary policy, leading to lower macroeconomic volatility – and therefore risk 
– in the last two decades (a phenomenon also known as the Great Moderation).2 But there 
have  also  been  transient,  and  thus  less  comforting,  factors  at  work:  lower  volatility  in  the 
economy may have been due to “good luck”, i.e. a historically unprecedented decline in the 
vigour  of  exogenous  shocks.  This  may  have  generated  a  false  perception  of  safety.  Most 
importantly from the point of view of monetary authorities, protracted low interest rates at the 
global  level  may  have  favoured  an  excessive  appetite  for  risk,  reinforcing  the  flawed 
incentives in risk management that have played a pivotal role in the recent turmoil. Indeed, 
the  existence  of  a  “risk  taking”  channel  –  an  impact  of  monetary  policy  on  either  risk 
perception or risk tolerance – appears to have some ground in both theoretical arguments 
                                                 
2   A detailed exposition of this topic can be found in J.-C. Trichet (2008), “Risk and the macro-economy” keynote 
address at the conference “The ECB and its watchers X”, Frankfurt am Main, September. 
6 
 BIS Review 112/2008
and  empirical  research.3  Again,  all  this  is  not  new.  From  a  historical  perspective, 
accomodative monetary policy has been found to be a key factor in many cycles that ended 
up in crises.4 The underestimation of risk is particularly worrying when it involves the housing 
markets, as participants are likely to be on average less informed and less protected against 
changing  conditions  than  is  the  case  in  other  markets.  Protracted  low  interest  rates 
associated  with  asset  price  booms  –  especially  in  housing  –  very  low  risk  premia  and 
buoyant credit growth should ring a bell to policy makers. 
Second,  the  thorough  analysis  of  intermediaries’  balance  sheets  and  monetary  and  credit 
developments, which the Bundesbank has championed and is now an essential part of the 
ECB strategy, is crucial in this field. Besides supporting the assessment on the outlook for 
price stability, this analysis could be an indispensable ingredient of a monetary policy aiming 
at  a  higher  symmetry  of  response  to  boom-bust  cycles,  reducing  procyclicality  and  moral 
hazard in the financial sector. Monetary analysis may be all the more important in situations 
of potential financial distress when it is necessary to lengthen the horizon of policy, but it is 
very hard to do so by means of forecasts given the complexities involved. This may be even 
more true if we allow for the possibility put forward by some observers, that when monetary 
policy  is  highly  credible,  excessive  liquidity  expansions  may  find  their  way  first  in  fuelling 
asset price and credit booms, rather than in creating inflationary pressures.5 The analysis of 
credit  and  money  has  also  permitted  us  to  form  a  balanced  opinion  on  the  effects  the 
financial turmoil. While we do see a slowdown in credit growth in the euro area, this appears 
to be in line with the regular impact of slower economic activity and tighter policy conditions. 
Up to now, we have seen no signs of additional effects coming from financial tensions, and 
so far the capital position of banks overall in the euro area remains sound. Of course, if the 
crisis were to become systemic, counterparty risks could always spread all over the world. 
Third, I do not think that central banks possess a superior knowledge, relative to the private 
sector, to be able to judge whether a deviation from fundamentals is occurring in the pricing 
of  any  individual  asset.  Having  said  that,  central  banks  –  with  their  strong  technical  skills, 
independent  judgement  and  system-wide,  longer-term  perspective  –  are  perhaps  better 
placed to assess systemic risks emerging from financial markets. This can prompt informed 
communication to the financial system and to the wider public and, at times, also monetary 
policy  action.  As  it  is  the  case  in  general  when  confronting  low-probability  but  high-cost 
events, it may be optimal to choose to err on the side of caution if this helps to reduce the 
likelihood of future crises.6
Fourth, as recently recognized by Adrian and Shin among others, in a market based financial 
system, banking and capital developments have become inseparable.7 Through the impact it 
has  on  capital  market  conditions,  monetary  policy  may  have  become  more  important  in 
influencing the size of financial intermediary balance sheets. In this respect it could play an 
important role in dampening fluctuations that may lead to potential disorderly unwinding of 
                                                 
3   See,  among  others,  G.  Jimenez,  S.  Ongena,  J.L.  Peydrò,  and  J.  Saurina  (2008),  “Hazardous  times  for 
monetary policy: what twenty-three million bank loans say about the effects of monetary policy on credit risk-
taking?”, CEPR discussion paper No. 6514.  
4   C. W. Calomiris (2008), “The subprime turmoil: what’s old, what’s new, and what’s next”, paper presented at 
Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City’s symposium, Jackson Hole, August 2008; Bordo, M. (2007), “The crisis 
of 2007: the same old story, only the players have changed”, paper presented at the Federal Reserve Bank of 
Chicago and International Monetary Fund conference “Globalization and systemic risk”; Chicago.  
5   Borio, C. and P. Lowe (2002), Asset prices, financial and monetary stability: exploring the nexus”, BIS working 
papers, No. 114. 
6   Bordo,  M.  and  O.  Jeanne  (2002),  “Monetary  policy  and  asset  prices:  does  “benign  neglect”  make  sense?” 
International Finance, 5(2). 
7   Adrian,  T.  and  H.  S.  Shin  (2008),  “Financial  intermediaries,  financial  stability  and  monetary  policy”,  paper 
presented at Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City’s symposium, Jackson Hole, August 2008. 
BIS Review 112/2008 
 7
leverage. Given the interlinkages existing in the global system, today this is true not only in 
the Anglo-Saxon systems, but also in the more bank-oriented European context.  
Therefore,  while  monetary  policy  should  continue  to  focus  on  delivering  price  stability,  it 
should  aim  at  a  greater  symmetry  throughout  the  cycle  and  cannot  afford  to  neglect  the 
modifications and innovations affecting the structure of the financial system.  
We  should  not,  however,  underestimate  the  enormous  informational  challenge  we  have  to 
confront. We need to improve our analyses and tools to be able to better assess the risks of 
a systemic crisis, quantify the effects that our actions may have to mitigate those risks and 
develop  a  deeper  understanding  of  the  two-way  linkages  between  the  financial  and  real 
sectors.  In  this  respect,  a  closer  interaction  between  macroeconomic  and  macroprudential 
analyses  is  essential.  This  requires  stronger  cooperation  and  information  sharing  among 
authorities  both  domestically  and  cross-border.  Moreover,  greater  transparency  and 
improved disclosure practices in the private sector are necessary to be able to fully assess 
the conditions of the financial system and formulate the appropriate monetary policy. In this 
sense, monetary policy and policies to achieve financial stability are closely linked. 
The crisis we are facing is one of the most severe and complex of our times. The challenges 
will  be  substantial:  restore  price  stability  that  would  support  growth,  and  ensure  that  the 
needed  adjustments  in  bank  and  households  balance  sheets  and  in  internal  and  external 
macroeconomic imbalances take place in an orderly manner. This will require action on the 
monetary, fiscal, and regulatory front. It will also require decisive action by the private sector 
to repair balance sheets, strengthen corporate governance, and improve the functioning of 
markets.  
History  has  repeatedly  shown  that  needed  reforms  are  ignored  until  a  crisis  forces  action, 
and  that  the  will  to  reform  quickly  dissipates  after  the  crisis  has  passed.  This  crisis  is  no 
different,  and  this  is  an  opportunity  to  strengthen  the  structure  of  the  financial  services 
industry. 
8 
 BIS Review 112/2008
