Gertrude Tumpel-Gugerell: Building and preserving trust – challenges 
for the financial community 
Speech by Ms Gertrude Tumpel-Gugerell, Member of the Executive Board of the European 
Central  Bank,  at  a  meeting  of  the  International  Chamber  of  Commerce  Commission  on 
Banking Technique and Practice, Athens, 15-16 April 2008. 
 Introduction  
A dinner speech should fulfil two criteria: It should not spoil the mood of the guests, and it 
should not be too long. Given that I will be talking about financial sector developments, this 
will be a very difficult task, but I will try my best.  
I am delighted to be able to share my thoughts with you tonight and would like to thank the 
organisers  for  inviting  me  to  do  so.  The  International  Chamber  of  Commerce  has  a  long 
history of establishing international standards. I very much welcome this setting of standards, 
as  it  is  the  motor  of  further  financial  integration,  efficient  banking  and  sound  management 
practices.  However,  in  the  light  of  the  ongoing  financial  market  turmoil,  more  rigorous 
thinking about banks’ risk taking and risk mitigation could be on the agenda for the years to 
come. 
In my speech tonight, I will talk from a euro area and ECB perspective. First, I will elaborate 
on the economic outlook for the euro area. Second, I will explain the clear distinction that we 
at the ECB, as well as many other central banks, make between our decisions on the level of 
the  key  interest  rates  and  the  provision  of  liquidity  to  banks.  Taking  a  longer-term 
perspective, it is clear that both the private sector and the authorities worldwide will have to 
undergo fundamental changes in their modes of operation. Third, I will therefore give you my 
view on the challenges facing the private sector and then describe the follow-up responses of 
international institutions and authorities. I will close with a few words on the importance of 
continued progress in furthering financial integration in Europe.  
I  
Euro area economic outlook, monetary policy stance, and the ECB’s market 
operations  
The financial turmoil has affected the global economy. So far, however, the effect on the euro 
area economy appears to have been limited, the fundamentals of the euro area economy are 
sound.  The  latest  information  on  economic  activity  confirms  the  picture  of  moderate  but 
ongoing growth. Looking ahead, both domestic and foreign demand are expected to support 
real GDP growth in 2008. Although growth in the world economy is moderating, it is expected 
to remain resilient, benefiting in particular from strong growth in emerging market economies. 
In the euro area, capacity utilisation is high, profitability has been sustained and so far there 
have been no significant signs of supply constraints on bank loans. In addition, employment 
and  labour  force  participation  have  increased  significantly  and  unemployment  rates  have 
fallen to levels not seen for 25 years.  
Nonetheless, this outlook for economic growth remains subject to an unusually high degree 
of uncertainty, as well as to downside risks relating mainly to a potentially broader impact of 
financial market developments on activity than currently foreseen, and additional increases in 
commodity prices. 
On  the  inflation  side,  the  picture  is  less  positive.  HICP  inflation  currently  stands  at  levels 
significantly above 3%, with inflationary pressures stemming mainly from increases in oil and 
food  commodity  prices.  Looking  ahead,  the  annual  HICP  inflation  rate  is  likely  to  remain 
significantly above 2% in the coming months, moderating only gradually over the course of 
BIS Review 44/2008 
 1
remain  strongly  committed 
2008. Risks to the medium-term inflation outlook remain clearly on the upside, due mainly to 
the  possibility  of  further  rises  in  oil  and  agricultural  prices  and  of  wage  growth  and  firms’ 
pricing power being stronger than currently expected.  
The  ECB’s  monetary  analysis  confirms  the  assessment  that  upside  risks  to  price  stability 
over the medium to longer term prevail. Money and credit growth are very vigorous in the 
euro area.  
On 10 April, we decided to leave the key ECB interest rates unchanged. We are convinced 
that the current monetary policy stance will contribute to achieving the price stability objective 
and  we 
the 
materialisation of upside risks to price stability over the medium term. 
The ECB has made – in this period of financial turbulence too – a clear distinction between 
the decisions on the level of the key ECB interest rates and the provision of liquidity aimed at 
ensuring an orderly functioning of the money market. Therefore, with the start of the turmoil 
in August 2007, the ECB countered the tensions in the money market by changing the timing 
of the liquidity provision within the maintenance period and increasing its average maturity 
through additional longer-term refinancing operations. The ECB’s measures did not add to 
the overall stock of liquidity and left the average supply of liquidity unchanged over the full 
reserve maintainance period.  
Overall,  thanks  to  its  flexible  design,  the  Eurosystem’s  operational  framework  has  thus  far 
proved to be resilient and effective in the current circumstances and the ECB has succeeded 
in steering the overnight rate close to the key policy rate set by the Governing Council.  
to  preventing  second-round  effects  and 
Challenges for financial institutions  
II  
Let me now move to the key challenges for financial institutions and markets in general over 
the coming months.  
I  would  like  to  start  by  stressing  that  it  is  my  firm  belief  that  many  of  the  weaknesses 
highlighted  by  the  recent  events  can  be  addressed  by  market-led  initiatives  and  self-
regulation. Nonetheless, it seems that regulatory measures are needed too.  
The  first  challenge  is  to  improve  market  transparency.  The  market  correction  has 
demonstrated the importance of the disclosure and valuation of risks.  
In particular, better disclosure of risks, as well as accounting and risk management practices, 
is of the essence in the short term. In the medium term, financial institutions should identify 
key risks and disclose information that is relevant to major stakeholders.  
The second challenge is related to the valuation of complex structured credit products – 
a task that has proved to be very difficult over the past few months. The current techniques 
are  typically  based  on  market  prices,  making  them  vulnerable  to  a  change  in  investor 
sentiment.  
To  mitigate  the  problem,  the  market  has  to  enhance  valuation  processes,  in  particular  by 
finding ways to improve the quality of inputs to their valuation models, even in the event that 
market data are not available. Credible valuation techniques are fundamental for maintaining 
trust among counterparties.  
The third challenge for banks is to address vulnerabilities in their liquidity management 
practices. Banks have relied increasingly on wholesale funding. This has rendered some of 
them vulnerable to a sudden disruption in the markets.  
The recent experience has spurred committees, both at the international and the EU level, 
into carrying out important work on liquidity risk. However, it should be noted that market-led 
initiatives are  also  under  way,  for  example  those  being led by  the  Institute  of  International 
Finance.  
2 
 BIS Review 44/2008
The fourth and final challenge that I will mention today is that institutions should live up 
to  their  social  responsibility.  This  issue  has  also  been  highlighted  by  the  European 
Commission,  which  is  exploring  ways  to  promote  responsible  lending  in  mortgage  credit 
markets.1  Socially  responsible  behaviour  is  key  to  creating  sustainable  value  for  all 
stakeholders.  In  the  global  and  competitive  financial  markets  of  today,  pressure  for  short-
term results may have a negative effect on incentives. This is particularly relevant in a market 
characterised by information asymmetries.  
Building,  preserving  and  valuing  trust  is  not  an  unattainable  ideal,  but  one  that  can  be 
concretely translated into business objectives and practices. Such an undertaking requires, 
among other things, effective corporate governance arrangements that are supported by a 
strong corporate culture.  
Policy responses  
III  
Let  me  now  say  a  few  words  on  the  regulatory  and  supervisory  follow-up  that  has  taken 
place so far.  
The global nature of the market turbulence requires enhanced cross-border consistency in 
financial  regulation  and supervision.  Consequently,  the  identification  of the  key  issues  and 
the measures to be taken over the coming months is based on cooperation and a common 
understanding, both at the EU and the global level. 
Let  me  start  by  addressing  the  initiatives  in  Europe,  moving  from  the  initiatives  that  are 
already  under  way  and  which  will  also  have  a  positive  impact  in  terms  of  addressing 
challenges and providing responses to the recent events in the financial markets. 
The first strand of initiatives relates to enhancing the framework for financial supervision. 
The first full review of the functioning of the Lamfalussy process conducted by the ECOFIN 
Council in December 2007 revealed a general consensus among EU bodies that there is a 
need for enhancing the functioning of the Lamfalussy approach. In this context, a number of 
possible improvements have been agreed recently, including giving a European mandate to 
national  supervisors;  requiring  national  supervisors  to  take  into  account  the  European 
dimension  in  their  work  towards  a  more  united  implementation  of  EU  regulations; 
strengthening the functioning of the various committees of supervisors; and reinforcing the 
supervision of  cross-border  financial  groups.  Regarding  the latter,  the  enhancement  of  the 
role of supervisory colleges (which have been set up by the Committee of European Banking 
Supervisors  for  major  EU  banks)  will  be  an  important  development  in  the  pursuit  of 
supervisory convergence, as well as a means for strengthening cooperation and improving 
the exchange of information.  
Second, in April 2008, the EU central banks, supervisors and finance ministries adopted a 
Memorandum  of  Understanding  on  cross-border  cooperation  in  financial  crisis  situations 
between supervisory authorities, central banks and finance ministries. 
Coming back to the initiatives specifically addressing the recent developments, the European 
finance ministers have agreed on a road map for policy responses to the financial turmoil, 
with four main objectives: (i) improving transparency for investors, markets and regulators; 
(ii) improving valuation standards; (iii) reinforcing the prudential framework, including liquidity 
risk management; and (iv) improving the functioning of the market, including the role of credit 
rating agencies.  
In parallel with the work at the EU level, there are initiatives taken by global policy fora. In 
this  context,  I  would  like  to  draw  your  attention  to  the  work  carried  out  by  the  Financial 
                                                 
1   See the White Paper on the Integration of EU Mortgage Credit Markets, COM(2007) 807, 18 December 2007. 
BIS Review 44/2008 
 3
in 
Stability Forum, which prepared its final report on strengthening the resilience of markets 
and  institutions  for  the  meeting  of  the  G7  Finance  Ministers  last  week.2  In  particular,  the 
report  calls  for  strengthening  the  Basel  II  capital  requirements  (particularly  for  structured 
credit  products  and  securitisation  activities),  enhanced  liquidity  risk  management,  the 
effective  prudential  oversight  of  relevant  risks, 
for  valuation  and 
the  role  and  use  of  credit  ratings.  Further  policy 
transparency,  and  changes 
recommendations 
to  risk  and 
improving  coordination,  as  well  as  enhancing  the  arrangements  for  central  banking 
operations in crisis situations.  
As you have noticed, the responses have been swift, both at the EU and global level, and are 
highly consistent with each other. This reflects the strong common understanding among the 
authorities on the key issues that need to be addressed over the coming months. The ECB is 
strongly supportive of these initiatives and will contribute to the pertinent work. I firmly believe 
that  the  international  cooperation  between  the  authorities  will  continue  to  foster  financial 
integration, development and stability. 
the  authorities’  responsiveness 
include  strengthening 
tighter  standards 
The role of financial integration  
IV  
Let me finally reflect on financial integration in Europe, a challenge currently faced by both 
the private sector and the authorities. History has shown that the tendency towards national 
retrenchment may occur in times of uncertainty. I would like to use this occasion to stress the 
importance  of  continued  financial  integration  in  Europe.  Besides  improving  efficiency, 
financial integration will make a marked contribution to stability in the long term. Integrated 
markets reinforce the shock-absorption capacity of the system, as they are more liquid and 
offer better opportunities for risk diversification.  
The  Eurosystem  is  strongly  committed  to  fostering  financial  integration.  As  an  example,  I 
would  like  to  mention  three  key  projects  in  the  area  of  market  infrastructures  that  have 
progressed  significantly  over  recent  months.  First,  the  European  payments  landscape 
reached  an  important  milestone  last  November,  when  TARGET2,  the  Eurosystem’s  single 
shared  platform  for  payments,  was  successfully  launched.  Another  of  the  Eurosystem’s 
projects,  TARGET2-Securities,  aims  at  concentrating  securities  and  cash  settlement  in 
Europe on an efficient, single platform. The private sector has contributed considerably to the 
planning  and  design  of  these  systems.  For  example,  last  year,  around  300  professionals 
from over 90 institutions played a large role in the formulation of the user requirements for 
TARGET2-Securities.  Finally,  the  Single  Euro  Payments  Area,  or  SEPA,  is  of  utmost 
importance to the integration of retail banking markets in particular. The project aims to make 
non-cash euro payments as easy, efficient and safe as they are today in a single country. 
This  project  is  being  led  by  the  European  Payments  Council,  the  decision-making  and 
coordination body of the European banking industry in relation to payments, and has been 
supported by the Eurosystem and the European Commission in a variety of ways. The official 
launch of SEPA in January this year introduced both credit transfers and a card framework. 
The SEPA direct debit will follow before the end of 2009. 
Conclusion 
Let me briefly conclude. The ongoing significant market correction should trigger reflections 
on the functioning of the global financial markets. I support the global efforts to draw all the 
lessons  from  recent  and  more  distant  history  in  order  to  make  practicable  policy 
recommendations to the private sector and the authorities alike. At this point, I would like to 
                                                 
2   Report of the Financial Stability Forum on Enhancing Market and Institutional Resilience, published on 12 April 
2008. 
4 
 BIS Review 44/2008
once  again  stress  the  importance  of  the  effective  coordination  of  all  initiatives  in  order  to 
ensure consistency.  
From the ECB’s point of view, it is important to foster a financial system that is stable and 
able to create sustainable value for all stakeholders. In this respect, prime responsibility lies 
with  financial  institutions  themselves,  but  the  public  framework  also  has  a  role  to  play  in 
providing  them  with  the  right  structure  of  incentives.  The  latter  objective  does  not  imply 
dramatic  changes,  but  some  adaptations  to  the  public  framework  in  terms  of  capital 
requirements  and  liquidity  risk  management  are  certainly  needed.  Finally,  financial 
integration in Europe will contribute to stability in the long term and therefore must not lose its 
momentum. Let’s all face the challenges that lie ahead of us.  
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 44/2008 
 5
