Jean-Claude Trichet: The governance of globalisation 
Speech by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, at the Bocconi 
University and Corriere della Sera International Forum 2008, Milan, 12 May 2008. 
 It is a great pleasure to be here today at this Forum and I wholeheartedly thank Mario Monti 
for  having  invited  me.  After  presenting  some  key  features  of  globalisation,  I  would  like  to 
discuss their implications for inflation and monetary policy, as well as issues related to the 
governance of globalisation at the international level.  
Globalisation,  while  frequently  quoted  in  many  circles,  is  a  rather  broad  concept  open  to 
many  definitions.  To  my  mind,  a  succinct  general  characterisation  of  globalisation  in  the 
current context can be thought of as essentially consisting of two main elements.  
First, globalisation involves the entrance of new participants into the global market-place. On 
this count, there has been a significant expansion in global productive capacity over the last 
decades.  This  has  come  through  the  opening  up  of  emerging  economies  to  international 
trade  and  production,  notably  the  greater  involvement  of  emerging  Asia  in  world  trade,  as 
well as Central and Eastern Europe following the collapse of the Soviet Union. On the basis 
of one measure, an export-to-GDP weighted labour force, the effective global labour supply 
quadrupled between 1980 and 2005, with much of the increase having occurred since 1990.1  
The  second  main  element  of  globalisation  is  the  growing  interdependence  between  both 
existing  and  new  participants  via  trade,  production  and  financial  market  linkages.  Trade  in 
goods  and  services  has  effectively  doubled  over  the  last  20 years,  with  world  imports  and 
exports  of  goods  and  services  as  a  share  of  world  GDP  having  increased  from  33.9%  of 
world GDP in 1986 to 60% of world GDP in 2006. The increase in interdependence on the 
financial  side  has  been  even  more  impressive,  with  the  share  of  gross  international  asset 
holdings in world GDP – which provides a measure of financial openness – having exhibited 
an eightfold increase over the last 25 years; now standing at more than 130% of world GDP. 
Indeed,  global  cross-border  capital  flows  have  been  growing  at  an  extremely  robust  pace 
over the last decade, increasing threefold as a percentage of GDP.2 For the euro area over 
the  last  decade,  the  stock  of  outward  and  inward  foreign  direct  investment  has  virtually 
doubled as a percentage of GDP since 1999. 
Ultimately,  these  globalisation  forces  provide  the  scope  for  many  economic  benefits, 
including  more  efficient  resource  allocation,  along  with  welfare  gains  from  deepening 
specialisation,  cheaper  products,  and  greater  product  choice.  But  as  the  economic  and 
financial effects of a changing global landscape are multifaceted, they imply several policy 
challenges at both the domestic and international level. I do not intend to address all of these 
policy  challenges  today,  rather,  I  would  like  to  focus  on  two  specific  challenges:  the 
implications  of  globalisation  for  inflation  and  monetary  policy,  and  the  governance  of 
globalisation at the international level.  
                                                 
1   See IMF (2007), “The Globalization of Labor” (World Economic Outlook, April). 
2   Source: IMF balance of payments statistics. 
BIS Review 57/2008 
 1
Globalisation and its implications for inflation and monetary policy  
The  aspects  of  globalisation  I  have  been  describing  thus  far  entail  many  important 
macroeconomic consequences for the euro area as well as other global regions.3 Perhaps 
most  crucial  from  a  central  banking  perspective  is  the  impact  on  consumer  price  inflation. 
While several ways of classifying the impact are possible, I think that a simple taxonomy of 
globalisation’s influence on inflation into two main channels – direct and indirect – provides a 
useful one in characterising the effects on inflation.  
First,  globalisation  has  strong  direct  effects  on  price  movements  of  certain  goods  and 
services,  and  in  this  sense  can  be  thought  of  as  a  shock  exerting  a  strong  influence  on 
relative price dynamics. On the one hand, increasing trade openness seems to have had a 
downward impact on manufacturing price developments over the last decade or so. In the 
euro  area,  rising  imports  from  lower-cost  countries,  mainly  from  China  and  the  new  EU 
Member  States,  appear  to  have  put  downward  pressure  by  an  average  of  approximately 
2 percentage points per year on extra-euro area manufacturing import prices over the period 
1995-2004.4  On  the  other  hand,  globalisation  and  its  implications  for  global  demand,  has 
implied  strong  increases  in  other  prices.  Here,  I  am  thinking  of  the  upward  pressure  from 
commodity  prices  that  derived  from  strong  growth  of  commodity  imports  by  emerging 
markets  –  both  concerning  energy  and,  more  recently,  food.  These  price  rises  have  been 
impressive to say the least. Since 2002, the price of Brent oil has risen more than five-fold in 
US dollar terms, while the price of non-ferrous metals has risen more than three-fold. Since 
the beginning of 2006, such large price increases have also extended to food – with at least 
a  doubling  in  the  price  of  wheat,  maize  and  soybeans.  While  I  would  not  claim  that 
globalisation has been the only factor underlying these price developments, it has certainly 
played a role through boosting demand for such commodities.  
In  this  way,  judging  globalisation’s impact  on  aggregate  prices  depends  on  the  balance  of 
these relative price movements. While relative price movements are always present and in 
this way need not affect aggregate inflation, they could embed short-term aggregate impacts 
either  to  the  extent  that  the  movements  are  sizeable  or  that  adjustment  frictions  and 
imperfect  information  imply  a  prolonged  impact.  Empirical  studies  estimating  this  relative 
price  effect suggest  a small  net  downward  impact  of  trade  openness on  annual  consumer 
price inflation over the period of five to ten years up to 2005.5 Since that time, the balance of 
relative price shocks as characterised above could very well have become inflationary.  
While  influences  on  relative  price  movements  of  goods  and  services  are  among  the  most 
visible  aspects  of  globalisation,  its  influence  on  inflation,  however,  does  not  stop  there.  A 
second  channel  involves  the  effects  of  globalisation  on  prices  through  competitive  forces. 
Prima facie, increased competitive pressures would be expected to both dampen firm profit 
mark-up behaviour while also potentially altering developments in costs (such as the cost of 
capital and labour) which underlie price dynamics. In contrast to relative price effects, which 
have  a  complex,  because  bipolar,  ex-ante  impact  on  inflation,  these  competitive  effects 
would  be  expected  to  unambiguously  exert  a  moderating  influence  on  inflation  as  long  as 
impediments  to  competition  are  not  in  place.  Evidence  to  validate  this  channel  is, 
unfortunately, fairly difficult to gather owing to the complex nature of the markup formation 
process along with measurement issues. What we do observe is that the responsiveness of 
prices  to  changing  demand  conditions  has,  if  anything,  fallen  to  some  extent  over  the  last 
decades – which would be at odds with the notion that firms are more active in adjusting their 
                                                 
3   For a detailed look at the macroeconomic impacts of trade globalisation, see the ECB Monthly Bulletin article 
entitled “Globalisation, trade and the euro area macroeconomy”, January 2008). 
4   See the box entitled “Effects of the rising trade integration of low-cost countries on euro area import prices” in 
the August 2006 issue of the ECB’s Monthly Bulletin for further details. 
5   See ECB (2008), op. cit. 
2 
 BIS Review 57/2008
mark-up behaviour in a competitive environment. In the context of globalisation, there may 
be reason to believe that, in integrated markets, local labour market conditions become less 
and less important for domestic price setting, in particular if factors of production (capital and 
labour)  become  increasingly  mobile.  On  balance,  however,  empirical  evidence  provides 
mixed support for the notion that global measures of economic slack played a large role in 
the  observed  weakening  in  the  relationship  between  prices  and  common  measures  of 
(domestic) economic slack in the euro area.6 Indeed, this weakening has to be judged in the 
context of a multitude of economic and also policy factors.  
The streamlined characterisation of price effects I have described thus far, of course, does 
not capture the numerous and complex other aspects of globalisation relevant for monetary 
policy.  In  particular,  in  addition  to  trade  globalisation  and  its  price  effects,  financial 
globalisation could also impact on other phenomena relevant for monetary policy, such as 
global liquidity and long-term interest rates. I will not go through an inventory of such effects 
but, rather, assert that despite such a changing environment brought about by globalisation, 
central banks still importantly retain the ability to control short-term interest rates and – by 
extension – still exert a very strong influence on the domestic cost of financing. 
But allow me to return to my specific example of globalisation’s price effects and ask, with 
such  impacts  of  globalisation  on  inflation,  what  is  the  best  possible  response  of  monetary 
policy? I would argue that guaranteeing price stability is as essential as ever. A clear and 
transparent definition of price stability contributes to a firm anchoring of inflation expectations 
in the face of considerable relative price shocks. Indeed, though the effects of globalisation 
on  inflation  I  have  described  thus  far  may  be  operative  in  the  short  term,  monetary  policy 
ultimately determines inflation over the medium term. The current situation today provides a 
useful example in this respect. While monetary policy has limited power in the short term to 
stem external price shocks such as the sudden  increase in the relative prices of food and 
commodities, medium term price stability can be delivered by preserving the firm anchoring 
of inflation expectations and by ensuring the absence of second-round effects. Indeed, the 
medium-term  orientation  of  the  ECB  monetary  policy  strategy  ensures  that  the  Governing 
Council duly discounts short-term price volatility and transitory movements in inflation.  
Domestic  price  stability is  also  a precondition  for  economic  stability  in the  face  of external 
shocks. A strong focus on domestic price stability also facilitates efficient adjustment of the 
economy  to  macroeconomic  shocks.  Of  course,  while  monetary  policy  provides  the 
foundation  for  efficient  and  beneficial  adjustment,  ongoing  structural  changes  such  as 
globalisation  also  intensify  the  need  for  more  flexibility  in  product  and  labour  markets. 
Greater microeconomic flexibility would not only allow our economy to take better advantage 
of  the  opportunities  provided  by  globalisation,  but  would  also  facilitate  macroeconomic 
adjustment in the wake of shocks and improve the resilience of the economy.  
Taking  a  strict  focus  on  domestic  price  stability  as  given,  continued  cooperation  amongst 
central  banks  can  also  contribute  to  global  financial  stability,  for  instance  in  the  form  of 
dialogue between central banks and a concerted contribution to solid international financial 
architecture – an issue to which I  will turn next. Before  moving to this next topic, I should 
underline, however, that by international cooperation I do not mean coordination. The major 
economies of the world have to run their own monetary policies, attuned to their domestic 
conditions, in line with their responsibilities in terms of price stability. The world economy is 
                                                 
6   For instance, evidence in support of this hypothesis for sixteen industrialised countries and the euro area has 
been  recently  provided  by  Borio,  C.  and  A.  Filardo  (2007),  "Globalisation  and  inflation:  New  cross-country 
evidence  on  the  global  determinants  of  domestic  inflation",  BIS  Working  Papers  No.  227.  However,  their 
results for a number of countries have been challenged by Ihrig, J., Kamin, S., Lindner, D. and J. Marquez 
(2007), "Some simple tests of the globalization and inflation hypothesis", Board of Governors of the Federal 
Reserve System, International Finance Discussion Paper No. 891. Similarly, Calza, A. (2008), “Globalisation, 
domestic inflation and global output gaps: Evidence from the euro area”, ECB Working Paper No. 890, finds 
limited evidence in support of the “global output gap hypothesis” for the euro area. 
BIS Review 57/2008 
 3
becoming more integrated but at the same time the various economies that are influential at 
a  global  level  remain  different,  with  characteristics  that  are  not  alike,  including  in  terms  of 
market  flexibility,  and  they  have  to  cope  with  idiosyncratic  shocks  that  can  be  equally 
different. This requires naturally different responses from the policy-makers of central banks 
around the world.  
The governance of globalisation at the international level  
As I have already alluded, to ensure that the process of globalisation occurs in an orderly 
manner,  the  international  financial  architecture  plays  indeed  a  crucial  role.  It  is  the 
institutional foundations of the global economic and financial system, which deserve credit for 
making  sure  that  the  tremendous  benefits  stemming  from  the  integration  of  national 
economies  clearly  outweigh  the  also  existing  challenges.  While  each  global  financial 
turbulence is different and has different triggers and repercussions – think for instance of the 
Asian  crisis  of  the  late  1990s  and  the  very  significant  global  financial  market  correction  of 
today –, such events have in common that they are really global. As such, they require, in 
addition  to  appropriate  policy  responses  at  the  national  level,  also  determined  policy 
cooperation  at  the  international  level.  Let  me  take  a  closer  look  at  some  key  international 
governance  structures  and  rules  that  provide  mechanisms  for  crisis  prevention  and  crisis 
resolution in the global economic and financial system. My first focus is on the surveillance 
activities  of  the  IMF  –  in  particular  its  multilateral  surveillance  as  well  as  surveillance  over 
exchange rates and exchange rate policies – and current efforts to adapt them to evolving 
needs. I will then share with you some thoughts on how the international institutions and fora 
are  responding  to  the  present  financial  situation  and  related  episodes  of  turbulence  and 
volatility.  
As mentioned earlier, national economies are increasingly interconnected so that changes in 
the economic and financial conditions of one country, to varying degrees, impact the situation 
in other countries. The Fund has responded to these far-reaching developments by adjusting 
its surveillance over its members’ economic situation and policies. Bolstering the multilateral 
and  cross-country  perspectives  in  its  bilateral  surveillance  and  placing  greater  focus  on 
international  economic  and  financial  linkages  and  spillovers  is  indeed  the  right  approach. 
Moreover,  cross-checking  between  multilateral  and  bilateral  surveillance  should  help 
promote policies at the national level that are consistent with other domestic policies as well 
as global adjustment within the international monetary system. In the context of this ongoing 
monitoring,  which  enables  the  IMF  to  combine  its  cross-country  and  cross-regional 
experience, I would see a clear merit in the Fund distilling national best practices. 
As far as the Fund’s multilateral surveillance instruments is concerned, I would like to recall 
that  the  international  community  agreed  in  Spring  2006  to  expand  the  Fund’s  surveillance 
instruments  and  to  launch  a  new  supplementary  consultation  procedure  in  a  multilateral 
format. The first such multilateral consultation has focused on the issue of global payments 
imbalances and involved several systemically important economies, namely China, the Euro 
Area,  Japan,  Saudi  Arabia,  and  the  United  States.  I  do  believe  that  the  multilateral 
consultation  is  an  innovative  and  useful  tool  as  it  brings  together  relevant  players  for  a 
meaningful dialogue on a very specific global matter. Looking at the multilateral consultation 
on global imbalances, it is worth noting that all parties to this consultation are in agreement 
that  reducing  imbalances  in  a  manner  compatible  with  sustained  global  growth  poses  a 
multilateral challenge to be addressed as a shared responsibility.  
Let  me  now  turn  to  the  events  we  are  currently  witnessing  in  the  global  financial  system, 
which illustrate the vulnerabilities of the system and point to shortcomings on the part of the 
public  authorities  as  well  as  in  the  private  sector.  With  the  global  financial  system  still 
undergoing a process of de-leveraging and risk re-pricing, the risks to global and financial 
stability  should  not  be  underestimated.  Signs  of  these  risks,  inter  alia  in  domestic  and 
external  real  and  financial  imbalances,  should  be  addressed  resolutely  by  the  relevant 
4 
 BIS Review 57/2008
lessons  and 
formulating  policy  responses  with  a  view 
parties. It is therefore highly welcome that, in view of the ongoing turmoil, the international 
community  promptly called for a concerted response aimed at identifying the weaknesses, 
drawing  comprehensive 
to 
strengthening the resilience of the financial system. Work has progressed intensively both at 
the international as well as the EU level.  
I will highlight the important work being done by the Financial Stability Forum (FSF) and its 
excellent  report  on  enhancing  market  and  institutional  resilience,  which  was  recently 
released to G7 Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors. The G7 identified a number 
of  recommendations  by  the  FSF  that  are  considered  among  the  immediate  priorities  for 
implementation within the next 100 days. Financial institutions, for instance, should fully and 
promptly disclose their risk exposures, write-downs and fair value estimates for complex and 
illiquid  instruments  in  their  upcoming  mid-year  reporting.  Moreover,  the  International 
Accounting Standards Board (IASB) and other relevant standard-setters should take urgent 
action to improve the accounting and disclosure standards for off-balance sheet entities and 
to enhance guidance on fair value accounting, particularly on valuing financial instruments in 
periods of stress. What is also relevant is that financial institutions should strengthen their 
risk  management  practices,  including  rigorous  stress  testing,  under  the  support  of 
supervisors’  oversight.  Finally,  by  mid-2008,  the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision 
(“Basel  Committee”)  should  issue  revised  liquidity  risk  management  guidelines  and  the 
International  Organisation  of  Securities  Commissions should  revise  its code  of  conduct  for 
credit rating agencies. Additional measures that are to be implemented by end-2008 relate to 
strengthening prudential oversight of capital, liquidity and risk management and enhancing 
transparency and valuation. Moreover, the role and uses of credit ratings should be changed, 
the authorities’ responsiveness to risk strengthened and arrangements for dealing with stress 
in the financial system implemented.  
Other international bodies and institutions that have responded to the financial turbulences 
include the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision which just announced that it will take a 
number  of  steps  to  bolster  the  resilience  of  the  banking  system  to  financial  shocks. 
Moreover,  the  IMF  is  sharpening  its  analysis  of  the  financial  sector  and  macro-financial 
linkages.  It  is  welcome  that  the  Fund  places  greater  focus  on  financial  sector  analysis  in 
Article IVs and continues its emphasis on Financial Sector Assessment Programmes. In this 
context,  I  would  highlight  that  all  27  member  states  of  the  European  Union  have  either 
already  completed  an  FSAP  or  confirmed  their  future  participation.  It  is  welcome  that  a 
number  of  countries,  including  some  systemically  relevant  ones,  have  expressed  their 
intention to undergo an FSAP exercise.  
At  the  EU  level,  the  Council  of  European  Ministers  of  Finance  (ECOFIN)  has  coordinated 
work aimed to strengthen supervisory and financial stability arrangements. This relates to the 
introduction  of  a  European  mandate 
the  clarification  and 
strengthening of the functioning of the committees of supervisors at the level of the 27 EU 
member states and the wider use of colleges of supervisors to re-enforce the supervision of 
cross-border banking groups. Moreover, a Memorandum of Understanding on cross-border 
cooperation  in  financial  crisis  situations  between  all  relevant  authorities  in  the  EU,  that  is 
supervisory authorities, central banks and finance ministries, has been signed.  
In sum, a number of significant initiatives are underway at the various levels of governance of 
the global financial system to respond to the challenges of globalisation. To ensure that the 
responses by the bodies and forums in charge of global economic and financial stability are 
effective,  it  is  of  course  crucial  that  they  collaborate  closely  and  complement  each  others’ 
efforts.  This  should  also  be  the  case  as  regards  the  interaction  between  the  FSF  and  the 
IMF.  
for  national  supervisors, 
BIS Review 57/2008 
 5
to 
important  changes 
Conclusion 
The  phenomenon  of  globalisation  entails  many 
the  global 
macroeconomic, financial landscape. Associated with this, it entails many policy challenges – 
both in terms of domestic macroeconomic policies and the international financial architecture.  
At the domestic level, a key challenge for monetary policy is to actively monitor changes in 
the  inflation  process,  while  continuing  to  solidly  anchor  inflation  expectations.  The  strong 
relative price movements associated with globalisation make a firm focus on price stability is 
as essential as ever. At the same time, such a sound monetary policy framework can lay the 
foundations  for  fostering  benign  economic  adjustment  so  that  the  euro  area  realises  the 
many benefits associated with globalisation. Of course, policy challenges do not stop here –
notably, greater microeconomic flexibility would also be essential to both allow our economy 
to  take  better  advantage  of  the  opportunities  provided  by  globalisation,  but  would  also 
facilitate macroeconomic adjustment in the wake of shocks and improve the resilience of the 
economy.  
At  the  international  level,  looking  at  the  implications  for  the  governance  of  globalisation,  I 
believe that a key contribution that the institutions and informal bodies and forums in charge 
of  global  economic  and  financial  stability  make  to  strengthen  the  resilience  of  the  global 
financial system is to foster information-sharing and increase transparency. It is the access to 
information  that  facilitates  investment  decisions,  the  management  of  risk  and  market 
discipline. These effects are of course particularly important in times of market volatility as 
they lessen herding behaviour and contagion.  
Moreover,  with  the  global  economic  and  financial  landscape  constantly  changing,  it  is 
essential  to  establish  market-based  policy  frameworks  and  to  pursue  sound  domestic 
policies,  while  regularly  updating  the  various  institutions  and  forums  that  form  the 
international  financial  architecture.  This  relates  both  to  the  format  of  these  institutions  and 
forums as well as to the policy issues that they deal with. Doing so ensures that the benefits 
stemming  from  the  process  of  globalisation  are  maximised.  As  I  have  set  out  earlier, 
policymakers  are  not  complacent:  they  do  live  up  to  this  important  task  and  adapt  the 
international financial architecture where necessary, thereby bolstering the shock-absorbing 
capacity of the global financial system.  
I thank you for your attention. 
6 
 BIS Review 57/2008
