Masaaki Shirakawa: Recent economic and financial developments and 
the conduct of monetary policy  
Speech  by  Mr  Masaaki  Shirakawa,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  at  a  meeting  with 
business leaders, Nagoya, 2 September 2008. 
 Introduction 
I am honored to be here today to speak and to exchange views with business leaders from 
the Chubu region, and would like to take this opportunity to express my deep gratitude for 
your cooperation with the Bank of Japan's Nagoya Branch. Before we begin, I also would like 
to express my heartfelt sympathy to the people in the Tokai area who suffered damage from 
the unprecedentedly heavy rain observed last week. 
Today, I will speak about issues facing Japan's economy and the Bank's thinking regarding 
the conduct of monetary policy. 
The current situation of Japan's economy 
I.  
First, I would like to discuss the current situation of Japan's economy. Since the beginning of 
2002, the economy has enjoyed a moderate but prolonged period of economic expansion. 
Since  the  end  of  last  year,  however,  the  pace  of  economic  growth  has  gradually  slowed. 
Business  fixed  investment  has  been  leveling  off  because  the  rise  in  energy  and  materials 
prices,  which  has  accelerated  since  this  spring,  has  depressed  corporate  profits.  Private 
consumption  has  also  been  relatively  weak  due  to  the  ongoing  price  rise,  while  growth  in 
wages has remained sluggish. The pace of increase in exports has slowed, because of the 
effects of a slowdown in overseas economies. Given this situation, the Bank's assessment at 
the Monetary Policy Meeting held on August 18 and 19 was that Japan's economic growth 
had been sluggish. 
Prices, on the other hand, have been on the rise. The year-on-year rate of increase in the 
domestic corporate goods price index (CGPI) exceeded 7 percent in July due mainly to the 
rises in prices of steel and petroleum products. This was the highest rate of increase in 27 
years,  since  1981.  The  year-on-year  rate  of  increase  in  the  consumer  price  index  (CPI) 
excluding  fresh  food  reached  2.4  percent  in  July.  This  was  the  highest  rate  in  16  years 
excluding  fiscal  1997,  when  CPI  inflation  increased  reflecting  the  rise  in  the  rate  of 
consumption tax. 
Japan currently faces a difficult situation given the sluggishness in the economy and the rise 
in prices. This situation has been caused by two factors: the disruptions in global financial 
markets  and  the  slowdown  in  the  global  economy;  and  the  surge  in  energy  and  materials 
prices. 
II.  
Disruptions in global financial markets and the slowdown in the global 
economy 
First,  I  will  address  a  topic  related  to  the  disruptions  in  global  financial  markets  and  the 
slowdown  in  the  global  economy.  Roughly  one  year  has  passed  since  the  U.S.  subprime 
mortgage problem emerged, underlying the disruptions in global financial markets, and the 
nature of this problem seems to have evolved over time. 
The  first  stage  was  the  time  of  "liquidity  constraints,"  when  conduits  and  aggregators  of 
securitized  products  and  financial  institutions  faced  difficulties  in  raising  funds.  Then  the 
second  stage  emerged:  the  time  of  "credit  contraction."  In  this  stage,  financial  institutions 
BIS Review 104/2008 
 1
have tightened their credit standards and their lending attitudes, and this has started to exert 
strong downward pressure on the economy. 
Most  recently,  a  third  stage  has  emerged.  In  this  stage,  delinquency  rates  of  not  only 
subprime-related products but also commercial real estate loans and consumer loans have 
been rising reflecting the sluggishness in the U.S. economy. As a result, a situation in which 
the  sluggishness  in  the  economy  causes  financial  institutions'  asset  quality  to  deteriorate 
further – with further adverse impact on the economy – is becoming a focus of concern. To 
put  it  another  way,  at  the  third  stage  there  are  concerns  about  a  negative  feedback  loop 
between financial markets, asset prices, and economic activity. 
U.S. economic growth is likely to remain sluggish for some time, since it is unforeseeable at 
present when and how the negative feedback loop will diminish. In Europe, economic growth 
is slowing further. In Asia, although the Chinese and Indian economies continue to post high 
growth, some of the NIEs and ASEAN economies are showing deceleration in exports and 
signs of slowing domestic demand. The growth rate in the world economy taken as a whole 
will inevitably slow, although it remains at a high level when compared with the average for 
the past three decades. 
The surge in energy and materials prices and Japan's economy 
III.  
Next, I will address a topic related to the surge in energy and materials prices. Since Japan 
depends heavily on imports of resources, a rise in such prices exerts downward pressure on 
Japan's economy through an outflow of income and exerts upward pressure on prices. 
The rise in crude oil prices during the current phase has been the largest, even compared 
with the two oil crises. During the first oil crisis, crude oil prices surged from 3 U.S. dollars to 
12 dollars per barrel – a fourfold rise – and during the second oil crisis they surged from 15 
dollars to 40 dollars – an increase of two and a half times. In the current phase, if we start 
from 2002, when the level of oil prices was 21 dollars, the present level of 110-120 dollars – 
somewhat below the recent peak – is more than five times the level recorded in 2002. As a 
result, the size of the income outflow resulting from the surge in oil prices has also been the 
largest  during  the  current  phase:  about  5  percent  of  real  GDP,  compared  with  about  3 
percent during the two oil crises. 
The  effects  of  rises  in  crude  oil  prices,  such  as  the  resultant  outflows  of  income  and 
decreases  in  production  capacity,  cannot  be  offset  unless  export  prices  are  raised  to  the 
same  extent  as  import  prices.  Nevertheless,  there  seem  to  be  many  aspects  where  the 
situation can be improved through our own efforts. In fact, economic and price developments 
differed markedly between the periods immediately after the two oil crises emerged.  
During the first oil crisis, Japan's economy suffered from a combination of runaway inflation 
and  economic  stagnation  –  in  other  words,  stagflation.  The  economy  suddenly  contracted, 
and CPI inflation peaked at an annual rate of 25 percent. Contrarily, during the second oil 
crisis,  the  economy  continued  to  grow  at  a  rate  of  3-5  percent  and  the  CPI  posted  only  a 
single-digit increase. 
Of  the  various  factors  behind  the  difference  in  Japan's  economic  and  price  performance 
between the two oil crises, two seem to be most important. 
The first factor was the difference in the economic and price situation immediately before the 
crises as well as the policy response. Already prior to the first oil crisis, the economy was 
overheated and the financial environment was overly accommodative, having increased the 
inflation  expectations  of  households  and  firms.  Against  this  background  crude  oil  prices 
surged, making matters even worse. On the other hand, when the second oil crisis occurred, 
the economy was not overheated, the financial environment was not overly accommodative, 
and monetary tightening was initiated in a timely manner. This kept inflation expectations low 
2 
 BIS Review 104/2008
and thus succeeded in avoiding the second-round effects – a rise in prices of non-petroleum 
goods and services triggered by a rise in crude oil prices. 
The  second  factor  was  that  Japan  succeeded  in  transforming  its  economic  structure  while 
accepting the change in the relative-price structure due to the surge in crude oil prices. After 
the  first  oil  crisis,  Japanese  firms  pursued  resource  saving,  and  as  a  result,  crude  oil 
consumption  per  unit  of  output  –  the  amount  of  crude  oil  used  to  produce  a  unit  of  value 
added  –  decreased  in  1980  by  22  percent  compared  with  the  period  of  the  first  oil  crisis. 
Meanwhile, Japanese firms made use of the change in the operating environment, seeking to 
develop energy-saving products. 
This experience clearly suggests policies necessary to cope with the current rise in crude oil 
prices. First, the second-round effects should be avoided so that inflation is contained within 
the  rise  in  import  costs  and  passing  of  the  rise  in  import  costs  on  to  output  prices.  And 
second, it is crucial to promote a change in economic and industrial structures to make them 
compatible with the new structure of relative prices. 
It  should,  however,  be  noted  that  the  current  rise  in  crude  oil  prices  has  characteristics 
different from the past crises. In the past oil crises, supply constraints were the main cause of 
the rise in crude oil prices. In the current phase, on the other hand, the major cause was a 
change  in  the  structure  of  the  world  economy  resulting  from  the  rapid  rise  of  emerging 
economies.  Looking  at  the  current  rise  in  crude  oil  prices  from  a  somewhat  longer-term 
perspective, we can also observe that it and the subprime mortgage problem share a similar 
background and thus have not occurred independently. 
IV. 
Issues facing the global economy and Japan's economy in the medium to long 
term 
Looking back on major trends in the global economy, we find that the rise in crude oil prices 
nearly coincides with the overheating in the markets for securitized products, including those 
backed by subprime loans. In the period that saw the onset of these two events, especially in 
and after 2003, the world economy enjoyed a positive combination of high growth and stable 
prices. A major factor supporting this combination was that the entry of emerging economies 
into the market economy expanded global supply capacity, providing an environment for low 
inflation. In this situation, accommodative monetary policy continued worldwide. 
In  these  favorable  circumstances,  however,  problems  that  can  be  seen  today  in  the  world 
economy  started  to  emerge.  First,  the  rapid  growth  of  emerging  economies  whose  energy 
consumption  was  inefficient  multiplied  the  demand  for  resources  such  as  crude  oil.  In 
addition, in these economies, improvement in the level of income increased the demand for 
general  merchandise  such  as  food,  and  this  raised  inflation  rates  there.  And  second,  as 
represented  by  the  emergence  of  the  U.S.  subprime  mortgage  problem,  investors  and 
financial  institutions  eased  their  credit  standards  amid  the  prolonged,  favorable  economic 
environment and accommodative financial conditions, and this resulted in expansion of credit 
and a rise in asset prices.  
Although the causes of the subprime mortgage problem and the rise in crude oil prices are 
complex,  they  seem  to  share  a  similarity  in  that  neither  might  have  occurred  without  a 
continuation  of  high  economic  growth  and  accommodative  financial  conditions  worldwide. 
This  fact  would  seem  to  hold  several  implications  for  the  future  development  of  the 
economies of both Japan and the world. 
First,  the  world  economy  should  be  regarded  as  being  in  a  process  of  transition  to  a 
sustainable  growth  path.  An  economic  slowdown  entails  hardships  in  every  economy. 
However, in view of the background of high energy and materials prices, which I mentioned 
earlier,  a  certain  pace  of  adjustment  in  the  world  economy  seems  necessary  for  them  to 
meet  the  conditions  –  such  as  stable  resource  prices  –  for  moving  to  another  stage  of 
development.  
BIS Review 104/2008 
 3
Second, from the viewpoint of the conduct of monetary policy in general, the risks that may 
arise from prolonged accommodative financial conditions warrant attention. Looking back at 
previous bubbles in financial activities and asset prices, including Japan's asset price bubble, 
we can see that many have occurred following a period of price stability and continued low 
interest rates. It is difficult, however, to recognize the emergence and bursting of a bubble as 
they happen. Given this, we should keep in mind the view that excessively accommodative 
financial  conditions  often  cause  large  swings  in  the  economy  after  a  certain  time  lag, 
although such a view may not appear well grounded. 
And third, in view of the background of the current rise in energy and materials prices, the 
probability  that  these  prices  will  fall  back  to  the  previous  low  levels  is  likely  to  be  small, 
although  the  pace  of  increase  seen  to  date  may  not  continue.  It  therefore  seems 
inappropriate to consider the current surge an "oil crisis," which implies a "temporary supply 
shock." In this situation, it is all the more important – even more so than during the periods of 
the two oil crises – for Japan's economy to transform firms' production structure into one that 
is compatible with the new structure of relative prices for better resource allocation, and to 
react  positively  to  the  change  in  the  operating  environment  and  create  areas  of  high 
competitiveness. 
In  this  regard,  Japanese  firms  have  already  started  to  undertake  a  range  of  projects,  in 
response to the surge in energy and materials prices and growing interest in environmental 
issues. These include the reduction in use of structural steel and facilitation of the reuse of 
scrap,  the  use  of  alternative  energy,  and  the  introduction  of  energy-saving  equipment.  In 
these  areas,  large  firms  in  particular  have  been  increasing  capital  spending  to  improve 
efficiency. With regard to development of new products, automakers, for example, have been 
working to develop energy-saving products such as hybrid cars and electric cars, and sales 
of hybrid cars are growing steadily. Some electric manufacturers are increasing production of 
products related to alternative energy, such as solar batteries. 
The outlook for Japan's economy and the conduct of monetary policy 
V.  
In view of the issues I have discussed, I would now like to talk about the outlook for Japan's 
economy and the Bank's conduct of monetary policy.  
The Bank's main scenario is that growth will likely remain sluggish for the time being against 
the  backdrop  of  high  energy  and  materials  prices  and  weaker  growth  in  exports  due  to  a 
slowdown in overseas economies. The sluggishness in Japan's economy has arisen against 
the background of the broad adjustments in the world economy that I mentioned earlier. In 
this  situation,  the  point  that  should  be  examined  is  whether  or  not  Japan's  economy  will 
experience a deep adjustment phase. I believe that the possibility of this occurring is small. 
Let  me  explain  the  thinking  behind  this  projection.  First,  as  a  result  of  firms'  restructuring 
efforts,  which  continued  in  the  1990s  up  until  recently,  the  "three  excesses"  –  namely,  in 
production capacity, employment, and debt – have been eliminated, and Japan's economy 
has become more resilient to shocks that weaken economic growth. Second, losses incurred 
by  Japanese  financial  institutions  due  to  the  subprime  mortgage  problem  are  limited 
compared  to  those  of  U.S.  and  European  financial  institutions  and  Japanese  financial 
markets  continue  to  be  stable,  which  suggests  that  the  functioning  of  the  financial  system 
remains intact. And third, Japan's financial conditions have been accommodative. Although it 
is  a  cause  for  concern  that  financing  conditions  of  firms  in  construction  and  real  estate 
industries and small firms in general are becoming increasingly severe, financial conditions 
taken as a whole have been accommodative. The short-term real interest rate calculated by 
subtracting the CPI inflation rate from the call rate has been negative, as the policy interest 
rate – the uncollateralized overnight call rate – has been at a low level of 0.5 percent. Firms' 
financing  costs  have  also  remained  low.  This  accommodative  environment  for  corporate 
finance is expected to continue to support business activity. 
4 
 BIS Review 104/2008
Because of this, it is reasonable to expect, as the main scenario, that Japan's economy will 
return  gradually  to  a  moderate  growth  path  as  commodity  prices  level  out  and  overseas 
economies move out of their deceleration phase. 
Let me now discuss developments in prices. Currently, the year-on-year rate of increase in 
the CPI exceeds the upper limit of the range of "understanding of medium- to long-term price 
stability" – that is, the level of inflation that each member of the Policy Board understands, 
when conducting monetary policy, as being consistent with price stability over the medium to 
long term. The assessment of price stability should, however, be based on whether it can be 
sustained  in  the  medium  to  long  term.  From  this  point  of  view,  the  issue  that  requires 
particular  attention  is  whether  second-round  effects  will  emerge.  This  largely  depends  on 
whether people's confidence in price stability is maintained, which ultimately is determined by 
the  stance  of  monetary  policy.  We  consider  that  the  second-round  effects  are  unlikely  to 
emerge  in  the  near  term,  given  the  current  level  of  the  domestic  output  gap,  the  inflation 
expectations  of  households,  and  firms'  price-setting  behavior.  Developments  in  wages  are 
one of the important indicators pointing to the emergence of second-round effects, and so far 
wage growth has been relatively weak. In sum, the rate of increase in consumer prices will 
likely remain elevated over the coming months, since the pass-through of earlier increases in 
import prices is expected to continue for a while. Thereafter, however, the rate of increase is 
expected to decline gradually in line with the expected moderation in the rises in international 
commodity prices and the resultant subsiding of firms' raising of sales prices.  
The outlook for economic activity and prices, however, entails considerable uncertainty, and 
various risk factors are influencing the outlook. Global financial markets, which I mentioned 
earlier, are likely to remain unstable for the time being, and there are downside risks to the 
world  economy.  Regarding  the  outlook  for  Japan's  economy,  there  is  a  risk  that  domestic 
demand  may  weaken  as  a  result  of  the  outflow  of  income  due  to  the  high  energy  and 
materials prices. The Bank is therefore attentive to the downside risks to economic growth, 
although the economy does not face the need to adjust production capacity and employment.  
As  for  prices,  the  Bank  is  focusing  on  the  upside  risks  to inflation.  As I  mentioned  earlier, 
energy  and  materials  prices  have  been  rising  for  a  long  time  and  this  rise  should  not  be 
regarded as "temporary." Moreover, given that Japan's economy has not faced such a high 
level  of  inflation  in  recent  years,  the  Bank  should  pay  attention  to  the  risk  that  possible 
changes  in  the  inflation  expectations  of  households  and  firms'  price-setting  behavior  may 
generate second-round effects.  
As  I  have  explained,  the  current  situation  requires  the  Bank  to  carefully  monitor  both 
downside risks to economic growth and upside risks to inflation. Furthermore, it should be 
mindful of the risk that if the downside risks to the economy turn out to decrease, prolonging 
the  period  of  accommodative  financial  conditions  may  lead  to  swings  in  economic  activity 
and prices, as the recent experience of the world economy suggests. The Bank continues to 
carefully assess the future outlook for economic activity and prices, closely considering the 
likelihood  of  its  projections  as  well  as  factors  posing  upside  or  downside  risks,  and  will 
implement  its  policies  in  a  flexible  manner.  Moreover,  since  global  financial  markets  are 
expected to remain unstable and there are various uncertainties in the outlook for economic 
activity and prices, it is essential for the Bank to ensure the stability of the Japanese financial 
markets.  
Closing remarks 
Thus far, I have spoken about the issues facing Japan's economy and the Bank's thinking 
regarding the conduct of monetary policy. 
It  takes  about  one  and  a  half  to  two  years  for  the  effects  of  monetary  policy  to  permeate 
throughout  the  economy.  It  is  therefore  extremely  important  to  make  macroeconomic 
projections  for  the  period  covering  this  lag.  You  may  be  able  to  imagine  the  difficulty  in 
BIS Review 104/2008 
 5
making  an  accurate  projection.  However,  speaking  from  my  own  experience  as  a 
policymaker, it is not easy even to grasp the current state of the economy. To succeed in 
doing so, a close analysis of both macroeconomic indicators and microeconomic information 
is  essential.  The  indicators  and  information  have  both  advantages  and  disadvantages. 
Macroeconomic indicators are important, but do not show the most recent developments due 
to  the  lag  between  the  relevant  period  and  the  time  of  release.  On  the  other  hand, 
microeconomic information that is gathered through interviews with firms has an advantage 
of a minimal lag. The latter also includes information that cannot be expressed numerically, 
such  as  business  sentiment.  However,  it  also  has  drawbacks:  there  often  is  a  significant 
disparity in the view of business conditions among firms and industries; and there may be 
also a tendency for respondents to play down positive news regarding their business.  
The  Bank,  keeping  in  mind  both  the  advantages  and  limitations  of  the  two  types  of 
information, strives to gather as much microeconomic information as possible using no small 
amount  of  operating  resources.  To  explore  the  activities  of  various  economic  entities  in 
depth, the Bank's 32 branches and 12 local offices throughout Japan perform an important 
role.  Their  analyses  of  regional  economic  developments  and  the  behavior  of  firms  and 
financial  institutions  in  the  respective  region  are  concentrated  in  the  Bank's  Head  Office 
through,  for  example,  the  meeting  of  general  managers  of  the  Bank's  branches.  The 
branches make reports based on the results of the Tankan (Short-Term Economic Survey of 
Enterprises  in  Japan)  for  the  respective  region,  analyses  of  regional  economic  indicators, 
and  interviews  with  firms  and  financial  institutions  in  the  region.  The  information  gathered 
from the branches is summarized in the Bank's Regional Economic Report, which is released 
quarterly. The branches also disseminate information locally in their respective areas through 
the monthly release of a report on recent economic and financial developments and quarterly 
release of the Tankan for the respective region. 
The  staff  of  the  Bank's  branches  and  offices,  including  the  general  managers,  may  have 
asked you on occasion to devote some time to completing interviews and Tankan surveys. I 
wish to express my deep thanks for your kind cooperation, and would like you to know that 
these  interviews  and  surveys  provide  an  essential  foundation  for  the  Bank's  conduct  of 
monetary policy. We seek your continued cooperation with us to this end, and please know 
that your opinions and requests are always welcome. 
Thank you very much for your kind attention. 
6 
 BIS Review 104/2008
