Jean-Claude Trichet: Globalisation, inflation and the ECB monetary 
policy 
Lecture  by  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the 
Barcelona Graduate School of Economics, Barcelona, 14 February 2008. 
 Introduction 
I would like to start by thanking Banco de Sabadell for hosting this event and thanking the 
CREA and the Barcelona Graduate School of Economics for offering me the opportunity to 
hold this lecture. It is a privilege for me to be here today, at this School which represents a 
prominent example of how Europe can successfully benefit from globalisation, and become a 
powerhouse of knowledge production and dissemination. Today, I would like to discuss the 
consequences for the euro area prices brought about by the forces of globalisation, and their 
implications  for  monetary  policy.  As  an  open-minded  practitioner  in  front  of  so  many 
distinguished  academics,  I  am  looking  forward  to  learning  a  lot  from  your  comments  and 
questions. 
Globalisation is certainly one of the most analysed and discussed economic phenomenon of 
our  time.  The  notion  of  “globalisation”  subsumes  the  concepts  of  cross-border  market 
integration,  country  and  policy  interdependence,  and  fundamental  historical  change. 
Economists classically think of globalisation as a process of market integration that leads to 
price  convergence  across  markets  for  goods,  labour  and  services  worldwide  as  well  as  to 
growing trade and financial flows. 
Outside economists’ circles, however, globalisation refers to a more general phenomenon of 
growing  interdependence  between  countries  including  also  technological,  environmental  or 
social  aspects.  It  encompasses  many  multifaceted  phenomena,  from  the  diffusion  of 
knowledge and cultural patterns, to the unprecedented speed and freedom of communication 
and travel in the age of the Internet and jet. 
Knowledge and ideas travel much faster than physical goods and people, a key distinctive 
aspect of the current wave of globalization compared to previous episodes. A striking aspect 
is  the  emergence  of  what  has  been  called  “self-organizing  collaborative  communities,”  like 
those that have produced Linux and Wikipedia. Academic economists know a lot about this, 
as  they  have  been  part  of  a  similar  community  for  long  time,  comprising  the  research 
universities of the US and Europe.1  
The  current  phase  of  economic  globalisation  has  also  coincided  with  the  reintegration  into 
global markets of China, India and the former Soviet bloc, transpiring into the doubling of the 
effective global labour force from about 1.5 to 3 billion. For this reason, the current debate 
about  globalisation  is  very  often  indistinguishable  from  the  debate  about  the  advent  of 
emerging economies and their systemic implications. 
Globalisation  brings  together  in  public  debate  a  broad  set  of  policy  issues,  such  as  trade 
liberalisation  and  competition  from  low-wage  economies;  foreign  direct  investment  and 
offshoring; international capital flows; immigration and pressures on labour markets in mature 
economies; the implications of the global spread of technology, as reflected in discussions 
about  intellectual  property  rights,  for  instance;  or  the  protection  and  promotion  of  cultural 
diversity.  On  the  one  hand,  globalisation  is  celebrated  by  its  supporters  because  of  the 
                                                 
1   See Leamer, E. (2007), “A Flat World, A Level Playing Field, A Small World After All, or None of the Above? A 
Review  of  Thomas  L.  Friedman's  The  World  is  Flat,”  Journal  of  Economic  Literature,  Vol.  XLV,  March,  pp. 
83-126. 
BIS Review 21/2008 
 1
higher quality of life it brings about, with very similar words as those Keynes used almost a 
century  ago  to  describe  the  heydays  of  the  “liberal  international  economic  order”  before 
World War I.2 On the other hand, the sweeping and relentless demise of physical and man-
made barriers to the mobility of goods and services, ideas and people, is criticised because it 
supposedly  also  does  away  with  necessary  protections  for  disadvantaged  workers  and 
households in poor and rich countries, the environment and cultural diversity. 
All these developments have put globalisation at the centre of international policy debates. 
The  European  Union  considers  globalisation  to  be  “one  of  the  major  challenges”  it  is 
confronted  with  and  defines  the  phenomenon  as  “the  increasing  interdependence  of  the 
global economy and ever-growing competition on international markets.”3
The increasing interdependence of the global economy is also of paramount importance for 
central banks as it possibly affects, among others, the formation of international good prices, 
the inflation process, the valuation of assets, the cross-border constellation of capital flows, 
and international financial stability.  
I will touch upon some of the consequences of globalisation forces for price stability, and the 
implications  and  challenges  for  monetary  policy.  Monetary  effects  of  globalisation  were 
already  a  topical  issue  in  16th  century  Spain,  during  the  establishment  of  global  colonial 
empires,  when  large  influx  of  silver  from  the  Americas  led  to  unprecedented  increases  in 
prices first in Spain but then also in the rest of Europe, accompanied by substantial external 
imbalances.  Then  as  now  the  debate  was  whether  inflationary  pressures  were  just  about 
relative prices or should also have implications for the price level. This incident of an early 
phase of globalisation was associated with the blossoming of key contributions to economics 
such as the quantity theory invented by the School of Salamanca, but also, quite alarmingly, 
the rise of protectionist mercantilism. Catalonia was indeed an early victim of protectionism, 
as only in 1778 it was allowed to trade with the Americas by decree of Charles III.4  
Setting the stage: globalisation and the euro area  
As  globalisation  means  different  things  to  different  people,  there  are  also  many  popular 
measures of globalization. For example, the 2005 issue of Foreign Policy magazine ranked 
countries  in  terms  of  their  degree  of  globalisation  based  on  a  variety  of  criteria,  including 
international travel and tourism, membership in international organizations, contributions to 
United Nations peacekeeping missions, international telephone traffic, Internet hosts and so 
on. The three most globalised countries turned out to be Singapore, Ireland and Switzerland; 
                                                 
2   “What  an  extraordinary  episode  in  the  economic  progress  of  man  that  age  was  which  came  to  an  end  in 
August,  1914!  […]  The  inhabitant  of  London  could  order  by  telephone,  sipping  his  morning  tea  in  bed,  the 
various products of the whole earth, in such quantity as he might see fit, and reasonably expect their early 
delivery upon his door-step; he could at the same moment and by the same means adventure his wealth in 
the natural resources and new enterprises of any quarter of the  world, and share,  without exertion or even 
trouble, in their prospective fruits and advantages; or he could decide to couple the security of his fortunes 
with the good faith of the townspeople of any substantial municipality in any continent that fancy or information 
might  recommend.  […]  But,  most  important  of  all,  he  regarded  this  state  of  affairs  as  normal,  certain,  and 
permanent, except in the direction of further improvement, and any deviation from it as aberrant, scandalous, 
and  avoidable.”  John  Maynard  Keynes,  The  Economic  Consequences  of  the  Peace,  New  York:  Harcourt, 
Brace  and  Howe,  1920,  pp.  10  –12;  quoted  by  M.  Wynne  (2005),  “Globalization  and  monetary  policy,” 
Southwest Economy , Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, Issue 4, pp. 1-8.  
3   See Berlin declaration of 25 March 2007. 
4   Papademos,  L.  (2007),  “The  effects  of  globalisation  on  inflation,  liquidity  and  monetary  policy”,  speech 
delivered at the NBER conference on “International dimensions of monetary policy,” Girona, 11 June 2007. 
2 
 BIS Review 21/2008
5
the  United  States  was  fourth.   When  one  looks  at  measures  focusing  more  narrowly  on 
economic globalisation, however, the striking and not widely known fact is that Europe, and 
the euro area in particular, turn out to be more closely integrated with the global economy 
than the US.  
Globalisation, if narrowly defined as growing trade openness in response to declining trade 
and  transport  barriers,  has  been  ongoing  for  decades  and  in  this  sense  is  not  a  novel 
phenomenon. Over the last decade, however, this process appears to have accelerated, and 
the  increasing  trade  integration  has  been  accompanied  by  signs  of  a  rapidly  growing 
interdependence  of  economies  also  via  production  and  financial  market  linkages,  with  two 
broad factors underlying such a development. First, falling costs of moving not only goods, 
but  also  services  and  information  across  borders,  have  led  to  changes  in  the  production 
processes,  most  notably  related  to  the  international  fragmentation  of  production  (Chart  1). 
Second, there has been a large expansion in global productive capacity on account of the 
opening up of emerging economies to international trade and production. 
Against this backdrop, euro area external trade as well as flows and stocks of foreign assets 
and liabilities have been growing strongly. This has been partly as a result of the increasing 
role of New EU Member States as trade partners, as well as rapidly increasing imports from 
Asia  (especially  China).  Thus  the  trade  openness  of  the  euro  area  has  increased  rather 
markedly through time, especially since the early 1990s, and is growing more rapidly than in 
either the USA or Japan. In particular, trade volumes have also expanded strongly for the 
euro area (from 33 % of GDP over the period 1997-2000 to 38 % of GDP over the period 
2001-2006 ; over the same periods, figures for the US stand at 24 % and 25 % and figures 
for Japan stand at 21 % and 23 %), with export and import volumes continually and rapidly 
outpacing  the  growth  rate  of  GDP  over  the  past  quarter  of  a  century  (Chart  2a  and  2b). 
Meanwhile, over the past decade world cross-border capital flows have also been growing 
strongly,  increasing  many-fold  (from  4  %  of  aggregate  GDP  in  1994  to  more  than  14%  in 
2005 for the OECD countries) as a percentage of GDP (Chart 3a). A similar story holds for 
the  euro  area  (Chart  3b),  where  the  ongoing  strength  of  capital  flows  is  reflected  in  the 
considerable increase in outward and inward FDI virtually doubling (from 20% of GDP to 35 
% of GDP as regards outward investments and from 15 % to 30 % of GDP as regards inward 
investments) as a percentage of GDP since 1999 (although cross-border bank lending has 
also significantly increased in recent years). Strikingly, while euro area external assets and 
liabilities  at  the  end  of  2006  amounted  to  148.4%  and  160.5%  of  GDP,  respectively,  the 
same ratios in the US were smaller, at 104.2% and 123.5% of GDP. 
Globalisation and price developments  
Economic  theory  predicts  that  this  ongoing  process  of  crumbling  of  national  economic 
borders,  and  the  associated  increase  in  international  flows  of  capital,  goods  and  services, 
should have resulted into greater pressure towards price equalization and convergence, for 
assets, commodities and factors. Given the different speed at which national borders have 
shrunk, one would expect a greater degree of convergence for asset prices than for goods 
and factor prices. 
The available evidence seems to support this contention. While there is ample evidence that 
assets  with  similar  risk  characteristics  yield  very  similarly  returns  in  international  financial 
markets,  prices  of  similar  goods  and  services  are  still  quite  different  across  countries.  For 
instance,  many  observers  have  pointed  out  that  long-term  real  interest  rates  in  the  major 
currencies  have  converged  to  very  similar  (low)  levels,  particularly  since  2000.  Moreover, 
                                                 
5   Foreign Policy (2005), “Measuring Globalization: The Global Top 20,” May/June 2005, pp. 52–60; quoted in M. 
Wynne (2005); “Globalization and monetary policy,” Southwest Economy , Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, 
Issue 4, pp. 1-8. 
BIS Review 21/2008 
 3
there has been a large increase in cross-country correlations of these rates, suggesting that 
these  dynamics  are  driven  by  a  global  factor  which  is  quite  independent  from  local 
developments in real economic growth.6
Likewise, a simple way to gauge the lack of overall price convergence is to look at the World 
Bank’s latest PPP calculations, according to which prices in China and India in 2004 were 
still on average roughly ½ and 1/9 of their dollar counterpart in the United States.7
However, a remarkable development associated with globalisation has been that, despite the 
limited  convergence  in  price  levels,  inflation  developments  have  seemingly  reflected  the 
influence of global factors.8  
This influence might be due to possible structural effects of globalisation on factors affecting 
global trend inflation; but also cyclical effects of globalisation forces – such as the soaring oil 
price from 1999-2007 – may provide part of the explanation. 
You won’t be surprise to hear from a central banker that inflation is ultimately, always and 
everywhere a monetary phenomenon and, as such, determined by monetary policy. Indeed, 
the  influential  observers  who  have  connected  the  current  period  of  lower  and  more  stable 
inflation across the world with the workings of globalisation have done so by carefully linking 
it to either its influence on the incentives to engineer an inflationary bias;9 or the emergence 
of an international consensus on putting price stability centrepiece as the overriding goal of 
independent central banks.10  
Nevertheless,  the  forces  of  globalisation  may  have  indeed  affected  cyclical  inflation 
developments through the following two channels. First, the influence of foreign conditions in 
the  price  and  wage  formation  process  may  have  increased  because  of  heightened 
international  competitive  pressures,  possibly  decoupling  inflation  and  standard  domestic 
measures of macroeconomic slack.11 Second, to the extent that the process of globalisation 
has  resulted  in  a  number  of  terms  of  trade  shocks  –  attenuated  increases  in  prices  of 
imported  manufactured  goods  and  accentuated  increases  in  commodity  and  food  prices  – 
these  may  have  in  turn  worked  their  way  into  short-run  fluctuations  in  headline  inflation.12 
While there is a widespread presumption that through the latter channel globalisation forces 
have exerted cyclical downward pressures on inflation, it is clear that potentially favourable 
“tail-winds”  are  increasing  turning  into  contrarian  “head-winds”,  posing  potentially  serious 
challenges to the maintenance of price stability. This would especially be the case were they 
to spill over into inflation expectations by the public, leading to their unanchoring. 
                                                 
6    See, e.g., Reichlin, L. (2006), Panel remarks at Conference “Financial Markets and the Real Economy in a 
Low  Interest  Rate  Environment,”  Monetary  and  Economic  Studies,  24  (S-1),  Institute  for  Monetary  and 
Economic Studies, Bank of Japan, pp. 247-52. 
7   See World Bank, http://devdata.worldbank.org/wdi2006/contents/Table4_14.htm. 
8   Ciccarelli, M. and B. Mojon (2005), “Global inflation,” ECB Working Paper No. 537. 
9   Rogoff,  K.  (2003),  “Globalization  and  Global  Disinflation,”  Economic  Review,  4th  Quarter,  Federal  Reserve 
Bank of Kansas City, pp. 45-78. 
10   Goodfriend,  M.  (2007),  “How  the  World  Achieved  Consensus  on  Monetary  Policy,”  Journal  of  Economic 
Perspective, Volume 21, Number 4 (Fall), pp. 47–68.  
11   Chen N., J. Imbs, and A. Scott (2007), “The Dynamics of Trade and Competition,” Paper presented at ECB 
conference “Globalisation and the macroeconomy”, July. 
12   Rogoff, K. (2006), “Impact of Globalization on Monetary Policy,” in Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, The 
New Economic Geography: Effects and Policy Implications, pp. 265-305.. 
4 
 BIS Review 21/2008
The cyclical impact of globalisation on euro area prices and wages 
Here, I will discuss the impact of globalisation on manufacturing and commodity prices and 
ultimately consumer price inflation in the euro area, arguing that there is evidence of only a 
small  overall  net  dampening  effect  in  last  5-10  years,  reflecting  the  balance  of  opposite 
relative price shocks.13
Import prices 
As  I  argued  before,  intra-euro  area  imports  have  been  growing  strongly,  but  euro  area 
imports from low-cost countries such as China and the new EU Member States (henceforth 
NMS) have been growing even more rapidly.  
Based on highly detailed data disaggregated both by sectors and countries over the period 
1995-2004,  Chart  4a  shows  that  the  level  of  import  prices  (proxied  by  absolute  unit  value 
indices) from China and the NMS are estimated to be approximately one-quarter the import 
price of total euro area import prices, and about one-fifth the price of imports from high-cost 
countries.14 Since the start of the 2000s, the share of low-cost countries in extra-euro area 
manufacturing imports has increased from just over one-third to almost a half (Chart 4b).15  
Rising  imports  from  low-cost  countries  are  putting  downward  pressure  on  extra-euro  area 
manufacturing import prices. Overall, it is estimated that the increase in import penetration 
from low-cost countries over this period may have dampened euro area import price inflation 
by an average of 2.1 percentage points each year, an effect almost equally accounted for by 
China and the NMS.16 The overall impact could be decomposed into two components (Table 
1): the first is the “share effect”, which captures the downward impact on import prices of the 
rising import share of low-cost countries combined with the relatively lower price level of low-
cost import suppliers (1.6 percentage points per year); and the second due to differentials in 
the  growth  of  import  prices  (the  “price  effect”),  which  captures  the  impact  of  lower  import 
price  inflation  from  the  low-cost  countries  relative  to  the  high-cost  ones  over  the  sample 
period (0.5 percentage points per year).17
So far, I have only referred to the downward impact of low-cost countries on manufacturing 
import  prices.  However,  there  have  also  been  globalisation-related  effects  on  euro  area 
import  prices  working  in  the  opposite  direction  as  the  strong  growth  in  the  non-OECD 
economies in recent years seems to partly explain the significant rise in the prices of oil and 
non-energy commodities since 1999.18 Overall, Chart 5 shows how globalisation forces have 
helped to keep extra euro area manufacturing import prices fairly flat since the start of the 
2000s, while the rising price of oil and other commodities (particularly metals and foods) are 
reflected in the stronger growth of total extra euro area import prices over the same period. 
                                                 
13   See for further details ECB (2008), “Globalisation, trade and the euro area macroeconomy,” Monthly Bulletin, 
January. 
14   This calculation is subject to caveats, notably that the accuracy of the results may be affected by the fact that 
unit value indices do not control for changes in quality. 
15   Among the low-cost countries, China and the New EU Member States (NMS) were the main contributors to 
this  increase  with  their  shares  roughly  doubling  since  the  mid-1990s  to  stand  at  around  12%  and  14% 
respectively in 2004. 
16   See ECB (2008). 
17   This  methodology  follows  the  methodology  in  Kamin,  S.,  Marazzi,  M.  and  Schindler,  J.  (2004),  “Is  China 
exporting  deflation”,  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal  Reserve  System  International  Finance  Discussion 
Papers, No 791 (April). 
18   See, e.g. Pain N, I Koske and M Sollie (2006), “Globalisation and inflation in the OECD economies,” OECD 
Economics  Department  Working  Paper  No.  52.  They  calculate  that  if  the  GDP  of  the  non-OECD  countries 
during the period 2000- 2005 had grown at the slower pace of the OECD countries then the world real oil price 
would have been up to 40% lower by the end of 2005. 
BIS Review 21/2008 
 5
Wages 
Turning  briefly  to  recent  euro  area  wage  developments,  globalisation  may  have  been  one 
contributing  factor  to  an  extended  period  of  wage  moderation  within  the  euro  area  (for 
instance,  through  offshoring  or  the  threat  of  offshoring),  across  both  manufacturing  and 
service sector. While productivity growth in the euro area has also been moderate over the 
last decade, real wage growth has also been low. Over 1985-1995 both productivity (output 
per person) and real wage growth rates averaged around 1.9%. Over the period 1996-2006, 
average productivity growth was approximately 1%, with average real wage growth around 
0.4%. 
While  such  a  development  might  be  taken  to  be  related  to  a  necessary  moderation  in  a 
period of persistent high level of unemployment and to an additional moderation driven by 
globalisation,  extreme  caution  should  be  made  in  drawing  such  conclusions  as  regards 
globalisation, given several caveats related to measurement issues and the fact that much of 
the  associated  decline  in  the  wage  share  took  place  well  before  the  recent  phase  of 
globalisation.19  An  increase  in  the  real  wage  elasticity  of  labour  demand  appears  to  have 
occurred  in  the  last  years,  particularly  for  low-skilled  workers,  which  may  signal  a  trend 
fostered by additional supply of low-skilled labour at a global level.20 Moreover, in addition to 
observable  factors,  an  unobservable  “threat  effect”  –  whereby  workers  in  industrialised 
economies  perceive  themselves  to  have  a  weaker  position  and  thereby  moderate  wage 
claims given a fear of production relocation to lower-cost economies– may have contributed 
to wage moderation. 
But in the euro area it appears that wage moderation since the setting up of the euro has 
been a very powerful response to the level of mass unemployment that characterized Europe 
in  the  90’s.  The  wage  moderation  has  been  at  the  root  of  the  remarkable  employment 
success of the euro area with 15 million new net jobs created in nine years, 2 million more 
than in the U.S. during the same period.  
Overall impact on producer and consumer prices 
The recent euro area experience thus indicates that relative price impacts have been strong 
over  the  last  decade,  with  disinflation  in  manufactured  goods  contrasting  with  a  strong 
acceleration  in  prices  for  commodities,  though  a  complete  assessment  of  their  importance 
relative to historical norms is hampered by limited past data. As shown in Chart 6a, producer 
price inflation has shown strong relative price effects, with muted development in consumer 
goods excluding food and tobacco (-1.0 % on average over the period 1996-2006 compared 
with  the  overall  index)  along  with  capital  goods  (-1.3  %  on  average)  relative  to  average 
producer prices contrasting with a relatively strong rise (+2.5 % on average) in the energy 
component (which also may have also affected prices further down the production chain). As 
shown in Chart 6b, HICP subcomponents have also exhibited sizeable price differentials, in 
particular  with  three  energy-related  items  displaying  the  highest  increases  over  1996-2006 
(between +5.5 % and +7.5 %), while three ICT-intensive internationally traded goods exhibit 
the lowest increases (between -5 % and -14 %) over the period.  
                                                 
19  Trade  theory  would  suggest  that  enhanced  trade  between  developed  and  developing  countries  places 
downward pressure on the relative returns to unskilled workers – whereby the relative real return to the factor 
used intensively in the production of a good whose relative price falls/rises should also fall/rise according to 
the Stolper-Samuelson proposition. However, real wage developments have remained similar across all skill 
groups  in  the  euro  area;  see  further  details  in  ECB  (2008),  “Globalisation,  trade  and  the  euro  area 
macroeconomy,” Monthly Bulletin, January. 
20   See, e.g. Pula G. and F. Skudelny (2007), “The impact of rising imports from low-cost countries on euro area 
prices  and  labour  markets:  Some  preliminary  findings,”  Paper  presented  at  ECB  conference  “Globalisation 
and  the  macroeconomy”,  July;  Molnar  M.,  N.  Pain  and  D.  Taglioni  (2006),  “The  internationalisation  of 
production,  international  outsourcing  and  OECD  labour  markets,”  OECD  Economics  Department  Working 
Papers 561. 
6 
 BIS Review 21/2008
Overall, numerous estimates suggest a small net dampening impact of globalisation on euro 
area inflation of 0-0.3 percentage point per annum over the last 5-10 years when taking into 
account  the  net  impact  of  disinflationary  effects  of  increased  trade  openness  in  the 
manufacturing  sector  and  strong  commodity  price  increases.  On  the  basis  of  several 
accounting methodologies, including aggregate and sectoral analysis, ECB research finds a 
direct dampening effect of import openness on euro area producer price inflation of 0.1-1.0 
percentage  point  per  annum  for  the  manufacturing  sector  over  the  period  1996  to  2004.21 
Likewise, aggregate data shows a dampening impact on euro area consumer price inflation 
of 0.05-0.2 percentage point per year on average.22
The outlook: upside risks to inflation related to globalisation 
Overall, while the empirical evidence would lend support to the idea of a favorable relative 
price  shock  associated  with  globalisation,  there  have  been  recently  signals  that  the 
disinflationary impact of low-cost countries on euro area import prices might be coming to an 
end  due  to  increasing  inflationary  pressures  in  those  countries.  At  face  value,  the  recent 
increases in the prices of import from low-cost countries might be interpreted as a sign that 
the  downward  impact  from  these  countries  is  waning.  Moreover,  from  a  forward  looking 
perspective,  price  pressures  on  soft  commodities  (such  as  food)  induced  by  globalisation 
forces  –  following  pressures  already  witnessed  on  hard  commodities  –  appear  to  be  a 
potential  source  of  strong  adverse  relative  price  shocks.  These  developments  clearly 
represent upside risks to price stability.  
A first, distinct threat to price stability associated with globalisation comes from the fact that 
global food prices have risen significantly in 2007.23 This is the result of a number of factors, 
such  as  increases  in  energy  and  fertiliser  prices,  adverse  weather  conditions  in  some 
regions,  greater  demand  for  foodstuff  resulting  from  the  changes  in  food  consumption 
patterns in many developing economies, and from the emergence of new sources of demand 
for some agricultural commodities, for example for the production of biofuels. As these latter 
developments  are  of  a  structural  nature,  they  are  likely  to  have  a  more  persistent  upward 
impact on global food prices in the future. 
The rise in global food prices has led to notable increases in food prices in the euro area, at 
both  the  producer  and  the  consumer  level.  The  producer  prices  of  food  products  and 
beverages  rose  by  8.6%  in  annual  terms  in  December,  compared  with  a  rate  of  2.2%  on 
average in 2006. At the consumer level, the annual rate of change in HICP processed food 
excluding tobacco rose to 5.6% in December, up from 1.6% in 2006. 
Further  ahead,  the  outlook  for  both  world  and  domestic  food  prices  remains  uncertain. 
Although  the  supply  of  agricultural  products  should  eventually  respond  to  the  increase  in 
demand, the catch-up period may  be more prolonged than currently envisaged. Moreover, 
food  price  developments  depend  on  a  number  of  factors  which  are  difficult  to  predict, 
including  technology  advances  and  possible  changes  in  energy  policy.  Hence,  risks  in  the 
medium term seem to be on the upside. 
Against the background of a marked increase in international food commodity prices, I will 
remind that further liberalisation and reforms in the EU agricultural markets are particularly 
                                                 
21   See Pula and Skudelny (2007). 
22   Pain et al. (2006) find a combined effect on consumer inflation from lower noncommodity import price inflation 
and higher commodity import price inflation of up to 0.3 percentage point per annum over the period 2000-05. 
Using similar methodologies, Chen et al. (2007), and Helbling T., F. Jaumotte and M. Sommer (2006), “How 
has  globalisation  affected  inflation?,”  IMF  World  Economic  Outlook,  Chapter  3  (April),  report  findings  of  a 
similar magnitude for other countries and regional groupings. However, for some caveats on these accounting 
methodologies see Ball, L. (2006), “Has globalisation changed inflation?” NBER Working Paper No. 12687. 
23   See ECB (2007), Monthly Bulletin, December. 
BIS Review 21/2008 
 7
important.  Reforms  would  help  to  enhance  market  efficiency  and  benefit  European 
consumers in the form of lower prices. In order to allow consumers to profit from lower farm-
gate prices, adequate competition in the downstream sectors (food processing, retail trade 
and catering) and compliance with Single Market provisions are necessary. The successful 
conclusion  of  the  Doha  round  of  world  trade  negotiations  should  also  help  to  improve  the 
functioning of global trade in general, and of agricultural markets in Europe and worldwide in 
particular.  
Turning to risks of inflationary pressures from emerging economies, currently, some limited 
inflationary pressures appear to be originating from NMS (Chart 7). These recent import price 
increases primarily reflect the lagged impact of higher energy and raw materials prices which 
have pushed up the prices of virtually all euro area import suppliers. 
 However, while the share of the NMS economies in euro area imports is rather significant, at 
around 11%, the relatively limited increases in their export prices – actual and expected – are 
unlikely to make them a significant source of imported inflation in the euro area. 
Turning to China and India, a noteworthy feature of both countries is the significant upturn in 
inflationary pressures recently. In China, food prices have been by far the main contributor to 
this recent rise in CPI inflation, whereas non-food prices have remained remarkably stable. 
On the one hand, an upside risk is that, admittedly, higher domestic inflation could feed into 
wages  and,  eventually,  export  prices.  On  the  other  hand,  ongoing  and  expected 
developments in domestic prices and costs in the NMS as well as in China and India suggest 
that potential risks to inflation originating from these two regions are relatively contained.24
Nevertheless,  economic  development,  robust  wage 
trade 
deterioration  in  low-cost  countries,  as  well  as  increasing  sophistication,  variety  and 
technological content of exports would suggest that low-cost countries are making a leap-up 
in the value chain and that their export bundles are becoming increasingly similar to the more 
advanced western economies, which will ultimately lead in the long-run to a convergence of 
their export prices to higher international levels. 
increases  and 
terms  of 
Monetary policy implications of terms of trade shocks 
To  what  extent  are  these  developments  relevant  for  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy  in  the 
euro  area?  The  European  Central  Bank’s  mandate  is  to  maintain  price  stability  over  the 
medium term, and price stability is defined as a rate of increase in the Harmonised Index of 
Consumer Prices for the euro area below and close to 2 percent. Hence, developments in 
external prices are relevant for the monetary policy of the ECB to the extent that they have 
an influence on medium term deviations from price stability.  
What are the potential risks to price stability in the medium term coming from globalisation? 
Before addressing these issues and drawing some lessons for monetary policy on the basis 
of the euro area experience, let me first reiterate that reports of the death of the effectiveness 
of monetary policy in a more globalised world, have been greatly exaggerated. Contrary to 
16th  century  Europe,  individual  central  banks  are  able,  given  flexible  exchange  rates,  to 
define  their  medium  and  long  run  definition  of  price  stability.25  Moreover,  as  far  as  usual 
arbitrage  considerations  still  apply,  long-term  interest  rate  determination  continues  to  be 
                                                 
24   See ECB (2008). 
25   See,  e.g.,  Woodford  (2007),  “Globalization  and  Monetary  Control,”  NBER  Working  Paper  No.  13329,  to 
appear in Galí, J. and M. Gertler eds., The international dimensions of monetary policy, University of Chicago 
Press. 
8 
 BIS Review 21/2008
closely  related  to  the  present  discounted  value  of  future  expected  short-term  rates,  thus 
giving a prominent role to central bank credibility and communication.26
Given that inflation is ultimately a monetary phenomenon even in a globalised world, theories 
asserting that China is exporting deflation or inflation should be viewed as overly simplistic. 
Globalisation forces materialise as external shocks, which should in principle affect relative 
prices, rather than the overall inflation rate in the long run. However, as is often the case in 
economics,  matters  become  particularly  complex  when  we  move  to  analyse  higher 
frequencies. In the medium run, whether terms-of-trade developments – like increases in oil 
and commodity prices or cheaper imports – exert positive or negative pressure on inflation 
will depend on their net effect on aggregate demand and aggregate supply. Soaring import 
prices will in fact tend to produce two competing effects. 
The  first  effect,  which  can  be  denoted  as  supply  effect,  derives  from  the  lower  potential 
output growth associated with an adverse terms-of-trade shock, for instance brought about 
by  an  exogenous  increase  in  the  prices  of  oil  or  other  commodities  which  are  used  as 
intermediate input in domestic production.27 Thus, for a given level of aggregate demand, the 
fall in potential output will tend to be such that actual output exceeds potential, leading to a 
positive output gap and upward pressure on inflation. 
There is a widespread perception that commodity prices affect inflation also through demand 
effects.  By  impinging  on  individuals’  wealth,  due  to  the  impact  of  higher  relative  prices  on 
current and expected future income, commodity price shocks may trigger a reduction in the 
demand for goods and services. For given potential output growth, the wealth effect would 
give  rise  to  excess  aggregate  supply,  thereby  leading  to  downward  pressure  on  domestic 
inflation.  
Whether inflation tends to increase or fall in response to an adverse terms-of-trade shock will 
therefore  depend  on  which  of  these  two  effects  dominates.  In  theory,  there  is  no  general 
result.  The  net  effect  will  also  depend  on  specific  features  of  the  shock,  e.g.  whether  it 
reflects exogenous shifts in the commodities supply or a buoyant global demand for them, 
and  of  its  transmission  throughout  the  economy.  The  wealth  effect  will  dominate  when 
aggregate  demand  reacts  quickly.  This  may  be  the  case,  for  example,  when  relative  price 
developments are perceived to be very persistent, or permanent. Conversely, supply effects 
will tend to dominate when aggregate demand adjusts more slowly. The wealth effect should 
also be small, thus contributing to building inflationary pressures,28  
Another  important  distinction,  particularly  in  the  present  juncture,  concerns  the  ultimate 
causes  of  terms  of  trade  shocks,  as  they  can  reflect  either  commodity-specific  or  more 
aggregate factors. For instance, from the point of view of large economies like the euro area 
or the United States, an oil price increase fuelled by Chinese demand is not the same as one 
fuelled by a supply disruption. The factors underlying increases in Chinese demand for oil 
can also affect global inflationary pressures in a way that oil supply disruptions need not, for 
instance if they stem from favorable supply shocks augmenting global potential output. The 
                                                 
26   Bernanke,  B.  S.  (2007),  “Globalization  and  Monetary  Policy,”  Remarks  at  the  Fourth  Economic  Summit, 
Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research, Stanford, California, 2 March. 
27   Under standard assumptions, imported commodities enter the production function of domestic gross output, 
but not the production function of domestic value added (see, e.g., Rotemberg, J. and M. Woodford (1996), 
“Imperfect Competition and the Effects of Energy Price Increases on Economic Activity,”  Journal of Money, 
Credit and Banking Vol. 28, No. 4, Part 1, pp. 549-577). 
28   See Blanchard, O.J., and J. Galí (2007), “The Macroeconomic Effects of Oil Shocks: Why are the 2000s so 
Different from the 1970s?” NBER Working Paper No. 13368, to appear in Galí, J. and M. Gertler eds., The 
international dimensions of monetary policy, University of Chicago Press. 
BIS Review 21/2008 
 9
global disinflationary effects associated with a Chinese increase of supply of goods may then 
counteract the adverse effects of the associated oil price increases.29
But, in any case, whatever effect dominates, either supply or demand, both might be dwarfed 
if “nominal second round effects” start to appear in case of a commodity price increase. The 
disanchoring of inflation expectations is threatening to become the dominant factor as soon 
as price setters and social partners are giving a permanent status to the otherwise transitory 
price increases.  
Some implications for the ECB’s definition of price stability  
The  medium-term  orientation  of  the  ECB  monetary  policy  strategy  ensures  that  the 
Governing Council duly discounts short-term price volatility in its deliberations.  
Our medium-term orientation is supported by recent research in monetary economics. On the 
one  hand,  there  is  a  substantial  theoretical  literature  on  the  optimal  response  of monetary 
policy to inflation. On efficiency grounds the best way to absorb relative price shocks is to let 
more flexible prices – like those of commodities and oil – bear the brunt of the downward or 
upward  adjustment,  while  stabilizing  more  inflexible  prices  and  wages,  and  preventing 
inflationary pressures to materialize owing to possible second round effects.30 On the other 
hand,  the  transmission  lags  of  monetary  policy  decisions  to  prices  (as  indicated  also  by 
recent  research  on  monetary  transmission  that  the  ECB  has  conducted  with  the  National 
Central Banks) are long and variable, thus strongly advocating against any attempt to fine 
tune short-run price developments. 
In  light  of  this,  some  observers  have  argued  that,  since  terms  of  trade  shocks  often 
contaminate  standard  price  measures,  central  banks  should  put  more  emphasis  on 
measures of so-called “core” or “underlying” inflation, or even specify their objective in terms 
of a measure of core inflation.31 These measures, it was argued, could help avoid the risk of 
monetary  policy-makers  focusing  excessively  on  temporary  price  fluctuations  unrelated  to 
fundamental price trends.32 Our medium term orientation precisely allow us to look through 
temporary price fluctuations and to assess risks to price stability in a forward looking manner. 
In addition, it overcomes several technical difficulties associated with the definition and the 
measurement  of  “core  inflation”.  First,  it  is  difficult  to  discriminate  between  alternative 
measures of underlying inflation, which typically diverge to a significant extent. Second, it is 
challenging to agree on a satisfying ex-ante definition of core inflation, because of the high 
degree  of  uncertainty  surrounding  the  nature  of  future  shocks.  Third,  measures  of  core 
inflation do not necessarily have good leading indicator properties. 
ECB  research  has  in  particular  shown  that  for  the  euro  area  standard  measures  of  core 
inflation,  excluding  energy  and  unprocessed  food  prices,  do  not  have  desirable  leading 
                                                 
29   Rotemberg, J. (2007), “Comment,” to appear in Galí, J. and M. Gertler eds., The international dimensions of 
monetary policy, University of Chicago Press. 
30   See, among others, Clarida, R., J. Galí, and M. Gertler (2003), “A simple framework for international policy 
analysis,”  Journal  of  Monetary  Economics  49,  879-904;  Corsetti,  G.  and  P.  Pesenti  (2005),  “International 
dimension of optimal monetary policy,” Journal of Monetary Economics 52, 281-305; Corsetti, G., L. Dedola 
and  S.  Leduc  (2007),  “Optimal  monetary  policy  and  the  sources  of  local-currency  price  stability,”  NBER 
Working Paper No. 13544, to appear in Galí, J. and M. Gertler eds., The international dimensions of monetary 
policy, University of Chicago Press. 
31   See among others, D. Gros, J. Jimeno, C. Monticelli, G. Tabellini and N. Thygesen (2001), “Testing the speed 
limit for Europe,” 3rd report of the CEPS Macroeconomic Policy Group; and A. Alesina, O. Blanchard, J. Galí, 
F.  Giavazzi  and  H.  Uhlig  (2001),  “Defining  a  macroeconomic  framework  for  the  euro  area,”  Monitoring  the 
ECB 3, CEPR, London. 
32   See ECB (2001), “Measures of underlying inflation in the euro area,” ECB Monthly Bulletin, pp. 49-59. 
10 
 BIS Review 21/2008
33
  This  implies  that  volatile,  flexible  prices  like  those  of  energy  and 
indicator  properties.
commodities are very useful and should instead be included in the broad index monitored by 
the central bank, as they could provide a timely signal of inflationary pressures, arising not 
only in their specific markets, but more generally in the overall economy. 
Most  importantly,  a  clear  and  transparent  definition  of  price  stability  contributes  to  a  firm 
anchoring of inflation expectations. In the absence of such definition, a sequence of adverse 
inflationary shocks could be misinterpreted by private agents as a shift in the objective of the 
central  bank,  thereby  unmooring  inflation  expectations  and  eventually  leading  to  second 
round effects. A definition of price stability in terms of headline CPI inflation provides a clear 
and  measurable  yardstick  against  which  the  central  bank  could  be  held  accountable  and 
guidance for forming expectations of medium-term price developments.34 At the same time 
various measures of “underlying inflation” are analysed as indicator variables in the context 
of our regular and comprehensive assessment of risks to price stability, as this may help, on 
occasion, in assessing longer-term price dynamics. 
Closing remarks 
How can monetary policy maintain and consolidate the current gains in terms of a low and 
stable  inflation  environment,  while  contributing  in  reaping  the  benefits  from  the  process  of 
globalisation?  Against  the  backdrop  of  a  rapidly  evolving  world  economy,  monetary  policy 
needs to be firmly geared to maintaining price stability over the medium-term, pinning down 
trend  inflation.  A  forward-looking  policy  stance  is  thus  most  appropriate,  which  closely 
monitors the ramifications of globalisation for inflation, looking through temporary changes, 
being constantly alert and remaining firmly committed to preventing second round effects. 
I thank you for your attention. 
                                                 
33   See Cristadoro R., Forni M., Reichlin L. and G. Veronese (2005), “A Core Inflation Index for the Euro Area,” 
Journal of Money, Credit and Banking Vol. 37(3), pp. 539-560; and Lenza, M. (2006), “HICP and Core Inflation 
in the Euro Area,” ECB, mimeo. 
34   For the purpose of setting a quantitative objective for monetary policy, a price index should embody a number 
of essential properties. These include the credibility of the index as perceived by the general public, a high 
level of reliability (e.g. revisions should be infrequent), and the availability of the index with sufficient timeliness 
and frequency. See Camba-Mendez, G. (2003), “The definition of price stability: Choosing a price measure,” in 
ECB, Background studies for the ECB’s evaluation of its monetary policy strategy. 
BIS Review 21/2008 
 11
Chart 1:
Costs of transport, information 
processing costs, and tariffs
(Index, 1985-100)
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
Sea freight
Passenger air transport
International calls
Tarriffs in OECD countries 
Costs of processing information 
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
Source: OECD.
Note: Tariffs are median of national mean bound tariffs for OECD
countries, Sea freight is average international freight charges per tonne, 
passenger air transport is average airline revenue per passenger mile/US 
import air passenger fares; international calls is cost of a three-minute call 
from New York to London, costs of processing information is cost of 
computing an average operation (sum and multiplication).
Chart 2a: 
Openness of the euro area,  the 
United States and Japan
goods
services
40%
35%
30%
25%
20%
15%
10%
5%
0%
P
D
G
 
f
o
 
e
g
a
t
n
e
c
r
e
p
 euro area
(1997-
2000)
 euro area
(2001-
2006)
 United
States
(1997-
2000)
 United
States
(2001-
2006)
Japan
(1997-
2000)
Japan
(2001-
2006)
Source: ECB calculations.
Note: The degree of openness is measured as exports plus 
imports as a percentage of GDP, average 1997-2006. Euro 
area based on extra euro area trade.
Chart 2b:
Total and extra-euro area imports
and exports divided by GDP
(quarterly data; indices; 2000=100; volumes)
imports (intra+extra)
exports (intra+extra)
imports (extra)
exports (extra)
130
120
110
100
90
80
70
60
50
80
82
84
86
88
90
92
94
96
98
00
02
04
06
Source: ECB calculations.
  BIS Review 21/2008
 12 
 Chart 3:
Inward capital flows in the OECD countries
Foreign equity investment
Foreign direct investment
Cross-border lending
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
% of World GDP
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
1994
Euro area foreign assets
(as percentage of GDP)
1999
2006
Euro area foreign liabilities
(as percentage of GDP)
1999
2006
45
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
FDI
Equity
Fixed income
Loans/Deposits
FDI
Equity
Fixed income
Loans/Deposits
45
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
Chart 4a:
China and NMS have lower 
import price level  
(euros per kg of EA manufacturing imports)
Chart 4b:
Rising share of low-cost 
countries in euro area imports 
(values in euro; % of extra-EA imports)
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
High Cost
Total
Rest of World
NMS
China
1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005
Source: Eurostat Comext data and ECB staff calculations.
Note: Latest observation refers to 2005.
share of low-cost countries (%, lhs)
share of low-cost countries (%, lhs)
50
48
45
43
40
38
35
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
Source: Eurostat, ECB staff calculations
Note: Latest observation refers to Q4 2006. Low-cost countries 
consists of 15 countries and regions (including ASEAN, NMS, CIS,
China, India, etc). 
    BIS Review 21/2008 
 13
Table 1
Impact of low-cost countries on 
extra-EA manuf. import prices
Decomposition of low-cost effect
(annual average 1996-2004, percentage points unless 
otherwise indicated)
Low-cost effect (aggregate 
direct effect)
-2.1
Share effect
Of which:
China
NMS
Rest of low-cost
Price effect
Of which:
China
NMS
Rest of low-cost
Sources: ECB staff calculations.
-1.6
-0.5
-0.8
-0.7
0.0
-0.2
-0.2
-0.1
Note: “Share effect” captures the impact of rising import share and 
relatively low price level of low cost import suppliers (1.6 pp per 
annum); “price effect” captures impact of relatively lower import 
price inflation of low cost countries (0.5 pp per annum).
Chart 5
Extra-euro area import and commodity prices
(indices: 2003M1=100, 3-month moving avg.)
210
190
170
150
130
110
90
70
2001
2002
Oil-Brent
Non-energy
commodities
Total imports
of goods
2003
2005
Sources: ECB, HWWA and Eurostat.
2004
Note: Last observation relates to dates from July 2007 to September 2007. All prices are in euro. 
Manufacturing
imports
2006
2007
  BIS Review 21/2008
  14 
 Sizeable relative price movements lead to net
dampening effect of 0-0.3pp on euro area inflation 
Chart 6a:
Producer prices: Evolution of selected 
sub-indices relative to overall index
(Difference between annualised growth rate over 
1996-2006 in component relative to overall index, %)
last 5-10 years
Chart 6b:
Consumer prices: average price 
changes in euro area HICP 
subcomponents
(average annual change over 1996-2006, %)
10.0
Liquid fuels
Heat energy
Gas
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
-0.5
-1.0
-1.5
Consumer goods
excluding food
and tobacco
Capital goods
Energy
7.5
5.0
2.5
0.0
-2.5
-5.0
-7.5
-10.0
-12.5
-15.0
Overall HICP inflation over period = 1.9%
Photographic and cinematic equipment
Telephone and telefax equipment
Information processing equipment
Source: ECB calculations based on Eurostat data.
Source: ECB calculations based on Eurostat data.
Note: Data for 92 HICP subcomponents.
 Chart 7
Recent developments in extra-EA manuf. import prices 
by import supplier
(monthly data, unit value indices, 3MMA, Euro)
120
110
100
90
80
70
NMS
UK
Extra Euro 12
NAFTA
Japan
China
ASEAN
Nov-
0
6
Jan-
01
Nov-
01
Sep-
02
Jul-
03
May-
04
Mar-
05
Jan-
06
Sources: ECB, HWWA and Eurostat.
Note: Last observation relates to dates ranging from Nov. 2006 
to March 2007.
  BIS Review 21/2008 
 15
