Lim Hng Kiang: Impact of current issues to Asia’s growth and the global 
environment ahead 
Keynote  address  by  Mr  Lim  Hng  Kiang,  Deputy  Chairman  of  the  Monetary  Authority  of 
Singapore  and  Minister  for  Trade  and  Industry,  at  the  Merrill  Lynch  Asia  Rising  Stars 
Conference 2008, Singapore, 14 May 2008. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It gives me great pleasure to address this gathering of industry leaders and rising businesses 
in  Asia.  I  find  the  term  “Rising  Star”  a  very  apt  description  of  Asia.  It  reflects  the  rising 
importance as the region, and its companies, many of which are growing rapidly and looking 
towards  the  world.  The  Asian  story  has  taken  on  a  more  pan-regional  character  with  a 
vibrancy underpinned by strong growth in intra-Asian trade and investments. Indeed, there 
are many rising stars.  
Asia and its companies have featured strongly in an increasingly interconnected world. The 
globalization trend can be seen from many aspects – movement of products and services, 
capital  and  talent.  Through  these  links,  there  is  greater  access  to  global  markets  and 
resources.  At  the  same  time,  there  is  also  greater  interdependence  and  susceptibility  to 
contagion effect during crises. This presents a unique set of challenges and opportunities to 
Asia and its companies. 
This conference is a good opportunity to take stock of these challenges and opportunities. 
You will get to hear from many expert speakers on what holds for the rising Asian business 
and for the investors considering Asian opportunities. Let me share a few thoughts on some 
of  the  current  issues  which  have  a  bearing  on  Asia’s  growth  and  the  global  environment 
ahead. 
Rising global food prices 
The first, and perhaps most pressing issue that the world faces, is spiraling inflation. Global 
food prices have spiked in the recent months due to a confluence of factors. Demand has 
increased to feed a growing global population with a rapidly expanding middle class in the 
developing  Asian  countries.  This  demand  is  compounded  by  competing  uses  for  food 
sources to generate biofuel and feed. Meanwhile, sources of supply have been hit by rising 
energy  costs,  increased  competition  for  arable  land,  and  the  erratic  weather.  As  a  result, 
prices of many food commodities including wheat, corn, and rice, a staple for all Asians, have 
soared. 
The  United  Nations  has  declared  the  drastic  increase  in  food  prices  “an  unprecedented 
challenge of global proportions” and established a task force to tackle the food crisis. This is 
indeed a global issue and cannot be resolved overnight. Many of these factors are structural 
and will take time for the demand-supply equilibrium to be established.  
On  the  Asia  Pacific  front,  the  Asian  Development  Bank  has  recently  announced  US$500 
million of immediate budgetary support to help countries that have been worst hit by rising 
food prices. With increasing food prices and high oil prices, mitigating the impact of strong 
inflationary  pressures  will  remain  a  key  priority  for  many  Asian  governments.  In  such  an 
environment, companies too will have to carefully manage the higher input and other costs 
and  how  much  of  that  to  pass  on  to  consumers,  to  preserve  your  margins  without  losing 
either competitiveness or affordability. 
BIS Review 60/2008 
 1
Subprime crisis and Asia’s continued push to deepen capital markets 
The second issue is the turmoil in global financial markets. The transmission of the crisis is a 
good illustration of how inter-connected financial markets are today. The problem started with 
US  subprime  mortgages,  in  fact  a  relatively  small  part  of  the  US  mortgage  market,  but  it 
rapidly escalated into other securitized markets, to more generic debt capital instruments and 
eventually into the wholesale or LIBOR money markets. From there, as central bank surveys 
have shown, there is now a general tightening of lending conditions to end-borrowers, which 
are exerting a drag on the US and Western European economies. 
Asia has felt some of the tremors of this crisis, but as yet we have been relatively unscathed. 
In the banking sector, a number of banks in the region wrote off losses on their US sub-prime 
mortgage related assets. Compared to their peers in the US and Europe, the impact on their 
balance  sheets  and  profitability  has  been  less  severe.  This  can  be  attributed  to  a 
combination  of  factors.  Following  the  Asian  financial  crisis,  banks  here  had  taken  active 
steps to improve their credit standing by enhancing their capital base. We are also aided by 
the fact that we are more reliant on traditional banking rather than the capital markets for our 
debt financing.  
Beyond  the  direct  impact  on  banks,  the  general  reduction  in  risk  capital  and  financial  de-
leveraging will be felt in Asia, through higher costs of capital. This is the downside that many 
companies and  investors  will  have  to  confront. On  the  upside,  this  should  further spur  the 
efforts of Asian countries to make their own financial intermediation process more efficient. 
This can be done through a lowering of barriers to global capital and the building of channels 
to  facilitate  the  growth  of  this  capital.  Global  investors  will  increasingly  look  to  Asia  for 
investments  as  Asia  remains  an  attractive  area  for  growth  in  the  long  term.  On  the  other 
hand, Asian companies will continue to require funds as they extend their global footprint.  
In this regard, lessons from the subprime crisis are timely. As Asian capital markets evolve, 
investors and risk managers alike will need to understand the innovations and the products 
as they develop. I believe that some key issues in the securitization markets will also have to 
be  addressed,  such  as  in  origination  standards.  How  investor  confidence  is  restored  will 
shape the ability of companies to tap capital market solutions in the near future. 
US recession and Asia’s growth story 
Let me now turn to the third issue, which is the impact of the US recession on Asia. Faced 
with falling housing prices, and rising gas and food prices, consumer sentiment in the US has 
been  significantly  affected.  There  are  strong  links  between  US  consumption  and  Asian 
production  as  a  significant  proportion  of  Asian  exports  is  finally  consumed  in  the  US. 
However, there are different views on the extent to which Asia’s domestic consumption can 
cushion  the  decrease  in  US  demand.  This  is  something  which  you  may  hear  more  about, 
over the next few days, on the extent of divergence between Asia and the rest of the world.  
However, the Asian growth story remains strong. The region continues to be propelled by the 
twin engines of China and India. According to the IMF, China will continue to grow by 9.3% in 
2008  and  9.5%  in  2009,  a  slight  decline  from  its  double-digit  growth  rates  in  the  previous 
years, but strong growth nonetheless. Beyond Asia, we have also seen a steady increase in 
exports from Asia to non-traditional markets such as Latin America, Eastern Europe, Russia 
and the Middle East. 
In  terms  of  trade  links,  Asian  countries  have  to  forge  closer  ties  with  each  other  and  with 
other non-Asian countries. The recent signing of the ASEAN-Japan FTA and the signing of 
the  ASEAN-Korea  FTA  Trade  in  Services  Agreement  last  year,  both  represent  a  steady 
move  towards  greater  economic  integration  within  Asia.  In  this  respect,  Singapore  is  well 
placed to leverage on our extensive network of FTAs. Asian businesses keen on expanding 
beyond their home markets should capitalize on these links to extend their market reach. 
2 
 BIS Review 60/2008
Climate change and environmental sustainability 
Another longer term issue that the world has to deal with is climate change. This is a topic of 
increasing  importance  and  it  is  timely  that  Merrill  Lynch  has  introduced  the  environmental 
theme  in  this  year’s  conference.  Many  countries  have  come  to  realize  that  economic 
development without taking into account the environmental cost presents a classic case of 
the  Tragedy  of  the  Commons.  Problems  caused  by  climate  change  and  global  warming 
affect all of us.  
As  a  country  lacking  in  natural  resources,  Singapore  sees  a  critical  need  to  promote 
sustainable  development.  Singapore’s  National  Research  Foundation  has  dedicated 
significant resources to facilitate research efforts and encourage commercial spin-offs. R&D 
initiatives have been complemented by both domestic and foreign investment in the areas of 
sustainable water and solar energy projects. Some of you would have read about Renewable 
Energy  Corp  from  Norway,  which  is  building  a  Euro  3  billion  plant  in  Singapore  for  the 
manufacturing of solar modules. By 2010, NEWater, our very own water recycling industry, 
will be able to meet 30% of Singapore’s water demand.  
Singapore  has  also  adopted  a  model  to  promote  sustainable  urban  design  for  housing 
development,  environmental  management  and  transportation.  For  example,  Singapore  is 
working with China on a project to help develop environmentally friendly townships via the 
Singapore-Tianjin Eco-city project.  
Access  to  funding  for  such  projects  is  the  key  to  the  success  of  developing  a  sustainable 
model of urbanization and production of renewable energy. In this respect, I am pleased to 
note that Singapore capital markets has already facilitated the funding of projects such as 
Hyflux water treatment plants in China via a SGX listed business trust IPO completed last 
year. 
Underlying  all 
for 
environmentally  sustainable  solutions.  The  promise  of  such  solutions,  besides  in  offering 
economic opportunities, lie in their potential to address the rising challenges of urbanization, 
increasing  energy  prices  and  shortage  of  clean  water.  Asian  businesses  should  position 
themselves  for  the  gradual  shift  towards  greener  living  as  such  technologies  are  not  only 
socially acceptable, but also socially demanded.  
the  potential  demand 
just  mentioned 
initiatives 
I  have 
the 
is 
Corporate governance 
Before I conclude, let me share one final thought. Asian SMEs, in their bid to become top 
Asian  and  global  companies,  should  devote  attention  to  corporate  governance.  A  sound 
corporate  governance  structure  will  help  to  ensure  proper  management  practices,  robust 
internal processes, and prudent controls. In the long term, these practices will help foster a 
strong reputation and increase the franchise value of the company, paving the way for Asian 
SMEs to expand into global markets. Indeed, global competition will require companies to be 
held to such high standards, especially those demanded by institutional shareholders. 
Closing 
To  sum  up,  Asia  and  Asian  businesses  are  poised  for  exciting  times  in  an  era  of  rising 
prosperity  and  growth.  There  will  be  both  challenges  and  opportunities.  One  need  not  be 
daunted by the challenges. However, there is a need to manage and mitigate the risks that 
come  with  the  opportunities.  Underlying  these  challenges  is  the  fact  that  the  world  is 
becoming more interconnected and interdependent. Conferences such as today’s forum will 
present useful meeting grounds to exchange information, establish new networks and to lay 
the foundations for regional cooperation and mutual learning.  
On this note, I wish you a successful conference. Thank you. 
BIS Review 60/2008 
 3
