Emmanuel Tumusiime-Mutebile: Bank of Uganda’s 5-Year Financial 
Markets Development Plan 
Speech  by  Prof.  Emmanuel  Tumusiime-Mutebile,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Uganda,  at  the 
launch of the 5-Year Financial Markets Development Plan, Kampala, 9 September 2008.  
 Your Excellencies, Honourable Members of Parliament, CEOs, Invited Guests, Ladies and 
Gentlemen, I would like to thank you for honouring my invitation to attend the launch of the 5-
Year Financial Markets Development Plan. The decision to prepare this Plan was made in 
2005 at a meeting of the Monetary Affairs Committee (MAC) of the East African Community, 
which at that time consisted of the three Central bank Governors of the Bank of Uganda, the 
Bank of Tanzania and the Central Bank of Kenya. I am glad to add that the MAC has since 
been expanded to include the Governors of the Central Banks of Rwanda and Burundi, after 
their countries became members of the East African Community in 2007.  
The process of developing the 5-Year Financial Markets Development Plan took some time, 
as the Central Banks had to come up with a harmonised common planning framework with 
the  active  participation  of  the  various  stakeholders  in  the  financial  sector  in  all  the  five 
countries.  Therefore,  this  plan  has  been  developed  through  an  extensive  consultative 
process involving stakeholders in Uganda and the rest of the East African Region.  
At the 2005 MAC meeting, it was noted that the Governments of the East African countries 
had made significant progress in promoting the development of financial sector, in areas of 
regulation and supervision; monetary and fiscal policies; infrastructure development such as 
payments and settlement systems, and trading platforms. The above efforts were aimed at 
fostering price stability and sound and competitive financial systems.  
While  macroeconomic  stability  had  been  achieved,  deepening  the  financial  sector  and 
increasing  the  efficiency  in  the  financial  markets  remained  a  challenge.  To  address  these 
deficiencies, the MAC decided to adopt a strategy of formulating a comprehensive five-year 
Financial Markets Development Plan for East Africa.  
To spearhead the development of the Plan in Uganda, the Bank of Uganda established the 
Financial Markets Development Committee (FMDC) and its dedicated Secretariat, and Sub-
committees comprising various stakeholders from the financial sector. I would like to thank 
the  members  of  these  committees  for  a  job  well  done.  Without  their  commitment  and 
dedication,  we  would  not  be  here  to  launch  this  framework  that  is  mapping  out  a  grand 
programme for transformation of financial markets in Uganda. I would also like to thank our 
development  partners,  GTZ/Sida,  for  their  assistance  in  the  process  of  formulating  the  5-
Year  Financial  Markets  Development  Plan,  as  well  as  the  consultants  who  facilitated  the 
process.  
The  major  goals  that  the  Plan  will  seek  to  achieve  are;  harmonisation  of  regulatory 
frameworks  in  the  financial  sector,  infrastructure  development,  increase  in  investor  base, 
deepening the financial market, capacity building, supporting regional integration, promotion 
of cost effective financial intermediation and promoting market information dissemination.  
The specific areas of emphasis will include; to bring the unregulated market participants into 
the regulatory ambit. This will involve reforms in legal and regulatory frameworks as well as 
liberalisation  of  the  pension  sector,  to  foster  competitive,  long  term  financing.  Another 
challenging  area  that  the  Plan  is  expected  to  address  is  extending  financial  infrastructure 
beyond  the  urban  areas,  so  that  the  rural  areas  can  also  enjoy  the  benefits  that  financial 
markets  offer.  Extending  financial  outreach  will  be  enhanced  by  the  introduction  of  new 
institutions, products,  services  and  payment  systems  in  the  rural  areas,  to  ensure  that  the 
rural population is enabled to save and to participate in investments in the financial markets. 
BIS Review 114/2008 
 1
The Bank of Uganda is already contributing to this effort by licensing new banks, in order to 
introduce greater competition, with the hope that this will encourage the banks to extend their 
presence to the unbanked rural areas. I expect many other non-banking financial institutions 
such as insurance companies, microfinance institutions, securities exchange, etc. to follow 
suit. Government will also be encouraged to divest its interests in the remaining parastatals 
in  which  it  maintains  ownership  through  public  offerings  in  the  stock  exchange  in  order  to 
widen the ownership of these institutions to the majority of Ugandans.  
The other crucial aspect which the 5-Year Financial Markets Development Plan is expected 
to  address,  is  financial  literacy.  It  will  be  difficult  to  see  through  the  various  initiatives 
proposed in this Plan, if the population remains financially illiterate. The FMDC, through its 
sub-committees, is expected to educate and sensitise the public about the various financial 
markets  programmes,  in  order  to  make  the  Ugandan  financial  market  vibrant,  so  that 
Ugandans can benefit from regional and global integration.  
In  order  to  realise  the  objective  of  transforming  and  modernising  the  Ugandan  financial 
markets, I urge the FMDC and its subcommittees to rededicate and commit themselves to 
the achievement of the objectives enshrined in this Plan. I realise that what lies ahead of us 
is no mean task, however, since we have already taken a positive step in the right direction, 
what remains to be done is to mobilise the support of all the stakeholders for the successful 
implementation  of  this  programme.  I  am  confident  that  this  Public  Private  Partnership 
approach that we have adopted for developing our financial markets will bear fruit.  
The  5-Year  Financial  Markets  Development  Plan  brings  in  a  well  coordinated  approach 
towards  developing  the  financial  markets  in  Uganda.  This  is  devoid  of  the  fragmented 
approaches of the past. This programme will ensure that efforts are not be duplicated, hence, 
avoiding  wastage  of  both  financial  and  human  resources.  The  financing  arrangements  are 
progressing  very  well,  with  prospects  from  the  World  Bank  and  GTZ/Sida  being  the  most 
promising. Some of the activities such as designing and development of new products and 
services shall also be funded by the implementing institutions themselves.  
I  believe  that  we  are  firmly  on  course  towards  bringing  the  desired  changes  in  the 
transformation of financial markets in Uganda. I request all of you to take up the challenge 
and play your part.  
I hereby launch the 5-Year Financial Markets Development Plan. 
2 
 BIS Review 114/2008
