Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Pushing ahead through headwinds 
Speech  by  Mr  Amando  M  Tetangco,  Jr,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  the  Philippines 
(Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas),  at  the  regular  membership  meeting  of  the  Rotary  Club  of 
Manila, Manila, 3 January 2008. 
 Distinguished  officers  and  members  of  the  Rotary  Club  of  Manila  led  by  your  President 
Benny Laguesma, my colleagues from the Bangko Sentral led by Monetary Board Member 
Raul Boncan, friends from the media, ladies and gentlemen, good afternoon. 
Thank  you  for  this  opportunity  to  address  your group  on  your  first  Membership  Meeting  in 
2008. I know it is customary, having just moved into a new year, to begin a speech like this 
by  looking  back  at  the  year  past  and  taking  stock  of  the  positive  outcomes  that  we  had 
achieved. But for today’s remarks, I thought I would begin by considering instead the year 
ahead and anticipating the challenges we face amidst the uncertainty in the global arena. I 
liken  this  beginning  to  how  one  would  probably  wish  to  commence  a  round  of  golf  on  a 
course one has never played before. (I hope you would pardon my reference to golf. But I 
know  many  here  share  my  passion  for  the  game.)  “Know  your  course.  What  hazards  are 
around  the  corner?  At  midday,  in  which  direction  does  the  wind  blow?  etc,  etc.  In  other 
words, let’s first consider the “lay of the land” ahead of us. 
Then, after a quick review of these challenges, which I see to be manageable, let me put 
forward  reasons  why  I  believe  the  Philippine  economy  would  be  able  to  ride  out  the 
headwinds  that  threaten  to  confront  us  and  the  steps  we  have  taken  and  intend  to  take 
toward this end. 
Challenges 
Since the third quarter of last year, a good deal of attention has been focused on the turmoil 
in  the  financial  markets  in  the  US  and  Europe  and  the  sudden  plunge  in  credit  market 
confidence  triggered  by  the  US  sub-prime  mortgage  crisis.  Since  then  portions  of  the 
underlying forces at work have been revealed – the complex nature of derivatives used, the 
high degree of leveraging on poor (or even absent) collateral, the underestimation of risk that 
had been prevalent in the financial markets and the surprisingly sizeable exposures of large 
financial  institutions  to  some  of  the  debt  instruments  and  derivatives  in  question  such  as 
CDOs. Much, however, still needs to be uncovered for the general public to appreciate the 
full import of these recent events.  
What  has  been  evident  so  far,  however,  is  that  this  crisis  has  been  more  financial  than 
macroeconomic in character and effect. Let me illustrate. In the US, despite all the concern 
with the subprime woes, the real GDP growth in 2007 looks to be 2.6%, the same as in 2006. 
In Asia (ex India and China), the region is expected to grow at 5.9 % in 2007 compared to 
5.7%  in  2006.  And  in  the  Philippines,  as  you  know,  we  are  expecting  2007  full  year  GDP 
growth to be around 7 percent, our highest rate in three decades. The financial impact of the 
crisis,  on  the  other  hand,  has  been  increased  volatilities  in  ALL  the  equity  markets  and 
spread widening ACROSS credit markets. 
Nonetheless,  more  market  analysts  now  believe  that  the  risks  are  tilted  to  an  outcome  in 
2008,  particularly  in  the  US,  wherein  the  financial  market  volatilities  would  begin  to  more 
noticeably filter through to the non-financial portion and non-housing portion of the economy. 
As the real  sector becomes affected, this is an event that  could prove to be critical to the 
Asian  growth  story.  The  region  has  become  less  dependent  on  the  US,  but  it  is  still  not 
immune to a US slowdown. Clearly, intra-Asian trade has grown, but most of the growth in 
BIS Review 2/2008 
 1
intra-Asian  trade  has  been  an  increase  in  trade  with  China  and  India,  a  portion  of  whose 
imports from the region are also re-exported to the US.  
The success of the US, and the other major economies, in avoiding a prolonged economic 
slowdown  therefore  becomes  of  particular  importance  to  Asia.  The  concern  goes  beyond 
merely  whether  the  major  economies  succeed  in  containing  the  slowdown,  but  also  the 
speed  and  manner  in  which  this  is  accomplished  –  whether  this  is  done  through  market 
prices  or  through  structural  reforms.  Which  instruments  are  chosen  could,  in  turn,  impact 
whether there would be an orderly adjustment in capital flows and exchange rate movements 
as  well  as  the  behavior  of  asset  and  equity  prices.  As  you  must  be  aware,  the  region, 
including the Philippines, has been grappling with the impact on exchange and interest rates 
of the tipping of liquidity into our region. In the Philippines, the BSP had to put in place our 
own policy package (that includes the build up of reserves, prepayment of external debt and 
the liberalization of the foreign exchange system) to contain the impact on the peso of the 
strong foreign exchange inflows into the country. 
A  further  challenge  from  the  global  front  is  the  elevated  price  of  oil  and  other  non-oil 
commodities. Several market analysts share the belief that inflation this year would be higher 
than  in  2007,  primarily  because  of  volatilities  in  global  commodity  prices  due  to  supply 
constraints.  
Impact on the Philippine economy 
The unraveling of the impact of subprime on financial markets, the growing prospect for a 
slowdown in the US and other major economies, the uncertainty of how monetary authorities 
will react to arrest the economic slowdown, volatilities in oil and commodity prices. These are 
just a few of the potential challenges that could determine the complexion of macroeconomic 
policies in the Philippines this year. The manner by which we will calibrate our response to 
these challenges will define how much the economy will grow, how much we will be able to 
limit inflation and up to what extent we can maintain the stability of our financial markets. Are 
we up to these tasks? I certainly believe we are.  
For  two  reasons.  First,  while  the  challenges  appear  staggering  and  mainly  beyond  our 
control, the Philippines is in the best macroeconomic shape it has been in two decades as a 
result  of  the  significant  structural  and  policy  reforms  undertaken  over  the  recent  years, 
making it more resilient in the face of global challenges. 
Inflation has been on a trend decline, with average headline inflation for the first 11 months of 
2007 at 2.7%, way below last year’s 6.2% as well as the target of 4-5%. The external position 
is in substantial surplus of around $8.5 billion, more than double last year’s level, due mainly 
from  the  continued  strength  of  the  current  account.  The  GIR,  at  an  all-time  high  of  $32.7 
billion,  remains  adequate  and  within  internationally  accepted  benchmarks.  The  peso, 
supported  by  the  strong  external  position,  has  been  one  of  the  top  performing  Asian 
currencies. The banking sector in the meantime continues to improve as evidenced by near 
pre-crisis  NPL  and  NPA  ratios,  double-digit  growth  in  assets  and  profitability,  and  capital 
adequacies  way  above  the  international  standards,  even  after  we  implemented  Basel  II  in 
July last year.  
Economic outlook 
Is the recent performance a short-term phenomenon? Is the country’s reduced vulnerability a 
passing episode? I don’t believe so. Our model on the Philippine business cycle shows that 
the  downward  phase  of  the  country’s  business  cycle  reached  its  turning  point  in  the  last 
quarter of 2006. Thus, we are now in the continuing upward phase of the business cycle, as 
validated  by  the  strong  growth  of  the  economy  posted  in  the  first  three  quarters  of  2007. 
Moving forward and barring any unforeseen risks, economic growth is expected to continue. 
2 
 BIS Review 2/2008
This will be driven by the combined acceleration of the industry and services sectors on the 
production  side  and  consumption  and  investments,  both  private  and  government,  on  the 
expenditure side.  
Average inflation was below the target of 4-5 percent in 2007, is projected to fall within the 4 
percent ± 1 percentage point target for 2008 and within the 3.5 percent ± 1 percentage point 
target  for  2009.  This  benign  inflation  outlook  would  in  turn  allow  us  to  maintain  an 
environment  of  low  interest  rates.  The  external  payments  position  is  seen  to  remain  as  a 
source  of  strength  for  the  economy  over  the  near  term.  Dollar  inflows  particularly  from 
remittances  and  foreign  investments  are  likely  to  remain  robust.  This  should  enable  us  to 
further build up our cushion of international reserves, and continue to provide support to the 
peso.  
We  also  envision  a  more  resilient  and  profitable  banking  system  as  banks  improve  their 
ability to anticipate and manage risks, perform their functions of intermediating funds to the 
broadest set of users, and providing alternative investment vehicles to savers. 
Policy directions 
This brings me to the second reason why I am convinced we are up to the task – Ladies and 
gentlemen, we are focused on our reform agenda. The BSP’s main policy thrusts in 2008 will 
involve  nurturing  a  resilient  economy  by  ensuring  that  this  is  anchored  on  sound 
macroeconomic  fundamentals  and  building  a  strong  financial  system  that  is  flexible  in  the 
face of growing global integration and innovation.  
Managing risks to inflation and inflation expectations will remain the key policy priority of the 
BSP. In this regard, the BSP will maintain an appropriately prudent monetary policy stance 
supportive  of  non-inflationary  growth.  This  will  require  relentless  environmental  scanning, 
continuous  surveillance  of  key  macroeconomic  variables  and  regular  sharpening  of  our 
inflation forecasting models. 
On  the  external  front,  our  policies  will  be  geared  toward:  (1)  ensuring  sustainability  of  the 
country’s external debt, (2) maintaining a market-determined exchange rate, with scope for 
occasional  official  action  in  cases  of  sharp  movements  in  the  peso,  and  (3)  maintaining  a 
comfortable level of reserves as market opportunities will allow. 
Reforms in the financial sector will be aimed at maintaining a strong banking system and a 
vibrant capital market, with the support of other government agencies and the private sector. 
This should help spur credit and investments, and contribute in providing the basis for a more 
sustainable  economic  activity  in  the  medium  term.  I  am  confident  that  when  the  National 
Government  goes  full  swing  into  the  implementation  of  its  “Ready  to  Go”  infrastructure 
projects, the banks would be at the center of that endeavor.  
We will also continue to push for the passage of key legislations intended to develop a deep 
and  efficient  capital  market,  including  the  Credit  Information  Systems  Act.  This  will  make 
credit more accessible to a broader set of users and ensure a more efficient mobilization of 
resources. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  the  biggest  challenge  before  us  is  to  sustain  the  country’s  strong 
economic performance. And we will be able to do this by continuing to focus on our reform 
agenda, while at the same time ensuring that this agenda remains relevant in the face of the 
changing global landscape.  
We  are  aware  that  headwinds  from  the  uncertainties  in  how  the  global  financial  market 
volatilities would unravel still remain. To help contain these, the Monetary Board approved, 
just  last  month,  two  important  reform  packages.  First,  the  second  phase  of  reforms  in  the 
foreign  exchange  regulatory  framework,  aimed  at  promoting  greater  integration  with 
international  capital  markets  and  enhancing  risk  diversification  in  support  of  an  expanding 
economy with global linkages. The idea is to ensure that both corporates and individuals are 
BIS Review 2/2008 
 3
given more latitude in accessing foreign exchange and expanding their portfolio of options. 
By making the FX environment more open, some of the pressure on the exchange rate could 
also be alleviated. 
The other set of reforms approved by the Board covers the amendments to BSP regulations 
governing  derivative  activities  of  banks  and  trust  entities,  including  the  guidelines  on  risk 
management  and  sale  and  marketing  of  derivatives.  The  amendments  seek  to  provide  a 
framework  whereby  banks  could  expand  opportunities  for  financial  risk  management  and 
investment diversification through the prudent use of derivates. It would also help promote 
growth in the domestic capital market by expanding the range of available derivatives which 
a bank can originate, distribute or use, without need for prior BSP approval.  
Both these reform packages are intended to help make the domestic market more able to 
quickly adapt to any further changes in the global financial markets.  
Concluding remarks 
In closing, our experience in the past year has demonstrated that sound monetary and fiscal 
policies,  complemented  by  key  structural  reforms,  have  a  salutary  effect  on  the  economy. 
Today, the Philippine economy stands on solid fundamentals that have been strengthened in 
recent years. These will serve us well in withstanding the “pockets of vulnerability” coming 
from the global financial markets. 
The key challenge will be to lock in the recent gains while steering the economy in riding out 
the current uncertainties, and then moving on to a higher and more sustainable growth path. 
The commitment to fiscal prudence and appropriate monetary policies and the intention to 
tackle  policy  challenges  boldly  through  purposeful  reforms  should  ensure  that  this  path  is 
sustained. This we hope to eventually translate to a reduction in poverty and improvement in 
the living standards of our people. 
I began these remarks by saying that a good strategy in playing a golf course for the first 
time is to know the “lay of the land”. But information about it is not sufficient to ensure that 
you win the game. To secure victory, you must play well. Nay, you  must play consistently 
and  hopefully,  better  than  others.  All  winners  know  that  to  have  a  consistently  good  golf 
swing, there are two important things to remember – 1. keep your eye on the ball, and, 2. 
follow through. Don’t lose sight of your objective and make sure you execute a good follow 
through  to  deliver  a  successful  outcome.  Do  this  throughout  the  game  and  you  could 
guaranty a victory (or at least a pleasing outcome).  
2006 was a good year, 2007 was an even better year. What do we foresee in 2008? I predict 
that we will continue to push ahead, despite significant headwinds. We have shored up an 
ample buffer in terms of our sound macro fundamentals and stable banking system that we 
are now more resilient and able to meet challenges.  
In the last few minutes, I hope I have been able to show you our roadmap for the new year 
and into the medium term. We hope to ride out this route together with you, confident that 
with solid economic fundamentals, we will prevail in our journey to a higher ground. 
Thank you and good day. 
4 
 BIS Review 2/2008
