Rick Houenipwela: Credit unions – legal & compliance  
Opening  address  by  Mr  Rick  Houenipwela,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Solomon 
Islands, at the Credit Unions Legal & Compliance Workshop, Honiara, 16-17 April 2008. 
 Introduction 
Salutations: 
Presidents, Managers, Board & Committee members of respective credit Unions; 
General Manager of SICUL; 
Media Representatives; 
Ladies and Gentlemen: 
I am pleased to welcome you all this morning to mark the opening of your workshop on the 
topic “Credit Unions: Legal & Compliance” that you will cover in the next two days. 
This  is  the  second  workshop  that  CBSI  and  the  Office  of  Registrar  of  Credit  Unions  have 
conducted in the past 12 months for credit unions that are members of the Solomon Islands 
Credit Union League. The first was held for the Board of directors and management of the 
Central  Malaita  Credit  Union  Limited  in  September  2007,  on  the  topic:  “Strategic  Planning 
and  Loan  Delinquency  Control.”  This  is  yet  another  example  to  demonstrate  the  Central 
Bank’s long term commitment to support the development of credit unions in our country. 
Let me now turn to the subject of this morning’s topic, which you will be covering in the next 
two days. In emphasizing the importance of this workshop, I would like to make three points. 
Legal compliance 
First, I want to stress that it is vital for credit unions to comply with the legal requirements in 
their operations. It is important for you as a Board or a member of the management team to 
understand that your credit union is set up under a legal framework. That legal framework 
requires you to conduct and manage your business in accordance with the provisions of the 
Credit Union Act and its Standard By-laws and Regulations. While some credit unions are 
trying to comply, it is sad to note that non-compliance is still a wide spread problem in many 
credit unions. Some examples of areas for compliance include submission of timely audited 
financial  statements  and  reports,  holding  of  annual  general  meetings,  proper  election  of 
officer bearers and paying your dues to the Solomon Islands Credit Union League (SICUL). I 
hope  as  a  result  of  this  workshop,  we  will  see  more  effective  compliance  with  the  legal 
requirements under the Credit Unions Act 1986. 
Role of credit union in the development the financial system 
I turn to my second point: where do credit unions fit in the financial system and what is their 
role in the development of the financial system? Let me reiterate that the CBSI takes the role 
the credit unions play in the financial system as very vital. While they remain pivotal to the 
informal financial sector, credit unions play a very vital link with the formal banking sector, not 
to  mention  the  important  place  they  have  in  promoting  and  encouraging  development  of 
financial  services  in  this  country.  Under  the  legal  framework  however,  credit  unions  are 
privately owned institutions, which are managed by a board and management, appointed by 
the members. That being the case, the Central Bank does not interfere with the way credit 
unions  manage  their  businesses.  CBSI  however,  subscribes  to  the  philosophy  behind  the 
credit unions movement: that members working in cooperative spirit to encourage the habit 
of savings and educating them in the wise use of credit. The more educated credit unions 
BIS Review 48/2008 
 1
members in the management of their money, the better it is for the financial sector and the 
economy. To this end CBSI has provided substantial support to the credit union movement 
over  the  years  through  the  Credit  Union  League.  CBSI  would  like to see  a  strong  League 
office which is able to deliver services as expected under the Credit Union Act to its member 
credit unions. CBSI support would continue but at the same time the Bank believes that it is 
now  time  to  promote  and  encourage  other  alternative  and  inclusive  ways  of  delivering 
financial services to the majority of the Solomon Islands population. 
Putting value on information 
Finally  I  would  like  to  stress  the  importance  of  this  workshop.  During  the  next  few  days 
valuable information and ideas will be imparted to you. This workshop will only be useful if 
what  you  learn  from  it  is  put  into  practice.  No  doubt  you  will  agree  that  information  is  not 
cheap and instructions to better manage and run your credit unions can be very expensive, if 
these are not put to practice. I sincerely hope that you will do the right thing to ensure your 
credit  unions  are  better  managed  for  the  greater  good  of  your  members  and  financial 
services development as a whole. 
In conclusion, let me take this opportunity to thank you all for the commitment and effort you 
have  shown  to  attend  this  workshop.  I  am  sure  the  next  two  days  will  prove  useful  in 
strengthening your credit unions compliance with the Credit Union Act. 
Thank you for listening. 
2 
 BIS Review 48/2008
