 Linah K Mohohlo: Promoting competitive, cost-effective banking in 
Botswana 
Keynote speech by Ms Linah K Mohohlo, Governor of the Bank of Botswana, at the official 
launch of Capital Bank Lilmited GICC, Gaborone, 28 May 2008. 
 I am most grateful to the Board and Management of Capital Bank for inviting me to be the 
guest speaker on the occasion of the launching of their bank in Botswana. Let me begin by 
recognising the presence of the Governor of the Reserve Bank of Malawi, Mr Victor Mbewe, 
who has timed his visit to Botswana to coincide with the official opening of Capital Bank. His 
welcome presence this evening is testimony to the regulatory and supervisory collaboration 
between  the  two  sister  central  banks;  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Malawi  and  the  Bank  of 
Botswana. 
Capital Bank Limited (Capital Bank) is a subsidiary of First Merchant Bank of Malawi, and 
was granted a commercial banking licence by the Bank of Botswana in December last year. 
At the time of licensing First Merchant Bank (FMB), which is headquartered and operating 
mainly in Malawi owned 51 percent of the shares of Capital Bank. The remaining 49 percent 
of the shares are held by citizens of Botswana, Kenya and the United Kingdom. One of the 
attractions of the bank’s application for a banking licence was the parent bank’s proven track 
record and strength in financing small and medium scale enterprises (SMEs). As you know 
SMEs  play  a  major  role  in  contributing  to  sustainable  economic  growth  and  poverty 
reduction. Therefore, access to credit is crucial for their survival. Based on the performance 
of the parent bank in Malawi, it is my hope that Capital Bank will leverage on its experience 
and infrastructure in servicing this niche market in Botswana, and in so doing, contribute to 
sustainable economic growth and job creation. 
I am further encouraged to learn that Capital Bank has expressed commitment to offer good 
quality  service,  accompanied  by  positive  real  interest  rates  on  savings  and  competitively 
priced  banking  products.  This  suggests  that  the  bank  is  fully  aware  that  it  will  grow  its 
business  and  prosper  only  when  customers  receive  the  standard  and  quality  of  service  to 
which they are entitled. 
Master of Ceremonies: 
Capital Bank establishes its presence in Botswana at a time when competition in the banking 
sector  is  intensifying.  You  will  recall  that  in  2006,  the  market  witnessed  the  entrance  of  a 
regional bank; and hot on the heels of that bank, Capital Bank has come to being; this brings 
the  number  of  commercial  banks  operating  in  our  country  to  seven.  This  is  a  welcome 
development for the Botswana banking sector and the wider financial industry. 
I would, therefore, like to take this opportunity to implore Capital Bank to immediately make 
its  presence  felt  in  the  domestic  market  and  contribute  positively  to  the  promotion  of  a 
competitive, soundly-based and growing financial sector. 
As we are all aware, a major development challenge for many countries in our region is the 
need to increase the availability and access to high quality banking facilities and services at 
affordable cost to both businesses and households. 
Not so long ago, a survey sponsored by a consultancy on financial sector issues, Finmark 
Trust, found that almost 57 percent of the population in Botswana do not have access to any 
form of banking. In addition, the branch network, marketing and other banking services were 
found to be highly concentrated in urban and semi-urban areas. The survey also found that 
the criteria and the initial deposit required for opening a bank account were restrictive. As a 
result, large segments of the population could not gain access to financial services. 
BIS Review 97/2008 
 1
 The  Bank  of  Botswana  had  also  obtained  credible  evidence  that  the  reasons  for  this 
undesirable state of affairs included very high transaction costs arising from, among others, 
high bank account maintenance fees and multiple bank changes, which were regrettably not 
matched by the quality of service. 
My  appeal  is  made  against  the  background  of  a  public  outcry  with  regard  to  the  cost  and 
quality  of  financial  intermediation,  as  well  as  public  perceptions  of  a  lack  of  transparency, 
particularly in respect of bank charges. Commercial banks continue to be regarded as not 
operating in conformity with their pledge to serve and deliver world-class service and satisfy 
market needs. Overall, the banking industry is still considered to be solely profit-oriented, and 
interested only in high returns and not in offering high quality service. 
These findings suggest that it is imperative for all players in the financial services industry to 
turn the right corner and embrace a more “financial inclusive” approach in reaching out to the 
unbanked members of society. 
It  is  no  secret  that  the  high  cost  of  banking  services  retard  efforts  to  encourage  financial 
saving and discourage full use of the banking facilities, at a time when banking is no longer a 
luxury  but  a  need.  While  it  is  appreciated  that  the  cost  of  providing  banking  facilities  and 
infrastructure in a vast but sparsely populated country such as Botswana can be significant, it 
is important that the level of banking charges should be seen to be commensurate with the 
quality of banking services. 
The  Bank  of  Botswana  has  continued  to  engage  in  a  healthy  dialogue  with  all  interested 
parties on the matter. While a lot remains to be done, the Bank of Botswana is encouraged 
by the progress made towards making banking more cost effective. 
I  realise,  however,  that  it  is  important  to  strike  an  appropriate  balance  between  bank 
profitability, on the one hand, and the provision of top-class banking services to all sectors of 
the  community,  on  the  other  hand.  Indeed  the  discernible  progress  is  exemplified  by  the 
many banking halls which have been revamped to look modern and a lot more welcoming to 
customers. Furthermore, the products on offer are increasingly diversified and responsive to 
the needs of the public and wider economy. The volume of business has also increased, as 
indicated by the growth of total banking assets, deposit liabilities, loans and other forms of 
credit,  particularly  in  the  last  five  years.  It  is  expected  that  the  entry  of  Capital  Bank  will 
further boost these and other performance ratios. 
In Botswana, we take pride in a sound, profitable and solvent banking system which ranks 
among  the  best  in  the  continent.  Even  third  party  observers  have  attested  to  the  fact  that 
Botswana  has  a  highly  profitable  banking  sector  which  operates  in  a  solvent,  soundly 
managed  but  not  overregulated  financial  system.  We  must  build  on  this  foundation  in  all 
facets of our business and aim at providing excellent service at all times. 
We  must  also  instil  a  positive  attitude  in  our  staff  and  create  an  enabling  environment  for 
international  exposure  so  that  staff  can  be  in  a  position  to  meet  modern  day  customer 
expectations with confidence. 
As  I  have  intimated  to  the  Chief  Executive  Officers  of  banks,  the  realisation  of  lofty  ideals 
such as competence, efficiency and effectiveness depends on the quality of staff. This can 
be achieved through a lot more staff training and exposure than has been the case so far. In 
this regard, it is my belief that the concern expressed by observers about shortage, if not, 
absence of skills in banking and finance and related disciplines is, to some extent, of our own 
making. It appears that somehow there is a mistaken belief that it is the Government’s and/or 
Bank  of  Botswana’s  responsibilities  to  train  staff  for  the  banking  and/or  financial  sectors. 
Even  if  that  were  the  case,  what  about  on-the-job  training!  Surely,  it  is  the  employers’ 
responsibility. 
I  have  no  doubt  Capital  Bank  will  find  that  the  issue  of  training,  about  which  I  feel  very 
strongly,  is  debated  at  for  a  such  as  the  Bankers  Association  of  Botswana,  the  Botswana 
Institute  of  Bankers,  Financial  Markets  Committee,  National  Payments  Committee  and  the 
2 
 BIS Review 97/2008
 Banking Committee. I am confident that the Managing Director of Capital Bank will make a 
meaningful  contribution  to  the  deliberations  on  this  and  other  issues  as  he  engages  in 
industry-wide consultations, collaboration and information sharing with his counterparts. 
You  are  rest  assured  of  support  from  the  Bank  of  Botswana  through  the  existing enabling 
regulatory  and  supervisory  framework,  within  the  context  of  strict  adherence  to  prudential 
norms that are in line with best international practice of governance. 
On a related matter, I want to believe that Capital Bank’s local Board of Directors will have 
corporate  responsibilities  that  include  ability  to  make  independent  judgements  in  adjusting 
business strategies and operations in line with local market conditions. While a parent bank 
has  the  responsibility  to  make  major  policy  decisions  affecting  the  group,  it  is  crucial  that, 
within this hierarchical structure, important decisions relating to the day-to-day operations of 
a subsidiary banks are made in the host country, and not referred on a regular basis to either 
regional  or  head  offices  abroad.  Otherwise  there  is  a  risk  of  undermining  and  weakening 
local management as they will be denied the opportunity to make decisions on the operation 
of the local business. 
The fact is that staff will not realise their potential unless there is an enabling environment for 
them to discharge their responsibilities. Some, if not all, of your staff are skilled individuals, 
and  I  know  that  I  am  speaking  to  the  converted,  when  I  say  that  successful  companies 
revolve around their people, so long as they are equipped with the requisite ability and room 
to perform. From this perspective, you are encouraged to identify the best of our citizen staff 
for  key  positions  in  your  staff  complement,  obviously  not  at  the  expense  of  competence, 
efficiency and effectiveness. 
Last, but not least, I want to believe that customer service will be extended courteously. The 
staff  of  Capital  Bank  should  live  up  to  the  Setswana  sayings:  “Maitseo  ke  namane  ya 
moroba! Tlhong botho!” In English one could say, “manners maketh a man”, and a dose of 
humility makes it even better. Needless to say, your customers deserve to be treated with 
utmost respect. 
I hasten to add that we live in difficult times as it seems money and morality appear to have 
meeting point, and greed seems to occupy centre stage. I am referring here to the current 
major economic turning point in the face of the bubble that burst due to the unsustainable 
debt in the US housing market that sent undesirable ripple effects across major banking and 
financial  centres.  No  wonder  observers  are  now  cynical  about  banks  in  the  face  of 
plummeting shareholder value and foreclosure on housing loans in affected markets. 
In the circumstances, you in banking business are well advised to put in place robust and 
effective internal controls environment and risk management infrastructure, and educate your 
staff so that they are in a position to prevent fraudulent transactions. 
On a slightly different but related matter, the Chairman of Capital Bank commented on the 
upward  adjustment  of  interest  rates  that  was  effected  earlier  this  week.  I  took  it  as  an 
invitation  for  me  to  comment  briefly  on  the  Bank’s  primary  objective  of  maintaining  price 
stability. While monetary policy has to respond to a sustained increase in inflation, as it is 
currently the case due to the escalating oil and food prices, this is done in the context of the 
framework articulated in the Bank’s Monetary Policy Statement. As I stated at the launch of 
the Statement in February this year, monetary policy indeed focuses on the containment of 
inflation within a medium-term (3-year) horizon on the basis of inflation forecasting. This is in 
view  of  the  significant  transmission  time  lag  before  policy  action  takes  effect.  Accordingly, 
therefore,  monetary  policy  will  be  preemptive,  as  necessary,  in  order  to  mitigate  second-
round  effects  relating  to  unsustainable  demands  for  wages  and  other  domestic  resource 
increases, which would lead to a further spiralling of inflation. It is just as important to anchor 
expectations of low and stable inflation. It is against this background that the bank rate was 
increased by half a percentage point to 15 percent on May 26, 2008. 
BIS Review 97/2008 
 3
As  I  conclude,  I  wish  to  applaud  the  Board,  management  and  staff  of  Capital  Bank  for 
bringing additional banking services and facilities to Gaborone. In the not too distant future, I 
would like to see expansion and extension of your services to other parts of the country. The 
magnificent premises I viewed last night are no doubt a benchmark for others to follow. My 
first impressions are that you will settle down to business at the speed of lightning. 
I thank you for your attention. 
 4 
 BIS Review 97/2008
