Nout Wellink: It’s the incentive, stupid! 
Speech by Dr Nout Wellink, President of the Netherlands Bank and Chairman of the Basel 
Committee  on  Banking  Supervision,  at 
“Integrating  micro  and 
macroeconomic  perspectives  on  financial  stability”,  University  van  Groningen,  Groningen, 
26 May 2008. 
the  Conference 
 Introduction 
1. It is a great pleasure for me to deliver a speech at this conference on financial stability. 
Needless to say, this subject has hardly been more challenging than in recent times. But let 
me start on a positive note. Because of the market turbulence, many people seem to forget 
how the financial system has improved over the past decades. The system has developed 
and expanded, and its potential to facilitate efficient allocation in the economy has increased 
enormously. Financial services have become more accessible to broad categories of firms 
and  households.  And  the  possibilities  to  spread  and  manage  risks  have  improved,  which 
partly  explains  why  the  financial  system  has  been  able  to  absorb  an  accumulation  of 
setbacks in recent years, including the burst of the dotcom bubble, the September 11 attacks 
and rising geopolitical tensions. If the financial system is the switchboard or operating system 
of  the  world  economy,  this  switchboard  has  clearly  become  more  powerful,  allowing  more 
transactions at a higher speed. 
2. But higher speed and greater power also entail the possibility of more severe accidents, as 
illustrated  in  the  past  year.  Looking  at  financial  history,  this  is  not  surprising.  Financial 
development  over  the  past  centuries  has  always  been  characterised  by  ups  and  downs. 
Typically,  vulnerabilities  like  the  ones  we  have  seen  recently  can  be  traced  to  wrong 
incentives and a lack of checks and balances. In the rest of this speech, I will first discuss 
common  patterns  of  past  crisis  episodes,  emphasising  the  role  of  incentives.  Against  this 
background,  I  will  then  examine  the  current  crisis.  I  will  conclude  by  discussing  policy 
implications and the recent recommendations of the Financial Stability Forum. 
Role of incentives: lessons from history 
3. Although every financial crisis has its unique features, there are several recurrent themes. 
As Charles Kindleberger argues in his famous book “Manias, Panics and Crashes”, financial 
crises are typically the result of a prolonged accumulation of imbalances, preceded by some 
exogenous shock or structural change in the financial system. Examples are changes in the 
political  environment,  new  regulation  and  financial  innovation.  These  changes  create  new 
opportunities but also uncertainty and a lack of awareness about potential new risks – the so-
called “unknown unknowns”. In such an environment, traditional checks and balances may 
become inadequate and easily lead to excessive risk 
4. We have seen numerous examples where periods of exuberance were accommodated by 
the financial system, reflected by increasing leverage and asset price inflation, followed by a 
correction. Without any doubt, the best example in Dutch financial history is the Tulip Mania, 
which  took  place  around  1635.  This  episode  is  especially  known  for  its  incredible  price 
increases. At the peak, 14 thousand guilders were paid for a single tulip bulb – more than a 
workman earned in his entire life those days. Less known is that the speculative bubble was 
largely  driven  by  financial  innovation.  In  the  years  before  the  Tulip  Mania,  new  financial 
markets  evolved  in  the  Netherlands,  including  a  stock  exchange  and  futures  markets. 
Sophisticated trading techniques were developed, allowing short selling and the use of put 
and  call  options.  Derivative  contracts  allowed  massive  trading  in  tulips  that  were  not  even 
planted yet – a genuine financial innovation at the time. Many investors did not realise that 
these new instruments were inflating a speculative bubble on an unprecedented scale and 
BIS Review 67/2008 
 1
lost all their money when the market collapsed after two years. The Tulip Mania illustrates 
how  imbalances  can  develop  when  previous  constraints  are  lifted  –  in  this  case  by  new 
financial tools allowing investors to take large speculative positions. But it also illustrates the 
role of naive optimism and even greed. 
5.  Misguided  incentives  are  often  also  at  the  root  of  growing  imbalances,  because  of 
conflicting  micro  and  macro  perspectives.  This  is  because  at  the  micro  level,  market 
participants tend to take the environment in which they operate as given, for instance prices 
and the behaviour of other market participants. But factors that are considered exogenous at 
the micro level may become endogenous for the financial system as a whole. At the macro 
level,  this  easily  leads  to  fallacies  of  composition.  For  example,  for  an  individual  investor, 
increasing leverage is a way to boost returns. But if everybody does this, without sufficient 
profitable  investment  opportunities,  it  can  only  be  counterproductive  by  reducing  long-term 
yields and raising risks. 
Pro-cyclicality 
6. A closely related issue is the financial system’s inherent pro-cyclicality. We all know that 
with a favourable economic outlook and upbeat financial markets, balance sheets look strong 
for both financial firms and their counterparts in the real economy. In such an environment, it 
is  understandable  that  banks’  lending  criteria  become  looser  and,  for  instance,  pension 
contributions are reduced. As the cycle turns, lending criteria are tightened and firms will find 
it more difficult to finance their investments, which exacerbates economic fluctuations. 
7.  So,  financial  institutions’  pro-cyclical  behaviour  is  to  some  extent  inevitable.  The  same 
holds  for  the  role  of  regulation,  which  may  strengthen  pro-cyclicality:  regulatory  rules  are 
more likely to become binding during unfavourable times. Nonetheless, there are examples 
where  we  managed  to  soften  this  trade-off  between  sound  risk  management  and  pro-
cyclicality. One example is the new Capital Accord, Basle II, which requires banks to perform 
stress  tests  and  demonstrate  that  they  hold  sufficient  capital  buffers  above  the  regulatory 
minimum  level  when  economic  conditions  are  favourable.  Another  example  is  the  Dutch 
Financial Assessment Framework for pension funds, implemented last year. Pension funds 
now have the possibility to make part of their liabilities conditional, allowing them to spread 
out shocks over 15 years. In addition, pension funds are required to use this long horizon 
when  setting  their  premiums.  This  way,  our  defined  benefit  pension  system  has  become 
more  sustainable  and  at  the  same  time  less  pro-cyclical.  It  is  important  that  this  carefully 
designed  system  will  also  be  better  acknowledged  in  the  new  IFRS  accounting  rules.  We 
must avoid an overly rigid application of these rules, which should reflect the real risks and 
risk  mitigants,  and  should  therefore  take  into  account  the  conditionality  of  Dutch  pension 
contracts. 
Characteristics of the current crisis 
8. It is too early to provide a thorough analysis of the causes and characteristics of the recent 
financial  turbulence.  Apart  from  the  fact  that  markets  are  still  fragile,  it  will  probably  take 
several years before we are in a position to put these developments fully into perspective. 
Nonetheless, even at this stage it is not hard to find similarities with earlier crisis episodes. In 
particular,  there  has  been  a  structural  change  in  the  form  of  financial  innovation. 
Deregulation  and  liberalisation  have  created  scope  for  new  financial  instruments  and 
enhanced the mobility of risks. This is most clearly illustrated by the so-called “originate-to-
distribute” banking model, which has emerged over the past decade. By securitising loans, 
retail banks can focus on their role as originators, while other institutions such as investment 
banks  specialise  in  bundling  these  loans  into  structured  products  that  are  then  sold  to 
investors. The benefits are clear: specialisation along the securitisation chain creates a more 
efficient financial intermediation process, in which risks can be priced and transferred. 
2 
 BIS Review 67/2008
   9. However, the shortcomings of the originate-to-distribute model have also become painfully 
clear and have everything to do with incentives. Some examples: 
• 
Obviously,  a  bank  that  sells  its  risks  to  other  parties  has  less  interest  to  vet  the 
original borrower, nor to continue monitoring these risks as closely as before. 
Unbalanced  remuneration  incentives  are  another  source  of  excessive  risk  taking. 
Employees who receive massive bonuses when earnings are high but are hardly hit 
when losses are made, are probably less prudent than would be in the interest of 
their employer. This not to say that bonus systems are by definition wrong, but they 
should  be  designed  in  such  a  way  that  curbs  exist  on  inappropriate  behaviour. 
Perhaps, one way to improve this is to ensure that an employee’s time horizon is 
aligned with that of more general interest, for instance by making bonus payments 
dependent on broad performance indicators over a longer period. 
Incentives  are  also  affected  by  insufficient  risk  awareness.  For  complex  financial 
instruments  such  as  structured  products,  it  is  difficult  to  assess  their  value  and 
underlying  risks.  This,  and  a  lack  of  experience  how  these  instruments  are 
performing  under  stress,  has  complicated  the  determination  of  adequate  credit 
ratings  for  structured  products.  In  addition,  rating  agencies  are  confronted  with 
conflicts of interest between debt issuers, who pay for the ratings, and investors who 
rely on them. 
Wrong incentives are also due to slow implementation of new regulation which, I am 
afraid, is a fact of life. Already in the 1990s it had become clear that the old Basle 
Accord was becoming outdated and needed to be replaced with a new framework. 
Basle  II  is  more  risk-oriented  and  provides  better  checks  and  balances.  It  should 
have  been  implemented  earlier;  and,  if  it  had,  the  recent  developments  would 
probably  have  been  less  turbulent.  Indeed,  under  the  old  Accord,  banks  could 
circumvent  regulatory  requirements  by  transferring  risks  to  special  off-balance 
entities such as Structures Investment Vehicles (SIVs) and conduits. 
10. Let me revisit the interaction between micro and macro perspectives, which has become 
increasingly  relevant  in  today’s  market-oriented  financial  system.  Wrong  incentives  at  the 
micro level have resulted in excessive risk taking, such as the supply of subprime mortgages 
to households that cannot afford them. At the macro level, the size and distribution of risks is 
blurred  by  complex  instruments  and  risk  transfer  mechanisms.  It  has  also  become  more 
difficult to interpret macroeconomic data on money and credit growth, which makes it more 
challenging to formulate a balanced monetary policy. Furthermore, with the deterioration of 
market  sentiment  and  evaporation  of  market  liquidity,  risks  have  rebounded  to  individual 
firms in the form of funding liquidity problems. 
11. So, apart from the similarities with earlier crisis episodes, what makes this crisis special? 
Let me stress two striking features: 
• 
First, many of the risks that crystallised in the past year were on our radar screen 
long before the crisis started. If you read the numerous Financial Stability Reports 
that  were  published  in  the  past  years,  including  our  own  Overview  of  Financial 
Stability,  you  will  see  several  analyses  about  excessive  risk  tolerance,  hazardous 
risk  transfer  mechanisms  and  possible  shortcomings  of  the  originate-to-distribute 
model. One of the key lessons is why we have not been able to translate our risk 
assessment into mitigating action. 
Second, this crisis stands out on account of its global nature. More than in the past, 
the  turmoil  affects  all  advanced  economies,  reflecting  the  integration  of  financial 
systems over the past decades. 
 BIS Review 67/2008 
 3
Policy implications: FSF recommendations 
12.  This  global  scope  underscores  the  importance  of  an  international  policy  response. 
Fortunately, international cooperation between financial authorities has increased over time. 
Examples  are  standard  setters  such  as  the  Basle  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision 
(BCBS)  and  the  International  Accounting  Standards  Board  (IASB),  and  international 
organisations  like  the  International  Monetary  Fund  (IMF)  and  the  Bank  for  International 
Settlements (BIS). All these organisations, as well as the major economies, are represented 
in the Financial Stability Forum (FSF) which meets biannually. When the market turbulence 
intensified  last  summer,  the  FSF  was  asked  by  the  G7  to  take  the  lead  in  organising  a 
coordinated  policy  response.  In  my  capacity  as  chairman  of  the  Basle  Committee,  I  am  a 
member of the FSF working group that prepared a report that was published last month. 
13. The FSF report includes 67 policy recommendations. It is impossible to discuss them all, 
but let me just mention some of the major themes: 
• 
Many  recommendations  are  aimed  at  strengthening  firms’  risk  management. 
Perhaps  the  best  contribution  to  this  is  a  timely  implementation  of  Basle  II,  some 
elements  of  which  will  be  strengthened  (e.g.  capital  treatment  of  structured  credit 
and  securitisation  activities,  risk  management  practices  (pillar  2)).  In  addition, 
regulators  should  work  with  market  participants  to  mitigate  the  risks  arising  from 
inappropriate remuneration structures. 
Many recommendations are aimed at improving transparency and valuation. When 
publishing  their  upcoming  mid-year  reports,  financial  institutions  should  disclose 
their risk exposures according to a template in the FSF report. This is important to 
enhance  consistency  across  firms.  Other  proposals  aim  at  improving  accounting 
standards  for  off-balance  sheet  vehicles  and  strengthening  guidance  on  the 
valuation of financial instruments. A specific set of recommendations focus on the 
role  and  uses  of  credit  ratings.  Rating  agencies  should  improve  the  quality  of  the 
rating  process  and  avoid  conflicts  of  interest  in  rating  structured  products. 
Furthermore, these ratings should be differentiated from those of regular bonds, for 
instance  by  using  a  different  rating  scale.  At  the  same  time,  investors  should 
address their over-reliance on ratings. 
Several  recommendations  refer  to  the  role  of  the  official  authorities.  I  already 
indicated  that  many  of  the  risks  that  have  manifested  themselves  were  not  a 
surprise;  to  some  extent,  we  saw  this  crisis  coming.  Therefore,  it  is  important  to 
improve  the  translation  of  our  risk  assessments  into  action.  This  requires  better 
information  exchange  between  authorities  and  with  the  private  sector.  It  involves 
improving cooperation between regulators and central banks but also cross-border 
(e.g.  supervisory  colleges).  Finally,  crisis  management  arrangements  need  to  be 
strengthened. This includes central banks’ liquidity operations which must be more 
flexible, avoid stigma-effects and allow cooperation with other central banks (e.g. by 
establishing swap lines and allowing cross-border use of collateral). 
  For  most  of  these  measures,  it  is  not  difficult  to  see  how  they  influence  incentives. 
Remuneration  structures,  possible  conflicts  of  interest  and  stigma-problems  clearly  have  a 
bearing on the behaviour of market participants. 
14.  The  FSF  recommendations  have  been  welcomed  by  the  international  financial 
community. But the real challenge is to implement them in such a way that the checks and 
balances in the financial system are restored so it becomes less prone to instability. In other 
words: we must get the incentives right. The Netherlands is in a good position to implement 
the  recommendations.  Our  institutional  set-up  is  helpful:  the  cooperation  between  central 
bank and supervisors is already ensured because they are combined in one institution. But 
we must avoid complacency; the implementation of the FSF recommendations will be one of 
our  top  priorities  in  the  next  months.  Furthermore,  even  though  we  are  on  the  right  track, 
4 
 BIS Review 67/2008
risks from the macro-financial environment have not disappeared. Banks are going through a 
fundamental  adjustment  process,  which  needs  time.  Financial  markets,  like  the  interbank 
money  market,  do  not  perform  as  they  should  and  the  US  housing  market  is  still  weak. 
Therefore, the economic outlook remains uncertain. 
Concluding remarks 
15.  The  international  response  to  the  credit  crisis,  coordinated  by  the  Financial  Stability 
Forum, is a crucial first step towards restoring financial stability. But I am sure that, at some 
point, our incentives will be tested again. Therefore, we need creative minds that help us to 
identify new imbalances at an early stage. These are great times for financial economists. 
Traditional  macroeconomic  analysis  and  monetary  economics  have  been  extended  by  a 
variety of financial stability issues, with both micro and macro dimensions. I am confident that 
this conference will contribute to this interesting and rapidly developing field. 
BIS Review 67/2008 
 5
