Axel A Weber: Current developments in the financial system 
Welcoming remarks by Professor Axel A Weber, President of the Deutsche Bundesbank, at 
the  5th  Bundesbank  Lecture,  Berlin-Brandenburgische  Akademie  der  Wissenschaften, 
Berlin, 16 September 2008.  
 Ladies and gentlemen 
I am very pleased to welcome you to this year’s Bundesbank Lecture at this beautiful location 
here in the very heart of Berlin. I am particularly grateful that Mr Mario Draghi, Governor of 
the Bank of Italy, will be our speaker today. Mario, my special welcome to you and thanks a 
lot for not hesitating one moment to accept our invitation to be the lecturer at our event. It is 
an honour to have you here.  
Let me briefly say a few words regarding both this event and our speaker for today. On the 
event:  The  Bundesbank  Lecture  Series  aims  to  achieve  two  things.  First,  we  intend  to 
provide  a  high-level  forum  for  public  debate  on  economic  and  monetary  policy  issues. 
Second,  we  want  to  raise  the  Bundesbank’s  profile  in  the  German  capital.  With  today’s 
gathering, our Lecture Series, which started in 2004, is celebrating its fifth anniversary. Alan 
Greenspan,  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  Tommaso  Padoa-Schioppa,  and  Ben  Bernanke  have 
shared their thoughts with us at previous lectures.  
We  are  proud  to  have  Mario  Draghi  as  speaker.  The  title  of  his  speech  will  be  “Restoring 
stability in the financial system”. He is a distinguished expert on financial stability issues. As 
the  current  chairman  of  the  Financial  Stability  Forum  he  is  in  a  focal  position  to  discuss 
necessary measures to restore financial stability. Obviously, the topic of his speech could not 
be more topical given the current developments on financial markets. The financial market 
crisis – alongside rising inflationary pressures – has been the dominant topic for more than a 
year now. One does not have to be a prophet to forecast that it is likely to stay with us in the 
months ahead, too.  
Of course, I do not want to anticipate Mario’s remarks, but let me say some words on the 
current developments.  
The filing of chapter 11 bankruptcy petition by Lehman Brothers Holdings inc. and the sale of 
Merrill Lynch to Bank of America has certainly further increased uncertainty and risk aversion 
on financial markets. 
We observe flight to quality behaviour by investors and rising spreads on credit markets. This 
had  to  be  expected.  All  in  all,  however,  market  participants  have  not  overreacted  and 
remained cool-headed. This is a positive sign.  
Central  banks,  including  the  Eurosystem,  have  reacted  decisively  to  the  situation  with 
liquidity provisions and other measures. German banks do not report liquidity problems.  
The German financial system is stable and over the past years its resilience against adverse 
shocks  has  markedly  improved.  Moreover,  the  universal  banking  model  –  a  characteristic 
feature of the German financial system – has proven its robustness and stability.  
These structural achievements will help to cushion current tensions due to higher perceived 
counterparty risk and a necessary unwinding of positions on the market for credit risk transfer 
–  both  unavoidable  outcomes  in  the  face  of  an  insolvency  of  one  of  the  major  market 
participants.  
financial 
The 
financial 
intermediaries,  for  central  banks,  for  supervisory  agencies,  and  for  regulatory  bodies  in 
decades. And since the causes of the crisis are deeply rooted, a comprehensive coordinated 
response at the international level is evidently warranted.  
the  most  challenging  situations 
turbulence  has  created 
for 
BIS Review 112/2008 
 1
In this context, the Financial Stability Forum – the FSF – in particular is playing a crucial role 
in  the  process  of  mitigating  the  ongoing  difficulties  and  making  the  financial  system  more 
resilient to future shocks. The FSF was established in 1999, following a report by the then 
Bundesbank President, Hans Tietmeyer.  
The FSF brings together senior representatives of national financial authorities (for example, 
central  banks,  supervisory  authorities  and  treasury  departments),  international  financial 
institutions (such as the IMF or the BIS), international regulatory and supervisory groupings 
(for example, Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, International Accounting Standard 
Board), committees of central bank experts (such as the Committee on the Global Financial 
System) and the European Central Bank. 
The FSF’s mandate is to assess vulnerabilities affecting the international financial system, to 
identify  and  oversee  action  needed  to  address  these,  and  to  improve  coordination  and 
information exchange among the various authorities responsible for financial stability.  
In doing so, the FSF aims to promote international financial stability, improve the functioning 
of financial markets, and reduce the tendency for financial shocks to spread from country to 
country, thus destabilising the world economy. The FSF seeks to give momentum to a broad-
based multilateral agenda for strengthening financial systems and the stability of international 
financial  markets.  The  necessary  changes  are  enacted  by  the  relevant  national  and 
international  financial  authorities.  In  a  nutshell,  the  FSF  acts  as  a  central  hub  for  all  the 
issues that are relevant from a global financial stability perspective.  
On the speaker: Mario Draghi, Governor of the Banca d’Italia, has been chairing the FSF in a 
personal  capacity  since  April  2006.  This  position  –  together  with  the  economic  and 
international expertise he has gained during his career – makes him an excellent speaker in 
current times, given the backdrop of the financial market turbulence.  
Mario Draghi graduated from the University of Rome, received his Ph.D. in economics from 
the  Massachusetts  Institute  of  Technology,  and  subsequently  served  as  professor  of 
economics at the University of Florence from 1981 to 1991. Prior to taking the helm at the 
Banca  d’Italia,  he  was  vice-chairman  and  managing  director  of  Goldman  Sachs  and  a 
member  of  the  firm-wide  management  committee  (2002-2005).  He  was  director  general  of 
the  Italian  Treasury  (1991-2001),  chairman  of  the  European  Economic  and  Financial 
Committee, a member of the G7 Deputies, and chairman of OECD Working Party 3. Finally, 
from 1984 to 1990, he was an executive director of the World Bank.  
A  few  weeks  ago,  during  the  annual  central  bankers’  meeting  in  Jackson  Hole,  Mario 
delivered  a speech  entitled  “The current  crisis and  beyond”.  In  his  speech,  he pointed  out 
three elements that mark the cornerstones of the work plan of the FSF for the month ahead. 
More  precisely,  he  talked  about  the  need  to  look  more  closely  at  the  incentives  for 
appropriate risk control frameworks, efforts to improve the resilience of the financial system 
to shocks frameworks for dampening the cyclicality of risk-taking. Not only was it a pleasure 
to listen to him, I also fully endorse the proposals he made.  
The title of his speech today is “Restoring Stability in the Financial System”, a topic that is 
evidently  highly  relevant  and  of  interest  to  all  of  us.  Mario,  I  am  looking  forward  to  your 
insights during the fifth Bundesbank Lecture. The floor is yours. 
2 
 BIS Review 112/2008
