Anselmo L S Teng: Risk management in financial services  
Opening speech by Mr Anselmo L S Teng, Chairman of the Monetary Authority of Macao, 
ASHK (Actuarial Society of Hong Kong) Regional Conference, Macao, 28 January 2008. 
 President Ng, Distinguished Guests, Dear Delegates, Ladies and Gentlemen, 
1.  Welcome  to  Macao!  I  would  like  to  say  thank  you,  on  behalf  of  the  Macao  SAR 
Government, to members of the Actuarial Society of Hong Kong for choosing Macao, where 
east and west meet, as venue for this regional conference. I am sure you will find fascination 
in the sophisticated mix of Chinese and south European culture provided by this unique city. 
I am honoured to be invited to make an opening remark in this occasion. What I intend to do 
through out the next twelve minutes or so is first to give you an up-date about Macao and its 
latest economic development, as well as an introduction of its financial sector; then I’ll move 
on to say a few words on the main theme of this conference.  
2.  Macao  is  no  doubt  in  the  lime  light.  This  enclave  is  a  small  but  open  economy  with  a 
relatively simple economic structure and a developing financial sector. It is governed under 
the principle of “One Country, Two Systems” in the context of our Basic Law. It is a free port, 
an independent tariff area; there is free flow of merchandize, financial assets and capital. The 
Pataca, our legal tender, is linked to the Hong Kong Dollar at 1.03 Patacas to 1 Hong Kong 
Dollar. 
Benefited  from  the  satisfactory  performance  of  the  tourism  sector,  Macao’s  economy 
continued to show remarkable growth in the first three quarters of 2007. Real GDP soared 
30.9% year-on-year in the third quarter, sustaining the growth of 25.7% and 31.6% in the first 
and the second quarter respectively. 
The  opening  of  new  tourist  facilities  successfully  attracted  more  visitors,  evidenced  by  the 
double-digit growth of visitor arrivals and service exports. Large-scale investment projects in 
the private sector continued to contribute to Macao’s robust economy. 
For the year 2007, visitor arrivals reached 27 million, equivalent to a hefty growth of 22.8% 
over a year earlier. Mainly due to the fast growing pace in recent years, Macao’s economy 
has virtually reached its full employment level as the unemployment rate hovered in a range 
of 2.9-3.2% in the first 11 months of 2007 while inflationary pressure apparently intensified in 
the second half of 2007 and reached 5.57% for the whole year.  
3. With an area of 28.5 sq.km. and a population of about 530,000, the burgeoning economy 
no  doubt  has  put  human  resources  and  infrastructure  under  great  strain.  To  maintain  a 
sustainable growth, we have to overcome the bottleneck and diversify. 
To enhance the capacity of our development, the Macao SAR Government has embarked on 
a number of infrastructural projects. Internally, a light rail mass transit system will link up all 
essential spots in a few years. Externally, the airport will be expanded while the Hong Kong-
Zhuhai-Macao Bridge is on the drawboard. We have applied a number of incentive schemes 
to  encourage  our  youths  to  acquire  more  knowledge  so  as  to  make  preparation  for  a 
transformation  to  a  knowledge-based  economy.  The  most  significant  measure  is  the 
provision of 15 year free education to our kids. We are fully aware of our strong connections 
with Mainland China and Portuguese speaking countries and also our competitive edge in 
terms  of  comparatively  low  cost,  quick  and  free  flow  of  information,  flexible  business 
structure and low tax regime. We have fully exploited all these. Thus Macao has been able to 
benefit from the Closer Economic Partnership Agreement with the Mainland and play a key 
role  in  platforms  servicing  Portuguese  speaking  countries;  important  economic  bases  of 
Mainland  China,  particularly  Guangdong  West;  and  ethnic  Chinese  merchants  all  over  the 
world. We also realize that our tourism services industry needs non-gaming elements. Ladies 
BIS Review 13/2008 
 1
and  gentlemen,  you  may  take  a  break  to  tour  around  Macao  to  appreciate  Macao  as  a 
metropolis  which  provides  culture,  entertainment,  recreation,  as  well  as  convention  and 
exhibition facilities to tourists and business visitors. 
4. When we talk about diversification, we put the financial sector in our agenda as it accounts 
for about 10% of our GDP. It is a high value-added, profitable and capital intensive industry 
which is most suited to an economic ecology like Macao. The Monetary Authority of Macao is 
the  sole  regulator  of  the  financial  sector,  which  is  dominated  by  banks  and  insurance 
companies. At the moment, there are 28 banks operating in Macao of which 3 are operating 
under  offshore  regime.  In  addition,  there  is  a  finance  company  with  restricted  banking 
activities  and  a  non-bank  credit  institution  which  specializes  in  the  issuance  and 
management of electronic money stored value card service. In the insurance sector, there 
are 11 life insurance companies and 13 non-life ones. Besides, there are other institutions 
operating in our financial sector which include money changers, cash remittance companies 
and  financial  intermediaries.  The  capital  of  all  these  institutions  are  provided  by  investors 
from Mainland China, Portugal, Hong Kong, the U.S., the UK, France, Canada, Singapore 
and Chinese Taiwan, in addition to local participants. In fact, overseas capitals account for 
the  majority  in  our  financial  sector.  It  is  even  more  obvious  in  the  banking  industry. 
Doubtless, from a global perspective, the financial sector of Macao is highly internationalized.  
The  most  luring  feature  of  the  Macao  financial  sector  is  its  profitability.  The  size  of  the 
financial sector here is not spectacular but the return on capital is lucrative. Further growth 
was registered for 2007. Both assets and deposits also grew by double digit for years. The 
insurance  industry  has  also  prospered  in  tandem  with  our  burgeoning  economy.  After 
encouraging growth for a number of years, gross premium receipts for the first three quarters 
of 2007 exhibited a growth rate of 47.2% year-on-year.  
5.  The  present  environment  of  Macao  provides  fertile  soil  for  actuarial  science  to  flourish. 
The  delegates  know  better  than  I  do  that  actuarial  science  has  a  wide  application.  It  is  a 
combination of mathematics, economics and business understanding, under which financial 
risk can be managed soundly and practically. Certainly, risk management is nothing new. As 
you are all familiar with, it has its root in the insurance field. After years of development, it 
has become an indispensable tool to different sectors of the economy, be it an individual, a 
specific product category or a particular industry. Its extensive use is apparent in areas such 
as insurance, social security, financial products, investment and wealth management etc.  
According  to  Principle  7  of  the  Basel’s  Core  Principles  for  Effective  Banking  Supervision, 
“risk  management  is  a  process  to  identify,  evaluate,  monitor  and  control  or  mitigate  all 
material risks and to assess the overall capital adequacy in relation to the risk profile”. On the 
other  hand,  Insurance  Core  Princile  ICP  18  defines  “how  supervisory  authorities  should 
require  insurers  to  recognize  the  range  of  risks  that  they  face  and  to assess and  manage 
them effectively”; and ICP 19 “states how supervisory authorities should require insurers to 
evaluate and manage the risks that they underwrite, in particular through reinsurance, and to 
have the tools to establish an adequate level of premiums”.  
6.  In  Macao,  banks  and  insurance  companies,  as  a  result  of  innovation  in  products  and 
services, improved technology and other developments in the industry, have a larger pool of 
risk  management  tools  and  practices  available.  Of  course,  they  are  faced  with  continuous 
challenges  as  they  manage  risk,  especially  when  they  need  to  remain  profitable  and 
competitive. However, if financial innovation can be used properly, on one hand, to add value 
to the customers in terms of products and pricing, and to improve profitability on the other, 
while  identifying  and  understanding  during  the  process  how  risk  profiles  can  change  as  a 
result,  then  good  risk  management  can  be  deemed  to  have  been  in  place.  This  complex 
process  falls  within  the  technical  expertise  of  professional  actuaries.  In  fact,  professional 
actuaries are the key players in the process. 
7. Viewing from a more macro perspective, the volatility of financial markets around the world 
underlines  the  imperative  nature  of  risk  management  in  maintaining  stability  of  our  global 
2 
 BIS Review 13/2008
financial  system.  Last  year,  there  were  worries  over  certain  financial  products,  particularly 
subprime  loans  related,  which  might  throw  international  financial  markets  into  turmoil. 
Unfortunately, it has turned out to be a “Cassandra” one. Excess liquidity and recklessness 
of  participants  were  causing  misallocation  of  resources  which  would  certainly  give  rise  to 
inflated financial assets and their subsequent bust. Last Tuesday, the FED announced to cut 
Fed Fund rate by 75 basis points to alleviate the battered markets. This action will certainly 
give short term relief. However, how long the effect will last is still a question. This time, the 
pain  comes  not  from  the  cost  of  borrowing  but  from  the  ability  to  lend.  As  we  all  know, 
gargantuan international banks are writing down the value of their SIV’s and bringing them 
back to their balance sheets. Such a move has already taken away tens of billions of dollars 
from their capital which will tremendously weaken their capacity to lend. Coupled with their 
suspicion  they  have  conceived  in  respect  of  the  viability  of  their  counterparts,  we  shall 
witness  some  stagnation  in  the  lending  market  for  quite  some  time  in  the  future.  Such 
structural retrenchment in liquidity has little to do with cost of borrowing. As a result, there 
may be continued upheavals in financial markets.  
8. As financial institutions offer more sophisticated products and services, there will be more 
associated  risks  in  their  on-going  risk  management  framework.  This  is  particularly  true  as 
they grow in size and complexity, and their ability to identify, define, measure, manage, and 
organize to manage their risks are of utmost importance and major concern, especially from 
the supervisory point of view.  
Given  the  change  in  the  international  regulatory  climate  where  risk-based  supervision  is 
becoming  a  “norm”,  regulators  have  to  work  closely  with  many  professions  to  ensure  that 
prudential standards and disclosure requirements are set. We would be seeing more of this 
cooperative working relationship in the coming years between professional bodies, such as 
the  International  Actuarial  Association,  and  the  regulators  for  the  purpose  of  setting 
standards  and  enhancing  market  transparency  which  are  conducive  to  the  healthy 
development of the industry. 
The  above  observations  are  meant  to  provide  certain  insight  to  the  main  theme  of  this 
conference.  I  am  sure  that  you’ll  be  hearing  more  indepth  views  from  a  good  line  up  of 
regulators, practioners, and professionals during these two days. 
9.  As  a  final  note,  I  strongly  believe  that  the  Society’s  choice  of  holding  its  Regional 
Conference  here  in  Macao  is  an  appropriate  one.  The  delegates  will  find  world  class 
standard in both hardware and software provided by this enclave. On top of that, delegates 
will  certainly  enjoy  the  nostalgia  and  excitement  which  are  indigenous  to  Macao.  On  the 
other hand, I would like to emphasize that we treasure your presence not for the pecuniary 
benefit you have brought to our tourism services sector but the vision and perspective you 
are going to impart to our financial sector and our young citizens, particularly at a time when 
we are striving to diversify our economy. I do  hope the spreading of your gospel, namely, 
actuarial  science,  as  well  as  the  main  theme  of  the  conference,  will  enable  our  financial 
participants to gain more insight into the industry and risk management and become more 
innovative in launching new products. Moreover, it may open a new horizon for our career 
minded  youths.  Macao  welcomes  your  Society  as  always,  whether  for  tourism,  business, 
academic or professional exchange purposes.  
Finally,  please  accept  my  best  wishes  for  the  success  of  this  conference  and  please  also 
remember to enjoy the charms of Macao after all the hard work. 
Thank you!  
BIS Review 13/2008 
 3
