Randall S Kroszner: Global economic and financial challenges – 
implications for Latin America 
Speech  by  Mr  Randall  S  Kroszner,  Member  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  US  Federal 
Reserve  System,  at  the  Annual  Meeting  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Inter-American 
Development Bank, Miami, Florida, 4 April 2008. 
The original speech, which contains various links to the documents mentioned, can be found on the US Federal 
Reserve System’s website.  
 Strains  in  global  financial  markets  first  became  manifest  last  summer,  when  sharply  rising 
delinquency rates on subprime mortgages in the United States caused investors to become 
concerned  about  the  credit  quality  of  home  mortgages  more  broadly  and  about  the 
exposures of major financial institutions to credit losses. These strains have persisted and, 
indeed, spread during the winter.  
In  the  United  States,  the  continued  poor  functioning  of  securitization  markets,  particularly 
those for private mortgage-backed securities and other structured finance products, as well 
as  pressures  on  balance  sheet  capacity  at  some  large  banks  and  a  deterioration  in  loan 
performance, have led to tighter credit conditions for many households and businesses. The 
tightening of credit, along with information suggesting that the housing correction was likely 
to  be  deeper  and  more  prolonged  than  initially  thought  and  that  the  labor  market  was 
weakening, led many analysts to revise down their outlook for economic activity. In turn, the 
deterioration  in  the  economic  outlook  seems  to  have  fed  back  into  financial  markets, 
contributing to lower prices for a range of securities and to trading conditions that are more 
volatile and less liquid. Aspects of the U.S. experience have also been felt in other advanced 
economies, although generally to a lesser degree.  
The  origination  of  mortgages  to  borrowers  with  less-than-prime  credit  profiles  fell  sharply 
over the second half of last year in the United States, and this segment of the market has 
continued to function poorly. In addition, the origination of jumbo mortgages to prime-rated 
homeowners has fallen since last summer, as lenders tightened their underwriting standards 
and  raised  the  cost  of  those  loans.  In  contrast,  mortgages  that  qualify  for  backing  by  the 
housing government-sponsored enterprises continue to be readily available to households. 
For  other  types  of  consumer  credit,  such  as  auto  loans  and  credit  cards,  access  has 
diminished  somewhat  in  recent  months  as  lending  standards  have  been  tightened  and 
securitization of consumer loans has become more difficult. 
In corporate markets, highly rated firms have continued to issue a sizable volume of bonds, 
but  issuance  of  speculative-grade  debt  has  been  sluggish  recently.  In  the  leveraged  loan 
market,  banks  have  found  it  difficult  to  syndicate  loans  previously  underwritten  to  finance 
large  leveraged  buyout  deals,  and  the  still-large  pipeline  of  leveraged  loans  has  led  to  an 
unplanned expansion of some large banks' balance sheets.  
In addition, some banks have taken onto their balance sheets assets for which they provided 
liquidity backstops or other forms of support. These balance sheet pressures have come at a 
time when asset write-downs were already weighing on capital. As I will discuss later, this 
episode  underscores  the  important  connection  for  banks  between  capital  adequacy  and 
liquidity, particularly in times of financial market stress. 
Despite the adverse developments in recent months, large U.S. banking organizations, in the 
aggregate  and 
in  excess  of  regulatory 
requirements, in part because of steps taken by many to replenish equity positions. Indeed, 
since  last  fall,  large  U.S.  bank  holding  companies  have  raised  more  than  $50  billion  in 
capital. Although the U.S. banking system will continue to face a challenging environment, it 
individually,  have  maintained  capital  ratios 
BIS Review 40/2008 
 1
remains in sound overall condition, having entered the period of recent financial turmoil with 
solid capital and strong earnings. 
Federal Reserve actions 
To  improve  market  liquidity  and  market  functioning,  and  consistent  with  its  role  as  the 
nation's  central  bank,  the  Federal  Reserve  has  supplemented  its  longstanding  discount 
window by establishing new facilities to depository institutions and primary dealers. The first 
of these actions was initiated in August, when the Federal Reserve modified the terms for 
borrowing from the discount window. Then, in December, the Fed introduced a term lending 
facility that provided funding to depository institutions without the potential stigma of discount 
window borrowing. At the same time, the Federal Reserve, in conjunction with other central 
banks,  established  reciprocal  currency  swap  arrangements  to  provide  dollars  to  address 
elevated pressures in foreign interbank funding markets. Last month, the Fed announced a 
series of initiatives to address additional stresses that emerged more recently. 
Taken  as  a  group,  these  actions  have  had  a  threefold  purpose:  to  expand  the  range  of 
institutions  with  access  to  collateralized  loans  from  the  Federal  Reserve,  to  broaden  the 
types of securities that can be pledged as collateral, and to lengthen the terms of the loans 
obtained  from  the  Fed.  To  date,  these  liquidity  measures  seem  to  have  been  helpful,  as 
funding  pressures  on  some  financial  institutions  appear  to  have  eased  somewhat  and  as 
liquidity  seems  to  have  improved  in  several  financial  markets.  To  the  extent  that  these 
measures improve market functioning, they will have favorable effects on the availability of 
credit to the broader economy.  More-liquid markets also increase the efficacy of monetary 
policy. 
In response to the weakening of economic conditions, the Federal Reserve has eased the 
stance  of  monetary  policy  substantially.  The  Federal  Open  Market  Committee  last  month 
lowered the target for the federal funds rate to 2-1/4 percent – 3 percentage points below its 
level last summer. The Committee anticipates that these actions, together with the steps we 
have taken to foster market liquidity, will help to promote growth over time and to mitigate the 
risks to economic activity. 
The  remainder  of  my  remarks  this  morning  will  cover  the  implications  of  these  financial 
market  strains  for  Latin  America,  focusing  on  the  linkages  between  the  U.S.  and  Latin 
economies and how they have evolved over time. Although there have been major structural 
improvements  in  Latin  American  economies,  the  region  is  also  benefiting  from  favorable 
global  conditions  that  are  helping  to  offset  potential  adverse  spillovers  from  the  financial 
strains.  Nevertheless,  those  strains  highlight  some  challenges  going  forward  in  Latin 
America, particularly in the area of the regulation of financial institutions. This is no time for 
policymakers anywhere to feel complacent. 
Developments in Latin America 
The recent financial turbulence has been evident in Latin America, but not as strongly as in 
the  United  States  and  Europe.  Spreads  on  Latin  American  dollar-denominated  sovereign 
bonds over U.S. Treasury securities are up noticeably since early last year, but they remain 
low  from  a  historical  perspective.  In  the  relatively  new  Latin  markets  for  long-term  local-
currency bonds, yields have edged up in a few countries but have remained essentially flat in 
others. Equity prices in Latin America are down relatively little compared with their very large 
increases in 2006 and early 2007.  
The pace of economic growth has edged down in many (but not all) Latin countries from high 
rates  in  2006  and  early  2007.  The  latest  International  Monetary  Fund  (IMF)  forecast, 
however, continues to project solid rates of growth this year and next in most Latin American 
countries. With a few notable exceptions, inflation has remained relatively well under control; 
2 
 BIS Review 40/2008
in  most  countries,  rising  commodity  prices  have  led  to  only  modest  increases  in  headline 
inflation rates. 
In  light  of  the  recent  indications  of  a  weakening  U.S.  economy,  is  there  any  historical 
precedent for Latin America to avoid spillovers? In the past, U.S. slowdowns have typically 
been  associated  with  slowdowns  in  Latin  America.  Indeed,  often  the  slowdowns  in  Latin 
America were much sharper than in the United States. One of the most famous examples of 
this  effect  occurred  during  the  U.S.  economic  downturn  of  the  early  1980s,  which  was 
associated with high U.S. interest rates. The increased pressures on financing flows and the 
reduced  demand  for  exports  contributed  to  widespread  slowdowns  in  Latin  American 
economies that in many cases were more severe than the U.S. slowdown. A milder version 
of such a synchronized slowdown occurred in 2001. 
There  have  been  exceptions  to  this  pattern,  however.  For  example,  many  Latin  countries 
experienced  solid  expansions  during  the  U.S.  contraction  of  1990-91.  A  variety  of  factors, 
some unique to individual countries, contributed to this good outcome. Perhaps most notable 
was the launch of the Brady Plan  in 1989 to restructure the sovereign external debts of a 
number of developing countries. This restructuring, along with previous fiscal and financial 
sector reforms in the wake of the debt crisis of the early 1980s, encouraged renewed capital 
flows  to  much  of  Latin  America  just  around  the  time  that  the  U.S.  economy  was  slowing 
down.  
Linkages between the United States and Latin America 
To  better  assess  the  prospects  and  lessons  for  Latin  America  from  the  recent  financial 
strains,  it  may  be  useful  to  review  the  various  linkages  between  the  two  regions.  These 
linkages include trade flows, capital flows of various types, and shared global shocks such as 
the recent run-ups in commodity prices. 
Trade has been growing faster than the gross domestic product in many Latin economies. An 
economic  slowdown  in  a  key  trading  partner  generally  reduces  demand  for  a  country's 
exports,  putting  downward  pressure  on  overall  activity.  However,  with  the  exception  of 
Mexico, most Latin American countries are not particularly exposed to U.S. demand for their 
exports.  
A more important linkage for many Latin American countries has been capital flows from the 
United  States  and  other  advanced  economies.  Differences  in  the  environment  for  capital 
flows, for example, appeared to be a key factor behind the much better outcome in 1990-91 
compared with 1981-83. Bank lending to Latin America has not regained the leading role it 
held  in  the  1970s,  but  it  has  grown  significantly  in  recent  years  after  a  long  period  of 
quiescence.  Local-currency  bond  markets  are  an  important  recent  development  that  is 
attracting some interest from foreign investors, but so far, most of the local-currency issues 
have been purchased by local investors such as pension funds.1 Foreign capital has surged 
into Latin American equity markets in recent years, helping to push market capitalizations to 
new  heights.  Finally,  foreign  direct  investment  into  Latin  America  is  substantial  and  has 
continued  to  grow.  The  IMF  estimates  that  total  private  capital  inflows  to  Latin  America 
jumped to $173 billion last year, compared with an average of $79 billion per year over the 
previous  ten  years.2  An  important  factor  fostering  these  flows  has  been  improvements  in 
macroeconomic and microeconomic policies. 
                                                 
1   Committee  on  the  Global  Financial  System  (2007),  Financial  Stability  and  Local  Currency  Bond  Markets, 
CGFS Publications No. 28 (Basel, Bank for International Settlements, June). 
International Monetary Fund (2007), World Economic Outlook: Globalization and Inequality, World Economic 
and Financial Surveys (Washington: International Monetary Fund, October), p. 239. 
2  
BIS Review 40/2008 
 3
An interesting and potentially important development in the past five to ten years has been 
the  decline  of  current  account  deficits  throughout  Latin  America  and  the  rise  of  current 
account surpluses in many countries in the  region. External debt burdens also have fallen 
substantially. In part, these developments reflect greatly improved fiscal discipline. Whereas 
bond issuance in international markets was an important source of capital in the 1990s, the 
improving fiscal situation led to negative net international bond issuance for Latin America, 
on balance, during much of the current decade. Indeed, Brazil recently announced that its 
foreign  assets  exceeded  its  foreign  liabilities  for  the  first  time  ever,  reflecting  increases  in 
international reserves, buybacks of global bonds, and the retirement of its IMF loans. Large 
holdings  of  foreign  exchange  reserves  provide  a  valuable  cushion  against  fluctuations  in 
foreign demand for a nation's exports or financial assets. 
It is important, however, to recognize that the decline of net capital flows to Latin America 
has not been accompanied by an equivalent decline in gross flows. Indeed, globalization has 
led to increasing gross holdings of both assets and liabilities with the rest of the world. Thus, 
to a great extent, all countries have become linked by a common global market for capital in 
a way that we have never seen before. 
Global shocks constitute a third set of linkages between the United States and Latin America. 
The recent global increases in commodity prices have generally had negative implications for 
U.S. growth and positive implications for Latin American growth, as the United States is a net 
commodity importer and Latin America is a net commodity exporter. High commodity prices 
have  also  encouraged  foreign  investment,  and  thus  capital  flows,  to  help  develop  the 
commodity  resources  of  Latin  America.  Of  course,  commodity  prices  themselves  are 
influenced  by  global  economic  activity;  a  U.S.  slowdown  could  put  downward  pressure  on 
commodity  prices,  providing  an  indirect  but  potentially  significant  link  between  the  two 
regions. 
The Inter-American Development Bank background paper for this session argues forcefully 
that  recent  strong  global  growth  and  high  commodity  prices  provide  a  very  supportive 
environment for Latin American economies.3 These developments have helped to mitigate 
the effects on Latin America of financial market strains and the slowdown in U.S. economic 
activity.  It  is  important  not  to  lose  sight  of  the  fact  that  linkages  through  trade  and  capital 
flows continue to be important and, indeed, have even increased over the past decade or so. 
Lessons going forward 
What are the lessons that Latin America should draw from the recent financial strains in light 
of  the  growing  linkages  between  Latin  America  and  the  rest  of  the  world?  I  think  it  is 
extremely important to bolster the great progress that has been made in many countries in 
the  framework  of  macroeconomic  and  microeconomic  policies  and  to  extend  these 
improvements to those countries that have experienced little improvement so far. The current 
attractive conditions for commodity exporters should not deceive us into thinking that Latin 
America has permanently escaped international business cycles.  
On the macro front, the good economic outcomes in most of Latin America that I described 
earlier reflect greater discipline in both monetary and fiscal policy. Although there have been 
some exceptions, central banks in Latin America have demonstrated their resolve to prevent 
inflation  pressures  from  becoming  entrenched.  Governments  generally  have  not  allowed 
spending  to  absorb  all  of  the  increased  fiscal  revenue  from  rapid  growth.  In  terms  of 
microeconomics, bank regulation has been strengthened, and local equity and bond markets 
                                                 
3  
Inter-American  Development  Bank  Research  Department  (2008),  "All  That  Glitters  May  Not  Be  Gold: 
Assessing Latin America's Recent Macroeconomic Performance" (Washington: Inter-American Development 
Bank, April). 
4 
 BIS Review 40/2008
have been  developed and are growing in a number of Latin American countries. Financial 
fragility from currency and maturity mismatches in the structure of debt has been pared back. 
Together, these structural improvements reduce the vulnerability of the financial system to 
external and internal shocks. Not only do better macro policy frameworks help to strengthen 
local financial systems, but they provide confidence to investors that prudent policies will be 
taken in the face of external shocks. Better microeconomic regulatory policies help markets 
to  operate  more  efficiently,  thereby  increasing  economic  growth,  which  makes  continued 
monetary and fiscal discipline easier to achieve. Continuing this virtuous circle should be a 
priority.  The  recent  financial  strains  and  the  potential  for  spillovers  to  Latin  America  only 
heighten the need for policymakers in the region to avoid complacency. 
Among potential microeconomic improvements, developing markets for residential mortgage 
securities is obviously an important priority for Latin American countries going forward. Key 
elements of such markets in any country are solid underwriting standards, meaningful credit 
disclosure  policies,  and  strong  protections  for  consumers  from  abusive  and  deceptive 
practices. Toward that end, in the United States, the Federal Reserve has recently proposed 
stricter regulations for mortgage lenders to protect consumers from abusive practices while 
maintaining the viability  of a market for responsible mortgage lending. The proposed rules 
would tighten standards on higher-priced mortgage loans, which we have defined broadly so 
as to cover substantially all of the subprime market. The proposed rules also cover a range 
of  practices.  For  example,  the  rules  would  prohibit  a  lender  from  engaging  in  a  pattern  or 
practice  of  making  higher-priced  loans  that  borrowers  cannot  reasonably  be  expected  to 
repay from income or from assets other than the house. Lenders also would be required to 
verify  the  income  or  assets  on  which  they  rely  to  make  credit  decisions  for  higher-priced 
loans.  The  Federal  Reserve  is  also  working  to  improve  mortgage  disclosures  through 
consumer testing so they are more effective. 
These  rules  are  particularly  valuable  for  households  that  have  little  experience  with 
homeownership  and  short  credit  histories.  Careful  underwriting  standards  and  good 
transparency for borrowers are important building blocks for a healthy market in mortgage-
backed securities, which can help to foster the flow of credit to the housing sector in Latin 
America.  
Risk management around the globe 
Sound  banking  regulations  are  another  high  priority  for  Latin  America  and  the  rest  of  the 
world. In particular, I'd like to emphasize how recent market events underscore that financial 
institutions around the globe face important risk management challenges. One of the most 
basic risk-management challenges relates to concentration of risk. As banks have extended 
their range of activities and involvement in new markets, including the markets for securitized 
assets,  they  must,  for  a  number  of  reasons,  be  particularly  mindful  of  the  potential  for 
concentrations  of  risk  to  arise.  First,  there  is  simply  less  information  available  to  evaluate 
risks on new activities. Second, risk concentrations can be hidden during normal times and 
may  manifest  themselves  only  during  times  of  stress,  such  as  the  recent  marketwide 
increase  in  the  demand  for  liquidity.  Third,  there  is  an  important  linkage  between  risk 
concentrations and capital: The concentration of risk of a given portfolio markedly affects the 
amount of capital that should be held against it.  
I  would  like  to  elaborate  on  these  themes  by  briefly  describing  how  they  can  be  used  to 
improve the practice of risk management in three fundamental areas: risk identification and 
measurement, liquidity risk management, and governance and risk control. 
Risk identification and measurement 
The  first  fundamental  of  sound  risk  management  relates  to  risk  identification  and 
measurement. Timely and accurate information is the lifeblood of sound risk management. A 
BIS Review 40/2008 
 5
good risk-management structure is designed to identify the full spectrum of risks across the 
entire firm, gathering and processing information on an enterprisewide basis in real time. In 
short, you cannot manage your risks if you do not know what they are. Gathering information 
should be done with appropriate care and with adequate resources for checking timeliness 
and veracity. Risk managers should live by the adage, "Trust but verify," being careful not to 
rely on assessments or data from others without conducting proper due diligence. 
It  is  also  worth  noting  that  financial  institutions  should  gather  information  before  they  see 
market troubles brewing. In other words, scrambling for information once turbulence sets in is 
not a good practice. Thus, even if Latin America has not experienced the strains that other 
markets are experiencing, it is nonetheless important to be proactive about stress testing and 
scenario analysis.  
Understanding a firm's true risk exposures requires examining not just risks on the balance 
sheet, but also off-balance-sheet risks that are sometimes more difficult to identify and often 
not so easy to quantify. Latent risks from certain complex products and certain risky activities 
are particularly problematic, because they can manifest themselves when market turbulence 
sets  in.  Careful  analysis  is  particularly  important  for  new  financial  products  that  have  not 
been fully "road-tested"; this caveat also applies when products with a track record in one 
country are introduced to another country for the first time or markets develop rapidly in a 
country.  Stress  testing  and  scenario  analysis  are  essential  tools  in  the  analysis  of  risk, 
because  they  can  reveal  potential  concentrations  of  risk  that  may  not  be  apparent  when 
using information gleaned from normal times. 
Liquidity risk management 
Next, I wish to consider the second fundamental, liquidity risk management. Because of its 
central  role  in  the  business  of  banking,  liquidity  risk  requires  rigorous  and  effective 
management.  This  is  a  fundamental  truth  that  may  have  even  greater  relevance  in  Latin 
American  markets,  where  securities  tend  to  be  less  liquid  than  in  the  United  States  and 
where banks rarely have the luxury of selling their loans. 
Recent  events  have  shown  that  during  times  of  systemwide  stress,  liquidity  shocks  can 
become correlated so that the same factors that can lead to liquidity problems for the bank's 
assets  or  off-balance-sheet  vehicles  can  simultaneously  put  pressure  on  a  bank's  own 
funding liquidity. Again, we see the trouble that risk concentrations can cause if an institution 
has not tried to identify them in advance and has not taken steps to mitigate their effects.  
As I mentioned earlier, we also have noticed the potential for liquidity risk to have an impact 
on  capital  adequacy.  In  a  few  cases,  unplanned  increases  in  a  bank's  balance  sheet  led 
some banks to take measures to bolster their capital. Because risk concentrations have the 
potential  to  manifest  themselves  during  times  of  stress  and  at  that  time  adversely  affect 
capital positions, it is particularly important that firms assess how liquidity events could place 
pressure on capital levels. In a nutshell, liquidity problems always have the potential to affect 
bank balance sheets and, in doing so, bank capital adequacy. 
Governance and risk control 
The third fundamental, governance and risk control, has been a key factor that differentiated 
performance across financial institutions during recent events.4 Clearly, senior management 
of financial institutions must take on a very active and involved role in risk management. In 
some cases, it appears that managers were not fully aware of the extent to which the risks of 
the different activities undertaken by the firm could, first, become correlated in times of stress 
                                                 
4   See, for example: Senior Supervisors Group (2008), "Observations on Risk Management Practices during the 
Most Recent Market Turbulence" (New York: Federal Reserve Bank of New York, March 6). 
6 
 BIS Review 40/2008
and,  second,  result  in high  concentrations  of  risk  exposures.  For  example,  those  in  senior 
management may not have been cognizant of a firm's overall concentration to U.S. subprime 
mortgages, because they did not realize that in addition to the subprime mortgages on their 
books,  they  had  exposure  through  off-balance-sheet  vehicles  holding  such  mortgages, 
through  claims  on  counterparties  exposed  to  subprime,  and  through  certain  complex 
securities. 
Senior  managers  should  encourage  risk  managers  to  dig  deep  to  uncover  not  only  risks 
within each business unit, but also risk concentrations that can arise from the set of activities 
undertaken by the firm as a whole as well as latent risks – such as hidden risk concentrations 
that can arise from correlation of risk in times of stress. It can be very difficult to challenge 
one's colleagues by pointing out business activities that may be creating too much risk, and 
that is why it is crucial for the risk manager to be known both inside and outside the firm as 
an independent voice who is influential with top management. Executives also must set the 
appropriate tone at the top with respect to the importance of independent and unbiased risk 
evaluation. 
Conclusion 
While  improvements  in  both  macroeconomic  and  microeconomic  policies  have  helped  to 
make  some  Latin  American  countries  less  vulnerable  to  outside  shocks,  the  region  is  not 
decoupled from the United States and the rest of the world. As globalization has proceeded, 
Latin America is increasingly connected to the world through global capital flows and capital 
markets.  Further  improvements  in  both  macroeconomic  and  microeconomic  policies  are 
imperative  to  maintain  those  flows  and  economic  health,  particularly  in  the  face  of  global 
financial turbulence. One area that merits particular attention is enhancing the management 
of  risk  in  financial  institutions  and  markets  in  Latin  America  as  well  as  emerging  markets 
more generally. 
BIS Review 40/2008 
 7
