Frederic S Mishkin: Whither Federal Reserve communications 
Speech  by  Mr  Frederic  S  Mishkin,  Member  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  US  Federal 
Reserve  System,  at  the  Peterson  Institute  for  International  Economics,  Washington,  DC, 
28 July 2008. 
The  original  speech,  with  a  full  list  of  references,  can  be  found  on  the  US  Federal  Reserve  System’s  website 
(www.federalreserve.gov).  
 Over  the  years,  the  Federal  Reserve  has  significantly  increased  the  transparency  of 
monetary policy making. For example, starting in 1979, the Federal Open Market Committee 
(FOMC)  has  included  economic  projections  of  the  FOMC  participants  in  each  semiannual 
Monetary Report to Congress Since 1994, the FOMC has publicly announced changes in its 
target for its policy instrument, the federal funds rate. Most recently, the FOMC extended the 
horizon for its projections in October 2007 and is now publishing these projections four times 
a year.1
Has the Federal Reserve gone far enough? Or would further advances in transparency be 
useful?  I  will  argue  here  that  the  science  of  monetary  policy  suggests  that  the  Federal 
Reserve can indeed go further in enhancing its communication strategy, and that doing so 
would produce important benefits in economic performance and democratic accountability. I 
will also outline a specific proposal of my own and address a few concerns that some might 
have with elements of this proposal. 
Before  proceeding,  I  would  like  to  emphasize  that  my  remarks  today  reflect  only  my  own 
views and not necessarily those of anyone else on the Board of Governors or the FOMC. 
Indeed, this disclaimer has even more meaning now since, as many of you know, I will be 
leaving  the  Federal  Reserve  Board  at  the  end  of  August  and  returning  to  Columbia 
University.2
What are the key scientific principles for monetary policy communication? 
To  think  about  what  kind  of  central  bank  communication  is  desirable,  let's  begin  by 
considering some key scientific principles regarding the objectives of monetary policy and the 
benefits of central bank transparency. 
Objectives of monetary policy 
The modern science of monetary policy is based on the idea that the central bank's objective 
is to maximize the economic well-being of the households in the economy (Mishkin 2007d). 
Broadly speaking, this objective can be expressed in terms of two components: minimizing 
the deviations of inflation from its optimal rate and minimizing the deviations of real economic 
activity  from  its  so-called  natural  rate,  which  is  the  efficient  level  determined  by  the 
productive potential of the economy. Moreover, this analytical formulation of the objectives of 
monetary  policy  captures  the  essential  mission  of  the  Federal  Reserve  System,  as 
summarized by the Federal Reserve's dual mandate to promote price stability and maximum 
employment.3  By  the  way,  I  believe  that  the  Federal  Reserve's  role  as  the  lender  of  last 
                                                 
1   A more detailed review of past enhancements in Federal Reserve communications can be found in Bernanke 
(2007) and Mishkin (2007h). 
I  appreciate  assistance  from  Brian  Doyle,  Michael  Kiley,  and  Andrew  Levin  in  the  preparation  of  these 
remarks. 
2  
3   Mishkin (2007b). 
BIS Review 95/2008 
 1
resort is also crucial for fostering the stability of the financial system, but I will not elaborate 
further on that today.4
Policymakers, academic economists, and the general public broadly agree that maintaining a 
low  and  stable  inflation  rate  significantly  benefits  the  economy.  For  example,  low  and 
predictable inflation simplifies the savings and retirement planning of households, facilitates 
firms' production and investment decisions, and minimizes distortions that arise because the 
tax system is not completely indexed to inflation. Moreover, I interpret the available economic 
theory and empirical evidence as indicating that a long-run average inflation rate of about 2 
percent,  or  perhaps  a  bit  lower,  is  low  enough  to  facilitate  the  everyday  decisions  of 
households and businesses while also alleviating the risk of debt deflation and other pitfalls 
of excessively low inflation.5
The  rationale  for  promoting  maximum  sustainable  employment  is  also  fairly  obvious: 
Recessions  weaken  household  income  and  business  production,  and  unemployment  hurts 
workers and their families. As I have outlined elsewhere, these two objectives are typically 
complementary  and  mutually  reinforcing:  that  is,  done  properly,  stabilizing  inflation 
contributes to stabilizing economic activity around its sustainable level, and vice versa.6
Nevertheless, it's important to note a fundamental difference between the objectives of price 
stability and maximum sustainable employment. On the one hand, the long-run average rate 
of inflation is solely determined by the actions of the Federal Reserve.7 On the other hand, 
the level of maximum sustainable employment is not something that can be chosen by the 
Federal Reserve, because no central bank can control the level of real economic activity or 
employment over the longer run.8 In fact, any attempt to use stimulative monetary policy to 
maintain employment above its long-run sustainable level would inevitably lead to an upward 
spiral of inflation with severe adverse consequences for household income and employment.  
Recent  research  has  also  emphasized  the  challenges  of  making  contemporaneous  "real-
time"  assessments  of  the  level  of  maximum  sustainable  employment,  because  this  level 
cannot be directly observed and can be inferred only with considerable uncertainty. Thus, in 
making  these  assessments,  monetary  policy  makers  need  to  draw  on  a  wide  range  of 
indicators from labor, product, and financial markets.9
Benefits of central bank communication 
A central element in successful monetary policy is the establishment of a nominal anchor. 
Why is this so important? The expectations for inflation of households and firms are a key 
factor  in  determining  the  actual  behavior  of  inflation.10  In  the  absence  of  a  firm  nominal 
anchor, these expectations may wander as the private sector revises its assessment of the 
rate  at  which  inflation  is  likely  to  settle,  and  those  movements  in  expectations  for  future 
inflation can generate pressure on the current inflation rate.  
                                                 
4   Mishkin  (2007f,  2007g,  2008a,  2008e)  discusses  the  lender-of-last-resort  function  and  reviews  the  Federal 
Reserve's recent measures for providing additional liquidity to financial markets. 
5   Mishkin (2008c). 
6   Mishkin (2008b). 
7   This  is  the  point  of  Milton  Friedman's  famous  adage,  "Inflation  is  always  and  everywhere  a  monetary 
phenomenon" (Friedman, 1963, p. 17). 
8   Mishkin (2007b). 
9   Mishkin (2007c). 
10   Mishkin (2007a). 
2 
 BIS Review 95/2008
By  establishing  a  transparent  and  credible  commitment  to  a  specific  numerical  inflation 
objective,  monetary  policy  can  provide  a  firm  anchor  for  long-run  inflation  expectations, 
thereby  directly  contributing  to  the  objective  of  low  and  stable  inflation.11  Additionally,  the 
presence  of  a  firm  nominal  anchor  gives  the  central  bank  greater  flexibility  to  respond 
decisively to adverse demand shocks. Such a commitment helps ensure that an aggressive 
policy easing is not misinterpreted as signaling a shift in the central bank's inflation objective 
and thereby minimizes the possibility that inflation expectations could move upward and lead 
to a rise in actual inflation. A strong nominal anchor can be especially valuable in periods of 
financial market stress, as we have been experiencing recently, when prompt and decisive 
policy action may be required to minimize the risk of a severe contraction in economic activity 
that could exacerbate uncertainty and financial market stress.12 Thus, the establishment of 
an  explicit  numerical  inflation  objective  can  play  an  important  role  in  promoting  financial 
stability as well as the stability of employment and inflation. 
More  broadly,  it  should  be  noted  that  central  bank  transparency  contributes  importantly  to 
democratic accountability and economic prosperity.13 In particular, in a democratic society, 
the central bank has a responsibility to provide the public and its elected representatives with 
a  full  and  compelling  rationale  for  monetary  policy  decisions.  Clarification  of  the  central 
bank's objectives and policy strategies also reduces economic and financial uncertainty and 
thereby facilitates efficient decisionmaking by households, businesses, and financial market 
participants. 
How has Federal Reserve communication been enhanced? 
The  Federal  Reserve  has  been  a  pioneer  in  a  number  of  aspects  of  central  bank 
communication, many of which I have mentioned at the beginning of these remarks. Now I 
would  like  to  discuss  some  of  the  main  aspects  of  the  enhancements  to  the  FOMC's 
communication strategy that were announced in November. First, the forecast horizon for the 
FOMC's  economic  projections  now  covers  three  calendar years  instead  of  only  two  years. 
For  example,  the  projections  released  after  the  past  meeting  extend  to  2010.  Second,  the 
Committee now publishes these projections four times a year rather than twice a year. Third, 
the projections now include a forecast of overall consumer price inflation, as measured by 
the  price  index  for  personal  consumption  expenditures  (PCE),  a  broad  price  index  that 
corresponds  closely  to  the  price  stability  objective  in  the  Federal  Reserve's  dual  mandate. 
These  forecasts  of  overall  inflation  complement  the  ongoing  forecasts  the  Committee 
provides of the so-called core version of the PCE price index, which excludes the prices of 
food and energy.14 Fourth, the release of the projections now includes a narrative describing 
FOMC participants' views of the principal forces shaping the outlook and the sources of risks 
to that outlook.  
As  I  indicated  last  November,  I  believe  that  these  enhancements  provide  important 
information  that  will  contribute  to  the  public's  understanding  of  our  objectives  and  the 
rationale for our policy actions and hence will facilitate the decisionmaking of households and 
businesses.15
                                                 
11   Mishkin (2008d). 
12   Mishkin (2008a). 
13   Bernanke (2007). 
14   Mishkin (2007e) discusses several key distinctions between overall inflation and core inflation in informing the 
conduct of monetary policy. 
15   Mishkin (2007h). 
BIS Review 95/2008 
 3
As  reported  last  week  in  conjunction  with  the  minutes  of  the  latest  FOMC  meeting,  the 
projections for overall PCE inflation at a three-year horizon (which is currently 2010) fell in a 
range of 1.6 percent to 2.1 percent, and the central tendency of these projections was 1.8 
percent to 2 percent.16 Each FOMC participant's projection is made under the assumption of 
"appropriate" monetary policy--that is, the path of policy calibrated to achieve outcomes for 
economic activity and inflation that are, in the eyes of each participant, most consistent with 
the objectives of price stability and maximum  employment. For that reason, the longer-run 
inflation  projections  provide  information  about  each  FOMC  participant's  assessment  of  the 
long-run inflation rate that best promotes those dual objectives--what I have referred to as 
the  "mandate-consistent  inflation  rate."17  The  increased  information  that  these  projections 
convey  regarding  FOMC  participants'  views  of  the  mandate-consistent  inflation  rate, 
combined  with  the  FOMC's  continuing  commitment  to  keeping  inflation  low  and  stable, 
should help anchor inflation expectations and actual inflation more firmly. 
The  longer-run  projections  of  output  growth  and  unemployment  are  heavily  influenced  by 
FOMC participants' assessments of the sustainable rates of output growth and employment. 
As  a  result,  these  projections  can  provide  the  public  with  useful  information  regarding  the 
FOMC's  estimates  of  the  sustainable  rate  of  output  growth  (often  referred  to  as  potential 
output  growth)  and  of  the  sustainable  unemployment  rate  (often  referred  to  as  the  natural 
rate of unemployment). 
Providing  projections  for  the  short  run  as  well  as  for  the  longer  run  encourages  FOMC 
participants  to  think  in  terms  of  desirable  paths  for  inflation  and  output,  a  discipline  that 
economic research suggests will produce better policy outcomes. These projections also are 
useful in enabling the FOMC to explain its policy decisions and strategies more fully in the 
context of its medium-term objectives for economic activity and inflation as well as the risks 
to those objectives. As a result, the public and the Congress can better assess whether our 
forecasts  of  the  economy  are  reasonable  and  whether  we  are  pursuing  a  policy  that  is 
consistent  with  achieving  the  dual  mandate  of  price  stability  and  maximum  sustainable 
employment.  The  result  should  be  increased  accountability  that  is  consistent  with  basic 
democratic principles. 
Is there room for further improvement? 
Although  the  enhancements  to  the  FOMC's  communication  strategy  last  November  have 
been a major step forward, I believe that there is some room for further improvement.  
Conceptual considerations 
As a conceptual matter, the three-year horizon of the projections may not be long enough to 
provide  sufficient  clarity  about  the  views  of  FOMC  participants  regarding  the  mandate-
consistent  inflation  rate,  the  sustainable  growth  rate  of  output,  or  the  natural  rate  of 
unemployment.  Moreover,  these  projections  do  not  establish  a  transparent  and  credible 
commitment to a specific numerical inflation objective and hence do not provide a sufficiently 
firm nominal anchor. 
In my view, the length of the forecast horizon is particularly relevant at the current juncture in 
considering  the  projections  for  output  growth  and  unemployment.  Because  of  the  recent 
adverse  shocks  to  the  economy--including  turmoil  in  financial  markets  and  the  sharp 
increase in the prices of oil--output growth in recent quarters has fallen below potential, and 
                                                 
16   The range of projections from the April FOMC meeting was 1.5 percent to 2 percent for overall PCE, while the 
central tendency was 1.8 percent to 2 percent (FOMC, 2008). 
17   This is particularly true  when the underlying level of inflation is reasonably close to the mandate-consistent 
rate, as I believe to be the case at the present time. 
4 
 BIS Review 95/2008
the  unemployment  rate  is,  as  best  as  I  can  judge,  above  the  natural rate.  Similarly,  sharp 
increases in the prices of many commodities have driven inflation above rates consistent with 
price  stability.  Even  under  appropriate  monetary  policy,  Committee  forecasts  of  inflation, 
output growth, and unemployment  might not settle at their respective long-run rates within 
the three-year horizon, obscuring Committee participants' views about these key parameters. 
This  problem  may  currently  be  somewhat  less  acute  for  the  current  set  of  inflation 
projections,  because  inflation  is  projected  to  moderate  to  about  2  percent  or  below  by  the 
end of the projection period. Nevertheless, to the extent that some slack in economic activity 
is projected to persist through 2010, that slack might well induce a modest further decline in 
inflation,  implying  that  policymakers'  projections  for  inflation  in  2010  might  be  a  bit  higher 
than their assessments of the mandate-consistent inflation rate.  
Empirical evidence 
My  discussion  of  room  for  improvement  relative  to  the  Federal  Reserve's  current 
communication strategy has been theoretical. There is, fortunately, evidence from a number 
of countries that have adopted an explicit numerical goal for inflation, including Canada, New 
Zealand,  Sweden,  and  the  United  Kingdom.18  And  there  is  also  evidence  from  the 
experience  of  the  European  Central  Bank  (ECB),  which  has  not  adopted  an  explicit 
numerical  goal  but  has  provided  a  fairly  precise  verbal  description  of  its  commitment  to 
keeping inflation "below, but close to, 2 percent in the medium term."19
                                                 
18   Further details on the experiences of these countries--as well as other economies that have adopted explicit 
numerical inflation objectives--may be found in Mishkin and Posen (1997), Bernanke and others (1999), and 
Mishkin and Schmidt-Hebbel (2001, 2007). 
19   See  ECB  (2003,  p.  6).  Indeed,  the  experience  of  other  central  banks  confirms  that  establishing  a  specific 
numerical value for the inflation objective can be viewed as a technical issue that does not necessarily require 
any  new  legislation,  but,  of  course,  this  depends  on  the  political  system  in  each  country.  In  Sweden,  for 
example,  the  government  announced  in  1991  that  low  inflation  was  an  overriding  political  goal,  but  the 
Riksbank's January 1993 announcement of an explicit inflation objective did not coincide with any legislative 
action (Giavazzi and Mishkin, 2006). The Riksbank stated an inflation goal accompanied by a two-year start-
up period, so that the goal was to become operational in January 1995. Soon after the initial announcement by 
the Riksbank, various changes to its legislative mandate were proposed. Many of these were adopted in 1999, 
when  a  new  constitution  and  new  Riksbank  Act  came  into  effect.  Similarly,  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Australia 
announced a numerical inflation objective in 1993, and this objective was formalized about three years later 
when the government and governor issued a joint "Statement on the Conduct of Monetary Policy" (see Fraser, 
1993; Reserve Bank of Australia and the Treasurer of Australia, 1996; and Reserve Bank of Australia, 2008). 
And  in  Chile,  the  law  establishes  broad  objectives  for  the  Central  Bank  of  Chile,  but  the  Bank  itself  has 
elaborated that its mandate for price stability is to be interpreted at aiming for a 3 percent inflation rate at a 
two-year horizon (see Central Bank of Chile, 2007). 
BIS Review 95/2008 
 5
 Over the past several years, empirical work that has drawn on this international experience 
has  found  some  significant  benefits  in  anchoring  inflation  expectations  by  establishing  an 
explicit inflation objective. For example, let's take a look at three figures from a recent paper 
by  Beechey,  Johannsen,  and  Levin.20  Figure  1  depicts  the  long-run  inflation  expectations 
from surveys of professional forecasters in the euro area and in the United States. Inflation 
expectations in both economies are relatively well anchored. The lines on the left for the euro 
area are extremely flat, with only tiny and occasional deviations from the ECB's inflation goal 
of keeping inflation just below 2 percent over the medium run. In the United States, inflation 
expectations  as  measured  by  the  mean  or  median  forecast  in  the  Survey  of  Professional 
Forecasters  are  also  quite  fixed  at  around  2-1/2  percent  for  consumer  price  index  (CPI) 
inflation, but those in other surveys move around somewhat more. 
                                                 
20   Beechey, Johannsen, and Levin (2008). 
 6 
 BIS Review 95/2008
However,  there  is  substantially  greater  disagreement  in  long-run  inflation  forecasts  for  the 
United States than for the euro area. As shown in figure 2, the standard deviation of U.S. 
inflation forecasts at each survey date is higher than the standard deviation of corresponding 
euro  area  inflation  forecasts.  Moreover,  the  degree  of  dispersion  in  the  views  of  individual 
forecasters has gradually declined towards negligible levels for the euro area but not for the 
United States. One obvious interpretation of these patterns is that professional forecasters in 
the United States are less certain about the Federal Reserve's longer-term inflation goal.  
  
That  uncertainty  may  also  explain  differences  in  the  behavior  of  inflation  compensation  as 
implied by the gap between nominal and real yields on long-term bonds. Figure 3 depicts far-
forward inflation compensation (that is, the one-year-forward rate nine years ahead) for the 
United  States  and  the  euro  area.  Inflation  compensation,  sometimes  referred  to  as 
"breakeven  inflation,"  reflects  not  only  inflation  expectations  but  also  a  premium  that 
compensates for uncertainty about inflation outcomes at the specified horizon. Evidently, far-
forward inflation compensation for the euro area displays much smaller fluctuations than for 
the  United  States,  consistent  with  greater  stability  of  inflation  expectations  and  a  lower 
degree  of  uncertainty  about  longer-run  inflation  outcomes.  Moreover,  regression  analysis 
confirms  that  U.S.  far-ahead  forward  inflation  compensation  exhibits  statistically  significant 
responses to surprises in macroeconomic data releases--consistent with the view that market 
participants  are  continuously  revising  their  views  about  the  longer-run  outlook  for  U.S. 
inflation.  In  contrast,  euro-area  inflation  compensation  does  not  respond  significantly  to 
economic news.21
One concern might be that these benefits in anchoring inflation expectations could come at 
the expense of the performance of output growth. However, the empirical evidence suggests 
that central banks with explicit inflation goals do not have worse output performances than 
                                                 
21   Gürkaynak,  Sack,  and  Swanson  (2005)  demonstrated  the  sensitivity  of  U.S.  far-ahead  forward  nominal 
interest rates to economic news. Gürkaynak, Levin, and Swanson (2008) examined far-ahead forward inflation 
compensation and found significant effects of news for the United States but not for Sweden or the United 
Kingdom; Gürkaynak, Levin, Marder, and Swanson (2007) obtained consistent results for Canada and Chile, 
and Beechey, Johannsen, and Levin (2008) found no significant effects of news on far-ahead forward inflation 
compensation for the euro area. 
BIS Review 95/2008 
 7
central  banks,  such  as  the  Federal  Reserve,  that  have  not  specified  an  explicit  numerical 
goal for inflation.22
 In addition, the international experience suggests that an explicit inflation goal does not imply 
that  these  central  banks  place  more  emphasis  on  stabilizing  inflation  to  the  detriment  of 
stabilizing output. Figure 4 plots the standard deviation of headline inflation (measured as the 
quarter-on-quarter  change  at  an  annual  rate)  against  the  standard  deviation  of  the 
unemployment  gap  as  estimated  by  the  Organisation  for  Economic  Co-operation  and 
Development. Note that the United States appears near the top of the graph, as the country 
with the highest volatility of unemployment gaps.23 Moreover, a number of researchers have 
shown  that  the  response  of  policy  interest  rates  to  economic  activity  and  inflation  in  the 
United States and euro area is quite similar, suggesting that the Federal Reserve and the 
ECB place similar weights on inflation and activity.24
This  overview  of  the  evidence  should  not  be  viewed  as  suggesting  that  the  steps  that  the 
FOMC has taken to improve its communications over the past couple of decades or the more 
recent enhancements last fall have provided no benefits. Rather, this analysis supports the 
view that some room for further improvement still remains. 
What should be done? A proposal 
In light of these considerations, I would like to suggest several specific modifications to the 
Federal Reserve's current communication strategy.  
                                                 
22   See Ball and Sheridan (2003) and Levin, Natalucci, and Piger (2003). 
23   Of course, this evidence is only suggestive, because differences in economic structure may account for some 
of these differences; for example, most of the countries with explicit inflation objectives are small and relatively 
open economies that might be expected to have higher volatility of both unemployment and inflation. It should 
also be noted that the U.S. economy is closer to the center of the pack instead of an outlier when the volatility 
of the real economy is measured in terms of output gaps rather than unemployment gaps. 
24   See Smets and Wouters (2005) and Christiano, Motto, and Rostagno (2007). 
8 
 BIS Review 95/2008
   First, the horizon for the projections on output growth, unemployment, and inflation 
should  be  lengthened.  This  change  might  involve  simply  an  announcement  of 
FOMC  participants'  assessment  of  where 
inflation,  output  growth,  and 
unemployment would converge under appropriate monetary policy in the long run. 
Alternatively,  the  horizon  for  the  projections  could  be  extended  out  further,  say  to 
five or more years.  
Second,  FOMC  participants  should  work  toward  reaching  a  consensus  on  the 
specific numerical value of the mandate-consistent inflation rate, and this consensus 
value should be reflected in their longer-run projections for inflation.25 
Third,  the  FOMC  should  emphasize  its  intention  that  this  consensus  value  of  the 
mandate-consistent  inflation  rate  would  only  be  modified  for  sound  economic 
reasons,  such  as  substantial  improvements  in  the  measurement  of  inflation  or 
marked changes in the structure of the economy. 
Would this proposal work? 
It  is  reasonable  to  ask  a  few  questions  about  whether  these  proposed  changes  would  be 
feasible or desirable adjustments to the Federal Reserve's communication strategy. 
Would this proposal be consistent with the dual mandate? 
Some  commentators  have  worried  that  establishing  a  specific  numerical  inflation  objective 
might  lead  to  an  overemphasis  on  controlling  inflation  and  not  enough  concern  about 
stabilizing real economic activity. My proposal is, however, consistent with the dual mandate, 
because it has the advantage of being less likely to be misinterpreted as a commitment to 
control inflation within a tight range over short horizons, since it only involves a consensus on 
the  mandate-consistent  inflation  rate  and  an  agreement  not  to  change  it  without  scientific 
justification.  By  so  doing,  this  proposal  should  enhance  the  ability  of  monetary  policy  to 
stabilize fluctuations in economic activity, and therefore support the dual objectives provided 
to the Federal Reserve by congressional legislation.  
One lesson from the experiences of foreign central banks with explicit inflation objectives is 
that such a goal is indeed consistent with a dual mandate  for stable prices and maximum 
employment. Some of the central banks that have explicit inflation objectives have mandates 
that  specifically  include  other  objectives  such  as  output  stabilization  and  financial  stability. 
For  example,  the  regulations  governing  the  Norwegian  central  bank  specifically  state  that 
monetary  policy  should  contribute  to  stable  developments  in  output  and  employment. 
Similarly,  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Australia  aims  at  encouraging  strong  and  sustainable 
economic  growth  while  ensuring  that  consumer  inflation  is  consistent  with  the  explicit 
numerical objective over the medium run. 
Even  at  central  banks  where  the  inflation  objective  appears  to  be  the  primary  goal, 
policymakers  do  acknowledge  that  the  stability  of  economic  activity  is  also  an  important 
objective.  For  instance,  Charles  Goodhart,  a  former  member  of  the  Bank  of  England's 
Monetary Policy Committee (MPC), has emphasized that the MPC aims at stabilizing both 
inflation and real economic activity and that its monetary policy strategy is quite similar to that 
of  other  central  banks  such  as  the  Federal  Reserve.26  Moreover,  as  I  noted  earlier,  the 
                                                 
25   FOMC participants would work toward reaching this consensus about mandate-consistent inflation using the 
overall inflation rate, as measured by PCE inflation, to be consistent with the Federal Reserve's dual mandate. 
Overall and core (excluding changes in the prices of food and energy) inflation rates are likely to be at similar 
rates at a horizon of five or more years. 
26   Goodhart (2005). 
BIS Review 95/2008 
 9
empirical evidence is consistent with this view: Central banks with explicit inflation objectives 
do  not  have  worse  outcomes  for  output  growth  and  do  not  appear  to  be  favoring  inflation 
stabilization at the expense of output stabilization. 
Should the inflation objective be stated as a specific numerical value rather than a 
range? 
Establishing  a  specific  numerical  value  for  the  inflation  objective  is  a  crucial  aspect  of  my 
proposal.  As  discussed  in  my  recent  speech  with  the  whimsical  title  of  "Comfort  Zones, 
Shmumfort Zones," publishing a range of values for the inflation objective has a number of 
undesirable features.27 For example, when the price stability objective is formulated in terms 
of  an  acceptable  range  of  inflation  outcomes,  the  policy  implications  may  be  difficult  to 
interpret  and  may  make  it  harder  for  a  committee  of  policymakers  to  decide  on  an 
appropriate course of monetary policy.  
Describing  inflation  objectives  in  terms  of  a  comfort  zone  could  also  lead  to  perverse 
expectations dynamics that leads to larger fluctuations in economic activity.28 Moreover, the 
uncertainty associated with long-run inflation under a zone could affect the perceived long-
term  real  interest  rates  faced  by  households  and  firms  through  differential  effects  on  the 
expectations  of  different  agents,  a  pitfall  that  seems  particularly  plausible  given  the 
dispersion in professional forecasters' long-run expectations for U.S. inflation, as shown in 
figure 2.29  
Indeed, one important lesson from the international experience is that point objectives have 
proven more effective than ranges in anchoring inflation expectations.30 And even in cases 
where the inflation objective is formulated in terms of a band, emphasizing the midpoint of 
that band helps allay concerns that the central bank will only take aggressive policy actions 
at the edges of the band. In light of these considerations, many foreign central banks have 
taken steps to move away from an inflation objective that is expressed as a range and have 
moved  toward  an  objective  that  is  expressed  as  a  single  numerical  value,  as  does  my 
proposal here.  
For  example,  the  Bank  of  England  initially  announced  an  inflation  objective  in  terms  of  a 
range  from  1  percent  to  4  percent  for  the  Retail  Price  Index  excluding  mortgage  interest 
payments  (RPIX),  but  this  range  was  perceived  as  a  band  of  indifference  that  implied  the 
Bank would be equally satisfied with inflation outcomes anywhere within the range. Perhaps 
partly as a result, inflation expectations and realized inflation tended to remain close to the 
top  of  the  range.  Thus,  the  objective  subsequently  was  modified  to  a  point  target  of  2-1/2 
percent  for  RPIX  inflation,  where  inflation  above  or  below  that  value  was  viewed  as  being 
equally undesirable. Inflation expectations converged quickly to this new rate in surveys of 
both households and professional forecasters, and the move was favorably received both by 
the public and by financial markets.31
                                                 
27   Mishkin (2008c). 
28   Mishkin (2008c). 
29   At a given point in time, the yield on a bond with a specific maturity is determined by the views of the "marginal 
investor" who is indifferent between buying and selling that bond. Thus, if financial market participants have 
heterogenous views about the central bank's inflation objective, the identity of the marginal investor might vary 
systematically over time in ways that influence the evolution of long-term bond yields. Another pitfall is that if a 
central bank  places  a high degree of emphasis  on the  boundaries of  a range, then these threshold  effects 
imply  nonlinearities  in  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy  that  are  likely  to  produce  less  desirable  economic 
outcomes; see Orphanides and Wieland (2000). 
30   See Mishkin and Westelius (2008) and Mishkin (2008c). 
31   In June 1995, the range of 1 percent to 4 percent was dropped and the goal became an inflation rate of 2-1/2 
percent or less for RPIX inflation. The goal became a point target of 2-1/2 percent on the RPIX with deviations 
10 
 BIS Review 95/2008
In  another  instructive  example,  the  ECB  had  initially  emphasized  a  broad  objective  of 
keeping inflation below 2 percent over the medium term, but in May 2003, the ECB clarified 
that  policy  would  be  aimed  at  maintaining  inflation  below,  but  close  to,  2  percent.  That 
clarification was welcomed by market participants and likely contributed to the firm anchoring 
of long-run inflation expectations. 
Would this proposal be misinterpreted as establishing a goal for maximum 
employment? 
As I have emphasized, a central bank can determine the long-run average inflation rate but 
cannot choose the maximum sustainable level of employment, which is determined by the 
underlying structure of the real economy. Thus, one might worry whether providing longer-
horizon  projections  for  output  growth  and  employment  as  well  as  inflation  might  be 
mistakenly  interpreted  as  establishing  specific--and  ultimately  infeasible--goals  for  real 
economic  activity.  I  do  not  believe  this  potential  pitfall  poses  a  substantial  risk.  Because 
monetary  policy  determines  the  inflation  rate  in  the  long  run,  agreement  on  the  mandate-
consistent  inflation  rate  among  FOMC  members  can  only  lower  uncertainty  about  future 
inflation.  In  contrast,  differences  in  the  long-run  projections  for  output  growth  and 
unemployment across FOMC participants are inevitable, as these factors are outside of the 
Committee's  control  and  inherently  uncertain  given  our  understanding  of  economic 
fluctuations.  The  ongoing  dispersion  in  long-run  projections  for  output  growth  and 
unemployment that is a feature of my proposal would help underscore that these projections 
are assessments of potential output growth and the natural rate of unemployment and should 
not be viewed as numerical objectives chosen by the FOMC. 
Could the numerical inflation objective be modified if appropriate? 
One  might  be  concerned  about  whether  the  numerical  inflation  objective  could  be 
subsequently  adjusted  for  sound  economic  reasons.  However,  I  would  again  draw  on  the 
experience from other central banks and point out that changing the technical specification of 
the inflation goal has been very well received elsewhere.  
For example, in late 2003, the inflation target of the Bank of England was switched from a 2-
1/2  percent  target  for  RPIX  inflation  to  a  2  percent  target  for  the  CPI.32  Despite  some 
concerns  both  from  the  public  and  the  Bank  about  the  change,  it  appears  to  have  been 
implemented  with  few  problems.  Indeed,  figure  5  shows  the  distribution  of  professional 
forecasters' medium- to long-range inflation projections in the United Kingdom in the fourth 
quarter  of  2001,  the  first  quarter  of  2004,  and  the  second  quarter  of  this  year.  These 
expectations were initially clustered relatively tightly around the inflation objective of a 2-1/2 
percent rate but moved to the new value of 2 percent within a few months of the announced 
change  and  have  remained  firmly  anchored  since  then,  especially  compared  with  the 
dispersion  in  views  regarding  the  longer-term  outlook  for  U.S.  inflation  (Gürkaynak,  Levin, 
and  Swanson,  2008).  Similarly,  as  I  mentioned  earlier,  the  ECB  also  clarified  its  inflation 
objective, and this change was implemented smoothly. 
                                                                                                                                                      
in  either  direction  treated  symmetrically  in  December  1997,  about  seven  months  after  the  creation  of  the 
Monetary Policy Committee and the granting of Bank of England independence (Bank of England, 2008). 
32   See Brown (2003) and King (2004) for the rationale behind the change. 
BIS Review 95/2008 
 11
 Would this proposal provide a sufficient degree of commitment to the nominal 
anchor? 
By  stating  its  intention  not  to  modify  the  mandate-consistent  inflation  rate  without  a  clear 
technical rationale, I believe that the FOMC would provide a firm nominal anchor that would 
not differ much in practice from some alternative commitment to a specific numerical inflation 
objective. In explaining this view, I want to draw on some conversations with my son, who is 
currently enrolled in law school, and to take advantage of the opportunity to demonstrate my 
erudition by using a bit of Latin. (As you may know, I've already demonstrated my command 
of Yiddish in another recent speech.33) 
In  this  instance,  the  relevant  legal  term  is  stare  decisis,  which  means  "to  stand  by  things 
decided."34 This concept plays a crucial role in the functioning of our legal system: When the 
Supreme  Court  makes  a  decision  in  any  given  case,  the  reasoning  behind  that  decision 
serves as a precedent that guides all subsequent legal considerations, except for particular 
                                                 
33   Mishkin (2008c). 
34   The full legal term is stare decisis et non quieta movere, and the literal translation from the Latin is as follows: 
"Stand by things decided and do not move that which is still." 
12 
 BIS Review 95/2008
circumstances  in  which  the  Supreme  Court  finds  compelling  reasons  for  modifying  or 
overturning a prior decision. The approach that I have recommended here would operate in a 
roughly similar way. Because the consensus on the mandate-consistent inflation rate would 
be very transparent, the FOMC would not be inclined to modify that consensus value except 
for  sound  economic  reasons;  hence,  this  proposal  would  be  sufficient  to  provide  a  firm 
anchor for long-run inflation expectations.  
Conclusion 
While the recent enhancements of the Federal Reserve's communication strategy have been 
beneficial, I believe that the science of monetary policy indicates that the FOMC needs to go 
even  further.  Thus,  I  have  suggested  that  the  FOMC  should  lengthen  the  horizons  of  its 
projections,  reach  a  consensus  on  a  specific  numerical  value  for  the  mandate-consistent 
inflation  rate,  and  indicate  that  this  consensus  value  would  be  modified  only  for  good 
scientific  reasons.  I  have  argued  that  moving  in  this  direction  would  improve  economic 
outcomes by anchoring inflation expectations more firmly while allowing sufficient flexibility to 
ensure that monetary policy would continue to be fully consistent with our dual mandate of 
price stability and maximum employment.  
Of  course,  once  I  return  to  academia  at  the  end  of  next  month,  I  will  no  longer  be 
participating in any official consideration of these issues. However, I hope that the views that 
I have expressed today will be useful in contributing to the continuing evolution of the Federal 
Reserve's communication strategy. 
BIS Review 95/2008 
 13
