Caleb M Fundanga: Promoting financial inclusiveness  
Opening remarks by Dr Caleb M Fundanga, Governor of the Bank of Zambia, to the second 
AFRACA Central Banks’ Forum, Livingstone, 23-25 September 2008. 
   The Guest of honour; Honourable Ng’andu P. Magande, MP Minister of Finance and 
National Planning; 
Your Worship the Mayor, Mrs Grace Shafik; 
Provincial Minister, Hon Daniel Munkombwe; 
Permanent Secretary, Southern Province, Mr Darius Hakayobe; 
Deputy Governor-Operations, Dr Denny Kalyalya; 
Chairperson; 
The  Secretary  General  of  the  African  Rural  and  Agricultural  Credit  Association 
(AFRACA), Mrs Mary Nandazi; 
Co-operating partners; 
Distinguished invited guests from Central Banks; 
Resource Persons; 
Chief Executive Officers of Banks and Non bank financial institutions; 
Distinguished invited guests; 
Ladies and gentlemen; 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
 
On behalf of the Bank of Zambia and indeed on my own behalf, I would like to extend a very 
warm welcome to you all to this important African Rural and Agricultural Credit Association 
(AFRACA) Conference. To our colleagues from outside Zambia, I wish to extend a special 
welcome to you to Zambia, in particular to Livingstone, our tourist capital. 
Like the rest of Zambia, Livingstone is a city of tranquility with an easy-going African charm. 
The city is not short of interesting sites and places to visit. It hosts the Victoria Falls, also 
known  among  the  locals  as  “Mosi-o-Tunya,  the  Smoke  that  Thunders”  and  is  one  of  the 
world’s seven natural wonders! There is also a game park, a well stocked curio market and 
the Mukuni Cultural Village, among the many attractions. I therefore urge you to find time or 
indeed stay an extra day or more to sample this special menu that Livingstone has to offer. 
Chairperson,  Central  Bank  of  Zambia  is  honoured  and  delighted  to  co-host  the  second 
AFRACA Forum that begins today, the 23rd and ends on 25th September, 2008. 
AFRACA  is  an  association  of  Central  Banks  and  financial  institutions  involved  in  the 
provision  of  financial  services  to  the  rural  population  in  Africa  and  increasing  access  to 
financial  services  in  general.  Its  membership  of  94  institutions  consists  of  central  banks, 
commercial  banks,  agricultural  banks,  development  and  cooperative  banks,  other  financial 
institutions  and  microfinance  operators  whose  networks  spread  throughout  26  African 
countries. It is through workshops and fora of this nature, among other events, that AFRACA 
endeavours  to  disseminate  information  and  share  experiences  among  members  and  other 
industry stakeholders across the continent. 
Following  the  first  Central  Banks  Forum  held  in  Accra,  Ghana  and  in  view  of  the  need  to 
deliberate further on the topical issue of financial inclusiveness, AFRACA felt it necessary to 
hold the second Central Banks Forum under the theme, “Promoting Financial Inclusiveness”. 
The main objectives of this second forum are to harness current views on promoting financial 
inclusiveness,  draw  lessons  and  recommend  strategies  for  improvement  of  the  levels  of 
access to financial services, particularly among the rural communities in our countries. 
This year’s theme, “Promoting Financial Inclusiveness”, is also very topical for us in Zambia. 
Only two months ago, Zambia hosted the Smart Partnership Dialogue that brought together 
BIS Review 118/2008 
 1
over 500 delegates from different parts of the world (including current and former Heads of 
State  and  Government)  to  discuss  several  developmental  issues  under  the  theme 
“realisation of national visions”. The conference had a session focusing on financial inclusion. 
Chairperson,  in  recognition  of  the  importance  of  the  financial  sector  towards  national 
development, the Zambian Government formulated a five year Financial Sector Development 
Plan  (FSDP).  The  FSDP  is  aimed  at  addressing  various  weaknesses  in  the  Zambian 
financial  system,  among  them  being  the  low  financial  intermediation  and  limited  access  to 
finance and financial services. 
As  a  matter  of  fact,  in  recognition  of  the  key  role  that  financial  inclusion  plays  in  the 
development of the financial sector, the Bank of Zambia has in its strategic plan for 2008-
2011 adopted financial inclusion as one of the strategic objectives. 
In order to determine the existing gaps in the provision of financial services in the Zambian 
economy,  a  market  knowledge  study  called  the  “Finscope  Demand  –  Side  Survey”  was 
conducted  in  2005  to  review  the  inclusiveness  of  the  Zambian  financial  system  under  the 
auspices of the FSDP. Significant findings from the survey were that 66.3% of the Zambian 
adult population did not have access to financial services and that only 33.7% used banks, 
other  formal  and  informal  financial  services  and  products  (such  as  those  offered  by 
microfinance and savings clubs). Above all, only 15% of the adult population had access to 
commercial banking services. 
This low level of financial access therefore constitutes one of Zambia’s main challenges in 
facilitating  economic  empowerment  of  every  citizen.  Arising  from  these  findings,  the 
Government has since set targets or performance monitoring indicators. One such target is 
to increase the level of access to financial services to 48% by 2008 and 50% by the end of 
2009. 
Following the earlier survey, a subsequent study called the “Finscope Supply – Side Survey” 
was conducted in 2007. Some of the key findings were that: 
a. 
b. 
c. 
It is therefore, my hope that this Forum will address these and other challenges that slow the 
pace of financial inclusion in our countries. 
Honourable  Minister,  over  the  past  two  years,  we  have  noted  with  delight  that  financial 
institutions in Zambia are beginning to rise up to the challenge by beginning to broaden the 
scope  of  their  financial  services  and  extending  their  services  beyond  the  traditional 
customers  to  include  previously  unbanked  communities.  In  addition,  the  Zambian  financial 
sector  has  in  recent  years  experienced  growth  in  numbers  of  both  registered  commercial 
banks and non – bank financial institutions. 
We in Zambia, therefore, see this Forum as being timely and providing a unique opportunity 
for African financial institutions to share knowledge and experiences on how best to promote 
financial  inclusiveness, particularly  among  our  rural  and  peri-urban  communities  who  have 
since not been fully integrated in the financial systems of most of our countries. This entails 
that they are not effectively participating in the economic growth that is being experienced in 
these countries. 
This  Forum  also  comes  at  a  time  that  we  in  Zambia  have  just  lost  a  statesman  who  was 
passionate about rural development and empowerment of all citizens. The conference theme 
therefore, is appropriate for us as we carry on the vision of our beloved late President, Dr. 
Levy  Patrick  Mwanawasa,  SC  (M.H.S.R.I.P).  In  this  respect,  we  would  also  like  to 
acknowledge the many expressions of sympathy extended to us during our time of mourning. 
bank charges are unaffordable for 90% of the rural adult population in Zambia; 
Zambian banks generally have high operating costs and interest rate spreads; and 
the physical coverage of financial outlets may not increase at current cost levels. 
2 
 BIS Review 118/2008
Distinguished delegates, on behalf of AFRACA, I would like to thank our various presenters 
and  panelists  for  accepting  to  facilitate  our  deliberations  over  the  next  two  days.  I  would 
therefore,  like  to  implore  all  delegates  to  engage  fully  in  these  discussions  and  make  the 
most of the wealth of knowledge and experience represented in the house. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  it  is  my  pleasure  and  privilege  once  again  to  welcome  you  to  the 
second  AFRACA  Central  Banks’  Forum.  I  now  wish  to  invite  our  distinguished  Guest  of 
Honour,  the  Minister  of  Finance  and  National  Planning,  Honourable  Ng’andu  P.  Magande 
MP, to officially open this Forum. 
Honourable Minister! 
BIS Review 118/2008 
 3
