Jean-Claude Trichet: International interdependencies and monetary 
policy – a policy maker’s view 
Speech  by  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the  Fifth 
ECB Central Banking Conference “The Euro at Ten: Lessons and Challenges”, Frankfurt am 
Main, 14 November 2008. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I  would  like  to  express  my  gratitude  for  having  the  opportunity  to  host  this  panel  of 
distinguished  experts  and  colleagues.  Dear  Ben,  dear  Stanley,  dear  Ning,  and  dear 
Guillermo: I greatly appreciate your willingness to participate in this conference despite the 
tremendous  challenges  we  are  all  currently  faced  with.  I  would  also  like  to  use  this 
opportunity to thank the conference organisers for a superb job and indeed all conference 
participants for their important contributions. 
It  is  perhaps  unfortunate  that  the  current  crisis  distracts  our  minds  from  the  subject  of  the 
Conference: the euro coming of age. In different conditions, I would have argued – as I did in 
the  past  –  that,  far  from  suppressing  growth  and  entrenching  divergences,  the  euro  has 
spurred a spectacular drive of job creation virtually everywhere in the Union. By helping and 
fostering a long-due redressing of economic priorities and processes, the euro has enabled 
many countries participating in Monetary Union to do their best to compete successfully. We 
see signs that this restructuring is spreading to other parts of the Union that have been less 
successful so far in taking up the challenge.  
Under  normal  circumstances,  European  Monetary  Union  –  international  integration  in  its 
most intimate form – would have been the subject of these remarks.  
With  the  current  crisis  in  the  background,  however,  I  want  to  address  a  different  form  of 
convergence  and  cooperation  in  the  international  arena,  which  involves  central  banks  and 
crisis management.  
Of  course,  this  brings  me  quite  far.  With  ever  stronger  global  integration  of  goods  and 
services  trade  and,  in  particular,  financial  markets  there  are  increasingly  stronger  linkages 
among  the  world  regions.  As  a  result,  economic  and  financial  crises  in  one  world  region 
increasingly  spill  over  to  other  regions.  At  the  same  time,  corrective  policy  action  in  one 
region  creates  conditions  and  economic  incentives  that  are  felt  and  are  acted  upon 
elsewhere. How  should  policymakers  around  the  world  deal  with  this fact?  In  particular,  is 
there a case for international coordination of macroeconomic policies? 
I will try to give a tentative answer to these important questions. I will argue that we need to 
be careful with what we understand by international policy coordination. Policy coordination 
does  not  mean,  of  course,  a  unique  policy  stance  for  the  entire  world.  Coordinated  policy 
action is not a surrogate for domestic macroeconomic prudence. We are all convinced that 
monetary policies geared towards domestic price stability, sound public finances and flexible 
economic structures create the conditions for an international financial architecture that can 
last.  
Are there areas in which policy  cooperation can help strengthen domestic macroeconomic 
policies?  My  short  answer  is  “Yes,  there  are”.  Before  giving  you  concrete  examples  of 
beneficial  cooperation,  let  me  take  a  brief  theoretical  detour,  which  will  make  clear  why 
aiming for a globally unified policy stance is undesirable, whereas other types of cooperation 
are more promising. In an influential paper a few years ago Obstfeld and Rogoff questioned 
BIS Review 139/2008 
 1
the  conventional  wisdom  that  increased  integration  of  goods  and  financial  markets 
strengthens the case for policy stance coordination.1,2 Their theoretical results even suggest 
that  the  need  for  policy  stance  coordination  decreases  with  the  level  of  international 
integration.  The  basic  intuition  is  that  integrated  goods  and  financial  markets  provide  a 
powerful  risk-pooling  mechanism,  leaving  policymakers  free  to  focus  on  minimising  the 
distortions that might hamstring their respective domestic economies. As I noted on previous 
occasions, the path of policy over the business cycle in the euro area relative to the United 
States has differed for a number of reasons – and this despite the common conviction that 
maintaining  price  stability  is  the  prerequisite  for  sustainable  job  creation  and  economic 
success. The most important reasons for different policy paths are differences in underlying 
economic structures and differences in the timing, nature and duration of economic shocks.3
This being said, there is an interesting sideline in Obstfeld and Rogoff’s paper, which seems 
to me to be very relevant for the current situation and which would be a fruitful area for future 
research. The result I mentioned earlier – that tight international linkages do not necessarily 
strengthen the case for international policy coordination – holds for what I would define as 
“normal times”. In Obstfeld and Rogoff’s words it holds “unless risk aversion is very high”.4 In 
the current generation of theoretical models, risk aversion is generally considered a constant 
parameter. I think that recent years and months have taught us an important lesson: attitudes 
toward risk not only vary over time – for example, following long-term trends – but they do so 
by waves and oscillations around trends. Phases of excessive risk taking can be followed by 
sudden reversals driven by abrupt global confidence shocks such as the one experienced in 
mid-September 2008.  
The entirely exceptional joined interest rate cuts on 8 October 2008 and – in similar tense 
conditions – on 13 September 2001 have to be seen in this context. In both cases there was 
extraordinary  uncertainty  about  the  economic  outlook  and  there  was  strong  evidence  that 
upside risks to price stability had diminished in many world regions at the same time. Joint 
action was first and foremost predicated on the need to respond to the same shock, a shock 
that was being transmitted around the globe with lags measurable in hours. This created the 
room for interest rate cuts, in all cases consistent with the mandate of the respective central 
banks. We chose to coordinate the timing of announcement because we wanted to mutually 
reinforce our message of confidence to the markets.  
That  being  said,  reflecting  upon  our  very  close  relationship,  I  see  all  the  hours  spent  on 
exchanging  ideas  with  my  fellow  governors,  reflecting  on  facts  and  prospects,  has 
progressively  consolidated  an  element  of  intimate  confidence  that  is  a  major  asset  for  the 
present  and  future.  We  have  built  a  remarkable  common  ground  of  shared  experience, 
mutual  understanding  and  trust  –  in  which  today’s  consultation  does  not  need  a  long 
preamble because it follows naturally from yesterday’s discussion – that has facilitated action 
in many directions.  
We  have  intimately  cooperated  in  ways  that  cannot  be  easily  integrated  into  theoretical 
models. For example, there is a continuous exchange of information that helps all of us to 
better understand the nature of the crisis and its intricate international propagation patterns. 
                                                 
1   M. Obstfeld and K. Rogoff (2002), “Global Implications of Self-Oriented National Monetary Rules”, Quarterly 
Journal of Economics 117 (2), 503-535. 
2   A classic contribution to the literature on policy coordination, reflecting the conventional wisdom, can be found 
in  G.  Oudiz  and  J.  Sachs  (1984),  “Macroeconomic  Policy  Coordination  among  the  Industrial  Countries”, 
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1, 1-64. 
3   See my intervention entitled “The Euro area and its monetary policy” at the Conference on “The ECB and its 
Watchers IX,” Frankfurt am Main, 7 September 2007. See also the article entitled “Monetary Policy Activism” 
in the November 2006 issue of the ECB Monthly Bulletin. 
4   Obstfeld and Rogoff (2002), p. 503. 
2 
 BIS Review 139/2008
We  have  cooperated  intimately  as  regards  the  provision  of  liquidity  in  order  to  restore  the 
normal functioning of interbank money markets around the world. 
Since December 2007, the ECB, in cooperation with the US Federal Reserve System and 
other central banks, has been conducting term auction facilities – so-called TAF operations – 
in which it provides USD liquidity on behalf of the US Fed to euro area banks against ECB 
eligible collateral. These operations do not have a direct impact on euro liquidity conditions 
and are aimed at improving global funding conditions. In this respect I would like to stress 
that to my knowledge this was the first joint action of that kind ever taken by central banks to 
relieve pressures in the short term funding markets. 
The world can count on a continuation of this fruitful cooperation among central banks and it 
can  also  count  on  the  fact  that  this  cooperation  occurs  fully  in  line  with  our  respective 
mandates and, in exceptional times like these, can even strengthen their achievement. 
I thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 139/2008 
 3
