Ivan Sramko: Euro implementation in Slovakia 
Speech by Mr Ivan Sramko, Governor of the National Bank of Slovakia, at the Opening of the 
European Central Bank Exhibition in the National Bank of Slovakia, Bratislava, 24 September 
2008. 
 I  am  pleased  to  welcome  you  at  the  present  ceremonial  opening  of  the  Exhibition  of  the 
European Central Bank about euro and on the eve of a big international conference on euro 
implementation in Slovakia. It is more than symbolic that this exhibition is located just here, 
on the grounds of the National Bank of Slovakia. Already from the very beginning, when the 
initiatives for euro implementation in our country were only emerging, the NBS several times 
declared  its  support  for  the  entry  into  the  monetary  union  as  soon  as  practicable.  Our 
recommendations were based on serious analysis – we were assessing the readiness of our 
economy  for  the  EU  membership,  we  were  evaluating  how  quickly  the  Slovak  economy 
would  be  able  to  approach  the  economies  of  the  countries  within  Eurozone,  we  were 
assessing the possibilities to comply with the Maastricht criteria from the points of time and 
costs.  Of  course,  we  were  considering  both  favourable  and  unfavourable  impacts  of  our 
future  membership  in  Eurozone.  According  to  all  the  analysis  available  the  benefits  were 
clearly prevailing.  
The development of euro implementation strategy in 2003 and later on the creation of the 
National Plan of Euro Implementation in 2005 followed. The predictions and analysis were 
the basis for setting the economic policy that ensured smooth preparation of our economy to 
euro. At present, all the decisions and assessments are known and with the New Year the 
common  currency  will  become  a  part  of  our  everyday  life.  By  accepting  the  euro  as  the 
national  currency  Slovakia  will  become  the  member  of  a  strong  club  of  Monetary  Union 
states and a new space will be opened for our country for its stabile economic development 
which will be reflected in other aspects of our lives.  
Hundreds  of  people  from  various  institutions  have  been  participating  at  various  projects 
relating to the access of euro. Many of them have been the employees of the National Bank 
of Slovakia. I would like to thank all of them for their efforts and persistency by which they 
significantly contributed to the fact than on January 1, 2009, Slovakia will become the 16th 
country  of  Eurozone.  I  would  also  like  to  thank  the  colleagues  from  the  ECB  and  partner 
central banks for their support and co-operation.  
Ladies and gentlemen, I believe we will all get used to euro in the course of time and that 
euro will become a natural part of our lives. I wish you manage the euro transition smoothly 
and without any problems and that euro brings a positive change into in your lives. 
BIS Review 117/2008 
 1
