Sada Reddy: Fiji’s economy 
Presentation by Mr Sada Reddy, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of Fiji, to the FIJI NZ 
Business Council, Suva, 3 October 2008. 
 Outline 
The outline of my presentation is as follows:  
• 
• 
• 
Global economic conditions 
Domestic economic conditions 
Summary 
Global economic conditions 
Global growth is slowing. In its July 2008 forecast, IMF expected global growth to slow to 4.1 
percent in 2008 and to soften further to 3.9 percent in 2009. However, in light of the severe 
global  financial  crisis,  which  unfolded  in  the  last  few  weeks,  there  is  a  high  likelihood  that 
global growth may further decline. We therefore expect our major trading partners and visitor 
source markets to have a sluggish outlook for the next two years. Emerging economies, like 
China and India, may experience some slowdown in growth but will continue to experience 
relatively high growth rates and may provide some stability to global growth.  
 
Economies 
Australia 
New Zealand 
US 
Euro-zone 
Japan 
China 
India 
Singapore 
South Korea 
Source: Consensus Forecast & Asia Pacific Consensus Forecast – Sep-08 
 
2007 
4.2 
3.1 
2.0 
2.6 
2.0 
11.9 
9.0 
7.7 
5.0 
2.6 
1.7 
1.4 
0.9 
0.9 
9.1 
7.6 
4.6 
4.3 
2.6 
0.5 
1.8 
1.3 
0.9 
9.9 
7.5 
4.2 
4.4 
2008(f) 
2009(f) 
Domestic economic conditions 
• 
GDP  growth:  After  contracting  in  2007  (-6.6%),  our  economy  is  showing  some 
recovery  in  2008  (1.7%).  Forecasts  for  2009  and  2010  are  1.4  percent  and  1.9 
percent, respectively. These forecasts were released by the Macroeconomic Policy 
Committee in July 2008. These growth rates are too low and insufficient to generate 
adequate employment. However, Fiji’s economy has been very resilient despite the 
global economic slowdown and massive increase in fuel and food prices. 
BIS Review 120/2008 
 1
      Major drivers of economic growth: The major positive contributors to the forecast 
medium-term growth are tourism (transport and wholesale & retail trade and hotels 
&  restaurants),  agriculture,  manufacturing  and  mining  sectors,  which  more-than-
offset the negative contributions from community, social & personal services sector. 
Visitor arrivals: Visitor arrivals are at historical highs. A strong recovery in visitor 
arrivals  by  an  annual  12  percent  was  seen  in  the  first  eight  months  of  the  year. 
Using the Fiji Islands Visitors Bureau’s growth forecast of around 571,000 visitors for 
2008 translates to a projected annual growth rate of around 6 percent.  
Occupancy: There has been a huge level of investment in the hotel industry in the 
last  few  years  where  we  have  seen  new  hotels,  renovations/extension  of  existing 
ones  and  an  expansion  of  services  provided  (weddings/spas/conventions).  The 
increase in hotels and rooms have seen occupancy levels fall. 50 percent of tourism 
capacity in terms of room days is unutilised. The challenge for the industry and for 
the country is to fill these rooms. 
Sugar production: Cumulative to August, sugar production has declined by around 
23  percent  compared  to  the  same  period  last  year.  However,  the  FSC  has 
maintained  its  forecast  of  around  246,000  tonnes  this  year,  as  against  237,000 
tonnes last year, which is an increase of about 4 percent. 
Gold  production:  Vatukoula  Gold  Mines  Ltd  expects  gold  production  to  reach 
25,000 ounces of gold this year from negligible levels last year, after the closure of 
the  mine  in  late  2006.  VGM  Ltd  is  forecasting  gold  production  to  exceed  over 
100,000 ounces in the next 2 years. 
Raise  investment:  Investment  is  generally  flat  but  sentiments  appear  to  be 
improving. Government and the Reserve Bank have committed to raising investment 
activity. Private sector investment is the catalyst for growth as we move forward. 
Public finance 
• 
that 
Government  balance:  The  overall  focus  of  Government’s  fiscal  strategy  for  the 
medium term is aimed at achieving gradual reductions in its budget deficits to attain 
sustainable debt levels, simultaneously ensuring adequate support for much-needed 
investment and economic recovery. Over the last 2 years, fiscal policy was directed 
towards  fiscal  consolidation  to  stabilise  the  economy.  Now  that  the  economy  has 
stabilised, there is scope for an increase in capital expenditure to support growth.  
Government  underlying  balance:  Latest  cashflow  data  shows 
the 
Government  had  achieved  a  net  surplus  of  around  $77  million,  equivalent  to  1.3 
percent of GDP, in the first half of the year. This is a result of an increase in total 
operating receipts (16%), and a fall in operating payments (4%) when compared to 
the corresponding period last year.  
Government revenue: Cumulative to June, total Government revenue amounted to 
around $658 million, an increase of 15 percent over the year. This was led by higher 
direct  tax  receipts  ($10m),  VAT  receipts  ($37m)  and  other  indirect  taxes  ($20m). 
Compared with the Budget, revenue collections were 9 percent higher ($53m). 
Government  operating  expenditure:  The  4  percent  fall  in  expenditure  was 
underpinned by lower payments for supplies and consumables (-16.1%), personnel 
payments  (-11.1%),  purchase  of  outputs  (-2.9%),  and  interest  paid  (-0.4%). 
Government operating payments was 19 percent lower than what was budgeted. 
Government  capital  expenditure:  Cumulative  to  June,  capital  spending  totalled 
$31 million, a 5 percent increase over the year. However, this was 70 percent lower 
than the budgeted amount.  
BIS Review 120/2008
    2 
  Trade 
• 
       Government’s  operating  to  capital  expenditure  ratio  target  is  80:20  for  this  year, 
compared to the 90:10 ratio in 2007. 
Government’s  expenditure  restraint  so  far,  coupled  with  relatively  tight  monetary 
policy  settings  in  2007,  has  ensured  that  Fiji’s external  position  was  safeguarded. 
Government now has room to provide some fiscal stimulus to encourage economic 
activity. 
Exports:  Export  earnings  remained  largely  flat  over  the  years,  averaging  around 
$1.2 billion in the last 5 years. However, cumulative to July, earnings increased by 
around  21  percent  over  the  comparable  period  last  year,  with  annual  earnings 
forecast at around $1.4 billion. Exports are forecast to continue to grow strongly in 
the next 2 years. 
Domestic  exports:  Domestic  exports  (excluding  re-exports)  rose  by  around  15 
percent cumulative to July this year when compared with the same period last year.  
The  increase  was  largely  attributed  to  higher  earnings  from  sugar,  fish,  other 
domestic  exports,  mineral  water,  timber,  sweet  biscuits,  flour,  gold,  garments  and 
folding cartons, boxes & cases. These more than offset the lower earnings recorded 
for uncooked pasta, coral, molasses and fruits & vegetables. 
Sugar exports: Sugar receipts fell sharply in 2007 as a result of lower production 
levels and a cut in the EU preferential price. However, earnings are anticipated to 
pick up this year to around $241 million. Unfortunately, this recovery is not expected 
to be sustained in the years ahead, as the full EU price reduction is realised next 
year. 
EU sugar price/tonne: Out of the total raw sugar produced annually, close to 85 
percent is exported – 60 percent is sold to the EU, under two trade agreements: the 
Sugar Protocol and the Special Preferential Sugar (SPS) Agreement. Effective from 
July 2006, the EU preferential price has gradually eroded – altogether, the industry 
will  experience  a  36  percent  price  cut,  with  the  final  price  reduction  coming  into 
effect  next  year.  The  local  sugar  industry  therefore  needs  to  implement  relevant 
reforms so as to quickly adapt to the world market. 
Mineral water exports: Earnings from mineral water have grown exponentially over 
the  last  decade.  Receipts  are  expected  to  be  around  $136  million  this  year. 
Cumulative  to  July,  mineral  water  earnings  rose  by  15  percent,  compared  to  the 
same period last year.  
Fish  exports:  Fish  exports  have  faired  quite  well  in  the  last  couple  of  years. 
Earnings are expected to exceed $110 million this year and grow steadily in the next 
2 years. Cumulative to July, fish exports rose by around 19 percent over the same 
period last year.  
Timber exports: Timber earnings (includes mahogany) have been performing well, 
with earnings expected to improve steadily in 2009 and 2010. For the first time this 
year,  receipts  are  expected  to  be  over  $50  million.  Positive  developments  in  the 
mahogany industry are anticipated to boost revenue into the future. Cumulative to 
July, earnings rose by 25 percent compared to the same period in 2007. 
Gold exports: In line with production gains, gold earnings are expected to rebound 
to $36 million this year. Next year, receipts are anticipated to soar to slightly over 
$100 million, a historical first. The recovery of this sector coincides well with the high 
prevailing gold prices, currently around US$828 per ounce (September average). 
BIS Review 120/2008 
 3
          4 
 Imports:  In  line  with  the  economic  contraction,  imports  fell  last  year.  However, 
imports have since picked up and are expected to grow by 15 percent this year to 
around $3.2 billion. Cumulative to July, imports expanded by 23 percent. 
The  increase  in  imports  was  underpinned  by  higher  payments  for  intermediate 
goods (12%), consumption goods (9%), and investment goods (3%).  
Food,  beverages  and  tobacco  imports:  Cumulative  to  July,  imports  of  food, 
beverages and tobacco expanded by 37 percent over the year for the comparable 
period.  Strong  annual  growth  is  forecast  for  the  year,  with  a  gradual  pick  up 
projected  for  the  next  2  years.  The  increase  in  global  food  prices  underpins  a 
substantial part of the current strong growth. 
Mineral fuel imports: Domestic imports of mineral fuel (excluding re-exports) have 
risen considerably since 2000. Last year, imports of mineral fuels declined, given the 
contraction in economic activity. However, mineral fuel imports have risen strongly 
so far this year (30%) and are expected to be around $843 million by the end of the 
year.  The  import  bill  for  mineral  fuel  is  projected  to  near  $1  billion  in  the  next  2 
years. This is mainly underpinned by current high oil prices. 
Crude oil prices: In the first 9 months of the year, oil prices have averaged US$112 
per barrel. Since its peak of US$146 in July, oil prices have since declined, currently 
around  $US97  per  barrel.  Strong  demand  from  emerging  economies  like  China, 
combined  with  supply  disruptions,  geo-political  concerns,  the  weak  US  dollar  and 
speculative demand amidst the US financial crisis have underpinned the movements 
in oil prices. Prices are anticipated to remain high in the months ahead. 
Volume of fuel imports: In volume terms, total mineral fuel imports contracted by 
around  16  percent  cumulative  to  July  over  the  comparable  period  in  2007.  All 
categories of mineral fuels declined. The highest decline was noted for automotive 
diesel followed by motor spirit, aviation turbine fuel and industrial diesel oil. 
Trade balance: Except for 2007, the trade deficit has continued to widen each year. 
This year, the trade deficit is forecast to be around $1.9 billion and be higher in the 
next 2 years. The widening of the trade deficit remains an ongoing concern. 
Personal remittances: These fell significantly in 2007 by around 20 percent. This is 
likely  due  to  the  cautious  stance  taken  by  remitters  following  the  political  crisis  of 
December 2006. Personal remittances are projected to fall further this year and be 
flat at around $225 million in the forthcoming years. 
Tourism earnings: Except for 2000 and 2007, tourism receipts have grown steadily 
each  year.  This  year,  tourism  earnings  are  forecast  at  $745  million.  Earnings  are 
expected to near the $1 billion mark in the next few years. 
Current  account:  The  trade  deficit  continues  to  place  pressure  on  our  current 
account position. Despite the surplus in the services, income and current transfers 
accounts (led by tourism and personal remittances), it is not sufficient to fully offset 
the  current  account  deficit.  This  year,  the  current  account  deficit  is  forecast  at 
around $957 million, about 18 percent of GDP and similar levels are projected for 
the years ahead. 
Financing the current account: The current account deficit is largely financed by 
the capital and financial account, which reflects net foreign investment, as well as 
the  drawdown  in  foreign  reserves,  and  unaccounted  inflows.  Unaccounted  inflows 
reflect  those  items  that  are  not  adequately  captured  by  the  Fiji  Islands  Bureau  of 
Statistics. This year, unaccounted inflows are forecast at around $721 million. 
BIS Review 120/2008
Money and credit developments 
• 
Money and credit: Private sector credit growth (7%) has stabilised somewhat, from 
the slowdown over 2007. The recent pick up in private sector credit has been led by 
credit to the real estate and wholesale, retail, hotels and restaurant sectors. 
Commercial  bank’s  investment  and  consumption  lending:  Investment  lending 
has picked up (15%), owing in part to allowances made in the administration of the 
credit  ceiling,  as  special  approvals  for  investment-related  projects  are  given  to 
commercial  banks  to  lend  above  their  ceilings.  Consumption  lending  has  also 
stabilised – the recent pick up (9%) reflects base effects. It is not expected to rise to 
double digit growth. 
Commercial banks’ private sector lending: Despite the credit ceiling imposed by 
the Reserve Bank, lending to the private sector has exceeded the credit ceiling due 
to special approvals given by the Reserve Bank for special investment projects.  
Special approvals have totalled $272 million. Approvals for building & construction 
have reached $140 million followed by transport, storage & communication ($21m), 
electricity,  gas  &  water  ($16m)  and  manufacturing  ($16m).  Other  miscellaneous 
approvals totalled $79 million. 
Interest rates: The lending rate of commercial banks has trended down since early 
2007 to around 8 percent in August. 
Inflation: Inflationary pressures will continue through to the end of the year. Inflation 
is expected to rise slightly above 9.5 percent in the coming months before settling at 
around  7.5  percent  by  year  end.  Higher  inflation  is  due  mainly  to  fuel  and  food 
commodity price increases in the international markets. 
Foreign  reserves:  In  recent  years,  monetary  policy  was  focussed  on  protecting 
foreign reserves. Foreign reserves levels are holding up well at around $911 million. 
Current levels are sufficient to cover close to 4 months of imports of goods. This is a 
comfortable level.  
Exchange rates: Over the year to September, the Fiji dollar strengthened against 
the NZ and Australian dollars by around 7 and 5 percent, respectively. However, the 
Fiji dollar fell against the Euro and US dollar by 6 and 4 percent, respectively. 
Summary 
• 
Global  economic  slowdown  may  adversely  impact  smaller  island  countries  in  the 
Pacific, including Fiji. 
Economic growth positive in the medium term but very low. 
Fiji’s economy very resilient despite the global economic problems, and high oil and 
food prices. 
Government’s fiscal consolidation over the last 2 years. Greater scope for increase 
in capital expenditure from 2009 onwards. 
Exports expected to pick up although imports remain strong: trade deficit remains a 
concern. 
Monetary conditions conducive for growth but will remain tight. 
Inflation is high – downside risks remain high. 
Foreign reserves stable but need to manage carefully. 
          BIS Review 120/2008 
 5
ADDRESS KEY CHALLENGES NOW: 
• 
• 
Raise economic growth to around 5% plus. 
Reduce reliance on imported fuel – invest in alternative energy and introduce fuel 
consumption policies. 
Food imports to be reduced through more local production. Will require reforms e.g. 
land tenure. 
Raise investments through stable and consistent policies and create a more investor 
friendly environment. 
Reduce trade deficit through growing exports and increasing visitor arrivals to raise 
occupancy to around 80 percent. 
   6 
 BIS Review 120/2008
