Shamshad Akhtar: Pakistan – framework for consolidated supervision 
Keynote  address  by  Dr  Shamshad  Akhtar,  Governor  of  the  State  Bank  of  Pakistan,  at  the 
Annual General Meeting of the Institute of Bankers, Pakistan, Karachi, 31 October 2008. 
 Financial markets have not only been growing at a rapid pace, but have also been marked by 
continuous  change.  Key  structural  transformation  has  been  the  evolution  of  large  and 
complex  global  financial  institutions  and  structures  that,  given  their  inherent  size  and 
strengths,  have  promoted  financial  engineering  and  innovation,  exploited  new  avenues  of 
financial  leveraging  accompanied  by  greater  risk  appetite,  and  infusion  of  information 
technology. Together these developments have changed the financial landscape. Over the 
period,  various  market  developments  along  with  few  key  legislative  changes,  such  as 
repealing  of  the  Glass  Steagall  Act,  1933  (which  rolled  back  the  restrictions  imposed  on 
banks  for  mixing  their  business  with  securities  and  investment  banks)  in  the  late  nineties, 
fostered new financial structures and strategic alliances that removed the distinction between 
activities specific to various types of financial institutions. Though the recent global financial 
market  turmoil  has  triggered  questions  regarding  the  risks  associated  with  the  emerging 
types  of  financial  structures,  however  a  more  relevant  debate  is  regarding  the  gaps  and 
weaknesses  in  the  regulatory  and  supervisory  structures  that  allowed  over-leveraging  and 
the  operations  of  several  financial  industry  segments  to  operate  without  appropriate 
oversight. 
Recognizing the need to evolve an appropriate oversight policy mechanism for its evolving 
financial  structure,  SBP,  as  a  part  of  its  overall  financial  sector  reforms  launched  in  July 
2008,  has  advocated  the  need  for  legislature  to  empower  the  central  bank  to  augment  its 
oversight  of  the  financial  sector.  In  my  remarks  this  morning  I  propose  to  outline  the 
economic  and  financial  benefits  of  financial  conglomeration  and  the  risk  and  supervisory 
challenges arising out of these complex financial structures. I propose to then share with you 
the legislative reforms launched by SBP in this area which have recently been approved, in 
principle, by the Cabinet and are to be tabled for Parliament consideration. 
Rationale for consolidated supervision 
Worldwide, the process of change has allowed many financial organizations, which used to 
engage in the primary business of banking, asset management or insurance activities on a 
standalone basis, to adopt more flexible structures whereby banks opened up a wide range 
of  subsidiaries  and  affiliates  that  primarily  engage  in  businesses  other  than  their  core 
business. The main economic and financial benefit which encourages the formation of such 
groups  is  the  enhanced  ability  to  achieve  economies  of  scale  and  to  capture  synergies 
across complementary financial services business lines. These synergies result in improved 
operational  efficiency  and  effectiveness  due  to  lower  costs,  reduced  prices,  and  improved 
innovation  in  products  and  services.  However,  at  the  same  time  the  emergence  of  such 
groups  has  also  added  complex  linkages  and  relationships  among  economic  agents. 
Consequently, they have also necessitated a paradigm shift in the supervisory approaches 
all  across  the  globe  to  assess,  manage,  and  mitigate  risks  stemming  from  such 
arrangements. 
Like other countries, these developments have steadily gained momentum in the Pakistani 
financial sector. The existing regulatory framework in Pakistan under SBP gradually became 
more  open,  flexible  and  allowed  the  banks  to  set  up  subsidiaries  to  operate  Non-bank 
financial  businesses.  The  prevalent  structure  under  which  non-bank  financial  services  are 
being offered is mostly through the parent – subsidiary form of structure wherein banks are 
parent of their non-banking subsidiaries, or in some cases banks have Non-banking finance 
BIS Review 133/2008 
 1
companies  (NFBCs)  as  associates.  Some  elements  of  Universal  banking  also  exist,  for 
example  banks  are  allowed  to  undertake  investment  banking,  and  leasing  businesses  on 
their own balance sheet as well. While the central bank showed flexibility in allowing these 
developments,  the  underlying  legal  architecture  was  not  changed  in  line  with  the  market 
needs and developments. 
As such, the current legislation and regulatory tools are not adequate to effectively address 
the  potential  risks  to  the  safety  and  soundness  of  the  financial  sector.  The  safety  and 
soundness of the banking sector, being at the core of all activities of the financial sector, is 
critical for the general public, for the financial sector itself and for the economy as a whole. 
The governing law of the banking sector viz. the Banking Companies Ordinance (BCO) was 
introduced in 1962 and occasional changes were made in it in response to the challenges of 
different  phases  of  development.  The  significant  challenges  posed  by  universal  banking, 
large  financial  groups  and  holding  company  structures  now  warrant  a  matching  legal 
framework  to  avoid  any  major  disruptions  in  the  economy  and  in  the  process  of  financial 
intermediation. Recognizing these challenges, SBP has sought in principle approval from the 
requisite  forums  for  amendments  in  the  BCO  to  enable  it  to  supervise  banks,  groups  and 
financial holding companies in line with international trends. 
Besides forestalling various risks, these amendments would enable significant benefits in the 
form  of  operational  efficiency,  lower  costs,  reduced  prices  and  innovation  in  products  and 
services.  Moreover,  one  of  the  Core  Principles  for  effective  banking  supervision  (CP-24) 
issued by the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision requires that a banking supervisor 
should be able to supervise the banking groups on a consolidated basis. Presently, Pakistan 
is either compliant or largely compliant with all the core principles except those dealing with 
consolidated  supervision.  The  proposed  amendments  in  the  BCO  would  also  enable 
Pakistan to ensure compliance with this principle. 
Major risks arising from complex structures and supervisory challenges 
While the increasing integration and the drive towards financial conglomeration has opened 
up possibilities of greater efficiency through increased economies of scale and scope, at the 
same  time  it  has  also  generated  novel  risks  and  has  consequently  raised  a  number  of 
supervisory concerns. A few of these risks and concerns are as follows:  
• 
One  of  the  foremost  risks  is  contagion  risk  which  can  manifest  itself  in 
psychological as well as financial forms. Financial distress in one entity could impair 
the reputation of the other entities and the market participants may be reluctant to 
engage in business with them. The reputational problem can often lead to financial 
distress in the entire group, as the parent or the other group associates may have to 
help out the distressed entity in order to safeguard the group from reputational risk. 
Such  other  group  entity  could  be  a  subsidiary  of  the  bank,  with  the  potential  of 
downstream risk, or parent of the bank or affiliate under the control of parent i.e. 
upstream risk. 
A  Bank  or  DFI,  together  with  other  group  entities  under  its  control,  could  take 
exposures  on  a  single  borrower,  borrowing  group,  or  sector  that  are  beyond 
prudential limits. Generally, on individual basis, there are per party exposure limits. 
However, various entities in a group may end up with an unusually large exposure 
on a collective basis. Moreover, since the entities within a group may be subject to 
different regulations, this may lead to regulatory arbitrage allowing banks to take 
advantage  of  the  less  stringent  regulatory  regime  applicable  on  some  of  its 
subsidiaries.  There  might  be  specific  intra-group  linkages  that  could  nullify  the 
impact of conventional risk mitigation techniques at the group level by simply shifting 
the risk from one of the group entities to another. 
 2 
 BIS Review 133/2008
     Another  problem  is  the  overstatement  of  capital  or  double  gearing  whereby  the 
capital  of  one  entity  is  used  to  satisfy  the  requirements  of  more  than  one  affiliate 
entities.  This  phenomenon  is  typical  where  investments  are  made  by  the  parent 
body in its subsidiaries. Double gearing results in the overstatement of capital and 
can also lead to regulatory arbitrage. 
Another  aspect  which  is  often  difficult  to  detect  is  of  intra  group  transactions, 
which might not be on arms-length basis. This increases the likelihood of fraud or 
siphoning-off of funds. 
Liquidity  risk  arising  from  asset  liability  mismatch  is  also  of  great  significance. 
Universal  banking,  since  it  houses  diverse  products  with  different  asset  liability 
structures  and  risk  profiles,  can  be  considered  the  most  risky.  In  conventional 
banking, where universal banking is allowed, banks need to create firewalls so that 
no asset liability mismatches occur, and internal transfers of funds raised from one 
type  of  liability  (i.e.  short  term  deposits)  are  not  deployed  against  a  source  which 
typically  provides  products  with  long  term  maturity  (i.e.  investment  banking, 
insurance etc). 
In the absence of a formal Holding Company structure, the corporate structures at 
the group level are quite opaque and in various cases create ambiguities about the 
roles  and  responsibilities  of  the  board  of  one  entity  vis-à-vis  another.  Similarly, 
interference in the managerial functions of one entity by the officials of another has 
also  been  witnessed.  Increasing  complexities  in  the  ownership  and  managerial 
structure of a group can make the supervision of financial institutions in the group 
difficult. 
In view of the dynamic ownership structure of our banking industry, entry of foreign 
players in our market and investment by our banks abroad, it is necessary to take a 
holistic  view  and  work  towards  an  appropriate  supervisory  structure  (consolidated 
supervision) to avoid any problem in future. 
Changes sought in the legal framework and supervisory regime 
These  concerns  and  the  risks  associated  with  group  relations  warrant  a  comprehensive 
framework for supervision that evaluates the strength of an entire group, taking into account 
all the risks which may affect a bank/DFI, regardless of whether these risks are carried in the 
books of the bank/DFI or related entities. SBP firmly believes that the financial sector as a 
whole  has  a  lot  to  gain  through  increased  integration  and  conglomeration.  However,  the 
newly  emerging  phenomenon  has  to  be  properly  monitored  and  governed  under  an 
appropriate  legal  framework  to  mitigate  the  potential  risks.  Keeping  these  factors  in  mind, 
three major changes are being proposed in the BCO. 
Firstly, the current supervisory set up has to be changed to bring under the fold of SBP, all 
deposit-taking  Non  Bank  Financial  Companies  (NBFCs).  The  major  rationale  for  this 
proposal is that these NBFCs are engaged in activities which are quite incidental to banking, 
both on the liability as well as the asset side. Bringing such entities under SBP would lead to 
greater supervisory efficiency, as being the regulator of banks, its supervisory approach is 
well equipped for their kind of business and the resulting risk profile. In this regard, the BCO 
ought  to  bring  under  its  folds,  besides  banks  and  DFIs,  NBFCs  like  Investment  Banks, 
Leasing  Companies,  Housing  Finance  Companies  that  are  until  now  outside  its  regulatory 
purview. 
Secondly,  another  change  being  sought  is  to  authorize  SBP  to  designate  and  regulate 
financial groups. Financial group for this purpose will be any group in which at least one of 
the entities is directly regulated by SBP. This is an extremely important step because it will 
enable SBP to effectively monitor the potentially dubious intra group transactions involving 
BIS Review 133/2008 
 3
banks  and  NBFCs,  and  would  also  enable  it  to  curtail  the  possible  contagion  risk.  The 
proposed  amendment  would  also  enable  SBP  to  seek  information  from  the  unregulated 
commercial entities and conduct limited inspection for verification of such information. 
For  entities  in  a  financial  group  which  fall  under  the  purview  of  the  securities  regulator’s 
supervision, the current supervisory mechanism also needs to be amended to move towards 
greater consolidated supervision. Under the proposed supervisory mechanism, the concept 
of lead and functional supervisors has been introduced. SBP would be the Lead supervisor 
for  a  financial  group  for  consolidated  supervision.  Functional  supervisor  would  be  the 
regulatory  body  responsible  to  carry  out  supervision  of  the  entity  on  a  stand-alone  basis 
under  the  relevant  laws  in  force  for  the  time  being.  In  order  to  ensure  that  consolidated 
supervision is done effectively, and that there are minimal enforcement issues, the power to 
seek  information,  conduct  onsite  inspection  in  collaboration  with  the  functional  regulator, 
recommend enforcement action to the functional regulator etc. are being sought for the lead 
supervisor. 
Thirdly, the time is ripe for the introduction of a Financial Holding Company (FHC) concept. 
SBP  has  so  far  facilitated  the  increasing  integration  of  various  segments  of  the  financial 
sector  through  various  rules  and  regulations,  and  the  next  logical  step  is  the  creation  of 
enabling  legal  provisions  for  the  establishment  of  more  efficient  forms  of  conglomerate 
structures  such  as  the  FHC  model.  The  FHC  model  is  becoming  popular  in  different 
countries, e.g. USA, Hong Kong, Singapore, India etc. 
The benefits of adopting a financial holding company model are as follows: 
(i) 
One of the key advantages of the FHC form of structure is that it provides separation 
of business activities and investment activities of financial institutions within a group. 
This structure would prevent the double gearing of bank’s capital and facilitate the 
growth  of  the  financial  sector,  as  new  capital  injection  would  be  required  for 
expanding businesses. 
It  would  be  easy  to  establish  firewalls  and  protect  banks  from  risks  arising  out  of 
non-banking  activities.  While  banks  will  not  be  able  to  directly  benefit  from  any 
profits of their non bank companies, the overall group will be strengthened. 
The  sponsor  shareholding  of  banking  as  well  as  non  banking  companies  will 
become  transparent  and  help  SBP  in  ensuring  that  these  institutions  operate  at 
arm’s  length.  The  majority  shareholding  in  a  bank  will  be  channeled  through  the 
FHC, and since under the proposed amendments, FHC supervision is with SBP, the 
shareholdings can be more closely monitored. 
The structure provides organic growth without increasing contagion risk as it is very 
unlikely that the whole group will fail. 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
In order to facilitate the FHC model, we are also seeking several amendments in the BCO 
covering its definition, licensing and supervision (which will be by SBP), capital requirement 
and  various  other  aspects.  In  anticipation  of  these  legal  changes,  SBP  is  also  preparing 
supportive regulations to aid the effective development of financial conglomeration and their 
oversight. 
In  conclusion,  the  proposed  legal and  regulatory  changes,  discussed  above,  to  strengthen 
the oversight of the financial sector, are an integral element of the Ten Year Strategy and 
blueprint  of  financial  sector  reforms  prepared  by  the  central  bank.  Concurrently,  SBP  has 
also  launched  wide  ranging  reforms  including  capital  augmentation  of  banks,  shift  to  risk-
based  supervisory  approaches,  and  proper  implementation  of  Basel  II.  The  private  sector 
has responded well to SBP’s initiatives and a number of banks are launching work to take 
benefit  of  the  emerging  legal  and  regulatory  changes  to  position  their  financial  institutions 
better to compete in a more aggressive regional and global environment. 
4 
 BIS Review 133/2008
