Guy Quaden: Towards an integrated macro-finance framework for 
monetary policy analysis  
Introductory speech by Mr Guy Quaden, Governor of the National Bank of Belgium, at the 
Biennial  NBB  Conference  "Towards  an  integrated  macro-finance  framework  for  monetary 
policy analysis", Brussels, 16 October 2008. 
 It is my great pleasure to welcome you to this biennial NBB Conference.  
At a time when we are experiencing the biggest financial crisis since the 1930's, it doesn't 
take much motivation to explain why it is extremely important for central banks to have at 
their  disposal  a  coherent  framework  that  can  explain  and  analyse  the  interaction  between 
financial  markets  and  the  real  economy.  The  theme  of  this  conference  –  "Towards  an 
integrated macro-finance framework for monetary policy analysis" – is now even more up to 
date  than  we  could  have  anticipated  at  the  time  it  was  chosen.  Although  I  would  have 
preferred  a  different  course  of  events,  even  if  that  would  have  meant  a  less  topical 
conference  today,  it  is  quite  clear  that  the  current  crisis  poses  important  challenges  for 
monetary policy. 
Central  banks  around  the  world  have  at  least  two  immediate  concerns  in  this  respect: 
providing  sufficient  liquidity  to  keep  the  financial  system  functioning,  and  adopting  the 
appropriate monetary policy stance in a highly uncertain and rapidly changing environment. 
Let  me  summarise  briefly  the  approach  that  has  been  taken  by  the  ECB  over  the  last  15 
months. 
Our first challenge was (and still is) to make sure that solvent financial institutions obtain the 
liquidity  they  need.  As  the  liabilities  of  financial  intermediaries  are  more  liquid  than  their 
assets, they are by nature subject to liquidity shocks. If the effects of such shocks are not 
properly managed, illiquidity problems can lead to bankruptcy, even when the intermediary is 
fundamentally sound. Therefore, it is important to make sure that solvent financial institutions 
can obtain liquidity with the central bank. 
So far, we have coped with this challenge. One stabilising factor has certainly been the fact 
that,  well  before  the  start  of  all  this  financial  turmoil,  the  Eurosystem  already  accepted  a 
broad range of assets as collateral in its refinancing operations. Another element was that we 
were able to flexibly adapt the existing framework to new challenges. We did so by adopting 
an ample allotment policy in our main refinancing operations, particularly at the beginning of 
each reserve maintenance period, by having wider recourse to fine-tuning operations when 
market  conditions  were  rapidly  changing,  and  by  increasing  the  share  of  long-term 
refinancing operations. Last week, for our main refinancing operations, we decided to switch 
from a variable-rate tender with a minimum bid rate to a fixed-rate tender at the policy rate 
with full allotment, implying that financial intermediaries no longer face uncertainty about the 
share they will be allocated. Together with our decision to narrow the interest rate corridor for 
the  standing  facilities,  this  should also  improve  our  ability  to  stabilise  the  overnight  money 
market  rate  close  to  the  policy  rate  and  to  adequately  signal  our  monetary  policy  stance. 
Since  December  of  last  year,  we  have  also  provided  liquidity  in  US  dollars  against  ECB-
eligible  collateral,  as  part  of  a  coordinated  action  by  the  central  banks  of  several  major 
advanced economies, including notably the United States' Federal Reserve. The amount of 
US  dollar  liquidity  provision  has  in  the  meantime  been  increased,  in  view  of  the  growing 
tension.  
Yesterday,  the  Governing  Council  decided  to  further  enhance  the  provision  of  longer  term 
financing  operations  through  fixed  rate  tenders  with  full  allotment.  Taking  into  account  the 
substantial  extension  of  the  liquidity,  as  well  in  euro  as  in  dollars,  provided  by  the 
BIS Review 142/2008 
 1
Eurosystem and as there were signs that some counterparties were getting constrained by 
collateral, it was further decided to expand the list of Eurosystem collateral. 
In a climate of generalised distrust, some financial institutions have come under particularly 
strong pressure. When they are systemically relevant, public authorities had to intervene in 
order to avoid contagion effects. In the euro area, it is up to national central banks to provide 
emergency  liquidity  assistance  and  to  governments  to  reinforce  the  solvency  of  such 
institutions in order to restore confidence. Governments have recapitalised some institutions 
and have provided public guarantees to restore confidence in the interbank market. Smooth 
cooperation among all players involved is crucial. In particular, when the central bank does 
not  directly  supervise  credit  institutions,  it  is  essential  for  it  to  receive  without  delay  all 
relevant information. 
Our  second  concern  is  that,  at  the  same  time,  we  need  to  think  about  and  choose  the 
appropriate  monetary  policy  stance.  In  doing  so,  we  have  to  take  a  somewhat  longer 
perspective and weigh up the implications of the financial turbulence for the consumption and 
investment decisions of the various sectors in the economy, as these will in turn determine 
future  outcomes  for  economic  growth,  employment  and  inflation.  Eventually,  the  policy 
stance  is  set  to  optimise  macro-economic  outcomes,  given  all  ongoing  shocks  (and  that 
includes other shocks like rising oil and commodity prices which have also been buffeting the 
economy) and taking into account the underlying structure of the euro area economy. 
One  question  that  could  arise  here  is  whether  the  massive  injections  of  liquidity  into  the 
banking system come at the price of either an inappropriate monetary policy stance or a less 
than optimal signalling of it. In practice, this is very unlikely to be the case. Indeed, since the 
beginning of the financial turmoil in August 2007, the ECB has repeatedly emphasised that 
the policy stance is defined in terms of the interest rate at which financial intermediaries can 
obtain liquidity, rather than by fixing the quantity of liquidity which is provided. As early as 
1970,  William  Poole's  classical  analysis  of  the  instrument-choice  problem  taught  us  that 
using  the  interest  rate  as  policy  instrument  is  desirable  when  short-term  uncertainty 
stemming  from  instability  in  the  money  multiplier  or  from  money  demand  shocks  is  high 
relative  to  the  uncertainty  stemming  from  aggregate  demand  shocks.  The  provision  of 
liquidity then becomes an endogenous variable as it is steered in order to stabilise the money 
market  rate  at  its  desired  level.  In  this  framework,  the  sometimes  substantial  liquidity 
injections  by  the  Eurosystem  should  be  seen  as  simply  offsetting  the  sudden  and  sharp 
declines in the money multiplier induced by the financial crisis. 
As  far  as  our  monetary  policy  decisions  are  concerned,  they  depend  on  our  medium-term 
assessment  of  the  risks  to  price  stability  and  are  based  on  our  two-pillar  strategy,  which 
enables us to cross-check developments in the money, credit and financial markets with the 
signals provided by economic analysis. Given existing upward inflationary pressures from oil 
and other commodity prices and the associated likelihood of second-round effects, euro area 
monetary  policy  was  until  recently  faced  with  predominantly  upward  risks  to  price  stability. 
However,  as  the  financial  crisis  intensified  further,  financial  conditions  for  the  private  non-
financial sector have tightened – independently of monetary policy – and the supply of credit 
from  financial  institutions  might  be  reduced.  As  a  result,  expectations  regarding  economic 
activity  have  rapidly  deteriorated  over  the  last  two  months  and  the  upward  inflationary 
pressures have eased, partly as a result of lower commodity prices but also because of the 
change in the outlook for domestic economic activity. Therefore, the coordinated interest rate 
cut  of  50bp  last  week  was  also  the  appropriate  response  for  the  euro  area  to  the 
materialisation of previously identified downside risks to growth and the associated decline in 
the upward risks to price stability. For the near future, we will continue to closely monitor all 
relevant economic, financial and monetary developments and act firmly whenever necessary.  
Particularly at the current juncture, we expect monetary analysis to provide us with relevant 
information about how banks’ balance sheets are adjusting to the financial crisis and what 
this  implies  for  credit  and  money  and,  eventually,  for  economic  activity  and  inflation.  The 
2 
 BIS Review 142/2008
present  situation  is  indeed  exceptional  in  this  regard,  as  financial  frictions  or  constraints, 
which might seem only marginal in normal times, may now suddenly become predominant 
for  understanding  and  forecasting  economic  developments.  This  comes  on  top  of  regular 
empirical  analysis  and  reduced-form  models  which  show  systematic  and  quite  robust 
relationships between monetary and financial developments and future economic activity and 
inflation.  Money  and  credit  developments  tend  to  precede  long-run  inflation  developments. 
Current  asset  prices  influence  future  investment  decisions,  and  measured  risk  premiums 
predict future cyclical developments.  
These aspects are poorly developed in our standard econometric macro-models, as well as 
in the benchmark new-Keynesian model which is so prominent in the academic literature. For 
the time being, it is difficult to reproduce these statistical relationships and their time-varying 
nature  in  state-of-the-art  structural models.  That  is  the  main  reason  why  the  Eurosystem's 
monetary  policy  strategy  now  deals  with  these  aspects  in  a  separate  pillar.  But  it  would 
obviously  be  extremely  useful  to  have  models  that  can  integrate  these  relationships  in  a 
structural way. This is clearly the way forward for research on these issues. I firmly believe 
that  this  kind  of  conference  helps  to  encourage  research  work  on  such  integrated  models 
and that policymakers will eventually benefit from these research efforts.  
Let me conclude by stressing that the financial developments unfolding before us also reveal 
that  we  face  important  challenges beyond  the  business  cycle  horizon.  Indeed,  we  have  to 
rethink the role of asset prices, risk premiums and money and credit developments for the 
systematic conduct of monetary policy, for ensuring financial stability and for re-designing the 
regulation  of  the  financial  sector.  Here  again,  we  could  clearly  benefit  from  models  which 
integrate real, monetary and financial developments. If there are actually common cycles in 
monetary, financial and real economic activity and inflation, it would be appropriate to adopt 
a longer-term perspective that concentrates on avoiding boom-bust cycles. Structural models 
that  incorporate  these  interactions  should  be  helpful  to  answer  a  crucial  question:  to  what 
extent can monetary policy contribute to preventing excessive liquidity and financial bubbles 
from  building  up  in  prosperous  times?  They  should  also  help  clarify  the  role  of  financial 
regulation and the extent to which it should be designed to avoid any excessive accumulation 
of risk during good times and prevent binding capital constraints from adding to deflationary 
pressures during bad times. 
It is important to better outline the relative role of monetary policy and financial regulation for 
price  and  financial  stability,  both  in  terms  of  strategies  and  institutional  design.  In  today's 
integrated financial world, international coordination at appropriate level seems desirable for 
policies to be effective in this respect. In Europe, the organisation of banking supervision at 
quasi  purely  national  level  contrasts  with  financial  market  integration  and  the  existence  of 
cross-border financial institutions. 
The  current  crisis  raises  all  these  challenges  much  more  strongly  than  before.  I  am 
convinced that academic research in these domains will be boosted in the near future and 
that new and clarifying insights will result from this work. I sincerely hope our conference can 
help stimulate research in these directions. 
BIS Review 142/2008 
 3
