Alan Bollard: Everyone needs to play their part – inflation and recession 
in the New Zealand economy 
Speech by Dr Alan Bollard, Governor of the Reserve Bank of New Zealand, to the Wellington 
Chamber of Commerce, Wellington, 10 December 2008. 
 The  world  economy  faces  some  significant  challenges.  Finance  markets  have  been  going 
through turmoil, the pace of global expansion has slowed abruptly, and policymakers have 
focused  on  preventing  a  more  pronounced  slowdown.  For  some  commentators,  concerns 
over inflation appear to have taken a back seat, for now at least. As the global economy has 
weakened, commodity prices have fallen, substantially in some cases. Many commentators 
are of the view that lower commodity prices and weak economic activity will drive inflation 
significantly lower.  
It is worth remembering that for the moment, however, inflation rates in New Zealand (and 
many  of  our  trading  partners)  remain  very  high.  In  the  September  2008  year  CPI  inflation 
reached  5.1  percent,  the  highest  rate  since  1990.  The  higher  rates  of  inflation  are  broad-
based. These reflect some common drivers: 
• 
A  strong  run-up  in  world  commodity  prices,  which  have  had  a  direct  inflationary 
impact. Oil prices increased nearly tenfold in USD terms in the decade to July 2008, 
with  global  food  prices  also  rising  strongly.  Prices  of  the  milk,  cheese  and  eggs 
category rose 18 percent over the last year.  
The  long-running  expansion  in  domestic  demand  contributed  to  a  build-up  of 
pressures  on  capacity  and  high  rates  of  domestically  generated  inflation.  So  far, 
weaker  demand  conditions  have  been  slow  to  feed  through  into  lower  domestic 
inflation.  In  the  building  industry  for  example,  rising  prices  for  raw  materials  and 
strong  wage  inflation  have  continued  to  underpin  high  rates  of  construction  cost 
inflation.  
There  have  also  been  sizeable  price  increases  in  areas  not  directly  exposed  to  a 
high degree of competition over the past few years. Increases in local authority rates 
have  run  well  in  advance  of  overall  CPI  inflation  for  a  number  of  years.  Cost 
increases in some utilities have also been notable, particularly electricity.  
In  the  banking  sector,  the  cost  of  international  funding  has  risen  significantly  and 
become  less  assured.  However,  since  July  the  Reserve  Bank  has  cut  the  Official 
Cash Rate by 3.25 percent. Short term mortgage rates have been cut, but not by 
this much. Banks should not expect to be able to maintain high profit margins in the 
current environment. 
   BIS Review 156/2008 
 1
Table 1 
Consumer price inflation over the 3 years to 2008Q3 
CPI component 
Average annual rate for the 3 years to September 2008 quarter 
 Annual percent change 
CPI contribution 
Food 
Petrol 
Construction 
Household energy 
Local authority rates 
Total CPI 
Source: Statistics New Zealand, RBNZ estimates. 
4.0
14.3
5.7
6.6
7.0
3.2
Figure 1 
Some contributions to quarterly CPI inflation 
1.0 
0.5 
0.3 
0.2 
0.2 
3.2 
 Source: Statistics New Zealand, RBNZ estimates. 
As the global economy has weakened, commodity prices have fallen again, substantially in 
some cases. Since July, global oil prices have declined by two-thirds and are back to mid-
2005 levels. Other commodity prices have also eased, including prices for our agriculturally 
based exports, with international dairy prices now around half of where they were a year ago. 
Sharply  lower  commodity  prices  are  expected  to  flow  through  into  lower  consumer  prices. 
However, the impact on short-term inflation will depend on a number of factors including the 
exchange rate, other costs, taxes, and firms’ margins. In the past, these factors have tended 
to mitigate the impact on retail prices. Although global oil prices more than doubled between 
mid-2005  and  mid-2008,  New  Zealand  retail  petrol  prices  only  increased  by  around  60 
percent over the period. Retail petrol prices have been dropping recently, but we believe they 
should be dropping further to restore refinery margins. 
Similarly, retail dairy prices only increased around 25 percent from early 2007 to October this 
year, while global dairy prices more than doubled to their peak in late 2007. In addition, there 
was a lag of more than six months before higher global dairy prices flowed through to the 
retail level. However, now that global prices have crashed, there is plenty of room for retail 
price cuts. 
2 
 BIS Review 156/2008
The exchange rate has tended to play a buffering role and has helped moderate the impact 
of  large  swings  in  global  commodity  prices  in  New  Zealand  dollar  terms.  Despite  the 
substantial  appreciation  of  the  New  Zealand  dollar  between  2002  and  2007,  tradable  CPI 
inflation has remained quite high. This may partly reflect trends in global import prices, but it 
is also likely to reflect some importers widening their margins when the NZD was going up 
and demand conditions were more favourable. While the lower NZD will eventually lead to 
higher inflation, this will be tempered by lower global import prices and a narrowing in firms’ 
margins to reflect the current demand climate. The prevalence of discounting and reports of 
high retail stocks suggest some temporary respite for retail prices from the lower dollar. 
As a result of all this, the Bank’s December Monetary Policy Statement projections are for 
annual  CPI  inflation  to  trough  around  1½  percent  in  the  September  2009  quarter,  before 
lifting slightly above 2 percent thereafter.  
Headline CPI and inflation expectations 
(annual) 
 Source: Statistics New Zealand, RBNZ estimates. 
We need to see inflationary pressures reducing significantly across the board, if we are to 
keep  on  easing  monetary  policy,  thus  helping  the  New  Zealand  economy  to  recover.  That 
depends on all sectors of the economy responding to the reduced demand and not adding 
inflationary pressures to the system. 
Some examples: we would hope that the electricity industry does not take advantage of its 
market position and keep increasing rates, that local authorities realise they need to set rates 
increases  below  inflation  for  a  change,  that  the  construction  materials  industry  respond  to 
much weaker demand, that the food industry react to lower international commodity prices 
with price cuts, that petrol companies keep cutting forecourt prices, that the transport industry 
pass on fuel price cuts, and that the banks pass on interest rate cuts. Only then will all these 
firms be playing their proper role in New Zealand’s recovery. 
BIS Review 156/2008 
 3
