Jean-Pierre Roth: Recent economic and financial developments in 
Switzerland 
Introductory remarks by Mr Jean-Pierre Roth, Chairman of the Governing Board of the Swiss 
National  Bank  and  Chairman  of  the  Board  of  Directors  of  the  Bank  for  International 
Settlements, at the end-of-year media news conference, Zurich, 11 December 2008. 
 Our  assessment  of  the  economic  and  monetary  situation  has  changed  considerably  since 
our  last  assessment  of  18  September  2008.  Already  back  then,  we  had  emphasised  that 
there  were  substantial  risks  attached  to  developments  in  the  global  economy,  in  financial 
markets and in energy prices. We had also stressed that our forecasts for economic activity 
and  inflation  in  Switzerland  involved  considerable  uncertainties.  We  had  announced  our 
intention to monitor developments closely, in order to react swiftly should the need arise. As 
you  know,  this  eventuality  did  indeed  materialise.  This  led  us  to  relax  monetary  policy 
decisively as the uncertainties faded and the deterioration in the economic situation became 
more concrete. We first lowered the Libor target range on 8 October, by 25 basis points; then 
on 6 November, by 50 points; and a third time on 20 November, by 100 points. With the new 
cut announced today, the Libor target range now lies between 0% and 1%, reflecting a firmly 
expansionary monetary policy. Today’s press conference gives me the opportunity to explain 
in detail the rationale behind our actions. 
Since our assessment of 18 September, the situation has changed in three key areas. First, 
the international economic outlook has deteriorated markedly, impacting heavily on forecasts 
for  the  Swiss  economy.  Second,  the  financial  market  crisis  has  intensified  since  mid-
September. Finally, prices for raw materials and oil have plummeted and this, combined with 
the  worsening  of  the  economic  outlook,  has  led  to  a  marked  improvement  in  the  inflation 
outlook. I will deal with these three points in turn. 
Global economic outlook 
In September, our main focus was the possibility of sharply contracting growth in the most 
advanced economies. Now, we know that economic activity will decline simultaneously in the 
US and Europe, while it will slow appreciably in emerging economies. Whether one can call 
this  a  recession  or  not  depends  on  the  definition  used,  and  is  now  merely  a  question  of 
semantics. 
In the US, GDP is likely to decline substantially during the current quarter, following its slight 
contraction  in  the  third  quarter.  Industrial  production,  which  had  hitherto  been  remarkably 
stable, fell sharply by 4% between July and October. Moreover, unemployment, which had 
also been stable for some time, rose rapidly, reaching 6.7% in November – a level not seen 
since 1994.  
The  sudden  worsening  of  the  situation  is  above  all  due  to  the  fall  in  household  spending. 
Households saw their financial situation deteriorate sharply due to the loss in value of their 
real estate and financial assets, while also suffering – until recently – a progressive erosion 
of  their  purchasing  power  through  the  continuous  rise  in  fuel  prices.  Although  fuel  prices 
have  since  receded,  the  effects  of  the  price  correction  in  the  real  estate  sector  –  the  root 
cause of the financial crisis – as well as the fall in stock market prices continue to be felt. 
In Europe in the third quarter, GDP recorded a second successive fall. Despite the recent 
depreciation of the euro, exports have been hit by the slowdown in global demand. This is 
especially  true  of  Germany,  which  is  highly  export-dependent.  By  prompting  a  revision  of 
plans  to  expand  production  capacity,  first  in  the  export  industry  and  then  in  the  upstream 
production  chain,  the  fall  in  exports  has  led  to  a  downturn  in  demand  for  equipment 
BIS Review 157/2008 
 1
investment. Moreover, in some countries, for instance Spain and Ireland, construction activity 
has been affected by a significant correction in property prices. 
The picture is more mixed in Asia. Japan and some emerging economies in the region will 
probably not be able to escape a brief recession, but on the whole economic activity should 
continue to advance, albeit less strongly than previously expected. In addition, the emerging 
economies  in  Latin  America  and  Eastern  Europe,  which  until  now  have  been  heavily 
dependent on capital inflows, could experience a marked slowdown in growth. 
Thus,  what  was  merely  a  risk  scenario  at  our  September  assessment  is  now  becoming 
reality. The advanced economies have more or less moved into recession simultaneously. 
The  crisis  in  the  financial  sector  has  finally  spread  to  the  rest  of  the  economy.  With  the 
decline in global demand, prices for food, raw materials and oil have fallen sharply. This is 
the  positive  flipside  of  the  coin,  since  this  development  will  boost  real  incomes  and 
consumption in most countries. 
Swiss economic outlook 
The Swiss economy is of course affected by this worsening of the international environment. 
At our September assessment, we were still projecting a marked slowdown in activity, but 
with  growth  remaining  positive  in  2009.  We  are  now  forecasting  that  GDP  growth  will  be 
negative, not only during the first two quarters of next year, but also on average for 2009 as a 
whole. With the probable exception of consumption, all demand components should decline.  
Exports of equipment goods, demand for which is known to be cyclical, will be affected. In 
most  countries,  difficulties  in  sales  and  distribution,  on  the  one  hand,  and  restrictions  on 
lending  conditions,  on  the  other  hand,  have  prompted  a  downward  revision  of  investment 
plans.  The  US  and  Europe  are  cases  in  point,  but  a  loss  of  momentum  is  also  being 
observed  in  emerging  markets.  These  developments  will  weigh  heavily  on  our  exports  of 
equipment and intermediate goods. The substantial decline in demand for vehicles made by 
US  and  European  manufacturers  will  also  impact  on  their  Swiss-based  suppliers.  The 
metals, machinery and electronics industry was the first to experience a sharp correction in 
new orders. 
The worsening outlook for sales will lead to an adjustment of investment plans in Switzerland 
as well. Domestic demand for equipment goods could even turn out to be the most severely 
affected  component  of  final  demand.  Developments  have  been  slightly  different  for  the 
construction  sector  and  its  most  important  component,  residential  investment.  Housing 
construction  has  been  in  decline  for  the  past  few  years,  although  the  cut  in  interest  rates 
could now halt this trend. 
All  these  factors  have  brought  about  a  sharp  deterioration  in  business  confidence,  which 
should put a damper on job creation in our country. Unemployment will start to rise again. 
Consumption  should  continue  to  grow,  but  at  a  considerably  slower  pace.  The  household 
sentiment  indicator  was  sharply  down  at  the  beginning  of  the  fourth  quarter,  reflecting 
expectations  of  greater  job  insecurity.  In  contrast,  the  unexpected  fall  in  inflation  will 
contribute to an increase in real income, which will support consumption. 
For 2009 as a whole, the SNB is forecasting a decline in real GDP. This decline is likely to lie 
between 0.5% and 1%. 
Changes in monetary and financial conditions 
As  I  mentioned  in  my  opening  remarks,  the  target  range  for  the  three-month  Libor  has 
already been cut by 175 basis points in three steps since our September assessment. These 
successive  cuts  were  rendered  necessary  by  a  number  of  factors  that  contributed  to  a 
tightening of monetary conditions, whereas the deteriorating general economic environment 
2 
 BIS Review 157/2008
called  for  relaxation.  I  need  only  mention,  in  this  regard,  the  brief  but  rapid  ascent  of  the 
Swiss  franc  in  October,  or  the  surge  in  credit  risk  premia  on  the  bond  markets.  These 
movements have since been partly reversed, but tensions remain. These remarks serve to 
illustrate a more general observation: unfavourable economic developments combined with a 
financial  crisis  can  impair  the  transmission  of  monetary  policy,  and  hence  compromise  its 
effectiveness.  The  expansionary  effect  of  an  interest  rate  cut  can  be  diluted.  When 
confronted with such a risk, monetary authorities have to take rapid and decisive action in 
order  to  exert  the  desired  influence  on  final  demand.  This is  what  we have  done  over  the 
past few months. 
In order to monitor lending conditions since the outbreak of the financial crisis, the SNB has 
been  conducting  regular  surveys  of  the  20  major  Swiss  banks.  By  providing  us  with 
information  on  these  banks’  intentions  and  expectations,  the  survey  complements  the 
analysis  of  lending  volumes.  In  the  vast  majority  of  the  institutions  surveyed,  no  lending 
restrictions were announced in the third quarter. Only 15% of the banks reported that their 
lending practice had become slightly more restrictive.  
Data for October on lending volumes in Switzerland confirm this picture. Mortgage lending is 
growing  steadily,  most recently  at a  rate  of  3.4%.  Growth  in  other  lending  remains  strong, 
albeit advancing at a slightly slower pace. Large companies have increasingly drawn down 
their lines of credit, owing to difficulties in sourcing financing on the capital markets. All in all, 
there is, at present, no reason to speak of a credit crunch. However, this favourable situation 
could soon worsen, as has been observed in other countries. 
I will now conclude this second section with a few brief remarks on movements in monetary 
aggregates.  Having  declined  until  recently,  monetary  aggregates  are  now  rising  slightly. 
Following  the  interest  rate  cuts,  we  expect  that  growth  in  monetary  aggregates  will  gather 
pace over the coming months. Given the current heavy demand for liquidity, higher money 
growth does not, of itself, indicate an increase in inflation risks. Only if money growth were to 
become  excessive  over  a  longer  period  would  this  pose  a  threat  to  price  stability  in  the 
medium term. 
Inflation outlook 
In  addition  to  the  rapid  worsening  of  the  global  economy  and  the  financial  crisis,  the  third 
factor behind our policy of successive rate cuts since October is the radical change in the 
inflation outlook. Inflation risks have largely dissipated since our last quarterly assessment on 
18 September, leaving considerable room for manoeuvre in monetary policy, which we have 
firmly exploited. 
As  you  know,  last  December  inflation  breached  the  2%  ceiling  above  which  the  SNB 
considers that the conditions for price stability are no longer met. The rapid rise in inflation – 
indeed, at the beginning of 2007, we still had zero inflation – was due to the combined effect 
of  a  virtually  unbroken  rise  in  oil  prices  and  the  healthy  state  of  the  economy.  In  July  this 
year, inflation reached 3.1%, a level not seen for 15 years. This was a matter for concern, as 
there was a risk that such a level would alter households’ inflation expectations, potentially 
leading to a sharp rise in nominal wages at year-end and resulting in a certain stickiness of 
inflation. 
However, these two elements behind the recent rise in inflation have since reversed. First, oil 
prices collapsed, falling below the USD 50 mark in mid-November after peaking at USD 145 
in early July. The plummeting oil price can be explained both by a drop in global demand as 
a  result  of  the  economic  slowdown  we  have  just  described,  and  by  the  unwinding  of 
speculative  positions.  Second,  the  Swiss  economy  will  soon  be  operating  below  potential, 
and we will see a renewed rise in unemployment. This situation will have a moderating effect 
on both price and wage-setting behaviour.  
BIS Review 157/2008 
 3
Thus, we are now forecasting – as the graph presentation will show in just a moment – that 
inflation  will  decline  almost  continuously  throughout  2009.  Despite  the  interest  rate  cuts 
made since October and the cut announced today, inflation will remain low in 2010 and 2011. 
As  of  now,  and  for  the  current  forecast  horizon,  upside  and  downside  inflation  risks  have 
become symmetrical. 
Monetary policy decision 
We  have  just  explained  the  rationale  behind  our  recent  monetary  policy:  first,  the  global 
economic situation has worsened, which will hit the Swiss economy as from this quarter, and 
in particular next year. By contrast, the inflation outlook has improved appreciably. This has 
increased the SNB’s room for manoeuvre. Finally, there is a risk that the financial crisis will 
cause  a  deterioration  in  financing  conditions  for  the  economy  as  a  whole.  These  are  the 
considerations that have prompted today’s decision to cut the three-month Libor target range 
by another 50 basis points. Given the expected deterioration in the Swiss economy and the 
imponderables linked to the long and variable monetary policy transmission lags, a further 
rate cut appears appropriate. With this action we are reducing, to the extent possible, the risk 
of an even more pronounced economic downturn. 
Inflation forecast chart 
How has our inflation forecast been revised? The dashed red curve on the chart represents 
the new forecast. It covers the period from the fourth quarter of 2008 to the third quarter of 
2011, and maps the future development of inflation on the assumption that the three-month 
Libor remains unchanged at 0.5% over the forecasting period. For purposes of comparison, 
the  dash-dotted  green  curve  shows  the  inflation  forecast  of  the  September  monetary 
assessment, based on a three-month Libor of 2.75%. 
The  new  forecast  shows  a  rapid  fall  in  inflation  over  the  next  few  quarters.  It  drops  back 
below  the  2%  mark  as  from  the  fourth  quarter  of  this  year.  In  the  light  of  economic 
developments, it will continue to decline until the end of the third quarter of 2009, and will 
then rise slightly over the next two quarters as a result of the base effect caused by oil price 
movements. Inflation will subsequently fall even further, to lie around 0.5% in 2010, before 
increasing  somewhat  over  the  course  of  2011.  This  slight  uptick  in  inflation  at  the  end  of 
2011  is explained  by  the  fact  that a  Libor  of  0.5%  does  not  represent  an  equilibrium  level 
capable of guaranteeing price stability in the long term. 
 4 
 BIS Review 157/2008
Observed inflation December 2008 
2006
2005
2007
2008
2005
2006
2007
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
Inflation
1.35 1.06 1.18 1.10 1.23 1.33 1.22 0.46 0.09 0.52 0.63 1.68 2.50 2.70 3.00
 1.2
1.1
0.7
  Inflation  forecast  of  September  2008  with  Libor  at  2.75%  and  of  December  2008  with 
Libor at 0.50% 
2008
2009
2010
2011
2008
2009
2010
Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4
Forecast September 2008,
Libor at 2.75%
Forecast December 2008,
Libor at 0.50%
    2.96 2.69 2.32 2.00 1.70 1.54 1.42 1.35 1.30 1.27 1.27 1.28
  1.66 1.17 0.73 0.59 0.99 0.80 0.45 0.40 0.38 0.43 0.54 0.64
  2.7
2.5
1.9
0.9
1.3
0.5
  BIS Review 157/2008 
 5
