Yandraduth Googoolye: E-payment developments in Mauritius  
Keynote  address  by  Mr  Yandraduth  Googoolye,  First  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of 
Mauritius, at a Visa Briefing on the Economic Benefits of E-Payments, Port Louis, 8 October 
2008. 
 Good Morning 
I am indeed glad to be here to share a few thoughts on the importance of Electronic Payment 
System for economic development. There is no doubt that the advent of Electronic Payment 
System has resulted in numerous benefits for consumers and suppliers in both developed 
and developing economies. Empirically, it has been established that increased use of credit 
cards is positively co-related with economic growth and exports. 
In  Mauritius,  the  growth  of  e-payments,  which  cover  the  entire  spectrum  of  use  of  the 
electronic media for settling transactions and would hence include among others, credit and 
debit cards, internet banking and mobile banking, has been tremendous. We, thus, had 382 
ATMs  in  July  2008  as  against  334  a  year  before  and  293  in  June  2005.  The  number  of 
transactions using credit and debit cards went up from 3 million in June 2007 to 3.7 million in 
July  2008  while  the  aggregate  value  of  monthly  transactions  increased  from  about  Rs  5 
billion to Rs 6.8 billion during this period. More than 1.1 million credit and debit cards were in 
circulation  at  the  end  of  July  2008,  an  average  of  more  than  one  card  per  head  of  adult 
population. A few banks are already offering internet banking facilities while some others are 
in various stages of doing so. 
It is heartening to note that the use of electronic media is spreading to many other types of 
transactions rather than being confined to purchase of goods and services at points of sale, 
withdrawal of cash and to put through transactions on the B2C portals. Thus, for instance, 
this year MRA allowed on line payment of taxes through select banks which, coupled with e-
filing of tax returns, is a major step forward. 
The  Central  Bank  has  the  responsibility  of  maintaining  the  stability  of  the  payments  and 
financial  system.  The  Bank  of  Mauritius  operates  and  manages  Mauritius  Automated 
Clearing  and  Settlement  System  which  is  the  communication  backbone  for  inter-bank 
settlements  and  for  the  Real  Time  Gross  Settlement.  We  also  play  an  enabling  role  by 
adopting a positive, though cautious, approach to development of e-payments in the country. 
The orderly development of any segment of financial sector would require sound regulatory 
framework. The present approach requires financial institutions under its purview to seek the 
Bank’s prior approval for offering internet banking services. At the same time, banks are free 
to open ATMs at any location they choose without the prior approval of the Bank of Mauritius. 
Before granting approval for introduction of internet banking, we at the Bank look at the risk 
management  framework,  the  data  and  physical  security  and  safety  of  the  processes  apart 
from the technological platform. We are in the process of revising the existing guideline on 
internet banking to make it more comprehensive and to align it with recent developments. 
Let  me  now  dwell  on  some  of  the  major  benefits  of  e-payments.  At  the  macro  level,  it 
enlarges consumer market, and thus contributes to economic growth. I am sure you are all 
aware of the tremendous advantages of e-ticketing, for instance. The advent of B2B and B2C 
portals  enhances  transparency  and  facilitates  better  price  discovery.  Further,  e-banking 
helps  spread  banking  facilities  to  areas  that  might,  for  economic  reasons,  have  been 
unviable  for  opening  a  brick  and  mortar  branch.  Thus,  e-banking  could  facilitate  greater 
financial inclusion. At a micro level, e-payment reduces the threat of physical loss of funds to 
the holder of a card and for the seller too, the ease of settlement helps in better cash flow 
management. 
BIS Review 126/2008 
 1
There  are  some  concerns  too.  The  safety  of  the  system  is  highly  dependent  on  the 
robustness of the technology, the anti-hacking features, continuous effort at improving risk 
management  framework  and  regular  information  system  audit.  The  cardholder  faces  risks 
arising from the threat of counterfeiting; now cards can be morphed in quick time and used 
for  unauthorized  withdrawal  of  funds.  The  Bank  encourages  financial  institutions  to  have 
adequate anti-counterfeiting features in their cards, insists on 24 hour help lines and requires 
safe delivery of PINs etc. Simultaneously, the Bank of Mauritius also embarked as part of its 
40th  Anniversary  celebrations  on  a  customer  education  programme  to  create  better 
awareness among the public. 
Another significant risk arises from the use of cards for trans actions with the B2C portals 
through less secure payment gateways over the internet. There is need for adequate caution 
in using such websites for making purchases through e-cards. In some jurisdictions, financial 
institutions issue separate cards exclusively for on-line payments, with such cards having a 
smaller sub-limit out of the main cards. Perhaps, issuers of cards in Mauritius could explore 
this possibility. 
Credit cards are subject to high delinquency; in most countries the nonperforming advances 
pertaining to credit cards as a percentage of the outstanding dues under the cards are very 
high. These often arise as a result of inadequate appraisal of the cardholder and to an extent 
can also be attributed to the high interest rate charged on the carry forward balance. In fact, 
one could see a chicken and egg relationship here since the high interest rate is sought to be 
justified by the high percentage of delinquencies in the card segment. 
Another  manifestation  of  e-payments  is  the  use  of  e-money  which  is  popularly  called 
e-wallet. This product is not yet available in Mauritius. They are like prepaid cards which can 
be used for different types of transactions. These cards could cause problem for the payment 
system, may result in loss to the card holder or merchant in the event of failure of the issuer 
and has implications for the monetary policy formulation as they function as store of value. 
But we will all agree that the benefits of the e-payment system for economic developments 
far  outweigh  the  concerns  which,  moreover,  can  be  mitigated  through  proper  systems, 
processes  and  adequate  awareness  among  the  public.  The  fact  that  at  the  initiative  of 
European Commission and European Central Bank, efforts are underway to develop a new 
European  Payment  Card  System  within  the  implementation  of  Single  Euro  Payment  Area 
agreement shows how important e-payment cards are becoming for the stability of payment 
system both from a financial and the social stand point. In the Mauritian context, it might be 
worthwhile to explore the feasibility of introducing Shari’ah compliant e-payment instruments 
given that we have decided to introduce Islamic Financial Services in the country. 
No address by a Central Banker at this juncture would be complete without a reference to the 
current global financial crisis. The present turmoil which originated in August 2007 as a fall 
out of what is now famous as the sub-prime crisis has accentuated in the wake of it taking a 
toll of systemically important financial institutions in the USA and later in Europe. The various 
measures  being  taken  by  the  different  central  banks  and  governments  are  also  too  well 
known. 
As far as Mauritius is concerned, we can vouchsafe that the banking system is stable and 
sound.  However,  we  have  constituted  a  multi  disciplinary  cell  comprising  Senior  Officials 
from  different  functional  areas  of  the  Bank  of  Mauritius  to  monitor  the  domestic  and 
international events on an on-going basis. This cell meets daily, reviews the developments 
and makes its assessment of the situation. 
The banking system in Mauritius of late witnessed some tightness because of local seasonal 
factors.  As  you  are  aware,  September  end  is  a  tax  payment  time  and  around  this  period 
importers  start  procuring  goods  for  year  end  sales.  To  ease  the  situation,  the  Bank  of 
Mauritius  intervened  both  in  the  rupee  market  by  conducting  repo  transactions  in  quick 
succession  and  on  the  foreign  exchange  market  by  selling  foreign  exchange  and  our  last 
intervention was on 6 October when we sold USD20 million. 
2 
 BIS Review 126/2008
Thus,  the  Bank  of  Mauritius  will  continue  to  play  an  effective  role  whether  in  the  orderly 
operations  of  the  financial  markets  or  ensuring  the  safety  and  soundness  of  the  financial 
system or for that matter the development of e-payments in the country. 
Thank you all for your attention. 
BIS Review 126/2008 
 3
