Duvvuri Subbarao: Mitigating spillovers and contagion lessons from the 
global financial crisis 
Speech  by  Dr  Duvvuri  Subbarao,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the  RBI-BIS 
Seminar on "Mitigating Spillovers and Contagion – Lessons from the Global Financial Crisis", 
Hyderabad, 4 December 2008.  
 On behalf of the Reserve Bank of India, it is my pleasure and privilege to welcome all of you 
international  delegates  to  India,  to  this  wonderful  city  of  Hyderabad,  and  to  this  RBI-BIS 
Seminar on "Mitigating Spillovers and Contagion – Lessons from the Global Financial Crisis". 
Seminar context 
This seminar is the second successive BIS seminar to be organised by the RBI, and marks 
an  important  milestone  in  the  intellectual  collaboration  between  the  Bank  for  International 
Settlements (BIS) and the Reserve Bank of India (RBI). I want to thank the management of 
BIS for giving us the opportunity of hosting this seminar.  
I understand the theme for this seminar, "Mitigating Spillovers and Contagion – Lessons from 
the Global Financial Crisis" was set several months ago. The global financial crisis has since 
become front page news. It is a tribute to the planners of this seminar, particularly Mr. Mar 
Gudmundsson  of  BIS  and  my  predecessor  as  Governor  of  RBI,  Dr.  Y.V.  Reddy,  that  in 
narrowing down to this topic they foresaw, ahead of many of us, the depth and sweep of the 
crisis. 
Global financial and economic outlook 
The global financial situation continues to be uncertain and unsettled. What started off as a 
sub-prime  crisis  in  the  US  housing  mortgage  sector  has  turned  successively  into  a  global 
banking crisis, global financial crisis and now a global economic crisis. Text book economics 
often  cite  housing  as  a  prime  example  of  a  non-tradeable  good.  It  is  paradoxical  that  a 
quintessentially  non-tradable  good  as  housing  has  triggered  a  crisis  of  global  dimensions. 
Such is the depth and sweep of financial globalisation. By far, the most dominant FAQ today 
is whether the worst in terms of the financial sector meltdown, in particular failure of financial 
institutions, is behind us. No one is really willing to take a definitive call on this, which is a 
sign of the increasing number of unknown unknowns.  
The  global  economic  outlook  has  deteriorated  sharply  over  the  last  two  months.  Many 
economists  are  now  predicting  the  worst  global  recession  since  the  1970s.  In  its  World 
Economic Outlook, published in early October, the IMF forecast global growth of 3.9 per cent 
in 2008, and of 3.0 per cent in 2009. The IMF has since revised its forecast for global growth 
downwards  to  3.7  per  cent  for  2008,  and  2.2  per  cent  for  2009.  Notably,  advanced 
economies,  as  a  group,  are  projected  to  contract  by  0.3  per  cent  in  2009.  If  this  gloomy 
outcome were indeed to come true, 2009 will mark the first year on record when emerging 
economies will account for more than 100 per cent of world growth.  
Emerging economies 
Emerging economies may be the sole contributors to global growth in 2009, but they too are 
hit  hard  by  the  crisis.  Ironically,  even  as  late  as  six  months  ago,  it  was  intellectually 
fashionable to subscribe to the “decoupling theory” – that even if advanced countries went 
into  a  downturn,  emerging  economies  will  at  worst  be  affected  only  marginally,  and  can 
BIS Review 153/2008 
 1
largely steam ahead on their own. In a rapidly globalising world, the decoupling theory was 
never totally persuasive; given the evidence of the last few months – capital flow reversals, 
sharp  widening  of  spreads  on  sovereign  and  corporate  debt,  and  abrupt  currency 
depreciations  –  the  decoupling  theory  has  almost  completely  lost  credibility.  Growth 
prospects  of  emerging  economies  have  most  definitively  been  undermined  by  the ongoing 
crisis with, of course, considerable variations across countries. The IMF revised its growth 
forecast for emerging economies for 2009 from its early October figure of 6.1 per cent to 5.1 
per cent. Clearly emerging economies have a painful adjustment to make.  
Impact of the crisis on India 
India too is having to weather the negative impact of the crisis. Even as consumption and 
domestic investment continue to be the key drivers of our growth, India's integration into the 
world has been on the increase. Going by the common measure of globalisation, India's two 
way trade (merchandise exports plus imports), as a proportion of GDP, grew from 21.2 per 
cent  in  1997/98,  the  year  of  the  Asian  crisis,  to  34.7  per  cent  in  2007/08.  If  we  take  an 
expanded  measure  of  globalisation,  that  is  the  ratio  of  gross  current  account  and  gross 
capital flows to GDP, this ratio has increased from 46.8 per cent in 1997/98 to 117.0 per cent 
in 2007/08. These numbers are clear evidence of India's increasing integration into the world 
economy over the last 10 years. 
No revolution in human history has been totally benign. So, it is the case with globalisation; 
globalisation  comes  with  costs  and  benefits.  Managing  globalisation  requires  that  we 
minimize  the  costs  and  maximize  the  benefits.  India  has  undoubtedly  benefited  from 
integrating into the world. By corollary, we also need to manage the downside ramifications 
of integrating into the world, as indeed evidenced by the current context. 
The Indian banking system is not directly exposed to the sub-prime mortgage assets. It has 
very  limited  indirect  exposure  to  the  US  mortgage  market,  or  to  the  failed  institutions  or 
stressed  assets.  Indian  banks,  both  in  the  public  sector  and  in  the  private  sector,  are 
financially  sound,  well  capitalised  and  well  regulated.  Even  so,  India  is  experiencing  the 
knock-on effects of the global crisis, through the monetary, financial and real channels. Our 
financial markets – equity markets, money markets, forex markets and credit markets – have 
all  come  under  pressure  mainly  because  of  what  we  have  begun  to  call  “the  substitution 
effect”.  As  credit  lines  and  credit  channels  overseas  went  dry,  some  of  the  credit  demand 
earlier met by overseas financing is shifting to the domestic credit sector, putting pressure on 
domestic  resources.  The  reversal  of  capital  flows  taking  place  as  part  of  the  global  de-
leveraging process has put pressure on our forex markets. Together, the global credit crunch 
and  de-leveraging  were  reflected  at  home  in  the  sharp  fluctuation  in  the  overnight  money 
market rates in October 2008 and the depreciation of the rupee. 
The outlook for India, going forward, is mixed. There is evidence of economic activity slowing 
down. At the same time, headline inflation, as measured by the wholesale price index, has 
fallen  sharply,  and  the  decline  has  been  sustained  for  the  past  three  weeks,  pointing  to  a 
faster than expected reduction in inflation. Clearly, falling commodity prices have been the 
key drivers behind the disinflation; however, some contribution has also come from slowing 
domestic  demand.  To  be  sure,  consumer  price  inflation  for  the  months  of  September  and 
October did increase. This is possibly owing to the firm trend in food articles inflation and the 
higher weight of food articles in measures of consumer price inflation. Historically there has 
been  a  correlation  between  wholesale  and  consumer  price  inflation,  and  given  this 
correlation, consumer price inflation too can be expected to soften in the months ahead.  
The  Reserve  Bank's  monetary  policy  stance  has  always  been  to  balance  growth,  inflation 
and financial stability concerns. When inflation surged earlier this year, the RBI had moved 
quickly to tighten policy. Then again, reflecting the unfolding global situation and expectation 
of decline in inflation, RBI has adjusted its monetary stance over the last couple of months. 
2 
 BIS Review 153/2008
The endeavour of our monetary stance has been to manage liquidity – both domestic and 
forex liquidity – and to ensure that credit continues to flow for productive activities.  
I do not intend to go into a detailed cataloguing of all the measures we have taken, but I do 
want to mention that we have instituted both aggregate measures as well as sector specific 
measures. Although, we remain vulnerable to global financial and economic developments, 
the measures taken so far have eased the liquidity and credit flow situations considerably. I 
must also add that in managing the impact of the global crisis, we have been mindful that no 
policy initiative is totally costless. Managing this delicate balance between costs and benefits 
has been one of our challenges. 
Going forward, developments in the real economy, financial markets and global commodity 
prices point to a period of moderation in growth with declining inflation. The fundamentals of 
our  economy  continue  to  be  strong.  Once  calm  and  confidence  are  restored  in  the  global 
markets, economic activity in India will recover sharply. But a period of painful adjustment is 
inevitable.  
The  Reserve  Bank's  policy  endeavour  will  be  to  ensure  an  orderly  adjustment,  and  to 
minimise  the  pain  of  its  impact.  In  particular,  we  will  try  to  maintain  a  comfortable  liquidity 
position, see that the weighted average overnight money market rate is maintained within the 
repo-reverse repo corridor and ensure conditions conducive for flow of credit to productive 
sectors,  particularly  the  stressed  export  and  small  and  medium  industry  sectors.  We  hope 
that all economic agents will plan their business activities on the basis of this assurance. 
Lessons from the crisis 
The  crisis  is  by  no  means  over.  Drawing  lessons  may  therefore  appear  a  bit  premature. 
There  may  yet  be  surprises.  Even  so,  it  will  be  instructive  to  put  our  minds  together  to 
understand how we got here and how we may avoid the mistakes and excesses in the future. 
It will be presumptuous on my part to anticipate the whole gamut of issues that you will bring 
to the discussion. Given your collective experience and expertise, that will indeed be a rich 
contribution. But I want to take this opportunity to raise some of the more important debates 
thrown up by this crisis. I will refer to five debates.  
1st debate: How do we manage global imbalances?  
In popular perception, the collapse of Lehman Brothers on 15 September 2008 will remain as 
the trigger for the global crisis. At one level, that many well be true. Indeed, for several years 
ahead, I can see ourselves furiously debating the famous counterfactual, "If Lehman had not 
been allowed to fail, …..".  
However, if only we look a little deeper, we will trace the origins of the crisis to the build up of 
global imbalances during the 90s and this first decade of this century. There is of course a 
separate debate on what caused the build up of imbalances? Is it excess consumption of the 
US, or is it the savings glut in emerging Asia with the US helping out as the “consumer of the 
last resort”?  
Be  that  as  it  may,  there  is  little  disagreement  over  the  mega  trends  that  lead  to  the 
imbalances. First, there was the globalisation of labour. Emerging Asia added nearly three 
billion to the world pool of labour as it integrated into the world through the 90s. What this did 
was  to  reduce  production  costs  at  the  aggregate  level  and  increase  Asia's  comparative 
advantage.  In  a  manner  of  speaking,  Asia  produced  and  America  consumed.  Asian 
economies ran  up  huge  surpluses  on  their  trade  accounts  which  were  mirrored  by  current 
account  deficits  in  the  US.  This  geographical  savings  –  consumption  imbalance  was 
inherently  fragile,  but  we  refused  to  acknowledge  it.  Instead,  we  lulled  ourselves  into 
believing that we have entered, what Mervyn King of Bank of England famously called NICE 
era – “non-inflationary consistently expansionary” era. It is these imbalances that generated 
BIS Review 153/2008 
 3
easy  liquidity  and  low  interest  rates  which  in  turn  encouraged  under-pricing  of  risk  and 
deterioration in credit quality.  
So, the debating issue is, can we prevent global imbalances from building up in the future? 
There is an argument that global imbalances are inevitable given the demographic profile of 
the  world.  Emerging  economies  typically  have  younger  populations  with  a  higher  marginal 
propensity to save. Conversely, advanced countries with ageing populations have a higher 
marginal propensity to consume. If the demand for, and supply of, savings at the global level 
is structurally so well matched, how do we prevent a recurrence of global imbalances?  
2nd debate: Is self-insurance a viable option for emerging economies? 
Writing in the Business Standard last week, Arvind Subramanian of the Peterson Institute for 
International  Economics  had  raised  the  issue  of  self  insurance  –  accumulation  of  foreign 
reserves  –  as  a  buffer  against  financial  crises.  Following  the  Asian  crisis,  East  Asian 
countries built up huge reserves as a deliberate policy of self insurance. China and India too 
built up reserves, with an important difference though. China's reserves derive from current 
account surpluses and are therefore an unencumbered asset, whereas India's reserves have 
been  built  up  from  capital  flows,  and  are  therefore  encumbered  by  liabilities.  It  is  this  war 
chest  of  reserves  that  has  given  the  muscle  to  the  emerging  economies  to  withstand  the 
worst impact of the ongoing crisis. 
Self-insurance, of course, is not costless, as Subramanian himself argues. Reserves should 
ideally  be  built  through  current  account  surpluses.  This  implies  greater  reliance  on  the 
external  sector,  particularly  exports.  But  such  reliance  on  exports  can  become  a  liability  if 
export demand shrinks which can happen for reasons exogenous to the emerging economy. 
There is obviously a trade off here. Self-insurance, as defined by reserve build up through 
aggressive  exports,  offers  protection  against  financial  contagion,  but  it  also  makes  the 
economy  vulnerable  to  trade  contagion.  How  do  we  balance  this  trade  off  between 
vulnerability to financial contagion and vulnerability to trade contagion? 
Another  relevant  issue  is  that  self-insurance  may  not  be  necessary,  indeed  may  be 
redundant,  if  international  collective  arrangements  –  regional  or  multilateral  –  can  provide 
easy, quick and unconditional liquidity during a crisis. For example, the motivation for self-
insurance will be less compelling if the recently instituted IMF's Short-term Liquidity Facility 
for Market Access Countries or the swap facility offered to select countries by the US Federal 
Reserve become more common and can be accessed with relatively low transaction costs. 
So,  the  second  debating  issue  I  want  to  raise  is  the  following:  "Is  self-insurance  a  viable 
policy option for emerging economies?" 
3rd debate: How do we reform financial sector regulation? 
By far the most contentious and most voluble debate triggered by the crisis has been about 
the flaws in the regulatory architecture. Several issues have come to the fore. I will mention 
just a few. How can complex derivative products which transmitted risks across the system 
be  made  more  transparent?  What  are  the  financial  stability  implications  of  structured 
products like credit derivatives? Are exchange traded derivatives better than over the counter 
(OTC)  derivatives?  How  do  we  eliminate  the  drawbacks  of the  "originate  –  to  –  distribute" 
model?  Is  universal  banking,  the  model  that  the  United  States  has  now  turned  to, 
appropriate? Can we apply the same regulatory regime for both wholesale and retail banks? 
The burden of all the above questions is to identify the drawbacks in the present regulatory 
regimes  and  indicate  possible  solutions.  There  is  no  doubt  that  we  must  pursue  all  these 
questions.  In  doing  so,  I  would  urge  that  we  remember  two  things.  The  first  thing  to 
remember is that no one size fits all. For example, universal banking may be good in some 
countries and in some situations, and not so in others. The second thing to remember is that 
some regulations arguably have been behind the curve. There is no denying that regulations 
4 
 BIS Review 153/2008
have to keep pace with innovations. But in doing so, we must be mindful of the risks of over 
tightening regulations so much that they stifle innovation. 
While  on  the  subject  of  reforming  regulation,  there  is  also  the  larger  question  of  risk 
modelling. True, the probability of risk follows a normal distribution – popularly called the bell 
curve.  But  our  regulatory  regimes  have  been  tailored  to  respond  to  the  central,  higher 
probability portion of the bell curve. Typically, we ignored the black swan lying in the long tail 
of the curve. We now know from the benefit of hindsight that this was a fatal flaw. The black 
swan  represents  the  low  probability,  high  risk  events  that  pose  systemic  risk.  While  our 
regulatory regimes were tailored to address institutional failures, they were not equipped to 
address systemic failures. 
So,  the  issues  for  debate  are  the  following.  What  are  the  flaws  of  the  current  regulatory 
regimes? How do we fix them? In what ways can international cooperation be fostered in this 
regard? How do we address the black swan systemic risk events? 
4th debate: How do we address regulatory arbitrage? 
Around  the  world,  regulations  governing  the  banking  system  have  typically  been  quite 
stringent on the premise that the interests of the depositors need to be protected. But under 
the  very  nose  of  the  regulators  grew  a  very  extensive  and  complex  network  of  a  “shadow 
banking  system”,  comprising  hedge  funds,  broker-dealers,  private  equity  funds,  structured 
investment  vehicles  and  conduits  and  money  market  funds.  This  shadow  banking  system 
was  typically  highly  leveraged,  and  had  an  extensive  nexus  with  the  banking  system. 
However,  the  shadow  banking  system  suffered  much  lighter  regulation.  This  “regulatory 
arbitrage”  encouraged  loose  practices,  hunt  for  quick  yields  and  non-transparent and  risky 
financial products. When the systems began to unravel, it was realised that many of these 
institutions in the shadow banking system pose as much of a systemic risk as banks. The 
moral of the story is that if an institution is “too big to be allowed to fail”, it is also too big to be 
let off with loose regulations. 
So, the question for debate is, how do we address the problem of regulatory arbitrage? 
5th debate: How do we keep the financial sector in line with the real sector? 
Last, and perhaps most important, let me turn to the debate surrounding the efficiency gains 
of  financial  engineering.  We  got  ourselves  into  believing  that  significant  value  could  be 
created  by  slicing  and  dicing  securities.  Illustratively,  we  believed  that  financial  alchemy 
could turn the “lead” of sub-prime mortgages into gold and platinum of “AAA” securities. In 
many ways, the malady was worse. We failed to learn from earlier crises. We should have 
learnt  that  the  modern  financial  system  with  its  deregulated  markets,  highly  leveraged 
players  and  large  capital  flows  was  dangerously  fragile.  We  should  have  seen  the  crisis 
incubating  behind  the  dazzle  of  financial  alchemy.  We  should  have  noticed  the  regulatory 
systems getting lax and behind the curve. Instead what happened was just the opposite. The 
complexity,  sophistication  and  finesse  associated  with  it  gave  the  financial  sector  a  larger 
than  life  profile.  Lulled  by  the  seemingly  benign  economic  environment,  we  deluded 
ourselves into believing that for every real life problem, no matter how complex, there is a 
financial sector solution.  
Forgotten in the euphoria of financial alchemy is the basic tenet that the financial sector has 
no standing of its own; it derives its strength and resilience from the real economy. It is the 
real sector that should drive the financial sector, not the other way round. 
So, the issue for debate is, how do we keep the financial sector in line with the real sector? 
BIS Review 153/2008 
 5
Summary and conclusion 
That  brings  me  to  the  close  of  the  five  debates  relating  to  the  lessons  from  the  global 
financial crises. To summarize, the five debates I have raised are the following:  
i) 
ii) 
iii) 
iv) 
v) 
I am aware that there are several other important issues beyond what I have raised. I hope 
and  trust  that  we  will  have  an  opportunity  to  discuss  all  these  issues.  I  wish  you  all  a 
rewarding learning experience over the next two days. 
How do we manage global imbalances? 
Is self-insurance a viable option for emerging economies?  
How do we reform financial sector regulation? 
How do we address regulatory arbitrage? 
How do we keep the financial sector in line with the real sector?  
6 
 BIS Review 153/2008
