Emmanuel Tumusiime-Mutebile: Inflation and opportunities in Uganda  
Press statement by Mr Emmanuel Tumusiime-Mutebile, Governor of the Bank of Uganda, at 
the Bank of Uganda, Kampala, 24 September 2008. 
 Recent inflation developments  
1.  
The recent spike in inflation comes after a long period of low and stable single digit inflation 
that has been entrenched in Uganda since the 1990s. The long term commitment of the BOU 
remains to maintain price stability at all times. In this regard, it is important to understand the 
reasons for the recent surge in inflation, and also explain the stance that Bank of Uganda 
has adopted to deal with the problem.  
Two developments need to be explained. First, at the international level, data from the World 
Economic Outlook indicates headline inflation in advanced economies to have risen to 3.5 
percent in May 2008. The rise in inflation in advanced economies has led central banks to 
express  growing  concerns  in  regard  to  the  current  price  environment.  The  increase  in 
inflation  is  more  marked  and  broader  in  developing  economies,  particularly  Sub  Saharan 
Africa where headline inflation has registered an average of 20.0 percent; the highest rates 
since  the  beginning  of  the  current  decade.  In  these  economies,  food  and  fuel  make  up  a 
larger  share  of  consumption  baskets  and  sustained  strong  growth  has  tightened  capacity 
constraints. The major part of the spike in inflation reflects sharp increases in global energy 
and food commodity prices, and other commodities. In part, the rise in prices was driven by 
the commodity boom that resulted from both accelerated demand and constrained supply. In 
particular,  the  increased  demand  from  emerging  economies  for  various  commodities; 
demand for specific food crops and bio fuels; and slow supply responses, amplified the price 
pressures.  
Second,  on  the  domestic  front,  core  inflation  had  remained  in  single  digits  since  1996  but 
rose  above  the  10  percent  mark  after  April  2008.  In  the  same  vein,  headline  inflation  was 
recorded at single digit levels for most of the period from August 1993 to May 2008. It was 
only some episodes in 1997, 2003 and 2005 that inflation rose above the 10 percent level, 
mainly  due  to  the  world  oil  prices  increasing  after  the  genesis  of  the  gulf  war,  supply 
constraints after the closure of the sugar factories among others, and periods of elongated 
drought. Figure 1 maps the inflation profile.  
The domestic food crop prices, as reported by the Uganda Bureau of Statistics, rose mainly 
due  to  seasonal  factors,  poor  harvest,  substitution  effect  and  high  domestic  and  regional 
demand. The rise I prices of processed foods were brought about by increased costs of raw 
materials,  the  impact  of  supply  constraints  as  a  result  of  the  Kenyan  crisis,  together  with 
increased transportation costs due to the surge in the world oil prices, among others.  
BIS Review 120/2008 
 1
 Food prices as a major driver of the recent high inflation rates  
2.  
In  terms  of  composition,  an  analysis  of  the  major  movers  of  inflation  shows  that  the 
contribution of food (comprising of food crop and food-non-food crop) to inflation has been 
growing  steadily  since  April  2008.  The  magnitude  of  the  contribution  of  the  above  factor, 
however, equaled that of non-food items on average.  
Previously, changes in food crop prices helped neutralize otherwise sharp increases in core 
inflation resulting in a less accelerated headline inflation rate. However, the annual food crop 
inflation started rising in February 2008 from levels of 4.8  percent to 15.4 percent in June 
2008  and  further  to  33.7  percent  in  August  2008;  the  highest  food  crop  inflation  recorded 
since May 2005. The total effect of the food price changes on headline inflation increased 
from 0.6 percentage points in January 2008 to 9.1 percentage points in August 2008.  
Opportunities and challenges before us  
3.  
While the short run hikes in prices may pose unfortunate and difficult stresses on the general 
standard  of  living,  it  also  provides  opportunities  for  the  Ugandan  producers  to  increase 
domestic  production  to  take  advantage  of  the  rising  world  commodity  prices.  Increased 
domestic  production  should  help  boost  supply  of  food  crops,  alleviate  price  pressures  and 
also contribute to prosperity for all. Information from the business confidence survey index 
conducted  by  BOU  continues  to  reveal  that  many  firms  are  positioning  themselves  to 
increase  investment  and  boost  the  supply  of  domestically  produced  goods  within  the  near 
term.  
The  increased  regional  demand  for  our  products  provides  a  challenge  to  firms  and 
households to increase output and take advantage of the high international commodity price 
developments.  
Uganda’s future competitiveness and ability to diversify exports depends fundamentally on 
reducing the costs of production through investment in infrastructure, particularly electricity, 
telecommunication  and  the  transport  system.  Indeed,  to  reap  the  benefits  from  expanded 
access  to  markets  for  export  products  that  our  people  produce  requires  a  solution  to  the 
binding  supply  side  constraints,  ability 
trade  standards  and  rapid 
improvements in productivity. Undeniably, the cost of doing business can be curtailed further 
to  comply  with 
2 
 BIS Review 120/2008
by constituting effective institutions, particularly, the judicial and legal system, the investment, 
taxation  and  other  regulatory  authorities,  among  others.  This  institutional  development 
should  help  maintain  and  improve  Uganda’s  competitiveness  in  regional  and  international 
markets.  
It is anticipated that global inflation will decline in the near future if world economic growth 
rebounds  and  the  financial  market  situation  in  the  developed  countries  normalizes.  On  its 
part, the Bank will continue to minimize the adverse impacts of second round price effects 
that may arise from the external shocks by pursuing appropriate monetary policy.  
Conclusion  
3. 
The  Central  Bank  remains  committed  to  the  low  inflation  objectives  in  the  medium  term 
outlook and shall implement an appropriate monetary policy stance aimed at setting money 
supply to such a level that would keep inflation on track to deliver price stability. Accordingly, 
while  the  economy  will  be  allowed  to  adjust  to  exogenous  shocks,  the  central  bank  policy 
actions will aim at minimizing the second round effects feeding into domestic inflation.  
It  should  be  pointed  out  that  continued  fiscal  discipline;  financial  markets  development, 
sustained financial stability and deepening have provided a conducive environment for doing 
business  in  Uganda.  The  gains  achieved  so  far  will  be  consolidated  by  continuing  the 
coordination of monetary and fiscal policies to ensure macroeconomic stability.  
There  is  need  for  urgent  action  to  tackle  supply  side  constraints  to  increase  production. 
Going forward, reforms to improve efficiency of institutions will continue to be implemented 
and significant investment effected in infrastructure to reduce the costs of doing business in 
the  country.  Government  has  already  committed  itself  to  address  the  infrastructure 
requirement  in  roads,  energy  and  communication  sectors.  The  private  sector  is  therefore 
called  upon  to  take  advantage  of  the  available  opportunities  in  the  global  community  and 
neighboring  countries  to  increase  the  supply  of  food  and  other  products  to  maximize  the 
gains from these opportunities. 
BIS Review 120/2008 
 3
