Christian Noyer: A founder’s perspective on the euro as a global 
currency  
Speech by Mr Christian Noyer, Governor of the Bank of France, at the joint conference “The 
euro at ten: the next global currency?”, sponsored by the Peterson Institute for International 
Economics  and  Bruegel,  Peterson  Institute  for  International  Economics,  Washington  DC, 
10 October 2008. 
 Good afternoon. It is a great pleasure to be here today with so many friends and colleagues 
to celebrate ten years of the Euro as a global currency. I must confess this is not exactly my 
idea of a quiet and peaceful anniversary. When I was privileged to be designated as ECB's 
first Vice President, I would never have imagined that I would be sitting now, as a member of 
the Governing Council, dealing with the worst financial crisis in the last eighty years. Actually, 
one of the main gratification of the job during the crisis has been the quality of our collective 
interaction  and  deliberation  in  the  Governing  Council,  based  on  our  willingness,  in  very 
challenging circumstances, to share judgments and exchange views in a spirit of friendship 
and mutual respect. I am very proud to be part of such a group. Together, we have been able 
to make quick decisions and adjust flexibly to fast changing environment, without ever giving 
up on our mandate and our mission. 
Obviously,  the  Euro  area,  like  the  rest  of  the  industrialised  world,  is  going  through  a  very 
rough patch. We can only imagine what would be the situation if we still had fifteen different 
currencies, with so many bilateral exchange rates potentially as volatile as other asset prices 
currently are. That single thought experiment is enough to show how much Europe benefits 
from having a single, truly global, currency. 
Two  days  ago,  we  took  two  very  important  decisions.  First,  in  an  unprecedented  move 
concerted  with  all  major  central  banks,  we  decreased  our  policy  rate  by  50  basis  points. 
Then, in a separate deliberation, we further adjusted our liquidity provision framework. I will 
spare you the technicalities. Suffice it to say that, as a result, banks will have regular access, 
against collateral, to unlimited amount of liquidity at the policy rate i.e. 3.75%; this, at least 
until the end of January 2009. 
Let me briefly comment on those two decisions. 
First, on liquidity provision. Since the crisis broke out, central banks have tried and restore an 
orderly functioning of money markets. Even when modalities are different, there has been a 
convergence in objectives and frameworks. Central Banks have stepped up their supply of 
funds  at  longer  maturities.  Some  have  broadened  the  range  of  collateral  accepted  in  their 
secured  lending  operations.  They  expanded  the  scope  of  eligible  counterparties  so  as  to 
ensure  a  wider  dissemination  of  funds.  Importantly,  major  central  banks  conducted  co-
ordinated  actions  to  provide  longer-term  funds  to  address  dollar  funding  needs  of  non-US 
banks, thereby ensuring an adequate distribution of liquidity across borders. 
Yet,  after  more  than  a  year  of  crisis,  credit  markets  remain  very  fragile,  normal  interbank 
relationships have not been reestablished, and those frictions could destabilize the financing 
of the corporate sector, thus further threatening economic growth. With our last decision, we 
have given financial intermediaries full assurance that their liquidity needs will be met, in an 
environment  of  total  clarity  and  absolute  predictability.  We  hope  that  this  will  contribute  to 
reduce uncertainty and restore confidence between counterparties, which is a prerequisite to 
a  functional  money  market.  This  may  depend  on  more  than  simple  liquidity  provision.  But 
central bank’s ability – and willingness – to use their capacity are a major source of stability 
in  the  financial  system,  and  should  be  seen  as  such,  both  by  market  participants  and  the 
general public. 
BIS Review 122/2008 
 1
Second,  on  monetary  policy.  We  have  participated  in  a  concerted  action  by  major  Central 
Banks This is a major, and unprecedented, move to restore confidence, but one, I want to 
emphasize, fully and absolutely consistent with our mandate. It is obvious to all observers 
that the overall environment has dramatically changed in the last three weeks. Declining oil 
and commodity prices, together with stagnant activity have significantly altered the inflation 
outlook. Based on current conditions, we can expect "instant" inflation rate to come under our 
definition of price stability somewhere in the middle of 2009. In addition, long term inflation 
expectations, as measured by the "5 years in 5 years" break even (or swap) inflation rate, 
has  dropped  significantly  under  2%,  perhaps  reflecting  the  credibility  created  by  our  past 
actions.  To  be  sure,  we  must  remain  vigilant  as  regards  wage  developments  and  the  still 
possible  second  round  effects  from  past  price  surges.  But,  overall,  I  would  asses  that  our 
new  monetary  stance  is  in  line  with  what  is  necessary,  in  current  conditions,  to  fulfill  our 
mandate. 
Let me now elaborate on two other set of policies, which, although not directly linked to the 
currency, contribute to underpin the strength and stability of the euro area. 
The  crisis  has  given  a  new  impetus  to  discussions  on  the  proper  architecture  of  financial 
supervision.  In  Europe,  with  market  integration  moving  at  a  quick  pace,  supervisory 
structures will have to adapt. I am a strong supporter of the Lamfalussy process and believe 
that current efforts to improve and develop it deserve all our attention. But I would also argue 
that  the  process  must  be  conducted  with  pragmatism  and  a  constant  look  at  reality  rather 
than  by  reference  are  some  theoretical  scheme  and  vision,  and  I  would  like  to  take  this 
opportunity to mention two lessons that I draw personally from events of the last 12 months. 
First, there are clear advantages in having banking supervision close to (or at least not too 
far  away  from)  the  Central  Bank.  I  think  this  is  now  a  conclusion  shared  by  all  Central 
Bankers  in  the  world,  whatever  the  regulatory  environment  they  live  in.  An  intimate 
knowledge of the banking sector and of different financial institutions is extremely helpful in 
managing periods of tensions and stress on money and credit markets. Central Banks have 
had  to  make  almost  instant  judgment  on  the  provision  of  liquidity  in  different  forms  and 
different  maturities.  There  are  circumstances  where  being  able 
the 
creditworthiness  of  market  participants  and  the  effective  amplitude  of  their  needs  is  of 
extreme help. More generally (and somehow academically), in times of crisis, the distinction 
between  liquidity  and  solvency  problems  becomes  both  more  important  and  much  more 
difficult  to  make.  Having,  so  to  speak,  all  the  cards  in  your  hands,  minimizes  the  risk  of 
making mistakes. 
Second, as concerns the supervision infrastructure, it seems to me that clear, simple, robust 
and pragmatic arrangements have performed better than more sophisticated and elaborate 
schemes. As you know, I had myself to face a situation of acute crisis and make decisisions 
in real time, concerning a major, and internationally active, financial institution. At no time did 
I have the feeling that our current arrangements were deficient and prevented me for getting 
the necessary information and making the necessary decisions. As you also know, seen from 
a public interest perspective, we could solve the situation without any significant disturbance 
to capital market. Nobody knows about the future. But I tend to come out from this episode 
with some confidence in the appropriateness of our current arrangements. 
In  addition  to  Central  Banks,  Governments  in  all  countries  have  judged  appropriate  to  act 
and try to restore financial stability through a broader set of policy actions. Initiatives have 
been taken first, to recapitalize banks through infusion of public money and, second, to foster 
confidence  in  deposit  guarantees.  In  an  European  framework,  such  actions  involve  mainly 
national  decisions  which  had  to  be  made,  in  many  cases,  with  some  urgency.  Hence  the 
impression that, at least initially, the coordination may not have been perfect. But things are 
falling progressively into place and I am confident that any remaining issues will be quickly 
dealt  with,  according  to  the  roadmap  and  joint  principles  recently  adopted  by  ECOFIN 
Ministers. 
to  assess 
2 
 BIS Review 122/2008
So I would encourage all market participants to take a step back and, as Jean-Claude Trichet 
said  “collect  themselves”  to  look  at  the  whole  package  of  measures  which  have  been 
publicized. True, they have been announced through a succession of public statements. But, 
taken  together,  they  represent  decisive  steps  and  a  coherent  package  towards  restoring 
confidence. I am convinced that their impact on the real economy and future growth is going 
to be extremely significant. 
Overall, it is fair to say that the euro has passed the test and comes strengthened out of the 
current  difficulties.  The  Eurosytem  will  keep  fulfilling  its  priority  mandate  of  price  stability 
while  also  contributing  to  the  broader  objective  of  financial  stability.  Governments  are 
increasing their cooperation. So the eurozone has shown it is well equipped to live up to its 
responsibilities  as  a  truly  global  player  in  the  international  monetary  system  of  the  21st 
century. 
I thank you for this opportunity to present my views. 
BIS Review 122/2008 
 3
