José de Gregorio: Price stability and financial stability – some thoughts 
on the current global financial crisis 
Speech  by  Mr  José  de  Gregorio,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Chile,  at  the  meeting 
Pensando  Chile  2009.  Propuestas  y  Desafíos  en  Tiempos  de  Crisis  (Thinking  Chile  2009, 
Proposals  and  Challenges  for  Critical  Times),  organised  by  Pontificia  Universidad  Católica 
de Chile, El Mercurio newspaper and Banco Santander, Santiago, 3 November 2008. 
I am grateful to Luis Álvarez, Kevin Cowan and Pablo García for their valuable comments. 
 The  current  world  financial  crisis  has  prompted  significant  debate  around  the  proper 
management of monetary policy and its role in preventing financial crises, particularly when 
they grow to the size of the one we are now seeing in developed economies. 
These are the issues I would like to address today, in the context of this seminar “Thinking 
Chile 2009, Proposals and Challenges in Critical Times,” to which I have been invited, and 
which makes us look into the future, beyond the juncture that has taken up the better part of 
our energies for the past several weeks. 
I would like to make a special reference to the role that central banks play in both price and 
financial stability. It is interesting to note that financial stability has been overlooked for so 
long, or has been the secondary goal of central banks. Some people even thought that the 
only objective of central banks was price stability. However, at their origin, these institutions 
were created precisely to deal with the financial instability caused by frequent bank runs in 
the late 19th and early 20th century. Furthermore, the concern for price stability was even 
institutionalized later on around the world, with the inflation-targeting regime being the latest 
stage of its development.  
It is important to review jointly the issues of price stability and financial stability, because here 
the well-known Tinbergen principle is clearly present. This principle indicates that, to achieve 
a  certain  number  of  objectives,  at  least  an  equal  number  of  instruments  are  needed.  We 
often have used this argument when asked to achieve inflationary, output and exchange rate 
objectives with only one instrument, that is, the interest rate.  
Although several objectives can and do coincide with an instrument fairly frequently, there is 
no  reason  why  they  should.  For  instance,  during  a  period  of  declining  inflation,  an 
expansionary  monetary  policy  could  be  justified,  which  could  trigger  an  excessive  credit 
expansion, asset price bubbles and, hence, introduce vulnerabilities into the financial system. 
If the monetary authority decides to fight the credit expansion with a high interest rate, it may 
end up reducing inflation excessively incurring in unnecessary costs in terms of employment. 
Here a new instrument is in order, namely, financial regulation. 
About these issues I want to talk today. 
Price stability: inflation targets 
The regime adopted in Chile and in a number of other countries with low and stable inflation 
to pursue the price stability objective, is that of flexible inflation targeting. It consists of setting 
a quantitative inflation goal to anchor expectations, which in our case is 3% with a tolerance 
margin of plus/minus one percentage point, to be met most of the time.1
                                                 
1   There  is  wide  empirical  debate  on  the  effects  of  inflation  targeting  regimes  on  the  volatility  of  inflation  and 
output. Gonçalves and Salles (2008) show that output volatility and inflation volatility are actually reduced in 
inflation targeting emerging economies.  
BIS Review 150/2008 
 1
To operationalize this objective – because the Central Bank controls inflation imperfectly and 
with lags and its purpose is not to cause output to deviate significantly to achieve its target – 
inflation  deviations  are  corrected  over  a  two-year  horizon.  In  other  words,  the  monetary 
policy is conducted in such a way as to have forecast annual inflation two years ahead stand 
at around 3%. 
The instrument of monetary policy is the interest rate. It could be some monetary aggregate, 
but virtually everywhere central banks will rather use the interest rate for well-known reasons 
that are beyond the scope of this meeting.2
What is inconsistent is to use both variables as monetary policy instruments, which certainly 
complicates the interpretation of the two-pillar strategy of the European Central Bank. Simply 
put,  setting a  monetary  aggregate  and  the  interest  rate  at  the  same  time  is  tantamount  to 
setting  the  price  and  the  amount  to  be  consumed  for  gasoline.  Supply  and  demand 
constraints imply that you can peg either one, but not both. However, as I will discuss below, 
in practice the rationale for considering monetary aggregates is a little different. 
What variables should a central bank consider when setting the interest rate? In the regime I 
just described, the answer to this question is pretty simple: anything affecting inflation over a 
two-year horizon. Variables such as inflation expectations, wages, output, the exchange rate, 
commodity prices, and so on, have important effects on inflationary forecasts and must be 
taken into account when deciding the future path of monetary policy. 
There are other variables that have caught particular attention and I would like to take a brief 
look at them. These are the prices of assets (e.g., stocks, housing), the exchange rate and 
monetary aggregates.  
Two  questions  arise  with  regard  to  asset  prices.  One  is,  should  they  influence  monetary 
policy decisions? And the other is, what must be done when those prices contain speculative 
bubbles? I will address this second question in the next section. But it must be noted that we 
must avoid the confusion between inflation and financial stability.  
Concern about asset price bubbles and distortions is at the core of financial stability analysis, 
but its impact on inflation is different. If stock or housing prices affect future inflation, they 
should be taken into account in monetary policy decisions. And this actually occurs via the 
effect  of  these  prices  on  aggregate  demand,  output  and,  in  the  end,  inflation.  Hence,  the 
monetary policy seems to have a stabilizing effect by leaning against the wind.  
This should not be mistaken for setting goals for asset prices. In fact, the empirical evidence, 
particularly  on  stock  prices,  suggests  that  once  the  effects  of  asset  prices  have  been 
internalized in inflation forecasts, they should have no further effects on the monetary policy 
reaction function, let alone be a  monetary policy objective.3 Something similar occurs with 
the  effect  of  a  house  price  boom. Where  special  care  must  be  taken is  in  the  relationship 
between  a  real-estate  boom  and  financial  crises,  which  makes  it  particularly  important  to 
monitor property prices and the expansion of mortgage credit, as I will review in a moment.4
Implications on the exchange rate in the inflation-targeting context are similar to those just 
discussed  for  asset  prices,  since  monetary  policy  should  have  a  stabilizing  effect.  If  the 
exchange  rate  appreciates  persistently,  this  should  reduce  inflationary  pressures  and  thus 
                                                 
2   See, for example, De Gregorio (2003). 
3   This means that they should not be an argument in the Taylor rule. See, for example, Bernanke and Gertler 
(2001). In any case, they note that this prescription does not remove the possibility of short-term reactions to 
preserve financial stability. 
In  an  interesting  exercise,  Taylor  (2008)  argues  that  monetary  policy  during  2003-2006  was  more 
expansionary than what a Taylor rule would have suggested, and that if it had been more in line with it, the 
real-estate boom would have been milder. 
4  
2 
 BIS Review 150/2008
blow some steam off the monetary policy, thereby tending to depreciate the exchange rate. 
This is precisely what the Board of the Central Bank of Chile decided to do in the face of the 
severe appreciation early this year, by holding the interest rate constant, while in the most 
likely scenario, had the appreciation not occurred, rates would have increased.  
There  is  abundant  evidence  that  pass-through  from  the  exchange  rate  to  inflation  is  fairly 
small. Monetary regimes pegging the exchange rate were based on the notion that exchange 
rate fluctuations were transmitted to inflation on a one-to-one basis. This was the logic, for 
example,  of  pegging  the  exchange  rate  in  Chile  in  1979. However,  the  empirical evidence 
shows  a  relatively  low  pass-through,  particularly  under  floating  regimes  where  the 
persistence  of  exchange  rate  movements  is  low.  Still,  despite  the  low  pass-through,  the 
inflationary effects of very acute depreciations such as those recently experienced by most 
emerging  economies,  would  not  be  negligible.  The  final  impact  of  the  exchange  rate 
depreciation on inflation will also depend on the behavior of international prices, which have 
been losing strength in the face of low growth prospects around the world. 
With respect to monetary aggregates, some efforts have been made to bring them back to 
monetary  policy,  but  as  I  said  before,  not  with  the  intention  of  setting  money  targets,  but 
rather because they are useful indicators of future inflationary pressures. 
It  is  worth  noting  that  the  transmission  mechanisms  under  study  do  not  stem  from  the 
traditional  recommendation  of  Friedman  (1959)  in  his  famous  A  Program  for  Monetary 
Stability,  where  the  focus  is  on  money  demand  stability  and  the  role  of  money  as  a  price 
anchor, and whose analytical base is the quantitative theory of money. Actually, recent works 
that  assign  a  role  to  money,  and  to  credit  in  general,  do  so  because  it  can  reveal  future 
inflationary pressures or because it can contribute to achieve increased stability (Christiano 
et  al.,  2007;  Goodfriend  and  McCallum,  2007;  Kilponen  and  Leitemo,  2008).  Nonetheless, 
the empirical evidence on the ability of money to provide information to forecast inflation is 
not  so  favorable  to  monetary  aggregates.5  It  is  more  promising  to  conceive  monetary  and 
credit  aggregates  as  indicators  of  potential  distortions  in  financial  markets,  an  issue  I  will 
discuss in the next section. 
In this review of inflation targeting regimes it is worth to bear in mind that they are subjected 
to stress when inflation is of external origin and corresponds to a cost (or supply) shock. A 
cost  shock  that  increases  inflation  may  require  a  restrictive  monetary  policy  in  order  to 
prevent relative price increases from snowballing into an inflationary spiral. In any case, and 
to avoid costly repercussions in terms of output losses, a horizon is established to correct 
deviations, which permits relative price changes to occur without requiring sharp monetary 
policy adjustments . 
This is what has been happening in Chile since the prices of foods and fuels began soaring 
in an unprecedented way in early 2007. Constraining the monetary policy in the presence of 
a  commodity  price  hike  has  its  costs,  but  as  we  have  stated  a  number  of  times,  failing  to 
tackle the inflationary problem opportunely leads to much higher output costs in the future, 
because inflation becomes much more entrenched. 
On the contrary, when facing demand shocks the inflation targeting regimes are particularly 
useful, and that is the scenario we are seeing today. To rein in inflation, it is necessary to 
slow down growth via a more contractionary monetary policy. However, if output slowdown is 
caused  by  forces  outside  the  monetary  policy,  the  policy  rate  dosage  should  be  small 
compared  with  that  where  the  external  scenario  does  not  contribute  to  the  deceleration, 
                                                 
5   For  details  on  the  European  case,  see  Berger  and  Stavrev  (2008).  In  Chile,  there  is  no  evidence,  either, 
indicating  that  monetary  aggregates  improve  inflation  forecasts.  For  discussions  on  money  and  monetary 
policy,  see  papers  in  Cuadernos  de  Economía’s  December  2003  issue  (De  Gregorio,  2003;  García  and 
Valdés, 2003; Vergara, 2003).  
BIS Review 150/2008 
 3
meaning  that  monetary  policy  conduct  is  countercyclical,  reducing  inflation  and  containing 
the demand slowdown. 
Financial stability 
Although more often than not, central banks have an explicit financial stability objective, for 
many years, and within a context of strong GDP growth and sound balance sheets of banks 
and firms, this was a second-class issue. Now things have changed dramatically. As of last 
year, financial stability became the protagonist in monetary policy management in developed 
countries.6  
At  the  industrialized  countries,  particularly  the  United  States,  the  potential  distortions  in 
financial markets were swept under the carpet. Furthermore, concern about the existence of 
an asset price bubble was nobody’s priority. An asset price bubble means that the price may 
be driven by variables other than its fundamentals. For example, stocks may be overpriced in 
comparison with the companies’ future stream of profits, or homes may be appraised at more 
than the living services they can provide. In other words, prices may be pushed up artificially, 
and the problem is that when the bubble bursts, it splatters across the financial markets and 
the overall economy. 
Regarding  how  can  monetary  policy  deal  with  the  bubbles,  as  with  the  downfall  of 
technological company stocks early this decade, the best strategy during the Greenspan era 
was believed to be “do nothing and clean up the mess when the bubble bursts” (Blinder and 
Reis,  2005).  Laissez-faire  is  based  on  the  idea  that  bubbles  are  hard  to  identify  and  also 
difficult  to  affect  through  monetary  policy.  Cleaning  up  afterwards  consisted  in  providing 
liquidity, which normally was accompanied by aggressive interest rate cuts. 
A  major  criticism  to  this  strategy  was  that  it  favored  bubbles,  because  financial  markets 
internalized  the  final  rescue.  In  fact,  this  strategy  is  known  as  the  Greenspan  put,  in 
reference to interest rate reductions in the aftermaths of severe financial turmoil, such as the 
stock exchange downfall of 1987, the collapse of LTCM in 1998, or the technological stocks 
in the early 2000s.7 In fact, from the standpoint of liquidity provision and potential downward 
pressures on inflation, a reduction in interest rates is generally recommended. The problem 
is  that  this  response  provides  an  incentive  to  adopting  more  risk-prone  behavior,  since 
investors perceive that they will have the put option available later. Therefore, it is advisable 
to not only provide the liquidity, but also carefully monitor the market’s operation to prevent 
overexposure to these risks in the future. 
Indeed it can be argued that bubbles are difficult to identify. For example, Gürkaynak (2005) 
finds that, for every work identifying a bubble, there is another one finding the opposite. At 
the same time, it is not so clear how much of a given bubble can be affected by raising the 
interest rate and the necessary magnitude of the adjustment in order to make any difference, 
because, by definition, a bubble is determined by “non-fundamental” price movements. Thus, 
although  after  seeing  the  critical  situation  that  developed  financial  markets  have  been 
enduring, a more proactive monetary policy strategy might have been advisable, but it is hard 
to believe that such a strategy could have averted this crisis by itself.  
Actually, the overall purpose of financial stability is the proper functioning of markets and to 
avoid  having  to  arrive  at  these  degrees  of  turbulence  and  dislocation.  From  the 
macroeconomic  standpoint,  risks  must  be  overseen  and  signaled,  because  the  primary 
                                                 
6   The Fed does not have an explicit financial stability objective, although its role in this matter is widely known. 
See, for example, Plosser (2007). 
7   The idea is that investors could sell their shares at a given minimum price in the future, which is equivalent to 
a put option. 
4 
 BIS Review 150/2008
objective is to prevent major crises. And if they do occur, every necessary measure must be 
taken to limit the damaging effects of their propagation. Two points are worth commenting 
here  in  the  policy  options  menu,  and  which  can  be  complementary  to  monetary  policy 
decisions: one is the information that monetary and credit aggregates can provide, and the 
other is the role played by macro-prudential regulation. 
An asset price increase induced by rapid credit growth is a first sign that these assets may 
be overvalued and financial markets are taking excessive risks. This is particularly important 
in the case of real-estate, which frequently end up in a financial catastrophe. 
Monetary aggregates in general, but especially the wider money aggregates as well as credit 
aggregates may signal unsustainable tendencies. As a matter of fact, whenever accelerated 
growth in credit and money aggregates occurs simultaneously with soaring asset prices and 
loose  lending  standards,  increased  inflation  becomes  very  likely  over  the  three  years  that 
follow (Roffia and Zaghini, 2007).8 In this context, one can argue that an increase in lending 
with inflation prospects can be fought with a tightening of monetary policy. However, if the 
boom was triggered by lack of regulation or supervision, monetary policy tightening by itself 
could  probably  be  ineffective  –  or  even  counterproductive  –  if  the  financial  system  is 
weakened because of excessive risk taking. 
Thus, financial regulation plays a major role in granting financial integrity. At the beginning, 
regulation  focused  on  the  strength  of  individual  institutions.  However,  the  tensions  we  are 
seeing now exemplify, once again, how individual fragility may quickly evolve into systemic 
problems. The interrelationships among financial institutions and the proper operation of the 
markets where liquidity is traded are essential ingredients of a market economy, but these 
characteristics are also the channels of financial contagion, as recently seen. So it is crucial 
to have a systemic vision, not only from the perspective of how the different institutions relate 
to each other, but also how the different types of financial and operating risks are intertwined, 
creating potential vulnerabilities.  
The Financial Stability Reports that many central banks put together periodically – including 
us – seek to evaluate the resiliency of the system as a whole to large disruptions, by carrying 
out stress tests. It is necessary to continue strengthening the robustness of these methods to 
evaluate situations of extreme tension. Starting tomorrow, the Central Bank of Chile will hold 
its Annual Conference, and this version will feature frontier work in this area. 
From  the  regulatory  standpoint,  supervision  must  consider  the  macroeconomic  impact  of 
financial  activity.  In  the  months  to  come,  we  will  have  to  analyze  also  the  potential 
procyclicality of the Basel II capital requirements, as well as the modeling and quantification 
of liquidity risk. A regulatory framework will be necessary to ensure the building of sufficient 
reserves  in  the  boom  phase  of  the  cycle  in  order  for  the  financial  system  to  be  well 
capitalized when the bust phase comes.9  
One  of  the  most  recurring  sources  of  financial  stress  in  the  past  few  years  in  emerging 
economies are periods of euphoria or pessimism, which trigger movements in their exchange 
rates  beyond  what  their  fundamentals  would  justify.  For  example,  when  economic 
expectations are good, foreign exchange appreciations can arise with symptoms of bubbles 
in favor of all the domestic assets. 
As I discussed before, a first line of defense for specific asset prices, stocks or housing is to 
raise  the  interest  rate.  However,  in  the  area  of  exchange  rates  this  may  trigger  more 
pressures  to  appreciate  and  exacerbate  financial  imbalances.  A  floating  exchange  rate 
regime  is  the  most  adequate  to  prevent  exchange  rate  policy  from  inducing  currency 
                                                 
8   These authors find that only half of the accelerated expansions of broad monetary aggregates result in higher 
inflation, but the probability increases when this coincides with an asset price boom. 
9   For an interesting discussion in the context of the present crisis, see Borio (2008). 
BIS Review 150/2008 
 5
speculation.  The  fiscal  policy  can  also  contribute  to  reduce  foreign  exchange  pressures. 
However, these measures may not be enough, and thus in some exceptional periods, and 
with  the  purpose  of  preserving  financial  stability,  an  intervention  in  the  foreign  exchange 
market is warranted.10 In Chile, since the floating exchange rate regime was adopted, this 
has  occurred  on  three  occasions,  all  deemed  exceptional.  To  avoid  conflicting  goals, 
consistency between the intervention and the direction of the monetary policy is important, 
and to that end a first requisite is that the intervention does not have a specific point or range 
objective for the exchange rate. 
Finally,  the  current  international  financial  crisis  underscores  the  importance  of  having  an 
adequate  framework  for  international  reserves  management,  as  a  key  tool  to  cushion  the 
impact  of  international  liquidity  shocks  on  the  economy.  The  accumulation  of  reserves  in 
Chile that begun in April this year was decided precisely to strengthen the liquidity position 
before  the  eventuality  of  a  worsening  of  world  financial  conditions,  which  is  what  actually 
occurred in September. 
Final remarks on the current juncture 
We  are  currently  enduring  an  international  financial  crisis  that  has  no  precedent  in  recent 
decades. How the world economic situation will unfold and for how long the recession will 
last is yet to be seen. Nonetheless, some reflections may be helpful at this point about the 
abilities of our economy to deal with the turbulences, in a scenario where our inflation rates 
are still very high and have to be brought down. 
One  feature  that  stands  out  in  solid  economies  is  that  they  learn  from  their  mistakes,  and 
hopefully the world will come out of this episode as a strengthened international economy. In 
our country, we learned the lesson. The financial crisis of 1982 endowed us with a General 
Banking  Act  that  has  been  perfected  over  time,  and  which  establishes  a  framework  that 
allows the existence of a dynamic banking industry together with good prudential regulation.  
The excesses of the US banking system could not have happened in Chile. Hence, the real-
estate bubble driven by fast and unhealthy credit expansion would hardly have formed in our 
country.  
In the first place, mortgage loans in Chile are different from those in the United States. There, 
these  loans  are  issued  “without  recourse”,  which  allows  the  bank  only  to  repossess  the 
mortgaged property, but not other goods belonging to the debtor to recover the loan, as is 
the case in Chile. 
Secondly,  in  Chile  banks  cannot  hold  substantial  off-balance-sheet  positions,  because  the 
General Banking Act expressly indicates what kind of firms the banks may establish, such as 
mutual  fund  administrators  or  securitizing  firms.  These  firms,  that  the  law  terms  affiliates, 
must have a single line of business and are banned from investing in other companies. In 
addition, banks must submit their consolidated financial statements on a monthly basis. 
Moreover,  banks  may  not  take  positions  in  credit  derivatives,  and  face  other  restrictions 
regarding the operation of derivative instruments. In particular, to operate with interest rate or 
foreign  exchange  rate  options,  banks  must  undergo  a  thorough  test  by  the  SBIF,  while 
holding uncovered positions in the balance sheet are costly in terms of capital requirements. 
But  not  only  regulators  and  policy-makers  learned  the  lessons  from  our  financial  crisis. 
Enterprises did too. Thus we haven't seen the massive currency speculations where so many 
firms in the emerging world were involved through the use of exotic derivatives that were not 
only complex but also very difficult to price. 
                                                 
10  In De Gregorio (2001), I discuss these points in connection with the first intervention period of 2001, and in De 
Gregorio (2006) I do so in the context of inflation targets and financial stability.  
6 
 BIS Review 150/2008
In  the  present  juncture  we  still  face  a  severe  inflationary  challenge.  In  our  last  Monetary 
Policy Report we stated that, in our baseline scenario, we needed to grow somewhat less 
than our potential to contain the inflationary pressures and ensure inflation convergence to its 
target rate of 3% annually over a two-year horizon.  
We also thought that the world economy would not help to reduce inflation. Today the scene 
has changed and we are carefully reviewing its inflationary implications. To begin with, the 
international  scenario  may  trigger  a  reduction  in  demand  that  could  help  contain  inflation. 
This certainly has implications on the monetary policy trajectory, consistent with the inflation 
target. Secondly, commodity prices are in a tailspin, particularly in the case of oil. However, 
these  events  have  not  fully  passed  through  to  our  economy,  because  our  currency  has 
depreciated substantially. Overall, more evidence is needed with respect to the persistence 
of the recent events in the world to calibrate the monetary impulse.  
The Central Bank of Chile has paid close attention to external developments and has been 
ready to provide any liquidity required for the proper operation of the financial markets, as it 
has been doing since the end of September and will continue to do for as long as it deems 
necessary. 
I am convinced that we will weather this international financial crisis successfully. We have 
built  a  macroeconomic  policy  scheme  with  sufficient  degrees  of  flexibility  and  a  strong 
commitment  to  stability  that,  under  the  current  circumstances  have  the  challenge  of 
attenuating the adverse world economic scenario and ensure stability. 
Our monetary policy is oriented at controlling inflation. The exchange rate floats to absorb 
international shocks without causing major disruptions in domestic activity. The fiscal policy 
is  based  on  a  rule  that implies  saving  transitory  incomes  and  today  enjoys  the  benefits  of 
prudence.  Fiscal  savings,  combined  with  the  Central  Bank’s  international  liquidity  position, 
provide  a  reserve  of  resources  that  permits  us  to  accommodate  external  financing  shocks 
even worse than those we are seeing now. Our financial system has been prudent and has 
the necessary levels of capitalization to play its credit intermediating role properly. Prudence, 
both of the private sector and of the macroeconomic policies, can now yield their fruits in the 
worst financial episode the world has had to suffer in many decades.  
Thank you. 
References 
Berger, H. and E. Stavrev (2008). “The Information Content of Money in Forecasting Euro 
Area Inflation”. IMF Working Paper WP/08/166. 
Bernanke, B. and M. Gertler (2001). “Should Central Banks Respond to Movements in Asset 
Prices?”  The  American  Economic  Review,  Papers  and  Proceedings  of  the  Hundred 
Thirteenth Annual Meeting of the American Economic Association, 91(2): 253-257. 
Blinder, A. and R. Reis (2005). “Understanding the Greenspan Standard.” In The Greenspan 
Era:  Lessons  for  the  Future,  Proceedings  of  the  Jackson  Hole  Symposium  2005,  Federal 
Reserve Bank of Kansas City, pp. 11-96. 
Borio,  C.  (2008).  “The  Financial  Turmoil  of  2007-?”:  A  Preliminary  Assessment  and  Some 
Policy Considerations.” BIS Working Paper No. 251. 
Christiano, L., R. Motto, and M. Rostagno (2007). “Two Reasons Why Money and Credit May 
Be Useful in Monetary Policy”. NBER Working Paper No. 13502. 
De Gregorio, J. (2001). “La Política Cambiaria.” Economic Policy Paper No. 2, Central Bank 
of Chile. 
_______.  (2003).  “Mucho  Dinero  y  Poca  Inflación:  Chile  y  la  Evidencia  Internacional”. 
Cuadernos de Economía 40(121): 716-724. 
BIS Review 150/2008 
 7
_______.  (2006).  “Esquema  de  Metas  de  Inflación  en  Economías  Emergentes”.  Economic 
Policy Paper N° 18, Central Bank of Chile. 
Friedman, M. (1959). A Program for Monetary Stability, Fordham University Press. 
García, P. and R. Valdés (2003). “Dinero y Conducción de la Política Monetaria con Metas 
de Inflación.” Cuadernos de Economía 40(121): 698-706. 
Gonçalves,  C. and J.  Salles (2008). “Inflation Targeting in Emerging Economies: What Do 
the Data Say?” Journal of Development Economics 85(1-2): 312–318. 
Goodfriend,  M.  and  B.  McCallum  (2007).  “Banking  and  Interest  Rate  in  Monetary  Policy 
Analysis: A Quantitative Exploration”. Journal of Monetary Economics, 54(5): 1480-1507. 
Gürkaynak,  R.  (2005).  “Econometric  Tests  of  Asset  Price  Bubbles:  Taking  Stock”.  Federal 
Reserve Board, Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2005-04. 
Kilponen,  J.  and  K.  Leitemo  (2008).  “Model  Uncertainty  and  Delegation:  A  Case  for 
Friedman’s “k”-percent Money Growth Rule”. Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 40(2-3): 
547-556. 
Plosser, C. (2007). “Two Pillars of Central Banking: Monetary Policy in Financial Stability.” 
Opening Remarks at the PACB Convention, Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia. 
Roffia,  B.  and  A.  Zaghini  (2007).  “Excess  Money  Growth  and  Inflation  Dynamics”.  ECB 
Working Paper No. 749. 
Taylor,  J.  (2008).  “Housing  and  Monetary  Policy”.  In  Housing,  Housing  Finance  and 
Monetary Policy, Proceedings of the Jackson Hole Symposium 2007, Federal Reserve Bank 
of Kansas City. 
Vergara, R. (2003). “El Dinero Como Indicador de Política Monetaria en Chile”. Cuadernos 
de Economía 40(121): 707-715. 
8 
 BIS Review 150/2008
