Emmanuel Tumusiime-Mutebile: Uganda’s new Credit Reference Bureau 
Speech  by  Mr  Emmanuel  Tumusiime-Mutebile,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Uganda,  at  the 
launch of the Credit Reference Bureau, Bank of Uganda, Kampala, 3 December 2008. 
 H.E. Mr. Reinhard Buchholz the Ambassador of the Federal Republic of Germany,  
H.E. Mr. Anders Johnson The Ambassador of Sweden,  
H.E. Mr. Thanduyise Chilliza The High Commissioner of the Republic of South African,  
Members of The Committee on National Economy, Parliament of Uganda,  
Members of the Board of Directors, Bank of Uganda,  
The Chief Executive Officers of Commercial Banks,  
Credit Institutions and Microfinance Deposit-taking Institutions, Managing Director 
Compuscan Information Technologies of South Africa,  
Managing Director Credit Reference Bureau B Ltd.,  
Distinguished Guests,  
Ladies and Gentlemen.  
It  is  my  pleasure  and  honor  to  welcome  you  all  to  this  auspicious  occasion  when  we  are 
launching  the  Credit  Reference  Bureau  (CRB)  and  the  associated  Financial  Card  System 
(FCS). This is a major initiative by Bank of Uganda and Government of Uganda through the 
Ministry of Finance Planning and Economic Development towards improvement of credit risk 
management in the financial sector. The establishment of the CRB is an important milestone 
in the development of Uganda’s financial sector.  
The  absence  of  a  CRB  in  Uganda  has  been  a  major  bottleneck  to  the  expansion  of  the 
volume of private sector credit. Indeed, Ugandan firms - large, small and medium enterprises 
consistently cite limited access to credit as one of the greatest barriers to their operations. Up 
to now, the infrastructure for information sharing and unique borrower identification has been 
non-existent. The Participating Institutions (PIs) (Commercial Banks, Credit Institutions and 
Microfinance Deposit-taking Institutions) had no way of checking and sharing information on 
the credit history of borrowers. Therefore, PIs have continuously been exposed to high credit 
risk on account of inadequate information on borrowers’ creditworthiness. This has inevitably 
resulted in increased cost of borrowing, thereby making credit more expensive than it would 
otherwise have been.  
As a step in the right direction, the Parliament of Uganda passed the Microfinance Deposit-
taking  Institutions  Act  2003  (MDI  Act)  and  the  Financial  Institutions  Act  2004  (FIA),  which 
propelled the process of establishing a Credit Reference Bureau in the country. 
The FIA mandates the Central Bank or its appointed agent or any other person authorized by 
the Central Bank to establish CRB for the purpose of disseminating credit information among 
financial institutions. Similarly, the MDI Act mandates MDIs to report non-performing loans to 
the  CRB.  Subsequently,  the  Credit  Reference  Bureau  Regulations  for  licensing  and 
operations were also gazetted.  
The  introduction  of  Credit  Reference  Bureau  services  opens  a  new  chapter  in  the  credit 
appraisal process. The PI’s will submit both positive and negative information on a customer 
credit profile to the CRB. The CRB will create a comprehensive credit report, which will be 
available  for  use  by  PI’s  to  support  their  lending  function  and  risk  management  functions. 
The  CRB  will  initially  focus  on  facilitating  information  sharing  among  regulated  financial 
institutions.  
In  the  absence  of  a  National  Identification  System,  it  was  also  deemed  necessary  for  the 
CRB provider to develop a Financial Card System (FCS) to uniquely identify borrowers using 
a biometric system. The FC is embedded with a memory chip. The chip is readable using a 
card  reader  supplied  by  the  CRB.  All  borrowers  shall  be  required  to  carry  a  financial  card 
BIS Review 151/2008 
 1
containing  the  photo,  name,  a  unique  number  and  biometric  information.  A  borrower  can 
register on the FCS at any PI branch. Through the unique identification system, PIs will be 
able  to  share  information  on  borrowers’  credit profiles,  which  hitherto,  has  been  difficult  to 
acquire.  
Ladies and gentlemen, allow me to reiterate the benefits of the CRB to the financial sector, 
which are as follows:  
• 
The CRB is expected to improve the performance of the Uganda’s financial sector 
and  stimulate  economic  development  by  making  lending  and  borrowing  easier 
faster, and ultimately cheaper.  
Borrowers  can  use  their  positive  credit  history  as  “collateral”  to  access  loans  at 
better rates and seek more competitive terms from different lending institutions  
By  addressing  the  problem  of  information  asymmetries,  the  CRB  supports  an 
increasing level of trust between lenders and borrowers – resulting in an increased 
volume  of  credit  in  the  economy.  This  trust  also  will  increase  transparency  and 
competition between lenders.  
Timely and accurate information on borrowers’ debt profiles and repayment history 
enables PIs to make more informed lending decisions  
As  the  data  on  the  system  is  built  up,  the  information  available  will  enable  loan 
processing to become simpler and faster, collateral requirements to be streamlined, 
default rates to be reduced and, ultimately we believe loans shall become cheaper.  
Participating Institutions (PIs) will, therefore, be able to offer new products and offer 
competitive interest rates due to availability of information on customers’ credit risk 
profiles.  
     BOU  in  its  mandated  responsibility  will  supervise  the  operations  of  the  CRB  and  FCS  to 
ensure that the information collected is managed securely and responsively at all times and 
in accordance with the agreement which we have signed with Compuscan. BOU has already 
issued Guidelines for the operation of the CRB. The Guidelines specify the standards that 
the CRB shall implement in order to ensure a reliable mechanism to process data.  
The  Bank  of  Uganda  conducted  education  and  sensitization  campaigns  in  21  districts  in 
order to:  
• 
deepen  the  understanding  of  key  stakeholders  of  the  CRB,  the  FCS;  and  the 
accruing benefits of the CRB.  
create a favourable public opinion and perception about credit reference services, 
through the careful and strategic deployment of available media and communication 
resources.  
 The Public awareness campaigns shall continue in order to encourage borrowers register on 
the FCS and to address the concerns of specific target groups, to allay fears of borrowers 
regarding  the  sharing  of  confidential  information  and  to  assure  all  stakeholders  of  the 
integrity and security of the system.  
I wish to assure the general public that we consider confidentiality and privacy of information 
paramount. Bank of Uganda, PIs and Compuscan CRB Ltd. will ensure that confidentiality 
and privacy are adhered to at all times.  
I  wish  to  thank  the  German  Development  Cooperation,  the  people  of  Germany  and  the 
Government and the people of Sweden for the financial and technical support accorded to 
Bank  of  Uganda  for  this  project.  I  also  want  thank  the  World  Bank  for  the  role  they  have 
played towards the successful establishment of the CRB and the FCS.  
2 
 BIS Review 151/2008
I thank you very much for joining Bank of Uganda on this memorable occasion. It is now my 
honor and pleasure to invite the Chief Guest, H. E. Reinhard Buchholz the Ambassador of 
the Federal Republic of Germany to give his remarks. 
BIS Review 151/2008 
 3
