Marion Williams: Safeguarding our future in the face of global economic 
challenges 
Opening remarks by Dr Marion Williams, Governor of the Central Bank of Barbados, at the 
Seminar  "Safeguarding  Our  Future  in  the  Face  of  Global  Economic  Challenges"  to  the 
Caribbean Association of Indigenous Banks, Bridgetown, 17 November 2008. 
 Mr. Chairman, Honourable Ministers, Chief Minister of Anguilla, Minister of State, President 
and Board of Caribbean Association of Indigenous Banks, Distinguished guests, 
I first would like to congratulate the organisers of this conference for the foresight and the 
tenacity in keeping this annual conference going. Thirty five years is a long time to have kept 
this up. 
Indigenous banks are a most important part of our economic landscape and even though, as 
we become more regional it seems we have tended to change our definition to a regional 
definition of indigenous, they remain as important as before. 
Indigenous  institutions  tend  to  have  an  ethos  which  is  Caribbean  and  which  I  trust  helps 
them to focus on the longer term goals of the region and not just on profitability and market 
share. 
Today more so than ever, it is necessary for financial institutions to take the long view about 
where they are going. It has been fortunate for the Caribbean that we have so avoided the 
impact of much of the global financial turbulence. This is partly because we were not on the 
cutting edge of the financial technology but also because we did not stray too far from the 
basics of good credit assessments and sound financial management. I would like to believe 
that the Central Banks within the region contributed to this approach and I know too that the 
calibre of managers which we have within the region make their regulations sound. After all 
this is your home. Indigenous banks will not leave at the sign of a downturn. They will stay 
and overcome any challenges. 
Having  said  that,  the  world  has  become  a  global  village,  and  we  cannot  isolate  ourselves 
from global developments. 
Given  the  unprecedented  events  that  have  occurred  in  the  global  economy  over  the  past 
eighteen  months,  the  theme  for  this  year's  conference  is  quite  appropriate.  In  my  opening 
remarks  this  evening,  I  will  restrict  my  focus  to  the  main  sources  of  risk  and  vulnerability 
which  have  emanated  from  four  areas:  (i)  the  global  macro-financial  environment;  (ii) 
financial markets; (iii) the balance sheets the region's households and businesses; and (iv) 
financial intermediaries. At this time, I am sure many do not envy our respective positions, 
since  policies  at  both  the  micro  and  macro  level  face  no  shortage  of  challenges. 
Internationally,  with  economic  growth  slowing  in  the  major  developed  economies,  the 
problems in international credit markets are still serious, and inflation rates still strong, and 
although there are signs of some deflationary trends, the task for policy makers is as delicate 
as any faced in many years. 
Though 
its  macroeconomic 
fundamentals  and  is  better  suited  to  face  external  shocks,  there  will  be  fallout  from  the 
current turmoil. Market volatility will undoubtedly lead to sharp downward growth revisions for 
2008 and 2009, as the decline in global demand will tend to reduce regional exports of goods 
and services. In addition, the fall in interest rates in the U.S. will impact on both fixed and 
floating exchange rate regimes, while the decline in global liquidity will force curtailment of 
Foreign Direct Investment and cross border flows. How we respond to the problems posed to 
us by the recent upheaval will be important for the robustness of the regional economy going 
forward. 
the  years  substantially 
the  region  has  over 
improved 
BIS Review 158/2008 
 1
Though the direct impact on the regional domestic banking sector has not been significant, 
largely because of the lack of sophistication and the relative of risk aversion if our regional 
banks,  there  are  lessons  we  can  draw  from  these  events.  We  must  respond  to  these 
changes  by  further  strengthening  our  efforts  at  maintaining  financial  system  stability  with 
adequate rules and regulations while avoiding over-regulation. It happened after Enron with 
Sarbannes  Oxley  which  tended  to  go  overboard  without,  some  would  say,  achieving 
sufficient strengthening of the system – the results of which we are seeing today. 
Many have now related the current crisis to market over-exuberance, coupled with less than 
all-encompassing  regulation  which  was  necessary  to  monitor  the  very  rapid  changes  in 
derivative  and  structured  finance  instruments.  The  innovations  and  developments  which 
spawned such instruments increased the complexity of financial transactions and made their 
traceability  difficult.  Such  changes  were  also  supported  by  increasing  levels  of  excess 
liquidity,  low  interest  rates  in  the  global  financial  market  and  the  increased  demand  for 
variations  in  financial  instruments,  given  different  consumers'  risk  profiles.  Consequently, 
there  was  a  further  blurring  of  financial  intermediation  roles  between  the  traditional  banks 
and non-bank market players. Risk-shifting and risk transfer eventually forced the collapse 
we  are  witnessing  today.  What  these  developments  have  demonstrated  is  that  adequate 
regulation of the financial system in the US is important to the rest of the world. While these 
guidelines are set in the developed world the failure of regulation impacts us all. Developing 
countries therefore have an interest in making sure that the US gets it right. While the global 
recession will have significant implications for the region, inflation continues to be a regional 
concern though there is evidence that this should ameliorate in the future. It is our hope that 
with oil and other commodity prices falling, the region will be a beneficiary of a substantially 
lower inflation rate in 2009. In some of the Caribbean islands, demand growth evidenced by 
still  strong  credit,  has  not  dropped  dramatically,  and  in  many  instances,  interest  rates  are 
below inflation rates. That is to say, real interest rates are negative; and this has occurred at 
a time when banks anticipate heightened levels of delinquencies, and would prudently adjust 
their credit standards. This has the potential to force individuals to use their savings to cope 
with normal activities. As a regulator it is important that we encourage the right balance, that 
is  both  the  concerns  of  the  depositor  as  it  affects  his  earnings  on  the  one  hand,  and  the 
borrower as it affects his costs on the other. Over the most recent past, we have also seen a 
tighter level of integration between international markets and regional economies, which is 
reflected  in  a  higher  volume  of  cross-border  financial  flows,  FDI  or  otherwise.  Greater 
integration between the markets is supported by the emergence of new players, who operate 
across borders and are often privately-owned, or are subsidiary companies of state-owned 
institutions. 
This has important implications for us in the Caribbean in the current situation. As we have 
witnessed,  that  changes  in  the  global  financial  markets  have  the  potential  to  rapidly  alter 
levels of global liquidity. The sharp growth in excess liquidity that started in the early 2000's, 
and cheaper financing costs which fuelled the export of wealth and capital from the financial 
capitals  to  all  parts  of  the  globe  is  now  at  a  premium.  This  boom  in  growth,  liquidity  and 
employment served to fuel heightened levels of Foreign Direct Investment flows to the region 
through interests in real estate and other forms of investment. These “boom” conditions also 
led to strong performances in the flow of remittances, which has been a vital component of 
virtually  all  regional  economies'  balance  of  payments.  With  the  turmoil  in  the  international 
markets, there has been a liquidity crunch, coupled with the higher-than-usual levels of risk 
aversion. As a result, access to this kind of funding has contracted sharply. 
The excess liquidity which we observed in the past few weeks could well be called upon and 
could contract as players who had previously been accessing the international markets turn 
to the local market now that these markets are closed. 
While we do need Foreign Direct Investment and value it highly, thankfully, the region has 
not been overly reliant on portfolio cross-border flows. This was a direct consequence of the 
thinness of our financial markets but has turned out to be a benefit. A decline in net inflows of 
2 
 BIS Review 158/2008
funds into the region would have had large spillover effects on the domestic economy, and 
some impact on the international business sector had the region been more securitised. 
Although  short-term  capital  inflows  can  be  useful  to  meet  short-term  national  financial 
requirements, they can also be very volatile and vulnerable to sudden reversal. Short term 
borrowers  are  more  influenced  by  market  expectations.  The  factor  of  expectations  is 
currently clearly evidenced in the sensitivity of some regional currencies towards changes in 
the risk appetite of global investors towards US dollar-denominated debt instruments in the 
region. At least one central bank in the region had to provide support for issuers of national 
bonds denominated in US dollars as a result of this volatility. We may therefore need to turn 
increasingly to the region and support each other. It would seem obvious that what I have 
outlined so far implies that maintaining regional macroeconomic stability is clearly one of the 
supporting pillars of overall financial system stability. 
As  for  the  resilience  of  the  banking  system,  I  can  say  that  the  regulatory  actions  of  the 
regional  central  banks  have  categorically  shown  that  our  banks  are  able  to  overcome  the 
market risk related to the current macro instability in the global market. However, we need to 
constantly reinforce the resilience of the banking industry and guard against over-confidence. 
Ladies and gentlemen, we should be grateful for the strength and resilience of the banking 
industry when confronting these various risks and shocks. Industry performance has steadily 
improved. Bank profits remain healthy and are in line with expansion of the intermediation 
function and with efficiency improvements, as well as effective risk management. Although 
much  has  been  accomplished,  a  lot  more  still  remains  to  be  done.  In  this  current 
globalisation  era,  the  speed  of  change  is  rapid.  Our  achievements  up  until  now  do  not 
guarantee success tomorrow. We have always relied on this awareness as the foundation of 
banking  industry  policy.  From  here  every  step  needs  to  be  carefully  and  cautiously 
calculated. It is imperative that we remain always sensitive to our long term goals and to the 
impact on the financial system when addressing the changes and dynamics of the current 
crisis. We also have to be able to calculate the implications of each step, prioritize policy, and 
maintain a good balance in the implementation. 
I know that the negative credit trends will filter through to our markets and is likely to affect 
corporations in some key sectors, particularly those who entered this phase with low levels of 
liquidity. This underscores the challenges of slower economic growth and, shrinking liquidity 
in  the  global  economy  and  may  mean  that  they  turn  to  regional  banks  and  to  indigenous 
banks in particular. 
These challenges facing regional macroeconomic policy makers look more difficult than they 
have been for a long time; but with the collaborative efforts at the micro level, the region will 
weather the storm. I am sure that the discussion over the next few days will help us focus on 
the severity of the issues, and will help us to find viable solutions to head off any potential 
adverse impacts. 
I  wish  again  to  congratulate  the  CAIB  for  their  commitment  to  commercial  banking  in  the 
region and to the exchange of views and ideas on the safeguarding of our future, given the 
global  financial  challenges.  Sometimes  collaboration  is  important  in  order  to  make  a 
breakthrough. I thank you and wish you a successful conference. 
BIS Review 158/2008 
 3
