Stefan Ingves: Ongoing changes in securities markets 
Speech  by  Mr  Stefan  Ingves,  Governor  of  the  Sveriges  Riksbank,  at  the  Nasdaq  OMX, 
Stockholm, 4 December 2008. 
 Counterparty risks and functional aspects 
At  present  a  lot  is  happening  in  the  financial  markets.  Besides  being  in  the  midst  of  the 
current  crisis,  we  are  experiencing  functional  changes  in  the  securities  market.  These 
changes  can  improve  the  workings  of  the  market,  which  is  particularly  important  in 
connection with financial turbulence. However, the changes also make greater demands on 
cross-border  cooperation.  One  change,  which  began  some  time  ago,  is  that  the  Swedish 
systems for handling securities are becoming increasingly integrated with systems abroad. 
Other changes are reducing the counterparty risks of financial players and making securities 
trading more transparent. In a discussion of changes in securities markets, it should be born 
in mind that an effective monetary policy also requires an efficient fixed-income market.  
The  vocabulary  for  my  discussion  of  these  changes  and  of  the  importance  of  a  properly 
functioning  fixed-income  market  is  somewhat  technical,  particularly  in  the  sections  on 
integration  and  counterparty  risks.  That  should  not  be  a  problem  for  my  audience  today. 
Many of you are occupied with precisely these matters.  
Changes in the securities markets 
I  shall  begin  with  a  brief  account  of  the  financial  infrastructure.  It  is  made  up  of  systems, 
instruments  and  routines  that  together  constitute  the  conditions  for  making  payments  and 
securities transactions in ways that are safe and efficient. If the financial infrastructure does 
not function, payments and securities transactions cannot be made, which would bring the 
economy  more  or  less  to  a  halt.  It  would  also  prevent  the  Riksbank’s  interest  rate  from 
exerting an impact on the economy.  
This means that the financial infrastructure and the ongoing changes in securities markets 
are  relevant  for  the  Riksbank’s  two  primary  functions,  namely  to  safeguard  both  financial 
stability  and  price  stability.  It  is  therefore  important  that  we  closely  follow  developments  in 
these respects.  
Increased integration 
As many of you are already aware, major changes are currently in progress in the securities 
markets  and  the  financial  infrastructure.  In  recent  years  we  have  seen  a  number  of 
tendencies  whereby  trading  in  financial  instruments  is  becoming  more  integrated.  Such 
tendencies have also been evident recently in clearing and settlement – the processing of 
securities transactions that follows the trade as such.1  
In  a  world  conditioned  by  further  globalisation,  increased  competition  and  advances  in 
technology,  companies  use  mergers  and  acquisitions  to  adjust.  In  the  field  of  financial 
instruments, the creation of NASDAQ OMX Group in February 2008 has strengthened the 
links between Nordic, Baltic and American exchanges. The driving force behind this merger 
is primarily economic in that it confers considerable economies of scale.  
                                                 
1   Clearing  involves  balancing  mutual  claims  and  liabilities.  Settlement  involves  the  transfer  of  money  and 
securities between transacting parties. 
BIS Review 153/2008 
 1
The  changes  in  securities  markets  are  also  connected  with  regulations.  The  EU  directive 
MiFID aims to strengthen competition, improve client protection and promote the integration 
of the European securities markets. The directive has paved the way for new types of trading 
facilities in Europe.2 A reasonable assumption against this background is that the map for 
share  trading  in  Europe  will  be  re-drawn.  Share  trading  will  be  channelled  to  the  market 
places that offer the best rates and the lowest tariffs, which signifies good liquidity. 
Distinct tendencies are also present in the clearing and settlement of securities transactions 
– the processing that follows a trade as such. An example of far-reaching integration in this 
field is Euroclear, which settles securities transactions in five markets in Europe and recently 
acquired Sweden’s central securities depository (VPC AB). Euroclear’s new system will be 
able to settle cross-border securities transactions just as smoothly as national transactions 
are  settled  today.  Alongside  market  solutions,  the  European  Central  Bank  is  working  on  a 
completely new system for linking up the national systems for securities settlement.  
In  recent  years,  moreover,  clearing  services  provided  by  central  counterparties  are  being 
used to a growing extent. The role of central counterparties is a topical issue in the United 
States as well as in Europe, not least because the global financial crisis has highlighted the 
advantages. More about that later.  
A number of central counterparties are already operating in Europe in clearing of derivatives 
as  well  as  of  shares  and  interest-bearing  securities.  In  Sweden  there  is  a  central 
counterparty  –  NASDAQ  OMX  Derivatives  Markets  –  for  derivative  instruments  that  are 
traded  on  OMX.  There  was  until  recently  no  central  counterparty  for  spot  transactions  in 
Swedish shares and interest-bearing securities. With the creation of new trading facilities in 
Europe,  however,  clearance  of  Swedish  shares  through  a  central  counterparty  is  now 
possible.3  In  October  it  was  announced  that  a  central  counterparty  service  will  also  be 
provided in future for spot share transactions on OMX Nordic Exchange Stockholm.  
The  tendencies  I  have  just  mentioned  indicate  an  explosive  development.  What  will  be  its 
consequences for the Swedish financial infrastructure? The Swedish systems will indeed be 
wholly  or  partly  replaced  by  or  linked  up  with  systems  elsewhere.  This  means  that  to  a 
growing  extent,  securities  trading,  clearance  and  settlement  will  be  arranged  outside 
Sweden.  
As integration increases, national securities markets and financial infrastructures will become 
more and more intertwined. For the Riksbank it is important that the systems in the Swedish 
infrastructure work safely and efficiently – even if they are in foreign ownership and located 
abroad.  
Coping with the increased integration entails new and stronger demands for joint solutions 
and  cross-border  cooperation.  There  is  much  to  be  done  in  all  these  respects.  In order  to 
oversee  the  foreign  systems  that  affect  the  Swedish  infrastructure,  the  Riksbank  will  be 
cooperating with other central banks.  
Counterparty risks and insufficient market transparency  
In the light of what I have just described, it is clear that trading, clearance and settlement are 
changing rapidly. It is important that we as a central bank understand these changes. At the 
same time, the financial crisis has made us aware that there are matters to do with trading, 
clearance and settlement which need to be improved.  
                                                 
2   Multilateral Trading Facilities, which are not required to be a traditional exchange in order to organise trading. 
3   One example is EMCF (European Multilateral Trading Facility N.V.), central counterparty for the clearance of 
Swedish  shares  that  are  traded  on  Chi-X  and  NASDAQ  OMX  Europe.  Another  is  EuroCCP,  central 
counterparty for the clearance of shares traded on Turquoise. 
2 
 BIS Review 153/2008
In  the  United  States,  two  problems  have  stood  out  in  connection  with  trading  in  American 
credit derivatives. They concern the credit derivatives that are traded on the over-the-counter 
market.4 One problem is the counterparty risks. The parties in a credit derivative trade have 
a credit risk towards each other – the risk of a party losing the whole of the underlying value 
in a transaction. The counterparty risks have been difficult to understand, which makes them 
difficult  to  value.  The  other  problem  is  the  lack of  market  transparency,  which  has caused 
pricing problems and poor liquidity in credit derivative markets.  
The question of how to reduce counterparty risks in over-the-counter derivatives trading has 
been raised by the US Federal Reserve and the European Central Bank. One way would be 
to clear credit derivatives with a central counterparty.  
How would a central counterparty improve matters? Well, the central counterparty, who is a 
known  player,  functions  as  the  counterparty  to  each  of  the  parties  to  the  transaction.  The 
seller  and  the  buyer  then  have  a  claim  and  a  liability,  respectively,  with  the  central 
counterparty instead of with each other.  
The  advantages  of  a  central  counterparty  are  that  securities  settlement  can  be  both  safer 
and more efficient. The transactions can be netted out5 and the counterparty is known. The 
counterparty  risks  can  be  managed  by  the  central  counterparty  obtaining  collateral. 
Moreover,  the  central  counterparty  has  its  own  financial  resources.  The  drawback  with  a 
central  counterparty  is  that  the  market  risks  are  concentrated  to  a  single  player  –  a  high 
concentration of risk. Provided the operations are properly organised, however, this is not a 
problem.  Still,  the  concentration  of  risk  does  mean  that  central  counterparties  are  often 
systemically important. Supervision and oversight are therefore highly relevant.6
I shall leave counterparty risks for the moment and turn to the problem in the United States 
with insufficient market transparency. Many American credit derivatives are non-standardised 
products  and  have  therefore  been  inherently  difficult  to  understand  and  value.  If  attempts 
were made to cope with the lack of transparency, one way would be to use electronic trading 
because this enhances market transparency and reduces the risk that access to information 
is not uniform. Another important effect of electronic trading is that concentrating trading to 
one  facility  makes  pricing  more  efficient.  Each  order  can  be  matched  with  the  best  price. 
Moreover,  new  players  can  have  better  access  to  the  market,  which  can  improve  market 
quality and strengthen competition.7  
So  what  is  the  situation  in  Sweden?  American  credit  derivatives  have  not  had  Swedish 
owners to any considerable extent. Neither is there a Swedish credit derivatives market of 
any  size.  This  is  mainly  because  the  Swedish  market  for  corporate  bonds  is  small  and 
without corporate bonds it is hard to trade in credit derivatives. So the problem with American 
credit derivatives that are traded over-the-counter does not exist in Sweden. That does not 
dissuade us from reviewing the Swedish securities market in the light of the problems that 
have been identified in the American market. 
                                                 
4   Securities trading can be arranged on an established market or over-the-counter; in the latter case, the parties 
to the transaction settle it on their own. 
5   Netting involves offsetting transactions against each other with a view to making the transactions cancel out 
as far as possible. 
6   The Riksbank  and Finansinspektion (the Swedish Financial Supervisory Authority) evaluate NASDAQ OMX 
Derivatives  Markets  in  accordance  with  the  international  standards  in  Recommendations  for  Central 
Counterparties, published by CPSS and IOSCO. 
7   For more information about electronic trading, see The implications of electronic trading in financial markets, 
Report by a working group established by the Committee on the Global Financial System of the central banks 
of the Group of Ten countries, Bank for International Settlements, 2001. 
BIS Review 153/2008 
 3
In Sweden, as in most other countries, the principle for all securities trading (shares, interest-
bearing  papers  and  derivatives)  settled  in  VPC,  is  Delivery  versus  Payment  (DvP).  This 
eliminates credit risk. The remaining counterparty risk is known as replacement cost risk – 
the  risk  of  having  to  pay  more  for  a  transaction  that  replaces  a  failed  trade.  This  risk  is 
normally just a fraction of the credit risk but can be sizeable when prices are volatile.  
In Sweden, transactions in shares and interest-bearing securities are normally settled within 
three days after the trade. The replacement cost risk for such business largely depends on 
the state of the market. When market rates are notably volatile, failure to deliver can result in 
substantial replacement costs. The introduction of a central counterparty service next year 
will  make  it  possible  to  manage  the  counterparty  risks  in  share  trading  on  the  Swedish 
market. Moreover, it is now possible to trade Swedish shares on the new European trading 
facilities that are linked to central counterparty clearance. This points to a future reduction of 
the counterparty risks in Swedish share transactions.  
The  counterparty  risks  in  the  derivatives  market  are  considerably  larger  and  harder  to 
manage than they are in the spot market. This is because the duration of risk exposures is 
longer in the derivatives market, often as much as several months. The Swedish derivatives 
market already provides the possibility of managing counterparty risks by means of a central 
counterparty.  
Turning  now  to  market  transparency,  what  is  the  situation  in  Sweden?  MiFID  entails  the 
introduction of rules for transparency before and after share trading. The requirement applies 
to all trading facilities and involves the publication of prices and volumes. So for shares there 
are  no  deficiencies  concerning  transparency  in  these  respects.  There  may,  however,  be 
shortcomings  in  over-the-counter  trading  in  interest-bearing  securities  and  derivatives.  A 
large  proportion  of  fixed-income  trading  in  Sweden  is  done  by  telephone  rather  than  on  a 
market. Derivative instruments can also be traded off-market.8 If trading is arranged instead 
with an electronic facility, each order is matched against the best price and market access 
can be improved for new players. Still, there may be financial markets whose functioning is 
not improved by increased transparency. It should therefore be up to each market, including 
the Swedish fixed-income market, to decide which approach is most effective.  
What  are  the  lessons  from  this  argument?  Well,  in  times  like  these,  coloured  by  financial 
market uncertainty, there is much less propensity to take risks. Financial market participants 
are  more  interested  in  low-risk  assets,  low-risk  markets  and  counterparties  that  they  know 
and  are  safe.  In  a  severe  situation,  this  can  mean  that  in  certain  cases  trading  ceases 
altogether  because  even  small  risks  are  perceived  as  too  large.  This  is  because  the 
problems  associated  with  counterparty  risks  and  a  lack  of  transparency  become  more 
tangible when markets are turbulent.  
Every  measure  by  which  the  financial  markets  can  be  made  to  function  even  in  turbulent 
times  is  welcome.  Some  of  those  who  stop  trading  when  markets  are  unsettled  would 
probably  not  do  so  if  they  had  a  known  and  safe  counterparty  with  whom  to  trade  in  a 
properly 
for  arranging  securities 
transactions  in  ways  that  are  safe  and  efficient,  so  that  financial  stability  can  be  more 
satisfactory. 
transparent  market.  Conditions  are 
in  place 
then 
The fixed-income market  
I  shall  now  say  something  about  the  fixed-income  market.  The  fixed-income  market  in 
Sweden  differs  from  its  larger  counterparts  in  Europe.  There  are  considerably  fewer 
participants and the market is shallower – less liquid. This presumably entails higher costs 
                                                 
8   This refers to the derivatives that are not traded on exchanges, for instance swaps, futures and options.  
4 
 BIS Review 153/2008
for transactions of a given size, as well as closer relationships between the players. These 
circumstances are liable to affect how the market functions, particularly in times of unrest. 
The risk propensity falls and with relatively few participants, market liquidity is easily eroded. 
Trading in the Swedish bond and money market is still done mainly by telephone, over-the-
counter, though some electronic trading has existed since 2001. This electronic trading is in 
three benchmark bonds. To work properly, electronic trading needs products that are highly 
standardised,  as  well  as  relatively  high  liquidity.  In  Europe,  electronic  trading  is  used  for 
roughly  75  per  cent  of  all  transactions  but  they  account  for  only  about  50  per  cent  of  the 
volume. Large orders are still traded by telephone. 
The functioning of the fixed-income market is important for us as a central bank. It makes it 
possible to implement monetary policy and thus to fulfil our task of controlling inflation. We 
aim to influence economic activity and thereby inflation via the price for credit – the interest 
rate. For this to be possible, the payment system and the credit markets must function so 
that  the  Riksbank’s  interest  rate  decisions  show  up  in  other  interest  rates.  What  does  this 
require of the fixed-interest market? 
A discussion of which characteristics the fixed-income market should have so that monetary 
policy can be as effective as possible must start from the answers to two questions: What is 
the objective of monetary policy? And, what instruments are at its disposal?  
The situation in both these respects – monetary policy’s objective and the toolbox – can differ 
somewhat  between  countries.  My  focus  is,  of  course,  on  the  Riksbank‘s  monetary  policy 
objective and instruments. 
Monetary policy’s objective and steering system  
We  have  specified  the  objective  for  the  Riksbank’s  monetary  policy  as  an  annual  rate  of 
inflation of 2 per cent plus or minus one percentage point. Our aim in setting the interest rate 
is that inflation will develop in such a way that the goal is fulfilled. When the Executive Board 
has  decided  the  level  of  the  repo  rate,  it  is  up  to  the  monetary  policy  steering  system  to 
ensure that the decision shows up in market interest rates.  
The  Riksbank’s  steering  system  is  constructed  to  influence  the  shortest  market  rate,  the 
overnight rate. This is the rate at which the banks manage their daily liquidity surpluses or 
deficits with each other. Interest rates for somewhat longer maturities are to a large extent 
determined, as you know, by expectations of future short-term interest rates. The idea is that 
by steering the overnight rate we also can affect interest rates further out on the yield curve.  
How do we steer the overnight rate in practice? First of all we lay down an upper and a lower 
limit  –  an  interest  rate  corridor  –  for  movements  in  the  overnight  rate.  This  we  do  via  our 
standing facilities, which enable the banks to borrow or deposit funds overnight at the repo 
rate plus/minus 75 basis points.  
In  addition,  to  ensure  that  the  overnight  rate  is  close  to  the  repo  rate,  we  perform  a  fine-
tuning operation, if necessary, on a daily basis. For this operation, at the end of each bank 
day we are prepared to lend funds at the repo rate plus 10 basis points or to accept deposits 
at  the  repo  rate  minus  10  basis  points.  Our  aim  is  that  after  the  fine  tuning,  the  banking 
system  as  a  whole  will  be  balanced.  That  means  that  we  only  lend  the  equivalent  of  the 
banking  system’s  net  borrowing  requirement  or  accept  deposits  for  the  equivalent  of  the 
banking system’s net investment requirement. The steering system has been successful in 
the sense that overnight loans between the banks are arranged as a rule at the repo rate.  
A potential drawback of the fine-tuning operations is that the operational risks grow with the 
volume  of  these  operations.  We  therefore  make  a  weekly  offer  of  one-week  Riksbank 
certificates at the repo rate. As this withdraws liquidity, the fine-tuning operations do not have 
to be so large.  
BIS Review 153/2008 
 5
The  way  in  which  we  implement  monetary  policy  means  that  we  are  active  at  two  time 
horizons or, as we usually say, at two points on the yield curve. One is for overnight loans or 
deposits, where our fine tuning helps to keep the overnight rate at the repo rate; the other is 
for one-week certificates, likewise at the repo rate. As we are active in the market only once 
a week, with one-week certificates, we cannot steer the one-week rate as effectively as the 
overnight  rate,  which  we  steer  on  a  daily  basis.  Neither  do  we  intend  to  do  so.  Our 
operational goal is precisely to steer the overnight rate. 
Which measures should be said to be connected with the implementation of monetary policy 
and which should instead be seen as more directed at assisting the performance of markets 
and promoting financial stability? There is no simple answer. Something that a financial crisis 
makes  clearer  is  how  monetary  policy  and  financial  stability  interact.  Neither  of  them  can 
evidently  function  without  the  other.  If  forceful  measures  are  not  taken  to  deal  with  the 
financial crisis and maintain financial stability, there is a risk of the crisis also having major 
effects on inflation and growth. The fall in output and employment can then be both deep and 
prolonged and that in turn can worsen the financial crisis.  
An efficient fixed-income market is a prerequisite for an effective monetary policy 
In other words, the monetary policy machinery I have described consists of two components. 
The first thing is to ensure that the repo rate does in fact affect the overnight market. Effects 
on this shortest rate must then spread to longer rates that are more important for economic 
activity. An effective monetary policy steering system is not enough by itself. We also need a 
fixed-income  market  that  functions  properly.  So  what  are  the  fixed-income  market’s 
functions? 
The fixed-income market caters both for those who need funds for their operations and for 
those with funds they need to invest for a certain period of time. As investment in the market 
is not risk-free, one of the market’s primary tasks is to price risk correctly. That in turn leads 
to an optimal distribution of risks between the markets’ participants. In this way the market 
contributes to an efficient distribution of economic resources. What a central bank requires of 
the  fixed-income  market  is  therefore  not  all  that  different  from  what  society  in  general 
requires. 
If  the  fixed-income  market  is  to  perform  its  important  function,  more  is  needed  than 
participants who set prices for the various assets. There must also be participants who trade 
actively  at  those  prices.  Neither  must  the  counterparty  risks  be  perceived  as  unduly  high 
because that may deter participants from trading. Moreover, the market must be capable of 
handling large volumes without this by itself having an appreciable effect on prices. In other 
words, the market should be adequately liquid.  
Why is liquidity important for monetary policy? The answer is that in a liquid market, relevant 
news  shows  up  quickly  in  interest  rates.  An  adjustment  of  the  Riksbank’s  repo  rate,  for 
example, has a rapid pass-through to the short market rates, as well as to somewhat longer 
rates.  This  applies,  of  course,  in  so  far  as  the  repo  rate  adjustment  takes  the  market  by 
surprise.  If  market  participants  instead  understand  how  the  Riksbank  interprets  new 
information in the form of macroeconomic outcomes, they can draw conclusions about the 
Riksbank’s future actions. News is then reflected in the formation of interest rates at the time 
when the macroeconomic outcomes are known. The relevant interest rates also react quickly 
to various forms of information from the Riksbank. Somewhat longer interest rates may be 
affected,  for  instance,  when  we  publish  a  repo  rate  forecast,  a  so-called  interest-rate  path 
that presents the Riksbank’s assessment of the future development of the policy rate. 
The  conditions  for  good  market  liquidity  include  low  transaction  costs,  management  of 
counterparty  risks  and  market  transparency.  In  practice,  access  to  information  in  most 
markets – including the credit market – usually differs between buyers and sellers. This is 
commonly  referred  to  as  information  asymmetry  and  implies  that  the  seller  of  a  product 
knows more about it than the buyer does. A good example is the used car market. In the 
6 
 BIS Review 153/2008
credit market it is commonly the borrower who knows more about his own situation than the 
lender  does.  One  approach  to  dealing  with  this  problem  is  to  have  a  company’s 
creditworthiness  assessed  by  an  independent  organisation.  A  credit  rating  can  aid  an 
investor because it would cost too much for the investor to analyse every company whose 
securities might be of interest. Moreover, market efficiency can be enhanced by businesses 
that are dependent on income from the market and therefore strive for a good reputation as 
providers of complete and correction information.  
Still, it is hard to ensure that the markets are liquid under every conceivable circumstance. If 
the participants suddenly become uncertain about asset values and if the counterparties are 
unfamiliar, a market can quickly become less liquid, which leads to high risk premiums. The 
current financial crisis has provided examples of this. Investors are averse to putting money 
into assets whose value is highly uncertain; they prefer the securities that are safest. Rather 
than  doing  business  with  unfamiliar  counterparties,  investors  prefer  counterparty  risks  that 
can  be  managed.  Markets  that  are  illiquid  also  have  consequences  for  monetary  policy 
because repo rate adjustments do not then have the intended impact. That brings me to this 
autumn’s financial market developments. 
Events this autumn and measures by Swedish authorities  
In mid September the Swedish financial markets became seriously disturbed and Swedish 
banks experienced growing problems with funding. An increasing share of bank funding was 
arranged  at  very  short  maturities.  Moreover,  any  funding  that  could  be  achieved  at  longer 
maturities cost the banks considerably more than normal. 
Prior  to  this,  in  2007  and  2008,  the  Riksbank  had  no  cause  to  take  any  extraordinary 
measures. Unlike the case in many other countries, the overnight rate in Sweden was stable 
and  close  to  the  policy  rate,  which  meant  that  the  intentions  behind  monetary  policy  were 
visible in the market. Moreover, Swedish banks still had good possibilities of obtaining funds, 
though  this  did  cost  more  than  before.9  When  Lehman  Brothers  filed  for  bankruptcy, 
however, the international financial crisis worsened. In this situation the Riksbank and other 
Swedish authorities introduced a number of measures so that markets would function better.  
The  Riksbank’s  measures  in  this  respect  have  aimed  at  making  bank  funding  easier  and 
thereby  assisting  the  banks  in  the  provision  of  credit  to  companies  outside  the  financial 
sector. In order to make corporate funding easier, during the autumn the Riksbank has lent 
more than SEK 200 billion and USD 25 billion.  
Besides these measures, aimed at getting the credit market to function more efficiently, the 
Riksbank has taken more conventional monetary policy measures. The repo rate has been 
lowered during the autumn by a total of one percentage point – starting with 0.5 percentage 
points on 8 October in a joint action with the Federal Reserve, the Bank of England, the ECB, 
the Swiss National Bank and the Bank of Canada, followed by another 0.5 percentage points 
on 22 October. The purpose of these interest rate cuts was to mitigate the ongoing financial 
crisis’  effects  on  output  and  employment  in  Sweden  while  continuing  to  target  2  per  cent 
inflation. With the autumn’s serious disruptions to financial markets, however, we  probably 
should not expect that policy rate adjustments will have the usual effects. The adjustments 
have  not  affected  market  interest  rates  in  the  same  way  as  they  do  under  normal 
circumstances.  
                                                 
9   ”Policy rate setting and the monetary policy steering system”, speech by Riksbank Governor Stefan Ingves at 
Handelsbank, 28 April 2008. 
BIS Review 153/2008 
 7
Conclusion 
Let me now conclude. 
Major changes are in progress in the securities markets and in the financial infrastructure. 
The systems for securities transactions in the Swedish financial infrastructure are becoming 
increasingly  integrated  with  systems  abroad.  This  places  new  demands  on  cross-border 
cooperation. 
Two  problems  to  do  with  the  infrastructure  have,  moreover,  come  to  the  fore  this  autumn: 
counterparty risks and insufficient market transparency. Given a reliable counterparty and a 
transparent  market,  conditions  are  in  place  for  making  security  transactions  safe  and 
efficient.  As  a  central  bank  we  naturally  welcome  every  measure  whereby  the  financial 
markets continue to function even in turbulent times. 
Finally,  the  financial  crisis  has  made  it  clearer  that  monetary  policy  and  financial  stability 
interact  –  if  one  does  not  function,  neither  does  the  other.  For  our  monetary  policy  to  be 
effective,  it  is  therefore  necessary  that  securities  trading  functions  properly,  with  low 
transaction costs, managed counterparty risks and transparent markets.  
Thank you. 
8 
 BIS Review 153/2008
