Jean-Claude Trichet: Interview with the Financial Times 
Interview with Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, conducted 
by  Mr  Lionel  Barber,  FT  Editor,  and  Mr  Ralph  Atkins,  FT  Frankfurt  Bureau  Chief,  on  10 
December 2008 in Frankfurt, published on 15 December 2008. 
 FT: Mr Trichet, this has been the Eurozone’s first real crisis. How do you think the authorities 
have coped?  
Mr Trichet: I’m not sure it is really the Eurozone’s first crisis, because you remember we also 
had the bursting of the internet bubble, and we had to cope with the oil and the commodity 
price shock. Moreover, we also had other sets of difficulties here and there, including when 
we were told in 2004 by some large countries that we had to unravel the Stability and Growth 
Pact. So I would say we had to face up to a series of circumstances that were certainly not 
easy. But it remains true, of course, not only for us but for all the authorities in the world – 
central banks, executive branches and perhaps also parliaments – that we now have to cope 
with a truly exceptional situation. In that sense I would say that we are all being tested. In a 
way  the  ECB  is  being  no  more  or  less  tested  than  the  Federal  Reserve,  because  these 
exceptional  circumstances  are  calling  for  exceptional  decisions  and  responses  by  a  large 
number  of  central  banks.  But  to  the  extent  that  we  are  only  ten  years  old,  this  test  is  of 
course particularly important for a young institution. 
FT: What was the most difficult moment for you at the ECB in terms of crisis management? 
Trichet:  I  would  certainly  say  that  these  were  the  first  hours  at  the  outset  of  the  financial 
turmoil. The Executive Board had to make a diagnosis of the situation in a very short time 
span,  assess  what  kind  of  problem  we  had  to  deal  with,  and  take  decisions  almost 
instantaneously.  
FT: …this is July/August 2007, yes…. 
Trichet: This was on 9 August 2007. We had a very important decision to take, which was in 
a way the first important decision that central banks had to take in order to confront these 
exceptional circumstances. I remember I was keen on thinking, “This is a grave situation that 
calls for appropriate responses”. And then we had a great number of important decisions to 
take in the subsequent months, which were largely “firsts”, in terms of supplying liquidity at 
fixed rates and even in terms of expanding our collateral framework which, from the outset, 
was already a very comprehensive collateral framework. It has been a big challenge. One of 
our  challenges  is  that  we  had  to  take  decisions  very  rapidly  at  the  level  of  the  Governing 
Council. And we again proved that, thanks to teleconferencing, in one hour and a half or two 
hours  we  could  make  a  full  judgment  and  take  a  decision.  We  had  to  test  the  capacity  to 
have such teleconferences at very short notice, in order to be sure that we could confront 
any new situation. We had a large number of teleconferences with the Governing Council. 
You see there…[points to telephones on table] 
If the situation were to demand now that we had in one hour and a half a teleconference with 
the Governing Council, we will then indeed have a teleconference in one hour and a half. 
The  full  continent  would  be  there.  That’s  very  impressive,  because  this  would  mean  all 
members of the Governing Council from Ljubljana to Helsinki and from Lisbon to Dublin.  
FT: And as you say, an exceptional crisis, a global crisis. How much worse would it have 
been without the euro? 
Trichet:  It  is  very  difficult  to  reconstruct  history  with  new  assumptions.  But  my  memory  of 
what we experienced together in the old days is certainly that we would have had a situation 
which would have been very difficult, because on top of all of these global challenges that 
are  without  precedent,  we  would  have  had  to  cope  with  the  intra-European  tensions,  the 
BIS Review 159/2008 
 1
equivalent of the intra-ERM 1 tensions, and that would have been demanding. There is no 
doubt from that standpoint that the enormous challenges we had at the level of the euro area 
as  a  whole  were,  very  fortunately,  not  the  result  of  intra-euro-area  tensions,  and  that  is 
something which is important. 
FT: And that would have put the single market at risk? 
Trichet: And that would have put the single market at risk, sure. Not only have the central 
banks had to cope with exceptional situations. Governments were called upon to take action 
in various forms, and the fact that Europe is a union of sovereign states means that a lot of 
decisions  implying  taxpayers’  money  or  risks  to  taxpayers  are  taken  at  the  level  of 
governments and parliaments. Hence there is a constant need to ensure that we maintain 
the single market and its level playing-field, and that we do not re-nationalise segments of 
the market. This is a big challenge at the level of the institutional framework of Europe, but it 
has been done well so far. 
FT:  In  the  past,  some  warned  that  the  first  test  for  the  euro  would  also  perhaps  put 
intolerable strains on the currency union, and some academics even suggested it would fall 
apart.  This  has  not  happened,  but  are  you  worried  about  some  member  states  in  the 
currency union that are facing greater challenges, say, than others? 
Trichet: Europe’s institutional framework is solid, and it has proved its solidity. The euro itself 
has functioned, by and large, as a protection against these intense international challenges. 
On the other hand it is clear that each economy has to be run as properly as possible. We 
are in a market system that punishes those who behave improperly. That is the reason why 
we  ourselves  are  telling  all  members  of  the  euro  area  to  respect  the  Stability  and  Growth 
Pact. It is the legal framework that we have as a quid pro quo for the fact that we do not have 
a federal budget and a federal government. And it is economically based on solid ground. 
Consider  the  spreads  for  the  refinancing  of  the  various  government’s  treasuries:  they  are 
taking  into  account  the  various  fiscal  policies.  Consider  the  Ricardian  effects,  the  level  of 
confidence  or  the  lack  of  confidence  that  you  observe  in  the  various  constituencies  of 
economic agents, particularly at the level of households: they suggest that there are certain 
situations where if you do not behave properly you might lose more in terms of confidence 
than what you are supposed to gain through the additional spending. We also say regularly 
to  the  various  members  of  the  euro  area  that  they  must  be  aware  of  the  unit  labour  cost 
evolution, of the relative competitiveness of the various economies inside the euro area, and 
inside  the  single  market  of  the  27  EU  members.  This  is  something  which  is  also  very 
important. 
FT: But of course the Stability and Growth Pact, thanks to the French government, 1997, is 
still very constricting. 
Trichet: It is supposed to function so as to prevent the various fiscal policies from loosening 
during  the  positive  part  of  the  business  cycle  in  order  to  provide  appropriate  room  for 
manoeuvre when we are in the downbeat episode of the business cycle. 
FT: You mean the exceptional circumstances clause? 
Trichet:  In  any  case  you  are  supposed  to  be  close  to  balance  or  much  better  in  surplus 
when you are in the… 
FT: … upswing… 
Trichet: … yes, affluent episode of the business cycle, so that you have at least 3% of GDP 
of room for manoeuvre to cope with the difficulty when the business cycle reverses. But on 
top of that there has been this mention of exceptional circumstances, which has been added 
to the Stability and Growth Pact. The Pact has been designed to cope with all episodes of 
the business cycle I was mentioning, and that is the reason why we ourselves say that the 
room for manoeuvre that is embedded in the Pact exists and can be utilised.  
FT: Do you think Germany is utilising it to the extent it should? 
2 
 BIS Review 159/2008
Trichet: Every nation has its own Ricardian effects and its own assessment of the situation. I 
do  not  want  to  comment  on  any  particular  country,  because  my  duty  is  to  look  at  the 
continent of 320 million fellow citizens as a whole. But I fully accept that there are differences 
in the capacity of households in various cultures to accept a deterioration of their situation, 
and again, the Ricardian channel tells us that one might lose more by loss of confidence than 
one might gain by additional spending. Every nation has to assess its own situation. We are 
a union of sovereign states, so you have to take into account the sovereign decision-making 
process  at  the  level  of  each  nation.  The  process  requires  the  approval  of  parliaments.  In 
some  cases  you  might  have  decisions  that  are  taken  very  expeditiously  because  the 
democratic institutions are functioning very rapidly. In other cases you have to accept that it 
takes longer to take decisions that would be fully in line with the effective functioning of the 
democracies concerned. But I do not judge any country.  
FT: But what role do you believe, then, should a fiscal stimulus play in mitigating the effects 
of this crisis and moving us towards a recovery? 
Trichet: I believe that the existing room for manoeuvre according to the Stability and Growth 
Pact rules can be fully utilised. And there is a great coherence between the provisions of the 
Stability and Growth Pact on the one hand, and what – at least speaking for the euro area – 
an attentive economic analysis would recommend on the other. Again we have to be mindful 
of the spreads on the various treasuries, and of the fact that the market is aware of the room 
for manoeuvre of the various countries. We also have to be mindful of the Ricardian effects 
which are very important. When you look at the level of savings as a proportion of household 
revenue in the various countries, you see to what extent some of them are already largely 
taking into account the expectation that tomorrow you’ll have to face up to additional taxation 
and additional financing needs for public funds. 
FT: In the US, what is really striking about Europeans is that some of them understand that 
this  crisis  is  so  exceptional  that  in a  way  you  may  have  to  put  aside the  rules.  These  are 
exceptional circumstances. But on the other hand there are other Europeans who just feel 
that we’ve used so much effort and political will to put together and agree on those rules that 
whatever we do, we mustn’t abandon them. Now, where do you come down on these two 
sides of the equation? 
Trichet: Incidentally, we had an exceptional relationship with the other side of the Atlantic in 
a  large  number  of  areas,  including  the  supply  of  dollar  liquidity.  We  have  had  a  lot  of 
“premiers” in terms of our own decisions, and “premiers” in terms of the close cooperation 
and  very  confident  cooperation  with  other  central  banks.  This  is  something  which  is 
important. 
But I’m cautious. I take the Stability and Growth Pact as it is, with its provision for exceptional 
circumstances. But it would be a mistake not to take into account fully the situation of the 
various economies. We have an exceptional situation, but understanding where exactly the 
limits are of the fiscal room for manoeuvre also depends on the culture. I see some cultures 
where people are very anxious that in the medium and long run the fiscal situation would be 
unsustainable, others that are reasoning short term. The “discount rate” which is implicit in 
the various cultures is not the same. We have to also take that into account. 
We  don’t  have  a  federal  government.  We  don’t  have  a  federal  budget.  If  we  unravel  the 
Stability and Growth Pact we won’t rebuild it afterwards. It would have been unravelled. And 
what would I say then to American friends telling me, “you put the cart before the horse – you 
don’t have a federal budget or a federal government – but you have a single currency”? I 
understand  that  from  the  outside  our  setup  might  seem  a  little  surprising,  but  taking 
everything into account, the credibility of the euro area, the fact that there has been a quid 
pro quo at the birth of the euro area in terms of the institutional framework, our setup is very 
solid. 
And don’t forget that there is also something which is not negligible. The role of automatic 
stabilisers  is  also  important,  and  I  urge  the  members  of  the  euro  area  to  display  to  which 
BIS Review 159/2008 
 3
degree the worsening fiscal balances represent the functioning of automatic stabilisers. If I 
compare the euro area – but I think this would also be true for Europe as a whole – with the 
US, we have public spending as a proportion of GDP that is significantly higher than in the 
US.  We  have  a  social  safety  net  and  social  protection  in  general  which  is  more 
comprehensive  than  in  the  US,  and  hence  the  role  of  automatic  stabilisers  is  significantly 
more important. It represents a much larger part of GDP. An order of magnitude could be 
that  for  the  same  decrease  of  GDP,  you  would  have  perhaps  twice  as  much  influence  of 
automatic stabilisers as a percentage of GDP in the euro area as compared with the US. A 
large level of public spending as a proportion of GDP is not something that we necessarily 
have to be very proud of, but it is some kind of “amortiser” in periods that are very difficult.  
FT: In Britain you’re looking at a potential 8 per cent budget deficit next year of GDP, and in 
America the word is for the next fiscal boost, name a number and go higher. And the doctrine 
of overwhelming force, the Powell doctrine, will be used to throw everything at this problem. 
Now, do you see risks in that approach, or are you sympathetic? 
Trichet:  If  I  stick  to  my  own  understanding  of  the  difficulties  we  face,  I  would  say  we  are 
certainly paying a price for the absence during a long period of time of appropriate balances 
in  the  various  economies  the  world  over.  I’m  not  mentioning  one  economy  or  another  in 
particular, because I think that we have had a phenomenon in the industrialised world which 
is very complex and which has manifested itself not only in the US but also in a significant 
number  of  industrialised  economies  including  the  European  economies,  where  you  see  a 
permanent tendency to have domestic imbalances between savings and investment, with the 
mirror image of large external imbalances. I think we have to be aware of that. It seems to 
me  that  what  we  are  told  presently  is  –  and  again  it  is  a  message  for  all  industrialised 
countries in my understanding – that it is not a normal position, that it is a dangerous position 
to be domestically and externally significantly in imbalance. Reflecting on what you call the 
“overwhelming force”… I don’t know. I have no memory of colleagues on the other side of the 
Atlantic telling me that as if there were no limit … All colleagues trust that there are limits, in 
any case. I would echo that and I would say that there are always limits. There are limits as 
regards the structural features and the permanent features of the functioning of the various 
economies. And if you think that you have no limits, then you are taught that there are limits 
by the Ricardian effects, by the financial markets themselves.  
FT: If you look to the medium term, how do we get to achieve a better balance? How do we 
avoid, if you like, another wave of volatility based around unrealistic asset prices, or an asset 
bubble?  
Trichet: Let us look at the time of the bursting of the internet bubble. There was a degree of 
excessive pessimism, if I can analyse the real situation after the internet bubble burst. I do 
not exclude that in terms of macroeconomic policies that were… 
FT:  …in  other  words  that  we  assumed  things  were  really  bad  after  the  bubble  burst,  and 
therefore we erred maybe on the monetary side, perhaps…. 
Trichet: I am not criticising anybody, and I know to what pressure the ECB was resisting at 
the time. I was appointed at the end of 2003. As early as the beginning of 2004 three Heads 
of  State  and  Government  of  large  countries  were  calling  publicly  on  the  ECB  to  decrease 
interest  rates.  I  suppose  with  the  benefit  of  hindsight  it  would  appear extraordinary,  taking 
into account what happened afterwards, but it is documented. Central banks are permanently 
asymmetrically called on to privilege more the short term to the detriment of the medium and 
long term and this by all sensitivities, all constituencies whether private or public … We were 
made independent precisely because our democracies rely on us to reason also medium to 
long  term,  and  to  avoid  being  exclusively  trapped  in  short-term  considerations.  In  my  own 
experience,  this  is  both  a  national  and  international  experience  in  the  euro  area:  I  know 
practically of no constituency which would call on us to increase rates at any time!  
I experienced all the consequences in the 1980s of the second oil shock and the defaults of 
sovereign states, which were the mark of the 1980s. We had a very negative consequence of 
4 
 BIS Review 159/2008
these dramatic oil shocks and commodity price shocks that we had to cope with in the 2000s, 
because there has been, on top of the savings glut, an additional pot of forced savings that 
were accumulated at the level of the global economy by the oil and commodity producers. 
That created an additional element of capital chasing investment and hunting for yields. You 
then had a very low level of spread, a very low level of volatility and a very low level of risk 
premia, which contributed to create an asset bubble, asset price inflation. 
FT:  Are  there  measures  that  you  could  take  or  policies  that  you  should  adopt  in  order  to 
avoid another wave of volatility? 
Trichet: I would say that it is impossible in market economies to avoid fluctuations. We have 
to  accept  that  we  have  ups  and  downs.  What  is  an  overwhelming  duty  is  to  eliminate,  as 
completely  as  possible,  all  the  in-built  elements  in  global  finance  that  are  amplifying  the 
booms and the busts. Such pro-cyclical elements are everywhere. They are in the behaviour 
of  the  various  private  entities  themselves.  We  have  to  draw  the  appropriate  lessons  from 
that, including in terms of risk management. We have to reflect on accounting rules. Now we 
have to see exactly how accounting rules could best reflect the reality of the situation, and 
how  they  would  avoid  augmenting  booms  and  busts  as  has  been  the  case.  We  have  to 
reflect  in  the  Basel  Committee  on  prudential  rules  for  banks  and  also  for  insurance 
companies. As regards market rules in general they might have been, all taken into account, 
too geared towards short-termism and too pro-cyclical.  
All of these are the avenues that we see in front of us when we meet in the context of the 
Financial Stability Forum, the G20, the IFMC, G7, G8 or the G10 grouping of Central Bank 
Governors. I think we very much agree on the appropriate avenues. I used to sum them up 
by saying that we first have to improve transparency dramatically for financial instruments, 
for markets and for institutions. We second have to combat pro-cyclicality everywhere in the 
global financial system, we third have to combat short-termism and we fourth have to very 
significantly improve risk management in the private sector in general. Moreover, we have to 
improve surveillance, at a global level, of the economies that are systematically important. It 
is not only China, the US and Europe, but it is also the other members of the G20, because 
they are systematically important. If everything is settled as regards the financial system, and 
if  we  really  go  without  any  taboos  in  the  directions  that  are  presently  suggested  we  can 
succeed.  This  includes  the  67  measures  suggested  by  the  Financial  Stability  Forum  that 
have been accepted by the international community. But on the other hand, if we maintain 
the possibility of the global economy having big imbalances that would pile up for years, we 
know that there will be recurrent corrections which will be equivalent to the earthquake that 
you have when continents are moving, which at some point leads to a collision. We have to 
prevent that too. We do not speak too much about that, but it is extremely important.  
FT: Have the politicians lagged behind the financial markets? Certainly, the technocrats, the 
central banks understood… The politics has lacked, hasn't it?  
Trichet:  I  would  not  say  that.  The  Central  Banks  have  indeed  been  instrumental  in 
organising  what  I  would  call  a  line  of  defense  against  the  “systemic  liquidity  risk”.  The 
executive  branches  have  taken  the  decision  to  organise  a  line  of  defense  against  the 
“systemic  solvency  risk”  that  was  threatening  national,  continental  and  global  finance.  We 
had asked ourselves for such decisions to be taken. But I certainly will not underestimate the 
difficulty  of  the  tasks  of  governments  to  put  taxpayers’  money  and  risk  at  stake  for  the 
guarantees and the recapitalisation that were necessary. In the euro area, in the UK, in the 
US, it called for courageous decisions.  
FT: Are there limits to the effectiveness of monetary policy because of the situation we're in, 
and  if  so,  should  the  reaction  of  central  bankers  be  to  do  more  or  less  in  such 
circumstances?  And  then  what  is  the  role  that  should  be  played  by  exceptional  measures 
that you have at your disposal, the quantitative easing debate essentially?  
Trichet:  First  of  all,  we  made  the  point  clearly  that  there  was  a  clear  separation  between 
monetary policy stance, which was designed to deliver price stability in the medium term in 
BIS Review 159/2008 
 5
line  with  our  definition,  and  our  interventions  in  the  money  market  aiming  at  permitting  a 
smooth  functioning  of  this  market  at  the  level  of  the  short  term  interest  rates  that  we  had 
decided. And we have continued to look at inflation expectations with extreme care during 
the  entire  period.  And  I  was  very  satisfied,  I  have  to  say,  that  we  had  regained  control  of 
inflation  expectations  before  the  event  of  mid  September,  because  it  permitted  us  to 
decrease rates and to accompany the alleviation of inflationary pressure without hesitation. 
We  participated  in  the  collegial  decrease  of  rates  which  we  had  organised  with  the  other 
major central banks in the world. So that is a very important first point. 
Second point, as regards the present situation, we consider that the decisions we have taken 
were  exactly  what  was  necessary.  Taking  into  account  the  alleviation  of  inflationary 
pressures, we have to be very mindful of the spreads that we are still observing in the money 
market.  I  said  at  my  last  press  conference  on  4  December,  you  remember,  we  have  to 
concentrate  on  obtaining  from  the  interest  rates  effectively  practised  the  intended 
consequences.  The  transmission  channel  is  not  functioning  as  usual,  but  it  is  functioning. 
There is no doubt that the decisions that we are taking have an impact, but it's made more 
complicated, more complex by the present situation, in particular by the fact that we do not 
have a money market which functions normally. We do all we can, in particular through our 
supply  of  liquidity,  for  this  money  market  to  function  as  well  as  possible.  But  we  observe 
these challenges at a global level on both sides of the Atlantic; it is a phenomenon that we 
are all observing and that we all are trying to counter. It is certainly not easy to eliminate, 
otherwise we wouldn't see the same phenomenon in the US and in Europe, but at least we 
are progressively attenuating the problem.  
FT:  You  said  last  week  that  you  have  an  opportunity  next  week  to  view  the  operational 
framework,  liquidity  regime.  You  seem  to  contain  a  hint  that  maybe  changes  might  be 
planned. Can you tell us about that without…? I don't expect you to tell us what you decide, 
but  what  would  the  aim  be?  Would  it  be  perhaps  to  apply  more  whip  on  banks  to 
encourage…? 
Trichet: I can say nothing at this stage. 
FT: What about buying debt, though; buying government debt? Would you consider such a 
move at the ECB? 
Trichet:  Again,  I  have  said  that  experience  has  demonstrated  that  we  had  to  prepare  for 
unexpected  exceptional  situations,  and  I  would  say  that  I  would  not  eliminate  anything  ex 
ante, and equally I will not pre-commit to anything ex ante. We'll always look at the situation 
on the basis of our own analysis, taking everything into account. Today, we will certainly not 
consider that it will be appropriate at all. 
You  were  speaking  of  quantitative  measures.  There  is  a  measure  of  quantity,  which  is 
impressive today – I'm speaking of both sides of the Atlantic, and both sides of the Channel – 
which is the size of the balance sheet of the central bank. This is explained by the fact that 
we are supplying liquidity on an unlimited basis and that we have allowed collateral in a way 
which  is  more  forthcoming.  And  this  is  true  for  all  central  banks.  But  for  us,  our  weekly 
balance sheet in comparison with that of one year ago has increased by around 55 % [from 
around 1.3 trillion to 2 trillion euro]. Of course, this increase does not imply an increase in net 
liquidity, because a significant part of the liquidity we provide comes back in the central bank 
through the deposit facility. 
FT: That’s less than the Fed. 
Trichet:  Yes,  true.  For  the  ECB  part  of  it  comes  also  from  the  fact  that  we  have  the 
counterparts of the dollar that we are supplying ourselves, and a counterpart of the dollar is 
our own collateral. The central banks are in a situation where they are playing a much more 
quantitative role than they used to play, and it is true for all of us. 
FT: Should there be more centralised supervision within the Eurozone, and should the ECB 
take responsibility? Is the ECB willing to take that responsibility if the politicians so desire? 
6 
 BIS Review 159/2008
Trichet: As you know, we have always been in favour of a very close relationship between 
the central bank and the banking surveillance authorities. We said that long, long before any 
new problems, any new difficulties. We had a Governing Council position close to the start of 
the ECB, which we made public. So on that point, there is no ambiguity at all. We are also 
strongly  thinking  that  better  coordination  for  big  cross-border  institutions  is  absolutely 
necessary; even if we could cope with all the issues at stake in the present circumstances, 
we should not forget that. It's clear that we can improve the present framework and we have 
to  improve  it.  Some  avenues  have  already  been  suggested  by  Ecofin.  There  has  already 
been  a  consensus  on  appropriate  Memoranda  of  Understanding.  But  going  further  in  this 
direction  also  seems  important.  At  this  stage,  I  have  to  say,  I  do  not  have  a  full-fledged 
Governing Council position. We are still reflecting, and we will see what will be the position of 
the  Governing  Council.  But  I  understand  that  the  European  Parliament  has  carried  out 
several  works  which  have  been  done  within  the  suggestion  that  the  ECB  would  play  a 
particular role in this domain for the coordination of surveillance for cross-border institutions – 
a little bit like in the US. The Federal Reserve has a position which concentrates very much 
on  the  big  cross-border  institutions.  And  I  see  also  suggestions  coming  from  the  private 
sector, coming from the industry, that we could play a more important role in this domain. As 
President  of  the  ECB’s  Governing  Council,  I  would  say  again,  I  have  no  position  of  the 
Governing Council, but I think it's flattering for the Governing Council that we are called to 
reflect on that, by both parliament and perhaps the high-level group that has been set up by 
the Commission and where you have a number of eminent personalities. We will see. 
A little bit of philosophy again. We cannot afford to put in the future the concept of the market 
economy at risk as we did. I have known myself a world where you had an east and a west, 
a north and a south. In this matrix, we were only one square out of four where you could say 
they are in favour of market economies. The others were devising other ideas, which failed, 
and it's very good that they failed. However, the trust which was put in the resilience of the 
market  economy  is  at  stake  now.  I  think  we  were,  again,  quite  lucid  on  this.  I  have 
permanently with me the first page of the Financial Times warning of it, it was January 2007, 
in Davos, where I was providing the sentiment of my colleagues, as it has arisen from the 
governors’  meeting  in  Basel  on  the  fact  that  market  participants  had  to  prepare  for  a 
significant  correction  because  risks  were  underassessed  and  underestimated  in  global 
finance.  But  the  fragility,  not  only  of  global  finance  but  of  the  global  economy  itself,  is 
something that we should reflect on. You know, there are some key intermediate inputs that 
are produced in only three factories in the world. This is not reliable. We have this just-in-time 
system, with minimum inventories, which in case of a shock might make the full body of the 
real  economy  more  immediately  vulnerable.  In  the  financial  system  we  have  eliminated  a 
number of cushions and shock-absorbers that we had here and there. This morning, I was 
telling our staff, that this is as if we had been keen on eliminating a number of air bags from 
the [global finance] “car”. So now that we have an accident, we are surprised to see that we 
have  a  lot  of  scars.  The  scars  of  the  current  crisis  on  the  global  financial  system  are 
significant. All investment banks in New York have either been purchased, or gone under, or 
changed by their legal framework. That is saying something. A new concept of resilience for 
the market economy is of the essence. 
BIS Review 159/2008 
 7
