Miguel Fernández Ordóñez: Weiß und Rot – the cycle, central bankers 
and supervisors 
Address  by  Mr  Miguel  Fernández  Ordóñez,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Spain,  at  the  “World 
Currency  Regime  –  to  Float  or  not  to  Float”  session,  18th  Frankfurt  European  Banking 
Congress, Frankfurt am Main, 20 November 2008. 
 Let  me  begin  by  thanking  the  organisers  of  this  edition  of  the  Annual  European  Banking 
Congress for the opportunity to address such a distinguished audience on the subject of the 
cycle, central bankers and supervisors. I will be talking about “Weiβ und Rot” and not exactly 
about wines. 
 Numerous factors have played an important role in triggering the current crisis: the subprime 
mortgages, the highly complex securitisation structures, the originate-to-distribute model, the 
over-reliance on rating agencies, risk valuation models that few could understand, etc. Many 
of  these  mistakes  have  been  identified  over  the  past  15 months  by  the  authorities  and  by 
financial institutions themselves. Some regulatory reforms are already under way in the EU 
and overseas, while the financial entities themselves are reviewing their risk management. 
We can be sure that the next crisis will not be like the current one. But it is naive to believe 
there will be no further expansions and slowdowns. For 5,000 years now, since the Pharaoh 
asked  Joseph  about  the  meaning  of  a  dream  in  which  he  saw  seven  fat  and  seven  lean 
cows, we have known that the economy is unequivocally cyclical. Perhaps we have made 
some  progress  over  these  5,000  years,  since  it  seems  that  the  years  of  plenty  are  now 
somewhat longer than the lean years. But little more than that. 
As central bankers and supervisors, we cannot therefore conceive of doing away with cycles. 
But we may try to reduce their intensity and effects, and I do honestly believe we can. 
Each  cycle  is  different,  but  the  severity  of  recessionary  problems  arises  from  two  main 
sources.  First,  the  excessive  leverage  of  economic  agents.  And  further,  the  weak  position 
from  which  financial  institutions  face  the  downturn.  On  one  hand,  due  to  the  problems 
stemming  from  excessive  credit  growth.  And  on  the  other,  because  banks  do  not  take 
advantage of the years of plenty to build up reserves or provisions. With less leverage, and 
greater resilience on the part of banks, we will not avert cycles, but we will experience cycles 
that are less painful for our citizens.  
There  are  two  ways  in  which  we  can  act  both  as  central  bankers  and  as  supervisors.  As 
central bankers, we can avoid explosive growth in debt. And as supervisors, we can demand 
more thrifty behaviour from our banks. I will develop these two arguments in my speech. 
The procyclicality of credit and debt is a familiar phenomenon to economists. During cyclical 
upturns,  a  breeding  ground  for  excessive  optimism  and,  subsequently,  the  widespread 
underpricing  of  risk  tends  to  develop.  The  financial  markets  behave  as  if  risk  falls  during 
upswings  and  grows  during  recessions.  It  is  curious,  for  example,  to  see  how  the  usual 
indicators of risk premia – such as CDS, bond spreads and so on – tend to touch bottom 
around cyclical peaks. However, the reality is quite different. During recessions risks do not 
increase; they simply materialise. And they do so after having built up during the boom. 
During  expansions,  households  and  firms  tend  to  overestimate  the  future  growth  of  their 
income  and  raise  their  degree  of  leverage  in  an  attempt  to  bring  their  current  spending 
patterns into line with this expected flow of future income. Banks, likewise short-sighted, also 
overestimate the ability of their borrowers to pay and their own ability to find, at low cost, the 
funding needed to meet the growing demand for loans. 
BIS Review 149/2008 
 1
inflation 
to  anchor  agents' 
financial  stability  considerations 
fighting  monetary  policy  manages 
When  the  downturn  sharply  curtails  optimism  and  borrowers  and  lenders  suddenly  revise 
their  expectations,  the  full  scale  of  the  imbalances  that  have  built  up  emerges,  triggering 
financial pressures that fuel – and are in turn fuelled by – the cyclical slowdown, setting in 
train a vicious circle that ends in deep crisis. 
Admittedly, this harmful effect of real growth on credit growth cannot be avoided; but it can 
be mitigated by means of a monetary policy that takes it into account. Central banks can help 
reduce the negative effects of an excess of credit growth if they apply a monetary policy that 
is oriented to maintain price stability in an horizon long enough as to account for this cyclical 
behaviour of debt, thereby ensuring that the effects of the crisis are not so devastating for 
households and firms. 
Indeed, this should be of particular concern since we know that a monetary policy successful 
in containing inflation can also contribute to increase household and corporate leverage. A 
successful 
inflation 
expectations. In such a setting, the demand-side excesses that tend to be generated during 
cyclical  upturns  do  not  translate  –  or  do  so  only  very  slowly  –  into  inflationary  pressures. 
Consequently,  central  bankers  do  not  consider  it  necessary  to  tighten  monetary  policy,  so 
that  interest  rates  remain  very  low  and  continue  to  fuel  the  cycle  and  the  consequent 
expansion of credit and debt. 
White  (Weiβ  in  German),  which  is  not  only  a  type  of  wine  but  also  the  name  of  the  chief 
economist  of  the  BIS  who  retired  last  summer,  has  been  calling  in  recent  years  for  the 
introduction  of 
into  monetary  policy  design  and 
implementation. And we should acknowledge that the latest events have shown the validity 
of  his  proposals.  In  short,  he  recommends  that  central  banks  act  against  the  build-up  of 
financial  imbalances  even  in  the  absence  of  inflationary  pressures  at  the  usual  reference 
horizons.  
But  a  more  conservative  monetary  policy  in  expansionary  phases  would  not  only  have 
favourable  effects  on  tempering  the  amount  of  credit,  it  would  also  improve  credit  quality. 
Monetary  policy  also  affects  how  banks  assume  risks.  Researchers  at  the  Bank  of  Spain 
have  shown  that  a  long  period  of  low  interest  rates  contributes  to  relaxing  banks'  credit 
granting standards. The market pressure to maintain high returns in a setting of low interest 
rates  and,  therefore,  of  lending  offering  very  tight  income  margins,  leads  some  banks  to 
extend  credit  to  individuals  and  firms  with  a  greater  risk  profile.  Also,  the  expansionary 
monetary  policy  stance  means  this  greater  risk  takes  longer  to  materialize,  which  in  turn 
stimulates ever greater increases in this type of risky investment. 
Banks thus increase their risk profile by financing individuals and companies with a history of 
default, or by increasing the credit extended to new borrowers who, lacking a credit record, 
entail a greater level of uncertainty and, therefore, of potential risk to the bank. Finally, in an 
environment  marked  by  low  interest  rates  and  the  search  by  banks  for  yield,  the  general 
conditions  of  risk  acceptance  and  selection  are  substantially  relaxed,  which  translates  into 
the riskier granting of credit that will materialise once the cycle turns down. 
If we add to the foregoing ingredients a strong increase in banking competition, both among 
deposit institutions and between these and other less regulated non-bank competitors, the 
pressure to increase the risk profile in order to maintain past profit levels simply heightens 
banks' incentives to take on more risk in upturns. 
Having commented on the problems of excessive credit growth and how a more conservative 
monetary policy can mitigate them, I would like to move forward to the second part of  my 
speech, and concentrate on the resilience of the banking system and the role of supervisors. 
We should acknowledge that the resilience of the financial system in general, and of credit 
institutions in particular, plays a key role in softening cyclical downturns. Evident in this crisis 
has  been  the  notable  weakness  with  which  many  banks  have  faced  the  downswing.  To 
increase their resilience, banking regulation policy can perform a pivotal function by curbing 
2 
 BIS Review 149/2008
the countercyclical behaviour of capital, so that it protects banks and prepares them for the 
crisis. 
And  to  discuss  this,  I  am  bound  in  this  second  part  of  my  speech  to  refer  to  Rojo  (the 
Spanish for red, and “Rot” in German). Again, this is not only a type of wine but the name of 
the former governor of the Bank of Spain entrusted with steering and successfully ensuring 
the Spanish economy’s entry into the euro area. 
It was also Rojo who, in the final stage of his mandate as governor of the Bank of Spain, 
designed and put into practice the prudential regulatory mechanism of dynamic provisioning. 
This  has  contributed  to  reinforcing  the  stability  of  the  Spanish  banking  system  and  today 
commands wide recognition; but, when initially launched, it aroused understandable rejection 
by Spanish banks and was met with indifference on the part of the international community of 
banking regulators and supervisors. 
Let me give you the background to this prudential and countercyclical regulatory mechanism. 
The origins of Spanish dynamic provisioning must be sought in credit developments in the 
late 1990s. Having emerged from the 1993 recession, the worst for 40 years in Spain, the 
economy,  and  much  more  intensely  so  bank  lending,  began  to  expand  at  an  increasingly 
brisk pace. 
The Bank of Spain was led to introduce dynamic provisioning, which came into force in mid-
2000,  by  a  combination  of  factors.  These  included  most  notably:  the  mix  of  strong  credit 
growth,  with  the  dangers  this  entailed  for  the  stability  of  the  financial  system;  heightened 
competition,  which  acted  to  exacerbate  these  risks  given  that  credit  institutions  applied 
increasingly lower risk premia to maintain their market share; the deterioration in the level of 
loan  loss  provisions  and  their  extremely  high  correlation  with  current  default  rates;  and, 
finally, the Bank of Spain’s past supervisory experience. 
In addition to the practical issues I have mentioned, behind dynamic provisioning there lied a 
conviction,  resulting  from  many  years  of  supervisory  experience  and,  more  recently,  also 
from empirical evidence, that credit risk appears in bank balance sheets at the time lending is 
granted. Risk is an ex ante concept, and default is no more than the ex post manifestation of 
this  credit  risk.  As  I  just  mentioned,  banks  commit  lending  policy  errors  in  upturns,  when 
there is excessive optimism and it is believed that the business cycle has disappeared and 
that recessions are a relic of the past that will not return, and when bankers, caught up in this 
wave  of  exuberance,  relax  their  credit  granting  standards.  By  contrast,  and  as  we  are  all 
experiencing  at  the  moment,  a  reaction  in  the  opposite  direction  occurs  in  recessionary 
phases.  Banks,  pressured  by  high  default  rates,  which  impact  their  income  statement  and 
their level of capital, contract credit significantly, granting financing only to those borrowers 
whose solvency is beyond all doubt.  
The end result is as follows: an overly expansionary credit cycle during the upswing and, by 
contrast, overly contractionary credit growth during the downswing. 
In addition, there may be a perverse effect on institutions’ income statements and levels of 
capital. During upswings, the failure to recognise risk through loan loss provisions results in 
very high profits. Institutions, very frequently due to the pressure exerted by the market, often 
decide to distribute these profits to shareholders through generous dividends, which in turn 
has a negative impact on the institution’s capital. When the downswing arrives and the risk 
assumed  in  the  past  turns  into  bad  debts,  the  income  statement  is  not  capable  of 
withstanding  the  losses.  These  losses  may  erode  a  very  significant  part  or  even  all  of  the 
institution's  capital.  Recapitalising  banks  during  downswings  is  not  easy,  as  recent  events 
have so starkly shown.  
By  the  way,  I  should  note  here  that  the  current  recapitalisation  with  public  funds  raises 
significant challenges in terms of management incentives at the recipient institutions and of 
competition policy for the entire banking system in question. However, this is neither the time 
nor the place to go into this in more details.  
BIS Review 149/2008 
 3
Accordingly, from the prudential standpoint, there are more than enough arguments to justify 
the development of regulatory policy instruments that enable credit institutions to recognise 
during  upswings  the  higher  level  of  credit  risk  accumulating  in  their  balance  sheets.  The 
dynamic provisioning is a way to achieve this recognition. The idea, an extremely simple one, 
is that banks should set aside provisions for loan losses when the risk is assumed. They will 
then be able to use these provisions during the downswing, when the risk materialises. 
As a consequence, credit institutions see their loan loss provisions to vary more closely in 
line  with  the  credit  risk  existing  in  their  balance  sheets,  and  the  profit  and  loss  account 
fluctuates less over the cycle. The main point here is that this strengthens the solvency of 
each individual credit institution and the stability of the entire financial system. 
Before continuing with the background to the dynamic provision, I should like to address a 
criticism made by accountants. It was said that this provision amounted to a distortion, and 
sometimes even a manipulation of the income statement. This is far from true. The Spanish 
regulator  required  institutions  to  advise  the  market  of  the  amount  of  this  provision  so  that 
analysts  and  investors  could,  if  they  so  wished,  “discount”  its  impact.  The  mechanism  is 
completely transparent and institutions cannot use it to manipulate their results. 
Admittedly, bankers did not welcome the statistical provision as warmly as we supervisors 
did. In fact they openly opposed it at first, arguing, with some reason, that this provision, by 
tightening  the  requirements  for  Spanish  institutions  alone,  gave  rise  to  an  uneven  playing 
field, especially for those institutions most heavily exposed to international competition. With 
time  they  came  to  appreciate  that  this  provision  helped  strengthen  their  solvency  and, 
therefore, their medium-term attractiveness and resilience, despite the fact that around 10% 
of their net income had to be assigned to the statistical provision. 
The  current  scale  of  the  international  financial  crisis,  with  credit  institutions  having  an 
enormous difficulty for recapitalising without public intervention, has revived the interest on 
procyclicality of accounting standards and capital requirements. The topic has sprung from 
the academic arena, to which it was confined until very recently, to the forefront of regulatory 
and  financial  policy  discussions.  The  Financial  Stability  Forum,  the  International  Monetary 
Fund, the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision and certain central banks have, among 
others,  highlighted  the  need  for  an  in-depth  discussion  of  procyclicality  and  regulatory 
mechanisms that may help reduce it. 
I believe that the Spanish experience of dynamic provisioning can serve as the starting point 
for this discussion. I am convinced that these provisions have significantly strengthened the 
solvency and stability of the Spanish banking system, both on aggregate and at the level of 
each  institution.  Clearly,  this  provision  did  not  insulate  Spanish  institutions  from  the  global 
financial crisis, but it had certainly positioned them better to withstand it. 
Let me conclude with three thoughts. First, I would like to see the standard-setting agencies, 
and the IASB in particular, as European law is one of the first to have adopted its guidelines, 
acting  with  greater  subtlety  when  setting  these  standards,  and  also  in  their  dialogue  with 
other  regulators.  The  present  serious  financial  crisis  has  shown  that  fair  value  is  an 
accounting concept and doctrine that has no better alternative, but that also should not be 
inappropriately applied. Allowing transparent dynamic provisioning would help to reduce the 
more  harmful  effects  of  credit  cycles  and,  therefore,  to  produce  economic  growth  with 
minimal fluctuations.  
Second,  I  believe  that  regulators  and  supervisors,  and  central  bankers  too,  must  further 
discuss procyclicality, the impact of accounting and prudential standards on the credit cycle, 
and how monetary policy interacts with the credit cycle. Our experience with the statistical 
provision may be useful, although it is not necessarily either the best or the only solution. The 
important  thing  is  that  we  should  be  ready  to  discuss  countercyclical  mechanisms,  in 
provisions, in capital and wherever we believe they might be appropriate and feasible. 
4 
 BIS Review 149/2008
Finally, but no less importantly, we should enter into international agreements to ensure that 
countercyclical  mechanisms  are  applied  consistently  in  all  countries.  A  global  banking 
system  requires  uniform  and  internationally  coordinated  responses.  I  assure  you  that 
applying prudential measures in isolation is not an optimal situation, even if such measures 
are shown to be the most appropriate ones. 
 Behind the ideas of White and Rojo (Weiss und Rot) that I have set out today were many 
other economists who I have not been able to mention, and who also contributed to help us 
to smooth cycles and strengthen credit institutions in the future. I have referred to these two 
because I wanted to pay tribute to all those economists that with their ideas and research, 
are seeking to make life easier for us and helping us to take better decisions. Now, in the 
recessionary  phase  of  the  cycle,  we  can  see  very  clearly  that  it  was  Rojo  and  White  who 
were right, and that other economists who underestimated the explosion in leverage and who 
did not worry about designing regulations forcing banks to strengthen themselves during the 
upswing  were  wrong.  Today,  with  the  benefit  of  hindsight,  we  know  who  was  right.  Next 
cycles will face us with fresh challenges but I hope that this experience will help us to meet 
them. 
Thank you very much and enjoy the wine – red or white (Rot oder Weiβ) – you have chosen. 
BIS Review 149/2008 
 5
