Peter Pang: Capital account liberalisation – international experience and 
implications for China 
Opening  speech  by  Mr  Peter  Pang,  Deputy  Chief  Executive  of  the  Hong  Kong  Monetary 
Authority,  for  the  conference  “Capital  account  liberalisation:  international  experience  and 
implications for China”, Hong Kong, 17 November 2008. 
 Good morning, ladies and gentlemen. 
It is my great pleasure to open this conference on “capital account liberalisation: international 
experience and implications for China”.  
This conference is taking place at a crucial time, as one of the most tumultuous periods in 
the financial history has put to test our ability of crisis management. Even as governments 
across the world keep their focus on the immediate task of stabilising financial markets and 
supporting  economic  growth,  wide-ranging  discussions  are  already  under  way  as  to  what 
lessons can be drawn from the crisis. These discussions are likely to affect many aspects of 
policy thinking on how best to monitor and manage risks in the financial system in order to 
achieve sustained economic growth and prosperity.  
The  topic  of  this  conference  –  the  costs  and  benefits  as  well  as  experiences  of  capital 
account  liberalisation  –  is  likely  to  be  one  such  area  of  intense  interest,  particularly  from 
emerging  markets'  point  of  view.  As  financially  more  closed  economies  have  been  less 
affected so far by the global turmoil, the merit of financial liberalisation and greater opening 
up  to  the  rest  of  the  world  by  the  emerging  economies  has  been  questioned.  Indeed,  this 
crisis  has  brought  us  to  a  juncture  where  a  better  understanding  of  capital  account 
liberalisation  –  through  learning  from  in-depth  analysis  and  open  debates  –  is  required  in 
order to formulate better policies in the area.  
The potentially destabilising effects that capital flows could inflict on the domestic economy 
are widely recognised. When it rains, it pours: as noted by an NBER research, capital flows 
tend to be pro-cyclical.1 Large influxes of capital could push up the value of currencies, drive 
up inflation and fuel asset bubbles, while affecting the competitiveness of the export sector, 
posing  challenges  to  the  authorities  of  the  host  country  in  managing  domestic  monetary 
conditions  and  maintaining  financial  stability.  Capital  flows  can  also  quickly  reverse,  often 
driven  by  changes  in  market  sentiment  or  external  environment.  The  “sudden  stops”  of 
capital flows have, in recent decades, brought severe financial stress to emerging markets, 
with substantial costs to the real economy. Such volatility is perhaps one main reason why 
the cross-country studies on growth benefits of a more open capital account have remained 
largely  inconclusive.  The  current  financial  crisis  brings  home  the  message  that  integration 
with the global financial market could expose a country to global financial turbulence even 
when its own financial sector and real economy are fundamentally sound. 
Despite the recent turbulence and the spillover effects of capital flows, we should not, in my 
view, lose sight of the many benefits of an open capital account. Free flows of capital across 
borders  can  make  the  domestic  financial  market  deeper  and  wider,  increase  liquidity,  and 
facilitate price discovery, thus improving efficiency of resource allocation. At the same time, 
diversification by investing overseas can help raise investment returns for households, which 
would  in  turn  help  promote  private  consumption  and  support  sustainable  growth.  For 
emerging markets in particular, participation of foreign financial institutions can speed up the 
                                                 
1   Kaminsky, G.L., C.M. Reinhart and C.A. Vegh (2004), "When it rains, it pours: procyclical capital flows and 
macroeconomic policies", NBER Working Paper, 10708. 
BIS Review 141/2008 
 1
learning  process  and  facilitate  the  adoption  of  best  international  practices  by  the  financial 
sector.  Therefore,  while  a  more  liberal  regime  for  capital  flows  could  at  times  bring  about 
negative  impacts,  the  relevant  response  should  not  be  to  keep  the  capital  account  closed 
forever, but to find ways of effectively managing the potential risks.  
International experiences have provided some broad suggestions on how such risks could be 
managed.  Foremost  is  the  importance  of  appropriate  sequencing  between  liberalising  the 
capital  account  and  other  domestic  reforms.  Development  of  financial  institutions  and 
markets,  enhanced  macroeconomic  stability,  and  proper  risk  management  by  banks  and 
enterprises  would  help  to  increase  the  resilience  of  the  domestic  entities  in  dealing  with 
volatile capital flows. In addition, prudential regulation and supervisory framework need to be 
established, in order to prevent excessive risk-taking by domestic financial institutions. Such 
framework  needs  to  be  accompanied  by  adequate  accounting,  auditing  and  disclosure 
standards, to improve market transparency and enhance supervisory effectiveness.  
Turning  to  Mainland  China's  experience,  the  liberalisation  of  capital  account  has  been 
selective.  Inflows  of  foreign  direct  investment  have  long  been  encouraged,  which  has 
contributed significantly to China's robust economic growth. In more recent years, steps have 
been  taken  by  the  authorities  to  allow  greater  portfolio  flows.  In  particular,  the  Qualified 
Foreign Institutional Investors (QFII) schemes have enabled foreign investors to access the 
domestic financial market, while under the Qualified Domestic Institutional Investors (QDII) 
schemes,  financial  institutions  can,  upon  approval,  invest  overseas  on  behalf  of  domestic 
investors.  
Reflecting  the  limited  channels  of  outward  investment  and  market  conditions,  however, 
capital  flows  have  been  overwhelmingly  inward  bound  in  recent  years,  and  China  has 
experienced a rapid accumulation of foreign exchange reserves. This had fed into pressures 
on the exchange rate and inflation which were only eased somewhat by the global economic 
slowdown  in  more  recent  months.  The  People's  Bank  of  China  has  employed  sterilisation 
through open market operations, reserve requirements and credit quota in order to offset the 
impact of capital inflows on domestic monetary conditions. Such measures, however, have 
incurred costs to the central bank and the banking sector. Thus it would be useful to consider 
ways in which outflows of capital can be liberalised in an orderly and regulated manner to 
alleviate  the  BOP  pressures  in  the  near  term.  From  a  longer  term  perspective,  greater 
financial  integration  with  the  rest  of  the  world  is  probably  inevitable,  with  China  now 
becoming  the  fourth  largest  economy  and  the  third  largest  trading  nation.  Indeed,  large 
financial crises in the past such as the Mexican crisis of 1994 and Asian crisis in 1997-8 have 
not prevented global financial integration.  
An open capital account has been generally considered as an ultimate policy objective in the 
Mainland,  as  its  many  benefits  are  well  recognised.  However,  there  have  been  lots  of 
debates mostly with regard to the pace of the reforms. Although the stable macroeconomic 
conditions, the improvement of the financial institutions' balance sheets, and the enhanced 
supervisory  framework  in  recent  years  have  increased  the  economy's  resilience,  there  are 
vulnerabilities.  Most  notably,  financial  market  development  and  the  price  discovery 
mechanisms are still at their early stage, and the risk management capacity of the financial 
institutions  and  the  corporate  sector  remains  limited.  It  is  therefore  understandable  that 
Mainland  policymakers  would  prefer  a  gradual,  controllable  process  in  capital  account 
liberalisation,  in  order  to  reduce  the  shock  on  the  domestic  financial  system  from  capital 
flows.  
Hong Kong fits well into this prudent strategy. It is well positioned to help the Mainland to 
manage  the  process  of  liberalisation,  while  ensuring  important  reforms  move  forward 
steadily. This unique role derives from Hong Kong's proximity with the Mainland and shared 
culture and language, the close cooperation of the financial authorities of the two sides, and 
importantly,  Hong  Kong's  status  as  a  well-established  international  financial  centre.  I  will 
point out two particular areas for such cooperation.  
2 
 BIS Review 141/2008
First, Hong Kong can be used as a platform for pilot schemes for further expansion of cross-
border fund flows. The use of Hong Kong as a financing platform has played an important 
role  in  Mainland's  economic  development  and  a  continued  and  expanded  use  should  be 
made going forward. In addition to the well developed platform for Mainland enterprises to list 
on the Hong Kong's stock exchange, consideration could be given to facilitate SMEs to raise 
funds  through  bond  issuance  with  credit  enhancement  in  Hong  Kong.  At  the  same  time, 
Hong Kong can serve as a platform for more investment outflows from the Mainland, which 
would improve investment choices for Mainland investors. For instance, financial instruments 
issued in Hong Kong could be allowed to be listed on the Mainland, or Mainland investors 
could be allowed to use their own foreign currency deposits to invest overseas through Hong 
Kong.  
Second,  Hong  Kong  can  be  a  testing  ground  for  the  international  use  of  the  renminbi,  a 
process  closely  related  to  Mainland's  capital  account  liberalisation.  The  renminbi  business 
scheme  in  Hong  Kong,  which  is  supported  by  a  clearing  arrangement  provided  by  the 
People's Bank of China, has developed steadily since its launch in early 2004. It has now 
extended  from  personal  banking  to  bonds  issuance  by  Mainland  financial  institutions. 
Renminbi deposits in the Hong Kong banking system have also risen significantly over the 
last  few  years.  Further  expansion  of  renminbi  business  into  trade  settlement  and  related 
financial services would bring convenience for traders and enterprises on both sides. More 
importantly,  it  will  help  to  lay  the  ground  work  for  the  use  of  renminbi  for  trade  related 
activities through a formal and supervised channel.  
The demand for a wider use of renminbi outside the Mainland is likely to increase further as 
the Mainland economy grows. In addition, the recent global financial turmoil has highlighted 
the  need  for  a  more  diversified  international  monetary  system,  including  more  currency 
choices for international transactions. In time renminbi could be one of the obvious choices 
for  many  countries.  In  this  process,  using  the  well-established  institutional  framework  of 
renminbi  business  in  Hong  Kong  for  pilot  schemes  will  enable  better  monitoring  and 
assessment  of  the  flows,  and  mitigate  the  potential  risks  particularly  on  the  domestic 
monetary policy management. 
One  important  pre-requisite  for  designing  appropriate  policies  to  facilitate  the  Mainland's 
capital account opening is a good understanding of the economy and financial system. Here 
at the HKMA, we have closely monitored, as well as undertaken in-depth analytical work on 
the  Mainland  economic,  monetary  and  financial  developments.  Our  Half-Yearly  Financial 
Stability Report has a section devoted to the Mainland economy, and research reports on the 
Mainland are published as working papers available on our website. We also started in 2006 
a  China  Economic  Issues  series  dedicated  to  detailed  analysis  of  economic  and  financial 
market  issues  in  the  Mainland.  This  conference  series  is  also  a  good  way  to  organise 
informed discussions on the Mainland's financial sector issues.  
The first part of the conference examines the experiences of Chile, India, Korea and Thailand 
in  their  capital  account  liberalisation,  with  the  view  of  drawing  useful  lessons  for  Mainland 
China.  The  second  part  focuses  on  the  Mainland,  assessing  the  effectiveness  of  current 
policies in dampening the impact of capital inflows on the domestic economy, their costs, as 
well  as  policy  options  of  outward  investment.  A  final  paper  will  gauge  the  current  level  of 
financial  integration  between  the  Mainland  and  Hong  Kong,  and  discuss  the  policy 
implications. I am pleased that this conference has brought together a group of experienced 
researchers and policymakers from a wide range of central banks, international organisations 
and research institutes. As earlier noted, the recent global financial turmoil will probably turn 
out to be the most critical time in recent economic history which will shape future economic 
and  policy  thinking.  I  hope  this  conference  can  provide  a  useful  platform  for  fruitful 
discussions on capital account liberalisation to enhance our understanding on the issue.  
I wish the conference great success. 
BIS Review 141/2008 
 3
