Barbro Wickman-Parak: Is there a typical business cycle? 
Speech  by  Ms  Barbro  Wickman-Parak,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Sveriges  Riksbank,  at 
Nordea, Stockholm, 7 October 2008. 
 The  expression  “economic  downturn”  is  often  used  in  the  media  and  general  debate,  but 
there appears to be some confusion as to what the term actually means. Sometimes the term 
is  used  to  describe  generally  less  prosperous  times,  on  other  occasions  it  is  avoided  and 
people talk instead of a recession. 
The  academic  definition  focuses  instead  on  deviations  from  a  long-term  trend.1  One 
imagines that GDP has a natural long-term equilibrium level that shows a growth trend over 
time and in periods when the economy is below the trend we have a recession and in periods 
above  the  trend  we  have  a  boom.  This  sounds  simple,  but  in  practice  many  questions 
remain. Many of the shocks that affect the economy can for instance be lasting and in this 
case they affect the long-term equilibrium level. As the long-term equilibrium level is not an 
observable  variable,  it  is  difficult  to  know  in  practice  what  point  in  the  economic  cycle  the 
economy is currently at. 
There  are  patterns  that  often  recur  in  economic  cycles  and  which  are  therefore  studied 
closely by forecasters. For instance, it is normal to have an over-investment in housing and 
for commodity prices to rise during an economic boom, just as in the current cycle. However, 
on each occasion there are also factors that dominate over the common pattern, for instance 
the  current  mortgage  crisis  in  the  United  States  and  the  ensuing  contagion  effects  on  the 
financial markets as a whole. It is partly because of this that the forecasts become uncertain. 
In addition, it is particularly difficult to predict the turning points in the cycle.  
As monetary policy acts with a time lag, it must nevertheless be based on forecasts of how 
we believe that growth and inflation will develop. As time passes, new information is received 
which  may  cause  us  to  reconsider  our  earlier  analyses.  This  means  that  the  forecasts  we 
make regarding, for instance, the repo rate are not promises, but a forecast that is just as 
uncertain as the other parts of the forecast. 
I shall try to put some perspective onto the current situation by first going over what we know 
about Swedish cyclical patterns and then discussing the prominent features of this particular 
recession.  
Do we know what governs economic cycles? 
At  the  beginning  of  the  20th  century  economic  cycles  were  regarded  as  natural  and 
unavoidable, often in the light of the variations in agricultural production. Then came Keynes 
in  the  1930s  with  his  classical  analysis2  where  fluctuations  in  economic  activity  were 
regarded  as  a  result  of  fluctuations  in  demand.  According  to  Keynesianism,  recessions 
should be combated by an active policy.  
At  the  same  time  as  Keynes’  analysis  began  to  be  questioned  on  the  basis  of  economic 
theory3, the world suffered deep recessions in the wake of the oil price shocks of the 1970s, 
                                                 
1   The NBER has a “Business cycle dating committee” which has a procedure for dating peaks and troughs in 
economic cycles in the United States. 
2   J. M. Keynes., “The General Theory of employment, Interest, and Money”. London: Macmillan. 1936. 
3   Lucas'  criticism,  for  instance,  R.  E.  Lucas  "Econometric  policy  evaluation;  a  critique.”  Carnegie-Rochester 
Conference Series on Public Policy 1976. 1: 19-46. 
BIS Review 121/2008 
 1
which led to a more pessimistic view of the ability of economic policy. People realised that 
fiscal  policy  measures often  came too  late  and  that  attempts  at  an  active  economic  policy 
often  merely  resulted  in  high  inflation.  An  alternative  interpretation  began  to  emerge; 
fluctuations  in  economic  activity  were  regarded  as  the  result  of  changes  in  production 
conditions. 
The  1980s  saw  the  advent  of  RBC-models4,  which  stands  for  Real  Business  Cycle.  The 
characteristic of these was that they considered fluctuations in the production of goods and 
services to be natural consequences of externally caused changes in production conditions. 
This could be changes in technology; IT is one example. It could also be sharp swings in the 
oil price, terrorist attacks or war, but also more natural examples such as the weather. They 
assumed that the markets themselves were best suited to adapt to the changed conditions. 
There was thus no scope for stabilising monetary and fiscal policies. 
Since then the pendulum has swung back a little with the neo-Keynesianism, which has re-
introduced  some  of  the  elements  of  the  classical  Keynesian  analysis.  Due  to  different 
reasons it can take time before the economy returns to its long run equilibrium after a shock. 
Monopolistic  competition  and  sticky  wages  are  a 
few  examples.  The  participants’ 
expectations can play a major role according to these theories. Monetary and fiscal policy 
can therefore be used to stabilise the economy.  
Macroeconomic  analysis  is  often  carried  out  with  the  aid  of  general  equilibrium  models 
(DSGE models, Dynamic Stochastic General Equilibrium).5 The Riksbank, like a number of 
other central banks, uses one of these models for forecasts and simulations. The Riksbank’s 
model is called Ramses (Riksbank’s aggregate  macromodel for studies of the economy in 
Sweden).  In  Ramses,  goods  and  labour  markets  are  assumed  to  be  in  monopolistic 
competition and wages and prices are sticky. 
However, the Ramses model analysis is only part of the forecasting process, which is also 
based on other statistical analyses and of course assessments. In the short term, that is to 
say the current quarter and one quarter ahead – what is usually called “now-casting” – we 
use different statistical models and indicators to make an assessment of the current situation. 
This analysis strives for the best possible accuracy in the forecasts and is often only vaguely 
anchored in economic theory. However, this type of forecast has a relatively good accuracy 
in the short term (up to one year ahead).6
The forecast produced by the now-casting is then entered into the large DSGE model and 
forms a basis for the model’s longer-term forecasts. The international forecast for all quarters 
is then also made outside of Ramses and entered as input into the model. As all models are 
simplifications  of  reality,  however,  the  final  analysis  must  always  contain  elements  of 
assessment that correct the results from the model. In addition, some markets, for instance, 
the financial markets, are not entirely reflected in these models.7 The latter play an important 
role in the current stage, which is affected substantially by the financial turbulence. 
General  equilibrium  models  are  an  important  analysis  tool  as  they  provide  a  consistent 
picture of the economy. They can therefore also be used for policy analysis and to analyse 
alternative scenarios. 
                                                 
4   F. E. Kydland and E. C. Prescott “Time to build and aggregate fluctuations”, Econometrica 50, 1982, 1345-
1370. 
5   O. J. Blanchard, “The state of macro”, NBER working paper series, August 2008. 
6   See M. K. Andersson and M. Löf. Sveriges Riksbank Economic Review 2007:1. 
7   C. E. Tovar. “DSGE models and central banks”. BIS Working Papers No 258. 2008. 
2 
 BIS Review 121/2008
Some facts about economic cycles 
According to economic theory, fluctuations in growth thus arise as a result of various external 
shocks  affecting  the  economy.  The  size  of  the  fluctuations  is  in  turn  affected  by  the 
functioning  of  the  economy.  I  now  intend  to  describe  briefly  what  we  know  about  how 
economic cycles manifest themselves and what consequences they have. 
International developments 
1.  
International studies show that fluctuations in economic activity have become somewhat less 
dramatic over the past 20 years, a phenomenon usually known as ”the Great Moderation”.8 
In  Sweden  the  situation  is  slightly  different  because  of  the  unusually  profound  crisis  we 
suffered  in  the  early  1990s.  However,  since  then  the  fluctuations  appear  to  have  also 
declined  here,  although  the  period  of  time  has  been  too  short  to  draw  any  definite 
conclusions. If one studies the volatility in world growth since 1970 and onwards, one can 
see that it has declined since the mid-1980s. 
There  are  many  possible  reasons  as  to  why  economies  have  become  more  stable.  One 
reason that is usually put forward is that the world economy has quite simply suffered smaller 
shocks in recent decades. Often the significance of modern economies having larger service 
sectors  is  put  forward  as  a  reason,  because  these  are  not  as  affected  by  international 
developments as the industrial sector. Improved stocks management can also have had a 
positive  effect.  Deregulated  financial  markets  have  made  it  easier  to  obtain  credit  and 
thereby smooth consumption over time. Finally, it is often pointed out that the changeover in 
fiscal  and  monetary  policy,  with  budget  targets  and  greater  focus  on  price  stability,  is  a 
contributory factor. To summarise, probably all of these factors have had some significance 
in  stabilising  the  world  economy.  However,  one  must  remember  that  20  years  is  a  short 
period when analysing economic cycles. Perhaps the current downturn will give us reason to 
reconsider the conclusion that the fluctuations have declined? 
In this context one usually mentions the importance of the extended period of high growth in 
some emerging economies. First and foremost China, but also India, has had an increasing 
significance  for  the  world  economy  over  the  past  decade.  If  domestic  demand  can  be 
sustained in these countries, despite declining economic activity in the United States, Japan 
and  Europe,  it  may  lessen  the  downturn  for  the  world  as  a  whole.  However,  their  growth 
opportunities should slow down as the economies enter a more mature phase. In the long 
term, they cannot support world growth. 
Sweden 
2.  
As  each  economic  cycle  is  to  some  extent  unique,  one  can  never  say  exactly  what  will 
happen in any phase of a cycle. There is quite simply no such thing as a typical economic 
cycle. But it may nevertheless be interesting to look at how different variables can vary in the 
economic cycle in Sweden. As Sweden is a small, open economy with a large export sector, 
we  are  very  much  affected  by  what  happens  abroad.  It  is  therefore  often  claimed  that 
Swedish  economic  cycles  are  "imported”.  However,  looking  at  studies  of  Swedish  data 
covering the period from the end of the 19th century up to the mid-1990s, it is difficult to find 
evidence of this.9  
                                                 
8   See, for instance, Chapter 5 “The changing dynamic of the global business cycle”, in World Economic Outlook 
2007,  IMF.  See  also  T.  Dalsgaard,  J.  Elmeskov  and  C-Y.  Park.  ”Ongoing  changes  in  the  business  cycle, 
evidence and causes.” OECD Working Paper ECO/WKP(2002)1. 
9   Jesper Lindé, ”Swedish postwar business cycles: Generated at home? Scandinavian Journal of Economics, 
2004:4, 623-45. and V. Bergström  and  A. Vredin,  ”Measuring and Interpreting Business cycles”, Clarendon 
Press Oxford, 1994. 
BIS Review 121/2008 
 3
If one looks at the period from 1980 to 2008, however, the turning points in the economic 
cycle  appear  to  systematically  occur  a  few  quarters  earlier  in  the  United  States  than  in 
Sweden.10  This  could  imply  that  international  developments  have  also  gained  increased 
significance in recent years as capital markets have been deregulated and the exchange rate 
has been allowed to float. One can also see that exports often show a turnaround a quarter 
or  so  before  GDP.  However,  there  have  been  few  cycles  since  1980  and  it  is  therefore 
difficult to reach any conclusions.  
Let me illustrate how the components of GDP in Sweden move in the example of a “normal” 
economic downturn. Export growth often turns around a few quarters before the turnaround 
for GDP. To begin with, companies adapt to the change in demand by adjusting production 
using their existing resources. For instance, they cut down on overtime and stand-ins rather 
than making staff redundant. At the same time, they invest less. Productivity falls and unit 
labour costs rise, as wages are sticky in the short term. In the end companies have to adjust 
their  costs  to  the  lower  demand  and  after  a  few  quarters  employment  begins  to  fall.  Now 
consumption is also beginning to be affected; the leaner times are making people hold more 
firmly onto their money.  
When unemployment rises, wage demands are subdued, which slows down the increase in 
unit labour costs. This in turn leads to companies’ profit margins gradually increasing. When 
the  effects  of  the  negative  shock  that  caused  the  downturn  fade  away,  growth  gradually 
returns  to  the  normal  trend  level.  Companies  respond  to  the  rising  demand  by  increasing 
production and investment, which in turn leads to unemployment falling and to consumption 
accelerating again.  
However, I would like to repeat that an economic cycle does not always follow this average 
example. It is often the case that one of the components does not show its usual pattern and 
sometimes the economy “settles” for an unusually long time in one phase of the cycle. A few 
years ago, for instance, there was much talk of “jobless growth” when employment failed to 
accelerate  despite  a  high  growth  rate.  In  addition,  the  length  of  an  economic  cycle  varies 
considerably. It can be anything from three to ten years11, and the turning points therefore 
become  difficult  to  predict.  Economic  downturns,  that  is,  the  period  when  the  economy 
moves from a peak to a trough, are usually shorter. The normal condition for the economy is 
thus a growth phase.12
The current economic cycle 
After  this  review  of  common  cyclical  patterns  I  shall  take  up  some  specific  features  that 
characterise the current downturn. Following the recent turbulence in the financial markets it 
can  easily  be  forgotten  that  there  are  also  elements  of  a  “normal”  slowdown  in  economic 
activity on this occasion, too. Even before the financial crisis took a serious hold in summer 
2007 it was possible to see in the Riksbank’s and other analysts’ forecasts that a slowdown 
in  economic  activity  was  expected  both  in  Sweden  and  abroad.  Since  then  the  world 
economy  has  been  exposed  to  major  shocks  that  have  led  the  Riksbank,  like  other 
forecasters, to revise down the growth forecasts for the coming years. 
The  financial  crisis  has  proved  to  be  more  profound,  more  prolonged  and  to  have  more 
ramifications than one might initially have expected. In the most recent phase of the crisis the 
                                                 
10   The  Riksbank’s  own  calculations.  See  also  the  box  “Future  labour  market  developments  –  experiences  in 
other countries and the significance of growth composition” in Inflation Report 2005:2. 
11   The longest expansion phase the NBER has noted for the United States was 10 years, between March 1991 
and March 2001. 
12   NBER. 
4 
 BIS Review 121/2008
unease  has  also  more  tangibly  spread  to  European  banks  and  government  agencies  in 
several countries have felt obliged to intervene. 
We have tried to take into account the effects of the financial crisis in our forecasts. But it is 
of course difficult to know to what extent we could have captured all the effects the crisis may 
have had so far on the real economy. Moreover, we cannot know how the financial crisis will 
develop in future and how long it will last. 
Falling house prices have affected not just the United States, but many other countries. We 
have not been affected by this, although there appears to be a cooling in the housing market 
here, too. 
Another shock that has occurred during this downturn is that energy and commodity prices 
have risen substantially. Last summer the oil price reached new top levels and inflation rose 
around the world. However, since then prices have fallen. Seen in a longer-term perspective, 
rising commodity prices are not an uncommon feature prior to a turnaround in the economic 
cycle. This was the case, for instance, in the 1970s. As a consequence of the rising inflation, 
central banks around the world have been faced with a difficult situation, where the risk of 
contagion  effects  on  other  prices  and  wages  must  be  assessed  in  an  uncertain  economic 
situation with receding growth. 
Another common cyclical pattern that is now repeating itself is that labour productivity is low, 
which  is  significant  for  cost  pressures.  Productivity  growth  usually  slows  down  when 
economic  activity  slows  down,  but  in  recent  years  productivity  growth  has  been  unusually 
low. It is also unusual that productivity growth falls as long as eight quarters in a row, as it 
has now. 
It is difficult to find a simple explanation for the low productivity growth in recent years. The 
National Institute of Economic Research has studied the composition effects, to put it simply, 
if the composition of industries with different rates of productivity has changed, and it finds no 
great effect on productivity.13 Another possible explanation could be that the recent increase 
in employment has meant that new groups with a lower productivity than others have entered 
the labour market. For instance, it can take time to train new employees. It may also be the 
case that companies have prepared for coming retirements by employing additional staff so 
there are currently two to a job in some cases. 
When productivity slows down, unit labour costs increase, and this puts further pressure on 
companies  to  raise  prices.  There  is  thus  risk  of  higher  inflation.  We  are  currently  facing  a 
situation where it is difficult to predict how companies will adjust to high unit labour costs. It is 
always  difficult  to  dismiss  staff,  but  indicators  such  as  job  vacancies,  redundancies, 
companies’ employment plans, etc. point towards an adjustment having begun. At the same 
time, a general decline in demand makes it difficult for companies to pass on cost increases 
to consumers.  
Commodity prices have also begun to fall, which reduces inflationary pressures not just in 
Sweden but also abroad. If this development does not reverse, it will make things easier for 
the central banks, as they will have greater scope to meet the slowdown in economic activity 
with monetary policy actions. 
I would like to take the opportunity here to talk about what we can and can't achieve with 
monetary policy. No one wants the economy to fall into a deep decline or a lengthy recession 
like the one we experienced in the 1990s. However, Sweden has dearly-bought experiences 
from  the  1970s  and  1980s  when  we  tried  to  use  fiscal  and  monetary  policy  to  stabilise 
fluctuations  in  economic  activity.  These  experiences  were  part  of  the  reason  why  the 
Riksbank became independent and the inflation target was established. 
                                                 
13   Special analysis "Negative Productivity Growth: Causes and Implications for the Period Ahead", The Swedish 
Economy, August 2008, National Institute of Economic Research. 
BIS Review 121/2008 
 5
The problem with rising commodity prices is a result of high demand that has arisen after the 
long growth period the world has just undergone. Perhaps this problem has been aggravated 
by the fact that many countries subsidise food and energy. Now we are in a situation where 
some  adjustment  is  probably  needed.  A  stimulative  monetary  policy  that  allows  inflation 
expectations to soar would possibly help the economy out of the current growth slump in the 
short term. However, this could be at the cost of an even larger adjustment further ahead to 
bring down inflation expectations again. This was what happened in Sweden in the 1970s 
and 1980s. 
Although  economic  downturns  cannot  be  avoided,  fiscal  and  monetary  policy  can  be 
conducted in such a way that the consequences for the economy are as small as possible. 
The impact of monetary policy is long-term and it is therefore important that confidence in the 
Riksbank's ability to stabilise inflation is maintained. This does not prevent us from taking into 
account developments in the real economy when we make our decisions on the repo rate. 
The  Riksbank  conducts  what  is  known  as  “flexible”  inflation  targeting.  Our  aim  is  that 
inflation,  when  it  deviates  from  the  target,  will  normally  return  to  the  target  level  within  a 
couple  of  years.  If  the  shocks  affecting  the  economy  entail  large  deviations,  it  may  take 
longer  before  the  target  is  achieved  in  order  to  attain  a  smoother  sequence  of  events  for 
production and employment. 
When we were to make a decision on the interest rate in September, we faced a situation 
where  the  declining  economic  activity  in  Sweden  and  abroad  needed  to  be  placed  in  a 
context  where  many  factors  could  conceivably  affect  inflation.  The  slowdown  in  economic 
activity  has  probably  had  a  subduing  effect  on  inflation.  However,  we  have  seen  that 
economic  cycles  are  not  sufficiently  regular  to  enable  us  to  forecast  how  profound  or 
prolonged a downturn will be. The relationship between economic activity and inflation is not 
particularly  stable  either.  In  the  difficult  deliberations  we  had  to  make  in  September  we 
Executive Board members reached different conclusions, with a majority voting to raise the 
repo  rate  while  the  minority  to  which  I  myself  belonged  voted  to  hold  the  interest  rate 
unchanged. On this occasion I shall not go into the various reasons for my stance in depth; 
they were clear from the separate minutes of the monetary policy meeting and I discussed 
them in a speech I held a couple of weeks ago.  
6 
 BIS Review 121/2008
