Mario Draghi: Financial stability and growth – the role of the euro 
Speech  by  Mr  Mario  Draghi,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Italy,  at  the  “Europe  and  the  Euro” 
Conference, NBER-Bocconi University, Milan, 17 October 2008. 
 To anticipate the thrust of my discussion today, I will concentrate essentially on two themes: 
First, the euro has proved to be an invaluable asset for our economies. The benefits 
1. 
of the European single currency are crystal clear at the current juncture, while we 
are  facing  the  most  dramatic  financial  crisis  of  the  last  several  decades.  The 
common  currency  has  been  an  essential  element  of  stability.  The  advantages, 
however,  are  not  confined  to  this  role:  the  euro  has  also  been  a  catalyst  for 
fundamental and positive changes in the real economy, some of which are already 
very visible.   
Second, much remains to be done to fully reap the benefits of the single currency. 
And in my opinion, what is left to be done goes very much in the direction of more – 
rather than less –  integration of our economies. There are measures that may be 
taken to achieve this goal in many areas and, foremost, in the field of regulation.  
2. 
The euro and the financial crisis  
1. 
To start with, it is quite easy for me to speak of the benefits of the euro in relation with the 
current crisis. There are several aspects I should like to consider.   
A first theme relates to the emergency responses to the crisis.  
As it has been emphasized, in academic publications and in the press, the current turmoil 
presents both similarities and differences with respect to earlier financial crises, in particular 
the crisis that led to the Great Depression in the 1930s. As in the past the crisis is marked by 
a  loss  of  confidence  by  investors  and  the  public  towards  key  financial  institutions  and 
markets.  Often  in  the  past,  the  response  of  policymakers  was  marked  by  uncoordinated 
actions,  and  in  some  case,  very  serious  mistakes,  in  the  provision  of  liquidity,  in  the 
management  of  exchange  rates  and  trade  policies,  in  the  insufficient  scale  of  the 
interventions needed to support banks. Exchange rate volatility and associated beggar-thy-
neighbor policies were an important step along the road leading to the Great Depression. 
Today the situation is clearly different, and we do have some tangible advantages in dealing 
with the crisis.  
First, the existence of a common currency in Europe ruled out the possibility of destabilizing 
movements  of  intra  euro  area  exchange  rates  in  response  to  the  financial  shocks,  which 
would have greatly complicated the response to the crisis. 
Second, the existence of EMU, by supplying a common currency, a common liquidity policy 
across Europe, a forum in which the issue of coordinating economic policies can be more 
effectively discussed and solved, is also crucial.  
In the immediate aftermath of the crisis, the ECB was quick and flexible to respond to the 
challenge  posed  by  the  drying-up  of  market  liquidity.  The  Eurosystem’s  operational 
framework  has  proved  adequate  to  allow  rapid  and  far-reaching  decisions  and  a  timely 
management of the initial stages of the crisis, and flexible enough to deal with the evolving 
situation, smoothly incorporating any required amendments. We have increased the amount 
of liquidity provided, lengthened the maturity of operations, set up a facility to offer liquidity in 
dollars in agreement with the Fed. In the last weeks, we stepped up our effort to normalize 
the dislocated money market, by deciding some further, and more profound, changes to the 
BIS Review 126/2008 
 1
operational system. We have narrowed the corridor of monetary policy, shifted to a fixed rate 
tender with full allotment and enlarged the collateral that can be used by participants.  
We  do  not  have  a  counterfactual,  but  I  would  argue  that  some  of  the  pre-EMU  national 
systems  would  have  been  put  to  a  hard  test  by  the  recent  events.  The  existence  of  a 
common  liquidity  policy  proved  effective  in  avoiding  that  uncoordinated  national  initiatives 
open the way to cross-border arbitrage and to undesired spillovers that could have further 
amplified the turbulence. 
More  generally,  in  the  presence  of  a  systemic  crisis  and  with  closely  integrated  financial 
markets,  the  appropriate  policy  response  needed  to  be  coordinated,  not  only  across 
European borders, but also beyond the euro area. The unprecedented policy move decided 
jointly by the main central banks of the world on 8 October is a case in point. Coordination on 
such a scale may have been very hard in the old days.  
Finally, the worsening of the turmoil since the beginning of September posed new challenges 
to policy makers of the euro area, calling for prompt action. At first, the severity of the crisis 
induced some national governments to take autonomous steps to restore confidence, but this 
proved insufficient, signaling very strongly the need for a coordinated action at the European 
level.  The  agreement  of  October  12  on  a  concerted  European  plan  of  action  setting  the 
guidelines  for  interventions  aimed  at  restoring  confidence  in  financial  markets  has  been  a 
fundamental step in the management of this crisis, not only at the European level, but also 
globally. Our ten year experience in sharing a single currency and monetary policy proved to 
be a solid foundation for a common and timely response to the emergency, providing strong 
support for a coordinated action of governments and central banks. 
A  second  theme  relates  to  how  we  should  act  to  limit  the  credit  crunch.  In  the  current 
situation  the  possibility  that  the  tightening  of  credit  conditions  and  the  cyclical  downturn 
reinforce each other in a vicious spiral represents the main risk for the global economy. In 
this respect, restoring the smooth functioning of the  interbank markets globally and within 
the euro area is a precondition to ensure the stability of credit flows to households and firms, 
thereby  minimizing  the  real  impact  of  the  financial  turmoil.  The  policies  adopted  so  far, 
including  the  changes  in  the  operational  framework  I  just  mentioned,  the  lowering  of 
monetary  policy  interest  rates,  the  efforts  of  governments  to  recapitalize  distressed 
institutions have been all essential to avoid a major financial disruption. However, while some 
progress is visible, their effect on interbank interest rates has so far been limited and slow to 
build  up.  Liquidity  and  counterparty  risks  continue  to  be  major  drivers  in  money  markets, 
which  remain  impaired  with  abnormally  high  spreads  between  secured  and  unsecured 
lending. 
In the weeks ahead, an additional support can come from the implementation at the national 
levels of the decisions agreed at the European level, including the recapitalization of banks 
and the possibility to make available, for an interim period and on appropriate commercial 
terms, governments’ guarantee, insurance, or other similar arrangements of new bank senior 
debt  issuance.  While  some  degree  of  flexibility  to  adapt  to  local  conditions  must  be 
preserved,  it  is  also  of    the  utmost  importance  that  the  actual  implementation  of  the  new 
measures proceeds in a coordinated manner, so as to avoid creating any segmentation in 
markets or uneven conditions for financial institutions across Europe. 
At the same time, we cannot rule out that further and even bolder steps may be needed in 
the  near  future  to  quickly  restore  confidence,  including  actions  to  strengthen  interbank 
markets. 
A final theme relates to the efforts to reshape the rules governing the global financial system, 
in a more structural and medium term perspective. In this field, it was immediately clear since 
the beginning of the crisis that the structural response had to be internationally coordinated. 
This  was  the  task  assigned  by  the  G7  to  the  Financial  Stability  Forum  (FSF).  The  line 
followed  by  the  FSF  is  that  financial  intermediaries  in  the  future  will  need  to  have  more 
capital and less debt, be more transparent and be subject to more effective rules. Several 
2 
 BIS Review 126/2008
important  actions  are  being  undertaken  at  the  international  and  national  level  –  largely 
following the FSF’s proposals –  to reinforce capital requirements and the management of 
credit  and  liquidity  risk,  to  improve  disclosure  policies,  valuation  practices,  accounting 
standards and the role of rating agencies, and others. Decisive and tangible progress in this 
area is an essential part of the cure to come out of the emergency. In Europe, I believe we 
must in particular step up our efforts to quickly overcome existing differences in supervisory 
practices at the national level, work towards a more harmonized set of rules, make further 
progress  in  the  cooperation  and  exchange  of  information  among  authorities.  Again,  I’m 
confident  that  the  EMU  and  its  institutions  will  act  as  a  powerful  catalyst,  helping 
governments  and  regulators  to  redesign  the  rules  for  the  financial  sector,  both  at  the 
European and at the global level. 
2. 
The euro and the real economy 
Macroeconomic stability  
2.1. 
Besides helping in confronting the financial crisis, there is ample evidence that EMU has also 
favoured  greater  resilience  of  the  euro  area  economy  to  adverse  real  shocks.  One  crucial 
aspect in this respect is the high credibility of monetary policy that the ECB inherited from the 
best traditions of the constituent currencies.  
A clear cut example is provided by the experience with increases in the prices of energy and 
raw materials. Blanchard and Galì, among others, have shown that the adverse effects of oil 
price shocks on the economies have become significantly less severe than it used to be in 
the past. Recent studies at the Bank of Italy show that after the introduction of the euro the 
impact  of  oil  price  increases  on  inflation  in  Italy  may  have  been  reduced  by  ten  times 
compared to the seventies. While there have certainly been other structural changes at work 
(such  as  a  lower  intensity  of  oil  in  production  and  consumption  and  more  flexible  labour 
markets), there is little doubt that the higher credibility of central banks has played a crucial 
role. The case of Germany is illustrative in this respect: the effects of oil price increases on 
inflation  were  very  limited  already  30  years  ago,  thanks  to  the  very  high  credibility  the 
Bundesbank enjoyed at the time.  
International trade  
2.2. 
One  of  the  reasons  for  adopting  the  euro  was  to  facilitate  market  integration  and  the 
completion  of  the  single  market,  reducing  transaction  costs  connected  with  the  hedging  of 
exchange risks and the variety of currencies used for commercial invoices. The evidence is 
that expectations have been confirmed in full. 
Numerous  empirical  studies  concur  that  monetary  union  has  had  a  positive  effect  on  the 
volume  of  trade  within  the  euro  area,  although  they  disagree  as  to  the  extent,  which  is 
estimated  between  5  and  15  per  cent.  A  positive  effect  has  also  been  observed  on 
commercial flows outside the area; this supports the theory that the adoption of a common 
currency,  unlike  preferential 
liberalizations,  does  not  have  distortionary  effects  on 
international trade. 
The trend in productivity  
2.3. 
Is there a visible link between the adoption of the euro and productivity trends in the single 
currency area? This is a fundamental question on which no consensus has formed yet. From 
the  second  half  of  the  1990s,  total  factor  productivity  increased  much  faster  in  the  United 
States than in the euro area, where instead its growth slowed sharply. The gap widened with 
the start of monetary union and has begun to narrow only recently: during the period it has 
averaged about one percentage point a year. The gap reflects diverging trends in the leading 
BIS Review 126/2008 
 3
European  economies:  slower  growth  in  France  and  Germany  and  absolute  decline  in  Italy 
and Spain, although our estimates indicate it has stabilized in Italy in the last two years. 
The  poor  performance  of  total  factor  productivity  accounts  for  much  of  the  growth  gap  in 
labour productivity in the euro area as a whole. The adjustment of capital intensity has also 
slowed in the area as a result of heavier reliance on labour in the presence of institutional 
reforms making employment more flexible. 
To be sure, there are important issues concerning the reliability of statistical measurements. 
For example, some studies have shown that productivity growth in the United States might 
have been somewhat overestimated due inter alia to the incorrect measurement of gains in 
the  terms  of  trade  and  tariff  reductions.  In  Italy,  The  Bank  of  Italy  showed  that  the  rate  of 
increase  in  the  export  deflator  was  overestimated  in  the  official  statistics.  This  led  to  a 
revision of statistics resulting in an increase of more than 0.5 percentage points per year in 
productivity growth in manufacturing in the period 1996-2005.  
But if the correction for statistical error can make Europe’s productivity and growth gap vis-à-
vis the United States less alarming than it seems on the basis of the original data, they do 
not  annul  the  gaps.  The  fact  that  they  have  existed  for  a  decade  forces  us  to  seek  their 
causes in the structure of our economies. 
Answering  the  question  on  the  effects  of  the  euro  on  productivity  is  as  difficult  as  any 
counterfactual exercise. It requires  to estimate  what trend in productivity would have been 
without the single currency.  
However,  I  believe  an  answer  emerges  quite  clearly  from  this  conference,  at  least  in  two 
mutually consistent analyses. In a presentation tomorrow, Bugamelli, Schivardi and Zizza will 
explain  how  the  euro  has  fostered  the  restructuring  of  firms  and  productive  systems, 
especially  in  sectors  and  countries  that  had  relied  most  heavily  in  the  past  on  currency 
depreciation in order to recoup price competitiveness in the short term. And Alesina, Ardagna 
and Galasso show how the same discipline has pushed governments to carry out significant 
reforms in the markets for products and services. The findings point to a substantial positive 
contribution of the euro in terms of productivity. 
Another case in point is the labor market. Thanks to the reforms of the last ten years, it has 
been possible to overcome the old image of an immobile European labour market – reflected 
in high rates of unemployment and a low labour force participation rate – for which the term 
“Eurosclerosis”  was  coined.  There  is  empirical  evidence  of  a  clear  positive  association 
between adoption of the single currency and the increase in employment and decrease in 
equilibrium unemployment.  
Finally, Bank of Italy research shows that the reduction of entry barriers in the past decade, 
thanks to new, less anti-competitive rules, led to an increase in the share of total employment 
of  the  sectors  where  reforms  were  introduced.  Sharper  competition  has  increased 
incumbents’ productivity and decreased their profit margins, fostered the adoption of ICT and 
reduced price increases. 
Conclusions  
3. 
To  conclude,  I  believe  that  confronting  successfully  the  challenges  posed  by  the  current 
crisis  requires  that  we  continue  on  the  road  of  greater  integration  and  market  openness 
which has been spurred by the adoption of the euro. 
In difficult times our economic paradigms may change dramatically and the temptation to go 
in isolation to deal with the most pressing problems may be understandable but may prove to 
be disruptive. The benefits of having had the euro for the last 10 years speak by themselves. 
We want to come out of this crisis able to continue enjoying these benefits. 
4 
 BIS Review 126/2008
