Heng Swee Keat: The sale of structured products to retail investors   
Opening remarks by  Mr Heng Swee Keat, Managing Director of the Monetary  Authority of 
Singapore,  at  the  Monetary  Authority  of  Singapore’s  Press  Conference  on  the  Sale  of 
Structured Products to Retail Investors, Singapore, 17 October 2008. 
 Many individuals who purchased structured products linked to Lehman Brothers are worried 
about their investments. MAS has been actively working to ensure a fair resolution for these 
investors. We have also been communicating our actions to the public since the issue first 
came to light in the middle of September. Our first priority has always been to help affected 
investors. Let me touch on what we have done and how we have put in place a serious and 
impartial resolution process to deal with investors’ legitimate concerns. 
First, we are making sure that HSBC Institutional Trust Services (Singapore) Ltd, the trustee 
for the Lehman Minibond Programme, carefully considers all options and acts in the interests 
of investors. If a new swap counterparty is available, investors would have the opportunity to 
vote on this option. In order to assist investors make an informed decision, MAS will appoint 
an  independent  financial  adviser.  We  expect  the  trustee  to  know  whether  options  will  be 
available to noteholders by the end of next week. 
Second,  each  FI  now  has  an  independent  person  to  oversee  the  complaints  handling 
process  relating  to  the  sale  of  the  Lehman  Minibond  Programme,  DBS  High  Notes  5  and 
Merrill Lynch Jubilee Series 3 Linkearner Notes. These persons are Gerard Ee, Hwang Soo 
Jin and Law Song Keng. We recognise that the complaints handling process has not been 
easy,  particularly  for  customers  of  some  FIs.  But  as  circumstances  for  each  case  may  be 
different,  this  is  the  best  way  to  deal  with  all  the  complaints.  The  independent  parties  will 
ensure that customers get a fair hearing. We have set a very clear timeline for complaints to 
be resolved. All the FIs have also set up internal review panels which are chaired by their 
CEOs. The panel is expected to conduct a thorough review of each complaint and decide on 
a  course  of  action  within  four  weeks.  The  decision  will  then  be  communicated  to  the 
customer. 
Third,  for  affected  investors  who  are  not  satisfied  with  the  FIs  decision  on  the  matter,  we 
have  established  a  fast-track  process  to  refer  the  case  to  the  Financial  Industry  Disputes 
Resolution Centre (FIDReC). The FIDReC mediation process is free for consumers. If a case 
goes to arbitration, it will cost the consumer $50. FIDReC will consider all relevant evidence 
whether written or oral. Statements can be prepared by consumers themselves and need not 
be  made  under  oath.  All  FIDReC’s  adjudicators  are  well  respected  professionals.  The 
chairman  of  FIDReC  is  Mr  Goh  Joon  Seng,  a  retired  High  Court  judge.  As  over  80%  of 
customers  invested  S$50,000  and  below,  FIDReC  is  the  right  avenue  for  them  to  pursue 
their claims. FIDReC normally deals with claims not exceeding S$50,000. In the case of the 
structured products, however, the FIs have agreed for FIDReC to hear deserving cases. 
We have also said that if there are breaches of our regulation, we will take action against the 
financial  institution  or  individuals  involved.  MAS  has  required  the  independent  parties  to 
highlight  these  breaches  and  potential  cases  of  mis-selling  to  MAS.  They  have  already 
brought a number of possible cases to our attention and we are following up on them. 
Normally, as you know, MAS does not comment on our dealings with individual institutions. 
However  given  public  interest  in  this  matter,  MAS  confirms  that  we  have  been  conducting 
formal inquiries into allegations of breaches of the law, inadequate internal controls by the 
FIs or poor sales practices by their representatives. We will make an announcement on any 
actions we are taking when our inquiries are completed. 
MAS  urges  any  affected  investor  who  has  a  genuine  claim  that  you  were  mis-sold  the 
product to make sure you lodge your complaint with your FIs. MAS requires FIs to have a 
BIS Review 126/2008 
 1
rigorous process to look into every complaint and resolve them fairly, giving due weight to the 
views of the independent parties. 
Clearly, there is a range of investors who bought these products. Some are well-educated 
professionals. Others are sophisticated investors. The group we are most concerned with are 
the vulnerable customers. We are focussing on cases of mis-selling to vulnerable customers 
and  on  cases  where  the  products  were  clearly  inappropriate  for  them  given  their 
circumstances.  We  have  required  the  FIs  to  give  priority  to  these  cases.  They  should  not 
take an overly legalistic approach to mis-selling in dealing with these cases. 
For cases where there are sufficient indications that the product was mis-sold or that it was 
clearly  inappropriate  given  the  investor’s  profile  and  circumstances,  the  FI  should  take 
responsibility.  Several  FIs  have  assured  MAS  that  they  will  take  full  responsibility  in  such 
cases. We welcome this commitment and expect all FIs that have sold these products to take 
the same approach. They must do the right thing and ensure a quick and fair resolution for 
these customers. We have communicated this to their CEOs. 
Thank you, I will now take your questions. 
2 
 BIS Review 126/2008
