José Manuel González-Páramo: Liquidity, financial markets and the 
economy – the role of central banks 
Speech  by  Mr  José  Manuel  González-Páramo,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the 
European  Central  Bank,  at  the  Fundación  Caixa  Galicia,  Santiago  de  Compostela,  16 
October 2008. 
 1.  
Introduction 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is a great pleasure for me to be here in Santiago de Compostela and I would like to thank 
the organisers – Cátedra Fundación Caixa Galicia, Universidad de Santiago de Compostela, 
and,  in  particular,  Jorge  Martínez-Vázquez  and  Santiago  Lago  Peñas  –  for  giving  me  the 
opportunity to participate in this Conference and share with you some considerations about 
the  recent  developments  in  international  financial  markets  and  the  responses  by  central 
banks, particularly by the ECB.  
The  degree  of  integration  of  international  financial  markets  has  significantly  accelerated  in 
recent  decades,  particularly  since  the  second  half  of  the  1990s.  While  some  researchers 
often point out that the current level of international financial integration is not unprecedented 
by  historical  standards,  there  is  no  doubt  that  we  live  in  a  world  in  which  advances  in 
financial and communications technology combined with regulatory and institutional changes 
have led to financial markets and institutions becoming more interrelated across borders and 
time-zones than ever before.1  
Growing financial integration across borders is a potential source of benefits, notably due to 
enhanced  opportunities  for  international  risk  sharing.  Indeed,  financial  globalisation  may 
provide  countries  with  instruments  to  hedge  against  idiosyncratic  shocks  in  order  to  better 
smooth consumption smoothing, thereby yielding significant welfare gains. In addition, larger 
integration into the international financial system may contribute to the efficient functioning of 
the  entire  economy  by  providing  additional  financing  at  a  reasonable  cost  to  domestic 
agents,  by  facilitating  the  transfer  of  technology  from  abroad  and  by  stimulating  the 
performance of the domestic financial sector.  
However, financial globalisation may also entail some risks. Increased international financial 
integration is likely to lead to a larger sensitivity to external spillovers. In addition, financial 
globalisation is likely to induce stronger and faster transmission of shocks across countries. 
This  poses  some  challenges  for  policymakers  that  require:  (1)  on  the  one  hand,  a  closer 
monitoring of global financial and real developments, and (2) on the other hand, the need for 
national  authorities  to  coordinate  their  responses  to  shocks  with  their  key  partners  in  the 
international economy.  
The financial turmoil 
2.  
The  episode  of  financial  market  turmoil  that  we  have  experienced  since  August  2007 
provides a dramatic illustration of how – in a globalised economy – an idiosyncratic shock 
can be propagated more rapidly and through a variety of new channels to seemingly distant 
countries and markets. Indeed, the turmoil originated in a relatively small segment of the US 
                                                 
1   For instance, Stanley Fischer notes that the current level of openness of international capital markets is still 
lower  than  that  prevailing  before  World  War  I.  See  BIS  (2006),  “Financial  globalisation”,  BIS  Paper  N.  32, 
December. 
BIS Review 125/2008 
 1
economy – the sub-prime segment of the mortgage market – that has no obvious relationship 
with the Eurosystem’s sphere of interest. Yet, its quick propagation caused an increase in 
volatility and a decline in liquidity in a variety of markets all around the world, including the 
euro area market for inter-bank unsecured loans, which represents a key component of the 
money market and the starting point of the area-wide monetary transmission mechanism. 
The decrease in liquidity has been most obvious for the markets directly related to the core of 
the  current  turmoil,  namely  the  market  for  sub-prime  mortgage-backed  securities  (MBSs). 
However, since the start of the turmoil problems of illiquidity have spread further, affecting 
other asset-backed securities (ABSs), asset-backed commercial paper (ABCP), and basically 
all structured credit instruments. Also the liquidity in the secured non-government repurchase 
agreement  (repo)  markets  has  been  heavily  affected,  as  many  banks  no  longer  want  to 
accept  the  types  of  securities  mentioned  above  (MBSs,  ABSs  at  large,  and  CDOs)  as 
underlying collateral in repo transactions. Another market segment that has seen a partial (at 
times, even severe) deterioration of liquidity conditions is the foreign exchange swap market, 
which  is  very  important  for  banks  managing  liquidity  in  different  currencies.  Occasionally, 
poor  liquidity  conditions  have  been  reported  even  in  markets  for  securities  historically 
regarded as very liquid and safe, such as the market for bank covered bonds or government 
bonds of some developed economies.  
In recent months – in particular following the takeover of Bear Stearns and the collapse of 
Lehman  Brothers  –,  the  financial  market  turmoil  has  intensified  again  and  entered  a  more 
damaging and disruptive phase in which large financial institutions have failed or have had to 
be rescued by either their private counterparties or public authorities, while the viability of the 
investment banking industry as a whole and of “the originate to distribute business” business 
model  has  been  put  into  question.  At  the  same  time,  a  number  of  international  financial 
markets  –  particularly  the  markets  for  equities  and  commodities  –  have  experienced  a 
significant  increase  in  volatility.  More  notably,  significant  tensions  have  emerged  again  in 
global  money  markets,  where  market  liquidity  has  come  under  severe  strain  and  term 
interest rates have continued to rise.  
International transmission of liquidity shocks and liquidity spirals 
3.  
Let me now refer to a couple of elements which have played a central role during the turmoil: 
(1) the international transmission of liquidity tensions, and (2) the interaction between market 
liquidity and funding liquidity.  
Indeed, the events of the past year have illustrated vividly the strength, the complexity and 
the  rapidity  of  the  transmission  of  liquidity  shocks  across  countries.  At  the  root  of  the 
international  transmission  mechanism  is  the  fact  that  interbank  markets  are  linked  across 
countries  by  the  funding  needs  of  banks  involved  in  cross-border  business  on  a  large 
geographical  scale  and  holding  assets  and  liabilities  denominated  in  various  currencies. 
Changes in liquidity conditions in the interbank markets are therefore correlated at the global 
level,  and  are  amplified  by  the  fact  that  many  of  the  key  players  are  subject  to  common 
shocks. 
Another  dimension  of  the  ongoing  turmoil  is  the  enhanced  interaction  between  market 
liquidity  and  funding  liquidity.  Under  normal  market  conditions,  market  illiquidity  is  typically 
short-lived, particularly since it creates profit opportunities for traders who, by providing extra 
funding liquidity, support the price discovery process and restore the smooth functioning of 
the  market.  In  contrast,  at  times  of  severe  turbulence  the  disruption  of  the  mechanisms 
channelling liquidity – be it through asset prices or the balance sheet of financial institutions – 
may also deeply and protractedly perturb the functioning of markets, ultimately creating risks 
for systemic imbalances.  
The  current  episode  is  an  example  of  this.  Even  in  the  interbank  markets  –  traditionally 
considered  as  the  deepest  and  most  liquid  of  all  markets  –  activity  has  been  protractedly 
2 
 BIS Review 125/2008
“frozen”.  This  has  happened  primarily  due  to  uncertainties  as  to  the  size  and  locations  of 
losses created by the opaque transfer of credit risk brought about by complex securitisation 
mechanisms.  Such  uncertainty  has  heightened  counterparty  credit 
risk  concerns, 
discouraging  banks  from  lending  to  each  other.  Moreover,  it  has  brought  to  the  fore  the 
increased interaction between market liquidity and funding liquidity of individual institutions. 
Indeed, the trend among large global banks has been towards greater reliance on wholesale 
market sources of funding as opposed to retail deposits. This has made access to funding 
liquidity more dependent on market conditions.  
In addition, the range of systemically relevant institutions has become broader. Indeed, non-
deposit  taking  investment  banks  and  primary  dealers  play  a  systemic  role  in  their  crucial 
broker-dealer  function.  They  perform  a  key  role  in  maintaining  market  liquidity  in  a  broad 
range  of  unsecured  and  secured  markets.  If  they  face  funding  liquidity  constraints,  market 
liquidity will be widely affected, with potential negative repercussions for the banking sector 
as a whole in addition to the risks to the individual institutions themselves.  
More generally, the experience of some financial institutions in recent months shows that a 
protracted  adverse  liquidity  spiral  may  weaken  the  balance  sheets  of  institutions  and  in 
extreme  cases  jeopardise  their  solvency.  This  environment  poses  challenges  for  central 
banks, as addressing funding liquidity shortages may require supporting market liquidity, also 
with  a  view  to  preventing  insolvencies.  Of  course,  this  does  not  mean  that  central  banks 
should tackle individual counterparty solvency concerns. This is a clearly a task which falls 
outside  the  reach  and  responsibilities  of  central  banks,  and  that  governments  are  better 
positioned to fulfil.  
The point is rather than in the current “new world” in which market and funding liquidity can 
be  highly  interdependent,  liquidity  interventions  aiming  to  ease  the  impaired  functioning  of 
the money market can also alleviate funding liquidity concerns and contribute to prevent that, 
in extreme cases, protracted illiquidity develops into lack of solvency. Along these lines, let 
me explain how central banks have responded to the challenges arising from market turmoil 
using a combination of operational measures and increased international co-operation.2  
4.  
Policy responses 
Central banks 
4.1  
Clearly,  the  responses  have  varied  across  central  banks,  but  in  general  terms,  they  have 
tried to address the liquidity squeeze in similar ways and have concentrated on the following 
fronts: 
First, central banks have acted to keep short-term money market rates in line with their policy 
rates (or targets) through more active reserve  management, thereby  flexibly responding to 
shifts in the demand for reserves.  
Second, central banks have sought to ease pressures in broader funding markets through a 
combination of measures, such as an increased supply of longer-term funds, the expansion 
of collateral accepted in lending operations, and the widening of the range of counterparties 
that  may  have  access  to  collateralised  lending.  In  some  cases,  central  banks  have  also 
extended lending to non-depository banks and to financial institutions other than banks.  
Third, some central banks have also established securities lending facilities to improve the 
functioning of interbank repo markets. 
                                                 
2   See “Central bank operations in response to the financial turbulences”, CGFS Papers, No 31, July 2008. 
BIS Review 125/2008 
 3
Fourth,  central  banks  have  increased  their  co-operative  efforts  both  through  enhanced 
communication and collective market monitoring, and through co-ordinated actions to provide 
both overnight and longer-term funds.  
Fifth, some central banks also calibrated their monetary policy stance to take into account 
any  impact  that  the  unfolding  credit  market  turbulences  might  have  on  inflation  and  real 
activity.  
Finally,  in  a  fortunately  limited  number  of  episodes,  central  banks  have  assisted  their 
domestic  governments  in  providing  emergency  liquidity  assistance  to  institutions  under 
stress. 
4.1.1.  Responses of the Eurosystem 
Let  me  now  briefly  describe  how  the  Eurosystem  has  responded  through  operational 
measures to changes in banks’ liquidity demand.  
Over the last fifteen months, the following three key features of the operational framework 
have proven useful in allowing the Eurosystem to address funding constraints indirectly also 
in term money and asset markets:  
1. 
access of a broad range of counterparties to central bank liquidity has facilitated the 
direct provision of liquidity to a large number of banks in need of it, at a time when 
the money market was working imperfectly; 
acceptance  of  a  broad  range  of  collateral  in  all  classes  of  lending  operations  has 
facilitated the raising of liquidity via the Eurosystem for banks with reduced access 
to the interbank market, at the same time economising through their operations with 
the  Eurosystem  on  those  few  types  of  assets  that  have  continued  to  be  tradable 
throughout  the  turbulence,  such  as  government  bonds.  In  this  respect,  the 
framework may have also supported the continued functioning of capital markets;  
the  relatively  large  scale  of  the  open  market  operations  (around  one  third  of  total 
assets  in  the  Eurosystem  balance  sheet  –  or  €450  billion)  has  allowed  the 
Eurosystem  to  provide  longer  term  refinancing  to  banks  at  a  large  scale,  thereby 
temporarily taking over a significantly increased intermediation role, and at the same 
time  to  continue  to  adequately  steer  liquidity  in  the  course  of  the  maintenance 
period, in line with the aim to keep short term rates close to the policy rate.  
2. 
3. 
Indeed, since the early phase of the ongoing turbulences in August 2007, the Eurosystem 
has resorted to a more pro-active liquidity management in order to maintain a proper control 
of short-term interest rates. In particular, we have adjusted the distribution of euro liquidity 
supplied  over  the  course  of  the  maintenance  period,  in  contrast  to  normal  times,  by 
frontloading the supply of liquidity at the beginning of the period and reducing it later in the 
maintenance period. Furthermore, we have significantly increased the amount of refinancing 
provided via longer-term refinancing operations with a view to smoothening conditions in the 
term money market. In fact, the outstanding amount of refinancing provided via longer-term 
refinancing operations has increased by around €270 billion since 2007. In order to keep the 
total amount of outstanding refinancing unchanged, the net amount of liquidity provided via 
shorter term refinancing operations has been reduced accordingly. 
Following the rescue of Bear Stearns last March the financial market turmoil has entered a 
new, more intense phase that has further deteriorated after the collapse of Lehman Brothers 
last month. In response to the renewed tensions, the Eurosystem has stepped up its efforts 
to support the appropriate functioning of the euro money markets and to alleviate both the 
euro and the USD funding needs of euro area banks by:  
1. 
Further enhancing its frontloading euro liquidity policy. For instance, last month the 
ECB  enlarged  the  provision  of  liquidity  at  its  regular  weekly  main  refinancing 
operations, well above the amount normally envisaged by the frontloading approach, 
4 
 BIS Review 125/2008
with the aim of further strengthening its liquidity intermediation at a time of significant 
rigidity in the euro money market. The ECB then reabsorbed the resulting excess of 
liquidity on a daily basis through overnight fine-tuning operations, and continued to 
rebalance  the  liquidity  conditions  towards  the  end  of  the  reserve  maintenance 
period. 
Significantly  increasing  the  average  duration  of  its  refinancing  operations,  notably 
with the introduction of six-month maturity operations, the expansion of those with 
three-month  maturity  and  the  announcement  of  a  series  of  special  six-week 
refinancing operations in September 2008 that will be continued until at least beyond 
the end of the year.  
Also by expanding coordinated provision of USD liquidity within the context of the 
Term Auction Facility, as will be discussed in the next sub-section. 
2. 
3. 
Besides,  in  response  to  the  recent  intensification  of  the  financial  market  turmoil,  the 
Eurosystem  took  on  8  October  the  exceptional  decision  to  temporarily  change  the  tender 
procedure in our weekly main refinancing operations to fixed rate tender with full allotment 
and  to  reduce  the  corridor  of  standing  facilities  from  200  basis  points  to  100  basis  points 
around the interest rate on the main refinancing operation. By providing uncapped access to 
euro liquidity (of course, against adequate collateral), the new format of the main refinancing 
operations  will  provide  an  important  contribution  to  easing  liquidity  tensions  in  the  euro 
money markets.  
In addition, in another crucial step, on 8 October the Eurosystem adjusted its monetary policy 
stance  to  address  the  changing  balance  of  risks  to  the  outlook  for  medium-term  price 
stability.  
Yesterday, the Eurosystem announced a new set of extraordinary measures to temporarily 
expand the list of assets accepted as collateral in the Eurosystem lending operations and to 
enhance  provision  of  euro  long-term  refinancing  over  the  current  and  next  quarters. 
However, before discussing more in detail about the changes to the monetary policy stance 
and the latest temporary adjustments to the operational framework, I would like to highlight 
the role of increased international cooperation in the supply of USD liquidity in international 
money markets. 
Increased international cooperation 
4.1.2 
As  pointed  out  before,  in  addition  to  domestic  operational  responses,  central  banks  have 
further strengthened their cooperation throughout the turmoil, while preserving differences in 
their  operational  frameworks.  They  have  enhanced  their  cooperation  first  by  means  of 
enhanced information sharing and collective monitoring of market developments and later on 
through coordinated steps to provide liquidity.  
The main example of such coordinated actions among central banks is the by now familiar 
US dollar Term Auction Facility, which started in December of last year and in which the ECB 
agreed with the US Federal Reserve to grant loans in dollars to euro area banks. These USD 
liquidity  providing  operations  have  increased  over  time  in  terms  of  size  and  number  of 
participants, with up to nine central banks now participating.  
As far as the Eurosystem is concerned, the scope of this facility has significantly increased 
over time in terms of maturities covered and volumes involved. Last Monday the Governing 
Council took a further step with the decision – announced together with Bank of England and 
the  Swiss  National  Bank  –  to  conduct  operations  at  7-,  28-  and  84-day  maturities  at  fixed 
interest rates and with full allotment. As a result of this decision, euro area counterparties will 
be  able  to  borrow  as  much  USD  liquidity  as  they  wish  against  eligible  euro-denominated 
collateral. The supply of USD is guaranteed by an unlimited temporary reciprocal currency 
arrangement between the Federal Reserve and the ECB that will remain in place for as long 
as needed. These liquidity-providing operations do not have a direct effect on euro liquidity 
BIS Review 125/2008 
 5
conditions, but are conducted to address the availability of US dollar funding for euro area 
banks and aim at improving global funding conditions. 
It is important to stress that the actions in connection with the TAF marked, to my knowledge, 
the  first  systematic,  multilateral  and  successful  central  bank  co-operation  in  the  money 
market field, a market which is central to the implementation of a central bank’s monetary 
policy. I believe that all of these actions have proved to be effective in easing the tensions at 
the  short-term  end  of  the  global  money  markets  and  in  maintaining  control  of  short-term 
interest rates in the euro area. I am sure that global money and funding markets will continue 
to benefit from our very close cooperation. We will carry on working together closely and are 
prepared to take appropriate steps as needed to address funding pressures. 
Increased financial intermediation 
4.1.3  
Before discussing the latest monetary policy decision, I would like to point out that as a result 
of  its  enhanced  liquidity  interventions  in  euro  and  USD  over  the  last  fifteen  months,  the 
Eurosystem has significantly increased its involvement in financial intermediation in the euro 
area. Indeed, the Eurosystem has moved from the situation before the start of the turmoil in 
which it provided banks only with as much liquidity as necessary to implement its monetary 
policy stance, with the intermediation being performed by the market, to the present condition 
in  which  it  effectively  intermediates  liquidity  flows  among  banks  in  order  to  mitigate 
dysfunctions of money markets.  
The  increased  intermediation  role  assumed  by  the  Eurosystem  during  this  period  of 
turbulence has contributed to the stabilisation of short-term liquidity conditions, as well as to 
contain  volatility  in  the very  short-term  rates  (especially  in  the  overnight  rate  as measured 
through the so-called EONIA) and to limit somewhat the volatility in the three-month Euribor, 
even if the behaviour of the money market remains extremely tense. Of course, this is not the 
ideal solution in a market-oriented economy like the euro area and, indeed, the Eurosystem 
looks forward to the reactivation of inter-bank lending and to banks resuming their traditional 
intermediation  activity.  However,  as  long  as  money  markets  remain  dysfunctional,  the 
Eurosystem  will  continue  to  provide  liquidity  as  needed  in  order  to  ease  tensions  in  the 
impaired money markets, with a view to ensuring that access to liquidity of solvent banks is 
not disrupted, thereby contributing to safeguarding financial stability. 
4.1.4   Monetary policy adjustment  
As mentioned earlier, in responding to the financial market turmoil the ECB has consistently 
stuck  to  the  principle  of  a  clear  separation  of  tasks  between  monetary  policy  and  liquidity 
policy. Monetary policy must define the appropriate level of the policy rate in order to achieve 
and maintain the primary objective of price stability, thereby supporting long-term economic 
growth  and  employment  creation.  Liquidity  policy  must  aim  to  keep  the  very  short-term 
money  market  rates  in  line  with  the  chosen  policy  rate  and  to  guarantee  the  smooth 
functioning  of  the  market,  thereby  delivering  the  desired  monetary  policy  stance  and 
contributing to preserving financial stability.  
In  practice,  this  principle  implies  that  the  ECB  does  not  use  its  key  policy  rate  as  an 
instrument to mitigate liquidity stress, to prop up the balance sheets of financial institutions or 
to  support  asset  price  valuations.  If  agents  believed  that  the  ECB  was  prepared  to  do  so, 
investors  would  probably  engage  in  excessive  risk-taking  behaviour,  thereby  sowing  the 
seeds of future financial crises. More fundamentally, if the ECB was perceived as assigning 
higher  priority  to  supporting  the  financial  sector  or  asset  prices  than  to  safeguarding  price 
stability – its primary statutory objective – inflation expectations could be adversely affected 
and even become disanchored.3  
                                                 
3   See S. Sauer (2007), “Liquidity risk and monetary policy”, University of Munch Discussion Paper 2007-27. 
6 
 BIS Review 125/2008
Of  course,  the  separation  principle  does  not  mean  that  the  ECB  should  not  adjust  its 
monetary policy at times of financial turbulence, if some adjustment is required by changes in 
the balance of medium term risks for price stability. Consistent with this consideration, the 
ECB announced on 8 October a 50 basis point reduction in its key policy rate – the interest 
rate on the main refinancing operation – in a move coordinated with five other major central 
banks. The decision to ease monetary conditions in the euro area (and, more generally, at 
the  global  level)  was  warranted  by  the  recent  moderation  in  inflationary  pressures  and 
inflationary expectations, partly reflecting weakening economic activity, a marked decline in 
the  prices  of  energy  and  other  commodities  and  increasing  downside  risks  to  future 
economic growth. Besides, the recent intensification of the financial crisis has affected the 
outlook for economic growth and price stability in the euro area, particularly by augmenting 
the downside risks to growth, while further diminishing the upside risks to price stability and 
bring inflation expectations back to levels consistent with price stability.  
The recent coordinated interest rate cut was unprecedented by historical standards and was 
very much welcomed as a sign of the strong commitment of the international central banking 
community to addressing the macroeconomic implications of the financial market turmoil. At 
the same time, the effectiveness of the coordinated monetary policy moves was very much 
enhanced  by  the  public’s  trust  in  their  own  central  banks’  commitment  to  fulfilling  their 
respective mandates.  
In this respect, the public at large should be confident that the monetary policy in the euro 
area  will  be  always  consistent  with  the  ECB’s  mandate  of  delivering  medium  term  price 
stability  at  home  and  with  the  need  to  maintain  expectations  firmly  anchored  at  levels 
consistent with price stability. This is the best contribution that the ECB can provide in order 
to  preserve  the  purchasing  power  of  citizens  over  the  medium  term  and  to  support 
sustainable growth and employment in the euro area.  
4.1.5   New temporary measures to expand the collateral framework and the provision of 
liquidity 
In the context of recent initiatives undertaken by the EU authorities to restore confidence and 
the  appropriate  functioning  of  our  financial  systems,  the  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB 
approved  last  Wednesday  a  new  set  of  temporary  measures  designed  to  enhance  the 
provision  of  long-term  euro  liquidity  and  to  expand  the  list  of  collateral  accepted  in  the 
Eurosystem monetary policy operations. 
These new temporary measures aim to further enhance the provision of liquidity to solvent 
banks, while also contributing to restore confidence among market participants in the current 
environment  in  which  money  markets  remain  under  stress  and  the  traditional  channels  of 
liquidity  transmission  are  impaired.  Given  the  starting  position  of  money  markets  in  the 
transmission mechanism of monetary policy, ensuring their smooth and orderly functioning is 
a primary objective for central banks.  
As  part  of  the  new  measures,  we  have  decided  to  strengthen  the  provision  of  long-term 
refinancing in euro over the rest of the year and the first quarter of 2009. The new measures 
include  inter  alia  the  switch  to  a  fixed-rate  tender  with  full  allotment  for  longer-term 
refinancing  operations,  consistent  with  the  procedure  already  in  use  for  the  weekly  main 
refinancing  operations.  At  the  same  time,  the  ECB  will  continue  to  steer  liquidity  towards 
balanced  conditions  in  a  way  consistent  with  the  objective  of  keeping  short-term  interest 
rates  close  to  the  key  policy  rate  (the  interest  rate  on  the  main  refinancing  operation).  In 
order to facilitate the steering of liquidity, the ECB will also accept fixed term deposits with a 
1-week duration from banks holding more liquidity than needed. 
In addition, on an extraordinary basis and for a temporary period (i.e. until the end of 2009), 
the  list  of  assets  accepted  as  collateral  in  our  monetary  policy  operations  has  been 
expanded.  As  a  result  of  this  expansion,  banks  will  be  able  to  post  as  collateral  with  the 
Eurosystem some categories of assets available within the euro area that were not eligible 
BIS Review 125/2008 
 7
before.  In  addition,  we  have  temporarily  lowered  the  minimum  credit  rating  accepted  for 
marketable  and  non-marketable  instruments  (expect  for  ABSs),  while  maintaining  the 
requirement that assets must be “investment grade”.  
The temporary expansion of the list of eligible collateral may potentially imply an increase in 
the  risks  taken  by  the  Eurosystem  through  its  refinancing  operations.  In  order  to  fulfil  the 
Eurosystem’s  statutory  obligation  to  ensure  that  its  balance  sheet  remains  adequately 
protected against financial risks across time, adequate risk control measures will continue to 
be carefully and thoroughly applied to the enlarged collateral set. 
financial 
to  non-bank 
Governments 
institutions  –  notably, 
4.2  
Governments  all  over  the  world  have  been  involved  in  interventions  designed  to  provide 
support to systemically-relevant individual banking institutions.  
Initially, interventions were addressed to address isolated cases of stressed institutions and 
mainly fell into two categories: (1) the rescue of troubled individual institutions, whose failure 
may have given rise to financial instability; and the (2) provision of guarantees covering the 
liabilities of individual institutions under stress. In the US, government support in the form of 
liability  guarantees  was  extended 
the 
government-sponsored mortgage agencies Freddie Mac and Fanny Mae – whose insolvency 
may  have  triggered  systemic  disruptions  worldwide  (though  the  failure  of  government 
guarantees  to  stabilise  the  agencies  prompted  the  US  government  to  subsequently  take 
them over). 
Some  governments  also  announced  measures  to  provide  relief  to  struggling  homeowners 
and  made  use  of  traditional  fiscal  policy  tools  to  stimulate  the  domestic  economies, 
particularly in countries where the slowdown in housing markets was more significant.  
More  recently,  the  scope  and  reach  of  interventions  by  governments  has  broadened,  with 
several  countries  announcing  more  general  and  comprehensive  schemes  designed  to 
support the entire domestic financial industries rather than individual institutions. The need to 
develop broader plans for public intervention has become more acute with the intensification 
of the financial market turmoil and the increasing awareness that the current turmoil has the 
potential to jeopardise financial stability and, ultimately, macroeconomic stability in the world 
economy. 
As  part  of  the  more  recent  and  decisive  efforts  by  governments,  public  recapitalisation  of 
banks  by  public  authorities,  mostly  through  capital  injections  in  exchange  for  equity,  has 
become  more  extensive,  leading  to  partial  and,  in  some  cases,  majority  or  total  state 
ownership  of  several  banking  institutions  in  various  European  countries  both  inside  and 
outside the EU.  
In  addition,  the  provision  of  guarantees  covering  deposits  or  other  liabilities  has  been 
extended to the entire domestic banking sectors rather than focus on individual institutions. 
In particular, several governments have increased current limits on retail deposit guarantees 
and  even  announced  unlimited  guarantees  in  order  to  prevent  generalised  bank  runs.  In 
addition, some governments have also extended the guarantees to non-retail deposits and to 
bank liabilities other than deposits, particularly bank loans and debt instruments issued by 
banks. In order to restart bank lending and restore confidence in money and credit markets, 
some  countries  have  announced  that  guarantees  will  cover  also  new  liabilities  issued  by 
banks.  
In  some  cases  government  guarantees  have  also  been  extended  to  holdings  with  money 
market funds, an industry that has been historically a major source of financing for banks. In 
addition,  US  public  authorities  have  approved  a  large-scale  programme  to  support  the 
banking  sector  and  the  market  for  asset-backed  securities  by  allowing  the  Treasury  to 
acquire  (directly  or  though  auctions)  distressed  mortgage-related  assets  from  banks 
(Troubled  Asset  Relief  Programme,  TARP).  This  programme  allows  for  the  possibility  to 
8 
 BIS Review 125/2008
inject capital directly in banks and also to extend the range of distressed assets covered by 
the programme. Similar publicly-funded scheme to purchase illiquid securities from banks are 
under consideration in some European countries. 
Most  initiatives  by  governments  have  been  presented  as  designed  to  reassure  domestic 
savers and investors by systematically addressing problems at national financial institutions. 
However, the “national” orientation of such initiatives clearly contrasts with the global nature 
of  the  financial  tensions,  which  by  definition  requires  a  common  understanding  among 
governments  of  the  roots  of  the  tensions  and  concerted  actions  to  address  them.  The 
desirability of concerted actions both for technical and signalling reasons is well illustrated by 
the  favourable  reception  that  coordinated  liquidity  injections  by  central  banks  have  met 
among market participants and the public at large.  
Increasing awareness that an overly domestic approach to addressing the present tensions 
may  subtract  strength  from  public  interventions,  introduce  cross-border  market  distortions 
and even be interpreted as signalling a coordination failure, has prompted governments to 
publicly state the importance of pursuing a more coordinated approach. In this respect, three 
important statements are (1) the Plan of action of the G-7 finance ministers and central bank 
governors  of  10  October,  (2)  the  ECOFIN  Council  conclusions  of  7  October  and  (3)  the 
Declaration on a concerted European action plan of the euro area countries of 12 October. 
These  documents  list  common  principles  in  key  areas  (ensuring  appropriate  liquidity, 
facilitating the funding of banks through various means, providing additional capital resources 
to 
recapitalisation  of  distressed  banks,  ensuring  appropriate 
implementation of accounting rules, and enhancing cooperation among European countries), 
while  leaving  national  governments  free  to  design  the  operational  aspects  of  such 
interventions according to the specific characteristics of their domestic financial industries.  
In  particular,  these  public  commitments  establish  some  core  principles  on  how  to  address 
liquidity, funding and solvency problems that should contribute to define a common and more 
effective approach to overcoming the present turmoil. It is impressive to see that over the last 
few  days  this  common  approach  has  started  materialising  through  the  announcements  by 
various  euro  area  governments  of  co-ordinated  action  plans  that  comply  with  the  general 
principles  agreed  in  euro  area  and  international  fora.  These  announcements  together  with 
the recent plans adopted by the United States, the United Kingdom and other EU Member 
States show the strong determination of the international community to preserve the stability 
of our financial and economic systems.  
institutions, 
financial 
Supervisors and regulators 
4.3  
Finally,  the  recent  episode  of  financial  turmoil  has  reminded  us  that  financial  globalisation 
makes the safeguarding of financial stability a more interdependent task, requiring effective 
coordinated international action aimed at addressing financial system vulnerabilities.  
Against  this  background,  both  the  public  and  the  private  sector  have  undertaken  a  major 
collective effort to identify measures needed to strengthen the resilience of the domestic and 
international financial systems in the longer term in order to avoid the recurrence of similar 
events in the future.  
Particularly important in this respect is the report of the Financial Stability Forum (FSF) on 
“Enhancing  Market  and  Institutional  Resilience”  that  has  been  fully  endorsed  by  the 
international community and acts as the main reference for the necessary improvements. In 
this  context,  let  me  briefly  recall  some  of  the  key  areas  in  which  the  report  has  identified 
room for improvement: (i) some aspects of the prudential framework, relating to capital and 
liquidity  risk  as  well  as  to  banks’  liquidity  risk  management  practices;  (ii)  transparency, 
including  full  disclosure  of  banks’  exposures  on  structured  products  and  off-balance  sheet 
vehicles; (iii) valuation standards, especially as regards marking-to-market illiquid assets; (iv) 
market functioning, including possible conflicts of interest of credit rating agencies and their 
BIS Review 125/2008 
 9
role in rating structured finance instruments; and (v) authorities’ responsiveness to risks and 
arrangements for crisis management. 
Significant  progress  has  been  marked  in  the  addressing  weaknesses  in  these  key  areas. 
Many financial institutions have improved disclosure in their interim financial reporting for the 
second quarter of 2008, especially in relation to their risk exposures, valuation methods and 
off-balance sheet entities. On valuation and transparency, guidance has been provided and 
is being further developed by the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision and public sector 
initiatives,  such  as  the  European  and  the  American  Securitisation  Fora.  In  addition,  the 
International Accounting Standards Board is accelerating its work to enhance accounting and 
disclosure standards of off-balance sheet entities and to develop guidance for valuation in 
markets that are no longer active.  
Furthermore, in the area of risk management, the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision 
published its Principles for Sound Liquidity Risk Management and Supervision, and is also 
developing  guidance  for  a  number  of  issues,  including  supervisory  review  under  Basel  II, 
concentration risk and securitisation. Private sector groups (such as the International Institute 
of  Finance  and  the  Counterparty  Risk  Management  Policy  Group)  have  also  set  out 
principles and recommendations on risk management.  
Finally  the  IOSCO  published  its  revised  code  of  conduct  for  credit  rating  agencies, 
addressing issues such as the quality and integrity of the rating process, disclosure of a wide 
range  of  information  on  risk  characteristics  to  market  participants  and  avoiding  conflicts  of 
interest. 
The substantial work that has been developed constitutes the basis for accelerated changes 
by the industry and provides a benchmark for policy work in the medium term. In this context, 
some of the topics of critical importance from a central banking perspective include: (1) to 
ensure  adequate  transparency  regarding  financial  markets,  institutions  and  financial 
instruments; (2) the effective and timely implementation of the new Basel II framework, after 
revising  detected  shortcomings  (for  instance  related  to  any  pro-cyclical  features  of  the 
regulatory  framework);  (3)  the  growing  importance  and  complexity  of  liquidity  risk  in  more 
market-based financial systems; (4) the enhancement of institutional arrangements for cross-
border cooperation among authorities, both at times of financial stress and in normal times.  
Finally, I would like to highlight the importance of improving cooperation and the exchange of 
information  between  supervisory  authorities  and  central  banks  on  financial  stability  issues. 
The recent financial market turmoil has confirmed the importance of a smooth and efficient 
relationship  between  the  central  banking  and  supervisory  functions.  In  financial  stress 
situations,  supervisory  information  remains  essential  for  the  effectiveness  of  the  central 
bank’s  financial  stability  assessments.  Conversely,  supervisors  should  benefit  from  the 
systemic  perspective  of  central  banks  when  considering  their  actions  vis-à-vis  individual 
institutions.  This  is  the  rationale  behind  the  specific  FSF  recommendation  to  enhance  the 
interplay between central banks and supervisory authorities. 
Final remarks 
5.  
We are certainly witnessing challenging times. With hindsight, the financial turmoil and the 
episodes of extreme volatility that have impacted all markets and regions around the world 
over  the  last  fifteen  months  have  put  at  risk  some  of  the  core  functions  of  the  financial 
system – in particular, the provision of financing to the economy – which are essential pre-
requisites for employment creation and economic growth. 
In the early stages of the turmoil – that were every much dominated by liquidity concerns – 
central banks occupied the central stage by addressing liquidity tensions through a host of 
measures aiming to provide short-term funding to illiquid but solvent institutions. 
10 
 BIS Review 125/2008
Since the last spring, the market tensions changed qualitatively insofar as the rescue of Bear 
Stearns  showed  how  quickly  liquidity  spirals  can  bring  about  insolvency.  The  months  that 
followed witnessed an increase in the number of case-by-case interventions by Treasuries 
around the world, while private capital investors and long-term lenders disappeared from the 
markets 
More recently, the demise of Lehman Brothers sent shock waves to the global system that 
put  at  risk  the  solvency  of  systematically-relevant  institutions  worldwide.  The  fallout  of  this 
episode  triggered  a  more  systematic  and  comprehensive  response  to  the  financial  crisis 
which has been framed with particular efficacy in the Declaration on a concerted European 
action plan of the euro area countries of 12 October. In order to avoid financial stability and 
to ensure appropriate financing conditions, the Eurogroup has complemented the concerted 
actions  on  deposit  guarantees  with  far-reaching  measures  in  two  main  areas:  (1)  funding 
guarantees, and (2) capital injections. 
These  measures  in  combination  with  the  enhanced  liquidity  provisions  by  central  banks 
should  restore  confidence  and  contribute  to  re-establishing  an  environment  within  which 
governments, regulators and supervisors can define and implement the urgent reforms that 
are needed to underpin a much sounder global financial system.  
Many thanks for your attention. 
BIS Review 125/2008 
 11
