Randall S Kroszner: Assessing the potential for instability in financial 
markets 
Speech  by  Mr  Randall  S  Kroszner,  Member  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  US  Federal 
Reserve  System,  at  the  Risk  Minds  Conference,  International  Center  for  Business 
Information, Geneva, 8 December 2008. 
The original speech, which contains a link to the documents mentioned, can be found on the US Federal Reserve 
System’s website. 
 Good  morning.  I  am  honored  to  give  the  opening  remarks  at  this  impressive  conference. 
Today, I would like to offer some thoughts about risks in financial markets and the manner in 
which  banking  organizations  need  to  assess  those  risks.1  In  particular,  I  will  note  the 
problems  that  can  arise  when  the  safeguards  that  market  participants  employ  for  their 
individual  positions  can  have  the  unintended  effect  of  actually  exacerbating  market-wide 
distress  and  amplifying  losses  among  multiple  market  participants  during  times  of  market 
turbulence. But before offering recommendations that might serve to address these problems 
for  banking  institutions,  I  believe  it  is  worthwhile  to  take  a  step  back  and  explore  some 
conceptual issues about the organization of markets.  
A conceptual framework for the organization of markets 
In  the  simplified  world  of  an  introductory  economics  class,  a  market  brings  together  the 
potential buyers and sellers of a product to negotiate prices and quantities. In this paradigm, 
the invisible hand of the market matches all willing buyers and sellers at a single, market-
clearing price. Transactions occur instantaneously and costlessly. 
While this stripped-down story is remarkably powerful in its essential predictions about the 
behavior of markets and economic agents, it leaves the operation of the market itself as a 
mystery. Any real-world market must deal with at least two fundamental questions: first, how 
do the buyers and sellers find one another? And second, how can buyers be assured that 
sellers will deliver as promised, and that the goods will be of the quality and value that the 
buyer expects? To understand how markets deal with the fundamental issues of transaction 
costs and information costs is an important and enduring challenge for economists. 
Market institutions arise to overcome these barriers to trade, but do not arise wholly-formed 
and  perfect.  Market  institutions  evolve.  Buyers  and  sellers  gravitate  towards  markets  that 
prove  most  effective  in  fostering  transactions,  and  this  rewards  successful  innovation  and 
refinement  in  the  institutional  forms  of  markets.  As  market  institutions  adapt  to  serve  the 
particular  needs  of  their  participants,  they  grow  more  varied  and  specialized.  The 
imperfections and ongoing evolution of market institutions have inspired a rich and insightful 
literature within economics. 
Returning to the first question, how do buyers and sellers find one another in the real world? 
Each side might be aware that potential counterparties exist, but not where and when to find 
them. Information problems of this sort, often termed search costs, have since ancient times 
been overcome by designating a market by location, time and product. The Pushkar camel 
fair, which draws 50,000 camels for trade to a small desert town in western India at the full 
moon  in  November,  is  a  colorful  but  not  atypical  example.  In  the  financial  world,  a 
corresponding  institution  is  the  exchange.  Many  exchanges  have  their  historical  roots  as 
                                                 
1  
I  will  use 
In  my  remarks, 
interchangeably. 
the 
terms  "banks,"  "banking 
institutions,"  and  "banking  organizations" 
BIS Review 156/2008 
 1
gatherings of speculators at a coffee house or other designated public place for a daily or 
weekly session to buy and sell securities.2  
The  introduction  of  new  technology  can  change  the  institutional  structure  of  markets. 
Improved  telecommunications  has  made  it  possible  to  relax  coordination  on  the  physical 
location  of  markets.  Once  a  building,  the  exchange  is  now  a  network  of  screens. 
Furthermore,  by  dramatically  reducing  the  cost  of  locating  counterparties  and  comparing 
prices,  technology  has  increased  the  scope  for  decentralized  markets  such  as  OTC 
derivative  markets.  Decentralized  markets  excel  at  providing  variety  and 
thus  at 
accommodating the idiosyncratic needs of investors and consumers.  
Returning  to  our  second  question, then,  how  can  buyers  be  assured  of  quality  goods  in a 
real-world marketplace? Whenever quality and value are costly to verify, how can buyers be 
assured  that  the  seller  will  not  deliver  subpar  goods?  Market  institutions  have  arisen  to 
address these concerns. A seller might invest in bolstering its reputation for delivering quality 
goods  or  offer  a  warranty.  Standardized  grading  is  a  convention  that  facilitates  the 
unambiguous  specification  of  quality  in  a  contract.  An  important  milestone  in  the 
development of commodity markets was the promulgation in 1856 by the Chicago Board of 
Trade of standardized grades of wheat.3 This allowed buyers and sellers of wheat to trade in 
standardized  "warehouse  receipts,"  rather  than  specific  lots,  with  inexpensive  quality 
verification by third-party policy and certification. The idea of standardized grading and third-
party  assessment  was  introduced  to  credit  markets  by  rating  agencies  in  the  early  20th 
century.  Of  course,  as  recent  events  have  made  clear,  the  qualitative  and  multi-faceted 
nature of credit risk limits the extent to which investors can or should rely on ratings as the 
sole measure of quality.  
A  more  subtle  form  of  the  quality  assurance  problem  arises  when  a  transaction  results  in 
future  contingent  obligations  by  the  counterparties.  Future  obligations  are  common  in 
financial markets, where the risk of nonperformance is known as counterparty credit risk. In a 
credit  default  swap,  for  example,  each  side  is  seeking  to  alter  credit  exposure  to  the 
reference  entity.  The  resulting  contingent  credit  exposure  to  the  counterparty  is  entirely 
incidental  to  the  reason  for  the  transaction,  yet  may  be  a  first-order  determinant  of  future 
performance.  
Financial  markets  have  developed  mechanisms  that  are  specific  to  the  control  of 
counterparty  risk.  The  simplest  of  these  is  the  posting  of  collateral  against  counterparty 
exposures.  Ensuring 
is  challenging  even  under  ordinary 
circumstances, and may leave counterparties especially vulnerable to large sudden changes 
in market prices, also called gap risk.  
A  more  sophisticated  convention  for  mitigating  counterparty  credit  risk  is  a  central 
counterparty  or  a  clearinghouse. 
trades  are 
intermediated  through  a  central counterparty.  This  arrangement  can  and,  in  practice,  does 
vastly reduce counterparty risk. The central counterparty runs a balanced book, so generally 
has no direct market exposure. In the case of a member's default, the central counterparty 
can draw upon the proprietary margin of the defaulting member, its own reserve fund, and 
the  assessment  of  members  for  share  purchase.  As  you  know,  plans  are  currently  being 
developed to establish one or more central counterparties in the credit derivatives market. 
So why do we not find a central counterparty in every financial market? A key reason is that 
the  gain  in  safety  may  come  at  the  expense  of  flexibility.  Like  an  exchange,  a  central 
In  markets  with  a  clearinghouse,  all 
the  efficacy  of  collateral 
                                                 
2   The early antecedents to the New York Stock Exchange and other fascinating stories of market formation are 
elegantly and insightfully recounted in John McMillan, "Reinventing the Bazaar," W.W. Norton & Co, 2002. 
3   See  section  1  in  Randall  S.  Kroszner,  "Can  the  Financial  Markets  Privately  Regulate  Risk?",  Journal  of 
Money, Credit, and Banking 31(3), August 1999. 
2 
 BIS Review 156/2008
counterparty  imposes  a  degree  of  standardization  upon  contracts.  As  noted  earlier,  OTC 
derivative  markets  have  grown  so  rapidly  in  large  part  due  to  the  demand  for  variety  and 
customization of contracts. That said, many OTC contracts are already eligible for clearing 
through a central counterparty. For example, SwapClear, a central counterparty for interest 
rate swaps, clears about half of global single-currency swaps between dealers.  
Assessing recent financial market performance 
Now that I have laid out a conceptual framework about markets and how participants ensure 
the  quality  of  transactions,  I  would  like  briefly  to  apply  that  conceptual  framework  to  the 
events  of  the  past  18  months.  Financial  crisis  can  serve  as  a  powerful  stimulant  to  the 
evolution of market mechanisms, and I expect that the aftermath of the present turmoil will 
see both innovation and incremental refinement to quality assurance in credit markets and in 
counterparty credit risk management. I would like to highlight two themes that I believe will 
influence this process. 
First, for quality assurance to be effective, some of the products traded in financial markets 
have  to  become  simpler  and  more  transparent.  Product  complexity  and  a  lack  of 
transparency are at the root of many of the problems that have emerged, especially in the 
markets for securitizations and structured credit products. I elaborated on these themes in 
remarks I made at a Federal Reserve conference last week on the future of the mortgage 
market.4 There I argued that a recovery in the market for mortgage-backed securities (MBSs) 
will require greater transparency and less complexity, and importantly, comprehensive and 
standardized loan-level data that will allow more independent credit analysis. For example, 
the structures of cash flows from mortgage payments in the pool to the various tranches of 
MBSs  should  be  much  less  complex  than  some  of  those  created  in  recent  years,  and 
securitization  contracts  will  need  to  be  made  more  homogeneous  so  as  to  allow  greater 
comparability of risk profiles across deals and perhaps promote more robust liquidity.  
I believe that a new infrastructure for MBSs built upon these foundations might be reasonably 
expected to lower the costs of information production and processing in the marketplace. The 
reduction  of  these  costs  will  facilitate  broader  independent  credit  analyses,  greater  due 
diligence by potential purchasers, and, hence, greater ability to provide a double check on 
credit  rating  agencies'  evaluation  of  the  riskiness  of  the  securities.  In  other  words,  market 
participants would be more likely to acquire the expertise to evaluate securities issues that 
were more homogeneous and less complex.  
A second key factor for effective quality assurance relates to the institutional and contractual 
framework  for  ensuring  future  performance  on  financial  transactions,  namely  counterparty 
credit  risk  management.  Counterparty  credit  risk  management  should  be  focused  on  its 
effectiveness in different market situations and its implications for financial stability. There is 
a broad class of market practices that can provide useful protections when an individual firm 
experiences trouble but these practices may not provide useful protections – and could be 
potentially harmful – when the trouble is marketwide.  
A  representative  example  is  the  use  of  rating  triggers  in  counterparty  credit  risk 
management. Some debt contracts and OTC derivative contracts link collateral requirements 
to a counterparty's credit rating. If a counterparty is downgraded past some threshold, it may 
become  subject  to  an  immediate  margin  call.  Counterparty  credit  risk  appears  to  remain 
contained so long as the rating trigger is breached long before the counterparty could reach 
insolvency – that is, the trigger is set at a relatively high rating. In such cases, this type of 
                                                 
4   Randall  S.  Kroszner,  2008,  "Improving  the  Infrastructure  for  Non-Agency  Mortgage-Backed  Securities", 
speech delivered at the Federal Reserve System Conference on Housing and Mortgage Markets, Washington, 
DC, December 4. 
BIS Review 156/2008 
 3
clause  can  be  quite  valuable  in  mitigating  counterparty  credit  risk  and  in  giving  the 
counterparty strong incentives to try to maintain its financial health and, hence, its rating.  
This type of protection against counterparty risk is most effective when changes in risk are 
specific to the counterparty and not correlated with increases in risks to other counterparties 
and  in  other  markets.  In  this  case,  the  posting  of  additional  collateral  long  before  a  firm 
reaches  insolvency  can  provide  valuable  protection.  Such  a  provision  may  not  provide 
protection,  however,  if  the  rating  change  comes  too  late,  the  firm  is  on  the  brink  of 
insolvency, and the requirement to post the margin can push it into insolvency.  
More  importantly,  such  a  provision  may  also  fail  to  provide  protection  if  the  trouble  at  the 
counterparty is correlated with trouble at other institutions and in other markets, that is, due 
to  marketwide  distress.  In  times  of  widespread  distress,  many  counterparties  may  have  to 
sell assets simultaneously to post margin. This occurrence can potentially lead to a situation 
in  the  market  in  which  assets  are  sold  quickly  and  below  their  fundamental  values.  When 
many counterparties are forced to liquidate similar assets, prices for those assets are pushed 
down.  If  these  assets  are  used  as  collateral  on  other  positions,  then  the  decline  in  value 
leads to additional margin calls. This set of circumstances, in turn, forces further liquidation 
and price declines. A widespread use of rating triggers can accelerate this downward slide, 
with further losses in asset values triggering additional downgrades and requirements to post 
collateral  and  liquidate  positions.  Recent  events  have  demonstrated  this  potentially 
destabilizing dynamic at work. 
Rating triggers are certainly only one example of market practices that can exacerbate the 
impact  of  a  systemic  event  and  make  financial  markets  less  stable.  Credit  enhancements 
and  guarantees  can  also  create  fragility  while  seeming  to  offer  protection.  A  highly-rated 
guarantor, for example, could offer effective protection against the default of a small number 
of  instruments.  In  the  event  of  a  market-wide  increase  in  credit  risk,  however,  there  is  an 
increased  probability  that  the  guarantor  would  be  required  to  pay  out  on  many  positions 
simultaneously.  As  the  market  comes  to  realize  that  the  credit  enhancement  may  not  be 
effective, further pressure may come upon the institutions that would be left exposed. Thus, 
widespread  reliance  on  credit  enhancements  could  induce  a  form  of  "wrong  way  risk"  in 
which the seller of protection becomes most likely to default in precisely the circumstances 
where protection is most valued.  
What might seem like a "herd" behavior in some markets may be at least in part a response 
to the fragile interconnections affecting the stability of those markets. Such apparent herding 
behavior,  reflecting  a  collective  loss  of  confidence,  may  be  generated  by  a  market 
infrastructure  that  induces  co-movements  across  markets  and  institutions  during  times  of 
stress. In these circumstances, contractual provisions that might seem on the surface to be 
prudent counterparty risk management could increase financial market stress. 
Improving banks' risk management for participation in financial markets 
Marketwide  credit  events  and  stresses,  and  how  market  infrastructure  could  exacerbate 
them, did not receive sufficient attention in risk management efforts in the period leading up 
to  the  current  turmoil.  For  example,  risk  managers  did  not fully  contemplate  the  possibility 
that  many  participants  would  need  to  unwind  their  positions  at  the  same  time,  that  such 
actions  might  present  substantial  losses  for  several  key  counterparties,  and  that  collateral 
posted  as  protection  for  positions  would  fall  in  value  at  the  same  time.  There  was  not 
sufficient  understanding  of  the  correlation  between  declines  in  collateral  value  and  the 
likelihood that collateral would need to be called upon. Similar issues arose with third-party 
guarantees  and  with  hedging  strategies  that  had  less  effectiveness  than  anticipated.  Even 
when risk managers had some understanding of these issues, each individually likely faced 
difficulty  in  demanding  more  collateral  or  guarantees  during  good  times  because  no  risk 
manager wanted to be the first. 
4 
 BIS Review 156/2008
individual  basis, 
they  also  need 
A  key  factor  for  assuring  market  quality,  as  I  noted  above,  is  assessing  the  behavior  of 
counterparties  in  stressful  times.  Not  only  do  banks  need  to  assess  counterparty 
creditworthiness  and  behavior  on  an 
to  assess 
counterparties  on  a  collective  basis.  They  need  to  understand  how  their  own  actions  to 
protect  positions  can  put  pressure  on  key  counterparties,  especially  when  other  market 
participants are likely to be taking similar action to protect themselves. So beyond ensuring 
that  their  own  individual  positions  are  sound  and  well  protected,  banks  need  to  assess 
whether  there  is  a  systematic  component  to  a  market  that  could  adversely  affect  multiple 
counterparties  at  the  same  time,  and  thereby  affect  their  own  risk  exposures.  As we  have 
seen, a counterparty does not need to be technically insolvent for it to be shunned by other 
market participants. The anticipation of downgrades, triggers, and so forth could very quickly 
cause a firm to lose funding and fail. 
In short, banks and regulators need to understand the type of market conditions that will exist 
when there is likely to be reliance on collateral, guarantees, or other contract clauses. It is 
then  important  to  assess  the  likelihood  that  the  bank's  safeguarding  actions  could  worsen 
market conditions and actually increase its losses. Might the bank only realize collateral at 
substantially reduced prices? Would multiple counterparties suffer distress at the same time? 
Would  guarantors  perform  in  times  of  distress?  In  other  words,  would  the  collateral, 
guarantee,  insurance,  hedge,  and  so  forth  work  in  precisely  the  time  the  institution  would 
need  it  most,  that  is,  during  a  market  stress  event?  These  are  important  questions  that 
regulators and supervisors are asking in the Basel Committee and in the Financial Stability 
Forum, and I represent the Federal Reserve System on both of these bodies. 
Naturally, these types of questions underscore the importance of stress testing and scenario 
analysis that focus on market-wide events. Such stress tests would include the potential for 
key counterparties to fail or suffer difficulty at the same time, for market liquidity to erode and 
remain low for some time, and for market participants to view the bank itself as an impaired 
counterparty. And these stress tests, when properly designed, can provide information that 
typical statistical models may leave out or have trouble capturing, such as abnormally large 
jumps  or  market  moves,  evaporation  of  liquidity,  prolonged  periods  of  market  distress,  or 
structural  changes  in  markets.  Stress  tests  are  most  useful  when  they  aim  to  include 
potential  secondary  or  "knock-on"  effects,  which  are  also  often  difficult  to  model  with 
standard techniques. In these ways, stress tests can serve as a complementary tool to other 
risk measures.  
Even if the ex ante estimate of the probability of joint distress among counterparties appears 
small, it is still useful to know the severity of such an outcome, since it may clearly reveal an 
unacceptable  loss.  Importantly,  banks  should  also  conduct  stress  tests  across  several 
markets, since some counterparties are key players across many financial markets and their 
inability to repay could cascade across those markets.  
Of course, based on their consideration of the factors noted above and the results of their 
stress tests, banks may reassess their participation in certain markets and exercise greater 
caution to account for potential "tail" risks and better protect themselves in times of market-
wide  stress.  One  of  the  first  things  they  may  do  is  increase  their  internal  assessments  of 
capital needs for these activities, given the added risks that stress tests reveal. They may 
wish  to  restructure  contracts  or  alter  terms.  Institutions  also  might  ask  for  higher  initial 
margin, given that subsequent calls may not provide as much risk mitigation during distress. 
They may wish to ask for more collateral, or ensure that the collateral is less linked to the 
counterparty's  condition  or  broader  market  distress.  Or  they  might  look  for  other  ways  to 
enhance their assessment of counterparties, and, perhaps more importantly, the potential for 
counterparties  to  encounter  difficulties  during  marketwide  stresses.  Additionally,  they  may 
wish  to  conduct  more  of  their  trading  and  hedging  on  more  organized  exchanges  or  with 
clearinghouses, to benefit from the safeguards I noted earlier in my remarks.  
BIS Review 156/2008 
 5
Some banks, acting on a collective basis, may decide to take action to improve the quality 
assurance performance of markets during future times of stress. Trade associations in the 
banking industry may consider additional safeguards to reduce the impact of systematic risks 
among  counterparties;  for  example,  banks  may  collectively  act  to  remove  uncertainty 
associated with back-office inefficiencies and related risks in the credit default swaps market. 
Another  example,  as  I  noted  in  remarks  last  week,  is  an  attempt  to  enhance  mortgage 
markets  so  that  there  is  greater  standardization  of  data  and  simpler,  more  homogeneous 
provisions in the securitizations, and less reliance on third-party monitoring.5  
As  a  more  general  step,  banks  should  hold  higher  liquidity  and  capital  buffers,  since  the 
enhancements  I  just  noted  are  still  no  guarantee  against  future  market  distress  that  could 
cause  correlated  and  cascading  losses  among  market  participants.  Finally,  banks  need  to 
exercise  strong  discipline  so  that  when  good  times  return,  they  do  not  forget  the  current 
market difficulties and return to more profligate ways. Indeed, now is the time for banks to 
establish good risk management policies addressing the issues I have just discussed, so that 
strong risk discipline is codified.  
Concluding thoughts  
Of course, it is not just the banking industry, but also those of us in the public sector who 
have some key lessons to learn. Banks and supervisors alike need to undertake additional 
work to facilitate the building of robust methods of quality assurance in the financial markets 
that  will  help  to  restore  and  maintain  confidence.  Ensuring  that  banks  exercise  good  risk 
management, of course, is an important job for bank supervisors, which includes overseeing 
their ability to properly capture the risks in the markets in which they operate, as well as their 
ability  to  conduct  appropriate  stress  testing  to  explore  potential  consequences  of  different 
types  of  market  distress.  Doing  so  requires  that  supervisors  themselves  develop  a  strong 
understanding  of  the  value,  limits,  and  potential  harms  associated  with  banks'  attempts  to 
protect their exposures. 
At the Federal Reserve, we have already begun to enhance our supervisory work in this area 
and are communicating expectations to banks. At the international level, we are working with 
our  colleagues  in  other  countries  and  within  international  bodies,  such  as  the  Basel 
Committee on Banking Supervision – which is meeting later this week – and the Financial 
Stability Forum, to investigate whether other practices could be adopted around the world to 
mitigate the challenges I have outlined above. This work will be a major focus during the next 
few months and over the course of 2009. 
                                                 
5   Randall  S.  Kroszner,  2008,  "Improving  the  Infrastructure  for  Non-Agency  Mortgage-Backed  Securities," 
speech delivered at the Federal Reserve System Conference on Housing and Mortgage Markets, Washington, 
D.C., December 4. 
6 
 BIS Review 156/2008
