Lorenzo Bini Smaghi: The internationalisation of currencies – a central 
banking perspective 
Speech by Mr Lorenzo Bini Smaghi, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central 
Bank, at the joint conference “The euro at ten: the next global currency?”, sponsored by the 
Peterson 
for 
International Economics, Washington DC, 10 October 2008. 
International  Economics  and  Bruegel,  Peterson 
Institute 
Institute 
for 
 Introduction1  
Ladies and gentlemen, 
It is an honour to be here to celebrate the approaching tenth anniversary of the euro. It is a 
privilege to represent the institution – the European Central Bank – which over the past ten 
years has watched over the first steps of the euro and brought it up to be the second most 
important international currency in the world. The euro is now leaving behind its childhood 
and entering the phase of adolescence. As with many adolescents, it is faced with a common 
question: “what would you like to do when you grow up?”  
The  ECB,  like  any  parent,  might  tend  to  have  an  over-optimistic  vision  of  its  own  child’s 
future.  This  is  why  we  have  adopted  a  policy  of  neither  encouraging  nor  discouraging  the 
international use of the euro. It should be an entirely demand-driven process. Like modern 
parents, we recognise that the euro does not belong to us but should develop according to its 
own ambitions. We are here to ensure that it has a few key virtues, the first being stability.  
There are already several people – including in the United States, where even the birth was 
considered improbable a decade ago – who predict a bright future for the euro, anticipating 
that it will surge to become the dominant international currency in the coming decades [Chinn 
and Frankel, 2008]. Others, however, think that the euro is unlikely to overtake the US dollar 
[Eichengreen and Flandreau, 2008a].  
Today, I will not try to review what the euro has already achieved over the last decade. The 
ECB regularly publishes a report that can be easily consulted [ECB, 2008a].  
What I would like to do instead is to assess what the implications are, in particular from a 
central banking point of view, of becoming an international currency. I will analyse both the 
advantages and the challenges. I will then try to assess whether the euro has the potential to 
further increase its role and examine what the main obstacles could be to achieving such a 
status. 
Implications of an international currency 
Even though the euro is currently not the dominant international currency, it has become an 
alternative to the US dollar as a reserve currency. Euro banknotes are a popular means of 
payment and store of value in the EU’s neighbouring countries. What are the implications for 
the ECB and the euro area as a whole? I shall try to answer this question, drawing on the 
economic literature. 
There  are  two  well-identified  advantages  that  countries  can  obtain  from  having  an 
international currency. First, there are microeconomic gains stemming from lower transaction 
costs.  Whether  the  currency  is  used  for  international  trade,  borrowing  in  the  international 
markets or simply tourism, the costs of conversion to a foreign currency and the exchange 
                                                 
1  
I thank Maurizio Habib for his input in the preparation of these remarks. 
BIS Review 122/2008 
 1
to 
liabilities 
low-interest  domestic  currency-denominated 
rate risk attached to these operations are eliminated. Second, the monetary authority issuing 
an international currency has larger seigniorage revenues to the extent that foreigners hold 
that  currency  in  the  form  of  non-interest-bearing  liabilities,  in  particular  as  coins  and 
banknotes. These gains are, however, relatively small and are estimated to amount to less 
than 0.05% of GDP for the euro area, as only a small fraction of the total cash in circulation – 
10% to 15% – is held by non-euro area residents. International seigniorage gains are only 
slightly larger for the United States, at about 0.1% of GDP, as more than half of their stock of 
currency is estimated to circulate abroad [EC, 2008 and ECB, 2007]. 
There  are  other,  broader,  implications  of  issuing  an  international  currency,  which  are  less 
well-documented  and  not  as  easily  quantifiable.  Both  Britain  in  the  period  before  the  First 
World War – from 1870 to 1913 – and the United States in the period after the Second World 
War  enjoyed  a  so-called  “exorbitant  privilege”  from  being  at  the  centre  of  the  international 
monetary  system  [Meissner  and  Taylor,  2006].  The  privilege  stems  from  the  possibility  to 
issue 
finance  higher-yield 
investments  abroad.  Both  Britain  before  1913  and  the  United  States  until  the  end  of  the 
1980s were net creditors towards the rest of the world, and this exorbitant privilege may be 
seen as their remuneration for being the so-called “bankers of the world”. Over the past 20 
years, the United States has shifted to a relatively large debtor position vis-à-vis the rest of 
the world, but its income balance has stayed positive thanks to a positive return differential 
between its external assets and its liabilities. For some economists, this is the result of the 
transformation  of  the  United  States  from  world  banker  to  “venture  capitalist”  with  a 
“leveraged” position, where fixed-income domestic currency liabilities finance riskier foreign 
assets taking the form of equity and direct investment [Gourinchas and Rey, 2005].  
The  greater  ability  to  issue  domestic  currency  liabilities  has  another  important  implication 
from a macro-financial stability perspective. To the extent that external liabilities are mainly in 
domestic currency, whereas external assets are denominated in foreign currency – as in the 
case  of  equity  and  foreign  direct  investment,  and  often  also  debt  securities  –  issuers  of 
international  currencies  tend  to  have  a  “long”  position  in  foreign  currency.  As  a  result, 
fluctuations  in  exchange  rates  tend  to  produce  counter-cyclical  valuation  effects  on  net 
external  assets.  When  the  exchange  rate  appreciates,  foreign  currency  assets  shrink  in 
domestic currency terms and as a share of GDP. Conversely, following sharp devaluations – 
often  associated  with  economic  and  financial  stress  –  the  foreign  currency-denominated 
assets grow in domestic currency terms and liabilities are unaffected, improving the overall 
investment position when it is more needed [Lane and Milesi-Ferretti, 2005]. As an example, 
after the currency crises in both 1949 and 1967, sterling’s status as an international currency 
– with most of the large overseas liabilities still denominated in pounds – allowed the United 
Kingdom to cushion somewhat the impact of the devaluations [Cairncross and Eichengreen, 
2003].  
The issuance of an international currency could potentially also have significant implications 
for the implementation of monetary policy. Let’s consider the experience of the euro over the 
past ten years in that regard.  
On the one hand, it has been essential for the euro area to have its own monetary policy in 
order to face idiosyncratic shocks and focus on the maintenance of domestic price stability. 
This result would not have been possible without the introduction of the euro and the creation 
of a large internal economic and trade area free of exchange rate risk. On the other hand, the 
external  demand  for  euro-denominated  assets  may  affect  domestic  monetary  aggregates, 
complicating  their  relationship  with  inflation  over  the  long  run.  Recent  ECB  staff  research 
shows  that  it  is  necessary  to  place  money  demand  in  the  context  of  portfolio  flows  and 
international asset prices in order to explain euro area M3 dynamics and measure excess 
liquidity, which can pose risks to price stability [ECB, 2008b].  
In addition, successful international currencies are used as external anchors by a number of 
countries  that  prefer  to  fix  the  exchange  rate  and  relinquish  their  monetary  independence. 
2 
 BIS Review 122/2008
Such  currency  pegs  eliminate  one  channel  of  adjustment  of  external  imbalances  for  the 
anchor currency. As long as the pegging countries are small relative to the issuing country, 
this  might  not  be  a  major  problem.  However,  when  the  aggregate  economic  weight  of  all 
pegging  countries  becomes  large,  the  margin  for  adjustment  of  the  nominal  effective 
exchange  rate  of  the  anchor  currency  becomes  constrained.  As  a  consequence,  the 
adjustment  of  the  nominal  effective  exchange  rate  might  require  a  more  than  proportional 
adjustment of the bilateral rates of the remaining floating currencies.  
Moreover, fluctuations in the demand and supply of the euro among international investors, 
from both the private and public sectors, may have implications for the exchange rate. The 
increasing attractiveness of euro-denominated assets as a potential alternative to US dollar 
securities may generate sudden shifts in portfolio flows and unwelcome volatility in foreign 
exchange  markets.  Another  potential  indirect  channel  of  disturbance  in  the  dollar/euro 
exchange  rate  is  possibly  the  role  of  the  US  dollar  in  the  invoicing  of  oil  and  other  major 
commodities. Over the past few years, the surge in oil prices and other commodities – in US 
dollar terms – has been associated with a negative relationship with the exchange rate of the 
US dollar against the euro. In the case of oil prices, this could be the result of policies by oil-
exporting  countries  to  try  to  defend  the  purchasing  power  of  a  barrel  of  oil  in  terms  of  a 
basket of international currencies, including, in particular, the euro. It must be acknowledged 
that it is difficult to detect and isolate the direction of causality between the oil price and the 
US dollar.  
Overall,  for  the  ECB  and  the  euro  area,  the  international  role  of  the  euro  offers  positive 
opportunities  and  serious  challenges.  This  explains  the  ECB’s  neutral  stance  aimed  at 
neither directly promoting nor hindering the international use of the euro.  
The determinants of the international use of currencies 
What are the conditions that cause currencies to dominate international markets? Do these 
conditions favour a growing role for the euro?  
There is a large body of literature on the determinants of the international use of currencies. 
Most studies focus either on the store of value function of currencies and their role in foreign 
exchange  reserves  [see  Chinn  and  Frankel,  2008,  for  a  recent  review]  or  on  the  unit  of 
account and means of payment functions, including the invoicing of international trade [see 
Kannan, 2007]. In the first case, users of an international currency are mainly concerned with 
its ability to maintain a stable purchasing power over time. In the second case, users care 
about  transaction  costs  and  the  economies  of  scale  that  are  obtained  from  tapping  into  a 
large network.  
In both cases, a number of political, institutional, financial and economic factors contribute to 
increasing  the  popularity  of  an  international  currency.  I  will  review  these  factors  with 
particular reference to the euro.  
Economic and financial conditions 
Let me start with the economic and financial conditions supporting the international role of 
currencies. The size of the economy and its foreign trade flows are crucial to promoting the 
international status of a currency. This is because there are scale economies and network 
externalities  in  using  the  currency  that  is  also  used  by  other  agents  in  international 
transactions.  The  larger  the  economy  and  its  trade  flows,  the  more  likely  it  is  that  smaller 
economies  will  adopt  the  currency  of  the  larger  trading  partner.  In  this  respect,  the  critical 
mass of the euro area, in economic terms, is large enough to exert gravitational attraction on 
the  rest  of  the  world.  In  2007,  the  euro  area  accounted  for  about  16%  of  world  GDP, 
measured at purchasing power parity, and its external trade was equal to more than 18% of 
world trade, at current exchange rates.  
BIS Review 122/2008 
 3
In the invoicing of international trade, however, network externalities tend to generate only 
one “winner”. For several decades, the US dollar has served as a medium of exchange and 
unit  of  account  for  homogeneous  goods  traded  in  organised  exchanges,  such  as 
commodities and oil. In this case, inertia is very important and it is very difficult to dislodge 
the incumbent currency, whose use is associated with low information and transaction costs. 
Yet even in this case, it would be possible to switch to a parallel invoicing system, including 
the  euro,  if  agents  expected  others  to  start  using  the  new  currency  and  technological 
progress diminished transaction and information costs [Mileva and Sigfried, 2007].  
Transaction  costs  are  important  not  only  in  international  trade  but  also  in  the  use  of 
currencies  as  financing  or  investment  instruments.  For  this  reason,  truly  international 
currencies must be backed by large, deep, liquid and efficient financial markets. In terms of 
size, credit quality and liquidity, US dollar financial markets still have an edge over the euro 
markets,  although  this  gap  seems  to  have  narrowed  since  the  launch  of  the  euro  in  1999 
[Galati  and  Wooldridge,  2006].  The  US  Treasury  bond  market  remains  the  most  liquid 
segment of the global bond market, whereas sovereign issuances are inevitably fragmented 
in  the  euro  area.  However,  this  structural  problem  has  been  mitigated  by  the  removal  of 
exchange  rate  risk  since  the  introduction  of  the  euro.  Government  bond  yields  have 
converged  across  euro  area  countries  and  are  increasingly  driven  by  common  factors, 
although local factors continue to play a role [ECB, 2008c]. Indeed, the bid-ask spreads of 
sovereign  bonds  denominated  in  euro  are  not  much  higher  than  the  spreads  of  those 
denominated in US dollar [Dunne et al., 2006]. Interestingly, the euro area bond market for 
“corporate” issuance is quite well-integrated [ECB, 2008c] and effective bid-ask spreads are 
possibly even lower than in the United States [Biais et al., 2006].  
I  have  argued  so  far  that  investors  take  into  account  liquidity  and  transaction  costs  when 
dealing  with  international  currencies.  Once  these  structural  and  cost  differentials  converge 
across currencies, traders and investors can discriminate among various alternatives on the 
basis  of  the  return  on  their  investment.  In  brief,  international  currencies  must  be  able  to 
preserve  their  external  value,  avoiding  inflation  and  sharp  nominal  devaluations.  It  is  well-
known that the erosion of the status of sterling as leading international currency was caused 
by a series of large shocks accelerating a declining trend. The fading of the United Kingdom 
as a major political and imperial power was accelerated by the First and Second World Wars. 
The  economic  decline  was  highlighted  by  at  least  three  devaluations  in  1931,  1949  and 
1967, which progressively undermined the confidence of international investors in the ability 
of sterling to preserve its external value. Recent evidence suggests that the pound sterling 
lost its dominance already in the mid-1920s, but then regained the lead in the second half of 
the  1930s  [Eichengreen  and  Flandreau,  2008b].  The  jury  is  still  out  on  this  case,  but  it  is 
evident that inertia in the international use of currencies is much stronger in the case of the 
invoicing  of  trade,  where  network  effects  favour  the  use  of  only  one  currency.  Inertia  is 
somewhat less powerful when investors decide how to allocate their portfolio, leaving greater 
room for currency competition.  
Evidently, inflation and devaluations accompanying the demise of world currencies are not 
natural  accidents,  but 
the  result  of  wrong  macroeconomic  policies  and  structural 
weaknesses. These often take a long time to emerge in the form of an erosion of external 
competitiveness and a rise in external imbalances, fiscal profligacy and internal imbalances, 
low productivity and, eventually, sluggish growth and high unemployment. Conversely, strong 
and balanced economic performances foster the international status of currencies. 
Where does the euro stand in terms of policies and their performance? The euro area fares 
relatively well compared with major economic partners, although a greater effort has to be 
made  to  raise  productivity  and  lift  the  potential  growth  rate  of  the  economy.  The  external 
position  is  fairly  balanced.  The  emergence  of  public  deficits  and  debt  is  guarded  by  the 
functioning of the Stability and Growth Pact. Over the past ten years, inflation has been kept 
relatively low in spite of large supply-side shocks. The institutional setting of the ECB, with its 
independence from political pressure and its mandate to preserve price stability, helped to 
4 
 BIS Review 122/2008
rein in inflationary pressures and indirectly fostered the confidence of domestic and foreign 
residents in the capacity of the euro to preserve its value.  
Political and institutional conditions 
Let me turn to the political and institutional conditions for currencies to steadily take on an 
international role. This is clearly a more complicated issue. 
Historically, countries with stable political systems and the capacity to enforce the rule of law, 
both inside and outside their borders, had currencies that were widely traded and accepted 
internationally. Certainty with regard to property rights, which may be undermined by political 
instability,  and  the  ability  of  the  issuer  of  the  international  currency  to  rule  and  to  raise 
revenues to repay its financial obligations are crucial in this case.  
The existence of “hard power” certainly contributes to the ability to enforce property rights, 
domestically  and  internationally,  and  thus  helps  in  developing  an  international  role  for  the 
currency. From this point of view, Europe cannot compete at present with other providers of 
“hard  power”.  On  the  other  hand,  the  success  of  Economic  and  Monetary  Union  provides 
Europe with a form of “soft power”. Such soft power is translated in different ways, such as 
the anchoring of several currencies to the euro, the adoption of the independent central bank 
model contained in the Maastricht Treaty, technical assistance on issues related to monetary 
policy, payment systems, supervision, banknote issuance, etc.  
Good  economic  governance  is  also  a  fundamental  ingredient  of  successful  international 
currencies. The Dutch guilder in the 17th and 18th century, the British pound in the 19th and 
early  20th  century,  the  US  dollar  in  the  late  20th  century:  all  were  (or  are)  international 
currencies backed by strong empires and states, but also supported by the economic power 
and success of their issuers.  
Some academics regard political and economic governance as the “Achilles heel” of the euro 
[e.g. Cohen, 2007]. They claim that the delegation of monetary and economic responsibilities 
across  Member  States  and  EU  institutions  is  unclear  and  they  lament  the  lack  of  a  single 
unitary governance structure, the so-called “commander in chief”, behind the euro. Over the 
past  year,  the  financial  turbulence  has  posed  a  serious  test  for  the  monetary  authorities 
throughout  the  world.  The  reaction  of  the  ECB  has  shown  that  the  central  bank  can  act 
rapidly and effectively to address liquidity issues.  
As the crisis has evolved from a liquidity to a solvency problem, the challenge has moved 
increasingly  to  supervisory  authorities  and  finance  ministers.  The  ability  to  provide  a 
coordinated European response is being tested. On specific occasions, such as the bail-out 
of the banks Fortis and Dexia, the framework has functioned properly. On the more general 
response to the crisis of confidence in the financial system, it is paradoxical that the relatively 
healthier European banking system might have to suffer more because of the uncoordinated 
and piecemeal reaction of national authorities. There is also a risk of a re-nationalisation of 
the single market for financial services, as a result of different solutions being implemented in 
different countries.  
The fear of many academics and observers has long been that, without a specific framework 
for crisis resolution, the European banking system would be unable to address major shocks. 
The  problem  might  turn  out  to  be  a  different  one.  The  absence  of  a  crisis  resolution 
framework does not prevent effective solutions from being found and implemented. But since 
these  solutions  are  different  from  country  to  country,  they  may  lead  to  problems  of 
discrimination and difference of treatment, undermining the functioning of the single market. 
This certainly would not contribute to the international role of the euro. And this is confirmed 
by the weakening of the exchange rate over the last two weeks. 
Another important institutional condition for the international success of currencies – closely 
linked to good economic governance – is trade and financial liberalisation. By definition, only 
currencies that can be freely converted for trade or investment purposes have the potential to 
BIS Review 122/2008 
 5
achieve the status of international currencies. According to Barry Eichengreen, the US dollar 
owes part of its success in maintaining its position as main reserve currency to the absence 
of truly convertible competitors after the Second World War. In his view, the international use 
of  potential  reserve  currencies  –  such  as  the  French  franc,  the  Japanese  yen  or  the 
Deutsche  Mark  –  was  directly  or  indirectly  discouraged  by  the  respective  governments 
[Eichengreen, 2005].  
Convertibility is not an issue in Europe, but protectionism, especially against foreign capital, 
might  be.  We  are  currently  observing  attempts  in  different  countries  to  limit  the  inflow  of 
capital  from  foreign  countries,  in  particular  in  so-called  “strategic  sectors”.  However,  the 
definition of “strategic” remains vague and can give rise to quite imaginative interpretations. 
Concluding remarks 
To sum up, currencies emerge as international players thanks to a combination of a large 
number  of  conditions.  These  include  geopolitical  influence,  political  stability  and  the 
enforcement  of  the  rule  of  law,  as  well  as  good  political  and  economic  governance.  Only 
large  economies  generating  meaningful  network  externalities  possess 
international 
currencies.  They  must  also  be  economies  with  deep,  efficient  and  open  financial  markets 
where it is possible to invest without the risk of incurring large transaction costs or capital 
losses. Eventually, once all these factors have been accounted for, the quality of economic 
governance  and  economic  institutions  and  the  ability  to  devise  policies  which  support 
confidence in the external value of the currency can make the difference. Obviously, inertia in 
the international use of currencies is strong and sudden changes in their relative position are 
unlikely, barring very large shocks.  
Since  its  introduction  ten  years  ago,  the  euro  has  emerged  as  the  second  most  important 
currency in the world. The euro area offers the opportunity of a large, deep and increasingly 
integrated financial market for foreign operators willing to hold euro-denominated assets. The 
monetary policy conducted by the ECB has certainly contributed to supporting confidence in 
the euro. We now face a different type of challenge, related to the integrity and sustainability 
of the single market in the face of a major financial crisis.  
Given the dimension of the current turmoil, it is not surprising that market participants view 
the ongoing developments with some concern. After all, the birth of the euro was followed by 
a substantial depreciation of the euro against all other currencies. The young currency and 
the young central bank needed to be tested in good and in bad times. The premature death 
of the euro was pre-announced several times. The sceptics had to concede.  
In my view, one element has to be taken into account in analysing the current situation, in the 
light  of  Europe’s  past  experience.  Either  a  strong  response  is  provided  to  the  challenges 
posed  by  the  current  turmoil  to  the  single  financial  market  within  the  existing  institutional 
framework, or the framework itself will be changed in favour of a more centralised system of 
supervision and crisis resolution. This is how the euro was born, after all, as it became clear, 
in  particular  after  the  1992-93  foreign  exchange  crisis,  that  it  was  not  sustainable  to  run 
different monetary policies within a single market. The same logic could apply in the case of 
financial regulation and supervision. And national authorities know it.  
References 
Biais  B.,  F.  Declerck,  J.  Dow,  R.  Portes,  E-L  von  Thadden  (2006),  “European  corporate 
bonds markets: transparency, liquidity, efficiency”, CEPR, May. 
Cairncross  A.  and  B.  Eichengreen  (2003),  Sterling  in  decline:  The  devaluations  of  1931, 
1949 and 1967”, Palgrave Macmillan, 2nd edition. 
6 
 BIS Review 122/2008
Chinn M. and J. A. Frankel (2008), “The euro may over the next 15 years surpass the dollar 
as leading international currency”, NBER Working Paper No. 13909, April. 
Cohen  B.  J.  (2007),  “Enlargement  and  the  international  role  of  the  euro”,  Review  of 
International Political Economy 14:5, 746-773, December. 
Dunne P., M. Moore, R. Portes (2006), “European government bonds markets: transparency, 
liquidity, efficiency”, CEPR, May. 
EC (2008), “EMU@10: successes and challenges after 10 years of Economic and Monetary 
Union”,  European  Commission,  Directorate-General  for  Economic  and  Financial  Affairs, 
European Economy 2/2008.  
ECB  (2003),  “Review  of  the  international  role  of  the  euro”,  European  Central  Bank, 
December. 
ECB (2007), “Review of the international role of the euro”, European Central Bank, June. 
ECB (2008a), “The international role of the euro”, European Central Bank, July. 
ECB  (2008b),  “The  external  dimension  of  monetary  analysis”  in  ECB  Monthly  Bulletin, 
August. 
ECB (2008c), “Financial integration in Europe”, European Central Bank, April. 
Eichengreen  B.  (2005),  “Sterling’s  past,  dollar’s  future:  Historical  perspectives  on  reserve 
currency competition”, NBER Working Paper No. 11336, May. 
Eichengreen B. and M. Flandreau (2008a), “Why the euro is unlikely to eclipse the dollar”, 
Financial Times, April 3 2008. 
Eichengreen B. and M. Flandreau (2008b), “The rise and fall of the dollar, or when did the 
dollar  replace  sterling  as  the  leading  international  currency?”,  NBER  Working  Paper  No. 
14154, July. 
Galati G. and P. Wooldridge (2006), “The euro as a reserve currency: a challenge to the pre-
eminence of the US dollar?”, BIS Working Paper No. 218, October. 
Gourinchas  P.  and  H.  Rey  (2005),  “From  world  banker  to  world  venture  capitalist:  US 
external adjustment and the exorbitant privilege”, NBER Working Paper No. 11563, August. 
Kannan P. (2007), “On the welfare benefits of an international currency”, IMF Working Paper 
07/49, March. 
Lane P. R. and G. M. Milesi-Ferretti (2005), “Financial Globalization and Exchange Rates”, 
IMF Working Paper No. 05/03, January.  
Meissner C. M. and A. M. Taylor (2006), “Losing our marbles in the new century? The great 
rebalancing in historical perspective”, NBER Working Paper No. 12580, October. 
Mileva E. and N. Siegfried (2007), “Oil market structure, network effects and the choice of 
currency for oil invoicing”, ECB Occasional Paper No. 77, December. 
BIS Review 122/2008 
 7
