Durmuş Yilmaz: Globalization and monetary policy  
Speech by Mr Durmuş Yilmaz, Governor of the Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey, at 
the  conference  on  “Globalization,  Inflation  and  Monetary  Policy”,  Istanbul,  21  November 
2008. 
 Dear Guests,  
I would like to welcome you all to the conference on “Globalization, Inflation and Monetary 
Policy”, organized by the Central Bank of Turkey. This conference will host a select group of 
central bankers, experts and academics today and tomorrow. It is a great pleasure for us to 
host this conference and such a distinguished group of participants. During these two days 
we will have the opportunity to discuss the globalization and monetary policy aspects in the 
context of current financial turmoil. 
Dear Guests,  
We have in the midst of fast changing economic agenda. When invited to an international 
conference in the Spring of 2008, I was requested to make a speech on inflationist pressures 
faced by world economies. The title of the session was “Inflation: Is it back to stay?”. In 
Fall 2008, a few weeks before the start of the conference, the organizers informed me that 
they  had  changed  the  theme  of  the  conference.  The  new  title  was  “How  to  cope  with 
deflationary risks?”. In a very short span, the main talking points of the policy makers have 
shifted from “decoupling”, “high energy prices” and “food inflation” to “deflation”, “recession” 
and “credit crunch”. 
Today, international financial system shaped more and more by globalization is on the brink 
of a crucial stage. The problems, which started in sub-prime mortgage markets in the United 
States,  have  spread  the  whole  financial  system  and  reached  a  point  that  threatens  the 
economic stability. Indicators on risk perceptions are at its highest level of all times. We have 
witnessed some relief in the liquidity shortage after the establishment of temporary reciprocal 
currency  arrangements  of  Federal  Reserve  Bank  (FED)  and  Short  Term  Liquidity  Facility 
established by IMF, which is designed to help member countries that are facing temporary 
liquidity problems in the global capital markets. However, despite these measures, liquidity 
squeeze in the credit markets and reluctance in bank’s tendency to lend credit have been 
unabated. One of the adverse features of the current crisis is the freeze in the private credit 
and the tendency of capital to flow back to where the current crisis originated. 
Recent readings on economic activities suggest that ongoing problems in international credit 
markets have spilled over into the real economy as well. Recent estimates of international 
institutions point out a prolonged period of recession in developed economies and a sharp 
slow down in growth rates of developing economies. 
Addressing these challenges, G-20 Summit held in Brazil on 8-9 November 2008, issued a 
communiqué that included the following statement: “We affirmed our determination to take all 
necessary  steps  to  foster  non-inflationary  growth  in  a  stable  and  sustainable  manner 
according  to  the  needs  and  available  instruments  in  our  respective  countries,  including 
through monetary and fiscal policy.” 
Distinguished Guests,  
As  concerns  over  inflationary  pressures  have  subsided  all  over  the  world,  maintaining  the 
smooth functioning of financial system and efficiency of credit markets has become the main 
priority  of  policy  makers.  It  will  be  proper  to  evaluate  the  recent  developments  in  Turkish 
economy in this perspective. 
BIS Review 144/2008 
 1
In Turkey, the banking system has been relatively prepared for the current crisis in terms of 
foreign exchange liquidity. Its foreign exchange short position is also well contained. Foreign 
exchange  position  of  the  public  sector  is  almost  negligible.  The  household  sector  is  net 
creditor in terms of foreign exchange, while real sector is net debtor. 
Since  securitized  products  are  rarely  used  in  the  Turkish  banking  sector,  the  ongoing 
financial turmoil has not put a marked pressure on local banks through that channel. 
Current account deficit, historically a source of vulnerability for the Turkish economy, is likely 
to experience a sharp drop in the upcoming period due to correction in commodity prices, 
slow down in economic activity and depreciation in New Turkish Lira. 
Still, extraordinary fluctuations in global liquidity conditions have adversely affected Turkey 
like other countries, which are sensitive to international financial developments. 
At this point, I would like to emphasize that we will continue to take the necessary measures 
to  contain  the  adverse  effects  of  the  global  financial  turmoil  on  the  domestic  economy, 
provided that they do not conflict with the price stability objective. 
The general framework of the Central Bank’s liquidity management is fairly flexible and well-
structured to fulfill its lender-of-last resort role and meet both New Turkish Lira and foreign 
exchange liquidity requirement of the banking system effectively. 
We will not allow any setback in New Turkish Lira money markets and will ensure smooth 
operation of payment system. In this context, judging that inflation will display a more rapid 
fall  than  envisaged  before,  the  Monetary  Policy  Committee  has  decided  to  lower  the 
borrowing rates by 50 basis points on November 19, 2008. In addition, the margin between 
the lending and borrowing rates was reduced by a further 50 basis points in order to contain 
the potential volatility in short term interest rates. 
Dear Guests,  
The Central Bank of Turkey is aware of the significance of foreign exchange liquidity in the 
banking  system  and  progressively  puts  into  effect  necessary  measures  in  order  to  get 
through this period with minimal damage. 
Accordingly, the Central Bank resumed its activities as an intermediary in Foreign Exchange 
and  Banknotes  Markets  as  of  9  October  2008  and  later  raised  transaction  limits  in  the 
Foreign  Exchange  and  Banknotes  Markets  to  USD  10.8  billion.  Along  with  the  above 
mentioned  measures,  in  order  to  ensure  orderly  liquidity  flow  in  the  financial  system  and 
efficient functioning of credit markets by stimulating an increased foreign exchange liquidity 
flow  in  the  interbank  foreign  exchange  market,  effective  as  of  today  the  Central  Bank  has 
decided: 
a) 
To  extend  the  maturity  of  the  FX  deposit  borrowed  by  the  Banks  within  the 
predetermined borrowing limits from one week to one month, 
To reduce the lending rate from 10 percent to 7 percent for USD and 9 percent for 
Euro in the said market. 
b) 
In  this  challenging  environment  the  way  developing  countries  use  their  foreign  currency 
reserves  is  of  utmost  importance.  The  Central  Bank  of  Turkey,  if  deemed  necessary,  will 
continue  to  take  additional  measures  prudently  within  its  means  in  order  to  ensure  the 
smooth functioning of the FX market and to support FX liquidity. 
Dear Guests,  
I  would  like  to  conclude  my  speech  by  giving  some  information  about  this  conference 
organized  with  the  aim  of  discussing  the  effects  of  globalization  on  monetary  policy  and 
inflation. The first session today will examine the linkages between globalization, monetary 
policy  and  financial  stability.  In  the  afternoon,  second  and  third  sessions  will  analyze  the 
impact of globalization on inflation and business cycles. Sessions on Saturday will be more 
2 
 BIS Review 144/2008
policy oriented. In the morning session, speakers will look at the topic of globalization and 
monetary  policy  challenges  faced  by  emerging  market  economies.  Then  we  will  conclude 
with a panel on the recent global financial turmoil and its policy implications. 
Once  again  I  extend  my  warm  welcome  to  all  participants.  I  also  want  to  thank  the 
distinguished  participants  for  their  valuable  contributions.  I  hope  you  enjoy  both  the 
conference and your stay in Istanbul. 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 144/2008 
 3
