Randall S Kroszner: Effects of the financial crisis on small business 
Testimony of Mr Randall S Kroszner, Member of the Board of Governors of the US Federal 
Reserve System, before the Committee on Small Business, US House of Representatives, 
Washington DC, 20 November 2008. 
The original speech, which contains various links to the documents mentioned, can be found on the US Federal 
Reserve System’s website. 
 Chairwoman  Velázquez,  Ranking  Member  Chabot,  and  members  of  the  Committee,  I  am 
pleased to appear before you on behalf of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve 
System to discuss the availability of credit to small businesses.  
Small businesses are critical to the health of the U.S. economy. They generate more than 
half  of  nonfarm  business  gross  domestic  product,  employ  more  than  half  of  private-sector 
workers,  and  over  the  past  decade  have  created  well  over  half  of  net  new  jobs  annually. 
Moreover,  larger  firms  often  begin  as  smaller  firms  that  prosper  and  grow.  If  small 
businesses are to continue to provide major benefits to the economy, their access to credit is 
clearly  a  high  priority.  My  statement  today  will  address  how  the  ongoing  turmoil  in  the 
financial sector and the weakening macroeconomy appear to be affecting small businesses' 
access  to  credit,  while  recognizing  that  the  impressive  diversity  across  both  industry  and 
geography  of  the  small  business  sector  makes  it  very  difficult  to  draw  too  many  general 
conclusions.  In  addition,  I  will  discuss  the  policy  actions  that  the  Federal  Reserve,  the 
Congress,  the  Treasury,  and  other  government  agencies  have  taken  in  recent  weeks  to 
address the overall functioning of financial markets and deteriorating economic conditions as 
well as how these policies should assist small businesses going forward.  
Recent financial market and economic developments 
As you know, the U.S. financial sector has been under severe stress for more than a year as 
a  result  of  declining  house  prices,  large  losses  on  mortgages  and  mortgage-related 
instruments  at  financial  institutions,  and  an  abrupt  pullback  from  risk-taking  by  investors. 
These strains intensified in late September and early October, and lending between banks 
and other financial institutions beyond more than a few days virtually shut down. Withdrawals 
from money market mutual funds and fears that net asset values would fall further severely 
disrupted  commercial  paper  and  other  short-term  funding  markets,  and  longer-term  credit 
became much more costly as risk spreads on corporate debt instruments jumped and private 
interest rates rose. The problems in credit markets and concerns about the economy have 
caused equity prices to swing sharply and to decline significantly, on net. 
Even  before  the  recent  heightening  of  the  financial  market  turmoil,  economic  activity  had 
shown  considerable  signs  of  weakening.  In  the  labor  market,  private  nonfarm  payroll 
employment fell in August by a notably larger amount than in the previous seven months of 
the  year,  and  in  September  and  October,  job  losses  were  even  more  sizeable.  The 
unemployment rate in October moved sharply higher to 6-1/2 percent. On the spending side, 
consumption  expenditures,  business 
investment 
spending all declined in the third quarter, and overall real economic activity contracted 1/4 
percent. Consistent with the emerging slack in both product and labor markets and a drop in 
the  price  of  energy  and  other  commodities,  headline  and  core  measures  of  price  inflation 
have both decelerated in recent months. In addition, measures of inflation expectations have 
also declined. 
investment  outlays,  and  residential 
BIS Review 145/2008 
 1
Small business access to credit in the current environment 
With  this  general  background  in  mind,  I  will  now  turn  to  how  current  financial  and 
macroeconomic conditions appear to be affecting access to credit by small businesses. As 
you  may  recall,  former  Federal  Reserve  Governor  Frederic  Mishkin  testified  before  the 
Senate Committee on Small Business in April and concluded that credit standards for small 
businesses had almost certainly tightened since the onset of the crisis, and that much of this 
tightening appeared to be reflected in an increased cost of credit to small businesses rather 
than  any  significant  reduction  in  the  availability  of  credit.1  He  noted,  however,  the  high 
degree of uncertainty surrounding this assessment, which remains the case now with even 
more data in hand. 
In  my  statement  today,  I  will  discuss  how  both  credit  supply  and  credit  demand  factors 
appear to be affecting small business access to credit, while recognizing that, in practice, it is 
normally  quite  difficult  to  separate  the  effects  of  these  two  forces.  With  respect  to  credit 
supply, access to credit for both small and large businesses may be affected by a decline in 
the willingness of banks and other lenders to make loans to small businesses because of, for 
example,  credit  market  disruptions  or  other  stresses  that  financial  institutions  may  be 
enduring.  In  addition,  small  business  access  to  credit  can  be  reduced  by  a  drop  in  the 
creditworthiness  of  small  businesses  because  of,  for  example,  a  decline  in  the  value  of 
collateral  they  can  post  to  back  a  loan.  Alternatively,  a  drop  in  the  demand  for  small 
businesses'  products  and  services  resulting  from,  for  instance,  weakening  macroeconomic 
conditions will reduce current and expected sales and revenues. The likely resulting pullback 
in  expansion  plans  will  reduce  businesses'  demand  for  credit  over  and  above  any  effects 
coming from the supply side of the market.  
To summarize our conclusions, the information that we have received since April from both 
banks and small businesses suggest, rather convincingly, that over the last six months it has 
become more difficult for small businesses to access credit, but that at the same time, small 
business demand for credit has declined. Commercial banks, the most common source of 
credit for small businesses, have generally both imposed more-stringent credit standards and 
increased interest rate spreads and fees. In addition, deteriorating financial positions in both 
the  small  business  and 
the 
creditworthiness of many small businesses and thereby constraining their access to credit. 
That being said, the information we have on the volume of small business loans suggests 
that  credit  is  generally  available,  albeit  on  significantly  stricter  terms.  In  addition,  small 
businesses generally report that reduced demand for their products and services caused by 
a lower level of economic activity is a more serious concern than is the tightening of credit 
supply conditions. Put differently, while credit supply concerns are real, the weakened state 
of the economy appears to be the more serious challenge facing most small businesses in 
the  current  environment.  Importantly,  there  is  some  evidence  that  concern  over  access  to 
credit is relatively stronger at larger businesses. The remainder of my statement discusses 
the information on which we base these conclusions.  
Incoming survey data for the banking sector suggest that small businesses access to credit 
has tightened further over the past half year. For example, in the Board's most recent Senior 
Loan  Officer  Opinion  Survey  on  Bank  Lending  Practices  conducted  in  October,  a  net  75 
percent  of  the  domestic  banks  surveyed  –  a  larger  net  fraction  than  in  the  July  survey  – 
reported that over the previous three months, they had tightened the standards applied when 
approving commercial and industrial (C&I) loans to small firms.2 But small businesses were 
the  household  sectors  are  almost  surely 
reducing 
                                                 
1   See  Frederic  S.  Mishkin  (2008),  "Small  Business  Lending",  testimony  before  the  Committee  on  Small 
Business and Entrepreneurship, U.S. Senate, April 16. 
2   See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2008), Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey on Bank 
Lending Practices, October, and July. 
2 
 BIS Review 145/2008
not alone; almost a net 85 percent of the domestic banks surveyed reported having tightened 
lending  standards  on  C&I  loans  to  large  and  middle-market  firms  over  the  previous  three 
months.  In  both  the  July  and  October  surveys,  a  significant  and  increasing  net  fraction  of 
banks noted that they had increased the interest rate spreads over their cost of funds and 
fees  on  the  C&I  loans  they  had  approved  for  small  firms,  and  a  somewhat  smaller  net 
fraction of banks reported tightening nonprice conditions, such as collateral requirements and 
loan covenants. Importantly, in both the July and October surveys, the net fractions of banks 
reporting tighter lending standards and tighter price terms on C&I loans to small firms were 
very high by historical standards going back to 1990. These results are also true for loans 
made to medium-size and large businesses.  
Somewhat  in  contrast  to  the  above  results,  information  from  the  most  recent  (August) 
quarterly Survey of Terms of Business Lending suggested that there has been relatively little 
net  change  in  average  interest  rate  spreads  on  C&I  loans  since  late  2006.3  Loan  rate 
spreads  at  small  domestic  banks,  which  are  an  important  source  of  financing  for  small 
businesses,  remained  toward  the  low  end  of  the  wide  range  within  which  they  have 
fluctuated since 2004. Spreads on C&I loan originations smaller than $100,000 at all banks, 
which  are  loans  that  are  likely  made  to  small  businesses,  have  also  remained  broadly 
unchanged since 2006. While differences between the two surveys, including their relative 
timeliness, likely explain part of the contrasting results, on balance, the quarterly Survey of 
Terms of Business lending results serve to temper the Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey 
results.4  
Data  on  changes  in  the  quantity  of  C&I  loans  at  banks  also  support  the  view  that  small 
businesses have generally maintained their access to bank credit, although new loans and 
new loan commitments are being subjected to stricter lending standards and terms. Based 
on  a  sample  of  banks  of  all  sizes  that  report  weekly  to  the  Federal  Reserve,  the  dollar 
volume of outstanding C&I loans at both large and small U.S. commercial banks expanded 
robustly over the first four months of this year, increased moderately over the months of May 
through  August,  and  surged  dramatically  in  September.  A  special  set  of  questions  on  the 
October Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey attempted to help explain these patterns. The 
results  suggested  that  firms'  drawing  on  unused  portions  of  loans  made  under  previous 
commitments was not especially important for explaining the September surge in lending at 
banks with less than $20 billion in total assets. Indeed, over one-third of those smaller banks 
reported having increased loans not made under previous commitments. However, many of 
those banks noted that the increased demand was accounted for, in part, by firms that were 
substituting bank loans for other funding sources.  
Incoming  data  from  business  surveys  also  indicate  that  lending  conditions  for  small 
businesses  have  tightened  –  in  some  cases,  significantly.  For  example,  recent  monthly 
surveys of the National Federation of Independent Businesses (NFIB), which are available 
through  October,  suggest  that  financing  conditions  for  small  businesses  have  deteriorated 
substantially over the past several months. In particular, the net percentage of respondents 
that reported that credit was harder to obtain over the preceding three months and the net 
percentage  of  respondents  that  expected  credit  conditions  to  tighten  over  the  next  three 
months have climbed to the higher end or the top of their ranges over the past two decades. 
That said, financing conditions have continued to be ranked as the top business concern by 
                                                 
3   See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2008), Statistical Release E.2, "Survey of Terms of 
Business Lending", August 4-8. 
4   The majority of loans considered in the Survey of Terms of Business Lending are drawn under pre-existing 
commitments, which differs from the Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey that considers changes in the terms 
and standards being applied to new loans. This difference between the two surveys likely explains in part why 
the  C&I  loan  spreads  reported  in  the  Survey  of  Terms  of  Business  Lending  show  little  change  despite  the 
notable tightening in the price terms on C&I loans reported in the Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey. 
BIS Review 145/2008 
 3
only a modest fraction of small business – 5 percent in October – although this is up from 2 
percent  last  March.  However,  this  modest  level  of  concern  may,  in  part,  reflect  the 
dominance of other factors, such as weak demand conditions, a topic to which I will return 
shortly. 
The  Duke/CFO  Magazine  Global  Business  Outlook  Survey,  conducted  most  recently  in 
September,  also  suggested  that  the  ongoing  financial  turmoil  is  having  an  increasingly 
adverse effect on small businesses' access to credit.5 Almost 40 percent of the chief financial 
officers  (CFOs)  of  small  businesses  who  responded  to  the  survey  said  that  credit  had 
become  more  costly,  less  available,  or  both  as  a  result  of  the  financial  turmoil.  This 
proportion is up slightly from the March survey when this sentiment was reported by about 
one-third of responding small business CFOs. This survey also asked respondents to rank 
their  top  three  concerns  for  their  business,  with  (changing)  options  given  in  the  survey. 
"Credit markets/interest rates" was ranked second to "consumer demand" as the top concern 
among small business CFOs in both the September 2008 and the March 2008 surveys. This 
survey also suggested, as did the Senior Loan Officer Survey discussed above, that access 
to credit is a relatively more serious concern for larger firms. For example, some 38 percent 
of the Duke/CFO Magazine survey respondents with less than 500 employees indicate that 
the  financial  turmoil  is  adversely  impacting  their  access  to  credit,  but  47  percent  of  larger 
firms say this is true. Consumer demand is the top business concern for firms of all sizes.  
The effect of the current crisis on household balance sheets is an additional channel through 
which small business access to credit is being affected. As you know, small business and 
household  finances  are,  in  practice,  very  closely  intertwined.  For  example,  data  from  the 
Board's 2007 Survey of Consumer Finances indicated that about 11 percent of households 
own and actively manage a small business, and of these households, about 18 percent use 
personal  assets  to  guarantee  or  collateralize  loans  for  the  business.6  A  broadly  similar 
fraction of households that own and actively manage a small business also have made one 
or  more  loans  to  the  business.  In  addition,  the  most  recent  Survey  of  Small  Business 
Finances (SSBF) indicated that about 15 percent of the total value of small business loans in 
2003 was collateralized by "personal" real estate (and some 37 percent was collateralized by 
business  real  estate  assets).7  Because  the  condition  of  household  balance  sheets  can  be 
relevant to the ability of some small businesses to obtain credit, the fact that declining house 
prices have weakened household balance-sheet positions suggests that the housing market 
crisis  has  likely  had  an  adverse  impact  on  the  volume  and  price  of  credit  that  small 
businesses are able to raise over and above the effects of the broader credit market turmoil.  
Another indicator of the stress that current conditions have placed on small business credit 
access  is  the  recent  experience  of  the  Small  Business  Administration's  (SBA)  7(a) 
guaranteed  loan  program.  This  program  is  generally  used  to  provide  loans  to  small 
businesses when they  cannot get conventional loans. Although SBA-guaranteed loans are 
only a small portion of total small business loans, in recent months the dollar volume of these 
loans has dropped significantly, and in October 2008 the volume was less than 50 percent of 
its  level  12  months  earlier.  These  declines  are  the  result  of  a  number  of  factors  –  lower 
demand overall for loans due to the weaker economic outlook, tightened credit standards by 
lenders,  and  declining  creditworthiness  among  applicants  because  of  their  deteriorating 
financial condition. In addition, market reports indicate that in recent weeks, banks and other 
                                                 
5   See  Duke  University,  Fuqua  School  of  Business,  and  CFO  Magazine  (2008),  Duke/CFO  Magazine  Global 
Business Outlook Survey, September, www.cfosurvey.org. 
6   Data collection for the 2007 Survey of Consumer Finances was completed early in 2008 and processing of the 
data is under way. An article reviewing the highlights of the data is expected to be published in the Federal 
Reserve Bulletin in the first quarter of 2009. Release of the public version of the micro data is expected to 
follow that publication (see 2007 Survey of Consumer Finances). 
7   See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2003), Survey of Small Business Finances. 
4 
 BIS Review 145/2008
lenders that make SBA loans have not been able to securitize and sell SBA-backed loans to 
other institutions in the secondary market.  
Turning  to  credit  demand,  the  NFIB  survey's  results  are  even  more  pessimistic  than  they 
were in April. For example, the survey's index of small business optimism dropped in October 
to  its  lowest  level  since  the  monthly  surveys  began  in  1986.  This  subdued  level  reflects 
deterioration in several components of the index, including that the fraction of respondents 
considering  expansion  in  the  next  three  months  and  the  fraction  considering  capital 
expenditures in the next three to six months have fallen to the bottom of their ranges over the 
past two decades. Weak plans for business expansion will likely reduce demand for loans, 
which could result in future declines in small business loans even without any tightening of 
credit supply conditions. As noted earlier, although only 5 percent of small businesses in the 
NFIB  survey  ranked  financing  conditions  as  their  top  concern,  some  23  percent  of  firms 
indicated  that  sales  were  their  main  concern.  These  results,  when  combined  with  the 
Duke/CFO  Magazine  survey  data,  suggest  that  consumer  demand  concerns  generally 
provide the most serious challenges facing small businesses. 
Policy responses to financial and economic developments and their implications for 
small business credit access 
I would now like to turn to a discussion of the policy actions that the Federal Reserve, the 
Congress,  the  Treasury,  and  other  government  agencies  have  taken  in  recent  weeks  to 
address the overall functioning of financial markets and the weakening of economic activity 
as well as how these policies should assist small businesses going forward.  
In  response  to  the  escalation  in  financial  market  stress  that  began  in  late  September, 
policymakers  both  in  the  United  States  and  other  countries  have  taken  a  series  of 
extraordinary  actions  aimed  at  restoring  market  functioning  and  improving  investor 
confidence. The Federal Reserve has continued to address ongoing problems in interbank 
funding  markets  by  expanding  its  existing  lending  facilities,  increasing the  quantity  of  term 
funds that it auctions to banks, and accommodating greater demand for funds from banks 
and  primary  dealers.  The  Federal  Reserve  has  also  implemented  several  important 
temporary facilities to alleviate the pressures on money market mutual funds and commercial 
paper issuers.  
The Emergency Economic Stabilization Act (EESA), enacted by Congress in early October, 
provides  critically  important  new  tools  to  address  financial  market  problems.  The  Troubled 
Asset Relief Program (TARP), authorized by the legislation, allows the Treasury to provide 
capital to financial institutions across a wide spectrum of sizes and to purchase or guarantee 
troubled  mortgage-related  and  possibly  other  assets  held  by  banks  and  other  financial 
institutions.  The  EESA  also  temporarily  raises  the  limit  on  the  deposit  insurance  coverage 
provided by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) from $100,000 to $250,000 
per depositor and temporarily fully covers non-interest-bearing transactions accounts, such 
as payroll accounts. As you know, this latter action was aimed particularly at helping small 
businesses. 
In  response  to  weakening  macroeconomic  activity  and  the  increased  downside  risks  to 
economic growth and employment implied by the recent escalation in financial market stress 
(along  with  diminished  upside  risks  to  inflation),  the  Federal  Open  Market  Committee 
(FOMC),  in  a  coordinated  effort  with  other  central  banks,  lowered  the  target  federal  funds 
rate  50  basis  points  to  1-1/2  percent  on  October  8.  This  cut  was  followed  by  a  further  50 
basis point easing to 1 percent at the October FOMC meeting. 
Additionally,  on  November  12,  the  federal  banking  agencies  released  an  interagency 
statement aimed at ensuring that all banking organizations fulfill their fundamental role in the 
BIS Review 145/2008 
 5
economy  as  intermediaries  of  credit  to  businesses,  consumers,  and  other  creditworthy 
borrowers.8  
These  actions  should  have  a  wide  range  of  positive  effects  across  the  entire  economy, 
including  small  businesses.  Policymakers'  actions  over  the  last  two  months  in  interbank 
funding  markets,  commercial  paper  markets,  and  the  money  market  mutual  fund  industry 
should help restore market functioning and allow short-term funding to be directed to where 
the economy most needs it. Likewise, the activities permitted as part of the EESA legislation 
should  help  rebuild  confidence  in  the  financial  system,  increase  the  liquidity  of  financial 
markets, and improve the ability of a broad range of financial institutions to raise capital from 
private sources. The expansion in the coverage of deposit insurance provided by the FDIC 
should  also  bolster  public  confidence  and  provide  additional  liquidity  to  FDIC-insured 
institutions. The FOMC's cumulative 1 percentage point reduction in the federal funds rate in 
October,  combined  with  previous  reductions  between  September  2007  and  May  2008, 
should  lower  lending  costs  and  stimulate  economic  activity  in  coming  quarters.  And,  the 
agencies' recent guidance should encourage lending to creditworthy borrowers. 
The  benefits  to  small  businesses  from  some  of  the  above-described  policy  actions  will  be 
largely  indirect,  but  nevertheless  real.  For  example,  although  small  businesses  do  not 
themselves  issue  nonfinancial  commercial  paper,  they  nonetheless  benefit  when  large 
nonfinancial firms can issue commercial paper in well-functioning markets and thus do not 
have to tap backup lines of credit at banks. Similarly, improving interbank funding markets 
and  restoring  public  confidence  in  banks  and  other  financial  institutions  benefits  small 
businesses  –  again,  indirectly  –  by  lowering  intermediaries'  and  thereby  small  businesses' 
borrowing costs and increasing the volume of loans that banks can extend. The temporary 
increase  in  FDIC  deposit  insurance  coverage  should  reinforce  these  effects  by  further 
strengthening public confidence and providing additional liquidity to FDIC-insured institutions.  
Importantly,  some  of  these  policy  actions  will  also  directly  benefit  small  businesses.  For 
example,  the  higher  deposit  insurance  coverage  limits  confer  direct  benefits  by  greatly 
reducing  the  volume  of  exposed  small  business  deposits  as  well  as  by  decreasing  the 
number of small businesses with exposed bank deposits. Data from the 2003 SSBF indicate 
that  under  the  $100,000  deposit  insurance  ceiling,  an  estimated  $178  billion  of  small 
business deposits were uninsured, and 8.7 percent of small businesses had some deposit 
exposure.  With  the  increased  ceiling  of  $250,000  and  the  full  insurance  of  non-interest-
bearing transactions accounts, the 2003 SSBF data suggest that total small business deposit 
exposure fell to $37 billion and that less than 1 percent of small businesses have any deposit 
exposure. Among firms with fewer than 10 employees – which represent over 80 percent of 
all  small  businesses  –  the  broader  deposit  insurance  coverage  reduces  total  deposit 
exposure from an estimated $22.1 billion to $1.6 billion and leaves only 0.3 percent of these 
businesses with any deposit exposure.  
The  recent  reductions  in  the  federal  funds  rate  should  directly  benefit  small  businesses. 
Lower policy rates should result in small businesses facing lower borrowing costs, especially 
because  rates  on  small  business  loans  tend  to  be  tied  to  the  prime  interest  rate,  which 
generally moves closely with the federal funds rate.9 In addition, stronger economic activity 
resulting  from  lower  interest  rates  should  result  in  small  businesses  enjoying  increased 
demand for their products and services.  
                                                 
8   See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, Office of the 
Comptroller of the Currency, and Office of Thrift Supervision (2008), "Interagency Statement on Meeting the 
Needs of Creditworthy Borrowers", joint press release, November 12. 
9   The  Survey  of Terms  of  Bank  Lending  indicated  that  40  percent  of  the  dollar  volume  and  two-thirds  of  the 
number of C&I loans originated over the past year have been tied to the prime rate. 
6 
 BIS Review 145/2008
Of  course,  the  magnitude  of  the  effects  of  recent  policies  are  highly  uncertain,  given  the 
current climate of extreme financial stress as well as the nonconventional nature of a number 
of these policy actions. Thus, the Federal Reserve will continue to monitor closely how the 
effects of recent policy actions are affecting small business conditions and economic activity 
more broadly.  
Conclusion 
The  health  of  the  U.S.  economy  depends  importantly  on  the  vitality  of  the  small  business 
sector, and continued access to credit on competitive terms is necessary for that vitality. On 
balance, credit supply conditions to small businesses have tightened substantially since last 
April. Although credit appears to be generally available, such availability usually comes with 
tougher  standards  and  at  a  higher  cost.  However,  while  credit  concerns  are  real,  the 
weakened  state  of  the  economy  and  the  resulting  drop  in  demand  for  their  products  and 
services  appear  to  be  the  more  serious  challenge  for  small  businesses  in  the  current 
environment. 
How  small  businesses'  access  to credit  will  evolve  will  likely  be  strongly  influenced  by  the 
success  of  recent  policies  undertaken  by  the  Federal  Reserve,  the  Congress,  and  other 
policy  institutions  aimed  at  improving  the  functioning  of  financial  institutions  and  markets, 
rebuilding  confidence  in  the  financial  system,  and  stimulating  economic  activity.  Given  the 
current  financial  and  economic  environment,  the  sizes  of  the  effects  of  recent  policies  on 
both the economy and small businesses are highly uncertain. For these reasons, the Federal 
Reserve will continue to monitor evolving financial market and economic conditions and their 
effects on small business access to credit as part of its broader efforts to restore the health of 
the U.S. financial system and our economy. 
BIS Review 145/2008 
 7
