Lucas Papademos: Opening remarks at the press briefing on the 
occasion of the publication of the December 2008 ECB Financial Stability 
Review 
Speech by Mr Lucas Papademos, Vice President of the European Central Bank, at the press 
briefing  on  the  occasion  of  the  publication  of  the  December  2008  ECB  Financial  Stability 
Review, Frankfurt am Main, 15 December 2008. 
 Introduction  
I. 
My colleagues and I would like to welcome you to today’s press briefing on the occasion of 
the  publication  of  the  December  2008  edition  of  the  ECB  Financial  Stability  Review.  The 
financial  stability  assessment  contained  in  the  Review  has  been  prepared  with  the  close 
involvement of the ESCB Banking Supervision Committee. It is for the most part based on 
information  that  was  available  up  until  the  “cut-off”  date  of  28  November.  The  Review 
examines  in  some  detail  the  main  trends  and  events  that  characterised  the  euro  area 
financial system over the past six months and it contains 14 boxes and five special feature 
articles  that  address  topical  financial  stability  issues  in  a  more  focused  and  analytical 
manner. The central objective of the ECB Financial Stability Review is to identify the main 
sources of risk and vulnerability to financial system stability and to provide a comprehensive 
assessment  of  the  capacity  of  the  euro  area  financial  system  to  absorb  adverse 
disturbances. 
For this edition of the Review, we made an additional effort to provide a summary that makes 
the key messages of our analysis more accessible. In my presentation, I will broadly follow 
this summary, but also provide additional explanations on some of the most topical issues. I 
will start with a brief review of the overall impact of the financial market turmoil on the global 
banking system and the current macroeconomic  outlook. I will then examine the risks and 
vulnerabilities in: (1) the global macro-financial environment; (2) the euro area corporate and 
household sectors and; (3) the euro area financial system. Finally, I will conclude with our 
overall assessment of risks to euro area financial stability in the period ahead. 
The financial market turmoil: overview 
II.  
Since the publication of the previous Financial Stability Review in June 2008, the financial 
crisis  has  intensified.  Banks  had  to  absorb  further  asset  valuation  write-downs  in  an 
environment where wholesale funding costs remained elevated. At the same time, the global 
economic  outlook  deteriorated  and  became  more  uncertain,  risk  aversion  among  financial 
market participants surged, and the prices of most financial assets fell.  
The  persistent  liquidity  stresses  in  the  early  phases  of  the  turmoil  eventually  gave  way  to 
deeper concerns about creditworthiness and the adequacy of capital buffers. Following the 
bankruptcy of Lehman Brothers, investors and creditors lost confidence in the ability of some 
financial firms to meet their obligations. As a result, many key financial firms faced mounting 
challenges in accessing short-term funding and capital markets, which triggered sharp drops 
in their stock prices. Some of the world’s largest financial institutions were affected by this 
adverse  dynamic  and  a  number  of  them  were  ultimately  declared  bankrupt,  purchased  by 
other financial institutions, or provided with government support.  
Central  banks  and  governments  have  taken  extraordinary  remedial  actions,  which  aim  at 
addressing  liquidity  stresses  and  strengthening  capital  positions,  thus  contributing  to 
restoring confidence in and improving the resilience of financial systems. These measures 
have  succeeded  in  stabilising  the  euro  area  banking  system.  Over  time,  as  some 
BIS Review 159/2008 
 1
government  measures  are  being  fully  implemented,  they  should  contribute  to  lowering 
funding costs of banks and facilitate the provision of credit to the broader economy.  
After these introductory remarks, let me first present the latest available figures regarding the 
total turmoil-related income losses and the new capital raised by major global banks since 
the beginning of the second quarter of 2007 up to and including the third quarter of 2008. 
Over this period, the total mark-to-market losses amounted to USD 720 billion globally. This 
figure  includes  losses  related  to  holdings  of  structured  finance  instruments  and  mortgages 
which are reflected either in net income or in the value of equity or in other comprehensive 
income.1 As shown in Chart 1, the share of European banks in this total was 37% (or USD 
239 billion). Euro area banks reported losses of USD 131.3 billion, which represented 18% of 
the global amount. North American banks bore the bulk (59%) of the global mark-to-market 
losses.  
Within  the  same  period,  major  global  banks  raised  USD  765  billion in  new  capital,  that  is, 
more  than  the  losses  reported  (see  Chart  2).  The  capital  raised  includes  common  stock, 
preferred stock, and hybrid securities that are accepted as capital by regulators.2 The share 
of  European  banks  in  the  total  new  capital  raised  globally  is  39%  and  that  of  euro  area 
financial institutions is 18%. These shares are, respectively, somewhat higher or the same as 
the corresponding figures for the total losses. However, bank losses in the euro area seem to 
be  more  widely  spread  across  individual  institutions  than  is  the  case  in  the  US  and  other 
countries.  This  notwithstanding,  the  intense  stresses  that  emerged  after  the  failure  of 
Lehman  Brothers  raised  serious  doubts  among  investors  about  the  asset  quality  and  the 
adequacy of the capital buffers of some euro area institutions and resulted in an abrupt and 
significant deterioration in money market conditions. Consequently, government and central 
bank actions were necessary to help stabilise the banking system.  
Since September this year, tensions have increasingly spilled over from the financial sector 
to the real economy. In the euro area, a number of the downside risks to economic activity 
that  had  been  previously  identified  materialised.  The  significant  weakening  of  economic 
activity could have a negative effect on borrowers’ ability to service their debt and thus on the 
credit risk faced by banks.  
According to the December 2008 Eurosystem staff macroeconomic projections for the euro 
area, global economic weakness will persist in the coming quarters; thereafter we expect a 
gradual recovery, supported by the fall in commodity prices and assuming that the external 
environment improves and the financial tensions weaken (see Chart 3).  
                                                 
1   Losses related to banks’ operating activities are not included, to the extent that investments in related assets can be 
segregated from operating losses. If a bank’s core business involves mortgage-loan origination, securitisation, or otherwise 
requires the firm to hold related assets, these losses are included. Losses from investments in all other banks or firms are 
included only if the firms or banks in question are not included in the data used to compute  these figures, or if the loss 
affects  cash  flows,  as  in  the  case  of  fixed  income  securities.  Figures  are  pre-tax  and  net  of  any  relevant  financial 
hedges  and  off-setting  gains,  unless  a  bank  does  not  report  these  factors.  Most  recorded  losses  are  the  quarterly  or 
accumulated losses that were reported at quarter-end. One important exception is when the company reports provisions for 
credit  losses  and  charge-offs.  In  this  case,  the  year-over-year  increase  in  provisions  or  charge-offs  are  used  instead,  in 
order to minimise the impact of normal operations on the figures. Unless it is certain that loan charge-offs are not included in 
new provisions for losses, these charge-offs are only recorded for 2007. The underlying assumption is that charge-offs after 
the end of 2007 are already included in previously recorded provisions. Some banks do not expect to fully realise these 
write-downs,  especially  in  the  case  of  unrealised  losses,  mark-to-market  losses,  and  loss  provisions.  Inclusion  in  the 
figures is not meant to imply that the firm has already incurred such losses, and any reversals or realised gains are included 
to mitigate the effects on write-down figures. 
2   Gains and losses from asset sales (gains/losses from assets sold) and divestitures (value of quantity sold) are also 
included. The after-tax gain on asset sales is reported so as to provide a more accurate picture of its effect on equity, if this 
data is provided by the firm. Otherwise, pre-tax gains or total proceeds from sales are used. A capital infusion may also be 
excluded  if  sufficient  information  is  not  available.  Information  on  write-downs  and  capital  raised  is  limited  by  the 
individual bank’s willingness and ability to report it. In general, data is included from the first quarter in which the bank 
reported related losses on, and the first observations are for Q2/2007. 
2 
 BIS Review 159/2008
Sources of risk and vulnerability 
III.  
This leads me to the second part of my presentation that focuses on the main sources of risk 
and vulnerability that may affect the euro area financial stability outlook over the next six to 
twelve months.  
The global macro-financial environment 
III.1  
Let me start with the risks and vulnerabilities we have identified in the global macro-financial 
environment.  Global  imbalances,  notably  the  persistently  large  US  current  account  deficits 
and  the  recycling  of  surpluses  from  emerging  Asia  and  oil-exporting  countries  continue  to 
pose  substantial  risks  to  global  financial  stability.  The  cumulated  net  capital  inflows  to  the 
United  States  remained  relatively  stable  (as  shown  in  Chart  4),  because  the  lower  capital 
inflows  from  private  investors  were  counterbalanced  by  important  official  inflows  stemming 
from  the  continued  accumulation  of  foreign  exchange  reserves  by  major  oil  exporters  and 
other surplus economies.  
Another  important  source  of  risk  stems  from  the  US  housing  market  which  has  been  the 
epicentre  of  the  financial  market  stresses.  The  outlook  for  US  house  prices  is  shown  on 
Chart 5 using the Case-Shiller futures price indices. The market expects that house prices 
will bottom out in 2010, about six months later than had been expected at the beginning of 
2008.  The  narrow  index  which  measures  developments  in  the  largest  US  cities,  also 
indicates that house prices are expected to drop to a level that is more than 30% below the 
peak  recorded  in  mid-2006,  before  they  start  to  stabilise. Estimates  of  the  existing  excess 
supply in the housing markets put the housing overhang at around 1 million houses. At the 
current rate of housing starts, it would take up to two years to eliminate the excess supply. 
Box I of the Review provides a more in-depth assessment of the current and expected future 
valuations in the US housing markets.  
At the same time, the outlook for the US corporate sector has, on balance, also weakened 
substantially.  By  mid-September,  corporate  profits  growth  and  default  rates  had  already 
deteriorated rapidly. As financing conditions have tightened significantly, even some of the 
largest corporations have reported shortages of cash. As shown in Chart 6, the rest of the 
world has remained the only positive contributor sustaining corporate profit growth in the US. 
It is likely, however, that the slowdown of the global economy will also curb this contribution 
in  the  period  ahead,  while  declining  domestic  demand  will  continue  to  depress  corporate 
profits.  
A  further  source  of  risks  to  financial  stability  has  been  the  continued  worsening  of  the 
average  hedge  fund  investment  performance  amid  prolonged  and  heightened  financial 
market volatility. During times of stress, many hedge funds reduced risk-taking and instead 
concentrated on capital preservation, either voluntarily, or due to the reduced availability of 
bank funding and investor withdrawals. The deleveraging in the hedge fund sector has been 
widespread and rapid as illustrated in Chart 7. Looking forward, if hedge funds fail to retain 
their  investors  and  cases  of  hedge  fund  closure  become  more  frequent,  the  possibility  of 
further sizeable position unwinds by the sector may pose a challenge to financial markets.  
In  a  context  of  global  de-leveraging  and  mounting  risk  aversion,  foreign  investors  also 
markedly reduced their exposures to emerging market financial assets. Persistent turbulence 
in financial markets weighed on those emerging economies that rely on external financing to 
fund  their  current  account  deficits,  particularly  in  Central  and  Eastern  Europe.  This  is  of 
relevance  for  financial  stability  also  in  the  euro  area  because  of  the  sizeable  cross-border 
exposures  of  European  banks  vis-à-vis  new  EU  Member  States.  The  pertinent  facts  and 
potential risks are presented in Box 2 of the Review. The share of assets in new EU Member 
States was the highest for banks in Austria, Greece, Sweden, Belgium and Italy, while other 
euro area countries were less exposed (as shown in Chart 8). In 2007, the growth of euro 
area  banks’  assets  in  this  region  was,  on  average,  35 percentage  points  higher  than  their 
total asset growth. Furthermore, given the higher profit margins that can be realised in the 
BIS Review 159/2008 
 3
banking  markets  of  new  EU  Member  States  the  contribution  of  some  euro  area  banks’ 
subsidiaries  in  the  new  EU  Member  States  to  group  profits  have  been  substantial.  Some 
large  banks  that  are  active  in  the  region  could,  therefore,  be  negatively  affected  if 
macroeconomic conditions in new EU members were to deteriorate.  
The euro area corporate and household sectors 
III.2 
In the euro area household sector, pockets of vulnerability may have grown in the mortgage 
markets,  mostly  stemming  from  developments  in  income  and  house  prices.  Regarding  the 
latter, Chart 9 indicates that house prices in the euro area – with the exception of Germany – 
increased more strongly than housing rents over the last decade. The 45-degree line depicts 
equal growths rates of house prices and rents. Box 5 of the Review analyses developments 
in  selected  euro  area  housing  markets  using  a  dynamic  asset  pricing  model.  The  main 
findings  are,  first,  that  while  the  bulk  of  the  variability  of  house  price  movements  can  be 
attributed to changes in rental yields, a generalised decline in expected returns on housing 
investments may permeate the housing markets of all euro area countries, irrespective of the 
evolution of fundamentals. A further interesting finding of this analysis is that house prices 
tend  to  overreact  to  news,  especially  when  fundamentals  are  deteriorating.  While  the 
ongoing  slowdown  in  the  annual  growth  rate  of  euro  area  residential  property  prices  has 
remained gradual so far, the possibility of a market overreaction to negative news might well 
apply to house price dynamics in some regions at the present juncture.  
Euro area non-financial corporations tend to exhibit, at present, stronger balance sheets than 
just before the last credit cycle downturn. However, their operating environment has become 
more challenging and less favourable than six months ago. In the near term, balance sheets 
are likely to deteriorate due to the expected slowdown of earnings growth, in an environment 
of  weak  economic  activity,  persisting  high  leverage,  and  difficult  funding  conditions  for  the 
corporate sector. Reflecting this outlook, Chart 10 depicts forecasts of private entities which 
suggest that the default rates for European firms are likely to rise from the current low level 
over the next 12 months.  
Many euro area financial institutions have large lending and investment exposures to euro 
area  commercial  property  markets.  In  most  euro  area  countries,  commercial  property 
inflation continued to decline in the first three quarters of 2008, and prices were even falling 
in seven out of the 12 countries for which data are available. Prices were affected by reduced 
commercial  property  investment  activity  in  the  latter  part  of  2007  and  in  2008.  Chart  11 
shows that investment volumes declined by 63% in the third quarter of 2008 compared to the 
same quarter of the previous year although wide variations were observed across euro area 
countries.  As  a  result  of  these  developments,  income  risks  for  many  commercial  property 
investors  have  increased.  Funding  costs  and  risks  have  also  grown,  raising  costs  for 
leveraged  property  investors  and,  in  turn,  contributing  to  the  observed  negative  price 
dynamics in some markets.  
The euro area financial system 
III.3  
Turning to the euro area financial system, conditions in the euro area and other major money 
markets  deteriorated  significantly  in  mid-September,  as  the  default  of  Lehman  Brothers 
fuelled concerns about counterparty credit risk and challenged the widely-held view that any 
large bank, which was considered too big or too interconnected to fail, would be supported 
by public authorities. This event triggered a sharp increase in the spreads between Euribor 
and EONIA swap rates across all maturities (as shown in Chart 12). Banks hoarded liquidity 
(or  lent  only  for  the  shortest  maturities)  in  view  of  growing  concerns  about  the 
creditworthiness  of  counterparties  and  heightened  uncertainty  about  their  own  liquidity 
positions.  Conditions  in  money  markets  in  other  advanced  economies  exhibited  similar 
developments.  
4 
 BIS Review 159/2008
Since  mid-September,  central  banks  have  stepped  up  the  already  remarkable  levels  of 
cooperation and provided liquidity in coordinated actions. Moreover, the ECB and also other 
central banks have made extensive efforts to provide refinancing at longer maturities and to 
expand the lists of assets that are eligible as collateral in credit operations. Not least thanks 
to these actions, the recent weeks have seen a noticeable improvement in the euro money 
market.  For  example,  in  the  past  week,  the  spreads  between  term  deposit  and  overnight 
index  swap  rates  declined  considerably,  by  15  to  20  basis  points  along  all  maturities, 
reflecting the continued fall in the Euribor rates. The spreads fell to 80 basis points for the 
one-month maturity and 160 basis points for the 12-month maturity.  
An interesting analysis related to the current problems in the money markets is presented in 
Box 7 of the Review which highlights the link between market liquidity and funding liquidity 
risk, on the basis of evidence from recent data. The results show that a negative relationship 
between  high  funding  liquidity  risk  and  low  market  liquidity  was  established  only  after  the 
financial  turmoil  had  erupted,  while  in  “normal”  times,  there  is  no  obvious  relationship 
between  the  two  measures.  This  supports  the  theoretical  proposition  (advanced  by  recent 
academic  research)  that  interactions  between  the  two  measures  emerge  only  when  banks 
face funding constraints, that is, when shocks to banks’ funding liquidity can lead to forced 
asset sales and may depress asset prices, with dire consequences for market liquidity.  
The tensions in the money market, and more generally the fallout from the financial crisis, 
have  had  a  significant  negative  impact  on  large  and  complex  banking  groups  in  the  euro 
area.  In  the  first  three  quarters  of  2008,  their  profitability  suffered  further  due  to  the 
unfavourable  financial  market  conditions  and,  increasingly,  by  rising  credit  costs  (i.e. 
gradually increasing provisions and loan losses). Chart 13 shows that the wide dispersion in 
the rate of return on equity across euro area LCBGs observed in the second half of 2007 
persisted  also  in  the  first  three  quarters  of  2008.  Institutions  in  the  lowest  quartile  of  the 
profitability distribution of these major banks continued to see significantly lower profitability. 
Moreover, those LCBGs that suffered substantial losses in the second half of 2007 remained 
among the weakest ones in the first three quarters of 2008.  
At  the  same  time,  however,  the  regulatory  capital  buffers  of  euro  area  LCBGs  improved 
moderately as a consequence of additional capital raised and slower growth in risk-weighted 
assets (as shown in Chart 14). While this was largely due to the actions of individual banks 
aimed  at  reducing  risks  in  their  balance  sheets,  it  also  reflected,  to  a  certain  degree,  the 
impact  of  the  implementation  of  Basel II.  In  addition,  some  of  the  newly  attracted  capital 
came  in  the  form  of  hybrid  financing  which  is  reaching  prudential  limits.  Nevertheless,  the 
actions  that  have  been  taken  by  governments  and  central  banks  since  October  2008  to 
support  the  banking  systems  in  euro  area  countries,  despite  comfortable  solvency  ratios, 
highlight the perceived fragility of the global financial markets.  
Box 9 of the Review analyses alternative ways in which LCBGs can reduce leverage in the 
process  of  restoring  their  balance  sheets.  It  shows  that  by  cutting  their  dividend  pay-out 
ratios, LCBGs could generate rather substantial additional capital buffers. On the other hand, 
if  the  banks  decided  to  de-leverage  mainly  by  shedding  assets,  this  could  imply  a  sharp 
contraction of credit to the private sector. It is therefore essential that banks use available 
opportunities  to  raise  new  capital,  either  from  private  sources  or  from  the  public  funds 
provided by governments in the euro area.  
The outlook for euro area insurers also deteriorated, as financial performance has weakened 
and  some  pre-existing  risks  facing  the  sector  increased  and  some  started  to  materialise. 
Investment income was reduced by the falling values of structured credit products, corporate 
bonds and equities. In addition, some insurers suffered losses on investments in commercial 
property. All in all, the information available for the first nine months of 2008 suggests that 
the shock-absorption capacity of euro area insurers in terms of their solvency positions has 
not  been  significantly  affected,  which  should  help  them  to  cope  with  the  possible 
materialisation of the risks they face.  
BIS Review 159/2008 
 5
The  size  of  euro  area  insurers’  exposures  to  structured  credit  products  differ  considerable 
across  institutions,  as  shown  in  Chart  15.  In  some  cases,  exposures  to  non-sub-prime 
structured credit products are rather large. This is a source of vulnerability in the event that 
the credit market problems were to affect also the valuations of prime or near-prime asset-
backed securities. Since insurers can hold investments until maturity (to back liabilities), the 
key  risks  from  insurers’  credit  exposures  are  not  temporary  losses  in  value  but  defaults. 
Nevertheless,  sharp  downgrades  of  the  ratings  of  structured  credit  products  could  force 
insurers to reduce their holdings or recognise impairments, which would affect their results 
and capital positions.  
A  summary  measure  of  the  risks  faced  by  the  euro  area  banking  sector  is  provided  by  a 
market-based  systemic  risk  indicator  which  is  depicted  in  Chart  16.  In  September  2008, 
systemic risk increased sharply, driven by a further widening of banks’ credit default swap 
(CDS) spreads. However, it is important to emphasise that, since July 2008, participants in 
the CDS market have started to increasingly discriminate across institutions. This could be 
seen as first sign that the market is on its way to a gradual recovery, because the market no 
longer  “penalises”  all  banks  across  the  board  with  similarly  high  spreads.  That  said,  CDS 
spreads are likely to remain high for some time to come. Following a series of defaults or 
near defaults of several global financial institutions after September 2008, the systemic risk 
indicator  decreased  substantially,  as  central  banks  took  coordinated  actions,  guarantee 
schemes were approved and some euro area LCBGs were recapitalised. Nevertheless, the 
indicator  has  remained  above  the  levels  of  summer  of  2008,  which  suggests  that  market 
participants continued to assign a relatively high probability to systemic defaults by both euro 
area and global LCBGs.  
The extraordinary measures that have been taken by central banks and governments since 
October  2008  are  summarised  in  the  table  on  this  slide  and  are  described  in  detail  in  the 
Review.  In  the  euro  area,  the  actions  taken  and  the  commitments  made  have  helped  to 
stabilise the banking system and should further mitigate counterparty credit risks from trading 
in  the  unsecured  interbank  money  markets.  Over  time,  and  once  they  have  been  fully 
implemented,  these  measures  should  improve  the  functioning  of  the  term  money  markets 
and the access of banks to wholesale funding markets. This should lower the cost of bank 
funding and facilitate the provision of credit to the economy. That said, in order to revive the 
process of efficient financial intermediation, financial institutions will need to play their part in 
the adjustment process by taking advantage of these measures to effectively recapitalise and 
repair their balance sheets.  
Overall assessment 
IV.  
Let me conclude with our overall assessment of financial stability at the current juncture: the 
euro  area  financial  system  has  undergone  a  further  significant  test  of  its  shock-absorbing 
capacity since the finalisation of the June 2008 Financial Stability Review. At the same time, 
there are a number of risks and vulnerabilities lying ahead with which the financial system 
may have to cope, notably the possibility of: 
• 
a further deterioration in the US and the euro area housing markets and the impact 
this  may  have  on  banks’  loan  quality  and  the  value  of  securities  backed  by 
mortgage-related assets; 
a  deeper  and  more  prolonged  slowdown  in  both  the  global  and  the  euro  area 
economy  than  currently  expected  that  could  cause  a  sharper  and  broader 
deterioration in borrowers’ ability to service their debt;  
a more pronounced de-leveraging by banks, due to persistently high funding costs 
and concerns about the adequacy of capital buffers, which could negatively affect 
the flow of credit extended to the broader economy; and  
BIS Review 159/2008
  6 
  an increase in financial market volatility caused by a further unwinding of positions 
by hedge funds.  
All in all, given the risks that lie ahead, banks will need to be especially watchful in ensuring 
that  they  have  adequate  capital  and  liquidity  buffers  in  place  to  cushion  the  challenges 
ahead.  
Thank you very much for your attention. I am now at your disposal for questions.  
 
   BIS Review 159/2008 
 7
   8 
 BIS Review 159/2008
   9
BIS Review 159/2008 
    10 
 BIS Review 159/2008
   BIS Review 159/2008 
 11
   12 
 BIS Review 159/2008
   BIS Review 159/2008 
 13
   14 
 BIS Review 159/2008
   BIS Review 159/2008 
 15
   16 
 BIS Review 159/2008
