Ardian Fullani: Achievements and challenges of the Albanian banking 
system  
Speech by Mr Ardian Fullani, Governor of the Bank of Albania, at the Open Forum with the 
Albanian banking system’s players, Tirana, 29 September 2008. 
 Dear heads of commercial banks operating in Albania, 
Dear participants, 
It has almost been 6 months since the first open forum was held, at the core of which were 
the achievements and challenges of the Albanian banking system.  
Today’s forum is a follow-up of the debate which commenced 6 months ago with the good 
will and goal to further bolster the banking system’s stability in Albania. I consider the first 
forum a successful one, given that it generated a number of important decisions that have 
been made recently. In addition, I have the strong conviction that the discussions to be held 
this  afternoon  will  be  productive  and  will  serve  to  the  prudent  examination  of  the  banking 
system’s activity, in particular in the context of the recent developments in the global financial 
markets.  
To  begin  with,  I  would  like  to  provide  a  general  overview  of  the  banking  sector’s  financial 
situation  and  the  extent  of  impact  from  the  developments  in  the  international  financial 
markets. During the first half of 2008, the banking sector maintained its stable growth pace.  
The  Albanian  banking  system  is  lucrative,  well-capitalized  and  liquid.  The  good  financial 
result continues to be driven by the rapid growth of high return on investment activities. As of 
end  June  2008,  credit  portfolio  of  the  banking  system  accounted  for  nearly  43%  of  total 
assets, increasing by 3.6 percentage points relative to end-year 2007.  
Consumer deposits remain the main funding source for the activity, accounting for 80% of 
total assets. Business funding through the credit lines from the parent banks increased to 9% 
of total assets in the first half of 2008.  
As  of  end  June  2008,  return  on  average  assets  was  estimated  at  1.3%  while  return  on 
average  equity  equalled  to  16.6%.  Capitalization  indicator  of  the  financial  sector,  and  in 
particular of the banking one, increased slightly. Capital adequacy rate of the banking sector 
showed a slight increase to 17.3% as of end the first half of 2008.  
Liquidity  indicator  continues  to  remain  at  higher  levels  compared  to  the  other  regional 
countries. Liquid assets of the banking sector share 47% of total assets, dropping by about 
5.7 percentage points relative to end-year 2007.  
The  spread  of  the  U.S.  economy  crisis  to  the  international  financial  markets  and  the 
uncertainty for the nature of its effects, the institutions’ map, the types of instruments and its 
extent,  do  theoretically  increase  the  risk  of  its  impact  on  the  financial  system  at  home. 
Basically, this crisis has not provided its impact on the banking activity in Albania.  
The Albanian system’s immunity to this crisis arises from certain factors, namely: 
• 
The relatively low exposure of the Albanian financial system to international financial 
institutions; 
The low integration level in general; and 
The  well-capitalized  activity  of  European  banking  groups  and  their  branches 
operating in Albania.  
 BIS Review 120/2008 
 1
In general, we consider that no risks that may be materialized or which may harm abruptly 
and severely the activity of the financial system are identified. However, I would like to dwell 
on the risk analysis of the banking sector. 
Scenario-based risk analyses confirm that the banking sector has the capacity to cope with 
the various risks that may arise as a result of the unwelcome shifts in the exchange rates and 
interest rates.  
Prudent monitoring of assets’ quality is required and time is ripe to pay greater attention to 
the performance of liquidity indicators. With respect to the latter, the following aspects are 
crucial to keep under consideration:  
First, the absence of a developed money and securities trading market curtails the financial 
institutions’  capacities  to  meet  the  unexpected  liquidity  needs  through  the  sale  of  assets 
considered  as  “liquid”.  In  addition,  as  a  result  of  the  financial  crisis  in  the  international 
markets, the trading of some securities, which were previously considered as favourite to the 
investors, has become challenging  
Second,  the  differences  in  the  size  of  the  banking  sector’s  institutions,  the  collateral’s 
quantity and quality, and the restrictions for the direct exposure among institutions hamper 
the circulation of liquid funds in the interbank market in the duly time and extent.  
Third,  given  the  enhanced  competition,  there  is  a  risk  that  significant  disproportions  arise 
between  assets  and  liabilities  in  the  balance  sheet,  with  regard  to  type  of  currency  and 
maturity term;  
Fourth,  some  institutions  have  also  turned  to  borrowing  from  parent  banks  in  order  to 
maintain the lending promptness and size; 
Fifth,  owing  to  objective  factors  that  have  conditioned  the  lack  of  efficiency,  the  banking 
sector  at  home  has  been  characterized  by  very  high  liquidity  levels.  Given  the  enhanced 
competition and improved efficiency, it is objectively expected that liquidity indicators being to 
shift downward. These factors hamper the setting of the optimum liquidity level, in which the 
enhanced efficiency in fund use does not shackle the institution’s capacity to cope with the 
business risks.  
All these elements provide evidence for the need that the banks’ governing structures follow 
practices that allow the institution itself to meet the expected liquidity needs independently, 
however, having options which improve their capacity to generate liquidity in urgent cases. 
You must re-evaluate the securities’ portfolio quality, in particular that in foreign currency, in 
order to attain the optimum characteristics of safety and tradability. In addition, the portfolio 
of  placements  in  foreign  currency  in  the  form  of  deposits  or  related  products  with 
international  financial  institutions  should  have  as  its  main  objective  the  safety  of  the 
investment and the adequacy of maturity term.  
In a broader context, you should reassess the adequacy of certain indicators’ level in terms 
of differences in maturity terms and the type of currency of assets and liabilities.  
Assets’ quality, which is mainly affected by the quality of loan portfolio, remains a constant 
risk to the banking business in general. The reduced quality of assets does not only impair 
the  institution’s  income,  but  also  harms  its  liquidity  position.  In  the  case  of  the  Albanian 
banking sector, the loan portfolio quality has been decreasing, although at gradual rates, and 
the  situation  is  presented  as  entirely  manageable.  The  rapid  growth  of  credit  and  the 
challenges  certain  sectors  of  the  economy  that  have  been  lent  significantly  may  be  faced 
with,  are  factors  that  will  continue  to  exert  pressure  on  the  loan  quality  in  the  near  future. 
Hence, it is crucial for you to implement a policy of rapid detection of non-performing loans 
and promptly create reserve funds. It is for this reason that the Bank of Albania will increase 
the frequency of controls and the efficiency in monitoring and checking this process.  
The  Bank  of  Albania,  through  its  Supervision  Department,  has  prudently  and  constantly 
monitored  the  developments’  dynamics  in  the  banking  sector,  part  of  which  are  also  the 
2 
 BIS Review 120/2008
recent developments related to interest rates on market products. We consider these interest 
rates as aggressive, providing their impact on the profit margin and representing a potential 
risk to the structure of balance sheet.  
As  you  are  aware,  we  have  required  from  you  information  related  to  the  strategy  and 
procedures followed by your bank with respect to the application of these terms and interest 
rates, the purpose and grounding basis for the decision-making process and the structures 
involved.  
It  is  essential  for  the  Bank  of  Albania  that  any  decision  made  is  a  product  of  deep  and 
comprehensive  analyses  from  the  most  junior  expert  to  the  decision-making  structures, 
placing in addition special emphasis on the impact on the financial result. The entire process 
should be transparent, understandable and absorbing by the public at large. Otherwise, it will 
provide opposite effects. 
This  summer  provided  evidence  for  the  fact  that  competition  in  terms  of  gaining  market 
shares is a determinant element of the Albanian banking system’s behaviour. It also holds 
true  that  we  are  dealing  with  one  of  the  core  principles  in  the  functioning  of  free  market 
economy: COMPETITION. However, given the fact that the other market principles, namely 
profit  maximization,  are not  on  the same  wavelength,  the  balances  between  them  may  be 
distorted  and  consequently,  different  risk  elements  may  be  present.  I  repeat  from  the 
previous forum that it is necessary for you to consider the macroeconomic consequences of 
your behaviour at an industrial or institutional level, since they are important factors which 
ensure the long-term stability of your institutions and the system in general.  
The difference between large and small-size banks, when public confidence in the system in 
general is in question, is relative. Each bank has its role and share in the system and the 
difference between the concept “a small bank” or “a large bank” in the context of systemic 
risks, is ever-increasingly reducing. 
In addition, the U.S. financial crisis was caused by the imprudence of financial institutions to 
assess  the  stability  of  private  debt  and  accurately  weigh  the  effect  of  macroeconomic 
developments on the U.S. household budget. Its consequences remind us of the expression 
“there's no such thing as a free lunch”. 
With  regard  to  the  issues  explored  in  the  forum  held  in  April,  I  would  like  to  bring  to  your 
attention  two  other  issues  that  I  believe  remain  indisputable  priorities  for  our  work  in  the 
future.  
As promised in the first forum, the Law “On repurchase agreements” has become effective 
upon its entry into force on August 19th 2008. Although this project was pre-announced by 
the Bank of Albania, according to the information made available by the operational staff of 
the central bank and the respective commercial banks, we notice that the entry into force of 
this  law  has  found  you  unprepared.  Hence,  I  require  from  you  that  the  issue  of  binding 
contracts for the execution of repurchase agreements be placed at the top of your short-term 
agenda.  
Your legal staff should equally assess both the retail and the Treasury Department products. 
Judicial and operational assistance will be provided by the Bank of Albania, but on the other 
side the Bank of Albania will not intervene in solving the liquidity needs in case these needs 
arise from the non-observance of the law on repurchase agreements.  
I find it pleasing to confirm that after a general agreement on their usefulness, the package of 
regulations  we  brought  to  you  in  the  first  forum,  has  now  become  effective.  The  Bank  of 
Albania is now expecting swift responses, in order to minimize their obligatory enforcement 
by  us.  The  new  regulations  increase  prudence  in  the  elaboration  and  protection  against 
foreign currency credit risk. I do not want to fail to disclose our stance that Albania needs a 
liquid  and  well-capitalized  banking  system  given  the  situation  we  are  going  through. 
Regulations on transparency and obligation to disclose are another important part of the last 
package.  
BIS Review 120/2008 
 3
We have now taken steps to a more regulated market and other parties should follow the 
same steps as well. I refer here to banks’ clients who at present have, can and should be 
acknowledged of all their rights in relation to the banks servicing them.  
In  every  meeting  with  you,  I  will  highlight  the  need  of  strengthening  the  control  on  the 
business of the institutions you are governing. In addition to the fact that only this way the 
personal philosophy of each of you with regard to the development of the institution will come 
true, this process is vital to the well-functioning and safety of its business, even more given 
its rapid growth. In this context, the control structures should act rightly and extend to all the 
bank’s activities. Given the absence of a good collection, processing and reporting process 
of the business data, the control process on the institution’s activity finds itself jeopardized.  
The process of the banking sector’s data collection and processing has improved over the 
recent  years  as  a  result  of  investments  in  modern  technological  systems.  In  many  cases, 
however, it is observed that the adoption of these systems is made only partially and hastily. 
Their full potential is not used and the banks’ personnel may not be fully familiar to their use; 
hence, weakening the necessary human control on these systems. Consequently, the control 
process  on  the  institution’s  activity  is  segmented,  and  the  process  of  data  collection, 
processing and reporting at the required quality and time is hampered. As a result, you being 
heads of commercial banks and us the system’s regulatory authority, risk to take decisions 
on  data  which  are  not  fully  accurate  and  furthermore  are  “old”.  Being  present  in  different 
banks and in different levels, a final solution should be found to this issue. This situations 
needs  to  change  and  therefore,  I  require  strong  commitment  from  you  and  your 
shareholders.  
In more concrete terms, I require each bank to promptly: 
a) 
Make a “cost/risk” analysis of all its activities and expand the information technology 
systems, at least in those areas of the activity where there is greater risk in terms of 
absence of accuracy in processes; 
Place all branches and its activity in a “net”; 
Strengthen the human control structures in all the business processes, in particular 
in  the  treasury  operations,  deposits’  collection,  credit  extension  and  execution  of 
transfers and payments; 
Document and keep track of the entire process, evidencing clearly the responsible 
structures and people, and regulating the process of delegation of responsibilities. 
b) 
c) 
d) 
Going back to the situation in the international financial markets, I would like to highlight that 
any negligence with regard to the serious assessment of the latest developments in these 
markets cannot be forgiven to any of us.  
The  monitoring  and  assessment  of  each  event,  news,  action  or  response  from  the 
participants  in  the  different  markets  should  turn  into  every  day  routine  in  our  work,  in 
particular when energetic measures need to be taken in line with a given situation. In this 
context, the possible extension of credit lines from parent banks and the possible increased 
dependence of the banking sector on them represent an increased element of risk. You must 
avoid at any cost your dependence on these funds and pay careful attention to preventing 
the deepening of the spreads that may arise in the type of currency and maturity term. In the 
context of global economic developments, the uncertainty related to the future prospects in 
consumer prices and economic growth in the euro area EU countries and the USA, will affect 
the  performance  of  interest  rates  in  the  money  and  credit  markets  and  the  exchange  rate 
performance.  These  changes  may  affect  the  internal  market  through  the  exposure  of  the 
Albanian financial sector in assets and liabilities denominated in foreign currency. In addition, 
there is a risk that the challenges the economies of the EU countries and broader are going 
through be reflected in Albania through the fall in workers’ remittances, deterioration of trade 
deficit and decrease of foreign direct investments.  
4 
 BIS Review 120/2008
Even  though  the  materialization  of  these  risks  and  their  extent  are  not  expected  to  be 
significant, you must assess the impact of these scenarios in your development objectives 
and take the necessary measures to be protected from them. In a broader context, in your 
relations with the parent banks, remember that you are leading banking institutions operating 
in Albania and that you are accountable to the Albanian authorities and the Albanian public 
for the well-functioning of your institution’s business.  
Increased  vigilance  is  required  from  you  in  order  to  maintain  low  exposures  in  the 
international financial markets and ensure a well-capitalized and liquid business.  
The Bank of Albania will constantly monitor and confirm that you are taking the necessary 
concrete measures to maintain and improve the capacity to constantly generate a positive 
financial  result,  by  preserving  the  assets’  quality  and  the  liquidity  indicators.  If  necessary, 
being  the  regulatory  authority  of  the  banking  sector,  the  Bank  of  Albania  will  orient  and 
support  these  measures  through  constant  revision  and  creation  of  necessary  regulatory 
stimuli. 
BIS Review 120/2008 
 5
