Bandid Nijathaworn: National financial system and supervisory 
framework 
Address  by  Dr  Bandid  Nijathaworn,  Deputy  Governor  of  Bank  of  Thailand,  at  the  Thai 
Insurance Forum 2008, Bangkok, 20 October 2008. 
 Good morning, 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
It  is  my  pleasure  to  be  here  this  morning  to  speak  at  the  Thai  Insurance  Forum  2008, 
organized by the Asia Business Forum. I would like to thank the organizer for the invitation. 
Today, my address will focus on two topics. The first is the global financial turmoil, and its 
implications  for  the  Thai  financial  system,  focusing  on  the  regulatory  framework  and  the 
banking  sector.  Next,  I  will  talk  about  developments  in  phase  II  of  the  Bank  of  Thailand’s 
Financial Sector Master Plan, and how this will help position the Thai financial sector going 
forward. 
Let me start with the first topic, current developments in the global financial system 
and its implications. 
In contemplating the key issues for my talk a few months ago, the main theme that came to 
mind was the rapid development and growth of the financial system in emerging markets in 
Asia. Despite the current global financial turmoil, this theme will remain the subtext for our 
region in the medium-term. Indeed, the turmoil seems to have highlighted the importance of 
these  developments  going  forward.  The  key  features  of  emerging  markets  in  Asia  are  the 
rapid changes in the financial landscape, the disintermediation and growth of capital markets, 
globalisation and the increased linkages between financial markets and economies via cross-
border  activities,  the  proliferation  of  complex  financial  instruments  and  the  increasing 
convergence  of  supervisory  framework  and  standards  such  as  Basel  II,  IOSCO,  the 
Insurance  Core  Principles  of  the  International Association  of  Insurance  Supervisors  (IAIS), 
and international accounting standards. 
In this changing landscape, we see competition along with synergy between like-institutions 
as  well  as  different  kinds  of  institutions.  In  savings  instruments  and  wealth  management 
market,  we  see  the  rapid  growth  of  interactions  between  commercial  banks,  investment 
banks, and insurance companies, domestic and overseas. Indeed, different types of financial 
institutions  have  different  asset-liability  structure,  risk  profile,  and  therefore  together  help 
enhance the completeness of the financial system. For instance, life insurance firms tend to 
have  natural  niche  in  the  longer  end  of  the  market,  and  as  such,  offer  opportunities  for 
financing  and  providing  hedging  instruments  for  long-term  investment,  such  as  for 
infrastructure,  which  is  a  key  driver  of  Asian  economic  growth.  Many  of  the  longer-term 
assets  have  become  underlying  assets  upon  which  the  market  for  financial  engineering 
thrives-derivatives  are  used  to  engineer  and  structure  complex  products  tailor-made  for 
various market players with different risk-return preferences. 
While  this  process  brings  benefit,  it  also  brings  inherent  risks  that  need  to  be  properly 
managed, as the current turmoil clearly demonstrates. On the benefit side, the market would 
become more efficient if buyers and sellers of financial products are offered product choices 
that  better  fit  their  risk-return  preferences.  Nonetheless,  there  are  important  risks,  and  the 
subprime and CDO problem have brought this to light. In short, the current global turmoil is a 
sharp reminder of the danger of overestimating one’s own risk management ability. On the 
one  hand,  iconic  investment  banks,  giant  insurance  firms,  and  market  specialists  such  as 
rating  agencies  and  bond  insurers have,  with  hindsight,  overestimated  their  ability  to  price 
BIS Review 133/2008 
 1
and manage complex derivatives. On the other hand, regulatory frameworks also need to be 
strengthened to ensure that financial institutions have adequate capital and liquidity. 
Hence, there are calls for strengthening regulations, and I agree that there are many areas 
such  as  leveraging  and  capital  requirements  that  needs  to  be  strengthened.  But,  I  also 
believe we would do well to approach this in a steady and thorough manner, as regulatory 
changes  need  to  be  considered  carefully.  Particularly,  there  needs  to  be  domestic  and 
international harmonization to avoid the sort of harmful arbitrage that has been associated 
with the current turmoil. Moreover, the current crisis also highlights the truly globalised nature 
of the financial market, as uncoordinated regulatory measures could cause major difficulty in 
crisis management. In short, we must ensure that regulations are truly risk-based and non-
distortive,  on  both  a  domestic  and international  basis.  This  requires  significant supervisory 
coordination going forward. 
This,  however,  does  not  mean  that  we  should  be  complacent.  In  the  case  of  the  Bank  of 
Thailand,  we  have  asked  banks  to  carry-out  stress-tests  to  ensure  that  bank’s  Board  and 
management are fully alert to the increased risk, have the strategy to manage it, and have 
adequate  capital  and  liquidity  even  in  severe  risk  scenarios.  The  result  of  the  stress-tests 
shows  that  the  system  remains  resilient,  but  we  will  continue  to  monitor  developments 
closely, and stand ready to take necessary actions to ensure financial stability. 
Why  have  both  financial  institutions  and  regulators  in  mature  economies  and 
elsewhere not been fully prepared for such a challenge? 
First, there were many factors that caused the deterioration in the credit discipline, including 
financial  innovation  such  as  the  originate-distribute  model  of  securitisation  which  tends  to 
lessen governance in credit process. The key lesson here is that financial innovation can be 
a mirage which misleads us into disbanding the fundamental discipline required for good risk 
management and governance. This lesson is not new; it re-emerges with different variants 
over the years. Therefore, going forward, we need to continue to be vigilant of this risk. 
Secondly,  as  risk-profiles  become  more  complex,  so  too  must  risk  management  and  risk-
based  regulatory  framework.  Here,  the  lesson  from  CDOs  is  clear  in  that  the  regulatory 
framework,  even  at  the  level  of  international  standards,  have  not  properly  converged,  and 
there are regulatory arbitrage which resulted in excessive risk taking, to the detriment of the 
overall financial system. 
And  thirdly,  the  level  and  complexity  of  interconnectivity  of  various  types  of  financial 
institutions  have  increased  very  rapidly,  and  with  this,  increased  counterparty  risk  and 
systemic risk implications. Much of this is in the OTC derivatives markets which are hard to 
monitor,  and  presents  huge  problem  in  unwinding  during  a  crisis,  even  with  standard 
agreements such as the ISDA Agreements. 
The overhaul of international regulatory framework is a major challenge, but as we all know, 
this process will not be immediate, as the regulators of major economies are still focused on 
solving  the  turmoil.  In  the  meantime,  it  is  up  to  all  of  us  to  be  aware  that  conforming  to 
minimum  standard,  even  one  prescribed  by  international  best  practices,  may  not  be 
adequate if the risk profiles dictate a higher level of vigilance, risk management, and capital 
adequacy. In this regard, given the complex nature of financial conglomerates in emerging 
markets  in  Asia  today,  a  robust  framework  of  risk  management  and  supervision  on  a 
consolidated basis is a must. 
In the case of Thailand, we have undergone the Financial Sector Assessment Programme 
(FSAP) of the IMF and the World Bank in 2007. FSAP assessed the regulatory framework of 
banks,  capital  market,  insurance,  the  payment  system,  against  international  best  practices 
such as the Basel Core Principles for Effective Banking Supervision, as well as the Insurance 
Core  Principles  of  IAIS.  Overall,  the  FSAP  team  found  the  Thai  financial  system  to  be 
resilient  and  with  the  regulatory  framework  broadly  conforming  with  international  best 
practices. 
2 
 BIS Review 133/2008
Moreover,  through  the  Financial  Institutions  Policy  Committee,  the  Bank  of  Thailand  is 
working  closely  with  the  Ministry  of  Finance,  Office  of  the  Securities  and  Exchange 
Commission (SEC), and the Office of Insurance Commissioner to ensure that the regulatory 
framework  is  consistent  and  conducive  to  financial  stability.  Where  banks  have  securities 
companies or insurance companies as subsidiaries in financial conglomerates, the Bank of 
Thailand as lead supervisor currently supervises on a consolidated basis. It should also be 
emphasised  that  the  Bank  of  Thailand  is  both  the  central  bank  as  well  as  bank  regulator, 
while  also  overseeing  the  payments  system.  Thus,  we  are  at  a  vantage  point  to  closely 
monitor  any  risks  to  financial  and economic  stability,  while  also,  with coordination  with  the 
Ministry of Finance and other regulatory agencies, have the means to act to safeguard the 
system. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
Let  me  now  turn  to  the  impact  of  the  global  turmoil  on  the  Thai  financial  system, 
especially the banking system. 
The  global  financial  turmoil  continues  to  pose  a  critical  challenge  as  prospects  for  global 
growth, asset quality, and banks, capital remain under pressure. In emerging markets, the 
stock market has been under considerable pressure. As of the 13th of October, the MSCI 
Asia  Pacific  Index  declined  by  49  percent  from  its  peak  in  November  2007,  indicating  the 
pressure  of  retreat  to  safe-haven,  and  lower  liquidity  in  financial  markets  in  emerging 
countries. 
Most  recently,  the  IMF,  in  its  World  Economic  Outlook  assessment  of  October  2008, 
forecasted  that  “The  world  economy  is  entering  a  major  downturn  in  the  face  of  the  most 
dangerous  financial  shock  in  mature  financial  markets  since  the  1930s.  Global  growth  is 
projected  to  slow  substantially  in  2008,  and  a  modest  recovery  would  only  begin  later  in 
2009. […] The immediate policy challenge is to stabilize financial conditions, while nursing 
economies through a period of slow activity and keeping inflation under control.” 
Nevertheless, there is also a positive development. Central banks and regulators around the 
world are now taking coordinated and concrete actions. Comprehensive measures aimed at 
restoring  confidence  in  the  banking  systems  include  provision  of  liquidity,  new  capital 
injection, guarantee of interbank loans, blanket deposit guarantee, and government purchase 
of troubled assets. 
As for Thailand, despite the magnitude of the turmoil in the global financial market and the 
decline  in  local  stock  market,  the  immediate  impact  of  the  turmoil  on  Thailand’s  banking 
system  thus  far  has  been  limited.  This  is  because  the  direct  first-round  impact  linked  to 
investment exposure of the Thai banking system is small. The indirect second-round impact 
via the downside risks to economic growth and financial market volatility, however, will be a 
challenge  and  will  require  vigilance  on  macroeconomic  policy,  as  well  as  prudential 
measures, to ensure continued economic growth and financial stability. 
Let me cite some of the factors which have helped to keep the direct negative impacts 
limited. 
First, Thai banks have low direct exposure to problem assets. 
The total foreign investment of Thai banks amounts to only around 1.2 percent of their total 
asset, and a small part of this is the investment by Thai banks on CDOs. Banks that have 
CDO investments have mostly sold them off, and all have made full provision and recognized 
losses in line with IAS 39. 
Secondly, Thai banks rely predominantly on local deposits for funding, as opposed to 
the international wholesale market. This helps make the domestic financial conditions 
more stable and not affected by the global credit crunch. 
Liquidity conditions in the Thai system have remained more or less stable, though liquidity 
tightened  marginally  due  to  acceleration  in  credit  growth.  The  ratio  of  loan  to  deposits, 
BIS Review 133/2008 
 3
including bills of exchange, has been stable at around 90 percent, indicating no shortfall in 
liquidity. 
Thirdly,  the  fundamentals  of  the  Thai  banking  system  have  strengthened  markedly, 
with robust capital and improved risk management. 
Banks have had solid profit since 2001, with gross NPL ratio to total loans declining to 6.4 
percent and the NPL ratio net of provisioning declining to 3.4 percent as of the end of the 
second  quarter  of  this  year.  NPLs  are  fully  provisioned  for  in  accordance  with  IAS  39.  In 
August, the BIS capital ratio of the banking system increased to 15.5 percent due to higher 
profit and capital increase. Credit growth accelerated to 11.3 percent, supportive of economic 
growth, while banks, fund mobilization via deposits and bills of exchange accelerated to 3.6 
percent in August, allowing the ratio of loan to deposits, including bills of exchange, to remain 
stable.  In  sum,  over  the  years,  better  risk  management,  improved  asset  quality,  greater 
provisioning  coverage,  and  enhanced  regulatory  and  supervisory 
framework  have 
significantly improved the overall risk profile of the Thai banking sector. 
Fourthly,  despite  much  weaker  global  outlook,  Thailand’s  economic  conditions  are 
expected to be well-supported. 
GDP growth for the first half of this year stood at 5.7 percent, with inflation contained through 
appropriate monetary policy and aided by the fiscal package which delayed some utility price 
increase  for  around  six  months.  While  the  expected  slower  global  growth  would  pose 
downside  risk  to  domestic  growth via  a  slowdown  in  exports,  Thailand  has  a  considerable 
policy  room,  especially  fiscal  policy,  which  helps  to  cushion  the  impact,  by  employing 
macroeconomic and prudential measures to support growth and maintain financial stability. 
Nevertheless, we cannot afford to be complacent given the severity of the global turmoil. The 
Bank  of  Thailand  has  asked  banks  to  conduct  stress-testing  to  ensure  banks  are  alert  to 
potential  impact  of  downside  risks.  Recent  stress-testing,  which  covers  credit  market,  and 
liquidity risks, linked to a macroeconomic impact scenario, confirms the resiliency of the Thai 
banking sector. 
On  the  regulatory  front,  considerable  progress  has  been  made  to  increase  the  efficiency, 
adhere  to  international  best  practices,  strengthen  banks,  capital  position  and  enhance  risk 
management  practices.  The  Bank  of  Thailand  continues  to  place  great  emphasis  on 
strengthening the regulatory framework and our surveillance capability in order to carry out 
prompt actions to adequately assess and deal with emerging risks in the financial system. 
We  also  have  regular  dialogues  with  top  management  of  banks  to  discuss  financial  and 
business conditions, risk management, and issues relating to broader economic and financial 
stability. 
In terms of international standards, Thailand is on track to adopting the Basel II framework 
starting end of this year. For the move to Basel II, banks are aligning their risk management 
practices  to  prepare  for  the  increase  in  requirements.  In  addition,  the  new  Financial 
Institutions Businesses Act, which came into effect this past August, has also empowered the 
Bank of Thailand to fully enforce consolidated supervision, carry out prompt corrective action, 
and strengthen the governance of boards and top management. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
Let me now turn to my second topic today, that is the medium-term plan to strengthen the 
efficiency  and  financial  infrastructure  for  the  banking  system  under  the  Financial  Sector 
Master Plan Phase II. 
During  the  past  five  years,  and  under  Phase  I  of  the  Financial  Sector  Master  Plan, 
considerable  progress  has  been  made  in  strengthening  the  banking  system,  through 
consolidation  of  financial  institutions,  under  the  “One  Presence”  policy.  There  has  been 
voluntary  merger  and  acquisitions,  among  local  institutions  as  well  as  with  foreign 
partnerships,  leading  to  fewer  but  stronger  players,  enhanced  capital  base,  improved  risk 
4 
 BIS Review 133/2008
include  globalisation  and 
technological  development  which  will 
management and operational efficiency. The enhanced strength and increased competition 
has fostered continued profitability as well as expansion of economies of scale and scope in 
the banking system, with wider range of products to serve the public. 
Going  forward,  Phase  II  of  the  Financial  Sector  Master  Plan  seeks  to  build  further  on  this 
process,  and  ensure  that  the  Thai  banking  system  can  meet  future  challenges.  These 
challenges 
increase 
competition  in  retail  banking.  The  Thai  economy  will  become  more  open,  with  increasing 
intra-regional trade and investment, due to the growing importance of regional economies in 
the  world  economy  as  well  as  various  trade  and  investment  treaties.  Hence,  financial 
institutions need to not only build resiliency and ability to adjust to these changes, but also 
build capacity to serve clients which will have growing needs for international businesses and 
risk management. Moreover, demographic factors point to an aging-society in the future, thus 
increasing demand for wealth management. The regulatory framework will continue to evolve 
with due regard to international standards and local needs. Indeed, with the current global 
financial turmoil, each of these challenges will become even more poignant in the future. 
The implication of these challenges to Thai financial institutions is that they must enhance 
their  operating  efficiency  and  risk  management,  while  also  becoming  more  responsive  to 
clients, with fair and transparent treatment. 
Given  these  challenges,  what  do  we  envisage  are  the  key  features  of  the  future 
landscape? 
We would like to see the banking system that is efficient, competitive, robust, and resilient at 
all  times;  the  banking  system  that  is  able  to  support  continued  economic  growth,  while 
providing better access to the underserved segments. Different types of banks will operate in 
each market niche to provide better service via improved access, choice, and pricing. These 
banks  will  have  enhanced  efficiency  via  increased  economies  of  scale  and  scope  through 
voluntary  mergers  as  well  as  expansion  of  business  scope  and  deregulation,  under  a 
modernised legal framework. With this improvement, the local banking system will be better 
placed to meet the future challenges of market innovation and international competition. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
The  policy  framework  to  achieve  these  objectives  under  the  Financial  Sector  Master  Plan 
Phase  II  comprises  three  key  pillars.  Firstly,  improving  the  regulatory  environment  and 
reducing  regulatory  and  legacy  costs.  Secondly,  enhancing  efficiency  by  injection  of 
competition  in  an  orderly  manner,  and  thirdly,  by  improving  financial  market  infrastructure 
such as the legal system and information, key to effective risk management. 
Let me turn to these three Pillars in more detail. 
Pillar I focuses on the assessment of the regulatory framework and streamlining regulations 
in order to minimize the burden of banks without compromising prudential imperatives. This 
will  be  done  by  shifting  more  to  a  principle-based  approach  focusing  on  risk,  lowering 
operating costs stemming from regulation, as well as tackling remaining legacy NPLs. 
Under Pillar II, the objective is to enhance efficiency by an orderly increase of competition 
and promotion of financial access. Pillar II is based on five key principles. The first principle is 
to ensure a robust banking system that is resilient, committed and able to provide a strong 
foundation to support the Thai economy at all times. In the second principle, banks will be 
encouraged to reap the economy of scale by promoting voluntary consolidation to promote 
competitiveness.  At  the  same  time,  proper  competition  policy  will  also  be  put  in  place  to 
ensure  fair  consumer  treatment.  The  third  principle  aims  to  promote  competition  via  the 
liberalization  of  branch  network  and  business  scope  and  to  enhance  the  roles  of  existing 
players, including banks and niche banks, while the fourth principle will consider new entries 
based on the value added to the economy. Lastly, the fifth principle will focus on enhancing 
the  role  of  specialised  financial  institutions  in  providing  increasing  access  to  financial 
BIS Review 133/2008 
 5
for 
information  system  and  pushing 
services for the low-income and small business groups and reducing the role of the state in 
commercial banking. 
Pillar  III,  on  the  other  hand,  will  focus  on  laying  down  the  foundation  for  a  strong  and 
supportive infrastructure for the medium term development of the financial system. This will 
be done through further enhancing the market and products which will facilitate banks, own 
risk  management,  promoting  an  effective 
the 
amendments of necessary laws to facilitate risk management. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
The  Thai  banking  system  will  continue  to  face  new  challenges  going  forward,  both  from 
external developments and domestic factors. In addition, the financial landscape is changing 
due  to  various  factors  including  increasing  competition,  changing  market  demand,  more 
complex  risk  and  innovation  in  business  models  and  financial  products.  Meeting  these 
challenges will require efficient risk management, improved financial infrastructure as well as 
enhanced  regulatory  and  supervisory 
the  changing 
environment. The ultimate goal would be a resilient financial system that is capable enough 
of withstanding external instabilities. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
In conclusion, let me just say that the underlying cause of financial turmoil, be it the Asian 
crisis over ten years ago or the current one, bears important lessons for the global economy 
as well as for Thailand. As the forces of innovation, globalisation, and increasing integration 
continues to steer the course of our financial system, meeting the increasing challenges will 
not only require an effective risk monitoring and management system, but also the concerted 
efforts of industry players to adopt and apply best practices. 
As  for  the  current  situation,  while  it  is  yet  uncertain  how  the  current  financial  situation  will 
unwind, the regulatory and supervisory management will have to keep abreast of the game. 
For us, as the Thai economy enters this more challenging period, we as bank regulators will 
have to continue to be vigilant to ensure a safe and sound banking system that is capable of 
weathering  the  storm,  without  adverse  impact  on  its  crucial  role  of  supporting  the  real 
economy. 
On that note, I would like to wish all of you a very productive and successful forum. 
Thank you for your attention. 
to  keep  abreast  of 
framework 
6 
 BIS Review 133/2008
