Lorenzo Bini Smaghi: Restoring confidence 
Speech by Mr Lorenzo Bini Smaghi, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central 
Bank, on the panel: “Society, State, Market: a European Answer” at the International Forum 
Economia e Società Aperta “Uscire della crisi”, organised by Bocconi University and Corriere 
della Sera in cooperation with University Carlos III de Madrid, Madrid, 25 November 2008. 
 Since the start of the financial crisis, attempts have been made to frame it within predefined 
schemes, based on past experiences. Comparisons have been made with previous crises, 
starting  in  1929.  Standard  terminology  has  been  used,  such  as  recession,  stagflation, 
stagnation,  and  more  recently  also  deflation,  sometimes  without  fully  understanding  their 
meanings. 
These  exercises  risk  being  not  only  useless  but  also  counterproductive,  to  the  extent  that 
they lead to policy conclusions that might have been appropriate for the past crises but not 
necessarily  for  the  current  crisis.  This  crisis  is  different  from  the  others  because  it  affects 
confidence, which is at the root of a market economy. What is at stake is confidence in the 
market. On the other hand – and this can be a decisive factor – confidence in the state has 
remained high. This can be shown by the fact that banks prefer to buy government bonds 
rather than lending to each other. 
There are two ways to escape this crisis. The first is to replace the market economy with a 
different system for the allocation of resources, in which the state has a predominant role – 
some new form of socialism (although there might not be many left who really remember how 
a socialist economy functions). The risk is that the remaining confidence in public authorities 
may be lost. The second solution is to rebuild a functioning market economy, which possibly 
functions better than it did previously. The state has a fundamental role in rebuilding agents’ 
confidence in the market. If confidence is not restored, policy actions may be in vain. And the 
crisis may get worse. 
To escape from the crisis we therefore need intervention from the state, in order to recreate a 
functioning market economy. However, if we have just get more state and less market we 
would be worse off. In the following I will try to develop this reasoning. 
The crisis of confidence started about a year ago, when financial market participants started 
to doubt each other’s solvency as a result of the undervaluation of risk on toxic assets, the 
large  leverage  accumulated  over  the  years  and  the  lack  of  transparency  on  reporting 
accounts. The lack of confidence extended to the entire financial system, and its capacity to 
appropriately assess the proper value of assets and liabilities. The attempt to reduce risk and 
leverage resulted in an excess of supply that led to a sharp reduction of asset prices. Some 
investors  tried  to  move  to  other  markets,  such  as  primary  commodities,  creating  a  bubble 
which, over the summer, brought oil prices to over USD 140 per barrel. An inflationary shock 
was  thereby  superimposed  on  the  financial  crisis,  further  weakening  the  confidence  of 
households and companies. The failure of Lehman Brothers delivered the final blow, with a 
general contagion to all markets. 
The  fall  of  confidence  has  had  a  direct  impact  on  agents’  behaviour.  Consumption  and 
investments have fallen. Portfolio investments are shifted away from any risk, and towards 
liquid assets. Banks do not lend to each other and the interbank market, which is at the basis 
of all markets, does not function properly. There is a tendency to reduce bank lending to the 
real economy.  
In  such  a  context,  agents  tend  to  be  less  reactive  to  incentives  and  opportunities.  For 
instance,  the  large  fall  in  fuel  prices  and  other  primary  commodities  since  the  summer  is 
leading to lower inflation and improving wage purchasing power; indeed, euro area wages 
are still growing faster than inflation. Nevertheless, the propensity to save has increased and 
BIS Review 148/2008 
 1
consumption has therefore stagnated. The depreciation of the euro and the improvement in 
competitiveness should induce firms to invest, especially in the export sector, but, instead, 
trade is suffering. 
The  effectiveness  of  economic  policies  is  impaired.  Central  banks  in  advanced  economies 
have drastically reduced policy rates, but bank borrowing rates for final users – households 
and companies – have come down only marginally. In the United States, where policy rates 
are lower than 1%, rates for mortgages and companies are in most cases higher than in the 
euro area, where policy rates are at 3.25%. Fiscal policies have also lost effectiveness. The 
US stimulus package last spring did not have the expected impact and has not prevented the 
cyclical deterioration. 
There  is  a  risk  that  the  policy  action,  even  when  rapid  and  ample,  does  not  succeed  in 
reversing the trend. There is a risk that policy-makers run out of ammunition too early and 
remain without a means of escape. As the great spaghetti westerns of our youth have taught 
us, the “goodies” win if they shoot first. But he also has to hit the target. There is no scene 
more depressing than those in which the cavalry is surrounded, without any ammunition left.  
If the transmission channel of monetary policy does not function, interest rate cuts have little 
impact  on  the  real  economy.  They  might  only  help  to  improve  banks’  profit  and  loss 
accounts, which might be the reason why they are so much in favour of rate cuts. Budget 
stimulus  measures  might  end  in  higher  savings,  and  in  higher  public  debt.  This  was  the 
experience of Japan in the second half of the 1990s. 
If  economic  policy  loses  effectiveness  and  margins  of  manoeuvre,  it  may  also  risk  losing 
credibility. This would deal a stinging blow to the feeble confidence of market participants. 
Policy  actions  must  give  priority  to  restore  confidence,  especially  with  respect  to  the 
functioning of financial markets. Markets are currently not working properly for two reasons. 
The  first  is  the  banks’  fear  of  having  to  face  an  unexpected  withdrawal  of  funds  by  their 
clients. This explains why banks cumulate liquid and riskless assets and sell the illiquid ones, 
with negative effects on stock prices and on financing flows to the real economy. The second 
reason  is  the  fear  that  the  counterparty  will  face  difficulty  and  will  not  be  in  a  position  to 
reimburse  the  loan.  This  explains  why,  in  spite  of  a  high  spread  of  over  100  basis  points 
between  the  ECB  refinancing  rate  and  the  three-month  interbank  rate,  the  arbitrage 
opportunity is not exploited. This also explains why banks prefer to deposit their funds with 
the ECB, at a current rate of 2.75%, rather than lend to another bank. Such behaviour might 
be justified from the point of view of individual banks which, after having taken too many risks 
in  the  past  have  now  become  more  prudent,  even  excessively  prudent.  From  a  collective 
viewpoint,  if  banks  stop  behaving  as  banks,  i.e.  they  stop  intermediating  savings  onto 
investment,  there  is  a  risk  of  implosion  with  repercussions  on  the  real  economy  that 
economic policy would be unable to stop.  
Policy  action  must  give  priority  to  making  markets  function  again.  Many  measures  have 
already  been  announced,  and  some  have  been  implemented.  I  will  not  dwell  too  long  on 
those that have been implemented, especially by the ECB, with a view to reassure banks on 
their  sources  of  financing.  In  particular,  banks  can  now  access  financing  from  the  ECB  at 
fixed rates, with a maturity of up to six months, for amounts limited only by the amount of 
collateral that they have at their disposal. The list of eligible collateral has been expanded to 
BBB-rated instruments. Lower quality assets can be used for emergency lending assistance 
operations with national central banks. 
European governments have committed not to let any bank fail. Such a commitment, to be 
credible,  must  be  followed  by  a  programme  of  bank  recapitalisation.  Such  a  programme 
should  be  implemented  rapidly  and  in  a  broad  way,  to  convince  market  participants  that 
indeed  no  bank  will  fail  and  that  it  is  again  safe  to  buy  bank  shares  and  bonds.  This  will 
create  a  virtuous  circle  of  confidence  in  the  markets  that  will  spread  to  the  rest  of  the 
economy.  
2 
 BIS Review 148/2008
Given  the  current  market  stress,  the  capital  injection  of  the  banking  system  must  be 
abundant  and  generalised.  The  private  sector  alone  cannot  do  the  job  properly.  Previous 
capital increases have been insufficient and entailed losses, which discourages new potential 
investors. To achieve a higher capital ratio banks would most probably cut their loans to the 
private sector, therefore creating a credit crunch. This is why state intervention is needed. 
Care must be taken, however, and I mention this in particular for those European authorities 
that are in charge of assessing state aid: such state intervention is not aimed at saving one 
or a few ailing banks; it is aimed at preserving systemic and macroeconomic stability. 
To achieve its goal, recapitalisation should meet the following requirements: 
• 
First,  it  has  to  be  abundant,  going  far  beyond  prudential  requirements  which  are 
designed  for  normal  times  and  which  should  not  be  modified  in  the  current 
conjuncture,  to  avoid  being  pro-cyclical.  I  would  not  dare  to  give  a  number  but  it 
should create a sufficient buffer to instantaneously restore confidence in the banking 
system, for instance pushing the Tier 1 capital ratio to a two-digit number. It should 
be  sufficient  to  further  push  down  balance  sheets  so  that no  doubt  remains  as  to 
where the losses are.  
Second, recapitalisation has to be across the board, and align all banks’ capital ratio 
to  the  same  high  level.  The  functioning  of  the  interbank  market  requires  that 
participants  have  no  doubt  of  each  other’s  solvency  position.  Any  fear  of  a  rotten 
apple can spoil the bunch.  
Third,  recapitalisation  has  to  have  conditions  that  make  it  temporary  and 
sustainable.  This  requires  that  the  remuneration  of  the  capital  injection  should  be 
sufficient  to  compensate  the  taxpayer  and  to  induce  an  early  repayment,  but  not 
punitive so as to penalise private shareholders. An interest rate that is too high on 
the public injection would encourage banks to pass on these rates to the end-users, 
who  would  ultimately  be  paying  the  bill.  Given  the  state  of  the  economy,  and  the 
difficulty to ensure a high rate of return on investment over the next few years, stock 
prices  would  be  likely  to  suffer.  It  would  be  paradoxical  if  the  injection  of  public 
capital led to a fall in private stock prices.  
  The  ECB  has  established  a  scheme  for  defining  an  appropriate  return  on  different 
instruments that could be used for recapitalisation, which has been sent to Member States 
and  the  European  Commission.  We  hope  that  this  scheme  can  be  adopted  in  all  Member 
States,  in  particular  those  in  the  euro  area.  Indeed,  ensuring  a  level  playing-field  across 
banks and countries is essential to foster the return of confidence.  
The  Japanese  experience  of  the  1990s  has  shown  that  the  major  factor  behind  the  fatal 
delay  in  bank  restructuring  and  recapitalisation  has  been  political  infighting  and  the 
immobility of the private sector. On 12 October, the Heads of State of the euro area countries 
met in Paris and announced measures aimed at providing financial institutions with additional 
capital resources so as to continue ensure the proper financing of the economy. The current 
state of the financial markets does not allow for hesitation. Leadership is required at both the 
national  and  European  levels  to  implement  the  solution  which  is  on  the  table.  A  similar, 
massive action is needed across the Atlantic. 
Restoring confidence in markets is the biggest contribution that the state can make to get the 
economy back on track. It is time to act. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 148/2008 
 3
