Andras Simor: The euro and the enlargement – challenges ahead 
Speech  by  Mr  Andras  Simor,  Governor  of  Magyar  Nemzeti  Bank  (the  central  bank  of 
Hungary), for the panel on “The euro and the enlargement: challenges ahead”, at the Fifth 
ECB Central Banking Conference “The Euro at Ten: Lessons and Challenges”, Frankfurt am 
Main, 14 November 2008. 
 I  am  glad  to  be  invited  to  this  panel.  It  seems  to  me  that  “euro  enlargement”  in  the  past 
couple of years featured prominently on the agenda of various European conferences and 
policy  fora  and,  as  such,  ended  up  a  bit  over-discussed.  However,  the  recent  bout  of  the 
financial  crisis  has  definitely  put  this  topic  in  a  new  perspective.  My  impression  is  that  a 
number  of  New  Member  States,  as  well  as  some  of  the  old  opt-outs,  that  were  seriously 
affected by the crisis now wish that they were already in the eurozone when this latest, most 
severe  episode  erupted.  I  would  not  be  surprised  if,  as  a  consequence  of  the  crisis, 
ambitions  for  speeding  up  the  eurozone  entry  process  intensified  in  these  countries.  This 
panel  discussion  is  a  good  opportunity  for  me  to  present  the  motivation,  arguments  and 
concerns that an “out” country may have in this respect. Naturally, I can only speak on behalf 
of Hungary, or more precisely the Hungarian Central Bank. It may not be a typical view as 
this  country  was  perhaps  the  most  spectacularly  affected  by  the  crisis  among  the  New 
Member States. Nevertheless, I think at least some elements of this view are shared by our 
Central Eastern European peers.  
I would like to touch upon three major topics.  
First,  how  we,  at  the  Hungarian  Central  Bank  saw  the  “pros  and  cons”  of  a  quick  euro 
strategy before the crisis.  
Second, how the crisis has changed this assessment.  
Finally I would like to say a few words about the Maastricht criteria and the way we envisage 
to meet them. 
The  Hungarian  Central  Bank  has  long  been  a  proponent  of  an  “as  soon  as  possible” 
eurozone  entry  strategy.  We  made  our  first  comprehensive  cost-benefit  analysis  back  in 
2001.  The  analysis  suggested  that  Hungary  constituted  an  optimal  currency  area  with  the 
eurozone, at least to the extent that some peripheral eurozone member countries did. The 
benefits  appeared  to  be  large,  stemming  from  trade  creation  and  the  disappearance  of  a 
sizeable currency risk premium. At that time fiscal policy seemed broadly on track. We had 
just  introduced  inflation  targeting  which  showed  some  early  success  in  breaking  inflation 
inertia. In the eurozone itself, there were no signs of divergence, either. All this suggested 
that a quick eurozone entry was doable and worth pursuing. The future looked rosy. 
However, things turned out to be quite different. An unprecedented fiscal expansion in 2002-
2006 shed a cruel light on the structural and institutional weaknesses of the Hungarian public 
finances  and  slowed  down  the  disinflation  process.  The  country  was  drifting  away  from 
meeting the Maastricht criteria and the expected date of entering the eurozone was moving 
further and further out in the future. At the same time, news from the euro area caused some 
discomfort too, as growth in some less developed member countries slowed down so much 
that their real convergence stopped or even reversed. 
Having had this experience, it is not surprising that when we did our review of the costs and 
benefits of the euro this year we were a bit more cautious than seven years ago. Although 
our basic conclusion remained the same, that is, we still think that Hungary should join the 
eurozone as soon as possible, clearly we had become more aware of some risks involved in 
the quick euro adoption strategy. 
Let me elaborate on two of these risks.  
BIS Review 139/2008 
 1
The first is entering the eurozone without sufficient progress in structural reforms; the second 
is  the  problems  caused  by  potentially  large  capital  inflows  after  the  common  currency  is 
introduced. 
It  is  a  commonly  shared  view  that  efficient  labour  and  product  markets,  which  help  a 
country’s  dynamic  adjustment  to  asymmetric  shocks,  are  essential  for  success  within  a 
monetary union. In terms of labour and product market reforms Hungary still has a lot to do. 
Although  nominal  and  real  wages  are  more  flexible  than  in  the  core  eurozone,  the 
employment  rate  is  one  of  the  lowest  in  the  EU.  Our  analysis  suggests  that  this  may  be 
related to wrong incentives hindering labour supply, such as generous early retirement and 
maternity leave schemes and a very high tax wedge. These are in turn manifestations of a 
bigger problem, “the premature welfare state”, which is weighing heavily on potential growth 
on the one hand, and is a source of a chronic fiscal imbalance on the other. Our fiscal and 
labour market weaknesses are deeply interconnected and we have to address them together 
in a wide-ranging structural reform. 
Scaling back the overly generous welfare state is painful and the political willingness to do so 
is not so strong, so when this structural reform will take place is rather uncertain.  
The question is, can we afford to enter the eurozone if this reform is not yet completed? This 
brings us to the territory of political economy, more precisely to the issue of whether the euro 
fosters  or  hinders  structural  reform.  Although  this  issue  has  received  a  lot  of  attention 
recently in both theoretical and empirical work, my impression is that so far no consensus 
has emerged. What this means for the euro strategy of Hungary is that probably we should 
not risk entering the eurozone until this crucial structural reform – that is, the scaling back of 
overly  generous  the  welfare  state  in  order  to  increase  the  labour  supply,  foster  potential 
growth and stabilize public finances – is completed or is at least safely on track. 
The second risk, which frequently took the centre stage in debates on euro accession, is that 
of large and potentially disruptive capital inflows. The starting point of the argument here is 
that the catching-up process of New Member States is about to continue for a long period 
even after they introduce the common currency. The catching-up entails a real appreciation, 
which, once the exchange rate is irrevocably fixed, translates into higher inflation and lower 
real interest rates. Low real interest rates may in turn trigger excessive demand fuelled by an 
unsustainable credit boom financed from foreign borrowing. When the inevitable correction 
comes, there is no independent monetary policy to smooth the adjustment and a serious bust 
follows  the  boom.  Such  boom-bust  patterns  were  clearly  observable  in  some  first-wave 
eurozone  members  like  Portugal,  Ireland  and  Spain.  Better  wait  with  euro  adoption,  the 
argument goes, until catching-up is more progressed and the equilibrium real appreciation is 
smaller. 
I  have  one  observation  to  this  argument.  We  cannot  ignore  the  fact  that  the  financial 
integration of the New Member States to a large extent had already taken place. The banking 
sectors in these countries are owned predominantly by euro area banks. In the past couple 
of  years  of  abundant  global  liquidity,  cross-border  lending  by  parent  banks  in  foreign 
currency  was  available  in  virtually  unlimited  quantities.  This  practically  meant  that  foreign 
(euro  or  Swiss  franc)  interest  rates  had  become  the  point  of  reference  for  domestic 
consumption and investment decisions well before the euro was introduced, pushing down 
the effective real interest rate. It is obvious by now that the credit boom that was envisaged 
to take place after eurozone entry actually arrived much earlier. The only difference was that, 
not having the common currency yet, it left us with a sizeable currency mismatch. Staying out 
of the eurozone did not prevent us from running into the boom. Now that we have to face the 
bust,  it  is  not  clear  either  whether  having  an  independent  monetary  policy  places  us  in  a 
better  position  to  smooth  the  adjustment.  That  is  because  the  effectiveness  of  monetary 
easing and the subsequent depreciation is seriously limited by the negative wealth effect on 
the  sizeable  unhedged  foreign  currency  liabilities  the  private  sector  had  accumulated.  In 
short, with integrated financial systems, large capital flows have been taking place in New 
2 
 BIS Review 139/2008
Member  States  regardless  of  the  fact  that  they  have  not  yet  introduced  the  euro.  Euro 
adoption does not carry an extra risk in this respect, on the contrary, it may help eliminate 
potentially dangerous currency mismatches. It is important to see that in this respect, it would 
eliminate a source of instability from the point of view of the eurozone parent banks as well. 
Let me now turn to the implications the current crisis may have on euro adoption strategies. 
First, the crisis clearly illustrates that having your own currency may be more of a source of 
shocks  than  a  shock-absorbing  device.  You  may  say  that  Hungary  deserved  what  it  gets 
now,  but  there  are  other  countries  with  more  sound  fundamentals  that  are  undergoing 
serious stress. 
Second, the crisis is an obvious indication that the years of abundant global liquidity are over. 
We  are  probably  in  the  middle  of  a  credit  contraction  globally  and  the  chances  of another 
credit-boom evolving in the foreseeable future are minimal. The risk of a credit-fuelled boom-
bust, should a country enter the eurozone in the next couple of years, is greatly reduced. 
Third,  the  crisis  may  have  increased  the  disciplining  power  of  financial  markets.  The 
deleveraging process that we are going through implies a thorough repricing of risk. Just like 
in other asset classes, there is increased differentiation among government bonds based on 
the issuers’ risk profile. This is well illustrated by the unprecedented differences we currently 
see between CDS spreads on bonds of euro area sovereign issuers. Countries with weaker 
public finances, and Hungary is obviously one of them, will receive stronger incentives from 
the financial markets in the coming years to put their fiscal house in order. This means that 
the crisis may actually speed up the most important structural reform in Hungary, the much-
needed  scaling  back  of  overly  generous  the  welfare  state.  From  the  euro  strategy 
perspective this would be good news, since, as I said before, we think that adopting the euro 
without going through this painful reform carries the risk of a prospective underperformance 
in the eurozone. 
All in all, this crisis has evidently demonstrated that the banking sectors of the euro area and 
the  New  Member  States  are  deeply  integrated,  has  greatly  reduced  the  chances  of  credit 
booms in the forthcoming years and may exert an extra disciplining power in countries prone 
to fiscal misbehaviour in the future. For these reasons, I think it may act as a catalyst for the 
euro accession process. Importantly, it should be let to act as a catalyst, that is, it should not 
be used as an excuse to make the entry criteria, or their interpretation, more stringent. 
Finally, let me turn to the prospects of meeting the criteria in Hungary and, more specifically, 
what I think this implies for our euro strategy. 
Currently, there is no official target date for euro adoption in Hungary. Popular support for the 
euro is relatively strong, and it probably intensified further after the recent currency turmoil. 
All the major political parties agree on the desirability of introducing the common currency.  
However, at the current juncture, Hungary does not meet any of the Maastricht criteria.  
Government  and  Central  Bank  officials,  including  myself,  repeatedly  expressed  that  the 
earliest date to start talking about a roadmap to eurozone may be somewhere in 2009. Given 
Hungary's not too convincing track record regarding the fiscal balance and inflation, an ERM 
II entry is only reasonable when the prospective meeting of the Maastricht criteria is safely on 
track. 
Hungary's  Convergence  Programme  envisages  meeting  the  fiscal  deficit criterion  by  2009, 
but  chances  are  that  this  could  take  place  as  early  as  this  year  (albeit  only  by  a  narrow 
margin). As a reaction to the recent bout of the global financial crisis and the deteriorating 
prospects for external financing, the government decided to withdraw the draft 2009 budget 
and rewrite it so that the deficit reduction next year is more pronounced. In addition, the IMF 
rescue  package  came  with  conditions  which  implied  further  expenditure-cutting  measures. 
The Central Bank’s latest inflation forecasts imply that the Maastricht inflation criterion may 
be met by 2010. These developments mean that the chances of meeting the entry criteria 
BIS Review 139/2008 
 3
relatively quickly has improved somewhat, which implies that, in principle, we should not wait 
with ERM II entry too long.  
On  the  other  hand,  the  financial  turmoil  has  undoubtedly  reached  Eastern  Europe.  As  a 
result, currently there is extreme uncertainty in the New Member States regarding the future 
course of such fundamental things as financial intermediation, credit growth, the exchange 
rate and real convergence in general. These are all very important factors that have to be 
taken into account when making a decision on the euro strategy or indeed on ERM II entry 
itself.  It  is  therefore  worth  waiting  with  setting  out  very  specific  euro  adoption  plans  for 
Hungary until the dust settles at least a little bit.  
In the meantime, the Slovakian experience with the euro, starting next year but showing its 
implications  already  in  the  recent  unfolding  of  the  crisis,  will  provide  a  good  natural 
experiment for the other New Member States, and will no doubt be closely watched. 
4 
 BIS Review 139/2008
