V Leeladhar: Contemporary international and domestic banking 
developments and the emerging challenges  
Speech by Mr V Leeladhar, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the Bankers’ 
Club, Kolkata, 24 November 2008. 
 Dear Friends, 
I am delighted to be here this evening at the meeting of the Bankers’ Club, Kolkata, which, I 
understand, is in the process of reactivating itself to provide a vibrant professional platform to 
the bankers for an ongoing exchange of views on the areas of functional and contemporary 
relevance  to  the  banking  community.  I  am  grateful  to  the  organisers  for  affording  me  this 
opportunity  to  be  with  this  august  audience  and  to  share  some  my  thoughts  on  the  very 
topical subject of Contemporary International and Domestic Banking Developments and the 
Emerging  Challenges.  The  recent  global  developments  point  to  a  very  important  systemic 
dimension which is closely intertwined with the core mandate of the Reserve Bank of India, 
namely, maintaining monetary and financial stability in the system.  
2. As you are aware, the credit markets in the western world have witnessed in the recent 
past  considerable  turmoil  leading  to  significant  loss  of  market  liquidity.  This  has  had  far 
reaching  consequences  all  around  the  world  and  a  few  major  global  financial  institutions 
either became insolvent or had to be rescued by the public authorities, at significant cost. Of 
late, there has been an explosion of literature analysing threadbare the myriad aspects of the 
global credit market crisis. I would however, like to present a broad overview, from the Indian 
perspective, of the factors underlying the credit market crisis in the west, the implications of 
the  crisis  for  the  financial  sector,  lessons  learnt  from  it,  the  various  suggestions  made  at 
different fora for pre-empting the recurrence of such events, the Indian regulatory framework 
for liquidity supervision, and the policy measures instituted by the Reserve Bank in the past 
few weeks for augmenting liquidity and to safeguard the Indian system.  
Factors leading to the sub-prime episode 
3.  The  recent  credit  market  episode  is  supposed  to  be  the  culmination  of  a  variety  of 
unanticipated  and  unforeseen  developments  and  many  common  drivers  of  the  crisis  have 
been identified by the academics and analysts. However, taking a holistic perspective, the 
credit  market  developments  could  be  viewed  to  have  been  triggered  by  a  combination  of 
circumstances,  which,  in  turn,  were  precipitated  by  a  complex  interaction  of  several 
variables. Let me briefly enumerate some of them.  
The rapid asset growth in the housing mortgage sector in the USA had been fuelled by an 
ongoing  benign  interest  rate  environment,  which  made  the  home  mortgages  affordable  to 
many borrowers, with limited means, for acquiring homes. However, the credit intermediaries 
did not appear to have factored-in the impact pf potential changes in the macroeconomic / 
interest-rate environment in their credit assessments of such borrowers and on their repaying 
capacity. It is reported that the lenders also enticed the home loan borrowers through “teaser 
rates”, which were artificially low interest rates, valid only for a limited initial period. 
There was wide-spread adoption of the “originate-to-distribute” model by the credit / banking 
institutions under which the loans were granted not with the objective of holding till maturity 
but for securitising them rapidly. Such an approach tended to weaken the incentives of the 
lenders  for  ensuring  rigorous  due  diligence  at  the  credit  appraisal  stage  –  as  they  were 
content in the knowledge that the asset would not remain on their balance sheet for long. 
This, in turn, led to assumption of significant amount of credit risks by the lenders on low-
BIS Review 146/2008 
 1
low-quality  assets,  which  were 
quality/sub-prime  counterparties,  and  acquisition  of 
subsequently securitised.  
The credit intermediaries also resorted to large-scale reliance on credit-risk transfer (CRT) 
instruments,  including  securitisation  structures,  which  enabled  the  hiving  off  of  such 
exposures to a variety of Special Purpose Vehicles through issuance of securitised paper, 
mortgaged backed securities and structured finance products. Such risk transfer resulted in 
the investors in such products getting farther and farther removed from the underlying risks 
on the borrowers whose loans had been securitised and the investors did not know the real 
nature of risk and where the risk actually resided.  
Also, the ready acceptance of the securitised products by the investors such as hedge funds, 
asset managers, structured investment vehicles (SIVs) and other specially designed conduits 
in various segments of the market led to a wide dispersal of the underlying credit risk to a 
larger investor universe that was not necessarily better equipped than the originating lenders 
to assess the underlying credit risks.  
The  provision  of  liquidity-support  commitment  by  the  banks  to  the  structured  investment 
vehicles (SIVs) was yet another factor that exposed the banks to the liquidity risks faced by 
the  SIVs.  The  SIVs  encountered  the  liquidity  squeeze  when  they  could  not  roll  over  their 
short-term funding raised through the Asset-Backed Commercial Paper (ABCP) for financing 
their long-term assets. This forced the banks, for reasons of reputational risk, to roll-in these 
off-balance sheet vehicles and their exposures, on to their own balance sheets. This, in turn, 
resulted  in  an  involuntary  and  sudden  expansion  of  the  balance  sheets  of  the  banks  – 
bringing their capital adequacy under severe strain.  
4.  It  would  thus  appear  that  the  sub-prime  lending  by  the  credit  intermediaries  in  the 
developed  world  was  premised  on  the  assumption  of  continued  benign  interest  rate 
environment and an enduring uptrend in the housing prices. This, in turn, was expected to 
keep  increasing  the  extent  of  “equity”  of  the  homeowners  in  the  houses  purchased,  thus, 
enabling them to refinance their mortgages at lower interest rates. However, a change in the 
macroeconomic  conditions  and  the  reversal  in  the  interest  rate  cycle  coupled  with  the 
moderation in the house prices, belied the assumptions. This strained the borrowers’ ability 
to service their mortgages, leading to large-scale delinquencies. This, in turn, impacted the 
servicing of the dues on the MBS and other structured finance products, held by a variety of 
investors.  
5. On account of default on the structured securities, the rating agencies had to resort to a 
large-scale down-gradation of numerous structured finance products. This, in turn, paralysed 
the  new  issuances  and  trading  in  these  papers,  eliminating  the  market  liquidity  in  these 
instruments. The attempt of some of the large investors in such products, facing redemption 
pressures  and  margin  calls,  to  liquidate  their  portfolio,  also  sharply  depressed  the  market 
prices. The drying up of market liquidity affected the funding liquidity of the SIVs and other 
conduits, which were unable to roll over / renew their market funding, raised predominantly 
through asset-backed commercial paper (ABCP). The conduits, therefore, had to invoke the 
liquidity lines committed to them by the banks which, in turn, resulted in the banks having to 
induct  these  illiquid  assets  on  their  balance  sheets,  as  per  contractual  obligations  for 
providing liquidity. This increased the demand for liquidity from the banks. However, given 
the uncertainty and the lack of transparency in regard to the level of problem exposures of 
the counterparty banks, the banks were reluctant to deal with each other in the inter-bank 
markets  and  tended  to  hoard  liquidity  for  their  potential  future  needs.  This  necessitated 
significant liquidity injection by some of the major central banks to ease market liquidity, even 
contrary to their own monetary policy stance.  
2 
 BIS Review 146/2008
Implications of the credit market turmoil for the financial sector 
6.  Recent  financial  developments  have  brought  to  the  fore  several  issues  that  carry 
significant  implications  for  the  safety  and  soundness  of  the  financial  sector.  Allow  me  to 
briefly dwell on some of these aspects.  
First, there is closer scrutiny of the business strategies of banks and financial institutions 
which are based on the model of “originate and distribute”.  
Second,  issues  relating  to  securitisation  are  being  debated  in  the  context  of  incentive 
structures  that  encourage  economising  on  capital  requirements  and  enhancement  of  off-
balance  sheet  exposures  of  banks  relative  to  the  considerations  of  their  safety  and 
soundness. 
Third,  recent  events  have  also  underscored  the  need  for  enhanced  market  transparency 
relating  to  disclosures  of  off-balance  sheet  exposures  of  banks,  particularly  with  regard  to 
their liquidity commitments to conduits, valuations of structured credit products dealt by them, 
and the like.  
Fourth, the apparent inadequacy of financial institutions' capital cushions has been exposed. 
In this context, the role of sovereign wealth funds as providers of capital is being carefully 
assessed by supervisory authorities across the world.  
Fifth, the sharp re-pricing of risks that began in the middle of 2007 has raised issues relating 
to the fair value accounting and marking-to-market of portfolios of financial institutions and 
the attendant issues relating to capital provision.  
Sixth,  there  are  concerns  that  existing  risk  pricing  and  risk  management  tools  and 
techniques employed in banks and financial institutions are inadequate in relation to the risks 
evolving in the financial markets.  
Seventh, there is a progressive blurring of the boundaries between liquidity and solvency 
stress faced by the banks in situations of generalised uncertainty in the markets and the loss 
of confidence amongst financial entities.  
Eighth, the role of structured investment vehicles (SIVs), the potential liquidity demands 
that  could  crystallise  on  the  balance  sheets  of  the  sponsoring  banks  and  the  degree  of 
leverage embedded in the global financial system has been largely underestimated – which 
has implications for the soundness and efficiency of the financial sector as a whole.  
Finally,  the  functioning  of  the  credit  rating  agencies,  role  conflict  in  their  operations  and 
excessive reliance on the credit ratings even by the institutional investors, are under scrutiny. 
Lessons from sub-prime crisis 
7. While India has been relatively insulated from the impact of the credit market turmoil, the 
sub-prime episode, in retrospect, provides several useful lessons for the banks as also for 
the banking supervisors all over the world. Allow me to briefly touch upon some of the major 
lessons emanating from the episode. 
Underwriting standards 
The  episode  has  once  again  brought  to  the  fore  the  imperative  of  observing  prudent 
underwriting standards by the credit intermediaries. The traditional banking tools such as the 
loan to value ratio, debt service ratio (particularly, after the initial “teaser rates” came to an 
end), purpose of the loan, verification of documentary evidence of income and assets of the 
borrowers,  and  ongoing  monitoring  of  the  borrowers’  affairs  have  demonstrated  their 
continued relevance, despite rapid advancements in the financial technology and products. It 
is  important  to  note  that  the  products  created  through  sophisticated  financial  engineering 
BIS Review 146/2008 
 3
may  not  be  sustainable  over  the  long  term  if  their  building  blocks  are  not  underpinned  by 
rigorous underwriting standards.  
Risk transfer 
The risk transfer by adoption of “originate-to-distribute” models by the credit intermediaries 
needs closer supervisory attention. The episode has demonstrated that there was insufficient 
understanding of how complex structured products work, the nature of the risks to which the 
investors were actually exposed, and, in the case of risk transfer through securitisation, etc., 
where the risk ultimately resided, and indeed, whether any risk has really been transferred 
from the originators.  
Liquidity risk 
There had been an insufficient recognition on the part of supervisors and banks of the close 
link between  market liquidity (ability to rapidly sell assets without impacting prices) and an 
individual bank’s funding liquidity (ability to raise funds from the market). The recent credit 
turmoil  has  highlighted  the  importance,  for  both  banks  and  supervisors,  of  considering 
market disruption scenarios as well as institution-specific scenarios in liquidity planning. This 
should also encompass the liquidity demands arising from off-balance sheet commitments, 
implicit or explicit, of the credit intermediaries. Also, the assumptions underlying the liquidity 
contingency plans need to be realistic and not overly optimistic. 
Valuation 
The recent market turmoil and resulting illiquidity has highlighted the importance of reliable 
valuations  and  transparency  of  risk  exposures.  Some  banks  seemed  to  have  used 
inappropriately  optimistic  valuation  and  modelling  methodologies  to  determine  the  value  of 
certain securitisation exposures, such as collateralised debt obligations (CDOs) and residual 
interests. It has been demonstrated that liberal and unsubstantiated valuation assumptions 
can  result  in  material  inaccuracies  in  financial  statements  and  substantial  write-downs  of 
structured products, and in case of excessive concentration, even demise of the sponsoring 
institution.  Supervisors  and  banks,  therefore,  need  to  understand  the  potentially  significant 
effect that market volatility on the financials of a bank.  
Residual risks in structured products 
There was insufficient recognition of residual risks in the structured products on the part of 
investing  banks,  as  well  as  those  banks  acting  as  issuers  and  sponsors  of  asset-backed 
commercial paper (ABCP) programmes. For instance, banks that extended liquidity facilities 
to ABCP programmes were exposed to high degrees of credit risk, of the underlying asset 
pool, which may be subtly embedded within the liquidity facilities' provisions. Securitisation 
exposures can also expose banks to significant reputational risks, as observed in the recent 
episode,  on  account  of  which  the  banks  had  to  roll-in  the  SIVs  on  to  their  own  balance 
sheets.  Supervisors  and  banks,  therefore,  need  to  take  cognisance  of  the  residual  risks 
entailed in structured products.  
Transparency and disclosure 
The  recent  difficulties  experienced  by  banks  as  well  as  investors,  with  respect  to  complex 
structured products highlighted the lack of transparency due to insufficient disclosure. Much 
of  the  current  turmoil  in  the  credit  markets  related  to  questions  about  the  soundness  of 
certain types of collateralised debt obligations (CDOs) and asset-backed commercial paper. 
These  problems  might  perhaps  been  avoided,  or  at  least  mitigated,  through  greater 
transparency,  particularly  with  respect  to  the  exposures  of  some  large  international 
4 
 BIS Review 146/2008
institutions  to  CDOs  of  securities  backed  by  sub-prime  mortgages  originated  in  the  United 
States. 
Regulatory scope 
In  view  of  ever-increasing  integration  of  different  segments  of  the  financial  market,  the 
potential  of  the  unregulated  market  participants  for  infecting  the  regulated  parts  of  the 
system, no matter how well supervised, needs better recognition by the financial supervisors. 
The  regulatory  gaps  in  which  the  unregulated  entities  operate  need  to  be  identified  and 
effectively  addressed  so  that  the  systemically-important  regulated  entities  are  not  put  to 
undue risk by the activities of the unregulated entities, entailing significant public cost.  
Employee-compensation structure 
The  remuneration  structure  of  the  employees  is  also  stated  to  have  played  a  role  in  the 
recent crisis. The pay structure was flawed in as much as the employee bonuses formed a 
large  part  of  the  entire  remuneration  package.  The  performance-based  remuneration  did 
induce risky behavior in the investment managers of the major global financial entities. The 
compensation  structure  was  also  reportedly 
the 
compensation  systems  rewarded  very  short-term  employee  performance 
instead  of 
reckoning the long-term effect of their actions. Moreover, when things went wrong, there was 
little penalty, except maybe the loss of a job – often with millions of dollars in compensation. 
Thus,  the  distorting  impact  of  the  design  of  compensation  structure  on  the  incentive 
framework  of  the  employees  needs  to  be  clearly  recognised  by  the  banks  as  also  the 
supervisors.  
in  many  cases  and 
front-loaded 
Conflict of interest in the role of rating agencies 
It is well known that the rating agencies are paid for their rating exercise by the issuers of 
securities and not by the investors in those securities. There were instances where the rating 
agencies,  while  rating  of  securities,  also  tendered  advice  on  the  structuring  of  those 
securities  so  as  to  be  able  to  improve  their  rating.  Such  structured  obligations  were  then 
assigned a rating. Thus, their role of providing to the investors an objective and independent 
assessment of the risks entailed in the securities rated by them, took a back seat while their 
primary  loyalty  lay  with  the  issuers  of  securities.  Moreover,  the  dual  role  of  the  rating 
agencies in structuring as well as rating of securities also created a conflict of interest in their 
functioning.  
Remedial and pre-emptive measures suggested for future 
8.  In  this  background,  a  variety  of  suggestions  have  emerged  from  different  quarters  to 
obviate the recurrence of such episodes in future. Several strands of broad policy measures 
have  been  suggested  from  time  to  time  towards  this  goal.  The  reports  of  the  International 
Institute of Finance and the Financial Stability Forum are particularly notable in this regard. 
The suggestions made so far include ensuring a greater emphasis on improving the market 
transparency through better market governance and securing full accountability of the market 
players  for  adverse  market  developments.  Permit  me  to  briefly  enumerate  some  of  the 
salient suggestions that have been made in this regard.  
9. As the institutions that generate and grant loans with the intention of subsequently hiving 
them off in the market, have less incentive to control credit risk than a traditional bank, which 
keeps  loans  on  their  balance  sheet  till  full  repayment,  it  has  been  suggested  that  the 
regulatory  framework  for  them  should  be  reviewed  and  strengthened.  In  other  words,  the 
receive  closer  regulatory 
banks  adopting 
oversight. 
“originate-to-distribute”  model  should 
BIS Review 146/2008 
 5
10. The rating agencies play a vital role in the process of securitisation, through rating the 
paper issued by the SPVs. It has therefore been suggested that (a) appropriate mechanisms 
should be evolved to ensure that the information received by the rating agencies is reliable; 
(b)  appropriate  rules-based  structures  should  be  established  to  particularly  prevent  the 
conflicts of interest in their functioning; (c) a closer attention to the liquidity risks faced by the 
rated entity / product should be mandated for the rating agencies in their rating process; and 
(d) an appropriate road map for the rating agency reforms, should be evolved to address the 
weaknesses revealed as also to promote competition in the rating industry. 
11. As the investors in the securitised paper were apparently unaware of the true quality of 
the  underlying  loans,  suggestions  have  been  made  to  improve  the  transparency  of 
securitisation transactions as also of the characteristics of the underlying loans. Mandating a 
certain  degree  of  standardisation  of  the  securitisation  transactions,  packages  and  of  the 
reporting requirements has also been suggested to improve transparency.  
12. As I mentioned, one of the causes for the banks’ distress was the invocation of liquidity 
support lines by the SIVs sponsored by the banks. Since unlike the Basel I Framework, the 
Basel II framework does require a capital charge for such liquidity support provided by the 
banks,  accelerating  and  encouraging  the  implementation  of  Basel  II  in  all  jurisdictions  has 
also been suggested.  
13. The financial innovation has transformed the contours of liquidity risks on account of the 
general trend toward the “marketisation” of assets through various securitisation structures, 
Since the imposition of additional regulatory capital charge alone can not be an answer to the 
liquidity problems faced by the banks, efficient and effective management of liquidity by the 
banks has acquired crucial significance. Hence, suggestions were made for modernising and 
upgrading international norms for liquidity management, with greater emphasis on simulation, 
scenario analysis and stress testing of the liquidity needs. The Basel Committee on Banking 
Supervision  has  since  published  the  Principles  for  Sound  Liquidity  Risk  Management  and 
Supervision, in June 2008, which provide a good starting point. 
14. With progressive marketisation of banking assets, the current accounting standards also 
increasingly rely on the “mark to market” valuation of financial assets. However, the need for 
a  more  cautious  approach  has  been  highlighted  in  relying  upon  such  valuations  since  the 
recent upheavals seem to have cast a doubt over the reliability of this model when markets 
are quite thin and shallow, not to mention short-lived. While the essential information value 
embedded  in  the  market  prices  is  beyond  dispute,  it  is  necessary  to  recognise  that  in 
stressful  times,  such  market-based  valuations  could  prove  quite  illusory  due  to  market 
illiquidity.  
15.  In  the  wake  of  the  sponsor/parent  banks  being  forced  to  bail  out  their  SIVs,  due  to 
reputational  risk,  the  legal  independence  of  such  SIVs  for  regulatory  and  accounting 
purposes  has  come  into  question.  Hence,  a  review  of  the  boundaries  of  consolidated 
supervision  has  been  suggested.  This  would  require  a  re-assessment  as  to  whether  the 
accounting boundaries between the parent and its off-balance sheet affiliates correctly reflect 
the risks to which the parent entity remains exposed. 
16. A certain class of unregulated entities in the financial sector had also been instrumental 
in the recent credit crisis. A careful examination of the modalities for periodical review of the 
regulatory  structure  for  the  financial  sector,  in  different  jurisdictions,  has  therefore  been 
suggested so as to ensure, through appropriate intervention, that none of the market players 
“fall  between  the  cracks”  and  remain  unregulated  in  the  regulatory  dispensation  in  any 
jurisdiction. 
The Indian scenario 
17. With rapidly increasing financial globalisation, it is difficult to assume that a country can 
remain totally insulated from the fallout of global turmoil of this dimension, though the degree 
6 
 BIS Review 146/2008
of  impact  could  certainly  vary  as  per  the  county-specific  conditions.  Thus,  India  too  was 
exposed to the impact of this global crisis though to a much lesser extent. A detailed study 
undertaken by the RBI recently in regard to the impact of the sub-prime episode on the select 
banks had revealed that none of them had any direct exposure to the sub-prime markets in 
the USA or other markets. However, a few Indian banks had invested in the collateralised 
debt  obligations  (CDOs)/bonds  which  had  a  few  underlying  entities  with  sub-prime 
exposures.  Thus,  no  direct  impact  on  account  of  direct  exposure  to  the  sub-prime  market 
was  in  evidence  though  a  few  of  these  banks  had  to  record  the  mark-to-market  losses 
caused by the widening of the credit spreads due to adverse impact of the sub-prime episode 
on the term liquidity in the market. 
Measures taken by the RBI 
18.  The  RBI  has  taken  several  measures  over  the  years  for  strengthening  the  risk 
management systems in the banking sector and wide-ranging measures at the systemic level 
in the recent past in the light of the global and domestic developments. Let me make a brief 
mention of some of these. 
Risk management in banks 
19.  The  management  of  liquidity  risk  by  the  market  participants  has  emerged  as  a  very 
crucial factor in the recent crisis. The RBI has been alive to the importance of liquidity risk 
management in the Indian banking system. We had issued the guidelines on Asset-Liability 
Management (ALM) system to the banks as far back as in February, 1999, which stipulated a 
simple  maturity  ladder  approach  to  the  ALM  along  with  certain  regulatory  gap  limits  for 
negative  mismatches  in  the  first  two  time  buckets.  In  October,  2007,  we  modified  the 
guidelines with a view to adopt a more granular approach to measurement of liquidity risk. In 
terms  of  the  revised  guidelines,  the  banks  are  required  to  capture  liquidity  risk  in  time 
buckets consisting  of  the  next  one  day,  the  next  2-7  days,  the  next  8-14  days  and  so  on. 
Banks have been urged to make concerted efforts to capture 100 per cent data, including off-
balance sheet items, from all their branches in a timely manner. While the banks are required 
to prepare the “Statement of Structural Liquidity” on a daily basis for their MIS, for monitoring 
by the RBI, the statement needs to be sent to the RBI at monthly intervals. 
20. Besides the ALM Guidelines, RBI has also issued the Guidance Notes to the banks on 
management of credit risk, market risk and operational risk. The banks are also required to 
adopt  formal  risk  management  architecture  for  effective  management  of  different  types  of 
risks, with appropriate high-level risk management committees guiding the risk management 
function  in  the  banks.  Such  a  holistic  risk  management  architecture  coupled  with  the 
inculcation  of  a  robust  risk  management  culture  in  the  banks  is  expected  to  adequately 
address the risk management imperatives in the Indian context.  
Management of systemic liquidity 
21.  On  account  of  liquidity  crunch  in  the  western  world,  there  has  been  wide-ranging  de-
leveraging in evidence as the global investors were constrained to liquidate their investments 
in  the  financial  markets.  This  has  also  resulted  in  significant  FII  divestments  in  the  Indian 
equity  markets  and  the  capital  outflows  from  India.  This,  in  turn,  impacted  the  systemic 
liquidity and also exerted pressure on the exchange rate of the rupee. The RBI intervention in 
the forex markets also added to the pressures on the rupee liquidity. In this background, the 
RBI  initiated  a  variety  of  policy  measures  to  infuse  liquidity  into  the  system  to  enable  the 
uninterrupted flow of credit to the productive sectors of the economy.  
22.  The  RBI  has  acted  pro-actively  and  promptly  and  taken  multi-directional  measures  to 
infuse liquidity into the Indian system so as to ensure availability of credit to the productive 
sectors  of  the  economy  and  thereby,  maintaining  financial  stability.  While  the  package  of 
BIS Review 146/2008 
 7
measures  has  had  some  positive  effect,  the  challenges  still  remain  as  the  global 
uncertainties  continue  to  persist.  The  Reserve  Bank  will  continue  to  closely  monitor  the 
developments in the global and domestic financial markets and will take swift and effective 
action as appropriate. The bankers too, on their part, mindful of the needs of their customers, 
have recently reduced their lending rates and it is expected to have a salutary effect on the 
credit off take in the system. 
Conclusion 
23.  These  are  challenging  times  for  all  of  us  and  we  need  to  be  watchful  of  the unfolding 
developments. While the temporary counter-cyclical measures taken by the RBI are as per 
the need of the hour, it has to be borne in mind that the measures are ad hoc in nature in 
response to a particular situation. The banks would, therefore be well advised to ensure that 
their  business  strategies  and  decisions  are  guided  by  the  longer-term  perspective  of  the 
systemic  and  macroeconomic  developments  and  are  not  unduly  influenced  by  the  current 
episode  of  the  exceptional  events.  Since  the  banks  would  have  a  key  role  in  successfully 
countering  the  adverse  impact  of  the  recent  developments,  their  continued  safety  & 
soundness  and  financial  health  would  be  of  utmost  importance  –  for  the  banks,  for  their 
customers as well as for the public policy authorities from a systemic perspective. I am sure, 
the  banking  community  would  rise  to  the  occasion  and  measure  equal  to  the  task  in 
effectively responding to the challenges ahead, through prompt action underpinned by robust 
pragmatism. 
24. I wish the reactivated Bankers Club of Kolkata become a vibrant platform for exchange of 
information and will come out with innovative ideas for taking safe banking to every nook and 
corner of the country. 
Thank you for the attention. 
8 
 BIS Review 146/2008
