Jean-Claude Trichet: Hearing at the Economic and Monetary Affairs 
Committee of the European Parliament 
Speech  by  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  Brussels, 
8 December 2008. 
 les  membres  de 
la  Présidente,  Mesdames  et  Messieurs 
Madame 
la  Commission 
Economique  et  Monétaire,  je  me  réjouis  de  cette  quatrième  rencontre  avec  votre 
Commission au cours de cette année. Je commencerai mon intervention par une évaluation 
de  la  situation  économique  et  monétaire,  en  expliquant  les  raisons  sous-jacentes  à  nos 
récentes décisions de taux. Je vous fournirai ensuite de plus amples informations sur nos 
opérations de politique monétaire ainsi que notre dispositif de garanties. Am Schluss möchte 
ich  auf  das  Management  der  Finanzkrise 
in  Europa  eingehen  und  einige  der 
Reformvorschläge  für  das  internationale  Finanzsystem  hervorheben,  die  ich  für  besonders 
wichtig halte. Danach beantworte ich wie immer gerne Ihre Fragen.  
Economic and monetary developments 
Since  my  previous  hearing  before  your  Committee  on  10  September,  euro  area  annual 
inflation has continued to decline, falling to 2.1% in November. With lower commodity prices 
and weakening demand, annual inflation is expected to be in line with price stability over the 
policy-relevant horizon.  
Risks to the outlook for price stability are more balanced than in the past. Unexpected further 
declines in commodity prices could put downward pressure on inflation, while upside risks to 
price stability could materialise if the fall in commodity prices were to reverse or if domestic 
price pressures were to turn out stronger than assumed.  
Turning to economic developments, since September, there has been an intensification and 
broadening of the financial turmoil, contributing in the third quarter to a contraction of 0.2% in 
real  GDP  growth  compared  to  the  previous  quarter.  Global  economic  weakness  and  very 
sluggish domestic demand can be expected to persist in the last quarter of 2008 and in the 
next few quarters. Subsequently, a recovery should gradually take place, supported by the 
fall in commodity prices and assuming that the external environment improves and financial 
tensions  weaken.  As  a  whole,  average  growth  in  2009  could  be  between  -1%  and  0% 
according to the Eurosystem staff. 
This  outlook  remains  surrounded  by  exceptionally  high  uncertainty.  Risks  to  economic 
growth lie on the downside, relating to concerns for a stronger impact on the real economy of 
the ongoing financial turmoil, protectionism and possible disorderly developments owing to 
global imbalances. 
All  parties  concerned  should  make  their  contribution  to  lay  sound  foundations  for  a 
sustainable  recovery.  The  measures  announced  by  governments  to  address  the  financial 
turmoil  should  be  implemented  swiftly  so  as  to  support  trust  in  the  financial  system  and 
prevent constraints on credit supply.  
Estimates  of  underlying  broad  money  growth  point  to  a  sustained  but  moderating  rate  of 
expansion.  This  supports  the  view  that  inflationary  pressures  are  diminishing  further,  with 
some risks remaining on the upside in the medium to longer term. 
On  4  December  we  decided  to  reduce  the  key  ECB  interest  rates  by  75  bps,  putting  the 
overall  reduction  of  our  key  interest  rates  at  175  bps  in  less  than  two  months.  We  will 
continue  to  keep  inflation  expectations  firmly  anchored  in  line  with  price  stability,  thereby 
supporting sustainable growth and employment, and contributing to financial stability.  
BIS Review 155/2008 
 1
Overview of recent monetary policy operations and the Eurosystem’s collateral 
framework 
Ladies and gentlemen, I would now like to say a few words about our recent monetary policy 
operations and the collateral eligible in the ECB’s operational framework.  
The widening and deepening of the financial turmoil over the last three months triggered an 
unprecedented  rise  in  risk  aversion,  which  was  felt  particularly  on  the  money  markets.  In 
view of this intensification of money markets tensions, the Eurosystem stepped up its efforts 
to ensure that solvent banks continued to have access to liquidity. Most notably, we decided 
to  supply  liquidity  on  an  unlimited  basis  and  at  a  fixed  rate.  In  addition  we  intensified  our 
close cooperation with other central banks, in particular with the Federal Reserve. 
These measures have enhanced the capability of euro area banks to refinance themselves 
with the Eurosystem and have helped to ease liquidity tensions in the money markets. Yet I 
should  like  to  stress  that  these  measures  are  very  exceptional  and  we  very  much  look 
forward  to  the  reactivation  of  inter-bank  lending  and  to  banks  resuming  their  traditional 
intermediation activity.  
The Eurosystem’s operational framework has proved to be “fit for purpose”. Three features of 
our operational framework have served us particularly well in dealing with the money market 
tensions.  First,  the  broad  set  of  eligible  counterparties,  which  ensures  that  our  operations 
have a sufficient scope. Second, the large scale of our operations, which ensures that our 
operations allow for an effective redistribution of liquidity across banks. And third, the wide 
range of eligible collateral.  
Since  its  inception,  the  Eurosystem  has  always  accepted  a  wide  range  of  assets  as 
collateral, including public but also private assets. This has proved to be a stabilising factor in 
the current turmoil, as it ensured that banks had a wide array of collateral at their disposal to 
access the Eurosystem’s operations. In view of the difficult situation on the money markets, 
we decided to temporarily expand the list of eligible collateral until the end of 2009. At the 
same  time,  in  order  to  protect  the  Eurosystem  against  financial  risks,  we  have  made 
refinements to our risk control framework. We are confident that these changes will help to 
ensure the functioning of the money markets whilst keeping in place adequate safeguards for 
the Eurosystem’s financial interests.  
EU financial crisis management  
Let me now turn to the second issue on which the panel of experts prepared studies, namely 
financial crisis management in the EU. The market turmoil has heightened the importance of 
addressing financial challenges in a comprehensive and coordinated manner, both globally 
and at the European level. In the context of the increasing cross-border activities of financial 
institutions,  coordination  is  particularly  important,  given  that  the  institutional  setting  for 
financial stability remains predominantly based on national competences. 
The events during the last three months have shown once again that – in times of crisis – 
Europe can rise to the challenge. In particular, by agreeing on a common European Action 
Plan in October, the responsible EU and national authorities demonstrated their ability to live 
up to their responsibilities and to act in a swift and concerted manner. In addition, relevant 
authorities coordinated closely in managing individual banks’ strains. The ECB contributed to 
liquidity  operations  as  well  as  by 
the  European  Action  Plan 
issuing 
recommendations on recapitalisations and on the pricing of government guarantees.  
I would like to stress that the support measures decided by central banks and governments 
for  the  financial  sector  were  designed  to  preserve  the  real  economy  as  a  whole,  the 
employees, the small businesses and all the productive sector against the potential systemic 
consequences of a financial meltdown. 
through 
its 
2 
 BIS Review 155/2008
As for the measures to render the financial system in the future more resilient, I commend 
the  work  which  is  being  pursued  at  the  global  level  by  the  FSF  and  the  G-20,  and  at  the 
European level by the Ecofin Council. I would like to emphasise five strands of work which I 
consider particularly important.  
First,  financial  institutions  must  improve  their  risk  management  systems  in  all  areas, 
particularly in those – such as securitisation or liquidity risk – where the crisis has highlighted 
grave  shortcomings.  In  this  context,  we  welcome  the  strengthening  of  the  prudential 
framework as envisaged in the current revision of the Capital Requirements Directive.  
Second, financial institutions should avoid excessive short-termism in their behaviour which 
tends to place undue emphasis on returns over risks. To that end a number of improvements 
are  necessary,  including  specific  guidance  by  supervisors  on  internal  compensation 
schemes.  
Third,  transparency  should  be  enhanced  in  all  respects,  including  all  financial  institutions, 
opaque financial instruments and markets, such as OTC derivatives markets. With regard to 
the latter, I welcome the initiatives to establish a central counterparty clearing for the CDS 
markets.  
Fourth, all the potential procyclical effects of the present functioning of the financial system, 
including the current regulatory framework – the implications of the present prudential rules 
and accounting standards – need to be mitigated.  
Finally, the supervision of cross-border financial institutions needs to be enhanced. To that 
end, the recent measures in the EU including the compulsory establishment of colleges of 
supervisors for all cross-border banks are particularly important. As regards the future I am 
sure  that  substantial  improvements  could  be  envisaged,  in  particular  by  the  High-Level 
Group  set  up  by  the  Commission  and  which  is  gathering  eminent  personalities.  Whatever 
proposals are made to enhance banking surveillance at a pan-European level I would stress 
the importance of a very close relationship between central banks and banking surveillance 
authority. This has always been the sentiment of the Governing Council of the ECB, and the 
most recent events have confirmed the pertinence of this view. 
Thank you for your attention.  
BIS Review 155/2008 
 3
