Guy Quaden: The integration of the euro government bond market – 
standstill or restart? 
Keynote address by Mr Guy Quaden, Governor of the National Bank of Belgium, at the Third 
Annual European Government Bond Summit, Brussels, 24 October 2008. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It  is  a  great  pleasure  for  me  to  be  the  guest  speaker  at  this  third  annual  European 
Government  Bond  Summit.  Even  in  these  turbulent  times,  I  hope  that  you  still  enjoy  your 
dinner  and  will  have  time  to  attend  the  conference  tomorrow.  Its  programme  looks  very 
interesting indeed, and closely reflects the current difficulties in the financial markets.  
The primary dealers community is now, maybe more than ever before, of great interest for 
central bankers. Indeed, one of your main missions is to make sure there is enough liquidity 
in  the  government  bonds  secondary  market.  Proper  functioning  of  this market  is  crucial  to 
ensure liquidity for financial institutions, via the collateralised interbank market among others. 
And this market has become increasingly important since liquidity in the unsecured interbank 
market has been drying up. Owing to the high distrust among market participants, banks are 
still  facing  acute  borrowing  restrictions.  This  lack  of  market  liquidity  is  one  of  the  main 
problems  with  which  central  bankers  are  confronted  at  the  moment.  The  Eurosystem  has 
adjusted its distribution of liquidity – and will continue to adjust it for as long as necessary – 
to ensure that solvent banks have continued access to liquidity and to keep the very-short-
term  rates,  in  particular  the  overnight  rate,  as  close  as  possible  to  the  policy  rate.  The 
Eurosystem has assumed an increasing intermediation role during this period of turbulence. 
With  its  actions  and  the  guarantees  offered  by  individual  governments,  conditions  are  in 
place for a pickup in confidence and a gradual reduction in tensions on the money market. 
Since the beginning of the financial turmoil in the summer of last year, the ECB Governing 
Council has made a clear distinction between liquidity management and its monetary policy 
stance,  which  is  signalled  by  the  interest  rate  on  the  main  refinancing  operations.  The 
dramatic  worsening  of  the  financial  crisis  since  the  collapse  of  Lehman  Brothers  radically 
modified  the  outlook  for  growth  and,  as  a  consequence  of  lower  commodity  prices  and 
faltering domestic activity, our assessment of risks to price stability as well. Therefore, the 
coordinated interest rate cut of 50 bp on 8 October was appropriate for the euro area. The 
Governing  Council  has  thus  shown  that,  without  prejudice  to  its  main  objective  of 
guaranteeing price stability in the medium term. it can also use its interest rate policy to help 
alleviate financial tensions and sustain confidence and economic activity. 
Also from a monetary policy viewpoint, a  properly-functioning secondary government bond 
market  is  very  important.  Allowing  for  the  existence  of  a  "risk-free"  yield  curve,  it  plays  a 
crucial role in the transmission of monetary policy. Indeed, while the Eurosystem has only a 
direct influence on very-short-term money market rates, households and firms look mainly at 
medium-  and  longer-term  rates  when  taking  consumption  and  investment  decisions. 
Consequently, when the Governing Council of the ECB reacts to disturbing shocks in order 
to maintain price stability in a medium-term perspective, it is interested in seeing monetary 
policy  impulses  effectively  transmitted  along  the  yield  curve.  Moreover,  the  Eurosystem's 
monetary policy strategy aims at firmly anchoring inflation expectations and minimising the 
inflation risk component of long-term interest rates. In this respect, government bond markets 
provide  useful  information  on  inflation  expectations.  Through  their  pricing  of  long-term 
government bonds, primary dealers thus contribute to the efficiency of monetary policy. Of 
course,  we  are  well  aware  that  the  whole  transmission  process  is  now  impaired  by  the 
banking crisis and we have to counteract these disturbances.  
BIS Review 143/2008 
 1
Last but not least, I am very pleased that the organiser of this summit, the European Primary 
Dealers Association, sees promoting integration of the EU government bond markets as its 
mission. Your association is therefore an active agent of financial integration. I would like to 
devote the rest of my speech to this issue. Firstly, I will remind you that the Eurosystem, too, 
has a strong interest in promoting such integration. Secondly, I will give a short overview of 
the current state of financial integration in the euro area, focusing on the government bond 
market. Thirdly, I will discuss several initiatives recently taken by the Eurosystem to foster 
financial  integration,  with  special  emphasis  on  the  second  generation  of  the  Eurosystem's 
collateral management system, the so called CCBM2. 
Apart from its particular importance for the conduct of monetary policy, financial integration is 
highly  relevant  to  other  Eurosystem  tasks.  It  is  fundamental  to  the  Eurosystem's  job  of 
promoting  the  smooth  operation  of  payment  systems,  which  in  turn  relates  to  its  great 
interest in the safe and effective functioning of securities clearing and settlement systems.  
Furthermore, by permitting risk-sharing and diversification, by enhancing depth and liquidity 
of  financial  markets,  integration  also  contributes  to  safeguarding  financial  stability.  We  are 
nevertheless aware that spill-over effects and contagion increase with financial integration. 
So,  it  will  probably  be  a  major  challenge  in  the  coming  years  to  accurately  gauge  this 
dimension, as borne out by the growing importance of cross-border financial institutions. In 
recent weeks, when the financial turbulence was at its fiercest, it became clear that a revamp 
of prudential supervision in Europe will be an essential element of the reforms necessary to 
avoid a repetition of such a dramatic turmoil. 
Finally, by encouraging more efficient allocation of resources, financial integration acts as a 
prerequisite  for  realising  Europe's  full  economic  potential,  that  is  raising  the  potential  for 
stronger non-inflationary economic growth, as highlighted in the Lisbon Strategy.  
For all these reasons, the Eurosystem has always been a strong supporter of the European 
financial integration process and we have monitored developments in the different segments 
very closely. The tenth anniversary of the ECB, a few months ago, gave us the opportunity to 
take stock of the achievements in European financial integration over the last decade. We 
were proud to conclude that significant progress has been made and that the single currency 
has acted as a major driving force.  
The  progress  that  has  been  achieved  nevertheless  differs  across  market  segments.  The 
money market, in particular the interbank market for unsecured deposits, can be considered 
as  a  single  area-wide  market  –  also  its  current  difficulties  ignore  national  borders!  But  the 
segment for short-term debt securities (commercial paper and certificates of deposit) is still 
fragmented. I would like to remind you that, in order to try and close this gap, the Eurosystem 
is supporting the private STEP initiative which aims to develop a pan-European short-term 
paper market. 
A considerable degree of integration has also been achieved in corporate bond and equity 
markets. By contrast, while the euro-area banking markets for wholesale and capital-market-
related  activities  also  show  clear  signs  of  integration,  retail  banking  markets  have  so  far 
remained fragmented.  
Undoubtedly,  the  euro-area  government  bond  market  is  the  segment  –  apart  from  the 
unsecured money market – that has reached the highest degree of integration. The removal 
of  exchange  rate  risks,  the  drop  in  transaction  costs  and  the  disappearance  of  currency 
restrictions for investors and intermediaries have pushed up cross-border bond holdings. Let 
me  mention  the  case  of  my  own  country.  At  the  end  of  June  this  year,  the  proportion  of 
Belgian linear bonds held by foreigners reached 55 p.c. In the case of Treasury certificates, 
foreign  holdership  came  to  73  p.c.  at  the  same  moment  in  time,  which  reflects  the  strong 
foreign  demand  generated  by  the  relative  scarcity  of  short-term  euro-denominated  public 
securities which were accorded a good rating by the credit rating agencies.  
2 
 BIS Review 143/2008
The  primary  dealer  community,  which  has  become  more  and  more  diversified,  has  been 
highly supportive of these developments. Looking for instance at the situation in this country, 
only  3  of  the  16  primary  dealers  active  on  the  Belgian  government  securities  market,  are 
actually Belgian! Financial institutions active in the main financial centres of the world (New 
York, London, Paris, Frankfurt) are now contributing to a successful widening of the investor 
base for securities issued by the Belgian Treasury.  
Besides growing market integration, the long-term tendency towards more sustainable public 
finances,  across  all  member  states,  has  also  helped  achieve  close  convergence  of 
government  bond  yields  among  EMU  countries.  For  many  euro-area  nations,  government 
bond yield spreads vis-à-vis the German Bund declined from the introduction of the euro until 
mid-2007, when they were just a few basis points.  
While  government  bond  yields  are  increasingly  driven  by  a  common  factor,  local  factors 
continue to play a role, however. The financial crisis we are going through has shed some 
light on the remaining gaps in the euro-area bond markets. Strong flight-to-quality flows have 
been accompanied by a sharp widening of intra-euro-area government bond yield spreads. 
In  the  euro  area,  the  ten-year  sovereign  spreads  vis-à-vis  the  German  benchmark  have 
reached  levels  not  seen  since  the  start  of  EMU  (this  morning:  Italy  88  bp,  Spain  56  bp, 
Belgium  53  bp,  France  26  bp).  A  common  shock  –  namely,  the  sharp  increase  in  risk 
aversion in global markets – thus led to different responses in the government bond market. 
The underlying factors behind this increase in bond yield spreads are multiple. The German 
Bund  certainly  benefited  from  its  high  liquidity  –  favoured  by  a  highly-performing  futures 
market – a strong plus in these turbulent times. Credit risks were also a factor – although not 
the main one – behind the increase in bond yield spreads, as corresponding credit default 
swap  spreads  also  widened.  Here  in  Belgium,  the  long  drawn  out  discussions  about  the 
country's institutional future have long hampered the formation of a stable government. All 
this  uncertainty  has  taken  its  toll  on  the  financial  markets;  the  credit  default  swap  rate  for 
Belgium increased somewhat, compared with Germany's rate. These increases have been 
quite modest, though, which seems to indicate that the markets believe – as I do – that these 
difficulties could be solved without far-reaching financial consequences. More recently, the 
problems confronting some of our main financial institutions have also had some influence. 
The  Belgian  government  –  like  several  other  European  governments  –  had  to  recapitalise 
those  institutions,  which  pushed  up  the  outstanding  public  debt,  and  thus  also  the  credit 
default swap rate for Belgium, which is now some 26 basis points higher than for Germany.  
Anyway, as I said before, the increase in spreads vis-à-vis the German Bund is a general 
phenomenon.  One  may  fear  that  the  recent  financial  turbulence  will  lead  to  a  standstill  or 
even a setback for European government bond market integration. So it might be useful to 
consider some initiatives to relaunch this integration process. Here, we can refer to several 
reports written by the Giovannini Group. 
In a report presented in 2000, this Group addressed the issue of "Co-ordinated public debt 
issuance in the euro area", arguing that the decentralised approach to public debt issuance 
was  an  obstacle  to  full  market  integration.  Different  options  for  greater  co-ordination  were 
discussed,  including  the  creation  of  a  single  euro-area  debt  instrument  backed  by  joint 
guarantees, an option that could be beneficial for smaller member states, currently paying 
liquidity premiums. Unfortunately, the Group did not start any concrete specification of such 
options. I nevertheless notice that tomorrow you will be bringing up the subject of common 
issuance again. Maybe your summit will give new impetus to this idea.  
In  two  later  reports  (2001  and  2003),  the  Giovannini  Group  focused  on  clearing  and 
settlement  infrastructures  in  the  EU.  It  described  clearing  and  settlement  as  an  essential 
feature  of  a  smoothly  functioning  securities  market,  providing  for  the  efficient  and  safe 
transfer of ownership from the seller to the buyer. It identified a number of barriers to efficient 
cross-border clearing and settlement. 
BIS Review 143/2008 
 3
Since the start of EMU, the ECB has taken a good many initiatives to provide payment and 
settlement  facilities  that  foster  market  infrastructure  integration  and  ensure  the  highest 
standards of efficiency and safety. 
First of all, I would like to mention TARGET, the real-time gross settlement system for the 
euro, which, since its launch in January 1999, has contributed to the integration of euro-area 
financial  markets,  by  providing  its  users  with  an  area-wide  payment  infrastructure.  In 
response  to  the  growing  demand  from  financial  institutions  for  more  advanced  and 
harmonised  payment  and  settlement  services  across  Europe,  the  Eurosystem  decided  to 
migrate  from  TARGET  as  a  system  of  systems,  to  a  single  shared  platform,  TARGET2, 
where the rules of the different legal systems are harmonised to the greatest possible extent. 
Let me now say a few words on the second of these ECB initiatives: the so-called CCBM 
(Correspondent Central Banking Model). As you know, all Eurosystem credit operations have 
to  be  adequately  collateralised  by  eligible  assets.  Moreover,  the  Eurosystem's  operational 
framework stipulates that counterparties can only obtain credit from the national central bank 
in  the country  in  which they  are  located,  and  that  any  Eurosystem  counterparty  should  be 
able to use any eligible asset as collateral. Thus, a specific mechanism had to be established 
to  enable  the  cross-border  use  of  collateral,  regardless  of  the  location  of  the  asset  or  the 
counterparty.  
Against  this  background,  the  Eurosystem  introduced  the  CCBM  in  1999  in  parallel  with 
TARGET.  Through  the  CCBM,  counterparties  obtain  credit  from  their  "home  central  bank" 
based  on  collateral  provided  to  another  Eurosystem  central  bank  and  this  "correspondent 
central  bank"  holds  the  collateral  on  behalf  of  the  home  central  bank.  In  the  current 
framework  for  the  delivery  of  collateral,  the  CCBM  provides  for  a  common  cross-border 
procedure, while national collateral delivery procedures are still not harmonised.  
The CCBM has proved to be a success, as the cross-border use of collateral has increased 
significantly. However, market participants have found some drawbacks in this system which 
mainly relate to the lack of standardisation of existing procedures, both domestically and at 
cross-border level. Against this background, the Governing Council decided in March 2007 to 
review the current Eurosystem collateral handling procedures. In July 2008, it has decided to 
launch  a  single  technical  platform  –  called  CCBM2  –  and  assigned  the  development  and 
operation of CCBM2 to the National Bank of Belgium and De Nederlandsche Bank. 
CCBM2  will  first  and  foremost  provide  a  harmonised  level  of  service,  thus  facilitating 
interaction between the Eurosystem central banks and their counterparties. While the CCBM 
was  built  for  the  cross-border  use  of  collateral  only,  CCBM2  will  provide  a  single  set  of 
uniform procedures both on a domestic and a cross-border basis. 
CCBM2  will  handle  all  eligible  collateral,  marketable  as  well  non  marketable.  It  will 
consequently allow to manage securities but also incorporate functions for the use of credit 
claims as collateral. Furthermore, CCBM2 will support the two currently used collateralisation 
techniques  (pledge/pooling  and  repo/earmarking)  and  will  be  able  to  accept  collateral 
through all eligible Securities Settlement Systems. 
While  CCBM2  is  first  and  foremost  a  collateral  management  facility  for  the  Eurosystem  (a 
"Eurosystem  back  office"),  it  will  at  the  same  time  bring  new  opportunities  for  Eurosystem 
counterparties  to  reduce  back-office  complexity  and  cost  and  optimise  their  collateral  and 
liquidity  management  with  the  Eurosystem.  By  harmonising  procedures  related  to  the 
Eurosystem credit and collateral management, it will also create a level playing field. In order 
to  ensure  that  CCBM2  is  fully  in  line  with  counterparties'  needs,  the  Eurosystem  is 
developing this new facility in close cooperation with market participants themselves. 
If  we  look  to  the  future,  CCBM2  will  also  be  implemented  in  a  way  that  changes  in  the 
collateral framework, such as the acceptance of new asset types or the introduction of risk 
control measures, can easily be taken up. As you know, the acceptance of a wide range of 
assets eligible as collateral is a structural feature of the Eurosystem's operational framework. 
4 
 BIS Review 143/2008
Nevertheless, last week, the ECB Governing Council decided to extend it further until the end 
of  2009,  to  make  sure  that  solvent  banks  can  get  the  liquidity  they  need.  This  temporary 
measure is liable to increase the risks taken by the Eurosystem in its refinancing operations. 
Adequate risk control measures will be applied in order to limit those risks. 
Finally, as a third initiative aimed  at better market infrastructure integration, the Governing 
Council decided, back in July, to launch the TARGET2 Securities (T2S) project. T2S will be a 
technical platform for central securities depositories for the settlement of euro securities in 
central bank money, thereby bringing together securities and cash settlements within Europe 
on one efficient single platform. On a more technical level, T2S will remove the differences 
between conducting domestic and cross-border settlements within Europe and will act as a 
catalyst  for  the  integration  of  the  European  post-trading  financial  sector.  It  will  also  foster 
competition and harmonisation in post-trading by providing equal and less costly access to a 
common  settlement  service.  Through  the  single  platform,  economies  of  scale  can  be  fully 
exploited, while at the same time the safe and smooth settlement of securities transactions in 
central bank money is ensured. 
Subject to certain conditions, almost all euro-area central securities depositories, accounting 
for a very large share of settlement activity in the euro zone, have reacted very positively to 
the initiative. For the further development of T2S, the Eurosystem will continue to cooperate 
closely  and 
their  users  and  other  relevant 
stakeholders. 
Once  implemented,  the  three  so  called  "second-generation"  services,  TARGET2,  CCBM2 
and  T2S,  will  represent  a  quantum  leap  forward  in  the  integration  and  quality  of  the  euro 
area's  core  infrastructure.  These  initiatives  enhance  the  harmonisation  efforts  through  the 
removal of Giovannini barriers, thus reinforcing the Lisbon Strategy. 
I am sure that market participants – and especially the primary dealers – will recognise the 
opportunities  these  Eurosystem  initiatives  present  so  that  we  can  work  together  for  truly 
integrated euro financial markets, capable of withstanding turbulence in future. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  thank  you  for  your  attention  and  I  wish  you  a  pleasant  and  very 
interesting meeting tomorrow. 
these  depositories, 
transparently  with 
BIS Review 143/2008 
 5
