Jean-Claude Trichet: Interview with Al-Ahram 
Interview with Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank. Questions 
answered in writing in response to Ms Inas Nour of the Egyptian newspaper, Al-Ahram, on 
24 November 2008. 
 Question:  Ten  years  have  passed  since  the  establishment  of  the  European  Central 
Bank and next January, we will celebrate a decade since the launch of the euro. How do you 
evaluate both experiences? Are they factors of stability within the European Union market?  
Trichet: Indeed, the European Central Bank – the ECB – as well as the European System of 
Central  Banks,  which  comprises  the  ECB  and  the  central  banks  of  all  the  EU's  Member 
States, were established on 1 June 1998. The euro was introduced first on 1 January 1999, 
while the euro banknotes and coins were put into circulation on 1 January 2002. As you may 
remember, the euro area first comprised 11 Member States, then 12, 13, and currently 15. It 
will comprise 16 countries as of 1st January 2009, when Slovakia will join the euro area. The 
ECB’s Governing Council is presently taking monetary policy decisions for 320 million fellow 
citizens and as of next year for 325.5 million.  
The  primary  objective  of  the  ECB  and  the  national  central  banks  of  the  euro  area,  which 
together form the Eurosystem, is to maintain price stability in the euro area over the medium-
term. Concretely, the ECB aims at maintaining inflation rates below, but close to, 2% over the 
medium term. We have been able to broadly achieve this objective since the creation of the 
euro.  This  record  compares  favourably  with  the  average  inflation  rate  of  3%  that  was 
achieved  in  the  member  countries  during  the  nine  years  preceding  the  introduction  of  the 
euro.  Therefore,  the  euro  enjoys  that  same  level  of  stability  and  credibility  as  the  most 
successful  legacy  currencies  that  it  replaced.  Nevertheless,  there  is  no  place  for 
complacency. The success achieved so far needs to be complemented and consolidated. 
Question: Do you think that the euro pays a stability factor in the world economy?  
Trichet:  The  euro  which  will  be  ten  years  old  next  January,  has  rapidly  achieved  a  well-
recognised status worldwide as a stable anchor also in turbulent times. This certainly is of 
utmost importance in the current circumstances.  
Question:  Do  you  see  a  united  European  role  in  the global  financial crisis,  especially 
between members of the euro zone and non-members? How are you facing that?  
Trichet: As the financial market turbulence developed, central banks in Europe and across 
the  globe  strengthened  the  already  high  levels  of  cooperation,  first,  through  enhanced 
information  exchange  and  collective  monitoring  of  market  developments  and,  later  on, 
through coordinated steps to provide liquidity. I would like to emphasise that the ECB was 
one of the first central banks in the world to react immediately, on August 9th, 2007, when we 
saw the first elevated tensions on the money markets. Since then, the ECB and other major 
central banks in Europe and across the world have reacted promptly and consistently during 
the various phases of the market turbulences, in order to ensure the smooth functioning of 
the money market. Cooperation among central banks at the global level has been essential 
in this respect. 
Besides the measures taken by central banks, governments also have a very important role 
to play. I was impressed by the scope of the decisions and orientations taken by European 
governments  and  by  their  unity  over  the  past  months.  I  would  like  to  also  stress  the  very 
good and close cooperation among EU institutions and have often repeated my support for 
the  initiatives  of  the  European  Commission.  Clearly,  in  the  current  circumstances, 
cooperation  and  unity  among  all  institutions  concerned,  wherever  they  are  located,  are  of 
paramount importance. 
BIS Review 148/2008 
 1
Question:  What  challenges  does  the  euro  zone  face  these  days? Are  these  challenges 
different in the non-euro zone European countries? Are there any concerted efforts between 
Central Banks in both regions (euro and non-euro zone) to tackle the crisis?  
Trichet:  As  far  as  the  ECB  is  concerned,  our  main  objective  and  challenge  is  to  maintain 
price stability in the euro area, in other words to maintain the euro’s purchasing power for 
over  320  million  citizens.  We  will  permanently  strive  to  preserve  and  consolidate  the 
remarkable success of the euro and, through monetary stability, to preserve the strength and 
reinforce the resilience of the euro area economy. To this aim, it is essential, in particular in 
the  current  uncertain  environment,  that  in  the  euro  area  structural  reforms  be  further 
implemented and labour productivity be fostered.  
Of course, the period of intense turbulences, which we are currently experiencing and which 
correspond to a very significant market correction at a global level, remains very demanding 
for all institutions, market participants and authorities, including central banks, in Europe and 
across  the  world.  As  I  explained  before,  the  ECB  and  the  Eurosystem  together  with  other 
central banks have taken a number of decisions to address elevated pressures in short term 
funding  markets  that  were  appropriate  in  view  of  the  exceptional  circumstances  we  were 
facing. As we have often said, central banks will continue to work together and are prepared 
to take whatever measures are necessary to provide sufficient liquidity in short-term funding 
markets. 
Question: How long could the present crisis last? What are the most severe scenarios? How 
to tackle it?  
Trichet: My assessment is that we are experiencing, since August 2007, an ongoing market 
correction of great dimension, at a global level, with episodes of turbulence, high levels of 
volatility and considerable strain in financial markets and institutions. It depends on all of us 
that we surmount the present situation. All institutions, whether private or public, must be up 
to their responsibilities. 
Question: In your point of view how long could the present global recession last?  
Trichet:  Well,  as  far  as  the  euro  area  is  concerned,  we  will  see  what  the  Eurosystem 
macroeconomic  projections,  which  we  will  publish  at  the  beginning  of  December,  will  be. 
Indications  from  all  private  and  public  entities  are  that  following  the  intensification  of  the 
financial  turbulence,  in particular  since  mid-September,  the  impact  on  the  real  economy  is 
more  and  more  important.  Negative  figures  for  growth  in  2009  are  gradually  appearing. 
Again, in the case of the euro area, we will see exactly what the macroeconomic projections 
are in the forthcoming days. That being said, to my knowledge, all forecasters are projecting 
positive growth in 2010. 
Question:  What  has  been  the  impact  of  the  international  crisis  on  Egypt  and  emerging 
economies? What role could the emerging markets economies play to overcome the global 
financial crisis?  
Trichet: I think that since the start of the turbulences in August 2007, emerging economies 
demonstrated a remarkable resilience, which has been quite impressive at a time when we 
could see the industrial economies heavily affected. Having said that, it is clear that even the 
emerging  economies  at  the  present  moment,  and  in  particular  since  mid  September,  are 
affected by what has happened in the industrialized economies and what has now become a 
truly global challenge. We live in a global economy and are all interdependent. None of us 
can be out of the influence of the others. However, it is absolutely clear that for the global 
economy to get out of this difficult period we have to very much count on all major emerging 
economies, as the potential for global growth is there. 
I would like to add that there is a general consensus that emerging economies – taking into 
account their growing influence and the size of their GDP and the contribution of their growth 
to  global  prosperity  –  should  become  more  influential  at  the  level  of  the  global  economic 
institutions.  The  G20  is  taking  more  and  more  influence,  which  I  welcome.  Furthermore, 
2 
 BIS Review 148/2008
there  are  also  calls  for  the  Financial  Stability  Forum  to  open  itself  more  to  the  emerging 
countries.  I  think  that  the  growing  role  of  emerging  economies  is  fully  legitimate.  In  that 
perspective, let me underline that the Minister of Finance of Egypt, Yousef BOUTROS-GALI, 
is  Chairman  of  the  IMFC  of  the  IMF  and  it  says  a  lot  on  the  increasing  influence  of  the 
emerging countries. 
Question: Could we consider the G20 summit as a new “Bretton Woods” in which the dollar 
is not the key currency anymore, in favour of others such as the Euro, the Yen, or the Saudi 
Riyal?  
Trichet: There are over 60 years that lie between the original Bretton Woods conference and 
the  recent  G20  summit.  The  G20  summit,  taking  place  after  the  G20  Ministers  and 
Governors in Sao Paulo, has shown that the world’s largest economies take responsibility for 
measures  to  resolve  the  crisis.  It  is  particularly  important  that  these  economies  represent 
both industrialised and emerging economies. The objective of the summit has not been to 
change the role of individual currencies in the global economy; it has been to lay the ground 
for  an  action  plan  to  strengthen  the  resilience  of  the  global  financial system  and  ensure  a 
basis  for  sound  macroeconomic  policies  that  are  stability-oriented  over  the  medium  and 
longer term. 
Question:  Egypt  has  benefited  from  diversifying  its  foreign  currency  baskets  and  relying 
solely  on  the  US  currency.  Is  it  thinkable  to  review  the  global  pricing  policy  taking  other 
currencies – i.e. euro – into account to apply it on commodities such as oil?  
Trichet: First, we never engaged in a campaign for the international use of the euro. The use 
of  the  international  role  of  currencies  is  very  much  the  outcome  of  efficient,  market-driven 
processes, which we as policymakers take as given. What we have seen over the past ten 
years, since the euro was introduced, is that there has been a very gradual increase in the 
international use of the euro in some markets. These gradual changes reflect the fact that the 
use of currencies is characterised by a considerable degree of inertia. This certainly applies 
to invoicing practices in international commodity  markets, where I  would consider that any 
fundamental and rapid change in the use of currencies is very unlikely. 
Question: You were chairing the “Paris Club” for rescheduling the debts. Did that help you in 
your present function, and what are the perspectives for these countries in overcoming the 
high debts?  
Trichet: I have a very vivid memory of the crisis of the emerging countries debt in the 80s. 
And I was  very happy to contribute, as Chairman of the Paris Club, to the success of the 
Egyptian debt rescheduling at the end of this difficult period. We always learn a lot – all of us 
–  from  such  demanding  experience.  That  being  said,  we  are  in  a  totally  different  situation 
today with the difficulties starting in the industrialized world. 
Question: Various central banks see the need to preserve the stability for prices. You are 
quoted  as  saying  that  there  is  no  need  to  have  a  global  monetary  policy.  Could  you 
elaborate? 
Trichet: To my knowledge all central banks are aiming at ensuring price stability. This is very 
important.  But  the  fact  that  they  pursue  the  same  goal  does  not  mean  that  they  have  the 
same  monetary  policy  stance  for  a  very  simple  reason:  their  economies  are  not  the  same 
with different structures, a different environment and different shocks to cope with. So, we 
must be clear on what we understand with international policy coordination. It does not mean 
a unique policy stance for the entire world. But it means monetary policies geared towards 
domestic  price  stability,  sound  and  sustainable  public  finances  and  flexible  economic 
structures. It also means very close and confident cooperation between policymakers of all 
systemically important economies of the world. 
Question: Are there any agreements expected to take place during your visit in Egypt?  
BIS Review 148/2008 
 3
Trichet:  Today,  26  November,  I  will  have  the  pleasure  to  sign  with  Dr  Farouk  El  Okdah, 
Governor of the Central Bank of Egypt, a Memorandum of Understanding which will intensify 
the  cooperation  between  the  ECB  and  the  Central  Bank  of  Egypt  ahead  of  the  start  by  1 
January 2009 of a new programme of technical assistance in the field of banking supervision. 
The  aim  of  this  programme,  which  will  involve  the  ECB  in  partnership  with  the  national 
central banks of Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, France, Germany, Greece, Italy and Romania 
is to gradually strengthen banking supervision in Egypt towards basic Basel II compliance, in 
line with the strategy devised by the Central Bank of Egypt. The European Commission will 
finance the new programme starting next year in the framework of the cooperation between 
Egypt and the European Union. 
Furthermore, I will have the great pleasure together with Dr. Farouk El Okdah, Governor of 
the Central Bank of Egypt to host tomorrow, 27 November, in Alexandria a high level Euro-
Mediterranean seminar, brining together Eurosystem and Mediterranean central banks. I look 
very  much  forward  to  the  seminar,  which  is  a  very  useful  platform  for  discussions  and 
exchanges  of  views  with  our  friends  and  colleagues  from  Mediterranean  central  banks  on 
issues of mutual interest from a central banking perspective. 
4 
 BIS Review 148/2008
