Duvvuri Subbarao: Lessons from the global financial crisis with special 
reference to emerging market economies and India 
Statement by Dr Duvvuri Subbarao, Governor of the Reserve Bank of India and Leader of 
the Indian delegation at the International Monetary and Financial Committee Meeting, at the 
International Monetary Fund, Washington DC, 11 October 2008. 
 1. Since the collapse of the leading US investment banks in August-September 2008, there 
has  been  a  breakdown  of  trust  in  inter-bank  and  inter-institutional  lending.  Given  that  this 
kind of extreme risk perception will be reversed only slowly, the full resolution of the crisis will 
inevitably take time. 
2. Additionally, there is the problem of contagion – across markets, across institutions and 
across countries. Each day, there is news of the crisis spreading to a newer part of the world 
or to a newer institution. What we are going through is an unprecedented crisis; and we will 
be failing the world if we do not draw lessons from the crisis to prevent its recurrence. It is on 
these lessons that I want to focus. 
3. First, financial supervision has drawn widespread critique. The stereotype perception is 
that  risk  management  and  supervisory  practices  lagged  behind  financial  innovations  and 
emerging  new  business  models.  The  present  crisis  underscores  the  need  for  regulation 
staying  ahead  of  the  curve,  and  for  continually  upgrading  the  skills  and  instruments  for 
financial regulation and supervision. However, there is need for a note of caution here. There 
is a distinct risk that in trying to stay ahead of innovation, regulation may get so stringent that 
it stifles innovation. This is a risk we must guard against. 
4. The second lesson relates to the inter-agency coordination. The origins of the current 
crisis can be traced to both the build up of macro-global imbalances as well as the mispricing 
of risks in the financial system, which in turn, was encouraged by prolonged easy monetary 
policy  and  excess  liquidity.  We  endorse  the  IMF  view  that  the  respective  roles  of  central 
banks, regulators, supervisors, and fiscal authorities regarding financial stability needs to be 
revisited. Central banks should play a central role in maintaining financial stability and should 
have the necessary informational base to do so effectively. This implies close co-operation 
among all the agencies entrusted with the task of maintaining financial stability. 
5. The third lesson is that the large scale bail-out packages will have implications for the 
regulatory  architecture  of  the  financial  system  and  for  the  fisc  of  countries.  Besides,  the 
rescue packages offered by one country could have ramifications for other countries, even 
when  they  are  far  from  the  epicentre  of  the  crisis.  A  relevant  issue  in  this  context  is  the 
efficacy and coverage of deposit insurance. What should deposit insurance cover? How are 
small deposits to be defined? Apart from small deposits, should we, in a crisis situation like 
this, consider extending guarantees to the money markets and mutual funds? 
6. Fourth, the unfolding crisis has revealed the weaknesses of structured products and 
derivatives  in  the  credit  markets.  This  throws  up  questions  about  the  appropriateness  of 
various structured product like credit derivatives and their financial stability implications. Are 
exchange traded derivatives superior to over the counter (OTC) derivatives? Do we need to 
focus  on  prescribing  and  instituting  appropriate  clearing  and  settlement  practices  even  for 
OTC products? In what way can we eliminate the shortcomings of the “originate-to-distribute” 
model? 
7. Finally, the near meltdown of the US financial sector is seen by some as evidence that 
markets  and  competition  do  not  work.  This  is  clearly  the  wrong  lesson  to  draw.  The  right 
lesson to draw is that markets and institutions do succumb occasionally to excesses, which 
BIS Review 122/2008 
 1
is why regulators have to be vigilant, constantly finding the right balance between attenuating 
risk-taking and inhibiting growth. 
8. Let me now make a brief comment on India. 
9. India, with its strong internal drivers for growth, may escape the worst consequences of 
the  global  financial  crisis.  Indian  banks  have  very  limited  exposure  to  the  US  mortgage 
market,  directly  or  through  derivatives,  and  to  the  failed  and  stressed  financial  institutions. 
The equity and the forex markets provide the channels through which the global crisis can 
spread  to  the  Indian  system.  The  other  three  segments  of  the  financial  markets  –  money, 
debt  and  credit  markets  –  could  be  impacted  indirectly.  Risk  aversion,  deleveraging  and 
frozen money markets have not only raised the cost of funds for Indian corporates but also 
its  availability  in  the  international  markets.  This  will  mean  additional  demand  for  domestic 
bank credit in the near term. Reduced investor interest in emerging economies could impact 
capital flows significantly. The impending recession will also impact on Indian exports. 
10.  To  sum  up,  even  EMEs  which  do  not  have  direct  or  significant  exposure  to  stressed 
financial instruments and troubled financial institutions are experiencing the indirect impact of 
the  financial  crisis,  and  this  impact  is  by  no  means  insignificant  or  trivial.  Indeed,  it  could 
intensify in the months ahead. 
11. It is heartening that there is coordination among developed countries in the management 
of the crisis. That is welcome and necessary, but not sufficient. In as much as emerging and 
developing economies are likely to be increasingly impacted by the crisis, going forward two 
things are necessary. First, in managing the crisis, the implications of that management for 
emerging and developing economies should be explicitly factored in. Second, emerging and 
developing economies should be taken into confidence and consulted whenever the policies 
and actions of the developed countries have implications for them. 
2 
 BIS Review 122/2008
