Ben S Bernanke: Troubled Asset Relief Program and the Federal 
Reserve's liquidity facilities 
Testimony of Mr Ben S Bernanke, Chairman of the Board of Governors of the US Federal 
Reserve  System,  before 
the  Committee  on  Financial  Services,  US  House  of 
Representatives, Washington DC, 18 November 2008. 
 Chairman  Frank,  Ranking  Member  Bachus,  and  other  members  of  the  Committee,  I 
appreciate having this opportunity to review some of the activities to date of the Treasury's 
Troubled Asset Relief Program, or TARP, and to discuss recent steps taken by the Federal 
Reserve and other agencies to support the normalization of credit markets.  
The legislation that created the TARP put in place a Financial Stability Oversight Board to 
review  the  actions  of  the  Treasury  in  administering  the  program.  That  Oversight  Board 
includes the Secretary of the Treasury, the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development, 
the  Chairman  of  the  Securities  and  Exchange  Commission,  the  Director  of  the  Federal 
Housing  Finance  Agency,  and  the  Chairman  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Board.  We  have  met 
four times, reviewing the operational plans and policy initiatives of the TARP and discussing 
possible  additional  steps  that  might  be  taken.  Officers  for  the  Oversight  Board  have  been 
appointed, and the Federal Reserve and the other agencies are providing staff support for 
the board. Minutes of each meeting are being posted to a special website established by the 
Treasury.1 In addition, staff members of the agencies whose heads are participating in the 
Oversight  Board  have  met  with  staff  from  the  Government  Accountability  Office  to  explore 
strategies for coordinating the oversight that the two bodies are required to perform under the 
enabling legislation. 
The value of the TARP in promoting financial stability has already been demonstrated. The 
financial  crisis  intensified  greatly  in  the  latter  part  of  September  and  spread  to  many 
countries that had not yet been touched by it, which led to grave concerns about the stability 
of  the  global  financial  system.  Failure  to  prevent  an  international  financial  collapse  would 
almost  certainly  have  had  dire  implications  for  both  the  U.S.  and  world  economies. 
Fortunately, the existence of the TARP allowed the Treasury to react quickly by announcing 
a  plan  to  inject  $250  billion  in  capital  into  U.S.  financial  institutions.  Nine  large  institutions 
received the first $125 billion, and the remainder is being made available to other banking 
organizations  through  an  application  process.  In  addition,  the  Federal  Deposit  Insurance 
Corporation announced that it would guarantee non-interest-bearing transaction accounts at 
depository institutions and certain other liabilities of depository institutions and their holding 
companies,  and  the  Federal  Reserve  expanded  its  provision  of  backstop  liquidity  to  the 
financial  system.  These  actions,  together  with  similar  measures  in  many  other  countries, 
appeared  to  stabilize  the  situation  and  to  improve  investor  confidence  in  financial  firms. 
Notably,  spreads  on  credit  default  swaps  for  large  U.S.  banking  organizations,  which  had 
widened substantially over the previous few weeks, declined sharply on the day of the joint 
announcement. Going forward, the ability of the Treasury to use the TARP to inject capital 
into financial institutions and to take other steps to stabilize the financial system – including 
any actions that might be needed to prevent the disorderly failure of a systemically important 
financial institution – will be critical for restoring confidence and promoting the return of credit 
markets to more normal functioning.  
As I noted earlier, the Federal Reserve has taken a range of policy actions to provide liquidity 
to  the  financial  system  and  thus  promote  the  extension  of  credit  to  households  and 
                                                 
1   U.S. Department of the Treasury, Emergency Economic Stabilization Act website. 
BIS Review 141/2008 
 1
businesses. Our recent actions have focused on the market for commercial paper, which is 
an important source of short-term financing for many financial and nonfinancial firms. 
Normally, money market mutual funds are major lenders in the commercial paper markets. 
However, in mid-September, a large fund suffered losses and heavy redemptions, causing it 
to suspend further redemptions and then close. In the next few weeks, investors withdrew 
almost $500 billion from prime money market funds. The funds, concerned about their ability 
to meet further redemptions, began to reduce their purchases of commercial paper and limit 
the  maturity  of  such  paper  to  only  overnight  or  other  very  short  maturities.  As  a  result, 
interest  rate  spreads  paid  by  issuers  on  longer-maturity  commercial  paper  widened 
significantly,  and  issuers  were  exposed  to  the  costs  and  risks  of  having  to  roll  over 
increasingly large amounts of paper each day.  
The  Federal  Reserve  has  developed  three  programs  to  address  these  problems.  The  first 
allows  money  market  mutual  funds  to  sell  asset-backed  commercial  paper  to  banking 
organizations, which are then permitted to borrow against the paper on a non-recourse basis 
from  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Boston.  Usage  of  that  facility  peaked  at  around  $150 
billion. The facility contributed importantly to the ability of money funds to meet redemption 
pressures when they were most intense and remains available as a backstop should such 
pressures reemerge. 
The second program involves the funding of a special-purpose vehicle that purchases highly 
rated commercial paper issued by financial and nonfinancial businesses at a term of three 
months. This facility has purchased about $250 billion of commercial paper, allowing many 
firms to extend significant amounts of funding into next year.  
A third facility, expected to be operational next week, will provide a liquidity backstop directly 
to money market mutual funds. This facility is intended to give funds confidence to extend 
significantly the maturities of their investments and reduce over time the reliance of issuers 
on sales to the Federal Reserve's special-purpose vehicle. All of these programs, which were 
created under section 13(3) of the Federal Reserve Act, must be terminated when conditions 
in  financial  markets  are  determined  by  the  Federal  Reserve  to  no  longer  be  unusual  and 
exigent. 
The primary objective of these and other actions we have taken is to stabilize credit markets 
and to improve the access to credit of businesses and households. There are some signs 
that  credit  markets,  while  still  quite  strained,  are  improving.  Interbank  short-term  funding 
rates  have  fallen  notably  since  mid-October,  and  we  are  seeing  greater  stability  in  money 
market  mutual  funds  and  in  the  commercial  paper  market.  Interest  rates  on  higher-rated 
bonds issued by corporations and municipalities have fallen somewhat, and bond issuance 
for these entities rose a bit in recent weeks. The ongoing capital injections under the TARP 
are  continuing  to  bring  stability  to  the  banking  system  and  have  reduced  some  of  the 
pressure on banks to deleverage, two critical first steps toward restarting flows of new credit. 
However, overall, credit conditions are still far from normal, with risk spreads remaining very 
elevated  and  banks  reporting  that  they  continued  to  tighten  lending  standards  through 
October.  There  has  been  little  or  no  bond  issuance  by  lower-rated  corporations  or 
securitization of consumer loans in recent weeks.  
To help address the tightness of credit, on November 12 the federal banking agencies issued 
a joint statement on meeting the needs of creditworthy borrowers. The statement took note of 
the recent strong policy actions designed to promote financial stability and improve banks' 
access to capital and funding. In light of those actions, which have increased the capacity of 
banks  to  lend,  it  is  imperative  that  all  banking  organizations  and  their  regulators  work 
together to ensure that the needs of creditworthy borrowers are met in a manner consistent 
with  safety  and  soundness.  As  capital  adequacy  is  critical  in  determining  a  banking 
organization's  ability  and  willingness  to  lend,  the  joint  statement  emphasizes  the  need  for 
careful capital planning, including setting appropriate dividend policies. The statement also 
notes  the  agencies'  expectation  that  banking  organizations  should  work  with  existing 
2 
 BIS Review 141/2008
borrowers  to  avoid  preventable  foreclosures,  which  can  be  costly  to  all  involved  –  the 
borrower, the lender, and the communities in which they are located. Steps that should be 
taken  in  this  area  include  ensuring  adequate  funding  and  staffing  of  mortgage  servicing 
operations and adopting systematic, proactive, and streamlined mortgage loan modification 
protocols  aimed  at  providing  long-term  sustainability  for  borrowers.  Finally,  the  agencies 
expect banking organizations to conduct regular reviews of their management compensation 
policies to ensure that they encourage prudent lending and discourage excessive risk-taking. 
Thank you. I would be pleased to take your questions. 
BIS Review 141/2008 
 3
