Christian Noyer: A review of the financial crisis 
Speech by Mr Christian Noyer, Governor of the Bank of France, at the Hearing before the 
Finance  Commission  of  the  Assemblée  nationale,  Paris,  7  October  2008  (updated  15 
October 2008). 
  A number of comments on the developments of the past month 
1.  
The bankruptcy of the investment bank Lehman Brothers on 15 September 2008 marked a 
crucial turning point in the crisis. The direct consequences of this failure, involving over USD 
600  billion  in  assets,  appear  to  have  been  correctly  contained  and  managed  up  to  now. 
Nevertheless, it exacerbated the crisis of confidence, with the following major repercussions: 
first, interbank markets increasingly seized up, because banks perceived there to be 
• 
a rise in counterparty risk. Overnight dollar interbank rates rose to particularly high 
levels of close to 7%; 
second, significant pressure on other money market segments, in particular the US 
commercial paper market, where yields on 30-day paper have been climbing since 
mid-September to reach levels close to those observed at the end of last year; 
lastly,  the  deterioration  in  the  financial  position  of  AIG,  the  largest  US  insurer, 
followed by its exceptional bailout. A two-pronged rescue plan was implemented: on 
the one hand, the Fed made an USD 85 billion loan at a penalty rate of three-month 
Libor  plus  850  basis  points  and,  on  the  other,  the  US  government  took  a  79.9% 
stake  in  the  company.  This  exceptional  intervention  was  necessary  because  AIG 
had engaged in the highly risky business of selling credit protection over the past 
few  years,  which  left  it  vulnerable  and  very  exposed  to  a  turnaround  in  the  US 
housing market. 
 The uncertainty stemming from this situation gave rise to the risk of a domino effect, affecting 
one  financial  institution  after  the  next.  Fears  that  this  effect  could  be  fuelled  by  price 
manipulations  and  speculation  resulted  in  a  restriction  of  short  selling,  first  in  the  United 
States and then in many other countries including France, the United Kingdom, Belgium, the 
Netherlands, Italy, Germany, Austria and Australia. 
It was against this backdrop that the idea of an "overall solution" emerged, marking a change 
in strategy compared to the case-by-case approach that had prevailed until then. This was 
the underlying rationale for the Paulson Plan adopted on 3 October. Three remarks on the 
latter: 
• 
The general idea behind the Plan is for the Treasury to purchase currently illiquid 
assets. It aims to rid banks of the bad assets weighing on their balance sheets, and 
to eliminate uncertainty about their real value and, in turn, about that of the banks 
themselves.  Indeed,  under  the  current  accounting  framework,  these  assets  are 
marked to market, which means that any uncertainty about their value affects that of 
the financial institutions themselves. 
The way in which the Plan is to be implemented still remains vague. One essential 
aspect is the price at which assets are to be purchased. The setting of such a price 
may  be  driven  by  two  opposing  concerns.  On  the  one  hand,  bolstering  banks' 
solvency  and  capital  base,  which  would  call  for  a  high  price.  On  the  other  hand, 
minimising  the  cost  for  public  finances,  which  would  call  for  a  low  price  and  the 
intervention would mainly aim to ease liquidity constraints. 
The consequences for Europe are generally positive. The rapid implementation of 
the  Plan  may  help  to  reduce  pressure  on  markets  and  restore  confidence  among 
  BIS Review 129/2008 
 1
banks. However, it is important to pay close attention to the way in which it is rolled 
out.  Indeed,  by  contagion,  low  prices  could  lead  to  further  write-downs  in  the 
balance sheets of European banks. 
A major shift in the direction of public policy 
2.  
Liquidity  problems  remain  crucial  at  this  stage  of  the  crisis.  Interbank  markets  remain 
strained. Central banks have considerable firepower to deal with this. In this respect, a wide 
range of actions has been taken over the past few days. 
In  addition  to  increasing  allotment  amounts  and  enhancing  the  provision  of  longer-term 
refinancing,  recent  actions  enable  the  Eurosystem  to  provide  unlimited  euro  and  dollar 
liquidity through fixed-rate tenders. Furthermore, the expansion of the list of assets eligible as 
collateral considerably enhances the access of counterparties to Eurosystem liquidity. These 
exceptional  measures  aim  to  restore  confidence  and  the  smooth  functioning  of  money 
markets. Central banks are closely monitoring this situation and remain ready to act. They 
have clearly demonstrated their will to take action when necessary. 
But  governments  are  also  intervening  to  bolster  banks’  solvency  and  soundness.  In  this 
context  and  in  order  to  ensure  that  national  measures  for  dealing  with  the  crisis  are 
consistent, the international community is taking a collective stand. The G7 plan of action is a 
major  step  forward.  It  sets  out  clear  principles  to  be  applied  by  the  whole  international 
community – in particular the IMF’s International Monetary and Financial Committee – with a 
view to giving structure to national actions. 
It expounds the following principles: 
• 
• 
• 
taking decisive action to prevent the failure of financial institutions; 
taking all necessary steps to unfreeze credit and money markets; 
ensuring  that  banks  and  other  major  financial  intermediaries  can  raise  capital  as 
needed; 
ensuring that national deposit insurance and guarantee programmes are robust; 
ensuring  accurate  valuation  and  transparent  disclosure  of  assets,  as  well  as 
consistent implementation of high quality accounting standards. 
 Thanks, in particular, to France’s leading role in discussions, Europe is organising itself. The 
meeting of the Heads of State and Government of the euro area, held at the Elysée Palace 
on  12  October,  with  the  participation  of  the  President  of  the  ECB,  provides  Europe  with  a 
structured and coherent framework: 
• 
• 
possibility of recapitalising banks; 
guaranteeing new medium-term bank debt (1-5 years), via, in France, a EUR 320 
billion funding vehicle; 
revisiting the accounting rules, with the recent reforms of the IASB – international 
accounting  standard-setters  –  and  introducing  greater  flexibility  in  mark-to-market 
accounting rules, allowing assets for which there is no longer a market to be valued 
at amortised historical cost. 
 Moreover,  the  European  Investment  Bank  will  be  mobilised  to  support  European  SMEs. 
Lastly, long-term discussions will commence on the best way to regulate finance and how it 
may better serve economic development. 
2 
 BIS Review 129/2008
The position of French banks and credit 
3.  
Our banks are not immune to the crisis. They have direct exposures, in particular through US 
monoline  insurers.  They  have  had  to  make  sometimes  substantial  write-downs.  They  are 
also impacted indirectly by the seizing up of certain markets and the rise in their refinancing 
costs. 
That  said,  our  banks  are  sound  and  profitable.  It  is  worth  recalling  four  facts  that,  in  the 
current period of turmoil, are often overlooked: 
• 
The  solvency  ratios  of  French  banks  are  high,  and  much  higher  than  the  minima 
imposed by the prudential regulation. 
Our banks, overall, remain profitable: over EUR 7 billion in the first half of the year. 
We ensure, contrary to certain rumours, that these earnings are reported using the 
strictest standards. In all probability, this trend – of lower but positive profits – should 
continue for the rest of this year. 
One reason for this profitability is that our banks have regular sources of income. 
They are universal banks. This sets them apart from banks in some other countries 
that depend exclusively, or for the most part, on financial markets. Our banks have a 
sound and recurrent source of future profits. This is a vital asset in periods when it is 
impossible to raise capital by issuing shares on the market. 
Lastly, the “manoeuvrability” of our banks remains excellent, as the recent takeover 
of Fortis’ assets by BNP Paribas shows. 
It  should  be  recalled  that  almost  all  money-market  mutual  funds  (SICAV  de 
trésorerie) are offered by major banks. Everything that the President of the Republic 
has said and everything that I have just said about the soundness of our banks also 
applies to these funds. 
    Credit  developments  are  the  subject  of  much  focus  in  the  current  period.  A  cautious  and 
balanced approach is required in their analysis and excessive optimism or pessimism should 
be avoided. The main facts can be resumed as follows: 
• 
As a snapshot, credit growth remains strong (over 10% per year for companies and 
9% for households). But this partly reflects the weight of past decisions and specific 
factors relating to the reintermediation, by banks, of previously securitised loans. 
All surveys point to a tightening of credit standards going forward. “Tightening” does 
not mean that credit will dry up, but rather that it will be more expensive and more 
selective. Banks are gradually passing on to their customers the increase in the cost 
of financing that they incur. 
We are closely monitoring this development that, at present, does not appear to be, 
in itself, a threat to growth. Indeed, the recent period had been characterised by an 
extremely high credit growth rate. As you know, the government has implemented 
measures to facilitate the financing of SMEs. 
  To  conclude,  in  the  longer  term,  and  in  accordance  with  the  guidelines  laid  down  by 
European governments on 4 and 12 October 2008, I believe that it would be useful to revisit 
the foundations of our financial regulation. This should be done without haste, but no stone 
should be left unturned. 
We must be willing to address all the questions and challenges that this crisis has raised. 
These  include  the  role  of  credit  ratings  agencies,  the  management  of  risk,  market 
infrastructures,  the  scope  of  financial  regulation  and  the  question  of  remuneration.  As 
regards the latter, we should not seek to over-regulate or punish, but rather to instil a sense 
of  responsibility.  Pay  structures  should  not  encourage  short-termism  or,  as  was  the  case, 
excessive risk taking. 
BIS Review 129/2008 
 3
