Axel A Weber: Finance after the turmoil – shape of markets and 
regulation 
Opening statement by Professor Axel A Weber, President of the Deutsche Bundesbank, for 
the panel discussion "Finance after the Turmoil: Shape of Markets and Regulation", at the 
18th Frankfurt European Banking Congress, Frankfurt am Main, 21 November 2008. 
 Introduction  
1  
Mr Ackermann, 
Ladies and gentlemen 
The  decision  to  run  this  panel  under  the  title  “finance  after  the  turmoil”  proves  that  the 
organisers belong to the more optimistic camp. And like most optimists over the past months, 
they have been proven wrong. Of course, for a forward-looking policy process it is essential 
to  learn  from  current  events  to  build  a  sustainable  future.  This  work  on  lessons  learnt  is 
ongoing in several international and national fora.  
The Bundesbank is making every effort to play a constructive role in these processes, and, 
thus, it is a pleasure and an honour to share with you some thoughts on finance after the 
turmoil, even though times are still turbulent. 
Current  challenges  are  twofold.  The  first  aspect  is  crisis  management  and  focuses  on  the 
resolution of institution-specific problems as regards liquidity and solvency. Moreover, it also 
concerns 
implementation,  application  and 
international coordination. 
The  second  challenge  is  to  use  the  current  window  of  opportunity  to  bring  about  lasting 
structural changes regarding the regulation of financial markets. The aim of such changes 
ought  to  be  a  financial  system  that  is  more  resilient  to  the  kind  of  disruptions  that  we  are 
currently observing. 
I  would  like  to  share  with  you  some  thoughts  on  crisis  management  –  especially  from  a 
German  point  of  view  –  and  on  crisis  prevention  –  the  latter,  of  course,  in  a  more 
international context. 
financial  system  rescue  packages, 
their 
Crisis management 
2  
As  you  all  know,  it  was  the  insolvency  of  Lehman  Brothers  that  led  to  the  dramatic 
intensification of the financial turmoil. As an aside, there seems to be a broad consensus that 
allowing this bank to go bankrupt was a mistake in view of the ensuing heavy losses.  
Owing  to  a  rapid  rise  in  counterparty  risks  following  the  Lehman  insolvency,  wholesale 
funding  markets  almost  completely  dried  up  causing  a  number  of  financial  institutions  that 
relied  heavily  on  wholesale  funding  to  run  into  serious  difficulties.  Furthermore,  financial 
market participants were forced to fire-sell assets thus amplifying market losses.  
After taking emergency rescue action for single institutions and in light of escalating worries 
among  depositors,  it  became  apparent  that  this  systemic  crisis  needed  a  more  systemic 
response.  Many  countries  implemented  financial  market  rescue  plans  and  comprehensive 
deposit guarantees – after some initial stand-alone initiatives such moves were coordinated 
internationally. While the specifics of these packages may differ, they often share a common 
feature – their dual approach of promoting liquidity and solvency. 
The  German  rescue  package  is  also  aimed  at  these  two  goals.  Its  core  instrument  is  a 
Financial Market Stabilisation Fund. 
BIS Review 149/2008 
 1
In order to eliminate liquidity shortages and to support refinancing in the capital markets, the 
Fund is authorised to guarantee, for a suitable fee, newly issued refinancing instruments with 
maturities  of  up  to  36  months.  The  Fund  may  also  purchase  shares  or  dormant  equity 
holdings  of  financial  institutions  in  order  to  recapitalise  them.  Finally,  with  the  option  of 
acquiring problematic assets, it can improve capital ratios too. 
The authority that administers the Fund has been set up at and by the Bundesbank, although 
it is organisationally totally separated from us. It is now fully operational. 
After  initial  reluctance,  a  growing  number  of  banks,  both  from  the  private  and  the  public 
sector, have asked the Fund for help. An important feature of the Fund is that it is voluntary. 
Private  banks,  in  particular,  obviously  feared  being  stigmatised  after  engaging  the  Fund. 
However, market reactions have shown that such fears were not justified. 
Another  important  feature  is  its  package  character.  Using  only  the  guarantee  scheme  is 
generally not intended.  
It is of the essence that banks raise their capital buffers in order to improve their resilience 
against further downward pressure and to regain confidence. In the current situation, capital 
adequacy  certainly  requires  more  than  just  compliance  with  Basel  rules.  Internationally 
competitive  levels  should  be  targeted,  while  it  does  not  matter  how  this  will  be  achieved, 
whether by means of private or public funds. 
Making of public funds, however, should be as temporary as possible. Having said this, it is 
obvious that every single public capital injection should not only imply suitable compensation 
but  clear  exit  procedures  as  well.  While  such  far-reaching  intervention  by  the  state  in  the 
economic system was unavoidable, it is not a permanent solution. 
Crisis prevention 
3  
There has been a lot of talk about the causes of the current crisis and I do not want to delve 
into  this  discussion  for  the  moment.  In  a  nutshell,  the  current  crisis  is  the  result  of  both 
market failure and regulatory failure. 
Intensive root cause analysis for more than a year has revealed numerous shortcomings in 
the financial system signalling a comprehensive need for action. As regards regulation, there 
is presently major political pressure “to do something” in order to reduce the probability of 
similar disruptions in the future. 
However,  rather  than  more  regulation  we  should  aim  at  better  regulation.  Self-regulation, 
anyway, has proven insufficient. 
A  lot  of  thought  has  been  given  to  necessary  consequences.  Considerable  efforts  have 
already been made. Last weekend’s Washington summit on Financial Markets and the World 
Economy has certainly taken another important step forward in this respect. 
The Financial Stability Forum – being key in this regard – had submitted a comprehensive list 
of recommendations for strengthening the financial system. Much progress has already been 
made in this respect. 
Instead  of  analysing  the  details,  I  would  rather give  some  general  remarks  as  regards  the 
future shape of regulation. 
The  first  is,  we  need  more  transparency  concerning  unregulated  business  areas  and 
markets, including hedge funds, OTC traded derivatives or off-balance-sheet vehicles. Gaps 
on the world map of regulation should be filled. 
On  the  other  hand,  we  should  not  throw  out  the  baby  with  the  bathwater!  We  should 
especially refrain from blanket judgements on discredited financial instruments. To mention 
just  one  example,  securitisation  can  be  essentially  a  useful  financial  technique.  Another 
2 
 BIS Review 149/2008
important  issue  regarding  the  future  shape  of  regulation  that  I  would  like  to  mention  is 
mitigating the procyclicality of financial regulation.  
Procyclicality  means  the  reinforcement  of  the  natural  cyclicality  of  the  financial  system, 
thereby  –  in  the  least  favourable  case  –  encouraging  boom  and  bust  cycles.  Capital 
requirement  rules  under  Basel  II,  for  example,  are  supposed  to  be  procyclical  owing  to 
accelerating capital requirements in case of rising borrower’s default risk. To the extent that 
banks change their lending behaviour in reaction to this, economic cycles can be amplified.  
Another case in point is management remuneration, in particular, schemes that reward quick 
success  with  annual  bonuses  without  penalising  long-term  adverse  consequences  of 
decisions that had been taken. 
Furthermore, accounting rules have come under scrutiny as regards procyclicality. While fair 
value  accounting  certainly  has  its  merits,  it  amplifies  the  cyclicality  of  leverage.  Recent 
amendments  in  international  accounting  rules  are  useful  in  order  to  protect  banks’  current 
results  from  further  crisis-driven  exaggerations.  One-sided  easing  of  accounting  rules, 
however, entails the risk of sowing the seeds of a growing risk appetite in the future. As an 
economist, I suppose, it has become obvious that accounting is too important to leave it to 
the accountants. 
Future  regulation  of  financial  markets  will  significantly  curtail  too  risky  business  behaviour. 
Taking recent rises of financial market participants’ risk aversion into account, a more stable 
financial system can thus be expected. Banking in the future might be more boring and less 
sophisticated, however, it will be more sustainable. 
What we should refrain from is 
a) 
creating  new  international  institutions.  Instead  we  should  promote  essential 
improvements of cooperation among existing ones, and – if warranted – assign new 
tasks to them. 
Invest  too  much  hope  into  crisis  prevention  by  means  of  an  institutionalised  early 
warning system as its utility seems to be overestimated. As you know, there were 
plenty  of  warnings  concerning  unsustainably  low  levels  of  risk  premiums,  sent  by 
central banks and other organisations, but these fell on deaf ears, 
Measures  of  protectionism.  Fortunately,  the  heads  of  state  of  the  G  20  have 
declared that they will resist the temptation to protect their national economies at the 
expense of other nations. However, I hope that these are not just empty promises. 
b) 
c) 
Central banks 
4  
Before I conclude, I would like to add some final remarks on central banks and their future 
role as to financial stability. 
Central  banks  are  affected  in  many  ways  by  the  current  crisis.  Three  issues  are  of  major 
importance  in  this  respect.  Firstly,  in  many  countries,  central  banks  are  responsible  for 
banking  supervision  and  therefore  concerned  with  the  liquidity  and  solvency  problems  of 
individual financial institutions. Even during a systemic crisis, the close connection between 
central  banks  and  banking  supervision  has  proven  to  be  advantageous  owing  to  synergy 
effects of micro and macro-prudential analysis. 
While the German model of a dual banking supervision system has proven to be effective, 
international cooperation among financial supervisors needs further improvement. Colleges 
of  supervisors  for  internationally  active  categories  of  banks  are  a  good  first  step  in  this 
regard. 
Secondly, being a “liquidity provider of last resort”, central banks are concerned with tensions 
on the money markets. Since the beginning of the subprime crisis, central banks have been 
BIS Review 149/2008 
 3
providing  commercial  banks  with  comprehensive  liquidity  measures.  After  the  Lehman 
collapse and the subsequent drying-up of wholesale funding markets, these operations have 
been further intensified. 
The  Eurosystem  has  repeatedly  declared  its  intention  to  continue  its  generous  supply  of 
liquidity as long as necessary. However, underlying solvency problems – while not always 
clearly  separable  from  liquidity  problems  –  cannot  be  solved  by  central  banks  or  banking 
supervisors  It  is  a  core  government  task,  and  the  German  Financial  Market  Stabilisation 
Fund is designed to do just that.  
Finally,  monetary  policy  has  to  keep  the  balance  between  price  stability  and  financial 
stability. Central banks have responded to the intensification and broadening of the financial 
turmoil due to its impact on the real economy with considerable monetary easing in order to 
support the real economy in view of an increasing room to manoeuvre due to the decline of 
inflation rates and inflation expectations.  
Owing  to  a  remarkable  decline  in  inflationary  pressure  in  the  medium  term  and  rapidly 
deteriorating economic prospects, euro-area monetary policy in my view has enough leeway 
for further easing if necessary. 
But let me voice a concern. Substantially easing monetary policy in the short term to deal 
with the effects of a bursting financial bubble on the real economy entails the obligation to 
normalise  monetary  policy  again  more  swiftly  than  in  the  past  in  order  to  prevent  new 
imbalances from emerging. 
4 
 BIS Review 149/2008
