Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Enhancing the resilience and stability of the Islamic 
financial system 
Keynote address by Dr Zeti Akhtar Aziz, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, at the 
Islamic  Financial  Services  Board  and  Institute  of  International  Finance  Conference: 
"Enhancing  the  Resilience  and  Stability  of  the  Islamic  Financial  System",  Kuala  Lumpur, 
20 November 2008. 
 It  is  my  honour  and  great  pleasure  to  speak  before  this  distinguished  audience,  at  this 
conference,  jointly  organised  by  the  Islamic  Financial  Services  Board  and  the  Institute  of 
International  Finance  .  At  a  time  when  the  international  financial  system  is  currently  in 
turmoil,  this  forum  provides  an  important  opportunity  to  enhance  our  understanding  of  the 
developments,  the  issues  that  have  come  to  the  forefront  and  the  implications  it  has  for 
achieving stability in the global financial system. 
Our specific interest today is to consider these issues in the context of the Islamic financial 
system, in particular, whether Islamic finance as a form of financial intermediation could be 
vulnerable to such risks of instability. In addition, what are the possible steps that might be 
taken  to  strengthen  the  resilience  and  stability  of  the  Islamic  financial  system.  The 
collaboration between the IFSB and the IIF in creating this platform is most timely. The global 
challenges  posed  by  current  international  financial  crisis  necessitates  global  engagement. 
Given  its  far  reaching  repercussions,  the  strategic  solutions  need  to  be  global  in  nature 
involving both reforms and measures to restore soundness and stability of the international 
financial system.  
My  remarks  today  will  focus  on  the  implications  for  the  strategic  direction  of  the  Islamic 
financial industry taking into consideration the lessons learned from such financial turbulence 
including the current crisis. As Islamic finance becomes an integral part of the international 
financial system, it will be increasingly tested by such developments. History has shown that 
the world will continue to be plagued by such crises. The key for the Islamic financial industry 
is therefore to ensure that it would not be a source of such financial instability and is able to 
achieve a level of resilience that would ensure its sustainability.  
Lessons learned from systemic banking crisis  
The world has experienced more than 124 distinct banking crises in the recent 27 years.1 
While the triggering factors that precipitated financial crisis have been different, for most, it 
resulted in a general loss of confidence and a downward spiral in asset prices.  
Such  a  crisis  was  experienced  in  the  Asian  region  just  over  ten  years  ago.  Following  the 
lessons  that  were  learnt  from  this  experience,  Asia  has  emerged  in  a  better  position  to 
manage the spill over effects of the current financial turmoil. The key elements in the efforts 
have  been  the  strengthening  of  the  foundations  that  accord  the  resilience  to  withstand 
shocks to the system and that will ensure sustainability through episodes of such turmoil.  
There are several similarities in the current financial crisis and the Asian financial crisis. In 
both cases, the crises followed a period of strong growth, rapid credit expansion and sharply 
rising asset prices. Prior to the Asian crisis, there was indiscriminate lending to the corporate 
sector.  Investment  activity  was  excessive,  with  the  ratio  of  investment  to  GDP  exceeding 
                                                 
1   L. Laevan and F. Valencia, "Systemic Banking Crises: A New Database", (Sept 2008) International Working 
Paper of the International Monetary Fund, WP/08/224. 
BIS Review 145/2008 
 1
35%  for  many  economies  in  the  region.  The  sub-prime  crisis  similarly  originated  from 
imprudent lending practices. The low interest rate environment also accentuated the build up 
of the excesses and rising asset values. In Asia , domestic credit increased to unsustainable 
levels, reaching 180% of GDP during this period. In the United States , it had increased close 
to  240%  in  2007.  The  excessive  leveraging  and  increased  risk  taking  reinforced  the 
formation of asset bubbles.  
In  both  cases,  there  was  also  abundant  liquidity.  Both  Asia  and  the  United  States 
experienced surges of capital inflows. This was reinforced by favourable sovereign ratings in 
Asia and the strong ratings for the securitized instruments in the US .  The eruption of the 
crisis  set  off  the  reversal  of  these  trends.  There  was  also  a  failure  to  recognise  that  in  a 
highly integrated international financial system, it meant that a crisis that originate in one part 
of  the  financial  system  not  only  would  have  an  impact  on  other  parts  of  the  system  but  it 
could have far reaching implications on other jurisdictions.  
A further similarity relates to the lack of capacity to manage the increased risks associated 
with the transformation of the financial sector. For Asia , the increased liberalisation was not 
accompanied by the development of the necessary domestic financial infrastructure and the 
capacity to manage the increased risks and vulnerabilities associated with the liberalisation. 
In  the  current  crisis,  financial  innovation  occurred  at  a  pace  that  outstripped  the  ability  to 
manage the associated risks with such innovations. There was excessive risk taking and a 
lack  of  transparency  and  disclosure  in  the  financial  transactions.  The  complex  structured 
instruments  and  securitisation  process  resulted  in  multi-layered  structuring  of  financial 
products which were not supported by enhancements to governance processes and the risk 
management infrastructures and practices. This resulted in an underestimation of the risks 
involved and the capital buffers that were necessary.  
The  ensuing  turmoil  in  the  financial  markets  that  followed  was  increasing  illiquidity  in  the 
financial markets and the subsequent breakdown in the functioning of the markets. As this 
continued, it has translated into stress and insolvencies in the financial sector. In both crises, 
this  precipitated  a  sudden  pull  back  in  bank  lending.  The  ensuing  credit  crunch  magnified 
further the damaging impact on the economy.  
In  Asia,  the  economic  contraction  was  severe  in  the  range  of  minus  7%  to  13%.  In  the 
current financial crisis, however, the spillover impact of the effects on the economy has yet to 
be fully felt. In the Asian financial crisis, it ran its full course with the rapid price adjustments 
in most asset markets taking place within a period of just over a year. In Asia , there was 
limited  potential  to  reduce  interest  rates  in  an  environment  that  was  vulnerable  to  capital 
outflows. The focus of policy in Asia was therefore on the resolution of the banking sector 
and  to  restore  the  functioning  of  the  intermediation  process.  In  most  of  the  crisis  affected 
economies in Asia , this strategy produced positive results and growth resumed within twelve 
to eighteen months.  
Financial crisis and Islamic finance  
In the midst of the unfolding of the global financial crisis, it is useful to review the foundation 
and  structures  of  the  Islamic  financial  system  to  assess  its  resilience  in  withstanding  the 
impact of the current and future crises. In taking into account the dynamics of the crisis and 
the  potential  implications  for  Islamic  finance,  two  important  dimensions  are  key  in 
undertaking the assessment.  
The  first  key  dimension  highlights  the  inherent  ability  of  Islamic  financial  system  to  deal 
with the test of such crisis. Islamic finance is well-supported by two essential features which 
serve as pillars to Islamic financial transactions. Firstly, Islamic finance encourages business 
and  trade  activities  that  generate  legitimate  profits,  subject  to  an  explicit  requirement  of 
materiality  and  validity  of  the  transaction.  This  requirement  ensures  that  the  funds  are 
channelled  into  real  financial  business  activities,  reinforcing  a  close  link  between  financial 
2 
 BIS Review 145/2008
and productive flows. This reduces the Islamic financial system from over exposure to risks 
associated  with  excessive  leveraging  and  imprudent  risk  taking.  In  Islamic  financial 
transactions, money is not a commodity, but a medium of exchange, a store of value and a 
unit of measurement. Money represents purchasing power and cannot be utilised to increase 
the purchasing power without any productive activity.  
Secondly, Islamic finance encourages business transactions on a mutual risk sharing basis. 
The  practice  of  risk  sharing  provides  the  impetus  for  the  Islamic  financial  institutions  to 
conduct the appropriate due diligence and maintain the explicit requirements for disclosure 
and  transparency.  These  requirements  thus  serve  to  promote  the  adoption  of  sound  risk 
management practices by the Islamic financial institutions.  
By  embracing  these  essential  features  and  the  objectives  of  Shariah  in  its  entirety  and  by 
exemplifying the true practice of Islamic finance as required by the principles of Shariah, the 
resilience  of  the  Islamic  financial  system  is  strengthened.  It  is  therefore  paramount  that 
Islamic  financial  professionals,  practitioners,  scholars  and  regulators  fully  understand  the 
inherent requirements of Islamic finance, which are in fact consistent with the international 
best practices and standards in the conventional financial services industry. It is these very 
elements of Islamic finance that provides an additional in built mechanism that enhances its 
prospects for soundness and stability.  
The  second  key  dimension  relates  to  potential  risks  for  Islamic  finance  in  a  crisis 
environment.  This  could  arise  when  the  economic  environment  and  the  conditions  in  the 
financial markets turn adverse. The increased globalisation of Islamic finance and its greater 
integration  with  the  international  financial  system  increases  the  exposure  of  the  system  to 
contagion  effect  from  such  developments.  In  the  dynamics  of  a  financial  crisis  in  the 
conventional financial system, this would be referred to as the second round effects. The first 
round effects is when developments within the financial system triggers the financial crisis 
which  in  turn  impacts  the  real  economy.  The  second  round  effects  is  when  the  resulting 
slower growth causes further strain to the financial sector.  
The  experience  has  shown  that  when  such  crisis  is  not  contained,  the  consequent 
deterioration  in  economic  conditions  results  in  a  worsening  of  the  financial  crisis.  For  this 
reason, resolution has to take place quickly. For Malaysia, in the 1997-98 crisis, every effort 
was taken to give attention to financial sector resolution so as to prevent the spiral that could 
have set in as economic activity became affected by the financial crisis.  
In this indirect manner, Islamic finance would be affected by such financial turmoil. Slower 
economic growth and the reduction in the global liquidity would affect those institutions that 
are heavily reliant on a business model that focuses on real estate and asset finance. Islamic 
financial institutions would also be exposed to increased inventory risk due to the increased 
volatility and the reduction in asset prices. Islamic financial institutions with a high proportion 
of  their  businesses  in  profit  sharing  business  (Mudharabah  and  Musyarakah)  may  be 
exposed to losses due to equity investment risk, possibly by the inability of the enterprises in 
generating  the  expected  returns.  The  absence  of  an  Islamic  money  market  infrastructure 
would also expose the Islamic financial system to higher liquidity risks.  
Strategies to strengthen the resilience of Islamic financial system  
As  innovation  of  Islamic  financial  products  and  services  intensifies  and  as  Islamic  finance 
becomes more integrated with the international financial system, it becomes imperative that 
the foundations upon which Islamic finance has been built remains intact. This will be the key 
to  sustaining  the  resilience  of  the  Islamic  financial  system  in  this  more  challenging 
international financial environment.  
Key  to  this  is  to  embrace  Shariah-based  innovation  in  the  development  of  Islamic 
financial  products.  In  a  highly  globalised  financial  market,  innovation  has  been  a  key 
differentiating factor to remain competitive. The current turmoil has however, highlighted that 
BIS Review 145/2008 
 3
highly  complex,  unbridled  innovation  can  become  highly  destabilising  resulting  in  major 
disruptions in a financial system. It is therefore important for financial innovation to have clear 
Shariah objectives and adhere to the requisite principles of Shariah. In this manner, Shariah-
based innovation would contribute towards Islamic financial products that have distinct value 
propositions with in-built strengths arising from the essential features of Shariah.  
To achieve this objective, it is important to have strong initiatives that promote Shariah-based 
innovation  in  Islamic  finance.  In  Malaysia  ,  several  steps  have  been  taken.  The 
establishment  of  the  International  Shariah  Research  Academy  for  Islamic  Finance  (ISRA) 
aims to engage in applied research on dynamic Shariah-centric innovation. ISRA can provide 
a global platform for greater global engagement and research with the focus on innovation.  
In  addition,  the  Central  Bank  has  also  embarked  on  the  initiative  to  develop  the  Shariah 
Parameters  to  promote  more  consistent  application  of  Islamic  financial  contracts.  This 
initiative aims to determine the essential features of Islamic financial products derived from 
underlying key Shariah contracts. These features will serve as a guide for the application of 
the Shariah contracts for the Islamic financial products.  
The  second  strategy  is  to  raise  the  bar  in  the  status  of  the  Islamic  financial 
infrastructure that supports the risk management and governance of Islamic financial 
institutions.  To  ensure  sustainability  of  the  resilience  of  Islamic  finance,  it  is  important  to 
have the comprehensive enabling infrastructure that allows for the management of the risks 
that are peculiar to Islamic finance. There is a need for Islamic financial system to have the 
capital  requirements,  effective  risk  management  and  strong  governance  that  are  fully 
equipped  to  manage  the  risks  that  are  specific  to  Islamic  financial  transactions.  It  is  also 
important for the institutions to spread the risks by having prudent asset allocation based on 
different Islamic contracts so as to ensure a sustainable revenue stream and to ensure the 
institutions are in a position to absorb the extreme circumstances that occur during a crisis.  
In  the  case  of  Malaysia,  an  additional  capital  requirement  is  required  to  cushion  inventory 
risks of underlying assets and to cover the potential equity position risks that are embedded 
within  the  partnership  contracts.  This  is  also  reinforced  by  the  requirement  on  the 
appointment of board representatives in the invested entities under the partnership contracts 
so  as  to  serve  as  a  safeguard  for  the  interest  of  the  Islamic  financial  institution  thereby 
allowing  for  continuous  monitoring  and  surveillance.  Islamic  financial  institutions  are  also 
allowed  to  transfer  the  risk  to  investment  account  holders  under  Mudharabah,  i.e.  profit 
sharing  and  loss  bearing  contract,  if  the  institution  can  demonstrate  the  appropriate 
disclosure  and  governance  practices  that  would  ensure  an  effective  risk  transfer.  Islamic 
banks  are  also  permitted  to  set  aside  a  portion  of  income  derived  from  assets  funded  by 
Mudharabah contracts, in the form of profit equalization reserves (PER) to sustain stable and 
competitive returns. Several of these requirements are based on the international standards 
that have been issued by IFSB. The implementation of IFSB standards across jurisdictions 
will be key in the continued robust expansion of Islamic finance.  
While  the  above  measures  facilitate  the  managing  of  risks  peculiar  to  Islamic  finance,  the 
legal, regulatory and supervisory infrastructure also needs to keep abreast with the evolution 
and  rapid  transformation  taking  place  in  the  industry.  As  part  of  this  infrastructure,  there 
needs to be an integrated crisis management framework to ensure that any emerging crisis 
in the Islamic financial system will be promptly managed. Such efforts, among others need to 
involve  three  basic  aspects.  This  includes  having  the  mechanism  and  vehicle  to  preserve 
short-term  liquidity,  to  remove  troubled  assets  from  the  balance  sheets  of  financial 
institutions and to recapitalise Islamic financial institutions.  
In the case of Malaysia , this infrastructure has been put in place. The Central Bank has a 
range  of  Islamic  financial  instruments  to  manage  liquidity  in  the  financial  system.  This  is 
supported  by  a  well  developed  Islamic  money  market.  In  addition,  the  financial  safety  net 
framework in Malaysia encompasses the lender of last resort facility and a comprehensive 
deposit insurance system that provides coverage for both conventional and Islamic deposits. 
4 
 BIS Review 145/2008
The Deposit Insurance Corporation has also been given sufficient statutory powers to ensure 
a prompt, effective and least cost resolution to safeguard the stability of the Islamic financial 
system. This entails among others, the regulatory powers and mandate to ensure expedient 
resolution  of  financial  institutions  in  distress.  Our  supervisory  oversight  also  subjects  the 
Islamic  financial  institutions  to  periodical  stress  testing  to  assess  whether  the  institutions 
would be able to cope in extreme conditions.  
Global ramifications of the crisis also calls for more concerted efforts at the international level 
to avert an escalation of the scale of a crisis. Central to this is to have coordinated initiatives, 
by having in place on-going assessments of any vulnerabilities in the Islamic financial system 
so as to avoid crisis. As part of this, the close cooperation of the central banks would enable 
a swift response if it is required.  
Thirdly is to assimilate the Shariah values in the realisation of benefit (Masalih) to the 
relevant  stakeholders.  Islamic  finance  industry  may,  by  according  attention  to  the 
preservation  of  good  relationship  with  the  customers  and  relevant  stakeholders,  avoid 
extreme  solutions  when  severe  deterioration  has  taken  place.  Consistent  with  this  is  the 
principle in Islamic finance to promote justice, fairness and shared responsibility. The focus 
of  Islamic  finance  thus  transcends  beyond  just  the  pursuit  of  growth  and  monetary 
performance by emphasising ethical market conduct practices. Central to this is the adoption 
of a comprehensive consumer protection framework.  
Conclusion 
In shaping the robust growth of Islamic finance, the strategic direction of the industry moving 
forward needs to be accompanied by the efficient implementation of the legal, regulatory and 
supervisory  regime,  including  having  in  place  a  crisis  prevention  and  management 
framework.  While  recognising  the  strengths  of  Islamic  finance  and  the  opportunities  it 
presents, key to this is ensuring the essential features of Islamic finance are preserved so as 
to retain its inherent resilience and stability.  
The  robust  growth  of  Islamic  finance  has  been  from  the  significant  interest  from  both  the 
Muslim and non-Muslim communities. This would not occur if Islamic finance was not able to 
meet the growing and differentiated financial requirements, if it were not an efficient form of 
financial intermediation and if it were not competitive. As a growing part of the international 
financial system that has become increasingly challenging, our task will be to build on the 
inherent strengths of Islamic finance and to continue to strengthen the supporting structures 
so  as  to  ensure  that  Islamic  finance  will  contribute  to  the  overall  stability  of  the  global 
financial system.  
BIS Review 145/2008 
 5
