John Hurley: Protecting the stability of the Irish financial system 
Statement by Mr John Hurley, Governor of the Central Bank & Financial Services Authority of 
Ireland, Dublin, 3 October 2008. 
 The Government decision to guarantee depositors in and lenders to Irish financial institutions 
was taken to protect the stability of the domestic financial system. It does this by supporting 
the  Irish  banking  system’s  ability  to  secure  access  to  funds  both  domestically  and 
internationally.  The  Government’s  decision  was  taken  after  close  consultation  with  the 
Central Bank and Financial Regulator. 
For  over  a  year  now,  the  Central  Bank  has  been  monitoring  the  disruption  in  international 
financial markets. This was triggered by difficulties in the US subprime mortgage market and 
resulted  in  a  protracted  drying  up  of  liquidity  in  a  range  of  markets.  Despite  central  bank 
actions, both at Eurosystem and global levels, to inject liquidity to improve the functioning of 
money markets, these markets have become increasingly impaired. The net effect was that 
banks internationally found it difficult, and expensive, to obtain term funding.  
The access of the Irish banking system to term funding was affected in a similar way to their 
international peers. The pressures became particularly acute during recent weeks following 
difficulties in state-sponsored financial institutions, investment and high-street banks both in 
the US and then Europe, and over the last weekend the failure to pass the US legislation.  
These events came to a head last Monday evening when the supply of funding to the Irish 
banking system was seriously threatened. At that time, I had to inform the Minister that the 
risks  to  financial  stability  were  becoming  unacceptably  high  with  knock-on  effects  for  the 
wider economy. A major consideration was that the highly concentrated nature of the Irish 
banking system created a high risk of contagion. Decisive action to protect the stability of the 
economy and its financial system was needed.  
While the decision was difficult, it was aimed at ensuring renewed access to funding for Irish 
financial institutions. The Irish banking system, unlike many of its international peers, has not 
to date had to write-off significant losses on loans and investments so that bad debts and 
loan losses were not the key issues for our financial system last Monday evening. The issue 
then was the unprecedented shortage of liquidity in financial markets and the urgent need to 
implement a solution that targeted that issue directly.  
The  legislation  giving  effect  to  the  Government’s  decision  was  signed  into  law  yesterday. 
Over  the  coming  days,  the  Central  Bank  together  with  our  colleagues  in  the  Financial 
Regulator will be advising Government on how the scheme should now operate in practice.  
The  guarantee  will  be  provided  for  two  years  on  commercial  terms.  The  pricing  of  the 
guarantee  and  the  terms  and  conditions  are  critical.  The  primary  consideration  underlying 
this decision is to ensure financial stability at minimum cost to the taxpayer. For instance, the 
price should reflect a market-based assessment of the benefits to the banks covered by the 
guarantee  and  thereby  minimise  any  impact  on  banks  not  covered  by  the  guarantee;  it 
should  minimise  moral  hazard  implications  such  that  the  banking  system  will  not  take  on 
additional risks on the back of this guarantee. Designing such a scheme that takes account 
of these various principles is a complex task and work is at an advanced stage and will be 
completed over the weekend.  
The  Central  Bank,  as  part  of  the  Eurosystem,  is  actively  involved  in  the  provision  of 
significant liquidity to credit institutions. We are also actively involved in international fora that 
are discussing solutions to the global crisis.  
Internationally,  liquidity  conditions  remain  difficult  and  the  likely  duration  of  the  crisis  in 
international  markets  remains  uncertain.  Accordingly,  the  outlook  for  the  global  economy 
BIS Review 121/2008 
 1
remains  uncertain.  Against  this  international  background,  and  alongside  a  necessary 
rebalancing  of  our  economy  after  more  than  a  decade  of  very  strong  growth,  the  Irish 
economy is entering a difficult period. We have shown in the past as a country that we can 
face up to difficult challenges and I suggest it will be no less on this occasion. It we adopt the 
correct decisions now, the medium term outlook for the economy is good. 
2 
 BIS Review 121/2008
