Glenn Stevens: Interesting times 
Address by Mr Glenn Stevens, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, to the Australian 
Business Economists Annual Dinner, Sydney, 9 December 2008. 
 It is a pleasure once again to address the Australian Business Economists. 
It was to this group that I gave my first speech as Governor, in October 2006. Tonight is my 
23rd speech since then. Between the two occasions, quite a lot has changed, globally and 
domestically (though I doubt the speeches have become any more exciting). 
Many people have said to me recently that the times are “interesting”. My response has been 
that  they  are,  perhaps,  a  little  too  interesting.  I  need  not  remind  this  audience  of  the 
international financial turmoil through which we have lived over the past almost year and a 
half, nor of the intensity of the events since mid September this year, in particular. 
I  do  not  know  anyone  who  predicted  this  course  of  events.  This  should  give  us  cause  to 
reflect on how hard a job it is to make genuinely useful forecasts. What we have seen is truly 
a “tail” outcome – the kind of outcome that the routine forecasting process never predicts. 
But it has occurred, it has implications, and so we must reflect on it. 
In that spirit, I shall set out a few features of this episode that make it “interesting”. 
The most obvious one is the prominence of financial events and particularly financial sector 
impairment  in  key  countries.  There  have  been  other  episodes  where  individual  financial 
institutions or sectors, or even the whole banking systems of small countries, have needed 
recapitalisation. But the scale of capital needed, the number of countries where it is needed 
and the extent of counterparty risk aversion because of concerns over solvency have been 
outside the range of experience of the past half century. 
In the near term, financial stress brings the obvious concern about the ability of the financial 
system to provide credit to the economies in question. As one measure of this concern, the 
number  of  loans  approved  for  housing  in  the United  Kingdom  in  October  was  65  per  cent 
lower than a year earlier, and about 50 per cent lower than during the downturn of the early 
1990s. The immediate need is to keep ample liquidity, strengthen banks’ balance sheets by 
adding capital and to help confidence, including by lending the strength of the sovereign’s 
credit rating where necessary. All this has been occurring. 
What may still be needed internationally is attention to the remaining problem assets, since if 
their prices continue to decline, the capital position of the banks will continue to deteriorate. 
So  while  the  UK  solution  has  emphasised  new  capital  and  the  initial  US  approach 
emphasised  excising  the  “troubled”  assets,  the  Swiss  solution  has  been  to  do  both:  to 
recapitalise the banks, while getting the worst of the bad assets off their balance sheets. The 
United  States  has  moved  in  this  direction  also  more  recently.  Continued  efforts  to  provide 
clarity on the state of balance sheets is also important. Surely the lingering counterparty risk 
aversion reflects uncertainty on this score. 
Longer term, some of the implications of the past year’s events will be seen in the regulatory 
environment. In those countries where the public purse has had to be used to support bank 
solvency, it can be expected that there will be significant regulatory reform – and rightly so. 
The real trick, however, will be to make sure that the reforms are not just knee jerk reactions 
to the symptoms of financial excess – as clear as they are – but well considered, durable and 
tractable changes that appropriately contain, but do not crush, the financial system’s capacity 
and appetite to take risk. Certainly, over the past five or so years, too much risk was taken, of 
the  wrong  sort.  The  danger  in  the  next  several  years,  however,  will  not  be  too  much  risk 
taking, but too little. Regulators will want to avoid compounding that. 
BIS Review 156/2008 
 1
While  the  prominence  of  financial  events  has  been  clear,  there  has  also  been  a  set  of 
“interesting”  events  in  the  real  economy  unfolding  at  the  same  time.  The  fortunes  of  the 
Chinese economy are increasingly important, particularly for Australia and other countries in 
our  time  zone.  The  most  striking  real  economic  fact  of  the  past  several  months  is  not 
continued US economic weakness, but that China’s economy has slowed much more quickly 
than  anyone  had  forecast.  Our  own  estimates  suggest  that  Chinese  industrial  production 
probably declined over the four months to October. Some of this might be attributable to the 
effects of the Olympics but surely not much. Some of it reflects the weakening in Chinese 
exports to major countries. But more than that seems to have been occurring. I am not sure 
that many economic forecasters have fully appreciated this yet. There is every chance that 
the rate of growth of China’s GDP is currently noticeably below the 8 per cent pace that is 
embodied in various forecasts for 2009. 
The  Chinese  authorities,  having  sought  a  slowing  of  their  economy  after  it  was  clearly 
overheating, are now moving policies quickly in an expansionary direction. So there is a good 
chance that China’s economy will be looking stronger in a year’s time than it does today. It is 
important,  though,  that  this  is  done  in  the  right  way  –  specifically  by  boosting  domestic 
demand. 
China’s slowing may be part of a third striking fact, namely, the simultaneity of the weakening 
in economic activity around the world during recent months. 
When this occurs, one is naturally led to look for a common shock. The noticeable slowing in 
many economies in the June quarter seemed at the time to be attributable to the sharp run 
up in oil prices. That rise has now been more than reversed, but the slowing has, if anything, 
intensified during the past several months. The more recent weakening might be the result of 
more widespread and intense tightening of credit conditions that has occurred in some of the 
major  countries.  But  the  state  of  domestic  financial  sectors  differs  across  countries.  In 
Australia  or  Japan  or  much  of  east  Asia  or  Canada,  while  credit  conditions  have  become 
more difficult, the banks are in much stronger condition than in the United States or Europe 
or the United Kingdom. 
One thing that stands out as closely related across countries, however, is the fall in share 
markets.  These  changes  are  to  some  extent  themselves  a  reflection  of  a  weaker  set  of 
expected  economic  outcomes.  But  with  closely  linked  financial  markets  and  rapid 
communication,  changes  in  sentiment  are  transmitted  very  quickly  across  countries  and  it 
appears that those changes in sentiment are themselves affecting behaviour. People have, 
understandably,  become  very  uncertain  about  the  outlook  and  are  correspondingly  more 
cautious in their spending behaviour. 
In essence, we are now in a period when the essential nature of events is not so much a 
crisis  in  the  financial  system.  It  is  a  crisis  of  confidence  on  the  part  of  households  and 
businesses,  and  it  is  global  in  nature.  Hence  the  need  for  actions  that  are  internationally 
consistent to deal with the situation. 
On that score, a fourth “interesting” feature is the speed with which official institutions seem 
to be reacting to the economic fallout now unfolding. To take one example, IMF forecasts, 
and associated policy advice, are being revised more often and faster than I can recall in the 
past. Perhaps this is simply because of the greater number of international meetings at which 
the  Fund  is  asked  for  its  view,  but  my  sense  is  that  international  official  bodies  and  their 
domestic  counterparts  are  shifting  their  assessments  unusually  quickly  as  they  attempt  to 
grapple with the unfolding situation. 
Monetary policy is being eased aggressively around the world. So is fiscal policy. One of the 
striking features of the recent G 20 meetings was the way the need for fiscal stimulus, where 
debt levels permitted, was readily agreed between participants, and actively encouraged by 
the  IMF.  Of  course,  agreeing  to  things  in  general  at  a  meeting  is  only  the  first,  and  the 
easiest,  step.  Actual  policies  have  to  be  delivered  and  in  a  timely  and  effective  –  and 
hopefully  consistent  –  way.  I  use  the  word  “consistent”  because  it  is  preferable,  in  my 
2 
 BIS Review 156/2008
judgment,  for  action  to  be  broadly  consistent  and  timely,  than  for  it  to  be  precisely  co 
ordinated but delayed. It also remains to calibrate the extent of the measures appropriately 
for the circumstances, which is no easy matter. Nonetheless, it seems to me that all this is 
happening faster than on previous occasions. 
It would not be realistic to suggest that this response has been, or ever could be, so fast and 
so well targeted that significant near term weakness in the global economy can be avoided. 
The data coming in by the day confirm that there is an international downturn taking place, 
and that it shows every sign of being a deeper one than the rather shallow affair of 2001. 
The  question  is  whether  we  have  reasonable  grounds  to  expect  that  the  combination  of 
private and public efforts to address the financial problems, a subsidence of the sheer panic 
in  financial  markets  and  the  use  of  macroeconomic  policy  to  provide  stimulus  to  weak 
economies  will  establish  sound  foundations  for  a  renewed  period  of  expansion  beginning 
some time in 2009. 
The inauguration of a new US Administration is a key opportunity. The economic downturn 
has been deepening during the transition period. But if the new team can announce credible 
plans to accommodate the required adjustments in the US economy, confidence in medium 
term  prospects  can  be  re  built.  This  would  assist  both  the  US  economic  recovery  and 
conditions elsewhere. 
Thinking  ahead,  the  next  international  expansion  will  no  doubt  have  some  different 
characteristics  from  the  previous  one.  It  cannot  be  based  on  a  continual  gearing  up  by 
consumers  in  developed  countries  and  associated  asset  price  escalation.  For  that  reason, 
neither  can  it  be  characterised  by  the  continued  large  build  up  of  balance  of  payments 
surpluses  by  the  emerging  world.  The  secular  increase  in  living  standards  in  emerging 
countries  ought  to  play  a  bigger  role  in  driving  global  demand  –  and  that  will  depend  on 
appropriate policies in both those countries and the developed world. It looks like there will 
be a fairly prominent role in the near term, in many advanced countries, for the government 
sector through the recapitalisation and/or guarantees of banks, or fiscal expansion, or both. 
But  for  sustained  growth,  there  will  also  need  to  be  a  role  for  innovation  and  prudent  risk 
taking in the private sector – even though, at present, that is in retreat. 
Turning  closer  to  home,  the  Australian  economy  has  seen  a  significant  change  in 
circumstances over the past six months. The biggest terms of trade boom in half a century is 
over, and has partly unwound. I still think that China’s emergence is far from complete and 
that, as a result, the terms of trade will be higher on average than they were until a few years 
ago. But over the next year they will be well below their peak. 
Our households, like those elsewhere, have observed financial turmoil and a decline in share 
prices and have become more cautious. Consumer spending, which slowed significantly in 
the  period  from  about  February  to  June  as  interest  rates  and  petrol  prices  rose,  has 
remained slow since, even as interest rates and petrol prices have fallen significantly. I think 
we  can  expect  that  households  will  be  more  cautious  about  debt  over  the  next  couple  of 
years. Business investment and government spending have remained pretty strong – so that 
domestic  demand  was  still  4  per  cent  higher  in  the  latest  data  than  a  year  earlier.  But 
businesses are currently in the process of scaling back plans for investment and hiring. This 
is  partly  in  response  to  slower  consumer  demand,  but  the  dramatic  change  of  view  about 
international  conditions and  the  general  uncertainty  reflected  in  financial  market  prices  are 
surely playing a major role. So in the period ahead, private demand could look weaker than it 
has for some years. 
What then do we need to be doing to ensure as far as we can that the period of weakness is 
brief, and that prospects for longer-term sustainable growth are maintained? 
Of course, we cannot change the course of the world economy. But we can keep our own 
house  in  order  to  maximise  our  chances  of  good  performance.  On  this  score,  as  I  have 
remarked before, Australia has scope to use macroeconomic policy to support the economy 
BIS Review 156/2008 
 3
in  the  weak  part  of  the  cycle.  That  scope  was  earned  by  being  prepared  to  run  budget 
surpluses and run down public debt when revenues were strong, and by raising interest rates 
to contain inflation when the economy overheated. 
The scope to ease policies is now being used. On the fiscal side, the “automatic stabilisers” 
will  reduce  the  budget  surplus  as  the  economy  weakens,  cushioning  the  economy  in  the 
process.  That  is  what  they  are  designed  to  do.  There  has  also  been  a  front  loaded, 
discretionary  easing  that  is  starting  to  arrive  in  recipients’  bank  accounts  this  week.  Of 
course, a good deal of this may be saved, but even if it is, that presumably takes the place of 
private saving that would otherwise have been done over a longer period, so it brings forward 
the point at which households become confident enough to lift spending. Also on the fiscal 
front,  there  is  no  reason  why  worthwhile  public  investment  decisions  that  are  currently 
planned should not proceed, as long as they really are worthwhile. 
On  the  monetary  front,  interest  rates  right  across  the  spectrum  have  fallen.  Some  fairly 
elementary  calculations  suggest  that,  as  a  result  of  the  decline  in  interest  rates  that  has 
occurred already, the fall in the household sector’s gross debt-servicing burden will be almost 
3 per cent of household income. This is roughly equal to that seen in the early 1990s, when 
the cash rate fell from 18 per cent to 4.75 per cent. But on that occasion it took two and a half 
years;  this  time  it  will  take  place  over  about  four  or  five  months.  The  decline  in  borrowing 
costs for businesses has generally been smaller and slower to appear, but there has been 
some faster pass through of the most recent reduction in the cash rate. These transmission 
channels of monetary policy are still operating in Australia, unlike in some other countries. 
In  addition,  the  exchange  rate  is  playing  its  normal  role  of  adjusting  to  changed 
circumstances in a way that stabilises the economy. It has declined by about 25 per cent in 
trade weighted terms since mid year, just about the largest movement we have seen in such 
a short period. 
These  are  quite  big  changes.  They  will  take  time  to  have  their  full  effect,  but  they  will  be 
making a significant difference to conditions over the next year. There is scope to do more 
with macroeconomic policy settings, if needed, given the strength of the public accounts at 
the  federal  level,  and  the  outlook  for  declining  inflation.  In  assessing  whether  more  is 
needed, and if so, how much, we will naturally need both to maintain a close watch on the 
data and to remember  the extent of stimulus that is still in the pipeline as a result of past 
actions. 
Other supportive factors include the state of the financial system. This has been said many 
times  but  bears  repeating.  Of  course  credit  conditions  for  some  sectors,  notably  property, 
have tightened. And overall, credit to business is rising much more slowly now than a year 
ago. But even so, over the three months to October, credit provided by intermediaries rose at 
an annualised pace of about 12-13 per cent. On a broader definition, which includes capital 
market raisings, the pace was about 9 per cent. Both numbers are actually a bit higher than 
they were around mid year. In most developed countries, this would be considered a very 
satisfactory  pace  (if  not  a  little  fast).  Credit  growth  to  households  has  recently  been  very 
slow,  by  historical  standards,  at  about  4  to  5  per  cent.  Margin  loans  in  particular  are 
contracting quickly as people reduce their leverage. Lending for housing is starting to pick up 
now,  however,  from  the  early  impact  of  interest  rate  reductions.  Australian  banks,  having 
raised very large quantities of deposits in the past couple of months, are now turning back to 
offshore markets, making use of the government guarantee. They do not appear to have had 
much  trouble  raising  capital  from  private  markets  when  they  wanted  it.  Overall,  while  not 
without  its  difficulties,  this  situation  remains  a  much  better  one  than  seen  in  a  number  of 
other countries. 
These are the key elements of handling the cyclical episode. Longer term, performance will 
depend  on  the  quality  of  investment,  both  public  and  private,  on  productivity  increasing 
innovation and reform, and on getting the right balance on regulation. All that is hard, but at 
various times over the past couple of decades, Australia has made considerable progress in 
4 
 BIS Review 156/2008
these  areas,  and  has  a  pretty  good  record  overall  of  responding  to  the  need  for  change, 
especially in times of adversity. There is no reason we should not maintain that record. 
As I said at the outset, we are indeed living through “interesting” times. They are tough times, 
for businesses, financial markets, households and policy makers. Given the global situation, 
we have a very difficult period to negotiate. But we can negotiate it. The long run prospects 
for  the  Australian  economy  have  not  deteriorated  to  the  extent  that  some  people  may 
presently be feeling. We do have reasonable grounds for some quiet confidence about the 
future, however bad the storm at present may be. 
A  period  of  reflection  and  recharging  of  batteries  over  the  break  will  be  helpful.  At  the 
conclusion of a hectic year, therefore, I wish all of you a Merry Christmas – and a much less 
interesting 2009. 
BIS Review 156/2008 
 5
