Gertrude Tumpel-Gugerell: European Pension Funds Congress 
Speech by Ms Gertrude Tumpel-Gugerell, Member of the Executive Board of the European 
Central Bank, at the Euro Finance Week, Frankfurt am Main, 18 November 2008. 
 Introduction 
Ladies and Gentlemen:  
It is with great pleasure that I accepted your invitation to deliver the Keynote address at this 
year’s European Pension Fund Congress.  
The  ECB  is  well  aware  of  the  growing  social  and  economic  importance  played  by  private 
pension  funds  for  household  wealth  accumulation  and  securing  the  income  of  an  ageing 
population. Individually, we are all still only getting older at a rate of 1 day every 24 hours, but 
what we are now seeing is that collectively our societies are also getting older.  
This ageing of the population is well illustrated by the development in the so-called “old age 
dependency ratio”, which captures the ratio of the population aged 65 and above to persons 
between 20 and 64 years. According to ECB calculations, by 2050, this ratio will increase to 
55%  from  the  current  level  of  around  26%  in  euro  area  (see  Chart  I).  Despite  some 
differences  across  countries,  the  challenges  posed  by  ageing  societies  are  common  to  all 
euro area countries.  
Pension funds therefore play a pivotal role in providing income to a substantial part of the 
population, and thus will be instrumental in shaping the standard of living in the future.  
In  order  to  fulfil  this  role,  private  pension  funds  invest  over  long  horizons  and  need 
predictable nominal trends. Pension funds thus have a great interest to see the purchasing 
power  of  money  preserved  and  the  risk  of  inflation  minimised,  as  there  are  sufficient 
uncertainties over these horizon without adding an extra and unnecessary one in the form of 
high and volatile inflation.  
A stable, non-inflationary macro-economic environment is thus essential in providing for an 
ageing society. In turn, private pension funds thus must have a vital interest that the ECB 
fulfils its mandate of preserving price stability in the euro area over the medium to longer-
term. 
At  the  same  time,  the  ECB  takes  great  interest  in  the  private  pension  fund  industry  as,  in 
many segments of financial markets, pension funds have become key institutional investors.  
As such pension funds shape the way financial markets work by enhancing the efficiency, 
the depth and therefore the liquidity of the market. This contribution to improving the overall 
functioning of the financial system may in turn foster a smoother transmission of monetary 
policy. In the current environment, with many financial market participants in need to adjust 
their portfolio, the presence of longer-term oriented investors such as private pension funds 
on  financial  markets  can  play  an  important  stabilising  force  for  the  financial  system  as  a 
whole.  
An insight into the importance of funded pensions in the OECD countries is provided by the 
market size. In 2006, this market was valued at approximately EUR 20 trillion: two thirds of 
which were invested in pension funds, compared to 18% provided by banks and investment 
management companies and 14% in life and pension insurance contracts. This large share 
reflects the dynamic growth of pension funds’ assets in recent years. Indeed, over the period 
2004-2006, the latest available data indicates that euro area pension fund assets grew on 
average  with  13.6%,  compared  with  9.0%  for  all  OECD  countries.  Notwithstanding  the 
current  period  of  turbulences,  this  dynamic  growth  is  likely  to  have  continued  in  many 
economies. 
BIS Review 142/2008 
 1
In my speech today, I will touch on three issues. First, I would like to emphasise the role of 
private pension funds in an ageing society. Second, I will briefly describe the role of private 
pension funds in financial markets in general and look more specifically at their role as long-
term oriented investors in the current environment.  
Thirdly, I will reflect on the impact of institutional investors on the transmission of monetary 
policy and the ensuing consequences for the conduct of monetary policy.  
The role of private pension funds in an ageing society 
Let me start with a piece of good news: between now and 2040, we are all expected to live 
longer  as  life  expectancy  increases.  For  this  we  all  wish  to  have  a  financially  secure 
retirement.  This,  however,  requires  that  we  will  all  have  to  save  more  or  work  longer. 
Confronted  with  population  aging,  governments  are  finding  it  increasingly  challenging  to 
maintain  the  entitlements  of  the  existing  public  pension  schemes.  Many  governments  are 
moving  in  the  direction  of  reducing  benefits  relative  to  contributions  to  public  pension 
schemes, reducing the ratio of the post-retirement income to the net pre-retirement income. 
Mandatory  private  pensions  also  operate  as  substitutes  for  part  of  the  public  pension 
provision, but in some countries, mandatory private pension saving has been added on top of 
existing public plans.  
Thus it is clear that, individuals will be increasingly supporting their old-age consumption via 
alternative, private pension plans and life insurance policies. In this context, I see a need for 
public  authorities  to  foster  conditions  that  encourage  and  are  conducive  to  saving, 
particularly in countries with a strong ageing of the population.  
Over the coming decades, as the “first pillar” of old-age provision will increasingly need to be 
complemented  by  a  strong  “second  pillar”  of  occupational  pension  funds,  a  significant 
increase in the value of assets managed by the retirement savings industry can be expected. 
This will particularly need to be the case in countries where this industry is less developed 
and in countries with underfunded public pension systems with defined benefits.  
At  present  the  share  of  total  wealth  invested  by  euro  area  households  with  insurance 
corporations and pension funds is much smaller than is the case for US households. This 
largely  reflects  the  larger  weight  of  real  estate  in  euro  area  households’  portfolios  (both in 
value and relative to GDP). The strong rise in property prices experienced in recent years by 
some  euro  area  countries  contributed  to  increase  the  share  of  housing  wealth  in  total 
household wealth.  
At the same time, with the normalisation of house price dynamics, the accumulation wealth 
through  institutional  investors  should  come  to  the  fore  more  strongly  in  the  future.  At  just 
under 30%, the share of financial wealth invested with insurance corporations and pension 
funds is currently very close to the share observed for the US. Furthermore, this share has 
gradually  risen  from  24%  in  early  1999  in  part,  reflecting  a  shift  in  the  preference  of 
households with respect to asset holdings from direct holdings of securities to professional 
asset managers. 
Looking across the euro area, the size of the private pension fund industry differs extensively 
with the spectrum going from the Netherlands with a very large sector of 1.3 times GDP to 
France and Germany with much smaller ones below a tenth of GDP. Several factors have 
contributed to this cross-country variation in the design and importance of pension funds: the 
past demographic structure of the population, the fiscal position of governments and socio-
economic trends. 
The global pension landscape is also being affect by the shift, in particular by occupational 
pension plans, toward defined contribution plans, while often defined benefit plans have been 
closed  to  new  entrants.  Traditionally,  private  pensions  have  been  employer-provided  and 
2 
 BIS Review 142/2008
been  of  the  defined-benefit  type,  where  the  entitlement  depends  on  some  measure  of 
individual earnings and years of service.  
The  pension  benefit  in  defined-contribution  plan  depends  on  the  value  of  individual  and 
employer  contributions,  the  investment  returns  that  these  earn  and  the  terms  on  which 
accumulated capital can be converted into a flow of pension benefits.  
Potentially, this shift in the type of the private pension schemes may have repercussions on 
to financial markets and portfolio allocation. Maturing defined benefit plans and newly set up 
defined contribution schemes may have different propensities to invest in risky assets, and 
thereby affecting the relative price of the assets.  
Looking  at  available  data  does  indeed  suggest  many  factors  impacting  on  the  asset 
allocation  of  the  different  types  of  pension  schemes.  At  the  same  time,  the  shift  between 
types of pension schemes transfers the longevity risk of the individual into a future income 
risk for the individual. In the defined contribution pension system, a longer life can only be 
counterbalanced by either saving more, working longer or through unrealistically high rates of 
return on investments. None of these remedial options are available ex post.  
Individuals with retirement income stemming from such pensions schemes therefore run the 
risk of outliving their resources, leaving only a reduction their standard of living when they are 
old. Furthermore, as retirement income becomes subject to a greater number of risks, plan 
beneficiaries  will  have  to  provide  for  these  challenges,  thus  putting  them  in  a  less  good 
position  to  bear  risk  in  their  remaining  portfolio  behaviour  and  altering  their  behaviour  as 
investors on financial markets. 
In  this  context  it  is  noteworthy  that  most  people  have  substantial  problems  giving  a 
reasonable estimate of how much money at retirement they will have had to accumulate in 
order  to  sustain  their  current  standard  of  living.  Few  people  realize  how  large  the  capital 
stock will need to be and how low the rate of withdrawal has to be, irrespective of the asset 
allocation  chosen.  Individuals  have  a  poor  appreciation  of  the  financial  implications  of 
longevity.  
It is the responsibility of public authorities to further promote financial education programmes 
aimed at enhancing not only the awareness of citizens on the financial risks they face in their 
decisions but also the ability to judge the options at their disposal.  
For  instance,  the  rate  of  return  on  the  investments  is  crucial  to  the  value  of  defined-
contribution pension schemes at retirement. This raises a number of challenging questions 
with  respect  to  the  structuring  of  the  payout  options  for  these  schemes.  The  main  options 
include lump-sum payments, programmed withdrawals and annuities.  
The choice amongst them depends on the balance to strike between flexibility and protection 
from  longevity  risk,  and  is  most  certainly  subject  to  the  country  context.  To  this  regard, 
financial markets need to be sufficiently developed and to offer adequate financial products, 
which  enable  individuals  to  convert  the  accumulated  assets  into  a  stream  of  income  at 
retirement. It requires the ability from individuals to carefully assess their situation and make 
important financial choices for themselves. 
From  a  public  policy  point  of  view,  as  the  share  of  household  wealth  managed  by 
professional asset managers increases, raises the need for good governance, more financial 
education, and transparency. There is a crucial need for adequate information to households. 
Recent  developments  in  financial markets  support  the  view  that  households  may  not  be  a 
position to make informed choices owing to a lack of financial sophistication.  
They  do  not  fully  grasp  the  risks  inherent  to  their  investment  decisions,  even  more  so,  if 
these investments have medium to long-term horizon.  
Most  households  today  simply  do  not  have  the  time,  skill  or  the  access  to  the  relevant 
information  in  order  to  manage  themselves  their  long-term  savings.  They  depend  on 
professional  asset  management  for  these  purposes.  However,  the  interaction  between 
BIS Review 142/2008 
 3
sophisticated asset managers and financially unsophisticated households has its own risks 
(for both sides) – requiring supervision and consumer protection in order to avert contagion 
and reputation effects. 
The role of private pension funds in financial markets 
Let me now turn to the role of pension funds in the financial system and their interactions 
with and implications for monetary policy: 
From  a  monetary  policy  viewpoint,  given  the  interactions  between  financial  market 
developments and monetary policy decision-making it is important to monitor and understand 
the factors driving the structures of the financial system.  
Furthermore,  a  well-functioning,  liquid  and  deep  financial  market  is  essential  for  central 
banks as it better ensures that high quality information about economic fundamentals can be 
extracted from financial market prices.  
Owing  to  the  fact  that  pension  funds  are  stable  long-term  investors  with  sophisticated 
investment strategies implies that they potentially play an important role in the shaping of the 
financial market.  
Hence,  the  growing  importance  of  pension  funds,  as  illustrated  in  the  strong  growth  of 
pension fund assets, is therefore likely to enhance the efficiency, depth and liquidity of the 
financial  markets.  This  may  contribute  to  improving  the  functioning  of  the  financial  system 
and, in turn, may foster a smoother transmission of monetary policy. 
In this light, it may be useful to briefly dwell on the recent trends in terms of pension fund 
investment structures measured by the allocation of financial assets.  
Chart II thus illustrates that bills and bonds issued by the public and private sectors is the 
predominant  asset  class  constituting  around  39%  of  total  pension  fund  assets  in  2006. 
However,  the  importance  of  bonds  as  an  investment  class  has  been  waning  somewhat  in 
recent  years  reflecting  a  reallocation  of  pension  fund  assets  towards  allocations  in  shares 
and  investment  funds.  Especially,  pension  funds’  investment  in  mutual  funds  increased 
markedly over the past years: from 8% of total pension fund assets in 2001 to 18% in 2006.  
In general, we observe that over the past 5-6 years the pension fund sector has pursued an 
increasingly diversified investment strategy. 
The  increasing  variety  of  pension  fund  assets  is  important  not  only  for  the  pension  fund 
sector’s  risk  and  return  characteristics,  but  crucially  also  affects  the  sources  of  financing 
available to the corporate sector.  
By  investing  (directly  or  indirectly)  in  shares  and  private  sector  bonds,  the  pension  fund 
sector may offer alternative sources of financing for the non-financial corporate sector, and 
hence may provide a substitute for bank financing, which remains the predominant source of 
corporate  funding  in  the  euro  area.  All  things  else  being  equal,  this  will  contribute  to 
improving the access to financing and lowering the cost of financing for the euro area non-
financial sector. 
In this context, pension funds – similar to other long-term institutional investors – may also 
contribute to the efficient monitoring of listed firms with favourable effects on transparency 
and  corporate  governance,  which  hence  should  enhance  the  market  discipline  of  the  euro 
area corporate sector. 
In  spite  of  the  overall  trend  towards  a  more  diverse  investment  portfolio,  the  pension-fund 
asset allocation still differs significantly across countries, as illustrated in Chart III.  
For  example,  investments  in  the  bond  market  remain  the  pre-dominant  option  for  pension 
funds  in  most  of  the  Central  and  Eastern  European  countries,  whereas  stock  market 
placements are particularly important in the Anglo-Saxon countries and notably in Sweden.  
4 
 BIS Review 142/2008
Moreover,  pension  funds  in  Belgium  and  Luxembourg  allocate  a  predominant  part  of  their 
assets to investment funds.  
The  widely  different  asset  allocation  strategies  observed  across  OECD  countries  can  to  a 
large extent be ascribed to the diversity of legal and regulatory arrangements pertaining in 
the individual countries.  
For  example,  in  general,  Anglo-Saxon  countries  adopt  the  prudent  person  rule  (PPR)  in 
pension fund investment. Under this approach assets should be invested “prudently” rather 
than limited according to category, and there are few investment restrictions on any specific 
assets. In practice this appears to lead to a higher share of assets in equities. 
Likewise,  different  quantitative  asset  restrictions  (QAR)  have  traditionally  been  applied  in 
many  other  countries  and  normally  stipulate  upper  limits  of  investment  in  specific  asset 
classes, e.g. equities and foreign assets.1  
At  the  same  time,  there  does  not  seem  to  be  clear  evidence  that  countries  with 
predominantly  defined-benefit  pension  plans  invest  more  or  less  in  risky  assets,  such  as 
shares, than in countries where defined-contribution plans are dominant.2  
Finally, in view of the cross-country differences in asset allocations even within the euro area 
monetary policy may affect pension fund asset returns in diverse ways across the euro area 
countries.  
That being said, a credible and stability-oriented monetary policy focused on preserving price 
stability  over  the  medium  to  longer-term  is  nonetheless  the  central  bank’s  most  important 
contribution to ensure that pension funds accomplish stable and predictable returns on their 
investments and maintain their crucial role as an important source of funding for the rest of 
the financial sector.  
However,  policy  makers  should  also  be  aware  of  the  potential  interactions  between  the 
development of the pension fund sector and the monetary policy transmission mechanism. 
This is the subject to which I now turn. 
Changes to the monetary transmission mechanism and implications for monetary 
policy 
In light of the changes to the financial system brought forward by the growing importance of 
institutional investors, and the pension fund sector in particular, let me now turn to some of 
the implications for monetary policy.  
In  terms  of  the  effect  of  institutional  investors  on  the  monetary  policy  transmission 
mechanism,  it  may  be  recalled  that  monetary  policy  affects  asset  prices  via  the  effect  of 
changes in the policy rates on the yields on asset prices. Furthermore, changes in monetary 
policy  may  affect  the  risk  perceptions  of  market  participants,  which  will  also  feed  into  the 
pricing of financial assets. Changes in asset prices will in turn (via wealth effects) affect the 
saving and spending behaviour of economic agents.  
Furthermore, financial innovation, for example in the form of new credit risk transfer products, 
created more investment opportunities for all market participants. This may have induced a 
more risk-taking investment behaviour and may have amplified asset price developments by 
                                                 
1   See e.g. OECD (2008), Survey of Investment Regulations of Pension Funds, July. 
2   OECD (2007), Pension Markets in Focus, Issue 4, November. 
BIS Review 142/2008 
 5
the compression of risk premia.3 Against this background, the turmoil observed over the past 
year may to some extent reflect a re-pricing of risks.4
In addition, it has been argued that the heightened importance of pension funds (and other 
non-bank financial intermediaries) has complicated the intermediation process.5  
In  a  sense  one  could  say  that  the  chain  of  intermediating  funds  between  savers  and 
investors has become longer and more complex than in the past. A practical implication of 
this  development  is  that  although  banks  remain  key  players  in  this  process,  central  banks 
can no longer limit themselves to the analysis of the banking sector when trying to interpret 
monetary developments.  
The modern central bank clearly needs to broaden its focus and to analyse a much wider 
group of financial intermediaries than in the past.6
Moreover, with the growing importance of institutional investors, including pension funds, on 
pricing in financial markets central banks need to pay attention to certain risks emerging from 
these developments.  
In  particular,  an  “agency  problem”  will  inevitably  exist  in  the  behavioural  pattern  of 
institutional investors arising from the difficulty of perfectly aligning the incentives of savers 
and  those  of  the  delegated  portfolio  managers.  This  may  create  issues  of  moral  hazard, 
which are often resolved by judging the performance of portfolio managers against certain 
benchmarks.  This  could  in  turn  lead  to  herd  behaviour  among  investment  managers  and 
potentially to misaligned financial market prices that may blur the content of the information 
retrieved by the central bank.  
For  pension  funds,  in  particular,  the  shortening  of  the  time  horizon  associated  with  the 
progressive aging of society might create incentives for asset managers to be myopic.  
Overall,  while  noting  that  the  growing  importance  of  pension  funds  is  beneficial  to  the 
functioning of the financial system, it also provides new challenges for central bank analysis 
and operations. 
Finally, in particular in view of the current juncture of financial market turmoil, I would like to 
stress the significance of a strong and stable pension fund sector for the stability of financial 
markets and the wider economy.  
Summary 
Let me now briefly conclude by summarising the main points of my intervention:  
Several difficult challenges are faced by the euro area economy in general and the private 
pension funds sector more specifically:  
1. 
the ageing population, where I see an greater need on the side of public authorities 
and private pension funds to foster conditions that encourage and are conducive to 
saving, particularly in countries with a strong ageing of the population.  
                                                 
3   See, for example, the article on “The role of banks in the monetary policy transmission” in the August 2008 
ECB Monthly Bulletin. 
4   See e.g. Box 3 entitled “The recent repricing of credit risk” in the October 2007 ECB Monthly Bulletin. 
5   See Rajan, R. (2005), “Has financial development made the world riskier?”, NBER Working Paper No. 11728. 
6   Recent  examples  of  monetary  and  financial  analyses  conducted  at  the  ECB  include  Box  1  entitled  “New 
estimates  on  holdings  by  sector  for  euro  area  M3”  in  the  December  2007  Monthly  Bulletin;  Box  1  entitled 
“Recent  developments  in  MFI  longer-term  financial  liabilities”  in  the  July  2006  Monthly  Bulletin;  and  Box  3 
entitled “Demand for bonds by institutional investors and bond yield developments in the euro area” in the May 
2007 Monthly Bulletin. Chart I: Old age dependency ratio (65+ in % 20-64). 
6 
 BIS Review 142/2008
2. 
the preservation of the purchasing power of money, where pension funds as long-
run investors have a great interest that the ECB fulfils its mandate of price stability.  
This is important not only for preserving the confidence of investors in private pension funds, 
but also to ensure the sustainability of pension funds as an important source of funding for 
the rest of the financial sector. Let me, therefore, assure you, that the ECB remains focussed 
on delivering price stability for the euro area. 
3. 
the  shift  in  the  preference  for  managed  savings  on  behalf  of  households,  where  I 
encourage all actions that improve the corporate governance framework for pension 
funds  and  provide  more  information  and  transparency  to  pension  fund  customers, 
supporting the long term accountability of private pension funds. At the same time, 
for such measures to be fruitful, I see a need to enhance the financial education of 
our fellow citizen. 
 It is in the most fundamental interest of Europe to have a strong and vibrant pension fund 
sector. This need is currently compounded in the context of the financial market turbulences 
as  private  pension  funds  owing  to  their  property  as  long-term  investors  can  importantly 
contribute to the stability of financial markets, and thus the macro-economy.  
Thank you for your attention!  
 
 
Chart I: Old age dependency ratio (65+ in % 20-64) 
Source OECD. 
 BIS Review 142/2008 
 7
Chart II. Structure of assets of pension funds in selected OECD countries 2001-2006  
(in per cent of total investment) 
Source: OECD, Global pension statistics. 
Note: Investment funds include “mutual funds” and private investment funds” (including private equity and hedge 
funds). 
 
 8 
 BIS Review 142/2008
Chart III. Structure of assets of pension funds in selected OECD countries 2006  
(in per cent of total investment) 
Source: OECD, Global pension statistics. 
Note: Investment funds include “mutual funds” and private investment funds” (including private equity and hedge 
funds). 
 BIS Review 142/2008 
 9
