Masaaki Shirakawa: The turmoil in global financial markets and 
economic and financial developments in Japan 
Speech  by  Mr  Masaaki  Shirakawa,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  at  the  Kisaragi-kai 
Meeting, Tokyo, 5 November 2008. 
 Introduction 
I am very privileged to have the opportunity to speak before such a large audience. 
As  you  all  know,  global  financial  markets  are  currently  experiencing  a  type  of  turmoil  not 
seen since the 1930s. Strains in the markets have mounted significantly, especially since the 
bankruptcy filing of Lehman Brothers in September. It is difficult for a central bank to choose 
the right words to express this situation, but the blunt phrase "financial crisis" was used in the 
joint statement by major central banks released in October. The degree of strains in financial 
markets, although they have recently improved somewhat, has increased to a level that has 
obliged us to use such a strong phrase. The turmoil in financial markets that began in the 
summer of 2007 as well as its impact on economic activity were, at first, limited to the U.S. 
and European economies, but have since gradually spread to Japan as well as to emerging 
economies.  This  global  turmoil  has  now  become  the  largest  problem  facing  the  world 
economy, although the degree of impact varies by country. 
In my speech today, I would like to first discuss developments in global financial markets and 
overseas  economies,  given  that  current  developments  in  Japan's  economy  are  being 
overwhelmingly influenced by them. After that, I will discuss the outlook for Japan's economic 
activity and prices, and then the Bank of Japan's conduct of monetary policy, including the 
reduction in the policy interest rate decided at the Monetary Policy Meeting held on October 
31. And lastly, I would like to touch on how a financial crisis should be dealt with and how, 
from a longer-term perspective, similar crises can be prevented in the future, based on our 
experience with the one that occurred in Japan. 
Developments in global financial markets and overseas economies 
I.  
I will begin by discussing developments in global financial markets and overseas economies. 
Looking  back,  until  recently  the  world  economy  enjoyed  a  sustained  period  of  benign 
economic conditions. The statement released after the meeting of the Group of Seven (G-7) 
finance ministers and central bank governors in April 2007, for example, indicated, "Although 
risks remain, the global economy is having its strongest sustained expansion in more than 30 
years and is becoming more balanced." All of you here are familiar with developments in the 
world  economy  since  then,  but  the  understanding  that  high  world  economic  growth  had 
continued  for  a  long  time  was,  without  any  question,  true  until  the  recent  past.  In  actual 
numbers,  growth  rates  of  around  5  percent  continued  from  2004  through  2007.  Even  with 
such  high  growth  rates,  inflation  rates  did  not  rise  noticeably  until  around  2006.  A  major 
factor supporting this combination of low inflation and high economic growth was the entry of 
emerging  economies  into  the  market  economy,  which  expanded  global  supply  capacity, 
providing an environment for low inflation. In this situation, there was a prolonged period of 
low  interest  rates  worldwide.  In  the  beginning,  the  low  interest  rates  seem  to  have  been 
partly affected by arguments stressing the risk of deflation, and later by optimism that non-
inflationary  sustained  growth  would  continue,  supported  by  the  fact  that  benign  economic 
conditions actually continued. 
In  any  event,  the  issues  the  world  economy  currently  faces  gradually  accumulated  in  the 
benign environment of high growth, stable prices, and accommodative financial conditions. 
BIS Review 132/2008 
 1
First, the rapid growth of emerging economies multiplied the demand for resources such as 
crude  oil,  and  led  to  a  surge  in  commodity  and  energy  prices.  And  second,  investors  and 
financial  institutions  eased  their  credit  standards  and  a  global  credit  bubble  emerged  as 
evidenced  by  the  U.S.  subprime  mortgage  problem.  Looking  back  on  phenomena  that 
occurred in this period, such as the substantial rise in asset prices, the surge in commodity 
and energy prices, and the significant increase in leverage by market participants, we now 
understand that they were generated by the overheating of financial and economic activities. 
The current global financial crisis and the slowdown in the world economy can therefore be 
viewed as part of the process of correcting imbalances that have accumulated. 
Developments in global financial markets and policy responses 
A.  
I will now discuss the problem of the current financial crisis. The problem surfaced when the 
economic  entities  that  originated  securitized  products  faced  funding  difficulties  due  to  a 
decline in the prices of those products and malfunctioning of their market. Subsequently, the 
situation  gradually  deteriorated  through  the  repetition  of  heightening  and  subsiding  of 
pessimism in the market. Since the bankruptcy filing of Lehman Brothers in mid-September, 
strains in global financial markets, particularly those in the United States and Europe, have 
sharply  intensified.  Looking  back  at  the  financial  crisis  in  Japan  after  1997,  the  defining 
incident that triggered it was the default of Sanyo Securities in the money market. After that 
incident, a sense of vigilance for counterparty risk intensified in the market and screening of 
trading  partners  and  contraction  of  the  market  started  to  set  in.  The  recent  conditions  in 
global financial markets after the collapse of Lehman Brothers could be described as such a 
market  contraction  taking  place  on  a  global  scale,  leading  to  a  heightened  sense  of 
counterparty risk particularly in the U.S. and European markets. Loss of trust is disastrous for 
markets. In the money market, where financial institutions exchange funds without collateral, 
the volume of trade dropped sharply, and trades offered were restricted to overnight funds, 
implying that there was a serious liquidity shortage. As a result, concerns among financial 
institutions  and  investors  over  funding  became  widespread  in  addition  to  concerns  over  a 
lack of capital, and this led to stricter lending and investing standards. This situation, if had 
no action been taken, would have deteriorated further. 
The  world  economy  has  accumulated  various  imbalances  in  the  past  several  years,  and 
adjustments  to  correct  them  are  inevitable.  Nevertheless,  we  must  prevent  further 
adjustments  or  turmoil  that  may  be  triggered  by  some  shocks.  Recognizing  this,  the 
participants at the October G-7 meeting shared a strong sense of crisis and confirmed that 
each  member  country  would  promptly 
implement  necessary  policy  measures  with 
determination, in order to ensure the stability of global financial markets and confidence in 
the financial systems. The results of the discussions were published as a set of concise and 
clear principles, the G-7 Plan of Action. 
Many countries have been implementing decisive measures including responses in line with 
the Plan of Action, and these measures can be summarized as follows. 
The first was to carry out aggressive provision of liquidity to ensure financial market stability. 
Central banks have been providing massive liquidity to the markets, and, with respect to U.S. 
dollar liquidity, central banks including the Bank of Japan have cooperated internationally to 
introduce  a  framework  of  liquidity  provision  and  have  been  providing  a  large  amount  of 
dollars in the market of each country. However, while central bank liquidity provision is an 
indispensable measure for preventing a systemic risk from manifesting itself and for ensuring 
financial market stability, it is not a silver bullet to fundamentally resolve the financial system 
problem. We should be fully aware that liquidity provision by a central bank is a measure to 
gain time until more fundamental solutions have been worked out. 
The second measure taken was a comprehensive guarantee of financial institutions' debts. 
During financial system instability, the concern of depositors and investors tends to intensify 
exponentially  once  it  passes  a  tipping  point.  Leaving  such  a  situation  unresolved  could 
2 
 BIS Review 132/2008
amplify their concern and thus lead to uncontrollable turmoil. Therefore, governments in the 
United States, Europe, and other countries, in quick succession, announced that they would 
expand deposit insurance coverage substantially and guarantee financial institutions' debts. 
The  third  measure  was  to  put  in  place  a  framework  that  used  public  funds  to  purchase 
impaired assets held by financial institutions and inject capital into financial institutions. Given 
that  the  financial  system  problem  is  essentially  a  problem  of  a  capital  shortage,  it  is 
necessary  to  identify  the  amount  of  capital  shortage  and  compensate  for  it.  However,  as 
Japan's past experience suggests, it is extremely difficult to accurately gauge, on a real-time 
basis, the size of impaired assets and a capital shortage when a negative interaction is at 
work  in  the  financial  and  economic  systems.  To  ensure  financial  stability,  someone  must 
make  a  judgment  on  the  capital  shortage  from  a  macroeconomic  perspective,  and  that 
someone  can  only  be  the  public  authorities.  The  public  authorities  must  decide  on  a 
substantial public funds injection if it is judged necessary after thoroughly factoring in future 
downside risks. 
While it appears that the condition of global financial markets has somewhat improved as a 
result of a series of measures being taken by the public authorities, strains in the financial 
markets are highly likely to continue for the time being. 
Developments in overseas economies 
B.  
Given  the  situation  in  global  financial  markets,  economic  activity  in  the  United  States  has 
been  sluggish  with  continued  adjustments  in  the  housing  market.  The  losses  incurred  by 
financial  institutions  were  at  first  mainly  on  securitized  products  related  to  the  subprime 
mortgage problem, but recently losses on consumer and commercial real estate loans have 
been on the rise. Despite the reduction of the Federal Reserve's target for the federal funds 
rate from 5.25 percent to 1.0 percent within the short period of a little over a year, the actual 
interest rates applied to funding by financial institutions, firms, and households are generally 
rising due to wider credit spreads. The tightening in financial conditions is exerting downward 
pressures on the economy, and this is leading in turn to deterioration in the asset quality of 
financial institutions. In other words, a negative interaction is operating between the financial 
system and economic activity, and the outcome of events is still not clear. 
In  Europe,  financial  institutions'  lending  attitudes  have  become  tighter  as  in  the  United 
States. Demand in the area is slowing due to the deterioration in the terms of trade reflecting 
the earlier increases in commodity and materials prices, and export conditions are worsening 
reflecting developments in the world economy. In this situation, economic activity in Europe 
has also been sluggish. Emerging economies and commodity-exporting countries continue to 
show high growth, albeit at a somewhat slower pace. However, in the NIEs and the ASEAN 
economies,  domestic  demand  has  been  showing  weakness,  and  the  pace  of  increase  in 
exports is slowing due to the deceleration of the U.S. and European economies. 
II.  
A.  
Developments in Japan's economy 
The current situation of and outlook for Japan's economy 
The current situation of Japan's economy 
1.  
Let me now move on to the current situation of and outlook for Japan's economy. 
From  the  beginning  of  2002  until  recently,  Japan's  economy  enjoyed  a  moderate  but 
prolonged  period  of  economic  expansion.  It  was  the  longest  postwar  expansion,  and  with 
hindsight, this was the result of the high and prolonged growth of the world economy that I 
mentioned earlier as well as restructuring efforts of Japanese firms. Since the end of 2007, 
however, the pace of growth has slowed, and has become increasingly sluggish recently with 
BIS Review 132/2008 
 3
the  deterioration  in  the  world  economy.  There  are  two  main  reasons  behind  these 
developments. 
The first reason is the sharp deterioration in the terms of trade, reflecting the surge in energy 
and materials prices toward the summer of 2008. The deterioration in the terms of trade is 
more pronounced in Japan than in other major economies, since Japan depends heavily on 
imports  of  commodities  and  most  of  its  exports  consist  of  manufactured  products.  The 
significant deterioration in the terms of trade has weakened corporate profits and household 
real income and exerted downward pressure on domestic private demand. 
The second reason is the slowdown in overseas economies. Japan's exports in real terms 
showed  high  growth  until  this  spring,  but  later  decelerated  and  have  leveled  off  recently. 
Growth in exports to the United States has been sluggish since the end of 2006, but that of 
exports to Europe and Asia has also recently started to slow. 
As for prices, the year-on-year rate of increase in the consumer price index (CPI) for all items 
excluding fresh food has risen to around 2.5 percent against the background of the continued 
pass-through of the rise in energy and materials prices. This is the highest rate in 16 years 
excluding  fiscal  1997,  when  the  increases  in  the  CPI  reflected  the  rise  in  the  rate  of 
consumption tax. The Bank's current assessment, however, is that, second-round effects – 
price inflation that exceeds the level of increase caused by the pass-through of the rise in 
energy and materials prices – have not emerged. 
The outlook for economic activity and prices 
2.  
The outlook for Japan's economic activity is the largest concern at the moment. The Bank 
released  the  October  2008  Outlook  for  Economic  Activity  and  Prices  (Outlook  Report)  on 
October 31, which contains projections through fiscal 2010. Given that monetary policy takes 
effect  with  a  considerable  time  lag,  it  is  necessary  that  a  central  bank  make  long-term 
projections  of  future  economic  activity  and  prices.  The  Bank  has  extended  the  projection 
period for the October Outlook Reports, and the recent report presented projections through 
fiscal 2010. Currently, the uncertainties regarding the world economy and the global financial 
markets  have  increased  significantly,  making  future  projections  of  economic  activity  and 
prices  more  difficult  than  usual.  Accordingly,  it  is  necessary  to  stress  that  a  careful 
assessment  of  not  only  the  baseline  scenario  but  also  risk  factors  is even  more  important 
than usual. 
Bearing  that  in  mind,  I  would  like  to  explain  the  baseline  scenario.  It  is  expected  that 
increased  sluggishness  in  economic  activity  in  Japan  will  remain  over  the  next  several 
quarters and that it will take some time for the necessary conditions for Japan's economic 
recovery to  be satisfied. It is likely to be sometime after the middle of  fiscal 2009 that the 
economy will return gradually onto a moderate growth path and that the growth rate will pick 
up toward its potential – estimated to be around 1.5 percent or somewhat higher. The rate of 
real GDP growth on a fiscal-year basis is likely to be around 0 percent in fiscal 2008 and 
around  0.5  percent  in  fiscal  2009,  and  the  growth  rate  for  fiscal  2010  is  expected  to  be 
around the potential growth rate. 
The  future  of  Japan's  economy  relies  heavily  on  the  recovery  of  overseas  economies  and 
also on the stability of global financial markets, which will form the basis for the recovery of 
the  world  economy.  Growth  in  overseas  economies  is  likely  to  continue  to  slow  in  coming 
quarters. Key factors for the future course of the world economy will be how and when the 
adjustments  in  the  housing  market  progress  and  measures  introduced  to  stabilize  the 
financial system start to take effect in the United States. It is likely that improvements in the 
U.S. economy as well as the recovery in the growth rate of overseas economies as a whole 
will become evident only sometime after the middle of fiscal 2009. 
With  regard  to  future  developments  in  prices,  the  rate  of  increase  in  the  CPI  for  all  items 
excluding  fresh  food  is  expected  to  decline  gradually  until  the  middle  of  fiscal  2009,  as 
energy  and  materials  prices  stabilize,  while  aggregate  supply  and  demand  conditions  are 
4 
 BIS Review 132/2008
expected to loosen, with real GDP growth falling short of the potential growth rate. On a fiscal 
year-on-year basis, the CPI (excluding fresh food) is projected to rise by around 1.5 percent 
in  fiscal  2008  and  remain  more  or  less  flat  in  fiscal  2009.  Thereafter,  it  is  projected  to 
increase somewhat and register an increase in the range of 0.0-0.5 percent in fiscal 2010, as 
commodity prices are likely to rise gradually reflecting the recovery in overseas economies 
and  the  aggregate  supply  and  demand  balance  in  the  economy  is  likely  to  improve 
moderately. What is important in the conduct of monetary policy when faced with a decline in 
the  inflation  rate  is  developments  in  medium-  to  long-term  inflation  expectations.  In  this 
regard, medium-term inflation expectations have barely changed during the recent period of 
price rises, and it is not anticipated in the current projections that they will change during the 
coming period of price decline. 
Uncertainty regarding the outlook for Japan's economic activity and prices 
B.  
In sum, the most likely outlook is that increased sluggishness in Japan's economic activity 
will remain over the next several quarters, but in the longer run, the economy will return onto 
a  sustainable  growth  path  with  price  stability.  However,  this  outlook  is  attended  by  a 
significant level of uncertainty. 
The first and the largest risk factor is the outcome of financial crises in the United States and 
Europe. If the negative interaction operating between financial markets and economic activity 
in the United States and Europe should worsen, this may lead to a further slowing in these 
economies and may further delay their recovery. If growth of the world economy slows as a 
whole due to a subsequent slowdown in emerging economies, not only will Japan's exports 
decline but also the slowdown in the world economy may reduce business fixed investment 
by altering firms' expectations of an increase in global demand. 
The second risk factor concerns developments in energy and materials prices. It is assumed 
that, in the medium term, these prices will rise moderately, supported by growing  demand 
especially  in  emerging  economies.  However,  this  assumption  is,  again,  accompanied  by 
uncertainty. If the current fall in these prices, which implies an improvement in Japan's terms 
of trade, mainly reflects the slowing of the world economy, it should be borne in mind that this 
also implies a decrease in Japan's exports. On the other hand, if commodity prices should 
surge again, inflationary pressures may increase globally, which could raise the specter of a 
subsequent economic slowdown. In the latter case, it is possible that the factors behind the 
recent sluggishness in Japan will become more acute. 
The  third  risk  factor  concerns  a  possibility  that,  if  strains  in  global  financial  markets  and 
financial  crises  in  the  United  States  and  Europe  should  result  in  significant  fallout  in 
Japanese  financial  markets  and  financial  institutions,  financial  conditions  will  become  less 
accommodative  and  pressures  acting  to  depress  economic  activity  may  become  more 
marked. 
Turning to the outlook for inflation, there are also uncertainties attending inflation that could 
cause it to deviate either upward or downward from the rate projected. With regard to the 
Bank's  projection  that  the  inflation rate  will  likely  decline,  however,  the  upside  risks  to  this 
projection seem to have decreased relative to the past. 
Conduct of monetary policy 
C.  
I  would  now  like  to  explain  the  Bank's  thinking  regarding  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy 
based  on  the  outlook  for  Japan's  economic  activity  and  prices  I  have  described.  Japan's 
economy, in the longer run, is most likely to return onto a path of sustainable growth with 
price  stability;  however,  the  outlook  is  attended  not  only  by  increased  downside  risks  to 
economic activity but also by decreased upside risks to inflation relative to the recent past. 
Given  the  above  assessment  and  outlook  for  the  economy,  the  Bank  decided  on  the 
following measures at the Monetary Policy Meeting held on October 31. 
BIS Review 132/2008 
 5
First, the Bank decided to lower the policy rate or the target for the uncollateralized overnight 
call rate by 20 basis points, from around 0.5 percent to around 0.3 percent. And second, the 
Bank further increased the flexibility of money market operations to ensure stability in money 
markets in order to facilitate the provision of sufficient liquidity toward the year-end and the 
fiscal year-end, when market liquidity usually becomes tight. More precisely, a facility called 
the Complementary Deposit Facility was introduced as a temporary measure to pay interest 
on current account balances, and the interest rate was set at 0.1 percent. Under this facility, 
the  Bank  will  pay  interest  on  current  account  balances  –  excess  reserve  balances,  to  be 
exact – that financial institutions hold with the Bank, and the interest rate applied will form the 
floor of market interest rates, since financial institutions will not have any incentive to offer 
funds  in  the  call  market  below  this  rate.  The  new  facility  will  enable  the  Bank  to  smoothly 
provide sufficient liquidity without causing large fluctuations in the call rates. 
Extensive  discussions  have  taken  place  regarding  the  amount  of  reduction  in  the  policy 
interest  rate  and  the  level  of  the  interest  rate  to  be  applied  to  current  account  balances. 
Before  explaining  the  discussions,  the  basic  mechanism  whereby  monetary  policy  takes 
effect through financial markets needs to be recalled. As I said earlier in relation to the case 
of  U.S.  and  European  money  markets  since  the  bankruptcy  filing  of  Lehman  Brothers, 
financial institutions cannot take risks when there are concerns over funding in the market. In 
this situation, monetary easing measures will not produce sufficient effects even with the low 
level of short-term interest rates. In this sense, ensuring the functioning of money markets – 
in  other  words,  ensuring  the  flow  of  funds  among  market  participants  –  is  an  important 
precondition for monetary policy to produce its intended results. In Japan, where the policy 
interest  rate  had  already  been  reduced  to  the  extremely  low  level  of  0.5  percent,  further 
reducing the policy interest rate will lower the interest income to a level insufficient to cover 
various transaction fees, which in turn may reduce the volume of transactions in the market 
and bring about a reduction in market liquidity. To put it differently, the Bank must consider 
carefully  not  only  the  positive  effects  of  monetary  easing,  but  also  the  possible  adverse 
effects that might hamper the proper functioning of the market mechanism and impede the 
flow  of  funds.  In  the  current  situation  where  the  influence  of  the  turmoil  in  global  financial 
markets is gradually being felt in Japanese financial markets and considerable deterioration 
in the functioning of the market mechanism can be observed, liquidity shortage in markets is 
becoming  an  increasingly  serious  problem.  Also  with  regard  to  the  spread  between  the 
targeted interest rate and the floor interest rate, an excessively narrow spread will hamper 
free interest rate formation and impair the functioning of the markets. The reason behind the 
Bank's  decisions,  after  extensive  discussion,  to  set  the  policy  interest  rate  at  around  0.3 
percent  and  the  spread  at  20  basis  points  was  to  strike  a  balance  between  the  monetary 
easing  effects  of  the  reduction  in  the  policy  interest  rate  and  its  negative  effects  on  the 
functioning  of  the  market  in  the  current  difficult  situation  facing  Japan's  economy  and 
financial markets. 
The  Bank  has  taken  various  decisive  measures,  besides  those  that  I  just  mentioned,  to 
ensure stability in financial markets. The most important among them was the introduction of 
U.S.  dollar  funds-supplying  operations  in  September  as  a  coordinated  measure  of  central 
banks in major economies. With the global decline in the liquidity of dollar funding markets, 
the  dollar  funds-supplying  operations  seem  to  be  making  a  contribution  to  supporting 
economic  activity  by  easing  concerns  among  Japanese  financial  institutions  as  well  as 
nonfinancial  firms  over  dollar  funding.  Furthermore,  on  October  14,  the  Bank  decided  to 
increase  the  frequency  and  the  size  of  CP  repo  operations  and  to  broaden  the  range  of 
eligible collateral. Moreover, at the Monetary Policy Meeting held on October 31, the Bank 
lowered the basic loan rate applicable under the Complementary Lending Facility. Through 
this facility, the Bank extends loans to financial institutions in the amount they need within the 
value of collateral submitted. The basic loan rate, the interest rate applied under the facility, 
is the ceiling of overnight market rates. The reduction in the basic loan rate will further limit 
the rise in overnight call rates and help to ensure market stability. 
6 
 BIS Review 132/2008
If I were asked to provide the Bank's basic stance with regard to future monetary policy, I 
would have to repeat that given the increased uncertainty, the Bank will implement monetary 
policy appropriately by carefully assessing the future outlook for economic activity and prices, 
closely  considering  the  likelihood  of  its  projections  as  well  as  factors  posing  upside  or 
downside risks. At the current juncture, particularly close attention should be paid to the risk 
of downward deviation in economic activity due to developments in the U.S. and European 
financial  systems  and  global  financial  markets  as  well  as  their  subsequent  impact  on 
economic activity. 
The  current  shock  that  is  threatening  the  world  economy  and  Japan's  economy  can  be 
regarded as part of the process of correcting the unsustainable growth in the world economy 
and  expansion  in  leverage  that  continued  over  the  past  several  years.  With  strains  in 
financial  markets  continuing  under  the  severe  adjustment  process,  the  most  important 
contribution  a  central  bank  can  make  is  to  ensure  stability  in  financial  markets  through  its 
provision of liquidity. Market stability is also a vital precondition for the current low interest 
rates  to  produce  their  maximal  monetary  easing  effects.  Keeping  in  close  contact  with 
overseas central banks, the Bank will do its utmost to ensure market stability by conducting 
appropriate money market operations. 
Lessons learned from the financial crisis 
III.  
As the last topic of my speech, I would like to offer my views on how we can avoid financial 
crises, based on the experience of addressing Japan's financial system instability following 
the bursting of the bubble economy. 
Policy responses to the current financial crisis 
A.  
In  response  to  the  current  financial  crisis,  governments  and  central  banks  worldwide  have 
announced decisive measures in rapid succession in order to ensure the stability of global 
financial markets and confidence in the financial system, and have been implementing these 
measures  while  seeking  international  coordination.  The  most  important  of  these  measures 
are liquidity provision by central banks and injection of public funds into financial institutions 
by governments. 
Not  all  the  problems  would  be  solved  immediately  even  if  public  capital  were  injected  into 
financial  institutions  on  an  appropriate  scale,  however.  That  is  because  this  would  not 
immediately correct the imbalances and excesses generated in each sector of the economy 
as  we  found  in  Japan;  a  comprehensive  framework  for  reinforcing  financial  institutions' 
capital by using public funds was established in 1998 in Japan, but it was only after 2003 that 
the economy started to return to a full-fledged recovery path, with the resolution of the "three 
excesses"  of  production  capacity,  employment,  and  debt  in  the  corporate  sector,  and  the 
support of recovery in overseas economies. 
Looking at the present condition of the U.S. economy, the sector that comes to mind first as 
having an "excess" is the housing market. Housing prices are still declining and it seems that 
it will take some time for the adjustment in the housing market to be completed. While it is 
difficult  to  specify  the  amount  of  excess  in  the  household  sector's  debts,  the  past  trend 
seems  to  suggest  the  existence  of  a  certain  amount  of  excess.  Not  only  had  the  financial 
sector grown substantially, but also the overall financial activity in the economy had greatly 
increased. More globally, as symbolized by the recent case of Iceland, the financial sector 
had been growing in recent years but is now shrinking. Various adjustments to reduce the 
excesses  are  likely  to  continue  for  the  time  being,  and  during  this  period  downward 
pressures  will  continue  to  weigh  on  economic  activity.  To  enable  such  adjustments  to 
proceed  as  smoothly  as  possible,  it  is  important  for  the  authorities  to  take  necessary 
measures with determination, as steps toward ensuring stability in the financial markets and 
BIS Review 132/2008 
 7
confidence in the financial systems. Fortunately, the measures for achieving the stability and 
confidence seem to have been put generally into place. 
Preemptive policy measures 
B.  
Next, I would like to consider what policy measures are necessary to prevent the emergence 
and  worsening  of  a  financial  crisis.  The  correct  set  of  answers  has  yet  to  be  found,  but  I 
would like to offer some tentative suggestions. 
Proper conduct of macroeconomic policy 
1.  
The first is to pursue proper macroeconomic policy. There have been a range of discussions 
on the causes of the subprime mortgage problem, and there is a view that it is a new type of 
financial  crisis.  I  believe  that,  although  there  were  complex  new  securitized  products  and 
changes  in  the  mechanism  of  crisis  generation,  what  happened  was  the  generation, 
expansion, and bursting of a traditional bubble, a phenomenon that has occurred repeatedly 
in  the  past.  That  is  to  say,  in  a  favorable  macroeconomic  environment,  asset  prices 
increased markedly and leverage expanded substantially. 
Japan's experience during the latter half of the 1980s and the first half of the 1990s, and the 
current  U.S.  subprime  mortgage  problem  –  or,  more  broadly,  the  turmoil  in  the  U.S.  and 
European financial markets – have in common the fact that the essence of the problem is the 
generation and bursting of a bubble. 
How monetary policy relates to the bubble is extremely complex, and nobody can provide a 
clear  answer  at  present,  but  it  might  not  be  a  mere  coincidence  that  Japan's  bubble  and 
many subsequent bubbles were generated when prices were stable or the rate of inflation 
was declining, a situation in which low interest rates were sustained. And in the current U.S. 
subprime mortgage problem, investors and financial institutions relaxed their risk assessment 
standards  and  leaned  increasingly  toward  pursuing  short-term  profits  by  expanding  their 
investments  in  securitized  products,  which  included  subprime  loans  as  underlying  assets, 
while  increasing  leverage.  In  the  United  States,  the  ratio  of  the  outstanding  balance  of 
residential  mortgages  to  nominal  GDP  rapidly  increased  from  49  percent  in  2000  to  75 
percent in 2006. An increase in leverage was not brought about by monetary policy only, and 
there had to be some convincing story that made the public's sentiment bullish. At the same 
time,  the  increase  in  leverage  did  not  occur  without  an  expectation  that  low  interest  rates 
would  continue  against  a  backdrop  of  prolonged  global  growth  and  low  inflation,  and 
associated credit expansion. 
Given such experiences, the proper conduct of monetary policy is extremely important. While 
price  stability  is  the  objective  of  a  central  bank's  monetary  policy  and  thus  is  extremely 
important,  if  price stability  is  understood  to  mean  always  containing  the  growth  rate  of  the 
CPI within a certain narrow range, it could, as various recent experiences show, lead to large 
economic fluctuations, and eventually result in the loss of price stability itself. 
A macroprudential perspective 
2.  
The second point crucial for preventing the emergence and worsening of a financial crisis is 
the importance of maintaining a macroprudential perspective. 
Let  me  take  the  example  of  residential  mortgage-backed  securities  (RMBSs),  securitized 
products that have residential mortgages as underlying assets, which were the trigger of the 
current  global  financial  crisis.  Investment  in  RMBSs,  in  which  borrowers  of  residential 
mortgages  that  consist  of  underlying  assets  are  distributed  widely  across  regions  and 
professional  classes,  enables  investors  to  diversify  risk  unique  to  where  they  live,  for 
example,  the  level  of  natural  disaster  risk  or  bad  debt  risk.  However,  if  a  housing  bubble 
common  to  every  region  and  professional  class  is  generated,  the  economic  value  of  the 
RMBSs will rapidly decline together with the bursting of the bubble. 
8 
 BIS Review 132/2008
In  this  context,  to  ensure  financial  system  stability,  financial  institutions  for  their  part  are 
required to manage risks properly, while the supervisory authorities and central banks need 
to  have  a  macroeconomic  perspective  to  cover  not  only  individual  risks  that  financial 
institutions incur, but also risks inherent in the financial system. The authorities and central 
banks use the term "macroprudential" to describe such a perspective, and it is important in 
checking whether proper risk management is in place through regulations, supervisions, and 
monitoring of individual financial institutions, as well as in conducting a risk analysis of the 
financial system as a whole and in disseminating information as necessary. Macroeconomic 
and market information converge at the Bank, as the monetary policy authority. At the same 
time, since the Bank is in a position to obtain information from individual financial institutions 
through  its  on-site  examinations  and  off-site  monitoring,  it  is  strongly  aware  of  the 
significance of having a macroprudential perspective. While it is not an easy task to establish 
a specific macroprudential methodology, the Bank has been recently making efforts to do so 
and  publishing  part  of  the  fruits  of  these  efforts  in  its  Financial  System  Report.  The  Bank 
would like to continue to strengthen and exercise its macroprudential function. 
Improvement in market and settlement infrastructure 
3.  
The third point important for preventing the emergence and worsening of a financial crisis is 
to steadily improve market and settlement infrastructures, and contain systemic disruptions if 
a financial crisis occurs. While the current global financial markets are in a state of strain, the 
turmoil would have been worse without the efforts that have been made in recent years by 
market participants and central banks to improve market and settlement infrastructures. 
One example is the Continuous Linked Settlement (CLS) Bank established in 2002, with the 
cooperation  of  major  central  banks  and  private  financial  institutions,  to  reduce  foreign 
exchange  settlement  risk.  Under  the  previous  settlement  system,  anyone  selling  the  yen 
would be exposed to the settlement risk associated with the time difference between paying 
the  yen  in  Japan  time  and  receiving  U.S.  dollars  in  New  York  time.  Now,  since  the  CLS 
system  links  the  fund  settlement  system  of  individual  countries  and  carries  out  multiple 
currency  settlements  associated  with  foreign  exchange  transactions  simultaneously,  the 
settlement risk unique to foreign exchange transactions has been reduced. As vigilance for 
counterparty risk is intensifying since the Lehman shock, this system has been functioning 
very  effectively  to  ensure  smooth  foreign  exchange  transactions  and  settlements.  Since 
financial institutions in individual countries are increasingly relying on foreign exchange swap 
markets,  which  convert  the  home  currency  into  foreign  currency,  to  procure  foreign 
currencies, it is highly significant that the smooth functioning of the foreign exchange market 
has been maintained. 
In addition, there have been various developments both domestically and internationally to 
improve  various  forms  of  financial  infrastructure  through  the  concerned  parties'  steady 
efforts, and these are ongoing. From the viewpoint of enhancing financial markets' efficiency 
and  strengthening  resiliency  against  a  crisis,  the  Bank  will  continue  to  actively  support 
concerned parties' efforts to improve market and settlement infrastructures. 
Closing remarks 
At present, the world economy and Japan's economy are facing quite a severe situation. In 
my closing remarks, based on my experience with financial crises, I would like to share with 
you my convictions on three aspects of the role of a central bank. 
First, I am convinced that the conduct of monetary policy is becoming ever more important. 
The recent experiences in various countries seem to suggest that it has become increasingly 
important  to  view  monetary  policy  as  a  tool  to  achieve  stable  financial  and  economic 
environments that can be sustained over time, rather than a tool for fine-tuning to achieve 
macroeconomic stability. 
BIS Review 132/2008 
 9
Second, I am convinced of the importance of the aspect of a central bank as "the bank for 
banks,"  that  is,  its  banking  function.  To  cope  with  the  current  financial  crisis,  the  central 
banks around the globe, including the Bank, have been implementing various operations to 
provide  financial  markets  with  ample  liquidity,  and  have  been  striving  to  maintain  financial 
stability. Provision of U.S. dollar funds is one typical example. Policy with respect to central 
bank  collateral  is  also  important.  When  market  functioning  has  declined,  particularly 
important are the types of assets a central bank accepts as collateral, and their prices. While 
the media tend to focus on monetary policy in the sense of interest rate policy, the current 
experience has strengthened my conviction that the function of a central bank as a bank is 
just as important. 
Third, I am convinced of the importance of on-site examinations and off-site monitoring. As 
shown by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York's lending to Bear Stearns, and years ago 
by the Bank of Japan's provision of emergency liquidity assistance to Yamaichi Securities, 
whether a central bank extends lending to financial institutions as a lender of last resort for 
banks is critically important for financial system stability. Given that a central bank has such a 
role,  collecting 
is 
indispensable  in  accurately  gauging  the  liquidity  and  soundness  of  individual  financial 
institutions.  It  is  also  important  for  a  central  bank  to  utilize  such  information  in  devising 
liquidity  provision  and  in  making  a  macro  risk  assessment.  At  present,  there  is  ongoing 
deliberation  in  international  forums  such  as  the  Financial  Stability  Forum  concerning  the 
system design of a global financial market and a financial system including the procyclicality 
of regulations – the effect whereby frameworks of regulations and supervisions for financial 
institutions  amplify  economic  fluctuation  through  financial  institutions'  behaviors.  More  and 
more people are arguing that the presence of financial activity in the economy became too 
large. If such criticism becomes too strong, leading to a rejection of the proper roles played 
by  financial  activity,  it  would  do  great  damage  to  the  economy  in  the  form  of  a  decline  in 
growth over time. Therefore, as a central bank, we will actively contribute to the discussion of 
specific system designs. 
Thank you very much for your attention. 
through  on-site  examinations  and  off-site  monitoring 
information 
10 
 BIS Review 132/2008
