Glenn Stevens: The economic situation 
Address by Mr Glenn Stevens, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, to CEDA Annual 
Dinner, Melbourne, 19 November 2008. 
 Thank  you  for  the  invitation  to  renew  my  association  with  CEDA,  which  goes  back  many 
years. CEDA has, for half a century, sought to promote informed discussion and balanced 
development of the Australian economy. That long-run perspective is never more important 
than  at  times  like  the  present,  when  a  cyclical  event  is  under  way  and  confidence  tends, 
understandably, to wane. 
The  global  economy  is  at  an  important  juncture.  After  a  number  of  years  of  very  strong 
growth,  the  latter  part  of  2008  and  2009  look  almost  certain  to  be  characterised  by  the 
weakest  international  economic  conditions  for  many  years.  Of  course,  global  growth  had 
already  been  slowing,  after  several  years  of  very  heady  expansion  that  had  stretched  the 
limits  of  resource  availability  and  pushed  up  commodity  prices  sharply.  Inevitably,  the 
slowing  was  initially  uneven  and  some  countries  –  notably  the  United  States  –  had  been 
battling economic weakness longer than others. 
But global growth prospects have been marked down significantly further in the space of just 
a  couple  of  months,  with  the  weaker  picture  led  by  the  United  States  but  by  no  means 
confined to it. The proximate trigger for the sudden deterioration in people’s assessment of 
the  outlook  was  a  sequence  of  financial  events.  It  was  not  that  these  events  initiated  the 
slowdown,  but  they  have  led  people  to  think  that  it  will  turn  out  to  be  a  bigger  event  than 
hitherto expected. 
What  had  been  for  over  a  year  a  serious  dislocation in  international  financial  markets,  but 
one  which  seemed  to  be  being  managed,  turned  quite  suddenly  into  a  very  serious  crisis 
during  the  weeks  following  the  failure  of  Lehman  Brothers  on  15  September.  In  a 
breathtaking turn of events, the financial landscape changed dramatically, with the failure or 
rescue  and  effective  nationalisation  of  a  number  of  systemically  important  financial 
institutions in the United States, the United Kingdom and continental Europe. Share markets 
slumped,  currencies  moved  abruptly,  commodity  prices  continued  their  sharp  decline  and 
investors’ appetite for risk contracted further. 
Not  only  that,  but  the  constraints  on  credit  that  periodically  had  been  flaring  up  over  the 
preceding year became more widespread, and are likely, if they persist, to have significant 
effects on economic activity in many countries and on trade between them. Until September, 
while the cost of borrowing for banks and low-rated corporates had increased, it had been 
the  case  that  the  most  highly  rated  corporations  had  not  experienced  a  significant  rise  in 
borrowing costs. That has now changed, with spreads for even AAA-rated corporates rising 
sharply. Likewise, spreads for emerging market sovereigns have increased significantly, for 
the first time in this episode. 
It is not surprising, then, that formal forecasts made by bodies such as the IMF have been in 
a  state  of  almost  continual  revision.  Their  latest  incarnation,  as  released  for  the  annual 
meeting  of G-20  finance  ministers and  central bank  governors  recently  in  Brazil, is  for  the 
weakest  performance  in  the  G7  group  of  countries  for  many  years.  In  addition,  emerging 
market  countries,  including  China,  are  also  being  affected  more  now,  and  talk  of  “de-
coupling” has gone away. Actually, this was a very unhelpful term anyway, carrying as it did 
the  implication  than  economies  are  either  mechanically  “coupled”  or  not.  Reality  is  more 
complex –  everything is connected, but the effects across national borders depend on the 
nature and severity of the originating shock and what else is going on in the other countries 
around the globe at the time. Given a big enough shock, everyone ultimately is affected. 
What then is needed to address the situation? 
BIS Review 143/2008 
 1
In  facing  the  financial  problems  themselves,  the  most  important  steps  have  already  been 
taken  by  countries  at  the  epicentre  of  the  crisis.  Those  steps  address  issues  of  liquidity, 
capital and confidence. 
In  the  area of  liquidity, central  banks  have  taken  unprecedented  steps  over  the  past  year, 
and especially the past few months, to add funds to their respective financial systems. This 
has culminated, through co-operative swap lines between many of the central banks, in the 
provision  of  virtually  unlimited  amounts  of  US  dollar  cash,  against  a  wide  variety  of  local-
currency collateral, across multiple time zones. This liquidity is on tap at a fixed (low) price: 
no quantitative limit has been set by the US Federal Reserve. As a result of this, and the 
expansion of other facilities, the Fed’s balance sheet assets have more than doubled in the 
space of a few months. 
In the area of capital, the lessons from earlier crises have been heeded, chief among which 
is that when a country faces a system-wide question of solvency, the only source of sufficient 
new capital may be the public purse. Hence, governments in the United Kingdom, the United 
States, Germany, France, Spain, Portugal, Sweden, Switzerland, the Netherlands, Belgium, 
Luxembourg and Iceland are offering to take, or have taken, equity stakes in key financial 
institutions, up to and including full nationalisation in some cases. 
As far as confidence is concerned, measures have been taken by a number of governments 
to  secure  retail  deposits  by  a  guarantee,  and  to  offer  a  guarantee  of  eligible  wholesale 
obligations of banks willing to pay for it. This ought to alleviate concerns about riskiness of 
the institutions concerned, allowing them access to term funding. 
These measures are bearing some fruit. Markets are beginning to thaw. Spreads between 
expected  central  bank  policy  rates  and  term  funding  costs  have  come  in  from  the 
extraordinary levels seen in September and October, though they remain high by historical 
standards. The actions taken to inject equity are stabilising a situation on solvency that could 
otherwise  have  unravelled  quickly.  There  have  been  substantial  issues  of  wholesale 
securities using the priced guarantee, mainly by UK banks, suggesting that term markets are 
opening again. What is needed now is for policy-makers everywhere to specify as quickly as 
possible  the  parameters  of  their  various  guarantees  so  that  market  participants  have  a 
degree of certainty about how things will work – while retaining, within reason, the capacity to 
adjust the parameters in the light of experience. 
So  a  good  deal  has  been  done  already  towards  addressing  the  financial  problems 
themselves. These measures cannot avert a significant slowing in the global economy – it is 
fairly clear that a recession in the major country group, the G7, is under way. That, in turn, 
means  that  credit  losses  will  be  incurred  by  the  lenders  in  those  countries  as  typically 
happens in a business cycle downturn. But the measures averted, in my judgment, potential 
systemic collapses that would have had massive repercussions throughout the world. 
That  leaves  an  international  business  cycle  event  to  be  addressed.  So  what  are  the 
ingredients for doing that? 
The slower growth in demand occurring now, and likely to be seen over the coming year, has 
had the effect of lowering the most flexible set of prices, namely those for raw materials and 
energy.  The  price  of  crude  oil  has  fallen,  measured  in  US  dollars,  from  nearly  US$150  a 
barrel at mid year to under US$60 today. Prices for metals and soft commodities have also 
declined  considerably.  It  now  looks  as  though  prices  for  iron  ore  and  coal,  critical  cost 
components for steel and electricity, are declining too. 
Other  prices  around  the  global  economy  are  typically  slower  to  respond  to  the  shifting 
balance between demand and potential supply, but with global output expected by the IMF to 
be growing during 2009 at its slowest pace for two decades or more, spare capacity is likely 
to be increasing, so we could expect these slower-moving prices to moderate over the next 
couple of years. 
2 
 BIS Review 143/2008
This outlook has increased the scope for many central banks to reduce interest rates. Until 
quite recently, concerns about inflation saw a majority of central banks tightening monetary 
policy.  Through  to  the  September  quarter  of  this  year,  those  central  banks  raising  interest 
rates had consistently outnumbered those reducing them, by a significant margin. There is 
now, however, a preponderance of reductions, in expectation of falling inflation. Some of the 
reductions have been quite large. 
So  monetary  policy  is  easing.  In  circumstances  where  the  financial  markets  are  seriously 
impaired, of course, the central bank reducing the overnight interest rate may not make much 
difference to the price of credit to ultimate borrowers. This is not a major problem in Australia, 
but in the United States rates paid by many borrowers have not fallen much, if at all, over the 
past year. It is also possible in some countries that, even at lower interest rates, neither the 
demand  for  credit  nor  the  willingness  of  banks  to  supply  it  will  be  increased  as  much  as 
would normally be the case. This does not mean that monetary policy in those countries has 
become completely ineffective – in many cases, it may simply lead policy-makers to lower 
overnight rates by more than usual. Nonetheless, it is handy in such circumstances to have 
an additional channel – namely, fiscal policy – that can affect aggregate demand if needed. 
Moreover, as the private sector in many countries is seeking to conserve wealth in the face 
of weakening incomes and lower asset values, it will presumably attempt to save more of its 
current  income;  this  might  be  particularly  so  for  households.  The  problem  is  that,  for  the 
economy as a whole, if everyone attempts this change simultaneously, the “paradox of thrift” 
says that the economy will contract. So if that were indeed the situation that some countries 
faced, the stabilising policy would be for the government sector to decrease its saving, so as 
to accommodate the rise in saving by the household sector. 
So,  in  addition  to  monetary  policy  easing,  fiscal  policy  adjustments  are  being  made  or 
contemplated  in  a  number  of  countries.  The  question  is  how  much  scope  the  relevant 
governments have for such actions, before encountering the potential limits to credibility of 
their own balance sheets. Those who already had largish deficits – which will get bigger as 
economic  activity  weakens  –  and/or  who  had  high  levels  of  public  debt,  presumably  have 
less scope for fiscal action. Calls for fiscal expansion around the world are accordingly being 
accompanied  by  calls  for  credible  statements  of  how  the  long-run  soundness  of  public 
finances will be maintained. 
There is an important point to make here, which generalises to monetary policy as well. It is 
that 
this  episode  having  practised  disciplined 
macroeconomic  policies  over  many  years,  and  I  would  include  Australia  in  this  group,  will 
tend to be the ones which find themselves with the most scope to move in an expansionary 
direction,  should  they  need  to  do  so.  And  that,  of  course,  is  the  whole  point  of  the  earlier 
discipline. 
That said, it is still important for fiscal measures to pass the “good policy” test. Poor public 
policy  proposals  should  not  be  accepted  simply  because  they  are  presented  as  boosting 
short-term aggregate demand. 
One of the countries of most importance to Australia is China. It has been said that the full 
emergence of China is a structural phenomenon that has many years to run and which is 
profoundly changing the world economy. I still believe that to be true. Nonetheless, as I have 
remarked before, the Chinese economy has a business cycle, like all economies, and it is 
apparent that this cycle is in the down-phase at present. While it is very difficult to get a full 
economic picture of China, it appears that the slowing may be much more pronounced than 
most  people,  including  the  Chinese  authorities,  expected.  That  change  in  trend  has  had 
major effects on prices for commodities, including ones important for Australia. 
But the Chinese authorities have now responded quite forcefully to the emerging weakening 
in  their  economy.  Details  of  the  recent  fiscal  package  are  still  difficult  to  assess,  but  new 
demand may be as much as 2 per cent of GDP or more in each of the next two years; and 
those  countries  which  went 
into 
BIS Review 143/2008 
 3
monetary settings have been eased noticeably over the past two months. So I suspect that, 
while China is weakening at present, it will be strengthening a year from now. 
These various policy responses are acting to limit the downside risks attached to the outlook 
over the next couple of years. It will be six to nine months before their effects begin to be 
seen in the statistics. Whether enough has been done adequately to restore conditions for 
sustainable growth, it is too soon to know yet. But if not, it is a safe bet that more will be done 
before long, if the recent comments by the authorities in various countries are any guide. 
What then of the outlook for Australia? 
Thus far most indicators have suggested that the economy has been slowing, after a period 
of  excessively  strong  growth  in  demand  that  had  pushed  up  inflation.  Absent  the  sudden 
recent deterioration in the global outlook, I think we would in due course have looked back 
and seen that the slowing had been similar to that observed in 2001, albeit with differences 
by  sector.  But  with  recent  international  economic  and  financial  events,  the  economy  will 
probably now experience a more significant slowing than was otherwise going to occur. That 
is  barely  detectable  yet  in  some  of  the  key  official  datasets.  Employment,  for  example, 
remained quite solid, and unemployment very low, through into October, consistent with the 
gradually  moderating  growth  of  mid  year,  but  not  yet  showing  the  effects  of  the  more 
cautious  mood  in  the  business  community  that  is  now  taking  effect.  Nonetheless,  in  the 
period just ahead, we are likely to see, for a time, growth at quite a slow pace. That is the 
outlook embodied in the Reserve Bank’s Statement on Monetary Policy released last week. 
This  means  that,  over  time,  the  extent  of  capacity  utilisation  will  decline  and  pressure  on 
prices will abate, though that could take some time to be apparent. The lower exchange rate 
will tend to push up prices for traded goods, though the weak global environment may mean 
this effect could be muted somewhat. Lower raw material prices will also be of considerable 
assistance in slowing manufactured prices – again subject to the exchange rate. Of course, 
many of the items pushing up inflation in Australia of late have been in the services sector, 
but the likely  moderating trend in labour cost  growth over the next couple of years should 
help here. Overall, our view is that after a fairly extended period of above-target inflation, we 
will  see  the  CPI  inflation  rate  moving  back  to  its  target  over  the  next  two  to  three  years. 
Should demand in the economy weaken further than we expect, that would be likely to be 
accompanied by a downward revision to the inflation outlook. 
Given this outlook, the Reserve Bank has been lowering the cash rate. We have chosen to 
do so quite quickly, well before a decline in inflation is evident in the data, in recognition that 
the international circumstances had changed quite sharply, which have increased the risk of 
a more abrupt slowing in demand. That is, we have been pursuing the inflation target in a 
forward-looking  way,  and  paying  due  account  to  economic  activity  considerations.  In  the 
period ahead, we shall be seeking to strike the right balance between, on the one hand, the 
need to have inflation come back down, albeit slowly, and on the other hand, the desire to 
avoid as far as possible an unnecessary weakening in demand. 
Looking beyond the near term, what needs to be done to make future growth less likely to be 
disrupted by the sorts of financial problems we have seen emerge over the past 15 months?  
Every  episode  of  crisis  provides  some  new  lessons  and  these  can  be  incorporated  into 
regulatory and supervisory practice as appropriate. Various proposed reforms in the area of 
financial  regulation  are  on  the  table,  many  of  them  developed  under  the  auspices  of  the 
Financial Stability Forum.1 These include likely adjustments to the Basel II arrangements for 
                                                 
1   Established  in  1999,  the  Financial  Stability  Forum  brings  together  senior  representatives  from  international 
financial institutions, international groupings of regulators and supervisors, committees of central bank experts 
and  national  authorities  responsible  for  financial  stability  to  promote  international  financial  stability  through 
enhanced information exchange and co-operation in financial supervision and surveillance. 
4 
 BIS Review 143/2008
the  capital  requirements  of  banks,  including  efforts  to  make  them  more  anti-cyclical;  more 
focus  on  liquidity  risk  management;  attention  to  the  conduct  of  credit  rating  agencies;  the 
increased use of central counterparties to control the risks in some derivatives markets; and 
the establishment of cross-border supervisory “colleges” for the largest internationally active 
banks.  Much  work  remains  to  be  done,  and  if  past  experience  on  finding  international 
agreement  on  regulation  is  any  guide,  it  will  be  hard,  slow,  grinding  work.  But  the  call  of 
global leaders last weekend in Washington for this work to be expedited gives it an important 
additional impetus and a greatly strengthened focus. 
But we need to approach the task of reform with realism. The cycle of greed and fear cannot 
be  regulated  away.  To  assume  that  unrealistic  optimism  will  not  again,  at  some  point, 
overwhelm the more sober instincts of investors, bankers, commentators and others would 
be a triumph of hope over experience. Regulation can be improved, but there will always be 
an unregulated part of the system, the more so the tighter regulations are; there will always 
be those who put at risk some of their capital in that sector; there will always be a business 
cycle, and there will always be some who take excessive risk near the peak of the cycle and 
get caught out. The genius of the market economic system is that so much of the risk that is 
prudently taken, much of the time, turns out to reward the risk-taker, and indeed all of us, 
with  the  profitable  deployment  of  capital,  jobs,  more  choice,  higher  productivity  and  better 
living standards. It will be important not to forget that in the next year or two. 
Nor is it realistic to assume that regulators and central bankers will always have the wisdom 
and prescience, or even the scope, to deploy their few instruments such as to ensure that an 
ideal  combination  of  financial  stability  and  high  growth  can  be  achieved  consistently.  The 
world  will  never  be  that  perfect.  Nevertheless,  in  addition  to  the  many  useful  steps  being 
planned by regulators, perhaps we could pay more attention to the low-frequency swings in 
asset prices and leverage (even if that means less attempt to fine-tune short-period swings in 
the  real  economy);  we  could  have  a  more  conservative  attitude  to  debt  build-up;  and  we 
could exhibit a little more scepticism about the trade-off between risks and rewards in rapid 
financial  innovation.  This  would  constitute  a  useful  mindset  for  us  all  to  take  from  this 
episode. 
To  conclude,  we  face  difficult  circumstances.  Policy-makers  and  regulators  both  here  and 
abroad  will  need  to  stand  ready  to  act  promptly  to  provide  any  necessary  support  for  the 
financial system and sustainable economic activity. In doing so, though, we need not, and 
should not, abandon the well-established and tested policy frameworks that are in place. In 
fact, it is these that have given Australia, in particular, ample scope to do what is needed in 
the current situation. 
Given that we have that scope, and given the underlying strengths of the economy, about the 
biggest  mistake  we  could  make  would  be  to  talk  ourselves  into  unnecessary  economic 
weakness.  Yes,  the  situation  is  serious.  But,  as  I  suspect  CEDA  members  know  well,  the 
long-run prospects for the Australian economy have not deteriorated to the extent that might 
be suggested by the extent of some of the gloomy talk that is around. If businesses remain 
focused on the long-term opportunities; if markets and commentators do the same; if banks 
remain willing to lend on reasonable terms for good proposals; if governments are able to so 
order their affairs as to continue supporting worthwhile – and I emphasise worthwhile – public 
investment (even if that involves some prudent borrowing); then Australia will come through 
the present period. We ought to go forward with some quiet confidence in our own abilities 
and in the opportunities that are on offer. I wish you all well in that endeavour. 
BIS Review 143/2008 
 5
