Jürgen Stark: Issues paper for the conference "The financial crisis and 
its consequences for the world economy" 
Speech by Mr Jürgen Stark, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
at  the  conference  organised  by  Aktionsgemeinschaft  Soziale  Marktwirtschaft  e.V.  and 
Eberhard-Karls-Universität Tübingen, Tübingen, 10 December 2008. 
 Background 
I.  
For more than one year we have experienced a correction process of unsustainable trends in 
the  financial  sector.  This  correction  process  has  deepened  –  in  particular  since  Lehman 
Brothers filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection on 15 September 2008 – as regards its 
magnitude  and  complexity  and  has  evolved  into  a  fully  fledged  financial  crisis.  The  recent 
intensification has increased the fear of a global slowdown and has also further negatively 
affected the outlook for economic growth in the euro area. 
The crisis started in the US with rising delinquencies in the subprime mortgage market which 
triggered  turbulences  in  the  subprime  mortgage-backed  securities  market.  These  tensions 
then spread to other asset-backed markets, money markets, and financial institutions, with 
further  effects  gradually  being  felt  in  other  market  segments,  across  borders,  and  in  other 
economies.  
This  crisis  has  already  led  to  substantial  structural  changes  in  the  financial  sector  in 
particular in the US. Some prominent financial firms have disappeared and the investment 
banking model in the US, once introduced by the Glass-Seagall Act in 1933 as a response to 
the  Great  Depression  and  tensions  in  the  US  banking  sector,  no  longer  exists.  In  other 
countries the financial sector is very likely to shrink, at least temporarily. 
Although  the  financial  correction  process  is  painful,  it  is  unavoidable  as  it  constitutes  the 
correction of exuberances of the past induced by a search for yield and an underestimation 
of risks in an overly benign macroeconomic environment with low interest and inflation rates.  
Reasons for the emergence of the financial crisis 
II.  
A distinction has to be made between macroeconomic and microeconomic factors.  
For  too  many  years  financial  market  participants  were  used  to  a  macroeconomic 
environment  with  high  global  output  growth,  low  inflation  and  very  low  interest  rates. 
Macroeconomic policies led to global and domestic imbalances which became increasingly 
unsustainable with debt financed over-consumption in one region and high savings in other 
regions. An overall benign macroeconomic environment led to (i) a general carelessness or a 
tendency to under-price risks and (ii) to a search for yield which in turn accelerated financial 
innovation.  
The main manifestation of financial innovation had been the extraordinary expansion of credit 
risk  transfer  instruments  which  permitted  the  transfer,  hedging  and  active  trading  of  credit 
risk as a separate asset class. The financial instruments became increasingly complex and 
the  speed  of  innovation  amplified.  Examples  included  credit  default  swaps  (CDSs)  and,  in 
particular, structured credit products, such as collateralised debt obligations (CDOs), backed 
both by cash instruments, such as primitive securities, loans or asset-backed securities, and 
by derivative claims, such as CDSs and CDOs themselves.  
The  expansion  of  these  products  had  both  contributed  to,  and  been  supported  by  a 
financial 
strengthening  of 
(O&D)  business  model  of 
the  originate-and-distribute 
BIS Review 158/2008 
 1
intermediation. Rather than holding the credits they originated, credit institutions increasingly 
sold them off – possibly after repackaging them – to the capital market. 
The advocators of the new financial instruments praised them as facilitators of an efficient 
distribution  of  risk.  However,  these  instruments  do  not  eliminate  credit  risk.  Therefore,  the 
high speed of innovation and the instruments’ increasing complexity as well as the exploding 
trade  also  pointed  to  potential  weaknesses  that  required  significant  vigilance  by  all  parties 
involved,  i.e.  originators,  investors,  rating  agencies  and  supervisors.  Thus,  “creative 
destruction” turned into “destructive creation”. 
However,  the  crisis  proves  that  the  institutional  framework  has  not kept  pace  with the  fast 
speed of innovation. In particular, the lack of adequate checks and balances at all levels of 
control has led to increased vulnerabilities and risks.  
• 
risk  and 
liquidity  management 
institutions:  weak 
Financial 
frameworks; 
specifically, management and supervisory boards of the financial institutions did not 
live  up  to  their  ultimate  responsibilities  as  regards  risk  management;  risk 
management models did not keep pace with the increasing complexity of financial 
instruments and  did  not  properly  take  into  account  the  potential  illiquidity  of  some 
market segments.  
Rating  agencies  and  external  auditors:  their  models  and  assessments  failed  to 
adequately evaluate the financial risks attached to financial innovations.  
Supervisory authorities: no serious attempts were made to stem against the trend 
of  searching  for  yield  that  accelerated  financial  innovation  in  good  times;  no 
adequate  monitoring  systems  were  in  place  in  particular  as  regards  ultimate 
exposure to mortgage backed securities and other new complex structured financial 
products and as regards off-balance sheet entities.  
  III.  
Effects of the financial crisis on the real economy 
External environment 
At the global level, the outlook for advanced economies has worsened significantly while the 
financial  crisis  has  started  to  spread  to  emerging  markets.  In  2009,  all  major  advanced 
economies  will  experience  weak  or  zero  growth  at  the  same  time.  The  outlook  for  the  US 
economy remains very gloomy. Forecasts by international organisations see 2009 average 
growth  near  or  below  zero.  The  growth  outlook  for  emerging  market  economies  has 
weakened dramatically. The IMF and the EU Commission see global growth at 2.2 and 2.3% 
in 2009, respectively, after 3.7% this year.  
The  depth  and  duration  of  the  global  economic  downturn  will  crucially  depend  on  the 
development of the financial crisis. At the current juncture, market volatility and uncertainty 
remain extremely high.  
Global inflationary pressures are easing due to the global economic downturn and the falling 
commodity prices. All in all, the global inflation outlook has improved. 
Euro area 
The significant intensification of the financial crisis since mid September has greatly affected 
the  outlook  for  short-term  economic  growth  in  the  euro  area.  However,  the  economy  was 
already  hit  by  significant  commodity  price  increases  and  the  ongoing  correction  in  the 
housing market in some euro area countries. 
2 
 BIS Review 158/2008
After two negative quarters of economic growth, GDP growth in the 4th quarter 2008 and in 
the  coming  quarters  will  be  very  weak.  This  reflects  a  subdued  outlook  for  external  and 
domestic demand and tighter financing conditions. 
The assumptions for the December 2008 Broad Macroeconomic Projection Exercise had to 
be  significantly  revised  compared  to  the  September  2008  ECB  Staff  Macroeconomic 
Projection  Exercise.  However,  it  should  be  born  in  mind  that  uncertainty  surrounding  the 
projections is particularly high at this juncture.  
According to the projection results for the euro area, GDP growth is projected to experience 
a  protracted  period  of  subdued  growth  (2008:  0.8%-1.2%;  2009:  -1.0%-0.0%;  2010:  0.5%-
1.5%), with dampened domestic and external demand. The European Commission forecasts 
growth near zero in 2009 and quarterly growth rates to remain very low until Q2 2010. More 
recently,  the  IMF  and  the  OECD  see  the  euro  area  in  recession  in  2009  (around  -1/2%). 
Uncertainty is extremely high and risks are further to the downside. 
Inflationary pressures and risks in the euro area have diminished amidst weakening demand, 
declining  commodity  prices  and  receding  pipeline  pressures.  Since  July  this  year  –  when 
HICP inflation was at 4% – inflation most recently has substantially declined, reading 2.1% in 
November.  In  this  process  of  disinflation  we  might  even  see  negative  inflation  rates  for  a 
couple of months in some regions of the euro area. Over the policy-relevant horizon, inflation 
rates  are  expected  to  be  in  line  with  price  stability,  supporting  the  purchasing  power  of 
incomes and savings. The Eurosystem staff projections foresee annual HICP inflation rates 
of between 3.2% and 3.4% for 2008 and declining rates of between 1.1% and 1.7% for 2009. 
Monthly inflation is expected to reach a trough in summer before rebounding again at the end 
of 2009. For 2010, HICP is projected to lie between 1.5% and 2.1%.  
In  this  context,  some  financial  analysts  discuss  the  risk  of  deflation.  However,  this  term 
should  be  used  with  caution  and  not  be  mixed  up  with  disinflation.  It  is  important  to 
distinguish between: 
• 
On the one hand “strong disinflation” or “temporary and mild deflation”, which is of a 
transitory  nature  and  which  stems  primarily  from  substantial  declines  in  energy 
prices. 
On  the  other  hand,  genuine  “deflationary  dynamics”,  which  are  characterised  by 
their persistent and self-sustaining character, their broad based effects across most 
price components, and their entrenchment in expectations.  
 However, it should be stressed that risks appear very limited given the continued anchoring 
of longer-term inflation expectations at levels consistent with price stability, wage and price 
stickiness and the still sustained pace of monetary dynamics. 
By contrast, upside tail-risks to inflation receive less attention – but may be more relevant 
and a stronger source of concern in the medium to longer term.  
Various  estimates  of  underlying  broad  money  point  to  a  sustained  but  moderating  rate  of 
monetary  expansion  in  the  euro  area.  Monetary  trends  therefore  support  the  view  that 
inflationary pressures are diminishing further, with some risks remaining on the upside in the 
medium  to  longer  term.  The  latest  monetary  data  up  to  end  October  2008  point  to  a 
continued moderation of the growth rate of loans to the non-financial sector. So far, the hard 
data does not support the view of a drying up in the availability of loans.  
Crisis management and resolution 
IV.  
Whatever politicians have decided already or are going to decide: they have to consider the 
medium to longer term effects of their actions. The measures taken today should not prepare 
the ground for future imbalances. This is true for both, monetary and fiscal policy. 
BIS Review 158/2008 
 3
What the ECB has done since the beginning of the financial turmoil 
The mandate of the ECB is to maintain price stability over the medium term. This mandate 
must be adhered to both in normal times and in times of crisis. The monetary policy stance 
appropriate to fulfil the ECB’s mandate depends exclusively on its assessment of the balance 
of risks to price stability, and nothing else.  
The ECB has shown remarkable flexibility in terms of liquidity provision. This flexibility was 
necessary in order to avoid the breakdown of the interbank market, which is a very important 
transmission  channel  for  monetary  policy.  Given  the  extraordinary  situation,  we  took 
extraordinary decisions. However, measures are all of a temporary nature only, i.e. market 
participants  should  not  get  accustomed  to  the  enhanced  role  of  central  banks  in 
intermediation.  
Since  8  October  we  have  cut  the  policy  rate  three  times  with  an  overall  reduction  by  175 
basis points. These moves in a very short period of time are unprecedented. As monetary 
policy  decisions  are  forward  looking  and  medium  term  oriented,  the  recent  rate  cut  by  75 
basis  points  takes  into  account  that  the  inflation  rate  will  decline  further  in  the  quarters  to 
come and that the risks to inflation are on the downside over the medium term. By adopting 
this  forward  looking  attitude  any  “double  counting”  of  news,  which  may  first  influence  our 
decisions via their anticipation and then again when they materialise, is avoided. 
After this substantial rate cut the remaining room for manoeuvre is very limited, potentially 
allowing for small steps only. Having only one instrument at hand the limits of what can be 
achieved and what cannot be achieved with a single instrument should be recognised. The 
key ECB interest rate is currently 2.5%. The President of the ECB has made it very clear that 
the decrease of 175 basis points within two months is exactly what is appropriate taking into 
account all available information. New relevant information for the euro area which allows for 
a  serious  re-assessment  of  the  outlook  for  price  stability  will  very  likely  not  be  available 
before February or March 2009. 
Fiscal policies’ reaction 
The write downs1 and losses by the banking sector have reduced the capital base of banks 
and implicitly their capacity to lend. In a welcome coordinated effort, euro area governments 
have  provided  support  for  the  banking  system,  most  notably  by  offering  funds  for 
recapitalisation  and  guarantees  for  interbank  loans.  To  date,  the  envelope  of  funds  for 
possible recapitalisations and guarantees amounts to some €2,000 billion, or roughly 20% of 
euro area GDP.  
These  measures  are  crucial  to  protecting  economies  from  harm,  and  they  are  key  to 
stimulating economic activity. At the same time, they may imply a considerable fiscal burden. 
Public debt and deficit ratios may increase substantially, and fiscal sustainability may come 
under pressure. On top of this, there are calls for substantial fiscal stimulus programmes in 
the  euro  area  countries,  and  a  number  of  countries  have  already  announced  or  approved 
significant  fiscal  support.  For  instance,  the  German  parliament  approved  a  fiscal  stimulus 
package  (1.3%  of  GDP)  for  2009  and  2010  and  the  French  government  announced  a 
stimulus package in total of 1.5% of GDP (2009-2011). 
But,  many  euro-area  governments  failed  to  use  the  past  boom  times  to  consolidate  their 
public finances. As a consequence, they are entering the current downturn with high deficit 
                                                 
1  
In the euro area the total writedowns and capital raised of large and complex banking groups and other banks 
since the second quarter of 2007 amount to $129.2 bn and $138.7 bn respectively (US: writedowns: $421.4 
bn, capital raised: $354.7 bn; UK and Switzerland: writedowns: $136.4 bn, capital raised: $164.1 bn). Source: 
Bloomberg. 
4 
 BIS Review 158/2008
and  debt  ratios.  Given  the  weak  growth  ahead  and  the  costs  of  the  bank  bailouts,  these 
ratios are set to increase. It is very likely that, in a year’s time, the deficits in many euro-area 
countries will be between 5% and 7% up from 3% now, while public debt may rise by 10 to 
20 percentage points.  
Against this backdrop, the current calls for a particularly loose application of the European 
Union’s framework of fiscal rules questions the credibility of politicians’ commitment to sound 
public  finances.  In  this  environment,  there  is  a  clear  risk  that  any  additional  stimulus 
programme may erode, rather than restore, public confidence. As a result, households may 
prefer to raise their savings, and thus counteract any fiscal stimulus because they know that 
they  will  soon  have  to  pay  for  today’s  fiscal  deficits.  From  the  experience  gained  in  the 
1970s,  it  is known  that  promises  to  reverse  stimulus  measures  once  the  crisis  is over  are 
frequently not kept. In many European countries, this has resulted in ever-increasing public 
expenditure and debt ratios, which are placing a burden on these economies even today. 
The  introduction  of  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  in  1998  marks  a  break  with  the 
undisciplined policies of the past. It also provides the necessary flexibility to allow budgets to 
be adjusted in line with economic fluctuations. But the pact does not provide for governments 
to attempt to fine-tune the economy by means of fiscal policies. The experience of the first 10 
years of the pact shows that some governments found it challenging to comply with the rules 
they had set for themselves. But the pact did help correcting very high deficits and reversing 
the increase in debt ratios. 
It  is  essential  that  the  public’s  confidence  in  the  soundness  of  fiscal  policies  is  preserved. 
This requires that fiscal sustainability is guaranteed. The Stability and Growth Pact must be 
fully applied and its integrity preserved. 
The automatic fiscal stabilizers in the euro area amount to about 1% of GDP. They provide a 
powerful  source  of  fiscal  support  for  a  weakening  economy.  And  this  type  of  stimulus  is 
automatically reversed when economic conditions improve. 
Only  a  few  countries  have  the  scope  to  take  additional  action.  Where  such  room  for 
manoeuvre exists, additional budgetary measures have to be targeted, timely and temporary 
(“three T’s”) in order to be effective. In the current circumstances, we cannot, and should not, 
risk adding a fiscal crisis to the financial turmoil and economic downturn. 
Lessons to be learned from the current financial turmoil 
V.  
There is no need for a new global financial system (Bretton-Woods II) or for creating new 
international institutions from scratch. Rather, there is a need for strengthening the existing 
institutional  framework  by  enhancing  those  general  principles  that  ensure  a  smooth 
functioning of market economies: stability-oriented macroeconomic policies; high competition 
on all markets; the protection of property rights; freedom of contract; and unlimited liability. 
As  regards  macroeconomic  policies,  they  have  to  be  medium  term  oriented  and  geared 
towards  price  stability  and  sound  public  finances.  The  commitment  to  price  stability  and 
sound public finances is the best contribution monetary and fiscal policies in the euro area 
can  make  to  financial  stability.  There  is  no  trade-off  between  price  stability  and  financial 
stability and there is also no trade-off between sound public finances and financial stability.  
As regards the institutional framework for the financial sector, we have to accept that even 
the tightest regulation cannot prevent a financial crisis. However, it is clear that the benefits 
of tighter regulation are larger than thought some quarters ago. Hence, there is a need for a 
realistic assessment of the costs and benefits of tighter regulation. New regulation should set 
general  principles  rather  than  drawing  up  long  lists  of  discretionary  measures,  which  are 
necessarily incomplete and invite renewed regulatory arbitrage. 
New regulations should  
BIS Review 158/2008 
 5
   not cover all possible states of nature but rather provide automatic stabilisers for the 
financial system in general term;  
strengthen incentives that improve the disciplining forces of competition;  
discourage “short-termism” and promote a medium to long-term attitude of financial 
agents towards success and stability;  
not prevent financial innovation as it is important for growth and employment; 
but strengthen at the same time the concept of liability and responsibility. It must be 
clear  for  those  who  engage  in  risky  activities  that  they  will  be  held  accountable  if 
these risks materialise.  
There  are  already  some  important  initiatives  that  provide  some  guidance  for  consistent 
regulatory standards on an international basis: 
• 
The  G20  has  approved  a  set  of  international  standards  and  codes  for  a  sound 
regulatory framework. However, implementation is lagging behind.  
The  Financial  Stability  Forum  has  already  developed  recommendations  for  the 
resilience of markets and institutions that have caused the financial turmoil.  
 There  are  in  particular  five  areas  of  concern  that  should  be  addressed  to  strengthen  the 
institutional framework for the financial sector:  
• 
Risk management of banks: Both bank management and supervisors will have to 
play a  more active role  in scrutinising risk management practices (internal checks 
and  balances,  clear  lines  of  responsibilities,  etc.),  especially  with  regard  to  off-
balance  sheet  entities  and  structured  products.  This  should  hold  true  not  only  in 
times  of  crisis  but  maybe  even  more  important  in  good  times  when  risks  are  less 
obvious.  
Management  of  liquidity  risk:  Bank  management  should  enhance  their  liquidity 
management  practices  to  address  the  liquidity  risks  in  their  day-to-day  business 
along  the  line  of  the  “Principles  for  Sound  Liquidity  Risk  Management  and 
Supervision” provided by the Basel Committee. 
Credit rating agencies: Rating methodologies failed to capture risks embodied in 
structured products and investors relied too heavily on those external ratings. Rating 
agencies should enhance their transparency and should comply with relevant codes 
of  conduct.  More  differentiated  rating  systems  for  structured  products  should  be 
adopted. Conflicts of interest are to be avoided which are in particular acute when a 
rating agency also offers consulting services.  
Valuation, disclosure and accounting: Weaknesses in accounting standards and 
gaps with regard to valuation of structured products contributed to the current crisis. 
Banks  will  have  to  develop  robust  pricing,  risk  management  and  stress  testing 
models  and  improve  disclosure  practices.  Supervisors  and  accounting  standard 
setters  should  advance  the  transparency  and  the  disclosure  standards  for  off-
balance sheet vehicles. They should further reassess the valuation of assets, with a 
special  focus  on  the  mark-to-market  approach  given  its  potentially  pro-cyclical 
effects.  
Strengthen capital adequacy: Supervisors did not adequately account for the risks 
associated  with  new  complex  financial  instruments.  Some  financial  engineering  in 
recent  years  focused  on  repackaging  weak  credits  into  high-rated  securities, 
receiving a favourable risk weighing for capital adequacy standards. The respective 
prudential  norms  and  rating  schemes  should  be  reassessed  also  with  a  view  to 
make the financial instruments less complex. 
    6 
 BIS Review 158/2008
The  O&D  business  model  of  financial  intermediation  should  not  disappear  but  it 
should  become  more  transparent.  It  should  also  be  considered  whether  the 
originator should always keep a certain percentage of an offloaded credit package 
on the own balance sheet.  
In order to increase the capital buffers that banks need to hold with regard to illiquid 
structured products and off-balance sheet activities, the capital adequacy provisions 
within the Basel II framework should be also enhanced in these areas.  
Conclusions 
VI.  
The  current  global  financial  distress  and  the  economic  downturn  pose  challenges  of  a 
significant  and  unprecedented  nature  to  the  ECB,  other  central  banks  and  policy  makers 
around the globe. 
During the financial turmoil the euro area, the monetary union and its institutional set up have 
proved their resilience and the capacity to act  decisively and promptly. National measures 
have been co-ordinated in a pragmatic manner with a view to enhancing their effectiveness 
through mutual reinforcement. 
All this is not self-evident. We should not forget how Europe would look today  without the 
euro.  The  euro  area  countries  would  be  significantly  worse  off.  Multiple  crises  would  arise 
simultaneously: currency crises would go hand in hand with banking crises and real economy 
disruptions at country level, potentially ending up in political tensions between countries. 
By  eliminating  the  exchange  rate  channel,  the  euro  has  mitigated  the  risk  of  contagion 
stemming from national economic or financial crises. In this sense, the euro has been a very 
important stabilising element in difficult times. 
BIS Review 158/2008 
 7
