Ardian Fullani: Interview with Voice of America 
Interview  of  Mr  Ardian  Fullani,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Albania,  to  Voice  of  America, 
14 October 2008. 
 What is the dynamics of this year’s meetings? Is Albania immune to this crisis? What 
measures have you as an institution and the government taken to cope with it? 
This regular meeting in Washington has been special. Besides permanent discussions with 
the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank, priority was given to discussing about 
the  grave  world  financial  situation,  the  way  to  weather  this  crisis,  along  with  possible 
solutions. At the same time, a special analysis was made for separate countries, of course 
Albania included, as a country that has a program with the Fund. So, participation in these 
discussions  has  been  important.  I  would  be  interested  in  seeing  Albania  not  only  in  our 
framework  but  also  in  the  regional  framework  and  even  broader,  because  this  situation 
should be considered in perspective, not only for what happened today, but also for what will 
happen  tomorrow.  The  week  has  been  full  of  activity.  Washington  has  been  involved  in  a 
special  and  unique  whirl  of  discussions  among  important  economic-financial  institutions, 
policy-makers and international banks for finding a solution, not only for the moment but also 
for resolving the situation over the medium- and long-term, as well as for discussing about 
the  future  global  economy’s  prospects.  Many  taboos  have  been  broken  and  discussed 
around; now the global economy is confronted with new challenges for the future. In view of 
this, it is important to emphasize the G7 meeting and yesterday’s meeting on the Euro area, 
organized by the President Sarkozy in France. The decisions of these meetings appeal for 
more  action  –  rapid,  well-organized  and  effective  –  as  well  as  for  more  cooperation  and 
coordination  rather  than  competition  and  arbitrage  in  law  and  regulations.  Simultaneously, 
these  decisions  appeal  for  supporting  public  packages  for  a  re-capitalisation  of  financial 
banking institutions, for putting the lending system into operation and for taking all relevant 
incentives in order to raise public credibility for these institutions, with the purpose to liven up 
the banking and financial system, as well as the economic life of different countries.  
In  specific  terms,  what  measures  have  you  as  an  institution  taken  to  raise  the 
credibility of this public already concerned about the financial situation?  
I have said it time ago that this grave situation is not any longer a situation aggravated by 
international financial institutions or by various packages they used, as it comes out today, 
but it has merely turned into a great confidence crisis. Presently cooperation, coordination 
and a greater attention is required as concerns not only to the current problems but also to 
the  prospects  of  the  situation.  We  have  been  cautious.  Over  last  two  years  I  have  taken 
some  initiatives  for  coordinating  our  operations  in  regional  framework.  Two  years  ago  we 
organized  for  the  first  time  a  Conference  on  Financial  Stability  in  Albania,  where  seven 
governors of central banks of the region participated. Besides the Governors’ Club, we have 
actually a club that functions precisely for supervision, where we discuss about all banking 
supervision problems and make a coordination of laws and respective regulations. Last year 
the  new  banking  law  entered  into  force,  while  the  current  year  has  been  full  of  changes 
regarding  four  basic  supervision  regulations,  having  the  main  focus  on  increasing  bank 
management quality, bank transparency, internal control and risk management.  
The financial crisis here in the United States of America started with a fictive house 
price  rise.  How  do  you  evaluate  this  market  in  Albania  and  how  concerned  are  you 
about non-performing loans? 
I  would  like  to  repeat  what  I  said  a  week  ago,  when  the  financial  stability  declaration  was 
made public, i.e., the Albanian banking system is not “contaminated” from “toxic” products of 
the American market and other markets. 
BIS Review 123/2008 
 1
Anyway,  have  foreign  banks  operating  in  Albania  invested  in  markets  that  may  be 
contaminated?  
The Albanian banking system is safe. The security of this system rests in its parameters of 
capital,  liquidity  and  profit.  The  Albanian  banking  system  is  profitable,  and  non-performing 
loans are within the specified international parameters. Our supervision standard is another 
additional  element  of  the  protective  network  that  the  Bank  of  Albania  creates.  Special 
attention the Bank of Albania has paid to the banking supervision, particularly over last two 
years.  It  is  a  great  guarantee  for  the  public  in  order  to  raise  the  confidence  in  these 
institutions. The increased confidence in these institutions is a cornerstone for a steady long-
term  progress  of  any  world  economy,  especially  under  such  situation.  We  have  always 
preceded  the  situations,  treating  the  financial  stability  problem  with  primary  importance.  I 
have  announced  in  public  more  than  one  year  ago  that  the  financial  stability  and  the 
macroeconomic policy walk hand in hand. I think every investment in financial system quality 
is an investment made for a better and more successful implementation of monetary policy.  
At  your  meeting  with  the  IMF,  of  course  you  have  discussed  for  the  perspective  of 
prolonging  the  program  of  the  IMF  with  Albania.  Is  there  achieved  any  preliminary 
result?  What  camp  do  you  belong  to,  the  camp  protecting  the  prolonging  of  this 
program or the one that says that the government’s responsibilities should increase, 
by the IMF leaving now?  
Presently  there  are  no  camps;  actually  there  has  not  been  any  camp  ever.  Personally  I 
believe  that  the  IMF  is  the  best  certifier  of  our  national  balances  and  statistics  and  the 
guarantor  of  our  macroeconomic  policies;  unquestionably,  the  best  guarantor  to  associate 
Albania towards European membership. 
2 
 BIS Review 123/2008
