Randall S Kroszner: Improving the infrastructure for non-agency 
mortgage-backed securities 
Speech  by  Mr  Randall  S  Kroszner,  Member  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  US  Federal 
Reserve  System,  at  the  Federal  Reserve  System  Conference  on  Housing  and  Mortgage 
Markets, Washington DC, 4 December 2008. 
The original speech, which contains a link  to the documents mentioned, can be found on the US Federal Reserve 
System’s website. 
 I  very  much  appreciate  the  opportunity  to  participate  in  this  conference  and  to  hear  your 
insights firsthand about such a range of important topics.  
As you know, housing markets are weak. Sales of new homes and of existing homes are well 
below  their  respective  peaks  around  the  middle  of  this  decade.  House  prices  have  fallen 
sharply – the national price index published by the Federal Housing Finance Agency is down 
almost 8 percent from its high in the spring of 2007, and the Case-Shiller national index is 
down  more  than  20  percent  from  its  peak  about  2-1/2  years  ago.  Residential  construction 
has remained weak, with single-family housing starts having declined to less than a third the 
number seen early in 2006. Even with the drop in homebuilding, the inventory of unsold new 
homes represents more than 10 months' supply at the recent pace of sales. Taken together, 
these data suggest continuing near-term challenges for stabilization of the housing market. 
With  the  plunge  in  home  sales  and  house  prices  as  well  as  very  tight  lending  conditions, 
mortgage borrowing by households has fallen sharply over the past two years or so. Indeed, 
the latest information suggests that, on net, home mortgage debt may not have increased at 
all since the spring. Moreover, most of the new mortgages that were originated in the past 
several  months  were  funded  with  mortgage-backed  securities  (MBS)  guaranteed  by  the 
government  housing  agencies  –  Fannie  Mae,  Freddie  Mac,  and  Ginnie  Mae.  That  is, 
origination of mortgages not eligible for a government guarantee has fallen dramatically as 
issuance of private-label MBS has virtually come to a halt this year. The rapid deterioration in 
credit quality of mortgages in subprime and so-called alt-A MBS pools – and the subsequent 
severe rating downgrades of the securities they backed – has significantly eroded the value 
of and investor confidence in private-label MBS.  
In my remarks today, I would like to suggest some fundamental changes in the structure of 
private-label  MBS  that  might  help  a  recovery,  over  time,  in  investor  confidence  and  in  the 
market for these securities. I believe that mortgage securitization has the potential to deliver 
economic value to investors, lenders, and, ultimately, borrowers.1  
Several conditions would be necessary for the potential of private-label MBS to be realized 
going forward. A necessary condition is for comprehensive and standardized loan-level data 
covering the entire pool of loans backing MBS to be made available and easily accessible so 
that  the  underlying  credit  quality  can  be  rigorously  analyzed  by  market  participants  more 
easily  than  is  now  the  case.  But  comprehensive  data  will  not  be  sufficient.  In  addition,  a 
number of aspects of the securities themselves will probably need to be changed. First, the 
structures of cash flows from mortgage payments in the pool to the various tranches of MBS 
should  be  much  less  complex  than  some  of  those  created  in  recent  years.  Second, 
securitization  contracts  will  need  to  be  made  more  homogeneous  so  as  to  allow  greater 
                                                 
1   Some  form  of  government  backstop  may  be  necessary  to  keep  the  market  functioning  under  the  most 
stressed circumstances. See Ben S. Bernanke (2008), "The Future of Mortgage Finance in the United States", 
speech delivered at the UC Berkeley/UCLA Symposium: The Mortgage Meltdown, the Economy, and Public 
Policy, Berkeley, California, October 31. 
BIS Review 153/2008 
 1
comparability of risk profiles across deals and perhaps promote more robust liquidity. Third, 
securitizations should involve fewer and larger tranches of MBS, which, in addition to further 
promoting liquidity, could also reduce the exposure of some securities to certain tail risks and 
model uncertainty.  
I believe that a new infrastructure built upon these foundations might reasonably be expected 
to  lower  the  costs  of  information  production  and  processing  in  the  marketplace.  The 
reduction  of  these  costs  will  facilitate  broader  independent  credit  analyses,  greater  due 
diligence by potential purchasers, and, hence, greater ability to provide a double check on 
credit  rating  agencies'  evaluation  of  the  riskiness  of  the  securities.  In  other  words,  market 
participants would be more likely to acquire the expertise to evaluate securities issues that 
were more homogeneous and less complex. This change would make the situation closer to 
what occurs in the corporate bond market, in which standardized disclosures about relatively 
homogeneous  and  straightforward  securities  of  publicly  traded  companies  allow  many 
analysts and potential purchasers to come up with their own evaluations, in addition to those 
of  the  credit  rating  agencies.  Moreover,  such  changes  might  also  lead  to  the  creation  of 
structures whose credit analyses are less sensitive to certain tail risks and types of model 
uncertainty  and  more  likely  to  be  liquid  even  in  times  of  market  stress.  Thus,  this  new 
infrastructure might allow investors  gradually to regain confidence in their ability to assess 
the risk-return tradeoffs inherent in MBS, allowing them to reconsider how those securities 
may best fit into their overall portfolios. 
As  I  mentioned,  in  principle,  mortgage  securitizations  make  good  economic  sense:  By 
providing access to the broad capital market, securitization allows loan originators to access 
a wider source of funding than they can obtain directly. In addition, securitization can limit an 
originator's  exposure  to  prepayment  risks  associated  with  interest  rate  movements,  to 
geographic concentrations of loans, and to credit and funding risks associated with holding 
mortgages all the way to maturity. Effectively, securitization can significantly lower the cost of 
extending home loans, and some of those cost savings can be passed along to homeowners 
in the form of lower mortgage rates.  
It seems clear that the housing government-sponsored enterprises (or agencies) played an 
important  role  in  the  development  of  mortgage  securitization  in  the  United  States.  In  large 
part,  the  broad  appeal  of  agency  MBS  can  be  traced  to  the  explicit  guarantee  of  the 
securities by the sponsoring agencies. This agency support may have meant that the returns 
to undertaking a thorough and costly credit analysis of underlying mortgages in agency MBS 
pools were low, so that task was essentially left to the agencies themselves. Indeed, even as 
agency MBS issuance took off in the 1970s and 1980s, the most basic infrastructure needed 
to  conduct  credit  analysis  on  home  mortgage  pools  –  comprehensive  loan-level  data  that 
was broadly accessible in a standardized format – went essentially undeveloped.  
The paucity and inaccessibility of data about the underlying home loans was, in my opinion, 
one of the reasons that private-label MBS was able to expand so rapidly in 2005 and 2006 
despite a deterioration in underwriting and prospective credit performance. That is not to say 
that better data would necessarily have led investors to completely sidestep the private-label 
MBS that have caused them so much difficulty. But I do think it was a significant hindrance 
that  the  information  needed  to  infer,  in  real  time,  the  extent  to  which  subprime  and  alt-A 
mortgage underwriting was sliding simply did not exist in a form that allowed the widespread 
scrutiny or objective analyses needed to bring these risks more clearly into focus.  
Thus,  I  believe  that  markets  for  private-label  MBS  are  unlikely  to  recover  unless 
comprehensive and standardized data for home mortgage pools are made widely available 
to market participants. As you may be aware, the American Securitization Forum (ASF) is in 
the  midst  of  a 
large-scale  project  called  RESTART,  or  Residential  Securitization 
Transparency  and  Reporting.  This  project  seeks  to  develop  a  standardized  format  for 
mortgage data that would be available to all investors and other market participants, with the 
goal  of  substantially  improving  disclosure  and  transparency  related  to  private-label  MBS. 
2 
 BIS Review 153/2008
RESTART has wide support in the industry, and the project is receiving input from a wide 
range of market participants, including investors, mortgage originators, loan servicers, credit 
bureaus, credit rating agencies, MBS trustees, legal counselors, and data vendors. Indeed, 
just  yesterday,  a  report  issued  by  a  consortium  of  several  securitization  industry  groups 
endorsed  the  RESTART  project  in  its  first  recommendation  for  an  "action  plan"  to  work  to 
restore  confidence  in  securitization  markets.2  Although,  to  be  sure,  some  time  will  be 
required to develop specific recommendations and then to overcome implementation issues, 
I am encouraged by the ambition of the project and the vigor with which participants appear 
to be working on it. 
While comprehensive loan-level data for mortgage pools are necessary to rebuild confidence 
in  private-label  MBS,  I  now  wish  to  elaborate  a  bit  on  improvements  in  the  contractual 
structure of private-label MBS that are, in my view, also needed to revive the market. First, in 
recent  years,  the  complexity  of  many  deals  made  non-agency  MBS  difficult  to  value.  For 
example,  looking  at  private-label  MBS  deals  constructed  in  the  heyday  of  2006,  some 
subprime  trusts  included  three  separate  pools  of  mortgages  –  for  example,  prime-rated 
jumbo loans, alt-A first liens, and a blend of subprime first and junior liens – with cash flows 
that  were  prioritized  using  complicated  payoff  rules  among  more  than  a  dozen  different 
securities. The securitization contract might have dictated that one AAA-rated tranche might 
have been paid using only cash flows from the prime jumbo loans, while another AAA-rated 
tranche could have received no payments at all from that pool.  
Second,  non-agency  mortgage  securitization  contracts  contained  numerous  idiosyncratic 
features  that  limited  the  comparability  of  deals  that  may  have  appeared  to  be  similarly 
structured. Not only might there have been subtle but significant differences in the cash flow 
obligations to each tranche, but there was also much variation in other important provisions, 
such as duties on servicers of the loans in the pool and the representations and warranties 
that govern the circumstances under which poorly performing loans can be put back to the 
originator. Thus, even if comprehensive data on the loans in the pools had been available, a 
thorough  credit  analysis  would  have  required  both  a  detailed  reading  of  the  deal-specific 
documentation  describing  a  particular  deal's  potentially  unique  structure  and  a  careful 
analysis  of  how  its  cash  flow  prioritization  would  affect  returns  to  holders  of  the  particular 
tranches of securities as laid out in the contract. Although such an analysis is possible, it may 
be  beyond  the  available  resources  for  many  investors.  I  believe  that  more  homogeneous 
mortgage  securitization  contracts  could  significantly  lower  the  barriers  to  entry  for  credit 
analysts,  thereby  promoting  greater  transparency  and  perhaps  more  confidence  among 
investors about the securities' underlying risk-return attributes. 
Third, larger tranches in private-label MBS could have a couple of key benefits. For instance, 
investors  might  view  larger  security  issues  as  being  more  likely  to  sustain  liquid  trading 
conditions, which would allow investors to rebalance their portfolios, as conditions evolve, at 
reasonably  predictable  prices  and  with  transaction  costs  comparable  to  those  of  other 
securities  traded  in  "thick"  markets.  In  addition,  as  has  become  evident,  tranched 
securitizations are exposed to tail risks – situations that can be expected to occur only rarely 
but  which  convey  very  negative  returns.  My  intuition  is  that  thinner  tranches  are  more 
vulnerable to tail risks, because it seems more likely in the latter case that widespread credit 
losses in the underlying loan pool could wipe out designated cash flows for the entire tranche 
–  so-called  nonlinear,  or  cliff,  effects.  Thus,  future  mortgage  securitizations  that  rely  on 
simpler cash flows and larger tranches might reduce some of the exposure to tail risks and 
enable investors to gain confidence.  
                                                 
2   See Global Joint Initiative to Restore Confidence in the Securitization Markets (2008), Restoring Confidence in 
the  Securitization  Markets,  a  report  sponsored  by  the  Global  Joint  Initiative's  Steering  Committee,  a 
consortium of the Securities Industry and Financial Markets Association, the ASF, the European Securitization 
Forum, and the Australian Securitization Forum, December 3. 
BIS Review 153/2008 
 3
As  an  aside,  I  should  note  that  I  do  not  expect  a  revival  for  some  of  the  most  complex 
structures  that  were  created  in  recent  years  to  finance  a  portion  of  subprime  and  alt-A 
mortgages.  I  am  thinking  specifically  of  collateralized  debt  obligations  (CDOs)  that  were 
themselves backed by other structured credit products, including the lower-rated tranches of 
private-label  MBS.  These  so-called  two-layer  securitizations  were  far  more  complex  and 
much more exposed to systematic losses than were the MBS themselves. Indeed, investors 
in – and more importantly, financial institutions that retained – the super senior tranches of 
CDO-squared  securities  took  substantial  losses  as  the  severity  of  the  downturn  in  the 
housing market and in mortgage credit quality became evident. Given the magnitude of those 
losses and the recognition that rigorous credit analyses are extremely information-intensive 
(and  very  sensitive  to  assumptions  about  loss  correlations),  I  would  expect  investors  to 
remain skeptical of two-layer securitized financial products for the foreseeable future. 
To  the  extent  that  larger  tranches  of  simpler  and  more  homogeneous  securities  might 
encourage  broader  information  processing  and  credit  analyses,  they  could  play  a  role  in 
rebuilding investor confidence. Corporations that issue large amounts of bonds, for example, 
tend  to  be  followed  by  quite  a  number  of  analysts.  Consequently,  investors  can  access  a 
wide range of information and opinions about those companies, providing a check – and less 
overall reliance – on credit analyses produced by the credit rating agencies themselves.  
In sum, an improved infrastructure for non-agency MBS should include comprehensive, loan-
by-loan  data  that  are  available  in  a  standardized  format  that  is  readily  accessible,  but  a 
robust data platform will not be sufficient. A new infrastructure will probably also include less-
complex cash flow waterfalls, more homogeneous contract designs, and larger tranches of 
securities.  With  these  features,  the  new  infrastructure  could  increase  transparency,  and 
promote independent, objective credit analysis for the various classes of non-agency MBS. 
By facilitating detailed information processing and independent risk analyses, the reliance on 
credit rating agencies could be reduced, easing the way for investors to regain confidence in 
these securities and for liquidity to return in these valuable markets.  
That  said,  the  recovery  in  the  market  for  non-agency  MBS  –  and,  more  broadly,  for  the 
origination of home mortgages that depend on these securities for funding – is bound to be a 
gradual process. It will take time to develop and implement a new infrastructure such as the 
one  I  have  outlined,  and  for  investor  confidence  to  be  rebuilt.  In  addition,  investors  could 
remain wary of re-engaging in the market for private-label MBS until they become convinced 
that housing markets around the country are on the mend.  
4 
 BIS Review 153/2008
