Gertrude Tumpel-Gugerell: Enhancing infrastructures for the EU 
financial market 
Speech by Ms Gertrude Tumpel-Gugerell, Member of the Executive Board of the European 
Central Bank, at the 11th Euro Finance Week, European Transaction Banking Conference, 
Frankfurt am Main, 17 November 2008. 
 Ladies and gentlemen,  
In 1909, almost one hundred years ago, the Frankfurt Festhalle was opened. The Festhalle 
is the main historic building of the Messe Frankfurt exhibition grounds and stands next to the 
modern hall in which this conference takes place today. At the time of its inauguration, the 
Festhalle was the largest domed building [Kuppelbau] in Europe and a symbol of Frankfurt’s 
pride as an important commercial and financial centre. The construction of the steel dome is 
intriguing: the weight of the roof is evenly distributed between the various crossbeams, with 
circular beams providing additional support. Just like in a gothic cathedral, each beam plays 
a key role in ensuring the safety of the entire building.  
For  me,  the  construction  of  that  dome-shaped  roof  reflects  the  set-up  of  financial 
infrastructures. The network of links and connections in such infrastructures ensures broad 
coverage and an efficient flow of liquidity. Changes to the infrastructures can only be made in 
a  coordinated  fashion,  as  each  individual  part  plays  an  important  role  in  the  network  as  a 
whole.  
It is thanks to steel engineering technology and the excellence of the architects and builders 
at the time that such a roof could be constructed. However, it is evident that, since 1909, the 
public authorities have also played a significant role in ensuring that the static construction of 
the  building  has  remained  safe  and  resilient  over  time.  Similarly,  regulation  and  oversight 
standards  play  a  vital  role  in  ensuring  that  the  market  infrastructures  provide  a  robust 
foundation for our financial system, particularly during these turbulent times.  
It is therefore a great pleasure for me to speak today at the opening of this conference on 
transaction  banking  and  to  share  with  you  my  views  on  future  priorities  for  enhancing  the 
market infrastructures of the European Union (EU). In my speech, I would like to focus on the 
following two main issues: 
First, it is clear that EU infrastructures have not yet reached a sufficient level of integration to 
provide effective support to the single financial market, especially in the fields of securities 
clearing and settlement, and retail payments. The present degree of fragmentation needs to 
be reduced significantly if we are to get closer to our objective of achieving a truly integrated 
and highly competitive single financial market in Europe. Today, I would like to highlight a 
number of priorities in this regard. 
Second,  more  must  be  done  to  ensure  the  reliable  functioning  and  resilience  of  market 
infrastructures.  So  far  market  infrastructures  have  performed  well  despite  the  financial 
market turmoil, but there is no room for complacency. The increasing pace of globalisation, 
the  blurring  of  the  boundaries  between  financial  institutions  and  market  infrastructures,  as 
well as the emergence of new products continue to give rise to new challenges that are a test 
of the soundness of our market infrastructures.  
My  remarks  will  be  structured  into  three  main  parts.  First,  I  will  briefly  discuss  the  role  of 
market infrastructures in supporting the financial integration process and systemic stability, 
highlighting  the  fact  that  these  two  objectives  are  closely  related.  Second,  I  would  like  to 
draw your attention to two important initiatives which aim to foster a closer integration of the 
infrastructures  for  securities  and  retail  payments,  namely  TARGET2-Securities  and  the 
Single Euro Payments Area. Finally, I will examine the role of market infrastructures during 
BIS Review 141/2008 
 1
the market turmoil and assess steps that could be taken to enhance their resilience. Such 
steps  are  aimed  particularly  at  making  progress  towards  a  more  consistent  prudential 
framework for securities clearing and settlement systems, and at enhancing the infrastructure 
for the over-the-counter derivatives markets. 
Financial integration and systemic stability: the role of market infrastructures 
Allow  me  to  begin  by  discussing  the  crucial  role  of  well-integrated  and  sound  market 
infrastructures  in  achieving  financial  market  integration  and  stability.  Market  infrastructures 
form the backbone of the financial system: they provide the networks through which financial 
institutions  and  financial  markets  are  connected.  Given  this  network  character  and  the 
associated  economies  of  scale,  and  also  considering  the  significant  growth  in  financial 
activity over the past decades, market infrastructures often handle very large volumes and 
values.  
Against  this  background,  it  is  obvious  that  any  weaknesses  in  the  functioning  of  these 
systems are likely to have a negative impact on financial trading activities.  
Let me emphasize that there is wide agreement on the fact that the integration of large value 
payment  systems  like  TARGET  and  today  TARGET2  have  been  key  to  the  integration  of 
money and wholesale activities in the euro area. The single pricing structure, the harmonized 
set  of  cash  settlement  services  and  the  single  technical  communication  interface  allow  to 
exploit  economies  of  scale  and  gains  in  efficiency  that  will  spur  even  further  integration  in 
money and wholesale markets. 
Therefore, can we really afford even closer trade relations between the different regions in 
Europe  and  globally  without  organizing  financial  services  in  a  smooth,  safe  and  efficient 
way? 
European  infrastructures  for  securities  clearing  and  settlement,  as  well  as  those  for  retail 
payments, remain highly fragmented, which makes cross-border transactions in these areas 
very costly.  This is widely recognised as a major contributor to the fact  that the European 
markets  for  corporate  bonds,  equity  and  retail  payments  are  still  not  integrated  to  a 
satisfactory degree.  
It should be emphasised here that when financial markets are not fully integrated, not only 
does this imply substantial economic cost in terms of a less efficient allocation of financial 
resources, which consequently limits opportunities for economic growth in Europe, but this 
can  also  be  associated  with  financial  risk.  Fragmentation  of  the  financial  markets  has 
negative  implications  in  particular  for  the  financial  system’s  overall  capacity  to  absorb 
shocks,  since  it  reduces  the  opportunities  for  risk-sharing  and  diversification  among 
economic agents and limits the depth and liquidity of financial markets. Therefore, from the 
perspective  of  both  financial  efficiency  and  financial  stability,  financial  integration  is  a  key 
issue. 
European  infrastructures  should  not  only  be  well-integrated;  they  also  need  to  meet  the 
highest  standards  in  terms  of  risk  management  and  resilience.  Indeed,  it  is  critical  that 
market  infrastructures  are  robust  in  order  to  reduce  systemic  risk  in  the  financial  system. 
After  all,  the  failure  of  a  clearing,  payment  or  settlement  system  is  likely  to  cause  major 
disruption to the underlying trading processes, thus putting wider financial stability at risk.  
Therefore,  the  reliable  functioning  of  market  infrastructures  is  indispensable  for  a  stable 
financial system, complementing the soundness of financial institutions and markets. While it 
is  the  operators  of  these  infrastructures  that  are  primarily  responsible  for  taking  the 
appropriate  measures  to  ensure  this  reliable  functioning,  specific  regulatory  and  oversight 
requirements are also in place to ensure that the infrastructures are designed to be robust 
and are operated in an effective manner.  
2 
 BIS Review 141/2008
The  challenges  posed  by  the  current  ongoing  turbulences  in  financial  markets  underscore 
the importance of not just continuing but of stepping-up financial integration efforts. 
Fostering the integration of market infrastructures: TARGET2-Securities and the 
Single Euro Payments Area 
I would now like to take a closer look at work which is under way to foster the integration of 
European market infrastructures, namely in the fields of securities clearing and settlement, 
and retail payments. As you are aware, a number of initiatives have recently been adopted or 
are currently under way with a view to achieving progress in these fields, led by both market 
participants and public authorities. Today I will focus on two major projects featuring on the 
EU agenda: TARGET2-Securities (T2S) and the Single Euro Payments Area (SEPA).  
The T2S project is a project of the Eurosystem and was developed in close consultation with 
all  relevant  stakeholders.  It  is  a  good  example  of  the  Eurosystem’s  capacity  to  advance 
European financial integration through the provision of central bank services. While SEPA is 
a  market-led  initiative  to  spur  financial  integration,  the  Eurosystem  has  actively  supported 
this  project,  together  with  the  European  Commission  and  ECOFIN.  Why  do  we  as  a  pan-
European public authority engage in these types of projects? The Eurosystem is both a pan-
European public authority and, in its capacity as a central bank, an active market participant, 
and, therefore, generally in a good position to act as a catalyst for private sector activities 
which encourage European financial integration. Indeed, this is particularly the case in the 
field of market infrastructures. It is one of the Eurosystem’s basic tasks under the Maastricht 
Treaty to promote the smooth functioning of payment systems, and the Eurosystem acts as 
both  operator  and  overseer  of  these  systems.  Because  we  offer  services  to  all  market 
participants  which  use  the  €  as  a  transaction  currency  we  see  the  need  for  integration  of 
systems  and  harmonisation  of  rules,  regulations  and  priorities.  Why  –  10  years  after  the 
introduction of the € – we still do not have an adequate infrastructure? Everyday European 
citizens  –  corporates  and  consumers  pay  much  more  than  citizens  in  the  US  for  getting 
cross-border  security  services.  Why  do  we  need  there  cross-border  services?  Because 
financial integration allows better risk sharing and this benefits economic development. 
TARGET2-Securities 
Let us now examine T2S in more detail. Over two years ago now the Eurosystem embarked 
on this project in an effort to meet the increasing demand for an integrated and harmonised 
European  settlement  infrastructure  and  to  reduce  the  high  settlement  costs  in  the  EU, 
especially for cross-border securities transactions. T2S will be a multi-currency platform used 
by  central  securities  depositories  (CSDs)  for  the  settlement  of  securities  transactions  in 
central bank money. The participating CSDs will maintain legal relations with their customers 
and continue to perform custody and notary functions. 
The  T2S  project  will  make  cross-border  securities  settlement  transactions  in  central  bank 
money  as  secure,  efficient  and  cheap  as  domestic  settlement  transactions  are  today.  T2S 
will build on and benefit from the TARGET2 system thereby combining cash settlements and 
securities settlements – in real time – within a single European infrastructure. The common 
settlement platform T2S will increase cost transparency and investors will be able to choose 
the  provider  on  the  basis  of  costs  and  services  rather  on  the  location  of  the  security. 
Therefore, T2S will increase trading activity in the market, reduce trading spreads, increase 
competition and lower service prices, and thus improve welfare in general. 
Exactly four months ago, on 17 July 2008, the Governing Council of the European Central 
Bank (ECB) finalised the decision to build T2S, given the widespread support of European 
CSDs and the confirmation of their intention to use the system once it is in operation. The 
development  and  operation  of  T2S  has  been  assigned  to  four  central  banks  in  the 
Eurosystem,  namely  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank,  the  Banco  de  España,  the  Banque  de 
BIS Review 141/2008 
 3
France and the Banca d’Italia, and I am convinced that they will continue the good tradition of 
the  “3CB”  (the  Deutsche  Bundesbank,  the  Banque  de  France  and  the  Banca  d’Italia),  the 
providers of the TARGET2 payment system. 
The Eurosystem is actively supporting non-euro area central banks, as well as local CSDs 
and market participants, as the banks decide on whether to include their currencies in T2S. 
Danmarks  Nationalbank  has  already  decided  to  do  so  and  the  central  banks  of  Sweden, 
Switzerland and the United Kingdom were invited to express their opinion on this issue. Their 
participation would, for me, make T2S even more successful. 
I  believe  that  T2S  will  bring  tremendous  economic  benefits,  will  foster  the  necessary 
competition and will crucially to speed up financial market integration, also in the field of bond 
and equity markets, to the benefit of financial market participants and the citizens of Europe. 
The Single Euro Payments Area 
Now I will turn to SEPA, the key project for advancing the integration of European market 
infrastructures  in  the  field  of  retail  payments.  You  may  ask:  why  are  retail  payments 
important at this time of unprecedented financial turmoil? In response, I would tell you that 
the retail payments business generates about one-quarter of all banking revenue. Therefore, 
it needs to be as integrated, efficient and reliable as possible. 
SEPA is a private sector initiative, led by the banking industry. It has not been an easy road 
for the European banks, but it is important not to waver now. The resulting integrated and 
modern retail payment infrastructure will make a significant contribution to the efficiency of 
European retail finance, as there will be one single payment system for all retail transactions, 
but  potentially  many  service  providers  in  competition  with  each  other.  Indeed,  we  will  no 
longer distinguish between “national” and “cross-border” euro payments. Moreover, at a time 
when banks’ other sources of income are more volatile, payment services can provide them 
with  stable and  regular  revenue.  So  far  it  would  appear  that  banks  which  act  as universal 
banks have proven better able to weather the financial crisis than specialised banks.  
Small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) rely on retail banks for payment services. As a 
result,  it  is  the  banks  that  know  their  customers  best  that  will  gain  the  most  from  SEPA. 
However, it  is important that they use this knowledge to expand their business by offering 
innovative value-added services to European enterprises. If SMEs can operate with minimal 
manual  intervention,  as  well  as  paper  and  cash-free,  they  can  focus  on  their  business 
instead of on their payments.  
There are currently a number of initiatives aiming to align national differences and develop 
frameworks  for  specific  value-added  services,  such  as  e-invoicing,  online  payments  and 
mobile payment initiation. Banks should use these frameworks to offer their clients payment 
services  that  facilitate  end-to-end  straight-through  processing  of  all  euro  payments  within 
Europe. This will deliver banks a stable source of income and enterprises a more efficient 
payment process. 
Market surveys show that awareness of SEPA is increasing, but that not everyone is ready to 
use it. Let me be perfectly clear: we should not use the financial market turbulence as an 
excuse  to  put  SEPA  on  hold.  On  the  contrary,  we  should  use  SEPA  as  an  instrument  for 
rationalisation and putting a new focus on the business of retail banking. SEPA will contribute 
to  the  creation  of  a  smooth  and  safe  underlying  payment  infrastructure  in  this  field. 
Therefore, commitment to SEPA is now more important than ever – for banks, enterprises 
and public administrations. Awareness must be transformed into readiness.  
4 
 BIS Review 141/2008
Lessons learned from the financial turmoil with regard to market infrastructure 
resilience 
I would now like to move on to the lessons that we have learned from the financial market 
turmoil  with  regard  to  the  resilience  of  our  market  infrastructures.  The  role  of  market 
infrastructures has not been covered very extensively in the policy debate on the financial 
turmoil so far. There would seem to be two reasons for this relative lack of attention. First, 
the financial distress clearly originated from shortcomings related to financial institutions, the 
overall  functioning  of  the  market  and  especially  excessive  risk  taking;  therefore,  policy 
discussion has focused on addressing these issues. Second, throughout the financial turmoil, 
market infrastructures have proven sufficiently robust to cope with the challenges to clearing 
and settlement.  
The performance of market infrastructures during the financial turmoil 
Payment  systems,  central  counterparties  (CCPs)  and  securities  settlement  systems  have 
dealt  with  peaks  in  transaction  volumes  effectively  and  without  any  major  operational 
disruptions. Similarly, when some CCPs were required to make greater and more frequent 
margin  calls  owing  to  the  increased  volatility  of  asset  prices,  those  margin  calls  were 
executed successfully. Overall, by acting as a buffer against the increased and more volatile 
trading  activity,  the  smooth  functioning  of  the  market  infrastructures  helped  to  maintain 
people’s confidence in the markets and played an important role in limiting the financial and 
economic impact of the financial turbulence. 
This is certainly reassuring and serves as evidence of the substantial work done in recent 
years to strengthen the resilience of market infrastructures. However, again, there is certainly 
no room for complacency. As financial innovation and globalisation progress, the boundaries 
between financial institutions and market infrastructures are blurring, the interdependencies 
between  payment  and  settlement  systems  are  increasing, and  new  challenges  in terms  of 
the  safety  and  resilience  of  payment  and  settlement  systems  are  continuing  to  emerge. 
Market  participants  and  public  authorities  need  to  remain  highly  vigilant  so  that  they  can 
respond to these issues in a timely and effective manner.  
The need for a consistent regulatory framework  
In  Europe,  we  have  recently  taken  a  significant  step  forward  in  this  regard,  with  the 
finalisation of the draft recommendations of the European System of Central Banks and the 
Committee  of  European  Securities  Regulators  (ESCB-CESR  recommendations)  for  EU 
securities clearing and settlement systems and central counterparties. The recommendations 
are  based  on  the  international  recommendations  which  were  issued  by  the  Committee  on 
Payment  and  Settlement  Systems  and  the  Technical  Committee  of  the  International 
Organisation of Securities Commissions (CPSS-IOSCO) in 2001 and 2004 respectively, and 
are open for public consultation until 23 January 2009.  
The  release  of  the  draft  ESCB-CESR  recommendations  constitutes  a  major  achievement 
after  several  years  of  hard  work.  However,  it  is  imperative  for  us  to  continue  making  the 
same amount of effort in the coming months in order to ensure that these recommendations 
are  finalised  without  delay  and,  subsequently,  consistently  enforced  by  the  competent 
regulators and overseers.  
The need for a more resilient infrastructure for over-the-counter derivatives 
Another  issue  which  warrants  your  attention  is  the  need  to  improve  the  infrastructure  for 
over-the-counter  (OTC)  derivatives.  Despite  the  rapid  growth  of  OTC  derivatives  in  recent 
years,  the  infrastructure  for  clearing and settling OTC trades is still predominantly bilateral 
and  non-standardised,  and  continues  to  require  a  considerable  degree  of  manual 
intervention. Against this background, it is not surprising that OTC markets have struggled to 
BIS Review 141/2008 
 5
cope with the increasing volumes and complexity of derivatives trades, particularly during the 
financial  turmoil.  Therefore,  we  fully  agree  with  the  Financial  Stability  Forum  and  the 
European Commission that measures must be taken to improve the market infrastructures 
for OTC derivatives.  
A particular priority at the present juncture is to reduce risk in the markets for credit default 
swaps (CDSs). CDSs, a form of insurance against the risk of default by corporate borrowers, 
are the derivatives which have shown the greatest exponential growth in the past few years.  
As the financial turbulence which started in the summer of 2007 turned from a liquidity crisis 
into  a  solvency  crisis,  CDS  markets  increasingly  raised  concerns,  for  three  reasons  in 
particular. First, regulators are broadly in agreement that, owing to their private nature, CDSs 
have  contributed  to  the  reduced  transparency  of  the  credit  markets,  helping  to  shift  credit 
exposures  in  a  manner  that  makes  it  very  difficult  to  assess  how  different  institutions  are 
interlinked and how much credit risk they actually hold. Second, given that the related credit 
exposures are significant in terms of both the total counterparty risk and the capital cushions 
of the financial institutions involved, and also considering the highly concentrated nature of 
CDS markets, purely bilateral risk management has proven insufficient, notably in view of the 
risk of default by a major counterparty. Third, given the absence of any regulatory oversight, 
CDSs  were  also  seen  to  be  offering  incentives  for  taking  credit  risk  without  applying  due 
diligence  regarding  the  respective  credit  exposures,  thereby  threatening  the  stability  of  an 
increasingly important segment of the credit market.  
These shortcomings in the functioning of CDS markets have played a significant role in the 
problems experienced by a number of major financial institutions in recent months, such as 
Lehman Brothers, the American International Group and the Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac 
mortgage groups, and the resulting difficulties have clearly exacerbated wider credit market 
strains.  
While it is clear that the fundamental rules and structures governing CDS markets will have 
to be thoroughly reviewed, a short-term priority in terms of enhancing the resilience of these 
markets  is  the  establishment  of  central  counterparty  facilities.  CCPs  for  CDSs  will  help,  in 
particular,  to  diversify  and  share  risk  exposures  and  their  strict  margining  procedures  will 
reduce the incentive to take excessive risks. At the same time, CCPs will help to increase 
transparency in what remain highly opaque markets. 
Against this background, how to move forward with the establishment of CCPs for CDSs has 
been  the  subject  of  discussion  in  recent  months  among  several  institutions  and  fora, 
including  the  European  Commission,  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York  and  the 
Financial  Stability  Forum,  as  well  as  the  ECB,  which  hosted  a  meeting  with  European 
stakeholders on this issue two weeks ago.  
In Europe in particular, we are close to reaching consensus on three major issues:  
First, there is broad agreement on the need for more than one CCP solution for CDSs, given 
the  importance  of  competition  for  the  efficient  functioning  of  CDS  markets.  However,  an 
excessive proliferation of clearing solutions should be avoided, as the resulting segregation 
of  financial  resources  would  limit  the  ability  of  the  CCP  to  reduce  financial  risks  through 
multilateral  netting  and  it  would  also  become  more  difficult  to  achieve  consistent  risk 
management in the market. Furthermore, from a user perspective, it would be overly costly 
and complex to connect to multiple CCPs. 
Second, there is consensus that at least one CCP for CDSs should be located in Europe, 
given the significant implications of CCP services in this field for European institutions and 
financial markets, and the corresponding need for effective regulation and oversight by the 
competent European authorities. In order to achieve rapid progress in the establishment of 
one (or more) European CCP(s) for CDSs, the European Commission is currently developing 
a concrete roadmap to ensure that these services are in place by the end of this year. The 
6 
 BIS Review 141/2008
Commission has clarified that any solution would need to be fully in line with EU regulatory, 
supervisory and monetary policy objectives. 
Finally, it is widely agreed that cooperation between the relevant authorities is of the utmost 
importance  to  ensure  that  the  different  CCPs  will  be  robust  and  that  competition  between 
them  will  not  lead  to  a  “race  to  the  bottom”.  In  this  context,  the  existing  risk  management 
standards for CCPs need to be made more specific to account for the risks particular to the 
CDS business, risks owing to the comparatively limited market liquidity, for example. Within 
the  EU,  the  aforementioned  ESCB-CESR  recommendations  for  securities  settlement 
systems and central counterparties are expected to form the basis for this work. In parallel, 
international  cooperation,  namely  between  the  competent  EU,  US  and  other  international 
authorities,  will  be  key  to  making  the  necessary  amendments  to  the  international  risk 
standards  (the  CPSS-IOSCO  recommendations)  in  order  to  maintain  a  level  playing-field 
worldwide. 
Conclusions 
In  conclusion,  ladies  and  gentlemen,  by  enhancing  the  integration  of  EU  infrastructures, 
Europe will move one step closer to a truly integrated and highly competitive single financial 
market and thus one step closer to realising the full economic benefit of our Economic and 
Monetary Union. Some have argued that the turbulence in the financial markets could take 
the attention and determination away from important integration projects, such as T2S and 
SEPA,  given  the  necessary  shift  in  focus  onto  the  safety  and  resilience  of  the  financial 
sector. But as I have outlined it is precisely because of the financial turmoil that we need to 
strengthen  our  efforts  towards  providing  integrated,  efficient,  safe  and  reliable  market 
infrastructures as backbones of our financial system.  
While market infrastructures have managed to cope with the impact of the market turbulence 
on clearing and settlement, the current crisis has also underlined how important it is for the 
financial system to have a robust backbone, particularly during times of stress in the system. 
Therefore, it is imperative to address inefficiencies, as well as the potential risks that result 
from having fragmented infrastructures, and we must keep up our efforts. One of the clear 
benefits of T2S is that it will reduce the need for, but provide greater access to, liquidity and 
collateral. This is crucial for both infrastructures and market participants, especially in these 
troubled times. 
At  the  same  time,  it  is  important  to  be  aware  that  the  dynamic  evolution  of  the  financial 
market  environment  continues  to  create  challenges  which  test  the  safety  and  resilience  of 
our market infrastructures. We will only be able to meet these challenges if the hard work 
done in recent years to strengthen market infrastructures continues at full speed and close 
cooperation  between  all  competent  authorities  is  maintained.  Looking  ahead,  specific 
priorities  will  be  to  make  further  progress  towards  a  consistent  prudential  framework  for 
securities  clearing  and  settlement  systems,  and  to  enhance  the  market  infrastructures  for 
OTC derivatives, which includes the establishment of one or more European CCPs for credit 
default swaps.  
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 141/2008 
 7
