Savenaca Narube: Monetary and exchange rate policies under rising 
inflation and global economic slowdown 
Opening address by Mr Savenaca Narube, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Fiji, at the 30th 
meeting of the SEACEN Directors of Research and Training, Nadi, 22 October 2008. 
 Introduction 
Dr Karunasena, SEACEN Executive Director 
Directors of Research and Training 
Resource Persons – Mr. Masaru Tanaka, Dr Susan Adams, Dr Andrew Filardo, Mr. Angus 
Sullivan 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
Bula Vinaka! 
I sincerely welcome you all to Fiji to the 30th Meeting of the SEACEN Directors of Research 
and Training. I extend a special welcome to those who are attending the meeting for the first 
time and also to those that are visiting Fiji for the first time. It is also a pleasure to see familiar 
faces as well – welcome back to Fiji. 
In  past  SEACEN  meetings  here  in  Fiji  including  the  Governors  conference  I  had  tried  to 
explain the meaning of the Fiji greeting “Bula” to the delegates. Let me take the opportunity 
to do that again this morning. You would have heard this greeting as you disembarked from 
the plane and also around this resort. You will hear this word many times throughout your 
stay  in  Fiji  –  it  is  an  all  encompassing  greeting  which  includes  hello,  good  morning,  good 
afternoon, good evening, welcome, good health and virtually everything good. It captures the 
warmth and hospitality of the people of Fiji. 
SEACEN Directors of Research and Training Meeting 
It is a pleasure to host this auspicious meeting this year. We were supposed to have done 
this one year ago. I thank Bank Indonesia for bailing us out and hosting this meeting in 2007. 
We last hosted the DORT meeting in 1993 when we were only an observer in SEACEN. So 
we are very pleased to be hosting the DORT conference again after 15 years!  
In April 2004 at the Board of Governors meeting in Colombo, Sri Lanka, Fiji formally joined 
the SEACEN family as its 13th member. We then hosted the SEACEN Board of Governors 
Meeting soon after that in 2005 and SEACEN EXCO in 2006. 
As  you  know,  Fiji  is  the  second  smallest  member  of  SEACEN  in  terms  of  population.  The 
smallest is of course Brunei. But right now we wish we have a bit of the wealth that country 
has particularly oil. We are also somewhat removed from South East Asia. As you no doubt 
have experienced, it takes a long time to come to our islands. You have tasted a bit of our 
medicine when we travel to your part of the world. But we always welcome the opportunity to 
network with our fellow SEACEN countries. It is an opportunity for us to observe, listen and 
learn from the experiences of some of the most dynamic countries in the world.  
We have benefited a lot from the SEACEN training opportunities hosted by members and the 
Center. We appreciate the efforts of the Centre in collaborating with central banks to mount 
courses, seminars and workshops as well as bringing people together to work on research 
projects. It is the relationships and networking that is formed that enables us to foster and 
strengthen partnerships and become more effective in our role as central banks. 
BIS Review 131/2008 
 1
Financial crisis 
Right  now,  everyone  is  reeling  from  the  meltdown  of  the  world  financial  markets.  It  is  the 
deepest since the great depression. I am sure none of us here were around then, but the 
length  and  the  depth  of  this  crisis  have  surprised  everyone.  It  is  now  become  a  global 
phenomenon. Asia and the Pacific will not be spared. We will feel its impact in different areas 
and degrees. 
The  1998  Asian  financial  crisis  has  forced  many  countries  in  the  region  to  strengthen 
institutions and establish mechanism that I believe have  made our financial systems  more 
robust and resilient. I think that this will help cushion the impact of this crisis in the region. 
However, like the Pacific we will all need to brace for its economic fallout. 
Themes of the meeting 
I am therefore extremely interested in today’s seminar on “Monetary and Exchange Rate 
Policies  under  Rising  Inflation  and  Global  Economic  Slowdown”.  It  is  relevant  and 
timely. 
This financial crisis has compounded our economic woes in Fiji. It has come on top of a deep 
economic decline of over 6 percent last year. It has also arrived at a time when our exports 
have  not  performed  to  expectation  which  has  been  further  exacerbated  by  the  high  world 
prices  of  oil  and  food.  This  combination  has  exerted  extreme  pressure  on  our  balance  of 
payments. 
In Fiji, we expect the economic fallout of the crisis to impact our tourism industry the most. 
The onset of a global recession combined with movements in exchange rate is expected to 
dampen tourist’s plans to visit Fiji. Tourism is the vehicle that we had anticipated to take us 
out of the economic decline back to a modest growth path. We will now need to reassess 
this.  Our  earlier  estimate  for  a  1.7  percent  growth  this  year  and  1.5  percent  next  year  is 
under serious threat. 
We  are  however  relieved  by  the  fall  in  oil  prices.  Like  many  of  you,  we  have  introduced 
several fiscal measures to cushion the impact of the increase in oil and food prices. But we 
basically cannot cushion their full impact given our balance of payments and debt position. 
We are relying on some demand management to help us reduce imports. Demand is already 
responding but the fuel import bill is still quadrupled our historical level. Inflation, at over 9 
percent, is the highest in over twenty years. 
It  presents  considerable  challenges  to  policy  makers.  How  can  you  pump  prime  an  ailing 
economy when the balance of payments are weak and inflation rising? 
Fiji’s scenario fits snuggly into today’s agenda. Mr. Tanaka’s keynote address is about the 
challenges  we  face  in  the  era  of  uncertainty.  Dr  Susan  Adams  will  discuss  the  trade  off 
between inflation and growth. And Dr Filardo and Dr Oh will address the policy options that 
may be available for central banks. We keenly look forward to these discussions and I am 
sure that we will take back with us some of the lessons that will help us in our policy work.  
Let me briefly share Fiji’s experience in monetary management with you. In Fiji, we have a 
political  dimension  to  our  economic  scenario.  Under  such  a  combination  of  factors,  the 
prescriptive  policy  medicine  may  not  work  very  well.  We  have  therefore  chosen  to 
temporarily  abandon  our  market  based  monetary  strategy  and  opted  for  a  rather  direct 
approach. We have introduced a credit ceiling but allowed commercial banks to exceed this 
ceiling  only  for  lending  to  priority  sectors.  This  is  working  well  for  us.  It  has  allowed  us  to 
suppress consumer lending and raise liquidity which has lowered interest rates. In addition, 
we  have  selectively  used  capital  controls  to  protect  our  foreign  reserves  while  the  fixed 
exchange  rate  continues  to  anchor  inflation.  This  combination  has  slowed  down  demand 
without  shutting  out  investment,  stabilised  our  foreign  reserves  and  kept  inflation  at  single 
digits. 
2 
 BIS Review 131/2008
Let me say something on the second theme of this meeting. We all know how important HR 
is  to  our  business  or  any  business  for  that  matter.  I  am  therefore  pleased  that  you  have 
combined this meeting with a Directors of Training seminar on HR as Strategic Business 
Partner. We in Fiji, again because of our small size, have a very small pool of skilled people. 
In addition, we loose a lot of our experience and knowledge abroad especially to Australia 
and New Zealand. While I know that this is a global trend, we are however at the bottom of 
the  pecking  order.  We  have  nowhere  to  replenish  our  losses  from.  Inevitably  we  need  to 
continue training and capacity building. It is however a costly exercise. 
SEACEN is doing a lot in building partnership in this capacity building and I commend their 
contributions. There is a lot that we can share amongst ourselves. We run our own individual 
training. There is no reason why we cannot share this training more widely than what we are 
doing already. It would be efficient to do so. Our collaboration with other training providers 
will also be useful. 
I always emphasise three things on training to my colleagues. One is that the Reserve Bank 
of Fiji will be an organisation that encourages capacity building and puts priority on training. 
The second is that we should ensure that the training is relevant. The last thing, which tends 
not to receive the attention it deserves, is that we need to measure the effectiveness of this 
training not only in the sort term but also in the medium to longer term. 
Arrangements 
Let me now move on to the fun side of our meetings. We must have fun as we work. That is 
the pacific way. During your brief stay in Fiji, we have arranged a few activities that will give 
you a taste of what Fiji is about. Tomorrow night, we will have the traditional kava ceremony 
and some cultural dances. On Friday, there is a cruise to Mala Mala Island, one of the many 
uninhabited islands off this coast line. We can arrange golf for those who wish to take up this 
option. On Friday evening, we will have fire dancing and a beach BBQ.  
Of  course,  we  must  encourage  you  to  shop  while  you  are  here  to  help  our  balance  of 
payments.  A  shopping  visit  to  nearby  Nadi  town  and  Port  Denarau  should  not  be  missed. 
You may also wish to also try our local dress code which are the bula shirts and “sulus” (or 
skirts) for the men and what we call the “sulu jiaba” for the ladies. The secretariat will only be 
too pleased to provide any assistance that you may need. The dress code for all our evening 
dinners will be bula dress or smart casual.  
Conclusion 
In concluding, let me say that the global financial environment that we operate and live in is 
becoming  more  and  more  unpredictable.  As  central  bankers,  we  will  need  to  respond 
accordingly  in  order  to  maintain  macroeconomic  stability  in  such  a  hostile  environment. 
Research and capacity building are two important pillars of our work that will help us meet 
the challenges that we are facing now and will face in the future.  
I thank the SEACEN Executive Director and his team for the arrangements they have made 
for this conference.  
I sincerely hope that you will find the conference fruitful and I that you will enjoy your stay in 
Fiji.  
Vinaka Vakalevu and thank you. 
BIS Review 131/2008 
 3
