Axel A Weber: Risk transfer – challenges for financial institutions and 
markets  
Dinner speech by Professor Axel A Weber, President of the Deutsche Bundesbank, at the 
Joint  Bundesbank-CEPR-CFS  conference 
for  Financial 
Institutions and Markets”, Frankfurt am Main, 11 December 2008. 
“Risk  Transfer:  Challenges 
 1 
Introduction  
Ladies and gentlemen 
I wish to extend a warm welcome to you at this conference dinner on the occasion of the joint 
Bundesbank-CEPR-CFS conference here in Frankfurt. 
The many aspects of credit risk transfer (CRT) that you addressed in your research papers – 
from the pricing of subprime mortgage risk through to counterparty risk in financial contracts 
– reveal just how broad and complex this topic is. And the current financial turmoil provides 
striking  confirmation  of  how  relevant  this  topic  is,  as  CRT  may  adversely  affect  financial 
stability.  The  different  forms  of  CRT  are  playing  a  key  role,  not  least  in  the  world  wide 
discussion  on  regulatory  responses  to  this  crisis.  I  therefore  believe  that  this  conference 
presents a great opportunity for you as researchers to exchange your findings and views on 
risk transfer. However, I also hope that it makes a contribution to the current search for an 
adequate regulatory framework for the financial markets.  
In my following remarks, I would like to comment briefly on CRT in the recent crisis and on 
some measures that are about to be taken. 
Credit Risk Transfer (CRT) in the recent crisis 
2 
When  analysing  an  economic  event  such  as  the  current  financial  crisis,  it  is  usually  very 
helpful to consult some economic theory. In the case of CRT general economic theory tells 
us that CRT is, in principal, beneficial. 
First, it may lead to a better risk allocation as it disconnects the originator of a risky asset 
from  the  ultimate  risk  taker.  Second,  referring  to  a  result  of  the  model  by  Hakenes  and 
Schnabel  presented  at  this  conference,  better  risk  allocation  provides  scope  for  socially 
beneficial  projects  that,  otherwise,  would  not  have  been  financed.  Finally,  as  the  Basel 
Committee  on  Banking  Supervision  points  out  in  The  Joint  Forum  on  Credit  Risk  Transfer 
(2008), “CRT has made the market pricing of credit risk more liquid and transparent”.  
However,  in  the  current  financial  crisis  different  methods  of  CRT  applied  by  financial 
institutions have made for negative headlines in the newspapers: 
Securitisation – Financial institutions (for example, IKB) that were engaged in the American 
mortgage  market  through  financial  products  such  as  RMBS  suffered  major  unexpected 
losses when house prices in the US started to decline.  
Credit Default Swaps (CDS) – Some insurance companies and other financial institutions 
are involved in insuring structured products linked to the US mortgage market in the form of 
CDS. Some of them experienced large losses and had to be rescued by the government (for 
example,  AIG).  The  bankruptcy  of  a  big  credit  risk  insurer  threatens  the  insured  financial 
institutions, which often undervalue counterparty risk. The crisis may be exacerbated in this 
way.  
Off-balance-sheet vehicles – Banks have transferred their credit risk to off-balance-sheet 
vehicles, such as SIVs and conduits, in order to save capital costs. The business model of 
these vehicles built on maturity transformation broke down leading to liquidity problems of the 
BIS Review 158/2008 
 1
SIVs  and  conduits.  Owing  to  reputation  concerns,  the  banks  took  the  suffering  SIVs  and 
conduits back on to their balance sheet. This transferred the credit and liquidity risk back to 
the banks and triggered the loss of confidence in the money market. 
All  these  examples  show  that  we  are  experiencing  severe  problems  with  CRT.  I  would 
therefore like to pose two questions. What are the weaknesses in CRT markets? How can 
we change the institutional framework in order to profit from the social benefits of CRT? 
Weaknesses in CRT markets 
3 
Concerning weaknesses in CRT markets, I would like to draw your attention again to general 
economic theory as this enables us to identify fundamental problems that are well known to 
an  economist.  We  deal  with  problems  such  as  wrong  incentives  for  economic  agents, 
insufficient transparency, and regulatory arbitrage. Let me point out just a few examples. 
Moral hazard – One possible weakness in the CRT  market results from the securitisation 
and  subsequent  distribution  of  credit  risk.  Once  the  credit  risk  is  forwarded,  there  is  no 
incentive for the originator of the credit risk to monitor the debtor. Hence, we are dealing with 
the  classical  phenomenon  of  moral  hazard.  The  empirical  results  of  a  paper  by  Mora  and 
Sowerbutts  at  the  conference  indicate  that  this  is  not  only  a  theoretical  reflection,  but  a 
present mechanism in the securitisation market. They show that retaining a greater fraction 
of  credit  risk  in  the  balance  sheet  of  the  originator  significantly  lowers  the  probability  of 
default of the underlying loan. The same problem may arise in the case of CRT via CDS, as 
Parlour  and  Winton  show  in  their  paper.  In  their  theoretical  model,  the  monitoring  of  the 
underlying loan is inefficiently low if a bank frees up regulatory capital by buying a CDS. The 
reason for this is that while the insured originator of the loan has no incentive to monitor, the 
insurer lacks the control rights. 
Transparency – Another weakness in the CRT market results from its potential opaqueness. 
During  the  past  decade,  we  have  experienced  a  hitherto  unique  process  of  credit  risk 
dispersion  that  had  its  roots  in  the  US  subprime  market.  The  decodification  of  the  actual 
degree  of  entanglement  is  still  in  progress.  In  a  recently  published  paper,  Gary  B.  Gorton 
gives a very detailed description of the different steps of CRT. And he argues that while the 
interlinking  of  securities,  structures  and  derivatives  made  it  possible  for  risk  to  be  spread 
among many capital market participants, it simultaneously resulted in a loss of transparency 
as to where these risks ultimately ended up.  
This  loss  in  transparency  meant  that  market  participants  did  not  evaluate  their  credit  risk 
adequately.  In  the  CDO  market,  for  example,  the  inherent  systemic  risk  of  certain  CDO 
products,  such  as  RMBS  on  US  housing  loans,  was  not  taken  into  account.  Market 
participants often relied solely on credit ratings and were attracted by the fact that these loan 
securities had larger spreads than similarly-rated corporate bonds. The resulting increase in 
demand for these products boosted their supply and allowed a decline in the quality of the 
underlying  loans.  Hence,  securitisation  and  the  “originate  to  distribute”  business  model 
became  more  and  more  attractive,  which  is  highlighted  by  the  fact  that  in  2005-06  dealer 
firms transferred more subprime risk to investors than was originated during this period.  
In the case of credit derivatives, a further aspect heightens the lack of transparency. The vast 
majority  of  these  agreements  are  made  over  the  counter.  This  not  only  aggravates  the 
misevaluation  of  counterparty  risk,  it  also  causes  an  evaluation  problem  concerning  the 
systemic  risk  in  the  CDS  market.  This,  in  turn,  exacerbates  uncertainty  and  loss  of 
confidence among market participants. 
Regulatory arbitrage – In addition, the well-functioning of markets in general is at stake as 
market  participants  usually  try  to  find  methods  to  evade  regulatory  regimes.  Financial 
institutions  shifting  credit  risk  to  off-balance-sheet  vehicles  was  a  typical  form  of  such  a 
regulatory arbitrage. In doing so, banks used a loophole in the old regulatory regime, which 
2 
 BIS Review 158/2008
did not capture these vehicles. This loophole has been closed with the introduction of Basel 
II. 
Changes to the institutional framework 
4 
But how can we change the institutional framework in order to avoid the mentioned frictions 
in the financial market and gain from the social benefits of CRT? 
For more than one year, international institutions, central banks, and politicians have been 
working  together  on  the  lessons  to  be  learnt  from  the  financial  crisis.  At  the  Summit  on 
Financial Markets and the World Economy held in New York in November of this year, the 
Heads of State of the G20 agreed on “Common Principles for Reform of Financial Markets”. 
International  Institutions,  such  as  the  IMF  or  FSF,  published  valuable  reports  and 
recommendations  on  possible  improvement  of  the  financial  architecture.  Furthermore, 
national central banks are contributing their expertise to the discussion. However, in order to 
achieve  improvements  in  the  financial  architecture  that  substantially  strengthen  financial 
stability,  an  in-depth  analysis  of  the  underlying  reasons  for  the  crisis  is  essential.  In  this 
respect, the economic research that takes place at universities and various institutions is of 
great  importance.  For  that  reason,  economic  research  should  have  a  strong  voice  in  the 
current debate. I therefore believe that events such as this conference are very important. 
But let me come back to my question about adequate changes to the institutional framework. 
As you can surely imagine, there are a great number of aspects that I could mention at this 
point. However, I fear that would go beyond the scope of my speech. I shall therefore confine 
myself to mentioning two measures, that are about to be taken. 
Central counterparty (CCP) for OTC derivatives – The first measure aims to enhance the 
transparency of the CDS market by implementing one or more CCPs for OTC derivatives. 
The advantages would be a reduction in market participants’ open positions due to netting as 
well as a better management and possible reduction of counterparty risk – for example, by 
guarantee funds or insurance schemes. In addition, the implementation of a CCP could be 
accompanied  by  disclosure  requirements  for  CDS  positions  of  the  originator.  These 
requirements  could  also  mitigate  the  just  mentioned  moral  hazard  problem  in  the  case  of 
forwarded  credit  risk  via  CDS.  As  Parlour  and  Winton  showed  in  their  paper,  reputation 
mechanisms  may  partly  solve  the  problem  of  inefficient  monitoring  incentives  of  the 
originator. Disclosure requirements are a prerequisite for such a reputation mechanism, as 
the market participants have to know the track record of the originator. Regulators on both 
sides of the Atlantic unanimously agree that there is a need for the implementation of a CCP 
for OTC derivatives. However, there is an ongoing debate on the specific design of such an 
institution.  The  first  steps  towards  the  implementation  of  a  CCP  were  initiated by  the  New 
York FED aiming for a single CCP located in the US. More recently, the Governing Council of 
the ECB discussed the idea of an additional European CCP. 
The Bundesbank is in favour of this “European solution” as the Eurosystem should be able to 
influence and to oversee these market infrastructures without any restrictions, especially in 
times of financial turmoil.  
Retention of a share of securitised products on the balance sheet of the originator – 
Another  concept  has  the  objective  of  solving  the  moral  hazard  problem  arising  from  the 
securitisation  of  credit  risk.  The  idea  is  that  if  the  originator  has  to  retain  a  share  of  the 
securitised  products  on  his  balance  sheet,  the  incentive  to  monitor  the  underlying  loan 
remains.  European  Commissioner  McCreevy  has  proposed  a  5%  retention  of  securitised 
products  on  the  balance  sheet  of  the  originator  and  the  Ecofin  Council  has  agreed  to  this 
proposal at its meeting on 2 December. Consequently, this issue will now be discussed in the 
European Parliament.  
BIS Review 158/2008 
 3
The Bundesbank in general agrees with the European Commission’s proposal as it is a step 
into the right direction in terms of avoiding moral hazard problems arising from securitisation. 
Therefore, the Bundesbank welcomes the decision taken by Ecofin. 
Concluding remarks 
5 
So this is my storyline concerning CRT – it is a story of the continual trade-off for financial 
regulators between the benefits of free markets and the threat of market failures.  
And I would like to emphasise that I believe this struggle for the right regulatory framework 
will  go  on.  Certainly,  we  will  learn  from  this  crisis  and  we  will  enhance  regulation  and 
supervision  in  order  to  erase  the  sources  of  this  crisis.  However,  financial  markets  will 
generate  new  financial  products;  there  will  emerge  new  forms  of  incentive  problems, 
insufficient 
transparency,  and  regulatory  arbitrage.  Financial  regulators  as  well  as 
researchers  in  the  field  of  financial  regulation  have  to  bear  this  in  mind  so  that  those 
developments  in  the  financial  markets  that  threaten  financial  stability  can  be  identified  as 
soon as possible.   
Thank you very much for your attention. 
4 
 BIS Review 158/2008
