Jean-Claude Trichet: European financial integration 
Speech  by  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the  23. 
Internationales ZinsFORUM ”Zinsen 2009”, Frankfurt am Main, 11 December 2008. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I  would  like  to  thank  the  organisers  for  the  invitation  to  speak  about  European  financial 
integration here at the Zinsforum. The challenging times we are now experiencing provide an 
excellent opportunity to exchange thoughts on this topic that is of great interest to the ECB. 
More  integrated  financial  markets  are  important  for  realising  the  full  potential  of  the  single 
market. But they also make the execution of the single monetary policy in the euro area more 
efficient, which is obviously of key importance to the ECB. 
My speech today has two major themes. I will start by addressing the current stage of the 
financial integration process in Europe. The introduction of the euro as a single currency 
was  a  quantum  leap  for  the  integration  process;  but  I  believe  that  further  efforts  are  still 
needed to make the objective of a competitive and safe single market in financial services 
come true. I am convinced that this process should be first and foremost market-driven. But I 
also  believe  that  public  authorities  have  a  role  in  fostering  financial  integration  in  Europe. 
This  is  particularly  true  when  it  comes  to  supporting  the  private  sector  to  coordinate  their 
action and to reducing policy-related obstacles to cross-border activities.  
The  second  theme  I  will  address  today  against  the  backdrop  of  European  financial 
integration are the regulatory and supervisory initiatives that have been taken recently in 
light  of  the  ongoing  financial  crisis.  These  pertain  both  to  managing  the  crisis  and  to 
preventing a recurrence in the future. I do believe that continued efforts are needed in this 
regard, in particular to enhance cooperation among the authorities. 
The state of European financial integration  
But  before  going  into  our  assessment  on  the  state  of  financial  integration,  I  will  briefly 
elaborate on the reasons behind our interest in this topic. For the ECB, financial integration is 
not an end in itself, but it is relevant for a number of issues that are important to us.  
First, financial integration matters for the ECB as it contributes to the efficient functioning 
of  the  monetary  union.  Integrated  financial  markets  support  the  effective  transmission  of 
the  single  monetary  policy  throughout  the  euro  area  and  the  smooth  operation  of  the 
underlying payment systems. Financial integration also increases the depth and liquidity of 
financial  markets,  and  consequently  enhances  the  resilience  of  the  European  financial 
system. In addition, it offers more possibilities for geographical risk diversification. Obviously, 
a more resilient financial system is highly relevant for the ECB’s task of contributing to the 
safeguarding of financial stability. 
Second, and more generally, integrated financial markets help to realise the full economic 
potential  of  the  European  Union,  as  also  recalled  in  the  Lisbon  strategy.  Financial 
integration contributes to the development of the financial system by increasing competition 
and  expanding  markets,  which  results  in  lower  intermediation  costs  and  a  more  efficient 
allocation  of  capital.  These  effects,  in  turn,  raise  the  potential  for  increased  economic 
growth.1  
                                                 
1   For example, a study by London Economics once estimated that the integration of the European bond and 
equity  markets  could  result  in  an  additional  GDP  growth  of  around  1%  over  a  ten-year  period,  or 
BIS Review 157/2008 
 1
For the reasons I come to mention, the ECB has always been a very strong supporter of the 
European  financial  integration  process.  We  therefore  monitor  developments  in  this  area 
closely, and present our view in our annual report on Financial Integration in Europe.2 As a 
matter  of  fact,  we  have  now  just  started  the  work  on  our  third  report,  which  we  intend  to 
publish in Spring 2009.  
Let  me  now  give  you  an  overview  of  our  assessment  on  the  current  state  of  play  in  the 
various financial markets. 
We have developed a number of quantitative indicators to track the integration of the money, 
bond,  equity  and  banking  markets  in  the  euro  area.  These  indicators show  that,  since  the 
introduction of the single currency, integration has advanced significantly. However, progress 
has  also  been  uneven  across  financial  markets.  Two  main  conclusions  stand  out  in  this 
regard: First, integration is typically more advanced in those markets that are closer to the 
single monetary policy. Second, it also depends on the degree of integration of the related 
market infrastructures.  
In order to highlight the role of infrastructures, I would in particular like to mention the long 
history  and  success  of  TARGET,  the  Eurosystem  real-time  gross  settlement  facility  for 
euro payments. This system has since 1999 enabled the safe and efficient euro-area wide 
handling  of  interbank  payment  transactions.  The  enhanced  version  of  this  system, 
TARGET2,  provides  since  the  completion  of  the  migration  of  the  national  central  banks  in 
May 2008 a single shared platform for euro wholesale payments. As a result, we now have 
an even more integrated and efficient payments landscape. Indeed, TARGET2 is the first 
market  infrastructure  to  be  completely  integrated  and  harmonised  at  the  European 
level!  TARGET2  processes  a  daily  average  of  nearly  400,000  transactions,  for  a  daily 
average  value  of  2.6  trillion  euro.  This  positions  TARGET2  as  one  of  the  largest  payment 
systems in the world – together with Fedwire in the United States, and CLS, the international 
system for settling foreign exchange transactions. 
This success of large-value payment systems integration has been instrumental in achieving 
and  sustaining  financial  integration  in  the  money  market.  The  evolution  towards  a  single 
market  can  be  observed  in  terms  of  cross-country  standard  deviation  of  the  unsecured 
interbank  lending  rates.  These  decreased  to  negligible  levels  of  two  to  three  basis  points 
almost immediately after the introduction of the euro, indicating near-perfect integration.  
Bond markets also show clear signs of integration. We observe that over the past ten years, 
bond yields are being increasingly driven by factors common to the euro area, rather than by 
purely  local  factors.  At  the  same  time,  euro  area  investors  are  seen  to  be  progressively 
diversifying  their  portfolios  on  a  cross-border  basis.  Currently,  euro  area  residents  have 
almost 60% of their total bond portfolios in euro area cross-border bond holdings.  
It  is  interesting  to  see  how  the  recent  financial  crisis  has  affected  the  evolution  of  our 
financial integration indicators in the money and government bond markets. In both markets, 
spreads and standard deviations of rates across euro area countries increased in 2008. The 
turmoil  in  2007  only  seemed  to  affect  the  unsecured  money  market  rates.  The  recent 
intensification,  however,  has  led  to  a  rise  in  the  cross-country  standard  deviations  of  one- 
and  twelve-month  secured  money  market  rates  as  well,  from  their  usual  level  of 1.5  basis 
points to 5-6 basis points.  
The key question is how much of this recent divergence should be allocated to factors 
related to financial integration, and how much of it has its origin in other factors. To be 
                                                                                                                                                         
approximately 100 billion euro. See London Economics (2002), “Quantification of the macroeconomic impact 
of integration of EU financial markets”, Report to the European Commission. 
2   See the Report on Financial Integration in Europe at 
http://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/pdf/other/financialintegrationineurope200804en.pdf. 
2 
 BIS Review 157/2008
more  precise,  higher  spreads  that  result  from  higher  counterparty  risk  or  increased  risk 
aversion  do  not  necessarily  point  to  a  more  segmented  market,  but  are  rather  rooted  in  a 
general change in investor behaviour. Increased liquidity risk, on the other hand, could well 
indicate more market segmentation. 
Our preliminary analysis confirms that, although these general factors have played a large 
role  in  the  increased  spreads  and  standard  deviations,  we  also  find  some  indication  of 
increased liquidity risk. However, I would like to stress that all assessments we can make 
at this juncture are still preliminary. We are not yet out of the storm, and a more complete 
and thorough analysis will have to wait for some time to come. My message at this point of 
time  is  for  us  all  to  remain  committed  to  a  continuous  integration  process  in  the 
European  financial  markets,  and  resist  the  tendency  to  focus  on  national  markets  under 
tension. Let us therefore not lose the momentum in these uncertain times. 
I  now  turn  to  the  equity  markets,  where  it  is  considerably  harder  to  measure  financial 
integration.  This  is  not  least  because  stock  returns  are  less  directly  comparable  across 
countries  than  returns  in  the  money  and  government  bond  markets.  Notwithstanding  this 
difficulty, our assessment shows signs of continuously increasing integration, and currently, 
there is no indication that this trend has been affected by the financial crisis. For example, 
euro area residents doubled their share of euro area cross-border holdings over the past ten 
years  to  slightly  below  one  third  of  their  total  equity  holdings.  Moreover,  according  to  our 
indicators, integration here seems to advance faster at the European than at the global level. 
At the same time, country-specific factors still play a significant role in the equity markets, not 
least  because  of  the  continued  fragmentation  in  the  post-trading  infrastructure.  A  pan-
European  infrastructure  for  securities  clearing  and  settlement  in  the  EU  would  therefore 
certainly provide new impetus for further integration. 
Equity markets offer me a nice entry point to make you aware of a new type of indicators that 
we are currently developing. Financial integration is an important, but not the only factor that 
contributes to the efficiency of the financial system. There are indeed other relevant factors, 
such  as  the  degree  of  financial  development  or  the  quality  of  the  framework  within  which 
financial markets operate. In the ECB we are now in the process of extending our analysis 
from financial integration to the development of financial markets. We understand financial 
development broadly as a process of financial innovation and organisational improvements. 
This includes developments that reduce asymmetric information; increase the completeness 
of  markets;  add  possibilities  to  engage  in  financial  transactions  through  contracts;  reduce 
transaction  costs;  and  increase  competition.  The  idea  to  extend  our  work  from  financial 
integration to financial development goes back to the ECOFIN Council’s invitation in 2006 to 
“monitor and assess relevant institutional features that hinder the efficient functioning of the 
financial system”.  
One  of  these  financial  development  indicators  measures  the  level  of  venture  capital 
financing. Venture capital is indeed an attractive additional source of corporate financing, as 
it  provides  financing  to  young  and  small,  research-based  firms,  which  typically  face 
constraints  in  the  more  traditional  markets.  Our  indicator  shows  a  rise  in  venture  capital 
financing  in  Europe  in  the  recent  years;  however,  the  starting  level  is  very  low.  More 
precisely, the euro area average for the last five years amounts to 0.02% of GDP, compared 
with 0.1% in the United States. Therefore, I see more room for investigating ways to promote 
the development of this type of markets as well.  
The final market I want to include in my overview of the state of financial integration is the 
banking  market.  Again,  banking  markets  offer  a  nice  illustration  of  how  important  the 
underlying  infrastructure  is.  The  wholesale  and  capital  market-related  segments  are 
supported by TARGET2 and, not surprisingly, are well integrated. For example, cross-border 
interbank  loans  account  for  a  quarter  of  total  interbank  loans,  and  banks’  intra  euro  area 
cross-border  holdings  of  bank  securities  have  almost  tripled  over  the  past  decade.  By 
contrast, the corporate and retail banking markets have remained more fragmented so far, 
BIS Review 157/2008 
 3
also reflecting the multiplicity of existing payment systems. For instance, the euro area cross-
border loans to non-banks have remained at low levels, currently at below 6% of the total. 
Similarly,  the  cross-country  dispersion  of  banks’  interest  rates  on  loans  to  firms  and 
households has remained relatively high, especially with regard to consumer loans.  
Now,  the  ECB  and  the  Eurosystem  are  working  hard  to  address  the  remaining  gaps  in 
financial integration, in particular when it comes to market infrastructures. The year 2008 
has marked the launches of two important projects in this regard: TARGET2-Securities and 
SEPA.  
The  Eurosystem’s  TARGET2-Securities,  or  T2S,  initiative  establishes  a  pan-European 
securities settlement platform, in which cross-border transactions will be settled at the same 
price and as efficiently as domestic transactions. Moreover, the T2S settlement cost will be 
significantly  lower  than  the  cost  of  domestic  transactions  today.  In  addition  to  the  pure 
settlement cost, banks and other users would also achieve back-office and collateral savings.  
The  T2S  User  Requirements  are  a  result  of  intensive  cooperation  by  hundreds  of  experts 
from  market  participants,  service  providers  and  central  bankers.  By  July  2008,  we  had 
received  support  of  all  euro  area  central  securities  depositories  to  the  continuation  of  the 
project, subject to certain conditions. Consequently, on 17 July the Governing Council of the 
ECB formally approved the T2S project. The pan-European settlement platform is scheduled 
to go live by 2013. 
Importantly  for  the  retail  banking  sector,  the Single Euro Payments  Area, or SEPA,  was 
launched in January 2008. SEPA aims to achieve a fully integrated market for retail payment 
services  in  the  euro  area,  with  the  means  of  harmonised  technical  standards  and  market 
practices. With SEPA, there is no distinction anymore between cross-border and domestic 
payments. The European Commission estimates that SEPA could bring substantial benefits 
over  the  next  six  years.  Moreover,  these  benefits  would  be  further  very  significantly 
increased if SEPA can be used for electronic invoicing!  
The  main  priority  for  all  the  stakeholders  is  now  to  make  every  possible  effort  to 
implement  SEPA  timely  and  in  full.  The  final  hurdles  –  which  by  definition  are  the  most 
difficult  in  a  market  integration  project  of  this  ambition,  size  and  complexity  –  need  to  be 
overcome.  Without  going  into  too  much  detail,  banks  and  competition  authorities  urgently 
need to come to an understanding with regard to the future inter-bank pricing models in the 
retail payments market. Finally, the studies by the ECB and the European Commission have 
clearly  shown  that  a  long  parallel  processing  of  the  old  national  and  the  new  SEPA 
instruments is costly for both banks and their customers. Consequently, the period of dual 
processing  should  be  kept  as  short  as  possible.  The  Eurosystem  therefore  has  voiced  its 
support for setting a realistic but ambitious end-date for the SEPA migration.  
Regulatory and supervisory initiatives  
I now turn to the second major theme of my speech. These are the recent regulatory and 
supervisory initiatives in Europe that are closely related to financial integration and that are 
particularly relevant in light of the ongoing financial crisis.  
As I mentioned earlier, financial integration presents large potential benefits for the European 
economy. At the same time, it also poses important challenges to supervisory authorities 
and  central  banks.  Indeed,  while  more  integrated  markets  increase  the  shock-absorbing 
capacity of the financial system, such shocks may propagate more quickly, thereby affecting 
a  wider  number  and  range  of  market  participants.  In  the  same  way,  a  large,  systemically 
relevant cross-border financial institution would clearly have implications for financial stability 
in the event that it runs into problems.  
4 
 BIS Review 157/2008
These  challenges  have  become  quite  evident  in  the  past  months.  The  financial  crisis  has 
underscored  the  importance  of  appropriate  public  policy  in  both  crisis  prevention  and 
crisis management. 
I  will  start  with  crisis  prevention.  In  the  face  of  increased  market  integration,  European 
supervisors are confronted with the long-standing challenge of ensuring that their actions are 
both effective and efficient. Or to put it differently: they have to balance the need that their 
actions contribute to preserving financial stability, while at the same time avoiding creating 
any unnecessary regulatory burden for the supervised entities.  
A  major  step  to  achieve  this  was  the  introduction  of  the  Lamfalussy  process,  which  has 
promoted more efficient and effective regulation and supervision in the EU financial services 
sector in the past years. The Lamfalussy process was initially created with the purpose to 
accelerate the adoption of regulatory measures related to the Financial Services Action Plan 
in  the  securities  sector.  Over  time  it  has  in  addition  assumed  a  very  important  function  in 
supervisory convergence and cooperation in the whole financial sector. The Eurosystem has 
from the outset fully supported the Lamfalussy process. 
A  review  of  the  Lamfalussy  process  by  the  EU  institutions  led  the  ECOFIN  to  adopt  a 
number  of  recommendations  in  December  2007  to  better  exploit  the  full  potential  of  the 
approach.  The  implementation  of  these  recommendations  is  currently  well  under  way.  To 
begin  with,  earlier  this  year  the  Level  3  committees  of  supervisors  have  introduced  the 
possibility for qualified majority voting into their charters; the members that do not comply are 
obliged  to  explain  their  decision  not  to  do  so.  This  will  improve  the  effectiveness  of  the 
committees’  decision-making  processes.  Moreover,  the  committees  have  to  submit  their 
annual  work  programmes  to  the  Commission,  the  European  Council  and  the  European 
Parliament,  thereby  enhancing  accountability  of  their  activities.  Finally,  the  European 
Commission will include explicit references to specific tasks, such as mediation or facilitation 
of information exchange, into the Decisions establishing these committees.  
A lot of emphasis has recently been placed on the creation and strengthening of colleges of 
supervisors  for  European  cross-border  banks.  As  you  may  know,  the  main  task  of  these 
colleges is to organise cooperation and sharing of information between the home and host 
supervisory  authorities  of  those  Member  States  in  which  the  cross-border  banks  have 
significant activities. In May 2008, the ECOFIN recommended to strengthen the role of the 
colleges and to extend their use to all banking groups with cross-border activities in the EU.  
The establishment of the colleges of supervisors will be accompanied by a clarification of the 
legal framework. The Commission has proposed amendments to the Capital Requirements 
Directive (CRD) to enhance the legal underpinnings of the colleges. These amendments 
pertain in particular to the interplay between the consolidating supervisor, which is chairing 
the  college,  and  the  authorities  that  are  responsible  for  the  significant  branches  and 
subsidiaries of the cross-border group.  
Now  allow  me  to  make  some  comments  as  regards  the  envisaged  role  of  the  colleges  of 
supervisors  and  the  Commission’s  proposal.  In  general,  I  believe  that  the  colleges  will 
improve supervisory cooperation, in particular as regards the effectiveness, efficiency and 
consistency of the supervisory action. 
First, in terms of effectiveness, the colleges should facilitate the information exchange on a 
cross-border  group  and  enable  all  the  involved  supervisors  to  have  full  knowledge  of  the 
overall risk profile of the group. Moreover, the colleges should improve the coordination of 
supervision  and  risk  assessment,  both  as  regards  consolidated  and  solo  supervision,  and 
arrange for the division of tasks.  
Second,  the  colleges  should  over  time  become  the  main  supervisory  interface  for  the 
banking  groups.  This  would  lead  to  higher  efficiency,  as  any  unnecessary  duplication  of 
supervisory requirements should be avoided. 
BIS Review 157/2008 
 5
the 
let  me  stress 
importance  of  effective 
Third,  the  common  legal  underpinnings  for  the  colleges  in  the  revised  CRD  will  ensure 
consistency  across  colleges.  In  addition,  the  ECB  supports  the  work  by  the  CEBS  on 
developing operational guidelines. These guidelines have the aim to further align the working 
procedures of the colleges, the efficacy of their decision-making bodies, and the coherence 
of the practices used across colleges.  
However,  it  remains  to  be  seen  whether  such  a  framework  will  suffice,  or  whether  further 
improvements will be needed. The key challenges now lie in its implementation. Let me 
mention some examples in this regard.  
First,  the  effectiveness  of  the  colleges  depends  on  their  ability  to  facilitate  decision-
making for the banking group as a whole. The CRD is expected to introduce some rules on 
the  decision-making  process  should  the  authorities  disagree  on  essential  decisions 
concerning  supervision  of  cross-border  banking  groups.  Recent  events  clearly  underscore 
that  swift  decision-making  is  of  the  essence;  we  cannot  afford  to  have  a  cumbersome 
decision-making process in case of disagreements.  
Second, the coordination role of Level 3 committees would be of critical importance to ensure 
consistency of supervisory actions across colleges.  
information  exchange.  First, 
Finally, 
communication  between  the  home  and  host  supervisors  within the colleges  is  crucial  for 
the  full  understanding  of  the  risk  profile  of  the  group.  Second,  the  financial  turmoil  has 
highlighted the importance of information sharing between central banks and supervisors 
for the identification and assessment of risks to financial stability.  
Moving  from  crisis  prevention  to  crisis  management,  I  would  like  to  stress  that  the  well 
coordinated action by public authorities was instrumental in limiting possible cross-border 
spillovers in the recent crisis.  
To  illustrate  this  point,  let  me  just  quickly  recall  that  the  Eurosystem  and  other  central 
banks  have  ensured  adequate  access  to  central  bank  funding  to  liquidity-constrained  but 
solvent banks. Governments, on their part, in a concerted and coordinated manner granted 
guarantees on new issuances of bank debt. They in addition committed to providing banks 
with  additional  capital  resources,  and  jointly  decided  to  raise  the  level  of  protection  of 
deposits. 
The Eurosystem has contributed to this work by proposing a set of recommendations on 
the  appropriate  framework  for  both  the  granting  of  government  guarantees  and  the 
recapitalisation measures for financially sound banks.  
With regard to the government guarantees, the Eurosystem recommendations provided not 
only  overarching  objectives  but  also  specific  parameters  for  the  pricing  system.  In  these 
recommendations,  we  have  stressed  the  importance  of  supporting  solvent  but  liquidity 
constrained  banks  and  preserving  the  level  playing  field.  In  addition,  consistency  with  the 
Eurosystem’s 
the 
implementation of the single monetary policy.  
With  regard  to  the  recapitalisation  measures,  the  Eurosystem,  in  collaboration  with  the 
European Commission, also contributed by elaborating a common framework for the pricing 
of different forms of capitalisation instruments. These measures aim to strengthen the capital 
position of fundamentally sound banks and to restore a smooth flow of credit to the economy. 
At the same time, they aim to preserve a level playing field and avoid undue distortions in 
competition. It is in addition important to ensure that the temporary nature of the government 
measures  is  preserved  and  that  private  investors  are  not  being  discouraged.  The 
methodology of the Eurosystem has been incorporated in the Commission’s communication 
on the recapitalisation of financial institutions.  
Finally, coordinated action was very important in the granting of state deposit guarantees. 
We all saw how initially uncoordinated initiatives immediately led to spill-overs with potential 
liquidity  management  should  be  ensured  so  as  not 
impair 
to 
6 
 BIS Review 157/2008
detrimental effects for banks in other countries that did not enjoy a similar level of protection. 
Timely concerted action among  Member States led to a joint decision to raise the level of 
protection  of  deposits.  The  action  was  accompanied  by  a  prompt  initiative  by  the 
Commission to amend the Deposit Guarantee Schemes Directive. This amendment had the 
full support of the ECB.  
The recent events have shown how the Member States and the EU institutions can act in a 
rapid  and  coordinated  manner  when  necessary.  However,  there  is  no  room  for 
complacency. Consideration of the lessons from the financial crisis and the introduction of 
improvements  to  the  EU  framework  for  supervision  and  crisis  management  has  already 
started. In October, the European Commission set up an independent High Level Group to 
develop  proposals  to  strengthen  the  supervision  of  European  financial  institutions  and 
markets  and  financial  stability  arrangements.  The  Group  shall  present  its  report  to  the 
European Commission in view of the Spring European Council 2009. I will assure you that 
the ECB Governing council will examine very carefully all proposals which will be made by 
the high level group, as well as by the European Parliament and by the industry itself.  
Conclusion  
Ladies and gentlemen, continued financial integration is of key importance for Europe. The 
financial crisis that we are currently facing may have caused a freeze on this development in 
some markets; all the more I urge us all to keep the momentum in this important process.  
The ECB remains firmly committed to fostering further financial integration. The successes of 
TARGET and TARGET2 demonstrate the importance of the work done in the field of market 
infrastructures.  We  will  now  continue  working  hard  in  order  to  address  the  still  remaining 
gaps. 
Finally, the financial crisis confirmed the importance of an appropriate public policy response, 
both in terms of crisis prevention and crisis management, to avoid cross-border spillovers in 
the single market. Stronger coordination among Member States and EU institutions for crisis 
prevention  and  crisis  management  is  needed.  The  ECB  will  closely  follow  the  debate  and 
contribute to it where necessary. 
I thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 157/2008 
 7
