Thomas Jordan: Swiss National Bank monetary policy in light of 
financial market disruptions  
Introductory remarks by Mr Thomas Jordan, Member of the Governing Board of the Swiss 
National Bank, at the end-of-year media news conference, Zurich, 11 December 2008. 
 Situation in the financial markets 
Looking at the financial markets, we currently find ourselves in a historically unprecedented 
situation. The financial crisis has escalated dramatically since September. In the course of 
the past three months, it has taken hold in almost every market segment around the globe. 
At the time of the last news conference in June, we had already experienced three waves of 
money market turbulence; now, a fourth wave has eclipsed all others (cf. chart 1).1
The situation in the money markets has calmed somewhat since November. This is due in 
part  to  the  measures  taken  by  central  banks  and  governments,  in  particular  the  generous 
amounts of liquidity injected into the system, the recapitalisation of banks, the provision of 
state guarantees for bank liabilities and the transfer of risk positions. After unsecured money 
markets had all but frozen in the autumn, central banks increasingly found themselves acting 
as lender of first resort, in other words, they were becoming the primary supplier of liquidity to 
the  financial  system.  To  this  end,  new  monetary  policy  instruments  and  facilities  were 
introduced, and  the  liquidity  supply  was  expanded  significantly.  Despite  the  calming  in  the 
money markets, the situation in the stock and credit markets continued to worsen as a result 
of the rapid deterioration in economic conditions. 
I would like to illustrate the unique nature of the current situation with a comparison of the 
Dow Jones Industrial Average from five stock market crises (cf. chart 2).2 Price declines this 
time round are significantly steeper than those in 2000 and 1973 and not at all comparable 
with  1987, when  the  stock  markets  recovered very  quickly.  Measured by  the  extent  of  the 
Dow  Jones  losses,  the  current  crisis  can  only  be  compared  to  that  of  1929.  Although  the 
financial  losses  suffered  this  time have  probably  already  far  exceeded  those  of 1929.  The 
reason  for  this  is  the  considerably  higher  market  capitalisation  of  the  stock  markets,  as 
measured by gross domestic product (GDP). What is more, the losses suffered today are not 
merely limited to the stock markets, they also affect practically every other type of asset, of 
which there are significantly more nowadays than back then. Prices have plummeted across 
the  board,  from  corporate  bonds  to  structured  products,  from  raw  materials  and  emerging 
market  currencies  to  real  estate  investments.  While  US  property  prices  dropped  by  2%  in 
1929  and  4%  in  1930,  they  are  currently  falling  at  a  rate  of  17%.3  Never  before  have  so 
many assets been wiped out worldwide in the space of a few months as they were this year. 
                                                 
1   Chart 1 shows the “fever curve” of the money market, i.e. the difference between the three-month Libor and 
the three-month (T)OIS rate (tom-next/overnight indexed swap). This difference reflects the credit and liquidity 
risk premium on unsecured money market trades. It is a barometer of the health of the money market and, in 
the broader sense, also for that of the financial markets in general. 
2   The five crises in the comparison are the stock market crash of 1929, the oil crisis of 1973, Black Monday in 
1987, the bursting of the IT bubble in 2000, and the current crisis. In each case, we look at price performance 
in and around the index’s highest recorded level prior to the crisis, which does not necessarily coincide with 
the onset of the turmoil. The highest levels were reached on 3 September 1929 (Black Tuesday was on 29 
October 1929), on 11 January 1973 (oil crisis), on 25 August 1987 (Black Monday was on 19 October 1987), 
on 14 January 2000 (IT bubble), and on 9 October 2007. 
3   For annual data and the Case-Shiller Composite 20 Index, cf. Robert J. Shiller, Irrational Exuberance (2006, 
2nd edition). 
BIS Review 157/2008 
 1
These financial losses alone will continue to have a major impact on the real economy for 
some time to come, owing to the fact that their full effect is not generally felt immediately.  
Despite  the  historic  disruptions  in  the  financial  markets,  this  is  not  the  1930s.  The  main 
differences to back then being the decisive way in which monetary and fiscal policy reacted 
and the far-reaching government intervention aimed at bolstering the financial system. As a 
result, the financial markets have been able to continue functioning, albeit to a much lesser 
extent. Yet the extraordinary circumstances pose a huge challenge to all market participants, 
not least to central banks. Both the Swiss National Bank’s (SNB) monetary policy strategy 
and its instruments have been thoroughly put to the test. Over the past few months, several 
observers have remarked that the SNB’s monetary policy had occasionally slipped from its 
control. We do not share this view. While it cannot be ruled out that we will be faced with new 
challenges, our strategy and instruments have so far proved very flexible and well suited in 
this crisis. 
Implementation of monetary policy 
The SNB implements its monetary policy by defining a target range for the three-month Libor; 
an  interest  rate  for  an  unsecured  transaction.  We  cannot  influence  the  three-month  Libor 
directly,  but  rather  indirectly  through  secured  money  market  trades,  such  as  repo 
transactions  and  swaps.  Before  the  onset  of  the  crisis,  there  was  very  little  difference 
between the interest rates for secured and unsecured transactions. Rising risk premia have 
since  widened  the  gap  between  the  two  rates,  however.  The  high  and  volatile  risk  premia 
have made steering the three-month Libor increasingly challenging.  
Tensions resulting from demand for the Swiss franc abroad have recently made steering the 
Libor even more difficult. In the past few years, a large number of Swiss franc loans have 
been granted in Europe that were refinanced through the Swiss banking system. Then, last 
October, many Swiss banks were suddenly no longer prepared to continue refinancing to the 
same extent, which put a considerable strain on the international Swiss franc money market. 
To  solve  the  problem,  we  decided  to  offer  other  central  banks  a  foreign  exchange  swap 
facility.  Since  20  October,  the  SNB  has  been  providing  the  European  Central  Bank  (ECB) 
with Swiss francs in exchange for euros through its swap facility. The ECB then allocates the 
Swiss  francs  to  its  counterparties  in  the  euro  area  through  swap  transactions.  A  similar 
agreement has been in operation with the National Bank of Poland since 17 November. 
In October, the turbulence in the money market caused the three-month Libor to overshoot 
the upper limit of the SNB’s target range for a few days (cf. chart 3). We do not, however, 
consider  this  a  strategy  failure.  The  overshoot  was  preceded  by  an  interest  rate  reduction 
that had come as a surprise to the markets. The three-month Libor cannot be expected to 
return immediately to the middle of the new target range. Even in periods of calm, the Libor 
does not react instantly to an SNB interest rate reduction and the associated lowering of the 
repo rates. Considering the historic dimensions of the money market crisis, the three-month 
Libor managed to return remarkably quickly to the target range – just one day after the two 
interest  rate  reductions  of  6  and  20  November  the  Libor  had  already  moved  into  the  new 
range in both cases. 
The turmoil in the money market prompted the SNB to conduct money market operations to 
an extent that had never before been witnessed. There were days when up to five auctions 
were held. The volume of the operations varied considerably. On record days, we carried out 
operations  worth  over  CHF  100  billion.  The  reason  for  these  sizeable  operations  can  be 
found  in  our  interest  rate  management  –  we  first  inject  large  amounts  of  liquidity  into  the 
market and later absorb it again. Until just a few weeks ago, the liquidity actually remaining in 
the  system  was  not  considerably  higher  than  before  the  crisis.  It  was  not  until  the  SNB 
adopted a policy of very low money market rates that the sight deposit balances increased 
markedly.  The  low  interest  rate  level  means  that  the  opportunity  costs  for  banks  to  hold 
2 
 BIS Review 157/2008
liquidity are lower, thus prompting them to hold more money in sight deposits. The extent of 
the  money  market  operations  also  has  a  major  impact  on  the  size  of  the  SNB’s  balance 
sheet.  Before  the  crisis,  approximately  CHF  20  billion  of  the  balance  sheet  went  towards 
monetary policy; today, we are looking at around CHF 80 billion.  
In recent weeks, the SNB has pursued a policy which has brought the repo rates close to 
zero. This does not mean, however, that our monetary policy will cease to transmit further 
expansionary impulses. In addition to the short-term repo rate, we use a whole range of other 
methods to pursue a more expansionary monetary policy. We can, for instance, extend the 
maturities of our money market transactions or intervene in markets other than the money 
market. 
Updates to monetary policy instruments 
The SNB’s monetary policy instruments have fared quite well since the onset of the crisis. 
However,  a  review  has  highlighted  two  areas  in  need  of  adjustment.  First,  a  liquidity-
absorbing instrument was found to be necessary, and second, the conditions of the liquidity-
shortage  financing  facility  were  no  longer  deemed  appropriate.  The  liquidity-shortage 
financing facility serves to bridge unexpected, short-term liquidity bottlenecks. It can only be 
accessed if a bank has a corresponding limit and if that limit is fully covered by securities at 
all times. 
Let’s start with the liquidity-absorbing instrument: The crisis has made it clear that a central 
bank must be able to offer large quantities of liquidity at short notice and do so via a number 
of  channels  and  with  different  maturities.  Repo  transactions  and  foreign  exchange  swaps 
meet these requirements very well. However, the SNB lacked a separate liquidity-absorbing 
instrument to handle large volumes. We therefore introduced our own debt certificates – SNB 
Bills  –  to  our  range  of  instruments  in  October.  SNB  Bills  allow  us  to  be  more  flexible  in 
steering  liquidity.  Consequently,  we  are  now  in  a  position  to  offer  more  long-term 
transactions,  which  help  calm  the  money  markets  and  facilitate  the  steering  of  the  three-
month Libor.  
The financial market crisis has also shown us that the liquidity-shortage financing facility can 
only  contribute  to  calming  the  situation  in  the  money  markets  if  it  is  actually  used  when 
needed. However, even during the crisis, it was rarely called upon. The reason for this being 
that the direct costs of drawing on it were relatively high, as were the indirect costs ensuing 
from the stigma associated with using the facility.  
The SNB has thus decided to lower the direct and indirect costs of using the facility. To start 
with,  we  will  reduce  the  special-rate  interest  premium  from  200  basis  points  to  50  basis 
points.  This  will  become  effective  from  1  January  2009.  The  SNB  will  also  make  some 
changes to its reporting methods. In order to protect the borrower’s reputation, claims from 
the liquidity-shortage financing facility will, in future, no longer be reported separately. These 
two  measures  should  encourage  banks  to  utilise  the  facility’s  limits  more  frequently  and 
therefore increase their liquidity provisioning.  
We have also found that, in periods of turbulence, some of the data reported in our weekly 
publication Important monetary policy data are misinterpreted, which can have a destabilising 
effect.  To  remedy  this,  we  have  decided  to  discontinue  the  real-time  announcement  of 
individual  transactions  and  facilities.  The  only  data  relevant  for  the  assessment  of  the 
situation  in  the  money  market  are  those  on  sight  deposits  and  interest  rates.  We  will 
therefore  continue  to  publish  these  on  a  weekly  basis.  From  now  on,  data  on  individual 
balance  sheet  items  and  monetary  policy  operations  will  only  be  published  in  the  SNB’s 
Monthly  Statistical  Bulletin.  Thus,  the  SNB  essentially  continues  to  report  on  its  monetary 
policy operations in a transparent manner, the only difference being that certain data will be 
published less frequently. Our Guidelines on monetary policy instruments have been revised 
accordingly. These will enter into effect on 1 January 2009. 
BIS Review 157/2008 
 3
Transaction with UBS 
On 16 October, the SNB announced that it had concluded an agreement with UBS on the 
long-term financing and orderly liquidation of troubled assets in the amount of no more than 
USD 60 billion. To facilitate this transaction, a special purpose vehicle was set up at the end 
of November called SNB StabFund Limited Partnership for Collective Investments, which is 
domiciled  in  Berne.  The  company  is  structured  as  a  two-party  limited  partnership.  It 
comprises  a  general  partner,  which  bears  unlimited  liability,  and  a  limited  partner,  bearing 
limited  liability.  Both  will  be  wholly  owned  by  the  SNB.  The  SNB  and  UBS  formed  a  joint 
project management team, which is supported when necessary by external specialists.  
In the meantime, the SNB chose Northern Trust to act as custodian of the securities. We also 
commissioned specialised agencies to carry out an independent valuation of the portfolio. An 
initial tranche of assets is due to be transferred to StabFund before the end of this year. 
As regards the financing of StabFund, the SNB will contribute 90% of the funding in the form 
a  loan;  UBS,  10%  in  the  form  of  equity  capital.  The  SNB  is  currently  securing  the  initial 
financing for the operation via its swap agreement with the Federal Reserve, but also on the 
foreign exchange market. It has also initiated steps to later be able to obtain funding on the 
market, independent of agreements with other central banks.  
The transfer of assets to the StabFund will be based on prices as at 30 September 2008, 
with the UBS book value being compared to the value determined by SNB on the basis of the 
independent expert opinions. The lower value will apply. In October and November, following 
the intensification of the financial market crisis and the global economic downturn, the prices 
for  these  assets  were  pushed  down  further.  The  extent  of  any  potential  loss  in  this  initial 
phase of StabFund’s existence will only become apparent at the end of 2008 or at the end of 
March  2009,  once  the  asset  transfer  has  been  completed  and  another  comprehensive 
valuation has been carried out. It is important to note that StabFund is primarily pursuing a 
buy-and-hold-to-maturity strategy with the portfolio at present. Short-term price movements 
have no bearing on the strategy’s success. A recovery of the affected markets in the long 
term  is  by  far  the  more  decisive  factor  here.  Furthermore,  the  SNB  has  put  in  place  two 
safety  nets  to  cushion  any  losses  on  its  loan  to  StabFund.  First,  with  the  10%  of  equity 
capital from the UBS, and second, with a payment of up to 100 million UBS shares in the 
event  that  StabFund  needs  to  be  liquidated  at  a  loss.  The  volatile  price  movements  and 
severe  illiquidity  of  the  markets  go  to  show  just  how  important  it  was  to  have  unburdened 
UBS of these risks when we did.  
4 
 BIS Review 157/2008
 
Chart 1: Risk premia in the money market
CHF 3M Libor - 3M TOIS swap
EUR 3M Euribor - 3M Eonia swap
USD 3M Libor - 3M OIS swap
GBP 3M Libor - 3M Sonia swap
basis points
400
350
300
250
200
150
100
50
0
J
A
S
O
N
D J 08 F
M
A
M
J
J
A
S
O
N
D
  Source: SNB Markets Analysis Platform, Bloomberg
 
 
 
 
Chart 2: Comparison of share price performance
 
 
Present
2000
1987
1973
1929
Dow Jones Industrial Average, Peak=100
120
100
80
60
40
20
    0
-500 -400 -300 -200 -100 0
 
 
Source: SNB Markets Analysis Platform, Bloomberg
trading days before/ after peak
100 200 300 400 500 600 700 800 900 1
000
BIS Review 157/2008 
 5
Chart 3: Target range, three-month Libor and repo rates
SNB 1W repo
CHF 3M Libor
 3.5
3
2.5
2
1.5
1
0.5
0
J
A
S
O
N
D J 08 F
M
A
M
J
J
A
S
O
N
D
Source: SNB Markets Analysis Platform, Bloomberg
  6 
 BIS Review 157/2008
