Christian Noyer: A new regulatory framework for a new financial system 
Speech by Mr Christian Noyer, Governor of the Bank of France, at a round table discussion 
at the University of Paris-Dauphine, Paris, 11 December 2008. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is a great pleasure for me to take part in this round table discussion. 
Today,  the  prevailing  view  is  –  and  justly  so  –  that  it  is  necessary  to  rethink  financial 
regulation. There are two reasons for this: 
a) 
Financial markets and banks are, more or less strongly, confronted with problems of 
asymmetric information; 
Operational inefficiencies may arise, leading, in some extreme cases, to the seizing 
up  of  certain  market  segments.  Needless  to  say  that  these  imperfections  are 
interconnected. 
b) 
In  many  respects,  the  financial  crisis  is  the  expression  of  these  imperfections.  Three 
examples can be used as an illustration. The underestimation of risk and the mispricing of 
assets  during  the  upswing  of  the  financial  cycle  show  that  markets  may  generate  excess 
investment in certain sectors of the economy (e.g. the US real estate sector). Furthermore, it 
appears that financial innovation and the change in banks’ economic models have resulted in 
a significant increase in information asymmetries and, more importantly, in lower incentives 
for economic agents to pay attention to these asymmetries. Lastly, the fact that some market 
segments seized up during the crisis suggests that some infrastructures necessary for their 
functioning are lacking. 
To  simplify,  I  believe  that  the  logic  underlying  the  current  regulatory  system  consists  in 
ensuring the financial stability of market segments, but without adopting an overall approach. 
However,  the  crisis  has  forced  us  to  acknowledge  that  this  fragmented  approach  to 
regulation does not necessarily ensure the stability of the entire financial system. During this 
crisis, the fact that financial institutions had considerably increased their use of leverage and 
that  risk  was  concentrated  among  a  relatively  small  number  of  banks  was  neither  well 
assessed, nor well captured, nor prevented by regulation. In view of this failure and in order 
to  mitigate  the  impact  in  terms  of  financial  instability,  government  interventions  were 
designed,  not  to  stabilize  the  situation  of  any  particular  institution,  but  to  prevent  systemic 
risk from materialising. As a result, we now require macro-prudential regulation. 
This naturally leads us to address the issue of the scope of financial regulation. Who should 
be regulated? The problem is not new; it is also complex. Like me, you will have noticed that, 
at  their  last  summit  meeting,  the  G20  Heads  of  State  and  Government  laid  down  a  clear 
principle  on  the  matter.  They  have  indeed  committed  themselves  to  ensuring  that  “all 
financial  markets,  products  and  participants  are  regulated  or  subject  to  oversight,  as 
appropriate to their circumstances”. 
The crisis shows quite clearly that the markets and institutions that have a systemic role must 
be  regulated.  This  criterion  implies  re-examining  the  functioning  of  certain  OTC  markets, 
such  as  the  interbank  money  market  or  the  credit  derivatives  market.  Similarly,  rating 
agencies  should  also  be  regulated,  given  the  key  role  they  play  in  correcting  information 
asymmetries on financial markets. Lastly, public authorities should pay greater attention to 
those financial institutions that are central to the supply of market liquidity and financing. 
An  important  starting  point  is  to  acknowledge  that  financial  system  participants  have  very 
different  functions,  pursue  different  strategies  and  operate  according  to  different  economic 
models.  This  diversity  is  crucial  to  the  smooth  functioning  of  markets.  A  one-size-fits-all 
BIS Review 161/2008 
 1
regulatory framework applied to all participants would certainly give rise to herd behaviour 
and, consequently, reinforce the endogeneity of certain risks. 
A  gradation  could  reasonably  be  applied  to  the  regulations  and  requirements  imposed  on 
financial  system  participants.  Three  levels,  ranging  from  oversight  to  regulation,  naturally 
come  to  mind.  The  first  level  would  take  the  form  of  a  mandatory  registration  and  the 
commitment to comply with a code of good practices. The second – more restrictive – level 
would include disclosure obligations with regard to activities and accounts, in addition to the 
mandatory  registration  and  the  compliance  with  good  practices.  Hedge  funds  and,  more 
generally, institutions pursuing strategies essentially based on leverage or risk-taking could 
have  to  meet  such  requirements.  Finally,  the  last  level  would  involve  more  restrictive 
regulations with regard to activities and risk-taking, as well as closer oversight. 
In  many  respects,  this  gradation  system  is  not  only  relevant  with  regard  to  prudential 
requirements. It should also apply to accounting rules for  example.  Beyond the theoretical 
considerations,  it  is  important  that  financial  regulation,  in  all  its  forms, should  contribute  to 
maintaining financial system diversity. Thus, attempting to measure all assets and liabilities 
at  fair  value  has  some  drawbacks  –  and  even  entails  risks  –  that  need  to  be  taken  into 
account if lessons are to be drawn from the financial crisis for accounting rules. 
To conclude, I would like to stress an important point regarding the new financial regulatory 
framework.  It  would  be  unrealistic  to  believe  that  financial  regulation  is  the  answer,  and, 
above all, that it is capable of protecting us from the risk of financial instability. Indeed, the 
crisis can largely be attributed to financial institutions’ inadequate risk management, which 
stems from an irrational trust in quantitative tools. 
Financial  regulation  should  be  an  incentive  for  financial  system  participants  to  develop  a 
sound and efficient management framework. It is no substitute. 
2 
 BIS Review 161/2008
