Ewart S Williams: Small and medium-sized enterprises in Trinidad and 
Tobago – challenges and priorities 
Opening  remarks  by  Mr  Ewart  S  Williams,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Trinidad  and 
Tobago, at the Small and Medium-Sized Enterprises Seminar, Port-of-Spain, 24 November 
2008. 
 Good Morning and welcome to this very important Seminar on “Developing Viable Small and 
Medium-Sized Enterprises in Trinidad and Tobago: Challenges and Priorities”. The seminar 
is  being  jointly  hosted  by  the  Central  Bank  of  Trinidad  and  Tobago;  the  Inter-American 
Development Bank; the Ministry of Labour and Small and Microenterprise Development; the 
Ministry of Trade and Industry; and the Ministry of Planning, Housing and the Environment. 
I would like to thank the Honourable Prime Minister for gracing us with his presence, which 
underscores  the  importance  that  the  Government  places  on  Small  and  Medium-sized 
Enterprises (SME) development. 
I would also like to take this opportunity to warmly welcome our guests from overseas – Dr. 
Erik  Terk  from  the  Estonian  Institute  for  Future  Studies  and  Mr.  Martin  Clemensson,  the 
Chief  of  Small  Enterprise  Development  at  the  International  Labour  Organisation. A  special 
word  of  thanks  to  Mr.  Iwan  Sewberath-Misser,  Country  Representative  at  Inter-American 
Development Bank, and to the various Ministries who have lent much support to this event. 
There is no doubt that the importance of the SME sector to the supply side of the economy is 
much  more  widely  appreciated  now  than  it  used  to  be.  While  there  is  a  dearth  of  reliable 
statistics, it is certain that the SME sector is a major provider of employment and makes an 
important contribution to the country’s GDP. 
In recognition of its critical importance, the SME sector has moved up the policy agenda and 
in  fact,  the  sector  has  been  identified  as  having  a  critical  role  to  play  in  the  economic 
diversification effort as envisaged in the Government’s 2020 Vision. 
SME  development  is  currently  being  implemented  across  a  very  broad  front  by  the 
Government, as well as by private-sector organizations. Initial steps have been introduced to 
use the education system to encourage an entrepreneurial culture – the idea that starting a 
business is a viable career option. The Government has established institutions to provide 
technical  support,  including  training  and  advice  as  well  as  direct  financial  assistance  to 
SMEs, fiscal incentives have been provided for SME development (though, perhaps this is 
not  sufficiently  known)  and  some  private  financial  institutions  have  opened  small  business 
windows to service the sector. 
Notwithstanding these increasing efforts, demand continues to outstrip supply, and there is 
the  widely-held  view  that  the  SME  sector  is  still  underserved.  Perhaps  that  is  the  main 
justification for this seminar – to provide an opportunity for small business entrepreneurs and 
associations,  financial  institutions,  government  bodies,  the  private  sector  as  well  as 
academic  institutions  to  (a)  examine  the  major  challenges  facing  the  sector;  and  (b)  to 
identify some necessary priority actions that can contribute to building a more vibrant small 
business sector in Trinidad and Tobago. 
Today’s  programme  is  organized  around  four  (4)  main  themes  (a)  characteristics  of  the 
sector and the Constraints affecting SMEs (b) Fostering Entrepreneurship and Developing an 
Appropriate  Business  Environment,  (c)  Financing  SME  Development,  and  (d)  Setting 
Priorities for SME Development. 
BIS Review 154/2008 
 1
One of the major obstacles to developing appropriate policies for the SME sector is the lack 
of  an  organized  set  of  information  on  the  sector,  its  contribution  to  national  output, 
investment and employment. The first session of the Seminar is devoted to a discussion of 
these issues, drawing from the preliminary findings of two studies that are currently in the 
field. 
The  second  and  third  sessions  of  the  seminar  take  a  more  in-depth  look  at  some  key 
factors that are critical to fostering entrepreneurship and to the development of appropriate 
business environment, drawing on current best practices. 
In the final segment of the programme, we have invited a number of associations connected 
to small and medium sized enterprises to identify some of the areas that need to be given 
priority, if SMEs are to play their role in the development and transformation of the economy. 
The Central Bank has a deep involvement in small business development – not by actually 
providing financing ourselves, but in a catalytic way, by encouraging financial institutions to 
be responsive to the financing needs of SMEs. Recently, the Bank expanded its support for 
SME  development  through  its  National  Financial  Literacy  programme.  We  are  now  in  the 
final stages of preparing a SME Handbook, which is geared to helping small entrepreneurs 
better understand the business climate and to providing them with relevant material to assist 
in the effective management of their businesses. This handbook will cover issues such as 
product  pricing,  product  distribution,  marketing,  sourcing 
the 
development of an appropriate business plan and the preparation of financial statements to 
mention a few. 
Ladies and gentlemen, today’s programme could not have come at a more opportune time, 
since we need our small business sector to bolster our economy’s resilience to exogenous 
shocks, of the type we are facing currently. 
I  therefore  welcome  you  all  to  the  seminar  and  invite  you  to  contribute  to  meaningful 
discussions which will further the development of our SME sector and redound to benefit our 
economy over the medium and long term. 
I thank you very much for your participation and I again thank the various sponsors, speakers 
and all those who have contributed to make this seminar possible. 
I wish you a most productive seminar. 
finance,  budgeting, 
2 
 BIS Review 154/2008
