Amando M Tetangco, Jr: The Philippine economy – building resilience in 
a time of uncertainty 
Remarks  by  Mr  Amando  M  Tetangco,  Jr,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  the  Philippines 
(Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas),  at  the  Consular  Corps  of  the  Philippines’  Monthly  General 
Luncheon Meeting, Makati City, 29 October 2008. 
 Minister  and  Consul  General  Sobashima,  Acting  Dean  of  the  Consular  Corps  of  the 
Philippines, honorable consuls-general, officers and staff of the Philippine Consular Corps, 
ladies and gentlemen, good afternoon.  
It is a pleasure to finally address the diplomatic community. Your organizers would recall that 
we have been trying to get our schedules “together” since January this year.  
In fact, we were first set to meet in February, but something came up on my side. Then in 
August,  but  something  came  up  on  your  end.  Then,  today.  (I  suppose  the  “stars” have  all 
finally aligned today, so to speak, so here we are.) 
What’s interesting is during all this time, the markets have moved quite significantly.  
Consider the table shown. I’ve compared some important financial indicators for Feb 27, Aug 
27 – the two previously scheduled dates – and yesterday.  
You will note that all of these have turned “south” as they say. But more dramatically so in 
the last two months.  
The peso dollar exchange rate has moved from P40.33 to P45.73. Yesterday it was quoted 
at P49.105. At close of morning trade today, the peso stood at P49.14. 
The 5-year credit default swap spread, which is a measure of the market’s perception of the 
country’s credit worthiness, has more than doubled from 248 to 660 bps. The same can be 
observed on the spread over the ROP30, which moved from 260 to 649 bps. 
The PSEi, on the other hand, lost close to half its value from 3,105 in February to 1,704 pts 
at yesterday’s close. 
The  regional  financial  markets  followed  the  same  trends  –  regional  currencies  weakened, 
credit spreads widened, and stock markets declined. 
Before any, or all of you cry “the sky is falling” – like the little chicken in that children’s fable 
who got hit on the head by a falling acorn, – let me share with you some good news:  
• 
Even  as  the  numbers  I  showed  you  earlier  appear  to  have  “run  away”  or  fallen 
sharply,  there  has  been  some  reprieve  in  them.  In  other  words,  what  we  are 
experiencing is not a “free fall”, rather there has been some “traction” in the markets 
lately.  
Our macroeconomy has remained fairly resilient and stable, owing to the buffers we 
have built up over the past years.  
Our banking system continues to be sound, despite some contagion – as reflected 
in the deterioration of the financial indicators since the beginning of the year.  
Our policy structure has so far been flexible. We have instituted significant reforms 
in the past, and we continue to fine-tune our policy tool kit to ensure our policies are 
responsive, targeted and therefore effective during these difficult times.  
   So, hold that urge to cry “the sky is falling” lest you meet the same fate as that chicken, who 
got fooled and eaten by the wily fox.  
BIS Review 131/2008 
 1
My presentation will be of four parts.  
I will begin with a brief discussion of recent events in global financial markets. 
I  will  then  focus  the  major  part  of  my  discussion  in  assessing  the  Philippine  economy’s 
resilience  in  the  face  of  what  the  former  Fed  Chairman  Alan  Greenspan  calls  the  “credit 
tsunami”.  In  particular,  I  will  discuss  how  these  external  developments  impact  on  the 
Philippine  economy,  why  I  believe  the  Philippines  is  well-positioned  to  withstand  the  crisis 
and what the Bangko Sentral’s policy responses are to bolster the economy’s foundations in 
the face of the enormous strains in the global financial markets. 
Recent developments in the global financial market 
I.  
I will no longer go into the genesis of the financial turmoil, as I am sure you have already 
heard a number of expositions on that.  
But I think it is important to highlight that this crisis has evolved and continues to do so in its 
FORM. 
It began as a liquidity seizure in the financial markets when the credit boom came to an end 
after  the  subprime  mortgage  collapse,  leaving  US  investment  banks  heavily  strapped  for 
cash. 
Then moved on to be more of a solvency crisis, when we began to see the rapid turnover of 
marquee names in the global financial stage.  
Then a confidence crisis. Increasingly, investors and creditors are losing confidence in the 
ability  of  certain  firms  to  meet  their  obligations  leading  to  a  general  distrust  in  the  global 
financial markets. 
The financial market turmoil has further changed its FACE.  
It has moved from its epicenter in the financial markets in the US and has begun to affect the 
US real economy. 
Its impact has also now crossed to the financial centers in Europe, as well as the European 
real economy.  
Now we are seeing it impact the Emerging Markets. So far, the effect on emerging markets 
has mostly been on the financial sector, and generally indirect through risk aversion.  
Indeed, the financial market turmoil has changed into a wider-spread contagion.  
Nonetheless, the three-pronged approach of the US and European governments aimed at: 
(1)  repairing  damaged  financial  systems  through  capital  infusion;  (2)  providing  a  liquidity 
lifeline;  and  (3)  enhancing  deposit  insurance,  appears  to  have  some  effect  in  terms  of 
shoring up confidence. 
This has been evident in the recent improvements in the LIBOR-OIS and TED spreads. The 
LIBOR-OIS and TED spreads are viewed as an indirect measure of funds availability in the 
market. A decrease in spreads typically signals an increased willingness to lend. 
A similar slowdown in the widening of CDS spreads in Asia has recently occurred as certain 
regional central banks also lowered policy rates and injected liquidity to their markets through 
repurchase facilities.  
These  are  “tractions”  that  we  are  seeing  in  the  markets.  I  believe  these  will  eventually 
constrain markets from doing a “free-fall”.  
Pockets of the financial markets are slowly adjusting, perhaps in confident response to the 
recent  display  of  concerted,  collaborative  and  cooperative  action  from  officials  of  both  the 
major and emerging economies.  
2 
 BIS Review 131/2008
If these tractions continue and broaden in scope, we may begin to see a further unfreezing of 
credit and a muting of the negative feedback from the financial turmoil to the real economy.  
Having  said  that,  however,  much  depends  on  whether  the  slowdown  in  the  US  and  other 
major economies would be shorter or shallower than first expected.. 
Impact on the Philippines 
II.  
How do all of these developments impact on the Philippine economy?  
The Philippine financial markets have not been spared from the ripple effect of the worsening 
global financial strains.  
As I noted in my introduction, the peso has weakened, credit spreads have widened and the 
stock market has fallen, like in the other countries. 
What concerns us now is that a negative feedback loop from the financial markets to the real 
economy cannot be fully discounted.  
In the Philippines, the macroeconomic impact of the current turmoil will depend, in part, on 
the linkages between the Philippine economy and that of the US. These linkages are in the 
areas of trade, remittances and investments. 
• 
Trade. There is no decoupling. The US accounted for about 17 percent of total RP 
exports in 2007. Although this is lower than the 30 percent in 2000 and has been 
declining  since,  the  US  slowdown  poses  a  downside  risk  to  the  country’s  export 
earnings as some exports to other countries are subsequently redirected to the US 
market.  
Remittances.  Remittances  are  another  important  channel  through  which  the  US 
economic slowdown could manifest itself in the Philippines. More than 30 percent of 
overseas Filipinos (OFs) were based in the US as of 2007.  
Investment. Moreover, more than 30 percent of net foreign direct investment (FDI) in 
the  Philippines  came  from  the  US  (in  2007).  Slower  US  economic  activity  may, 
therefore,  cause  a  reduction  in  inward  foreign  direct  investment.  The  expected 
slowdown  in  other  advance  economies,  including  those  in  Europe  and  Japan, 
dampens further the country’s FDI prospects.  
  Sources of resilience of the Philippine economy 
III.  
While  the  Philippines  is  not  immune  to  the  contagion  from  the  global  financial  turbulence, 
underlying strengths or buffers in the economy remain that can help it ride out the storm. 
The Philippines is in a good position to withstand the crisis for the following reasons: 
• 
First,  the  country’s  macroeconomic  fundamentals  are  sound  and  the  economic 
growth potential remains good; 
Second, domestic demand remains a major contributor to growth;  
Third, the external payments position is stable; 
Fourth, dividends from structural reforms adopted by financial institutions since the 
Asian crisis have helped mitigate the impact of external shocks; and 
Fifth, information disclosure practices have improved.  
• 
Let me highlight some of these factors in greater detail… 
 BIS Review 131/2008 
 3
Favorable growth dynamics 
The economy has continued to expand despite a difficult external environment. In the second 
quarter of 2008, gross domestic product (GDP) grew by 4.6 percent on the back of relatively 
strong  performances  of  manufacturing,  agriculture  and  fishery,  trade,  private  services  and 
construction.  On  the  expenditure  side,  the  main  drivers  of  growth  have  been  private 
consumption and, to some extent, investments.  
Domestic demand has proven to be fairly resilient in previous episodes of global slowdowns 
and should be helpful once again in buttressing the economy from the fallout of the ongoing 
global slowdown. 
Stable external payments position 
The country’s external payments position remains favorable.  
The  balance  of  payments  –  although  it  is  beginning  to  come  under  pressure  from  global 
developments – has remained in surplus for the first nine months of 2008 at US$1.5 billion. 
The  continued  strength  of  the  BOP  is  underpinned  by  the  sustained  strong  remittances  of 
overseas  Filipinos  as  well  as  higher  services  receipts,  particularly  from  business  process 
outsourcing. 
Let me go into some specifics:  
• 
Remittances. Overseas Filipino remittances reached US$11 billion in the first eight 
months of 2008. OF remittances are expected to grow on the back of improvements 
in the quality of workers deployed. In addition, the geographical diversification of our 
deployments  as  well  as  the  relatively  inelastic  demand  for  our  growing  deployed 
workers in the medical related fields, should form a buffer against a global economic 
downturn.  
BPO  revenues.  Revenues  from  BPO  services  also  provide  some  lift  (actual 
revenues  for  2007  reached  US$5  billion  according  to  the  BP  Association  of  the 
Philippines). The BPO industry is poised to grow by 39 percent for 2008 on account 
of strong demand for back office, engineering and financial services. In a period of 
slowdown, our BPO centers may benefit as they remain cost-competitive relative to 
the other regional centers.  
 The  country  also  continued  to  build  up  sufficient  international  reserves  to  cover  import 
payments and to service external debt. The current GIR level of US$36.7 billion as of end-
September 2008 covers about six months of imports of goods and payments of services and 
income and is equivalent to nearly three times the country’s short-term external debt based 
on residual maturity. 
Stable banking system 
Going to the banking sector. 
You  must  have  heard  me  say  that  direct  exposure  of  Philippine  banking  system  to  the 
financial  institutions  currently  in  trouble  is  limited.  Our  banks  continue  to  be  innately 
conservative, domestically-oriented, and have not moved to the business model of “originate 
and  distribute”,  which  has  propelled  the  popularity  of  structured  products  in  the  major 
economies. 
In  addition,  the  reforms  implemented  to  clean  up  bank  balance  sheets,  strengthen  bank 
capitalization through Basel II, improvements in governance structures, enhancements in risk 
management  systems  and  adoption  of  international  accounting  standards  have  all  come 
together to create a steadily growing, adequately capitalized, significantly stronger banking 
system.  
4 
 BIS Review 131/2008
In particular – 
• 
  Banks  remained  capitalized  at  levels  above  both  the  BSP-regulatory  requirement 
and  the  BIS  standard.  This  provides  a  buffer  to  banks  to  absorb  more  “shocks” 
going forward.  
NPL Asset-quality has been enhanced – NPL ratio has been going down and is at 
its  best  level  since  the Asian  crisis  level.  As  of  Aug,  NPL  ratio  for  UKBs  stood  at 
3.88%.  The  asset  clean-up  of  banks  was  accomplished  without  the  use  of  public 
funds. 
Profitability has been sustained. As of 2007, return-on-equity and return-on-assets 
were posted at 10.8 percent and 1.3 percent, respectively, and were on increasing 
trend since the post-1997 Asian financial crisis period. During this period, however, 
there  may  be  a  dent  in  banks’  profitability  as  banks  provision  for  potential  losses 
from affected investments.  
Policy response to the turmoil 
IV.  
Despite these buffers, the BSP has not remained complacent in the face of the turmoil. 
What have been the BSP’s responses to the current turmoil? 
The BSP’s approach to the financial turmoil has consisted of the following:  
1. 
Shoring up confidence through timely communication and transparency. 
• 
Immediate  release  of  information  on  bank  exposures  to  troubled  financial 
institutions. 
Continuous messaging on developments and policy changes.  
• 
Ensuring that there is adequate peso and dollar liquidity. 
• 
Enhancing  existing  peso  repo  facilities  through  relaxed  valuation  and 
broader acceptable collateral. 
Establishing the US$ repo Facility. 
Maintaining a presence in the spot and swap markets by selling dollars. 
Keeping the e-rediscounting facilities and emergency loan facilities open. 
• 
• 
• 
Providing directed relief to banks by allowing reclassification of financial assets from 
categories measured at fair value to those measured as of 1 July 2008. 
Engaging  with 
developments, and pool resources, particularly foreign exchange reserves.  
• 
BSP has supported the proposal in the ASEAN+3 to enhance the existing 
swap arrangements as a means of boosting confidence in the region.  
information,  discuss  emerging 
its  regional  peers 
to  share 
2. 
3. 
4. 
The BSP is also considering other possible measures to help stabilize the financial markets, 
including a possible reduction in bank reserve requirements. We are also in constant touch 
with  the  Bankers  Association  of  the  Philippines  to  discuss  other  steps  that  can  be  taken 
under the evolving market conditions. 
Further, the BSP supports the proposed legislation that seeks to increase the maximum bank 
deposit guarantee to be provided by the Philippine Deposit Insurance Corporation, although 
under the context of a general restructure and recapitalization of the PDIC. 
BIS Review 131/2008 
 5
Conclusion 
V. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
While  the  Philippines  is  not  immune  to  the  impact  of  the  financial  market  turmoil,  it  is 
relatively better insulated now to ride out the crisis. The continued resilience of the economy 
and soundness of the banking system, buttressed by gains achieved from purposeful reforms 
(past  and  present),  puts  us  in  a  good  position  to  deal  with  adversities  in  the  global 
environment.  
In addition, we are seeing pockets of improvement in the financial markets, which can help to 
build confidence and prevent a “free fall”. Nevertheless, there is no room for complacency. 
We must continue to be mindful of the risks that could impede the growth of the Philippine 
economy. 
We can learn a lesson from the little chicken in that children’s fable – like the chicken, we 
must be watchful of our surroundings. But, unlike the chicken, we must take courage. These 
are difficult times. If, however, we are armed with the correct information and an appropriate 
plan of action, we should be able to get out of this crisis stronger.  
In this endeavor, the BSP looks forward to the continued support extended by the Consular 
Corps.  Your  work  of  promoting  the  dissemination  of  correct  information  about  our  country 
takes on a more critical dimension as we try to cope in these very trying times.  
Thank you very much and Mabuhay tayong lahat!! 
6 
 BIS Review 131/2008
