Philipp Hildebrand: Current state of the Swiss financial system and 
lessons learnt  
Introductory remarks by Mr Philipp Hildebrand, Member of the Governing Board of the Swiss 
National Bank, at the end-of-year media news conference, Zurich, 11 December 2008. 
 When we published our report on financial stability six months ago, I talked to you about the 
most important lessons that the SNB had learned from the financial crisis. Today, after a brief 
assessment of the current state of the financial system, I would like to tell you about progress 
in  the  follow-up  from  these  lessons.  The  focus  here  is  on  capital  and  liquidity  regulation. 
Finally, I will speak briefly about a more cheerful topic that is unrelated to the financial crisis – 
the launching of a new series of Swiss banknotes.  
The economic environment has sharply deteriorated ... 
As  you  have  already  heard  from  Mr  Roth,  the  economic  environment  has  sharply 
deteriorated. The three big economic blocs – Europe, Japan and the US – are in recession, 
and  growth  in  the  emerging  economies  has  slowed  markedly.  For  Switzerland,  we  also 
expect a period of negative growth.  
The situation on the US real estate market has not yet stabilised. Futures on the Case-Shiller 
index  indicate  a  further  drop  in  prices  of  around  15%  until  2010.  Thereafter,  the  contracts 
suggest  that  prices  will  stabilise.  Falling  prices  can  also  be  observed  in  some  European 
countries, in particular in the English and the Irish real estate markets. The past few weeks 
have seen some calming of global financial markets, but we are still a long way away from 
normalisation. 
With the worldwide deterioration in the economy, credit risks at banks will rise considerably. 
Attention  was  drawn  to  this  in  June  2008,  in  our  last  report  on  financial  stability.  Bank 
provisions  for  credit  risks  are  currently  at  a  historically  low  level,  and  they  will  need  to  be 
substantially increased. This will have a negative impact on their profitability. In the case of 
the big banks, the situation also involves considerable risks for trading portfolios.   
The worldwide economic downturn comes at a time when the international financial system is 
already in bad shape. In particular the big banks that have been hit especially hard by the 
crisis  could  be  forced  to  curtail,  or  further  curtail,  their  lending.  This,  in  turn,  could  have 
additional negative effects on the real economy. In order to put a halt to this negative spiral, 
we consider it important that the economy be supported with monetary and fiscal measures. 
The interest rate reductions carried out by the Swiss National Bank (SNB) should be seen as 
part of these measures.  
... but the resilience of the big banks has been increased 
Given this situation, the fact that it has been possible to increase the resilience of the Swiss 
big banks is crucial. Credit Suisse boosted its capital through private investors by a total of 
CHF  10  billion.  It  thereby  strengthened  its  equity  position  substantially  and  increased  its 
capacity for absorbing additional shocks. The losses of CHF 3 billion announced by the bank 
for the fourth quarter show how important it was to reinforce the capital base.  
At  UBS,  the  government  package  provided  significant  relief  to  the  balance  sheet  from  the 
burden  of  illiquid  positions  particularly  affected  by  the  crisis.  With  this  package,  the  SNB 
made it possible for UBS to transfer illiquid positions to a special purpose vehicle. The UBS 
provided  this  special  purpose  vehicle  with  equity  amounting  to  USD  6  billion.  The 
Confederation  compensated  UBS  for  the  capital  requirement  arising  for  this  purpose  by 
BIS Review 157/2008 
 1
subscribing to mandatory convertible notes (MCN). Since the announcement of the package, 
the UBS liquidity situation has stabilised.  
The numerous international measures aimed at stabilising the financial system have also had 
a positive effect on the position of the Swiss big banks. Nevertheless, further losses cannot 
be ruled out in view of the difficult market conditions. The situation remains serious, and the 
SNB will continue monitoring it closely together with the Swiss Federal Banking Commission 
(SFBC) and the Federal Department of Finance.  
Lessons from the crisis and reforms in Switzerland 
I would now like to speak about the lessons learned from the crisis. The continuing financial 
crisis is almost unprecedented, in terms of both extent and duration. It is also unprecedented 
in  terms  of  the  measures  taken  by  the  authorities  and  the  central  banks  with  the  aim  of 
stabilising the situation and minimising the impact on the real economy. This also applies to 
Switzerland.  
At the presentation of the last report on financial stability, we expressed our conviction that 
the financial system needs to be made more resilient to possible shocks. This is all the more 
valid  if  we  consider  the  hundreds  of  billions  of  taxpayers’  money  that  had  to  be  spent 
worldwide on stabilising the financial system over the past few months. The focus is on the 
need for improvement in the “shock absorbers”: capital and liquidity. The crisis has shown 
that the current regulation in these areas is no longer sufficient in the case of the big banks. 
Their level of capital is inadequate when set in relation to their risks. In the area of liquidity, 
events have occurred that were not taken into account in any of the big banks’ scenarios.  
The reform of the capital adequacy regulation for big banks, drawn up by the SFBC with the 
support  of  the  SNB,  represents  an  important  step  in  the  right  direction  –  for  the  area  of 
capital.  It  specifies  an  increase  in  risk-weighted  capital  together  with  the  introduction  of  a 
leverage  ratio.  The  leverage  ratio  is  a  supplementary  instrument  and  does  not  call  into 
question  the  principle  of  risk-sensitivity  with  regard  to  the  capital  regulation.  An  essential 
constituent of the reform are countercyclical mechanisms whereby, in good times, banks are 
required to considerably exceed the minimum requirements for capital and the leverage ratio. 
This ensures that a buffer is created to absorb losses during crises. This kind of flexibility is 
explicitly provided for in the new SFBC capital regulation. 
The orders already issued by the SFBC relating to the reform of the capital regulation state 
that the big banks will not be required to comply with the higher risk-weighted capital ratio 
and  the  leverage  ratio  until  2013.  However,  if  the  situation  on  the  capital  markets  or  the 
individual earnings position of the big banks make it impossible to achieve the objectives by 
2013, it may be possible to defer this date. The long time period allowed for implementation 
is crucial. It will prevent the new regulation from having a procyclical effect. In the short term, 
priority will clearly be devoted to managing the crisis. 
In  the  area  of  liquidity,  the  SFBC  and  the  SNB  are  in  the  process  of  drawing  up  a  new 
regulation. The basic objective is to obtain higher liquidity buffers that better reflect the great 
complexity  of  liquidity  risks.  When  calculating  liquidity  requirements  for  various  crisis 
scenarios, the authorities use internal model calculations by the banks. In order to ensure the 
comparability and transparency of the internal calculations, the new regime foresees certain 
standardisations. The conclusion of the project is scheduled for early 2009.  
Both  regulatory  measures  –  capital  regulation  and  liquidity  regulation  –  are  in  line  with 
proposals made by the Financial Stability Forum and the G20 action plan. The reforms are 
also  compatible  with  the  strategy  of  the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision  for 
implementing the lessons from the crisis. In a recent speech in Beijing, the chairman of the 
2 
 BIS Review 157/2008
committee,  Nout  Wellink,  said  that  the  main  objectives  of  the  strategy  were  to  strengthen 
capital  and  liquidity  buffers  and  to  restrict  leverage  in  the  banking  system.1  In  the  area  of 
capital  regulation,  he  also  stressed  the  importance  of  countercyclical mechanisms  and  the 
possibility of combining risk-weighted and simple unweighted instruments. 
We  believe  that  the  crisis  should  prompt  the  big  banks  to  consider  where  the  core 
competences  of  bankers  lie,  and  that  it  should  not  be  left  to  the  authorities  alone  to  think 
about  the  lessons  to  be  drawn  from  the  turmoil.  In  our  view,  long-term  risk-adjusted 
considerations should take on more of a leading role in bankers’ decisions. In this situation, 
we believe, the apparent contradiction between supervisory demands for more capital and 
liquidity, on the one hand, and banks’ competitiveness, on the other, will be dissipated.  
Preparations for the new series of banknotes running according to plan 
As  announced,  I  would  like  to  close  with  a  more  cheerful  topic  that  is  unrelated  to  the 
financial crisis. A number of you will remember  the SNB’s artistic design competition for a 
new  series  of  Swiss  banknotes,  which  was  held  in  2005.  Since  then,  design  work  has 
continued  and  the  technical  requirements  for  the  creation  of  an  innovative  series  of  new 
banknotes have now been fulfilled.  
Manuela  Pfrunder,  the  graphic  artist,  has  further  developed  her  drafts  and  completed  the 
design  for  the  CHF  50  note,  taking  the  technical  aspects  of  banknote  production  into 
account. At its meeting of 29 August 2008, the SNB Bank Council approved the design of the 
new CHF 50 banknote and gave the go-ahead for the further work that is to be done.  
Preparations for the technical aspects of implementation of banknote production are now in 
full swing. A particular challenge is posed by the security features that will be used in the new 
banknote  series  for  the  first  time.  Based  on  the  progress  of  work  to  date,  the  SNB  is 
confident  that  the  first  banknote  in  the  new  series  will  be  ready  for  production  within  the 
planned  time  period.  The  CHF  50  banknote  will  mark  the  beginning  of  the  new  series  of 
banknotes  and  is  scheduled  to  be  issued  in  autumn  2010.  The  appearance  of  the  new 
banknote  and  the  security  details  for  the  entire  series  will  be  presented  shortly  before  the 
scheduled issue date. 
                                                 
1   Nout Wellink, The Importance of Banking Supervision in Financial Stability, High Level Meeting, 17 November 
2008, Beijing 
BIS Review 157/2008 
 3
