José Manuel González-Páramo: Future of banking supervision in Europe 
Speech  by  Mr  José  Manuel  González-Páramo,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the 
European  Central  Bank,  at  the  IBF  National  Conference  2008  “Beyond  Financial  Turmoil”, 
Dublin, 22 October 2008. 
 Introduction1
1.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is a great pleasure for me to be invited to speak at the Irish Banking Federation National 
Conference in these challenging times.  
In August 2007 the global financial system entered a period of considerable turbulence that 
started  with  a  liquidity  squeeze  triggered  by  rising  delinquencies  in  the  US  subprime 
mortgages, and led to disruption in various segments of the financial markets. More than one 
year  later,  the  global  financial  system  is  still  undergoing  a  process  of  de-leveraging,  and 
market functioning is suffering by lack of confidence on the exact impact of the turmoil on the 
robustness of financial institutions and their ability to weather the current shock. This lack of 
confidence further intensified following the collapse of Lehman Brothers in September. In this 
context, both central banks and governments have announced coordinated actions designed 
to restore confidence and to preserve financial stability.  
Furthermore, on 12 October a concerted action plan was adopted by the euro area Heads of 
State aiming at: facilitating the funding of banks through various means; providing additional 
capital  resources  to  financial  institutions;  and  recapitalisation  of  distressed  banks.  They 
agreed on common principles to be followed by the EU and euro area governments, central 
banks and supervisors to avoid that national measures adversely affect the functioning of the 
single  market  and  the  other  Member  States.  These  principles  were  endorsed  by  the 
European  Council  at  its  15-16  October  meeting.  The  above  demonstrate  the  criticality  of 
recent market events and confirm the commitment of EU leaders to act together in a decisive 
and comprehensive way in order to restore the confidence to and proper functioning of the 
financial system. 
In  the  light  of  the  recent  developments,  the  topic  I  have  been  asked  to  address  today  is 
particularly challenging: the future of banking supervision. This is one of the issues that have 
come under the scrutiny by those public authorities that are in charge of reviewing practices, 
rules  and  procedures  in  all  areas  having  a  substantial  influence  on  the  functioning  of  the 
global  financial  markets  and  the  behaviour  of  market  participants.  In  my  speech  today,  I 
would  like  to  first  review  the  current  policy  initiatives  targeting  the  major  weaknesses 
revealed by the turmoil in the financial markets. I will then assess whether there are lessons 
to be drawn as regards the institutional supervisory framework, with particular focus on the 
interplay  between  central  banks  and  supervisory  authorities.  Finally,  I  will  conclude  by 
underlying the importance of some initiatives aiming to strengthening the responsiveness of 
national and European authorities at times of crisis. 
Policy response to the weaknesses revealed by the financial turmoil  
2.  
Let me start by discussing, in broad terms, the main areas where weaknesses have been 
brought  to  the  fore  by  the  turmoil  in  the  global  financial  markets.  This  is  of  particular 
importance, since a thorough understanding of the underlying developments that contributed 
                                                 
1]  
I am very grateful to Fabio Recine and Valia Rentzou for their valuable contributions. 
BIS Review 128/2008 
 1
to the emergence of the financial markets turmoil or accentuated its impact constitutes the 
basis for the definition of proper guidance by policy makers. In this respect, I would like to 
make  reference  to  four  major  areas  that  have  been  identified  by  the  public  authorities  in 
charge of maintaining financial stability as deserving special attention: 
First,  the  turmoil  underscored  the  increased  exposures  of  financial  institutions  to  complex 
financial instruments, which was not always accompanied by a commensurate development 
of risk management systems capable of assessing and managing properly (and through the 
cycle)  their  inherent  risks.  Furthermore,  the  high  reliance  on  more  volatile,  market-based 
funding sources has rendered financing more difficult and expensive. This is especially true 
for banks that depend for their funding needs on financial instruments traded in markets that 
proved to be thin and illiquid, as well as for those that had to finance contingent liabilities that 
had not been appropriately incorporated in their funding plans. As a result, the turn of the 
housing  and  credit  cycles  affected  most  severely  financial  institutions  that  did  not  have  in 
place appropriate risk management processes. In particular, risk management systems that 
help the build-up of sufficient capital and liquidity buffers would have better protected them 
from disruptions to the financial markets. 
Second, financial markets were in certain cases affected by misaligned incentives related to 
the increased adoption of the “originate to distribute” model. This model, as opposed to the 
traditional “lend and hold”, involves a long chain of participants from the originators to end-
investors.  The  asymmetry  of  information  between  these  participants  can  give  ground  to 
conflict of interests, especially in the case when credit risk is transferred. This contributed to 
(among  others)  the  decline  in  underwriting  standards  that,  against  the  background  of 
unfavourable  conditions  in  the  US  housing  market,  led  to  an  unprecedented  surge  in  the 
delinquencies of sub-prime mortgages, ultimately triggering the turmoil that is still affecting 
international markets. 
Third, recent events highlighted shortcomings in banks’ valuation practices that were relying 
to  a  large  extent  on  market  prices,  thus  being  particularly  vulnerable  to  any  disruptions  to 
market  functioning.  Moreover,  disclosure  of  information  on  risk  exposures  and  valuations, 
including those related to structured products and off-balance sheet vehicles, proved to be 
opaque  and  very  diverse  in  terms  of  breadth  and  detail.  Improving  transparency  and 
valuation practices has been considered a top priority, as a sound transparency framework 
based  on  enhanced  disclosures,  high-quality  accounting  standards  and  robust  valuation 
practices is crucial for market confidence and effective market discipline. 
Fourth,  the  current  financial  stability  framework  has  been  assessed  both  in  terms  of  its 
effectiveness  in  identifying  and  preventing  the  occurrence  of  disturbances  that  impact 
financial stability (i.e. its role in crisis prevention) as well as in terms of effectively monitoring 
and  addressing  the  risks  and  vulnerabilities  that  rise  during  the  turmoil  (i.e.  in  crisis 
management). While it can be argued that the financial stability framework, has performed 
relatively  well  –  for  instance  in  the  field  of  crisis  management  and  in  light  of  the  recent 
initiatives I have already mentioned, there is a need for a more broad, frequent and timely 
exchange  of  information  as  well  as  a  strengthened  cooperation  and  coordination  between 
competent authorities. 
Turning to the policy response of public authorities, let me recall that since the early days of 
the  financial  market  turmoil,  public  authorities  at  the  international,  European  and  national 
level have been very active in developing measures aiming at rebuilding confidence in and 
enhancing  the  resilience  of  the  financial  system.  At  the  European  level,  the  ECOFIN 
Roadmap  defines  the  actions  to  be  taken  by  authorities  through  the  course  of  2008  and 
beyond,  while  at  the  international  level  consistent  policy  initiatives  have  been  developed 
under  the  auspices  of  the  Financial  Stability  Forum.  Let  me  make  a  brief  reference  to 
measures  that  are  currently  being  developed  and  are  expected  to  be  implemented  in  the 
medium term. 
2 
 BIS Review 128/2008
First,  enhancing  risk  management  practices  is  of  pivotal  importance.  In  this  context, 
strengthening the capital treatment of structured credit and securitisation activities, mitigating 
the  build-up  of  excessive  exposures  and  risk  concentrations  and  revising  banks'  stress 
testing practices both in the context of liquidity and credit risk management are some of the 
areas  where  work  is  currently  underway.,  I  would  like  to  welcome  the  development  of 
guidelines by the industry (such as the reports of the Institute of International Finance and 
the  Counterparty  Risk  Management  Policy  Group  III  –  “Corrigan  report”)  and  stress  the 
congruency of their recommendations with those put forward by public authorities.  
Second, enhancing transparency and valuation practices is crucial for restoring confidence in 
financial  markets.  Progress  has  already  been  marked  in  this  respect,  as  many  financial 
institutions have improved disclosure in their interim financial reporting for the second quarter 
of  2008,  especially  in  relation  to  their  risk  exposures,  valuation  methods  and  off-balance 
sheet entities. Relevant guidance has been provided and is also being further developed by 
the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision  and  public  sector  initiatives,  such  as  the 
European  and  the  American  Securitisation  Fora.  In  addition,  the  International  Accounting 
Standards Board is accelerating its work to enhance accounting and disclosure standards of 
off-balance sheet entities and to develop guidance for valuation in markets that are no longer 
active.  I  take  this  opportunity  to  welcome  the  amendments  adopted  by  the  International 
Accounting  Standards  Board  and  implemented  in  the  EU  by  the  European  Commission 
earlier  this  month.  These  amendments  introduce  the  possibility  to  reclassify  assets  in  line 
with  what  is  already  permitted  by  the  US  GAAP  and  require  additional  disclosure 
requirements linked to these reclassifications in order to ensure full transparency. The ECB 
has  been  championing  enhanced  transparency  and  valuation  practices  as  well  as 
consistency  at  the  international  level  and  will  continue  following  all  relevant  developments 
given the importance of accounting standards to financial stability.  
Third,  reviewing  regulation  on  capital  adequacy  to  assess  the  extent  to  which  the  current 
regulatory framework encourages procyclical behaviour by financial institutions is pivotal in 
promoting financial stability. In the short term, regulators have agreed to avoid measures that 
will in effect tighten capital requirements, impinging on the financial standing of banks and 
negatively  impacting  the  supply  of  credit  and  the  economy  as  a  whole.  At  the  same  time, 
work  has  been  initiated  to  investigate  the  impact  of  factors  potentially  contributing  to 
procyclicality from a longer-term perspective.  
Finally,  I  would  like  to  discuss  the  measures  aiming  at  enhancing  the  cooperation  among 
central  banks,  supervisors  and  regulators  in  the  current  context.  On  the  crisis  prevention 
side,  it  has  been  agreed  that  there  is  a  need  to  reinforce  multilateral  surveillance.  To  this 
end,  the  FSF  and  the  IMF  will  intensify  their  cooperation  with  a  view  to  enhancing  the 
assessment  of  financial  stability  risks  on  a  global  scale.  In  the  EU  context,  the  same  is 
envisaged for the Committee of European Banking Supervisors and the Banking Supervision 
Committee  of  the  European  System  of  Central  Banks.  These  initiatives  should  also  be 
reflected  at  national  level.  To  this  end,  strengthening  cooperation  and  exchange  of 
information  between  central  banks  and  supervisory  authorities  can  effectively  exploit  the 
synergies  between 
to 
establishing  a  more  efficient  framework  for  the  identification  and  monitoring  of  risks  to 
financial stability.  
On the crisis management side, it is important to ensure that the central banks’ operational 
framework  is  sufficiently  flexible  to  deal  with  extraordinary  situations  and  that  supervisors’ 
cross-border  arrangements  for  dealing  with  weak  banks  are  sufficiently  robust.  This  is 
particularly pressing given the global nature of financial markets and the emergence of large 
cross-border  groups  spanning  across  a  large  number  of  jurisdictions  and  thus  being 
supervised by a multitude of national authorities. In this respect, let me mention that in the 
EU context the review of the Capital Requirements Directive is expected to lead to enhancing 
the role of the consolidating supervisor and to provide the institutional underpinning for the 
operation of supervisory colleges under the auspices of the Committee of European Banking 
the  macro-  and  micro-prudential  approaches  and  contribute 
BIS Review 128/2008 
 3
Supervisors (CEBS). Furthermore,  supervisory  cooperation should also be intensified on a 
cross-sector basis as the boundaries between financial activities are becoming increasingly 
blurred and all financial sectors can be affected by market developments. More broadly, all 
competent financial authorities, including central banks, supervisors and ministries of finance 
should  strengthen  their  coordination  mechanisms  for  managing  crises  impacting  cross-
border  financial  institutions.  In  the  EU,  the  Memorandum  of  understanding  on  financial 
stability  arrangements  that  was  signed  in  June  2008  represents  an  important  step  in  this 
direction. 
3. 
The Eurosystem’s position on the role of central banks in prudential 
supervision 
I  have  reviewed  the  main  strands  of  work  under  way  by  financial  authorities  to  remedy 
identified weakness in the regulatory framework, in which a number of initiatives are under 
way. Let me now assess whether the latest developments have indicated possible lessons 
as regards the institutional framework for financial supervision and, more specifically, the role 
to be played by central banks. 
I would start by recalling that the ECB has already expressed its position on the possible role 
of central bank in financial supervision in 2001. This was triggered by developments in some 
countries that were at the time in the process of transferring the supervisory function from the 
central bank to independent authorities. Also in your country in 2003 the central bank was 
restructured  and  it  became  the  Central  Bank  and  Financial  Services  Authority  of  Ireland 
(CBFSAI), with the Irish Financial Services Regulatory Authority (IFSRA) being established 
as the authority responsible for prudential supervision of the entire financial services sector 
within the CBFSAI. 
The  main  position  at  that  time,  which  remains  valid  today,  is  that  there  is  no  optimal 
arrangement  for  the  organisation  of  supervision  at  the  national  level.  All  organisational 
models – sectoral supervision, supervision by objectives, supervision in a single authority – 
can  in  principle  work  well  or  fail  depending  on  circumstances.  However,  regardless  of  the 
model, it is important that there exists a very close and smooth interplay between the central 
banking and the supervisory function.  
An analysis of the institutional supervisory setting in place in EU Member States shows that 
the majority of EU central banks have extensive supervisory responsibilities and confirms a 
tendency  towards  strengthening  the  role  of  central  banks  in  supervisory  activities.  For 
instance,  in  Germany  and  Austria  the  key  role  of  the  central  bank  in  conducting  on-going 
prudential supervision of banks and on-site bank inspections, whose results are reported to 
the separate supervisory authority, has been recently strengthened.  
As the experience of the financial market correction is very likely to challenge some views 
that  previously  seemed  to  be  fairly  consensual,  we  can  wonder  whether  it  brings  new 
elements also as regards this issue.  
In general, the experience of the Eurosystem central banks during the market turmoil shows 
the importance for the central banks of the availability of full supervisory information for the 
discharge  of  their  tasks.  More  specifically,  all  central  banks  felt  necessary  to  deepen  the 
dialogue between the central banking and the supervisory function for a better understanding 
of  the  market  turmoil.  [Conversely,  in  some  member  states  the  domestic  central  banking 
function provided the supervisory function with the necessary information concerning money 
and financial markets, banks’ liquidity positions and the collateral provided by banks in open 
market operations. ] 
Therefore the experience of the Eurosystem central banks during the financial market turmoil 
clearly confirmed the existence in practice of relevant information-related synergies between 
the  supervisory  and  the  central  banking  functions.  Moreover,  the  experience  made  has 
4 
 BIS Review 128/2008
highlighted the particular importance of a smooth interplay between the central banking and 
the supervisory functions in certain areas. 
First,  in  the  area  of  monitoring  and  assessing risks  to  financial stability,  central  banks  can 
benefit  from  extended  access  to  supervisory  information  and  intelligence  to  better 
understand risks and vulnerabilities for the financial system as a whole. At the same time, the 
experience made in some countries showed that a possible area for improvement concerns 
the  modalities  with  which  the  outcome  of  the  financial  stability  assessment  may  trigger 
concrete supervisory action. The bottom line here is that the supervisory authority should be 
able  to  take  into  consideration  the  results  of  the  macro-prudential  analysis  made  by  the 
central banks in its supervisory activity. 
Second, in the area of liquidity, there is clearly room for a closer interplay between the two 
authorities.  Central  banks  would  benefit  from  enhanced  access  to  supervisory  information 
and  intelligence  for  its  role  of  contributing  to  the  orderly  and  smooth  functioning  of  money 
markets.  To  that  end  for  instance  access  to  information  on  banks’  liquidity  contingency 
planning funds would be useful. At the same time, supervisors would benefit from information 
available at central banks stemming from their role in the money markets. 
In  Europe,  an  important  step  in  this  direction  is  the  recent  proposal  of  the  Commission  to 
review  the  Capital  Requirements  Directive.  This  directive  includes  a  provision  setting  an 
obligation  for  the  consolidating  banking  supervisor  to  alert  interested  central  banks  and 
communicate  to  them  all  necessary  information,  whenever  an  emergency  situation  arises 
which has the potential to jeopardise financial stability in any of the Member States where the 
banking group is present through subsidiaries or systemically relevant branches. 
Third,  in  the  area  of  crisis  management  and  resolution,  the  developments  of  the  last  few 
weeks showed the importance of close interaction between the two authorities, in particular 
when  the  provision  of  Emergency  Liquidity  Assistance  become  necessary.  In  this  field,  I 
believe  that  an  important  step  forward  is  represented  by  the  MoU  on  financial  stability 
arrangements signed by the EU central banks, supervisors and ministries of finance in June 
2008, which I already mentioned before.  
Conclusion 
EU and national authorities are developing a number of policy measures to respond to the 
financial market turmoil. These efforts show the strong commitment of all EU and national 
authorities  to  take  proper  action  in  a  timely  fashion  with  a  view  to  responding  to  the 
challenges posed by the present financial turmoil. Every effort is also made to ensure that 
actions are coordinated without raising undue concerns from the perspectives of preserving 
the level playing field and competition among financial institutions.  
Let  me  conclude  by  making  a  reference  to  two  other  initiatives  aiming  to  further 
strengthening  the  EU  institutional  framework.  First,  the  EU  Council  decided  last  week  to 
establish  a  mechanism  (the  financial  crisis  cell)  comprising  the  Presidency-in-office,  the 
Presidents of the Commission, the ECB (in conjunction with other NCBs), the Eurogroup and 
the governments of Member States to ensure that information is provided in confidence and 
with timeliness to all members states and institutions. Second with a view to improving the 
coordination of supervision at European level, the European Council welcomed the setting up 
of a high level group by the Commission. Both initiatives are welcomed by the ECB which 
participates in the former initiative and will provide its contribution to the latter. 
BIS Review 128/2008 
 5
