Lorenzo Bini Smaghi: How to strengthen Europe’s financial stability 
framework? 
Introductory  remarks  by  Mr  Lorenzo  Bini  Smaghi,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the 
European  Central  Bank,  at  the  Roundtable  discussion  of  the  CFS-IMF  Conference  “A 
Financial  Stability  Framework  for  Europe:  Managing  Financial  Soundness  in  an  Integrated 
Market”, Frankfurt am Main, 26 September 2008. 
The views expressed reflect only those of the author. 
 It  is  certainly  appropriate  to  reflect  on  ways  to  strengthen  Europe’s  financial  stability 
framework.  At  this  stage  our  reflections  are  bound  to  be  tentative,  given  that  we  are  still 
managing the current crisis.  
What seems to be sure, even in the current phase, is that changes are required at all levels 
of the financial infrastructure, from accounting to prudential rules, from the oversight of rating 
agencies  to  risk  management  practices  in  financial  institutions.  This  crisis  should  lead  all 
parties  involved  to  a  deep  rethinking  of  the  role  of  financial  industry  and  legislation  in  our 
societies. 
The  starting  point  is  well  known:  the  very  specific  nature  of  financial  markets  which  can 
function  only  to  the  extent  that  there  is  confidence.  Confidence  in  financial  markets,  and 
within financial markets, depends on many factors. Regulation is only one factor. 
The second step of the reflection – which is often forgotten or treated in a partial way – is to 
recognize  that  the  whole  financial  infrastructure  is  affected  by  conflicts  of  interest.  The 
conflict is between individual and collective interest. Unless these conflicts are identified and 
dealt with, at all levels, any reform of the framework is bound to be partial and dealing mainly 
with failures of the past, rather than address the challenges of the future. The problem is that, 
by  their  very  nature,  conflicts  of  interest  are  hardly  recognized  by  those  that  are  directly 
affected  by  them.  This  is  why  a  sustainable  reform  requires  the  contribution  of  all  parties 
involved. 
I will not list all the conflicts in the financial system, nor the remedies, but only provide some 
examples of what needs to be tackled, with a top down approach, from legislation to market 
participants. 
Let me start with the first conflict of interest, at the political level, which involves those that 
are responsible for financial markets legislation. We know by now that those sectors of the 
financial markets that are less regulated are also more prone to be risk taker and thus more 
profitable, at least in certain periods. There is a clear incentive for market participants to have 
less regulation, at least for the part of industry in which they operate. There is thus a strong 
incentive  to  lobby  the  political  sphere  to  reduce  legislation  and  regulation,  in  a  somewhat 
vicious  circle.  The  less  regulated  is  the  sector,  the  more  profitable  it  will  be,  the  more 
resources  it  will  in  turn  have  to  lobby  and  thus  the  more  likely  it  will  be  to  succeed  in 
influencing  the  legislator.  Furthermore,  the  more  unregulated  is  the  sector,  the  more 
innovative  it  can  be,  creating  complicated  instruments  and  vehicles  that  the  legislator  will 
hardly  understand  and  thus  will  have  difficulties  in  regulating.  The  legislator  will  need  to 
consult market participants when preparing legislation, and these occasions are effectively 
used to water down or reject proposals.  
As an example, when one looks at the recommendations contained in the April FSF Report, 
they hardly look controversial and one might wonder why they hadn’t been adopted before. 
The  answer  seems  to  be  that  the  financial  industry  opposed  them  until  now  and  lobbied 
strong enough to avoid that they became legislation. 
BIS Review 117/2008 
 1
Another source of conflict of interest derives from the international dimension of finance and 
the rapid mobility of products and factors of production in this sector. In such a context, there 
is an incentive to reduce the level of regulation compared to other countries in order to attract 
the  financial  industry  from  neighbours.  Given  the  high  value  added  that  financial  industry 
generates and the negative correlation between regulation and profitability, the incentive to 
compete  on  regulatory  standards  is  much  stronger  than  in  other  sectors,  especially  for 
countries which have put the financial sector at the centre of their economic policy priorities. 
Experience  shows  that  national  legislators  are  tempted  to  lower  standards  also  for  the 
protection of savers, for instance in terms of deposit protection or bankruptcy laws, in order 
to attract financial industry. Given the complexity of financial instruments and practices and 
the asymmetry of information inherent in the financial industry, the savers, i.e. citizens, i.e. 
the taxpayers, are bound to find out that their interests have been given a lesser importance 
compared to those of the financial industry only when the crisis erupts.  
The  problem  exists  not  only  at  the  international  level  but  also  within  the  single  European 
financial  market.  National  regulators  deliberately  want  to  maintain  a  substantial  leeway  in 
transposing European directives into national rules. It has long been contended by some that 
such a leeway was healthy, because it allowed for competition and therefore avoided over-
regulation. Some progress in regulatory convergence has been achieved in recent years, in 
particular within the Lamfalussy framework, but clearly not enough. The proposal for a single 
rulebook of regulation has been turned down by some countries. Maybe they could review 
this position in light of recent events. 
At  the  international  level,  in  particular  in  discussions  with  the  US,  the  aim  of  achieving 
common rules on a whole series of issues, such as capital requirements, accounting rules, 
offshore centres, hedge funds, has always bumped against the interests behind the ongoing 
competition between financial systems, in particular financial centres.  
Similar conflicts of interest affect the supervisory authorities in the performance of their tasks 
of  producing  secondary  legislation  and  overseeing  financial  institutions.  In  addition  to 
contributing to the stability of their financial system, supervisory authorities have as implicit – 
and sometimes explicit – task, that of defending and promoting their national industry, within 
an integrated international financial market. To some extent this puts supervisory authorities 
in competition among themselves, which affects their regulatory and oversight tasks. 
The  incentive  to  compete  is  in  conflict  with  the  need  to  cooperate,  especially  in  a  single 
market, particularly in the supervision of large and complex institutions. Proposals have been 
put forward, in particular in Europe, to establish colleges of supervisors in order to coordinate 
the  oversight  of  financial  institutions  present  in  several  countries.  But  it  is  difficult  to  know 
how well these colleges would be working in the presence of such conflicts of interest which 
create  obstacles  for  the  exchange  of  information,  especially  on  critical  institutions. 
Developments of recent days tend to confirm this hypothesis. 
Conflicts  of  interest  emerge  not  only  with  respect  to  crisis  prevention  but  also  crisis 
resolution. Authorities have an incentive to push the burden of adjustment, in case of a crisis, 
towards  other  institutions,  either  domestic  or  foreign.  Recent  experience  has  shown  that 
conflicts of interest hamper the necessary transmission of information on critical institutions 
from the supervisory authority to the central bank, even within the same country, in the hope 
that weak institutions would be bailed out by liquidity injections rather than by addressing the 
solvency problem. This makes contagion from individual institutions to the rest of the market 
more  difficult  to  avoid.  It  also  undermines  confidence  between  financial  institutions.  The 
lesson  to  be  learned  is  that  if  supervisory  functions  are  entrusted  to  a  separate  authority, 
outside the central bank, voluntary cooperation between the two is not sufficient. There must 
be  an  obligation  for  the  former  to  provide  the  central  bank  with  a  whole  series  of  detailed 
informations. 
The same incentive exists at the international level, including within a monetary union, where 
the use of the inflation tax to help out weak banks would enable to spread out the cost to all 
2 
 BIS Review 117/2008
taxpayers of the union rather than to only those of the country of origin. The superimposition 
of complex supervisory arrangements in the various countries and a single currency does not 
necessarily  encourage  timely  information  on  problem  banks,  until  insolvency  is  effectively 
declared.  
If  a  solvency  problems  emerged  in  a  large  and  complex  institution,  with  branches  and 
subsidiaries in several countries, a multitude of conflicts of interest would spur, in the home 
and host countries, which would be quite difficult to disentangle in a short time period. The 
creation of colleges of supervisors should facilitate this task, but as experience has shown 
also within countries, voluntary mechanisms might not be sufficient to effectively tackle the 
problems, precisely because of the existing conflicts of interest. 
Conflicts of interest are widespread in market participants. 
The problems with rating agencies have been examined several times in the past, with little 
progress so far. The recent turmoil has confirmed that on some occasions ratings are given, 
on the request of the issuer, without sufficient care with a risk of inducing investors to wrong 
decisions.  The  time  has  come  for  more  effective  actions  to  be  taken  by  the  legislator.  If 
prudential  regulation,  in  particular  Basel  II,  allows  banks  to  make  reference  to  external 
ratings, there must be mechanisms that assert that these ratings have been done according 
to agreed standards. 
Within banks and financial institutions the conflicts of interest are numerous, starting from the 
management  and  the  Board  to  the  whole  structure  of  market  practices.  The  incentive  to 
maximise profits over the short term, as the competitors are doing, to hire and remunerate 
with a short term perspective, to pass on the losses to clients that are unaware, to advise 
clients  and  provide  them  the  financing,  are  at  the  roots  of  the  conflicts.  We  haven’t 
discovered  many  things  new  from  the  recent  crisis.  The  failures  of  risk  management  –  or 
should I say the underestimation of warnings from risk management – were evident also in 
the past. Prior to the Asian crisis the warnings about the fragility of the financial system in 
those countries were also ignored by the top management, as in recent years the warnings 
on the complexity of some of the ore fashionable instruments were rebuffed. An interesting 
article in one of these summer’s numbers of the Economist reports the story of an investment 
banker  working  in  risk management,  explaining  how  he  was  bullied  by  his  colleagues  that 
were earning more money.  
One thing we’ve got from this crisis is a nice quote, that says it all: “As long as the music 
plays, we shall dance”. 
Intellectually  honest  bankers  would  admit  that  they  cannot  tackle  these  problems  by 
themselves, through self imposed regulation or self discipline. How can a bank change the 
incentive  structure  underlying  its  remuneration  scheme  if  the  others  are  not  and  –  more 
importantly  – if unregulated institutions like hedge funds are cannibalising them?  How can 
boards  improve  their  knowledge  of  what  management  is  doing  if  they  have  little 
understanding  of  the  complexity  of  financial  instruments?  There  is  clearly  a  coordination 
problem, i.e. a role for public policy. Financial institutions would generally oppose constraints 
that reduce their profitability, but would ultimately accept them if the constraints are imposed 
on all. 
The  bottom  line  is  my  starting  line.  The  main  problem  with  financial  markets  comes  from 
conflicts of interest, at all levels. The problem with conflicts of interest is that those that are 
affected by them do not recognise them, sometimes not even in private (I myself as a central 
banker  might  not  be  immune  from  this  sense  of  denial).  Experience  has  shown  that  self 
discipline  and  self  regulation  are  not  sufficient.  There  must  be  constraints  and  obligations, 
not  only  for  individuals  but  also  for  institutions.  If  we  really  want  to  overhaul  the  financial 
system so that it can face the challenges of the future, we have to recognise this and act 
accordingly. In a global financial system, such an action requires a strong European initiative.  
BIS Review 117/2008 
 3
