Bandid Nijathaworn: Financial globalization and emerging market 
economies 
Speech by Dr Bandid Nijathaworn, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Thailand, at the Panel 
Discussion, Bank of Thailand’s International Symposium 2008, Bangkok, 8 November 2008.  
 First, let me thank the organizer for inviting me to take part in this panel. A lot has been said 
in the last two days about financial globalization and emerging markets. We spoke about the 
challenge for monetary policy, the challenge for financial regulation, and the implications for 
capital flows management, and on this panel, we discuss the importance of having the right 
international financial architecture to respond to the global challenge. But more important at 
this  time,  I  think  the  current  global  financial  turmoil  also  offers  a  unique  and  important 
perspective for us to look closely at financial globalization, in terms of the inherent risk, the 
lessons  that  can  be  learned,  and  how  emerging  markets  should  go  about  managing  the 
process of financial globalization. 
My remarks today will be on the practical challenge faced by emerging market economies 
like Thailand in managing the process of financial globalization. On this, I will focus on the 
financial sector and the implications that financial globalization has for the financial sector in 
emerging markets. 
A good starting point to discuss the issue is to look first at the lessons that can be learned so 
far  from  the  current  turmoil.  For  all  that  can  be  said,  the  current  turmoil  is  a  powerful 
manifestation of the risk and the complexities that could come with financial globalization. For 
me, the turmoil points to three important observations. 
First  and  foremost,  it  shows  that  financial  turmoil  can  happen  in  any  market  regardless  of 
whether it is large or small, or whether it is emerging or developed. Once the imbalance is 
allowed to occur, financial distress will likely happen and there is no exception to it. 
Second, the turmoil highlights the central role that the financial sector plays in a boom-bust 
cycle. First is the role that it plays as a mechanism that can contribute to and trigger a crisis. 
This is because a bubble usually cannot happen without excessive credit growth. Therefore, 
without  proper  regulation,  a  combination  of  strong  capital  inflows,  easy  credit,  and  the 
procyclicality of the financial system can set the stage for a build-up of serious economic and 
financial imbalances. 
The financial sector also plays an important second role in that its strength and resilience can 
significantly help cushion the real economy from the impact of external shock. The fact that a 
majority of emerging markets in Asia at this time have been in a better position to weather 
the  first  round  impact  of  the  turmoil,  both  the  direct  impact  on  banks  and  the  impact  on 
financial markets from de-leveraging and capital flow reversals, is a clear testimony to the 
importance  of  this  second  role.  For  emerging  markets,  both  these  roles  are  powerful,  and 
they  put  the  financial  sector  at  the  center  of  any  efforts  to  ensure  economic  and  financial 
stability in the long run. 
The  third  observation  is  that  the  turmoil  shows  that  the  risk  of  systemic  instability  can  be 
greater  with  financial  globalization,  and  this  raises  an  important  question  about  the 
appropriate monetary policy framework for maintaining macroeconomic stability. 
For central banks, price stability remains the first and foremost objective of monetary policy. 
But  in  the  context  of  today’s  financial  globalization  when  the  source  of  systemic  danger  is 
clearly  external,  the  idea  that  price  stability  in  itself  might  not  be  enough  to  ensure 
macroeconomic stability is now gaining more acceptance. One approach to deal with this is 
to  combine  conventional  monetary  policy 
targeting  with  a 
macroprudential framework. The latter is aimed at addressing the risk to financial stability by 
framework 
inflation 
like 
BIS Review 142/2008 
 1
implementing measures to counter excessive lending or the procyclical nature of the financial 
system. This is the approach that we have taken at the Bank of Thailand, and I will speak 
more on this later. 
So, the current turmoil is a reminder of things that can go wrong with financial globalization, 
and  the  three  observations  I  cited  point  to  the  key  challenge  faced  by  policy  makers  in 
emerging  markets.  In  this  context  and  in  relation  to  the  financial  sector,  the  challenge  for 
policy is three-fold.  
The first is how to ensure that we have a strong and resilient financial sector with disciplined 
risk management so that it can help mitigate the risk of major imbalances in the economy. 
The  second  is  how  to  reduce  the  procyclicality  of  the  financial  sector  so  that  the  risk  of  a 
credit-driven bubble can be avoided, especially at the time of strong and persistent capital 
inflows.  And  the  third  is  how  to  develop  a  deep  and  liquid  financial  market  that  can  help 
improve the ability of the economy to adjust to shocks. 
In  the  context  of  financial  regulation  in  emerging  markets  where  the  dominant  part  of  the 
system  is  typically  the  banking  sector,  the  challenge  for  policy  is  to  calibrate  a  regulatory 
policy  that  fosters  a  strong  and  resilient  banking  sector  with  good  and  disciplined  risk 
management, that makes use of the necessary macroprudential measures when needed to 
help  reduce  or  counter  the  procyclicality  in  the  financial  system,  and  that  provides 
momentum  for  reform  to  strengthen  financial  infrastructure  and  governance.  Thailand,  like 
most emerging markets, has also been struggling with this issue. And I want share with you 
some of the policies that we have pursued in response to the challenge. It is a long journey, 
and it is the journey that we are making. 
On  the  issue  of  reducing  risk  from  procyclicality  of  the  financial  sector,  prevent 
excessive  lending,  and  ensure  adequate  capital.  In  our  view,  the  key  issue  here  is  to 
reduce a possible large swing in the availability and the price of credit stemming from the 
tendency of banks to underestimate risks in good times, and then to overestimate them in 
bad  times.  On  this,  our  approach  has  been  to  ensure  that  banks’  capital  and  risk-
management policy is forward-looking by using a combination of three instruments. 
The  first  is  stress  testing  to  ensure  that  bank’s  own  internal  process  for  assessing  the 
adequacy of capital and overall risk management is alert to possible key risks. Thai banks 
have begun conducting stress tests as part of the supervisory process since early last year 
when we first underwent the FSAP assessment. From our experience, we find stress testing 
to be a useful and effective instrument for helping banks in formulating strategy for capital 
and  risk  management  in  a  forward-looking  manner.  Also  importantly,  it  provides  a  formal 
process for a two-way dialogue between banks and supervisors on risk management and on 
other financial stability issues. 
The  second  instrument  is  the  fair  value  accounting  rules  or  IAS  39,  which  we  have 
adopted for non-performing loans and for structured products. In our view, these rules can 
help  strengthen  market  discipline  over  bank  lending  and  investment.  And  because  fair 
valuation  involves  marking  to  market,  its  adoption  also  helps  make  provisioning  for  asset 
impairment more forward-looking. The third instrument is prudential policy to limit excessive 
procyclicality. In the past five years, when capital inflows were strong, we have put in place 
prudential measures to stem the build-up of excessive credit growth on consumer spending 
and on speculative housing demand. These include measures on credit card approval and 
maximum loan-to-value ratio for luxury housing. As I noted earlier, in the context of monetary 
policy  framework,  combining  inflation  targeting  with  macroprudential  measure  offers  a 
pragmatic  approach  to  deal  with  concerns  on  financial  stability  and  asset  prices  without 
compromising the discipline of monetary policy with respect to its primary inflation objective. 
So far, we have found this approach to be practical and useful. 
On a final note, financial globalization is an important issue for emerging markets. It is the 
development that is likely to continue given the strong momentum of globalization in trade 
and in production that we are now seeing. But financial globalization is not without risk as the 
2 
 BIS Review 142/2008
current turmoil shows. For emerging markets, this risk can be quite potent because of the 
smallness  of  the  financial  market  and  the  limited  abilities  of  economic  agents  to  adjust  to 
shocks.  How  well  we  manage  this  risk  will  depend  critically  on  how  well  we  manage  the 
process of financial globalization. 
In dealing with this, my view is that we should not resist it, but should manage it by adopting 
a  pragmatic  approach  to  financial  globalization.  Being  pragmatic  means  having  the  right 
reservation about it, taking a careful step toward it, and be willing to take the needed action 
to deal with the unintended consequence. This is not going to be easy, but it is probably the 
best that we can do for now.  
Thank you. 
BIS Review 142/2008 
 3
