Amando M Tetangco, Jr: The importance of microentrepreneurship 
Keynote  address  by  Mr  Amando  M  Tetangco,  Jr,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  the 
Philippines  (Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas),  at  the  Microentrepreneur  of  the  Year  (MOTY) 
Awarding Ceremony, Manila, 19 November 2008. 
 Magandang hapon sa inyong lahat!  
Ladies and gentlemen, we are gathered once again to celebrate, honor, and give recognition 
to our outstanding microentrepreneurs. Their collective success in overcoming the difficulties 
inherent in microentrepreneurship serves as a powerful inspiration for all of us. Their stories 
remind  us  that  with  vision,  courage,  passionate  commitment,  a  persevering  spirit,  we  can 
pursue  and  reach  seemingly  impossible  goals  even  in  the  midst  of  a  global  economic 
slowdown and financial turmoil.  
And  so,  friends,  let  us  show  our  appreciation  for  all  our  awardees  by  giving  them  a  long 
round of applause. Palakpakan po natin ang ating mga awardees!  
Let us also thank the officers and staff of Citi Philippines headed by Country Officer Sanjiv 
Vohra  for  initiating  and  sustaining  the  Citi  Microentrepreneur  of  the  Year  Awards  which  is 
now on its 6th year. With Citi, this annual recognition of outstanding microentrepreneurs has 
been institutionalized. A round of applause please for Citi.  
Of course, we also salute the members of the working groups from the Microfinance Council 
of  the  Philippines  headed  by  Rollie  Victoria,  from  the  Bangko  Sentral,  from  Citi,  and  from 
other partner institutions. Palakpakan din po natin sila. They had the privilege of seeing our 
successful microentrepreneurs up close and personal, but I am sure they had a difficult time 
narrowing down the list.  
I  can  say  this  with  certainty  because  we  who  compose  the  National  Selection  Committee 
devoted long deliberations on each of the finalists. Given the remarkable accomplishments of 
our finalists, it was a tough choice indeed. And so, this year, the members of the National 
Selection Committee decided to give three special awards on top of our eight major winners. 
Friends, let us also reward the hardworking members of the National Selection Committee 
with a round of applause.  
Ladies  and  gentlemen.  The  stories  of  our  winners  become  even  more  significant  when 
viewed  against  the  backdrop  of  an  increasingly  difficult  operating  environment.  These 
exceptional microentrepreneurs not only survive they thrive!  
Their stories give us confidence that our micro, small and medium enterprises (MSMEs) will 
continue  to  be  a  vital,  resilient,  and  viable  foundation  for  sustaining  economic  growth 
throughout our country.  
It is noteworthy that one of the country’s pioneer MFIs – CARD-MRI – is a 2008 awardee of 
the  prestigious  Ramon  Magsaysay  Award  Foundation  for  Public  Service  under  its  theme 
“Pathfinders  in  a  Changing  Asia.”  It  was  honored  for  its  "successful  adaptation  of 
microfinance in the Philippines, providing self-sustaining and comprehensive services for half 
a million poor women and their families."  
Indeed, real-life success stories of microentrepreneurs and hard data on hand prove beyond 
reasonable doubt that microfinance truly has the power to liberate our entrepreneurial poor 
from poverty and to give them a better life.  
As  of  June  2008,  there  were  802,092  microfinance  borrowers  who  have  accessed  loans 
worth  P6.5  billion  from  230  banks.  These  borrowers  have  also  accumulated  roughly  P1.6 
billion in deposits with the banks.  
BIS Review 144/2008 
 1
It  is  also  evident  that  our  banks  have  successfully  taken  their  strategic  place  in  providing 
financial  services  to  the  previously  unbanked.  Since  2006,  rural  banks  have  consistently 
accounted for a significant portion of the winners. In fact, both of our national winners this 
year  are  clients  of  rural  banks.  I  believe  this  trend  will  continue  as  more  banks  provide 
microfinance services.  
I  also  see  more  successful  microentrepreneurs  being  nominated  in  the  years  ahead  as 
partner institutions who have become fierce advocates of microfinance get more supporters 
and more microentrepreneurs on board.  
Synergies  developed  between  and  among  partner  institutions  should  result  in  a  further 
broadening and deepening of the microfinance sector. The case of Citi awardees are a case 
in point. I understand our 11 awardees have attended financial education lectures to boost 
their ability to sustain profitable operations.  
The  members  of  our  National  Selection  Committee  have  also  been  generous  in  terms  of 
giving guides to growing their business and providing marketing outlets for consumer goods.  
On our part, the Bangko Sentral will continue to provide a policy environment conducive to 
broader  participation  of  banks  in  the  microfinance  sector.  Rediscounting  of  microfinance 
loans will also continue.  
And  so,  ladies  and  gentlemen,  let  us  continue  working  together  to  ensure  the  continuing 
success of microfinance, to expand its reach, and to lift millions more of our countrymen from 
poverty to a better quality of life through microfinance.  
Again, my congratulations to all our awardees, to Citi and all those involved in this annual 
search for outstanding microentrepreneurs.  
Mabuhay ang Pilipinas!  
Salamat po sa inyong lahat. 
2 
 BIS Review 144/2008
