Hermann Remsperger: Stabilising the economy and the financial system 
– lessons and challenges for monetary policy and supervision 
Keynote speech by Professor Dr Hermann Remsperger, Member of the Executive Board of 
the  Deutsche  Bundesbank,  at  the  16th  Central  Banking  Seminar  of  the  Bank  of  Korea 
on "Global Stagflation Threat and Monetary Policy", Seoul, 21 October 2008. 
 Introduction 
I 
Governor Lee,  
Members of the Governing Board of the Bank of Korea,  
Ladies and Gentleman, 
It is a great honour for me to be invited to deliver the keynote speech at the 16th Central 
Banking Seminar of the Bank of Korea on "Global Stagflation Threat and Monetary Policy”. 
Given the ongoing turmoil in the global financial system and the related risks for the world 
economy,  the  topic  of  this  seminar  is  well  chosen  and  timely.  Three  closely  interlinked 
developments are currently shaping events.  
The  public  focus  is,  of  course,  first  and  foremost  on  the  financial  crisis.  Starting  from  the 
United  States  in  August  2007,  the  global  financial  system  has  been  repeatedly  shaken  by 
new waves of heavy turbulence. These were driven by rapid and dramatic changes in market 
sentiment.  Investors  and  lenders  have  moved  from  trusting  anybody  to  trusting  nobody.  A 
situation  in  which  liquidity  was  simply  assumed  to  be  given  has  turned  into  a  situation  in 
which funding markets are frozen and dysfunctional. Emergency measures have been taken 
by  central  banks  and  governments  in  many  countries.  These  measures  were  often 
unprecedented in scale and unconventional in nature.  
With  the  financial  storm  intensifying  in  recent  weeks,  an  increasing  number  of  financial 
institutions in advanced economies have been encountering severe difficulties. What started 
as a liquidity crisis is turning out to be more and more of a solvency crisis. It represents a 
growing  danger  to  the  supply  of  credit  and  the  proper  functioning  of  the  economies  in 
advanced  economies.  Moreover,  the  effects  of  the  crisis  are  being  increasingly  felt  in 
emerging  markets,  too.  Many  of  these  economies  are  faced  with  capital  outflows  and 
reduced export demand. Hence, we are confronted with a truly global challenge.  
This brings me to my second observation. Surging commodity prices, until very recently, and 
the current financial market turmoil have resulted in a marked slowdown of global economic 
activity.  With  the  financial  crisis  deepening,  uncertainty  about  the  outlook  for  the  global 
economy is increasing, while growth risks are biased strongly to the downside. Following a 
roughly 5% increase in each of the past few years, the IMF now expects global economic 
growth  to  slow  to  close  to  4%  this  year  and  to  3%  in  2009.  The  economic  slowdown  is 
especially marked in the advanced economies. In these countries, the word recession has 
re-entered the public debate.  
Third,  with  global  economic  activity  weakening,  inflation  worries  have  abated.  However,  I 
would  caution  against  the  temptation  to  "declare  inflation  dead",  as  some  observers  have 
done. We saw a sharp rise in inflation worldwide, in particular from the end of 2007 up to the 
middle of this year. For the current year, the IMF is forecasting a rise of 3.6% in consumer 
prices in advanced economies and an increase of as much as 9.4% in the emerging markets.  
Fortunately, the crest of the current wave of inflation seems now to have broken due to falling 
oil and commodity prices, reflecting weaker global growth. But it should not be overlooked 
that inflation in a whole number of countries has doubled within a relatively short space of 
time. In more than half of the emerging market economies, inflation spiked to double digits 
BIS Review 129/2008 
 1
only recently. And, more importantly, at the moment inflation is diverging considerably across 
individual countries and regions. If this divergence were to persist or even widen, it is likely to 
complicate monetary and exchange rate policy for emerging markets with an exchange rate 
peg.  
At this point, it might be useful to mention the so-called impossible trinity: Countries that peg 
their exchange rates to an anchor currency either have to control capital movements or cope 
with  the  interest  rate  policy  of  the  anchor  currency.  Fixed  exchange  rates  are  sustainable 
only  as  long  as  there  is  no  major  divergence  in  inflation  and  growth  vis-à-vis  the  anchor 
currency. This was the case during the period of the “great moderation”. The risks posed by 
exchange rate pegs are now becoming increasingly obvious and in many emerging markets 
are rendering a stability-oriented monetary policy more difficult.  
In my view, in an increasingly integrating world, the global economy needs more exchange 
rate flexibility in dealing with large shifts in relative prices that affect advanced and emerging 
countries  differently.  While  interest  rates  in  advanced  economies  are  at  comparatively  low 
levels, significantly higher interest rate levels are required in emerging markets, given their 
still relatively high rates of growth. At the same time, history tells us that capital controls are a 
short-term  solution  at  best.  Therefore,  interest  rate  differentials  corresponding  to  different 
macroeconomic circumstances at home and abroad can be achieved only through sufficient 
exchange rate flexibility.  
To a European observer, this line of reasoning sounds familiar. It has been at the heart of the 
discussion on European monetary and exchange rate policies ever since the collapse of the 
old Bretton Woods system. And in the following 26 years that preceded the creation of the 
euro, European countries tried almost every possible exchange rate regime to cope with the 
challenge  of  conducting  independent  monetary  policies  on  an  increasingly  integrated 
continent. In the end, the corner solutions prevailed: a hard peg among European countries, 
and the euro area itself operating an independent float.  
I will not go further into exchange rate issues.1 Instead, I would like to invite you to join me on 
a  journey  through  recent  economic  history  –  a  journey  with  three  stops.  Our  first  stopping 
place will be the period of stagflation in the 1970s and early 1980s (section II). I believe that 
a number of important monetary policy lessons can be drawn from that episode. We shall 
then  move  on  to  our  second  stopping  place.  It  is  the  period  of  the  “great  moderation” 
(section III), which began in the early 1990s and now seems have come to an end with the 
recent  increase  in  macroeconomic  volatility.  This  episode  has  another  set  of  interesting 
lessons to teach us. Third, and finally, our journey will end with the current financial crises 
and a discussion of the many challenges facing central banks and supervisors in stabilising 
the financial system (section IV).  
II 
Lessons of the period of stagflation: Anchoring inflation expectations at a low 
level by means of a credible monetary policy 
Let us start our journey with some monetary policy implications of the period of stagflation in 
the 1970s and early 1980s, when high inflation rates and recessionary developments were 
simultaneously triggered by oil price shocks. 
I do know that likening the recent past to the 1970s and early 1980s is an oversimplification. 
Currently,  the  global  economy  is  faced  with  multiple  shocks.  And  it  is  precisely  the  heavy 
turbulence in the international financial markets that sets the present situation apart from the 
period  of  stagflation  in  the  1970s  and  early  1980s.  Even  so,  this  episode  provides  some 
important monetary policy lessons for the present. 
                                                 
1   For  an  in-depth  discussion,  see  H  Remsperger  and  A  Winkler  (2008),  Emerging  Markets  and  the  Global 
Monetary System: The Challenge of Rising Inflation, Intereconomics (5), pp 268-277. 
2 
 BIS Review 129/2008
I  believe  these  lessons  can  be  summed  up  in  one  key  message:  anchoring  inflation 
expectations  at  a  low  level  is  crucial  for  monetary  policy  to  be  successful.  Anchoring  both 
inflation and inflation expectations is essential in order to contain the risk of second-round 
effects  induced  by  the  oil  price  shocks  and  thus  to  counter  the  emergence  of  wage-price 
spirals.  However,  the  first-round  effects  of  oil  price  shocks  –  in  other  words,  the  direct 
increase in consumer prices due to the higher cost of energy – impose costs that have to be 
borne. The real transfer of wealth to the oil-exporting countries cannot be compensated by 
loose monetary policy. 
With firmly anchored low inflation expectations, risks to price stability can be averted with a 
less  tight  monetary  policy  than  would  be  the  case  with  higher  inflation  expectations.  Once 
high  inflation  expectations  have  become  entrenched,  monetary  policymakers  have  to 
respond with high interest rates. The real economic costs of a disinflation process, which is 
inevitable  sooner  or  later,  are  correspondingly  high.  Here,  I  would  like  to  point  to  the 
experience  of  the  Fed  in  the  1980s  under  Chairman  Paul  Volcker,  known  as  the  “Volcker 
disinflation”.  
And perhaps I may also recall that monetary policy was the subject of in-depth discussion 
during the period of high inflation in the 1970s and early 1980s. Concurrently, there was a 
growing  willingness  – or  perhaps  I  should  rather  say  “a  growing  necessity”  – to  implement 
newly developed monetary policy strategies. The Bundesbank and the Swiss National Bank 
were among the first central banks – following the collapse of the Bretton Woods system – to 
enter  uncharted  monetary  policy  territory  with  the  introduction  of  monetary  targeting. 
Although the road to price stability under the new strategy was bumpy at times, the final track 
record  was  convincing.  The  gearing  of  monetary  policy  to  a  quantitative  objective  and 
resolute interest rate responses pushed inflation in Germany down from a peak of nearly 8 % 
in the beginning of 1974 to 2 ½ % by the end of 1978. 
With this monetary policy strategy, the Bundesbank also mastered the second oil price shock 
very  well: at just over 6 % in the spring of 1980, inflation in Germany remained below the 
1974  peak,  while  inflation  in  the  USA  went  up  to  14  ½ %.  The  rapid  lowering  of  inflation 
expectations  to  a  low  level  meant  that  Germany  succeeded  in  “opting  out  of  the  great 
inflation” at an early stage.2
Put in a nutshell, the success of monetary targeting was based on the explicit, transparent 
and credible commitment to a quantitative objective. To be sure, institutional conditions and 
supportive  measures  also  played  a  crucial  part.  These  include  the  central  bank’s 
independence, a flexible exchange rate and, not least, an active communication policy. But 
the  be-all  and  end-all  of  a  successful  monetary  policy  remain  the  three  “C”s  – credibility, 
credibility and credibility.  
For  me,  the  key  lesson  from  the  experience  of  the  1970s  and  1980s  is  that  a  resolute, 
forward-looking and credible monetary policy can anchor inflation expectations at a low level. 
And let me add that the ECB was well advised to take due account of the monetary policy 
lessons  of  the  1970s  and  1980s.  According  to  survey  data,  average  long-term  inflation 
expectations since the introduction of the euro were broadly in line with our target figure of 
close to, but below 2%. 
                                                 
2   A Beyer, V Gaspar, C Gerberding and O Issing (2008), Opting Out of the Great Inflation: German Monetary 
Policy after the Break Down of Bretton Woods, paper prepared for the NBER Conference “A Retrospective on 
the Great Inflation”, September 2008, available at https://nber15.nber.org/c/2008/gif08/beyer.pdf.  
BIS Review 129/2008 
 3
III 
Lessons of the period of the “great moderation”: Increasing globalisation 
calls for a long-term, symmetric interest rate policy based on a broad 
monetary policy analysis 
And  with  this  remark  I  would  like  to  turn  to  the  second  part  of  our  journey  through  recent 
economic  history.  From  the  early  1990s,  low  inflation  rates  were  accompanied  by  an 
accelerated  globalisation  of  the  world  economy.  Cheap  imports  from  emerging  market 
economies  with  low  production  costs  have  dampened  the  rise  in  consumer  prices  in  the 
industrial countries. This is supported by a number of empirical studies covering the period 
from the mid-1990s up to the middle of this decade.3
However, I would caution against drawing premature conclusions. We have been witnessing 
a reverse development, in particular since the middle of last year. The fact that the emerging 
market economies are becoming more closely integrated into the global economy means that 
their  demand  for  commodities  is  also  growing.  This  additional  demand  – along  with  some 
supply-side  constraints – is  playing  a  crucial  role  in  the  steep  increase  in  global  oil  and 
commodity prices. The global surge in inflation until the middle of this year should teach us to 
regard the globalisation dividend of low inflation rates as not being permanent.  
Moreover, I would like to emphasise that shifts in supply and demand in individual markets  
– either nationally or on a global scale – merely lead to a change in relative prices. Even in 
an  increasingly  globalised  world,  a  broad-based  increase  in  the  general  price  level  is  and 
remains a monetary phenomenon. This generally accepted fact of monetary policy seems to 
have been overlooked somewhat in the period of the “great moderation”, when globalisation 
kept inflation down for quite some time.  
I would, in fact, like to go one step further: Central bankers can never afford to sit back and 
relax  – even  in  periods  of  low  inflation.  It  seems  that  price  stability  based  on  a  credible 
monetary policy is not, by itself, enough to ensure financial stability. There are even some 
observers  who  advance  the  hypothesis  that  a  credible  monetary  policy  which  anchors 
inflation expectations at a low level actually sows the seeds for a build-up of imbalances in 
the financial sector later on. In the literature, this is described as the “paradox of credibility”.4  
Has  credibility  –  the  be-all  and  end-all  of  a  successful  monetary  policy –  unintentionally 
become a risk to financial stability? In order to throw more light on this, I would like to explain 
briefly how financial imbalances could arise in the period of the “great moderation” despite 
stable prices – imbalances that ultimately became a threat to the real economy.  
The years prior to the outbreak of the current financial crisis were marked by low nominal 
and  real  interest  rates  and  abundant  liquidity.  The  main  driving  forces  were  the 
accommodative monetary policy stance around the world in combination with excess savings 
in parts of the emerging world, in particular in emerging Asia – the so-called saving glut.5  
increasingly 
In 
underestimated underlying risks. This is suggested, at least, by the low and steadily falling 
cost of insuring against credit risk, in particular in the period from 2005 to mid-2007. High risk 
appetite  boosted  the  demand  for  complex  financial  products:  The  risks  of  these  financial 
instruments  were  not  recognised  or  were  ignored  in  many  cases.  At  the  same  time,  we 
observed  a  credit  boom  and  strong  output  growth  which  neared  the  point  of  overheating, 
while the benign impact of globalisation kept consumer inflation in check.  
this  environment, 
for  yield  and 
their  search 
intensified 
investors 
                                                 
3   See Deutsche Bundesbank, Globalisation and monetary policy, Monthly Report, October 2007, pp 15-33. 
4   C Borio, and I Shim (2007), What can (macro-)prudential policy do to support monetary policy?, BIS Working 
Papers, No 242. 
5   B Bernanke (2005), The Global Saving Glut and the U.S. Current Account Deficit, remarks at the Sandridge 
Lecture, Virginia Association of Economics, Richmond, Virginia, 10 March, reprinted in BIS Review 16, pp 1-
10. 
4 
 BIS Review 129/2008
In addition, the propensity to lend normally follows a cyclical pattern. The quality of credit is 
generally better in an upturn than in a downturn. During the period under consideration, this 
contributed to the emergence of asset price bubbles. Developments on housing markets in a 
number of countries, including the United States, the United Kingdom, Spain and Ireland but 
also some emerging market economies, are a case in point. Higher house prices lifted the 
value  of  real  estate  collateral,  which,  in  turn,  made  lending  easier.  In  countries  where 
mortgage  equity  withdrawal  played  a  role,  rising  house  prices  also  created  an  income 
illusion. This explains at least part of the over-consumption in the United States.  
Recent events make us painfully aware of the fact that asset prices do not rise forever. Asset 
price corrections, too, can generate risks to sustainable growth. Falling asset prices tend to 
reduce  the value  of  collateral  and  to  increase banks’  holdings  of bad  loans,  thus  reducing 
their scope to provide new credit.  
The  fact  that  adverse  financial  developments  have  a  huge  negative  impact  on  the  real 
economy is shown not only by the current events. A recent comprehensive study by the IMF 
demonstrates for the long period from 1960 to 2007 that recessions last longer when they 
are  accompanied  by  tensions  in  the  financial  markets  and  the  collapse  of  asset  prices.6 
Although a build-up of tensions can remain unnoticed or deliberately be ignored for a long 
time, financial imbalances do have a destabilising impact in the end.  
This  brings  me  to  an  important  lesson  regarding  the  monetary  policy  decision-making 
process.  Monetary  policy  analysis  should  be  broad  in  design  in  order  to  detect  financial 
imbalances at an early stage. It is precisely in a setting characterised by uncertainty that a 
diversified  analytical  approach  is  of  particular  value.  For  that  reason,  it  is  essential  to 
enhance  and  strengthen  both  the  monetary  analysis  and  the  analysis  of  financial  market 
developments.  I  believe  that  it  is  necessary  to  interpret  particularly  pronounced  price 
developments in the asset markets as a “leading indicator of financial instability”. 
The  fact  that  financial  sector  imbalances  are  reflected  in  the  development  of  various 
monetary  indicators  applies  especially  in  the  longer  term.  Recent  empirical  work  tends  to 
confirm  the  view  that  the  correlation  of  medium  and  especially  longer-term  trends  in 
monetary  developments  and  inflation  was  underestimated  in  the  period  of  the  “great 
moderation”.7  
If the underlying monetary dynamics signal price risks in the medium to long term, monetary 
policymakers have to respond, for at least two reasons. First, a monetary policy that “feeds” 
asset price developments in an upturn may amplify the dynamics of the financial markets and 
encourage  procyclicality.  Second,  the  monetary  policy  response  to  downturns  in  the  asset 
markets has an impact on market participants’ risk perception in the following upturn. This is 
especially  evident  where  monetary  policymakers  lower  rates  asymmetrically  in  times  of 
severe  financial  market  downturns  and,  at  the  same  time,  more  than  is  warranted  by  the 
baseline outlook for prices and growth. Monetary policy should be applied symmetrically. 
In  the  words  of  Axel  Weber,  Bundesbank  President  and  member  of  the  ECB  Governing 
Council: “A more symmetric approach would treat boom and bust episodes not as isolated 
events but would try to look through the financial cycle in order to steady policy. To be more 
specific, a more symmetric policy would also realise implicit risks in times when money and 
credit growth is dynamic, asset prices go up and risk perceptions decline. This can create the 
need to act despite sufficiently low current inflation rates.  
                                                 
6   S Claessens, M A Kose and M E Terrones (2008), What Happens During Recessions, Crunches and Busts?, 
http://www.aei.org/events/ 
available 
Working 
Paper, 
at 
forthcoming 
eventID.1759/event_detail.asp. 
IMF 
7   K Assenmacher-Wesche and S Gerlach (2008), Interpreting euro area inflation at high and low frequencies, 
European Economic Review (52), pp 964-986. 
BIS Review 129/2008 
 5
This,  however,  does  not  mean  that  monetary  policy  should  downgrade  the  price  stability 
objective for the sake of other objectives. Rather, it means that central banks should take a 
longer-term  perspective  which  takes  into  account  the  future  inflationary  consequences  of 
such unfavourable developments.”8
IV 
Challenges for the stabilisation of the financial system: refining and 
implementing the Basel II framework, addressing procyclicality, and 
strenghtening the institutional setup of supervision9
The  last  part  of  our  journey  brings  us  right  up  to  the  present  day,  where  we  are  facing  a 
financial  crisis  of  historic  dimensions.  While  my  topic  is  not  crisis  management  but  rather 
long-term  crisis  prevention,  let  me  nevertheless  begin  with  a  few  general  remarks  on  the 
measures  that  have  been  undertaken  so  far  by  the  central  banks  and  governments  in 
response to the deepening financial crisis.  
Central banks’ main objective, from the very beginning of the financial turmoil, has been to 
address  the  liquidity  squeeze  in  funding  markets,  first  and  foremost  in  the  money  market. 
Responses have varied among major central banks and have evolved as the crisis unfolded. 
Essentially, central banks have provided short term-liquidity on a massive scale, including in 
foreign currency. They have also increased the supply of longer-term funding, sometimes in 
an internationally coordinated manner.  
In addition, central banks have extended both the range of eligible collateral for their lending 
operations and the range of eligible counterparties for collateralised lending. At the level of 
operational  instruments  and  procedures,  the  crucial  need  for  a  central  bank’s  monetary 
policy framework to be broad and flexible in design has been clearly confirmed. 
Moreover, central banks have adjusted their monetary policy stance at various stages as the 
crisis unfolded, taking into account differences in their mandates and in the expected impact 
of the financial turbulence on inflation and growth in their respective countries and regions. 
The coordinated interest rate cut earlier this month has to be seen against the backdrop of 
escalating  financial  market  stress.  In  addition,  the  global  economic  outlook  had  taken  a 
distinct  turn  for  the  worse,  with  the  possibility  of  a  further  deterioration,  while  inflation  had 
become less of a concern in view of falling oil and commodity prices. 
With the financial crisis deepening and liquidity strains turning into solvency problems for an 
increasing number of financial institutions, governments around the world have been forced 
to adopt a broad range of emergency measures. These include the creation of various kinds 
of  funds  and  guarantees  to  keep  ailing  financial  institutions  afloat  and  help  them  clean  up 
toxic  assets  from  their  balance  sheets.  In  addition,  provisions  have  been  made  to  inject 
capital into banks and insurance companies to compensate for the asset losses that cannot 
be  recovered.  Furthermore,  many  governments  extended  and  strengthened  bank  deposit 
guarantees. In all these cases, taxpayers’ money is involved, or at least at risk.  
Given the scale and range of the current crisis, these measures were indispensable in order 
to prevent worse damage from occurring. But once the dust of the current financial turmoil 
has settled, the underlying regulatory framework has to be carefully reviewed in the light of 
the current experience.  
                                                 
8   A  Weber  (2008),  Financial  Markets  and  Monetary  Policy,  speech  delivered  at  the  CEPR/ESI  12th  Annual 
Conference  on  “The  evolving  financial  system  and  the  transmission  mechanism  of  monetary  policy”,  co-
organised by the Bank for International Settlements, Basel, 26 September, reprinted in BIS Review 116, p 3. 
In  this  section,  I  am  drawing  on  my  recent  keynote  speech  “Fundamental  issues  of  stabilising  the  financial 
system”, delivered at the conference on "Determinants and implications of the financial crisis" of the Frankfurt 
School of Finance & Management Bankakademie, Frankfurt, 17 September, reprinted in BIS Review 115, pp 
1-7. 
9  
6 
 BIS Review 129/2008
The  list  of  recommendations  agreed  by  consensus  and  adopted  by  the  Financial  Stability 
Forum (FSF) is at the heart of the longer-term international response to the financial crisis. 
This includes, first, an improvement in the supervisory framework for capital and liquidity as 
well as risk management within the context of Basel II. Second, the role of ratings and rating 
agencies is under scrutiny. And, third, there has to be enhanced transparency of institutions 
and markets in order to strengthen market discipline. Let me comment briefly on these three 
issues. 
Basel  II,  the  new  capital  framework  for  credit  institutions,  was  initiated  long  before  the 
outbreak of the financial crisis. By tailoring capital requirements more precisely to the specific 
risk profile of the credit institutions, Basel II provides incentives to improve risk management. 
I regard it as essential that the capital framework be applied worldwide.  
Nevertheless, the current financial market turmoil has once again highlighted that we have to 
continue working on increasing the capital requirements for complex securitisations and for 
credit risks in the trading book.  
As you are certainly aware, however, the recent events have raised fundamental issues of 
regulation with regard to stabilising the financial system, not only in banking supervision and 
securitisation business, but also, say, in connection with hedge funds and, as an especially 
pressing issue, in the case of the rating agencies.  
In  the  United  States,  rating  agencies  have  to  be  registered  with  the  SEC.  Furthermore,  it 
should be borne in mind that Basel II relies on ratings for classifying the riskiness of bank 
loans. In Europe there is therefore a procedure for authorising and mapping agencies' ratings 
in determining a bank’s minimum capital.  
Following  the  experience  with  ratings  in  the  recent  financial  crisis,  the  current  practice  of 
having only a non-binding IOSCO code of conduct is generally perceived to be in need of 
reform.  The  rating  agencies  themselves  are  in  the  process  of  reviewing  their  internal 
procedures and rating methods.  
Furthermore,  the  European  Commission  has  now  put  forward  a  proposal  for  consultation 
which envisages an authorisation procedure and the supervision of rating agencies – in other 
words,  sovereign  regulation.  I  would  like  to  make  two  comments,  which  are  of  general 
importance beyond the European context.  
First of all, every effort should be undertaken to ensure that solutions at the European or any 
regional level are consistent with a level playing field internationally. A common framework 
should  be  ensured  by  the  IOSCO,  since  anything  else  might  result  in regional  competitive 
disadvantages.  
Second, emphasis should be placed on the investors’ own responsibility when using ratings. 
Thus, for example, EU registration must not be seen as being “rubber-stamped in Brussels” 
and thus interpreted as a seal of quality for individual ratings.  
Turning now to transparency, I would like to emphasise how crucial the market players and 
their behaviour are for financial stability. The key issue is the responsibility of the financial 
players themselves – both directly for their own actions, but also indirectly for the system as 
a  whole.  In  order  to  reconcile  the  public  interest  in  transparency  with  the  marker  players' 
individual preference for confidentiality, transparency has to be enforced by appropriate rules 
and regulations.  
Beyond these specific improvements to be introduced into the regulatory framework, there is 
a crucial conceptual challenge for stability-oriented supervision. This is right at the top of the 
agenda internationally and, in my view, will also be under discussion for some time to come. 
Basically, the question is whether the regulatory framework for the financial system, as well 
as the provisions for accounting, act procyclically – and, if so, what can be done to counter 
that.  
BIS Review 129/2008 
 7
For  the  sake  of  simplicity,  I  shall interpret  the  term  “procyclicality”  quite  narrowly  for  once, 
namely as a reinforcement of the natural cycle of the financial system. Procyclical policy and 
procyclical elements of regulation would amplify the natural upswings and downswings of the 
financial  system.  If  this  leads  to  boom-bust  cycles,  the  viability  of  the  financial  system  is 
jeopardised.10
Naturally, considerable caution is called for when dealing with the topic of procyclicality as 
we  still  know  too  little  about  the  cyclical  effects  of  regulatory  provisions.  To  avoid  any 
misunderstanding,  I  wish  to  stress  that  the  current  regulatory  framework,  with  the  risk-
sensitive minimum capital requirements under Basel II and the use of fair value accounting 
under IFRS (or US GAAP), does contain cyclical elements. 
As you know, the risk-sensitive minimum capital requirements under Basel II are based on 
probabilities of default, which fluctuate over the economic cycle. In a downturn, probabilities 
of  default  increase  –  along  with  the  minimum  capital  requirements.  Similarly,  fair  value 
accounting means that valuations fluctuate in tandem with market prices.  
Let me start with possible procyclical elements in the Basel II framework. So far, it is unclear 
– and how could it possibly be otherwise so soon after the introduction of Basel II? – whether 
the  cyclical  fluctuations  of  the  minimum  capital  requirements  actually  impact  on  the 
propensity to lend – in other words, whether they really have a procyclical effect. The extent 
to  which  this  happens  hinges  on  a  large  number  of  factors  –  for  example,  on  how  far  the 
capital buffers exceed the regulatory minimum, on the willingness of the banks to expand or 
contract  these  buffers,  and,  naturally  enough,  on  the  use  of  alternatives,  such  as  raising 
additional capital. 
In addition, the potential antidotes to procyclicality have not yet been researched and tested 
in detail. This relates to components in the regulatory framework that dampen procyclicality, 
or even automatic stabilisers, which have an anticyclical effect and which are now being built 
into  Basel  II.  For  example,  long-term  averages  are  now  to  be  used  for  the  probabilities  of 
default.  And,  by  means  of  “prudential  filters”,  the  banking  supervisors  have  ensured  that 
fluctuations in the balance sheets do not impact fully on the level of regulatory capital.  
Less than one year after the introduction of Basel II in Germany, the database is still very 
narrow. Knee-jerk responses, such as the general introduction of additional general capital 
buffers  by  means  of  Pillar 2,  are  therefore  not  appropriate  in  my  view.  What  is  called  for 
instead  is  the  close  monitoring  of  developments  and  a  careful  analysis  of  the  complex 
mechanisms of banks’ capital management and of Basel II’s impact over an adequate period 
of time. And if, but only if, procyclical effects are found to exist on a significant scale, they 
should be taken into account in a system-oriented supervisory approach. 
I would also add that a possible procyclical nature of credit, in addition to its cyclical nature, 
would  be  an  instability  factor  not  only  for  the  financial  systems.  It  would  also  represent  a 
further  reason  for  focusing  great  attention  on  credit  aggregates  in  the  monetary  policy 
analysis.  
Regarding fair value accounting, the case for procyclicality is somewhat more obvious. In an 
environment like the current financial crises, where market prices are heavily influenced by 
fire-sales of assets as well as significant risk and liquidity premiums, an obligation to mark 
assets  according  to  the  mark-to-market  principle  can,  in  effect,  exacerbate  the  downward 
trend  of  prices.  Against  this  backdrop,  international  efforts  to  modify  accounting  standards 
with  the  aim  of  better  reflecting  the  underlying  value  of  assets  are  currently  being 
                                                 
10 C Borio, C Furfine and P Lowe (2001), Procyclicality of the financial system and financial stability: issues and 
policy  options,  BIS  Papers  No  1;  D  VanHoose  (2008),  Bank  Capital  Regulation,  Economic  Stability,  and 
Monetary Policy: What Does the Academic Literature Tell Us?, Atlantic Economic Journal (36), pp 1-14. 
8 
 BIS Review 129/2008
implemented  in  a  number  of  countries.  However,  modified  accounting  rules  should  not 
induce banks to postpone losses.  
I would now like to talk about a number of fundamental institutional questions relating to the 
stabilisation  of  the  financial  system  and  the  allocation  of  competencies  among  the  various 
sovereign  regulatory  levels.  I  am  doing  this  because,  during  the  financial  crisis,  it  has 
become  clearer  to  me  than  ever  before  just  how  much  institutions  matter.  I  am  therefore 
focusing  my  attention  on  the  institutional  framework  for  the  monetary,  supervisory  and 
regulatory infrastructure.  
The US Treasury has presented an ambitious but cogent overall strategy for a longer-term 
reform of financial supervision. The “blueprint” addresses the current fragmented structure of 
financial  supervision.  It  envisages  a  radically  overhauled  institutional  structure,  with  a 
complete  change  of  design  in  its  tasks.  I  see  one  particularly  important  aspect  of  this 
blueprint in the fact that the Fed, in the role of a “market stability regulator”, would, for the 
first  time,  institutionalise  a  primarily  macro-oriented  perspective  on  the  financial  system.  I 
await the ongoing evolution of this debate with keen interest.  
When  I  now  look  at  the  institutional  structure  for  financial  stability  in  Germany  and  in  the 
Eurosystem, I would like to highlight the synergy effects between operational money market 
management  and  banking  supervision.  The  financial  market  turmoil  has  shown  us  quite 
clearly  that these  synergy  effects can  indeed  be  very  large.  As  the  Bundesbank is  closely 
integrated  into  banking  supervision,  we  can  also  fully  exploit  such  synergy  effects.  Our 
deliberations  on  the  time  profile  of  liquidity  provision  and,  hence,  our  stance  in  the 
Eurosystem  benefit  from  general  information  passed  on  from  our  banking  supervisors. 
Conversely, the insights gained from regular contact with the banking industry in the practical 
conduct of refinancing operations and in payments are helpful to the banking supervisors.  
Finally, I think that the international governance of the financial systems has to be subjected 
to critical scrutiny. If we are thinking about changes, I believe we should strengthen those 
institutional structures that did their job well during the financial market turbulence. For me, 
this  means  that,  first  and  foremost,  the  FSF  should  continue  to  play  a  key  role.  Its 
membership  drawn  from  central  banks,  ministries  of  finance,  supervisors,  regulators  and 
international institutions means that the holistic assessment of the financial system is one of 
the main strengths of the FSF.  
The International Monetary Fund should mobilise all its resources in the FSF, above all, with 
an in-depth analysis of the way the financial system interacts with the real economy. For the 
analysis  of  these  interactions,  the  IMF  can  draw  on  decades  of  experience  in  Article IV 
consultations and a decade of financial sector assessments. 
Conclusions  
V 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  what  are  the  key  lessons  and  challenges  that  we  should  take  on 
board from our journey through economic history, from the stagflation episode of the 1970s 
and early 1980s to the financial crisis of today? 
One  simple but  fundamental lesson  consists  in  knowing  the  strengths,  as  well  as  the 
limitations,  of  the  various  areas  of  policy.  The  primary  mandate  of  the  central  banks  is  to 
safeguard price stability. At the same time, they often also have the task of contributing to 
financial stability. Price stability and financial stability are, in turn, necessary conditions for 
sustained growth and prosperity.  
Regarding the primary mandate of central banks, three important lessons can be drawn from 
the  past  decades.  First,  anchoring  inflation  expectations  at  a  low  level  is  and  remains  of 
crucial significance. Here, credibility is the key to success. Second, monetary policy has to 
be symmetric. It is important to identify emerging financial imbalances at an early stage and, 
if  necessary,  respond  accordingly.  A  broad-based  monetary  analysis  turns  out  to  be  an 
BIS Review 129/2008 
 9
important  analytical  device.  Third,  in  a  world  of  growing  real  and  financial  integration,  a 
sufficient  degree  of  exchange  rate  flexibility  can  help  ensure  price  stability  when 
macroeconomic  conditions  differ  at  home  and  abroad.  While  many  advanced  economies 
have  learned  that  lesson  –  sometimes  the  hard  way  –  it  still  poses  a  challenge  for  some 
emerging market economies. 
This  brings  me,  finally,  to  the  challenges.  It  has  become  very  clear  to  me  that  a  lasting 
stabilisation  of  the  financial  system  calls  for  a  holistic  approach,  which  links  the 
microprudential  perspective  to  the  macroeconomic  situation  and  the  developments  in  the 
financial markets. I firmly believe that a stable financial system is not just a precondition for 
macroeconomic stability. Both are conditional on each other. Ultimately, stabilising inflation 
expectations finds its natural complement in the primacy of crisis prevention in the financial 
markets. 
Thank you for your attention.  
10 
 BIS Review 129/2008
