Barbro Wickman-Parak: The financial crisis from a central bank 
perspective  
Speech  by  Ms  Barbro  Wickman-Parak,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Sveriges  Riksbank,  at  the 
Swedish Bankers' Association annual meeting, Stockholm, 12 November 2008. 
 Introduction 
In normal times, reporting about the Riksbank is dominated by what we do, or do not do, with 
interest  rates.  The  focus  is  usually  on  one  of  the  Riksbank's  two  main  tasks:  maintaining 
price stability. Less attention is paid to the other main task, safeguarding financial stability; 
health is silent, as the Swedes say. For obvious reasons, financial stability has been given 
more prominence recently.  
We have now lived with turmoil in the international financial markets for rather more than a 
year  and  over  the  past  two  months  have  seen  it  lead  to  a  large-scale  global  crisis  of 
confidence. The origin of the current crisis, as well as of our Swedish banking crisis in the 
early 1990s, can be found in reckless lending practices related to property. As we now know, 
it  began  when  American  financial  institutions  lent  money  to  borrowers  with  weak  credit 
histories. Whereas the Swedish banking crisis remained altogether Swedish, the American 
crisis has spread like wildfire and reminded us of just how globally connected the financial 
markets are. The high-risk sub-prime loans were sold on to a large extent by bundling them 
together  with  low-risk  loans  in  what  are  known  as  structured  credit  products.  The  use  of 
these  complex  products  grew  rapidly  and  had  a  wide  geographical  distribution.  Investors 
found  it  difficult  to  conduct  their  own  risk  assessments  and  largely  relied  on  the 
classifications of credit-rating agencies.  
When the losses on sub-prime loans became unexpectedly large, genuine uncertainty arose 
about  the  value  of  the  structured  products  and  where  losses  associated  with  them  would 
occur. Banks and other financial institutions became cautious about lending money to one 
another. They began to hoard liquidity to meet their own obligations and to avoid losses on 
loans  to  counterparties  about  whose  status  they  felt  uncertain  in  the  wake  of  the  general 
crisis.  The  cost  for  bank  borrowing  on  the  interbank  market  rose,  causing  other  market 
interest rates to climb.  
The  financial  turmoil  spread  to  Europe  and  resulted  in  a  general  aversion  to  invest  in 
mortgage securities. Banks and mortgage institutions found it increasingly difficult to obtain 
funds on the securities markets.  
Escalating crisis after Lehman Brothers collapsed 
When  the  Lehman  Brothers  investment  bank  filed  for  bankruptcy  protection,  a  full-scale 
confidence crisis erupted. A major financial player was left to its fate and there was rapidly 
growing  concern  that  other  institutions  would  follow  suit.  Credit  flows  dried  up  almost 
completely and investors essentially dared to invest only in government bonds. Companies 
had  already  experienced  a  tightening  of  credit  terms;  opportunities  for  loan  financing  now 
essentially disappeared.  
In  this  phase  of  the  crisis,  around  mid  September  this  year,  the  effects  on  the  Swedish 
financial  system  became  clear.  When  banks'  access  to  liquidity  dried  up  on  every  market, 
this hit all banks, including those that are financially strong, like the Swedish banks. Many 
central  banks  around  the  world  had  been  taking  measures  for  some  time  to  strengthen 
liquidity in banking systems but the Riksbank had not needed to act. The interbank market 
and other short-term markets had worked, though interest rates had climbed sharply. When 
BIS Review 140/2008 
 1
the crisis had a more tangible impact on Sweden, the Riksbank also implemented a series of 
interventions.  Meanwhile,  central  banks  in  the  rest  of  the  world  continued  with  their 
interventions and governments approved crisis packages to guarantee financial stability.  
Against the backdrop of this summary of events in the financial sector over the past year, 
today  I  will  speak  about  the  effects  of  this  financial  crisis  on  the  Riksbank's  work  of 
maintaining a safe and effective payments system. But first I would like to briefly describe 
how we carry out this work under normal circumstances. I will also conclude with a comment 
on the crisis’ effects on monetary policy. 
Work with financial stability under normal circumstances 
The  task  of  maintaining  a  safe  and  effective  payments  system  includes  the  role  of  the 
Riksbank  as  the  banks'  bank.  This  task  includes  maintaining  the  RIX  payment  system  for 
payments  in  Swedish  kronor.  Participants  in  the  system  may  borrow  during  the  day  and 
overnight to cover temporary deficits. 
The  task  also  includes  continuous  oversight  of  the  financial  system.  For  some  time  the 
Riksbank has had a well-designed analytical apparatus for early detection of changes and 
vulnerabilities that could develop into a serious systemic crisis. Above all, its purpose is the 
timely  detection  of  vulnerabilities  in  banks  that  are  of  central  importance  for  the  payments 
system,  which  requires  knowledge  of  the  status  of  the  various  institutions  and  how  the 
market functions. This in turn presumes continuous follow-up, where frequent contacts with 
financial market participants play an important role. These established contacts are essential 
in  a  crisis  situation,  both  to  determine  the  type  of  measure  that  is  needed  and  to  ensure 
timely implementation. 
Ten years ago we began to publish stability reports twice a year. These reports provide a 
basic  analysis  of  financial  stability  with  an  emphasis  on  the  four  major  banks.  The  report 
leads up to a comprehensive stability assessment, highlighting the various risks to stability.  
Financial stability and implementation of monetary policy 
Monetary  policy  and  financial  stability  have  a  fundamental  relationship  in  the  payments 
system.  Through  its  repo  rate  decisions  and  by  determining  the  conditions  for  the  banks’ 
deposits  in  and  borrowing  from  the  RIX  system,  in  practice  the  Riksbank  determines  the 
overnight  rate,  that  is, the  interest  rate  on  overnight  interbank  loans. Through  the  steering 
system,  the  Riksbank  aims  to  keep  this  shortest  market  rate  close  to  the  repo  rate.  The 
overnight  rate  in  turn  affects  the  interest  rates  offered  to  the  general  public,  and  thereby 
economic  activity  and  prices.  The  repo  rate,  which  is  set  on  the  basis  of  monetary  policy 
considerations, indicates the level at which the Riksbank wants the overnight rate to lie.  
Interest  rates  with  a  slightly  longer  duration  are  determined  in  the  financial  markets  and 
usually  display  a  fairly  stable  relationship  to  the  existing  repo  rate  and  expectations  of  its 
future  level.  During  periods  of  financial  turmoil  and  crisis,  however,  various  risk  premiums 
rise  and  this  may  disconnect  the  short-term  market  interest  rates  from  their  normal 
relationship to the repo rate. That weakens the impact of monetary policy 
Financial stability  in  terms  of  a  functioning  payments  system  and  financial  markets  is  thus 
essential for the Riksbank to conduct an efficient monetary policy. 
As can be seen, for a long time the Riksbank has been working intensively on issues relating 
to financial stability. This assiduous effort, which hardly attracts any attention under normal 
circumstances, provides a good foundation for crisis management. And this brings me to an 
account of all the measures taken over the past two months. 
2 
 BIS Review 140/2008
Poorly functioning markets require special measures 
The  crisis  we  are  currently  experiencing  did  not  originate in  the  Swedish  financial  system. 
But the global financial turmoil has been imported to Sweden and has had repercussions on 
the  Swedish  financial  system.  As  I  already  mentioned,  these  consequences  became  clear 
when the crisis escalated in the aftermath of the Lehman Brothers bankruptcy filing.  
Several components of the fixed-interest market have not been working as well as usual. The 
uncertainty  there  is  evident,  for  example,  in  the  banks’  difficulties  with  borrowing  at  longer 
maturities and in investors’ preference for safe government paper over what they perceive as 
more  risky  securities  such  as  mortgage  bonds.  Even  the  short-term  interest  rate  on  the 
interbank  market  has  risen  sharply  as  a  result  of  mutual  distrust  between  banks,  causing 
them to avoid lending to each other.  
As a result, the banks’ borrowing costs rise, access to loans decreases, and companies and 
households pay more for loans. At times, moreover, trading on certain segments of the fixed-
income  market  has  ceased  completely.  When  such  disruptions  occur,  the  Riksbank  has 
considered that special measures are required to restore the functioning of the markets so 
that the supply of credit is not jeopardised and the financial markets, and therefore monetary 
policy, can work more normally.  
The first sign: a shortage of treasury bills … 
The very first, very concrete sign of the financial crisis in Sweden was an acute shortage of 
treasury bills. The high demand for safe investments, especially in the United States, caused 
interest rates on American treasury bills to fall almost to zero. Even foreign investors then 
turned to European countries, including Sweden, to get treasury bills that gave a higher yield. 
The Swedish National Debt Office decided to implement additional issues of treasury bills. 
The  funds  from  these  extra  issues  are  being  used  for  reversed  repo  transactions  with 
mortgage  bonds  (purchase  of  mortgage  bonds  with  agreements  to  resell  them  within  a 
specific period of time). Mortgage bonds that were difficult to sell could be converted into a 
liquid  asset,  which  meant  that  the  measure  simultaneously  helped  the  situation  on  the 
mortgage bond market. 
About the same time, the Riksbank also made it easier for banks to borrow from the Bank by 
accepting additional types of securities as loan collateral. Covered mortgage bonds issued 
by  an  institution  with  close  links  to  the  counterparty  could  now  be  used  as  collateral  to  a 
greater  extent  than  in  the  past.  This  measure  is  also  helping  the  situation  for  mortgage 
bonds.  
… a shortage of dollars the second 
The next problem to address was a general shortage of financing opportunities in US dollars. 
Since  the  Swedish  banks  are  not  counterparties  to  the  US  Federal  Reserve  (Fed),  they 
cannot  be  sure  of  benefitting  from  the  Fed's  liquidity  injections.  In  late  September,  mutual 
currency  arrangements  with  the  Fed  were  established  by  the  Riksbank  and  several  other 
central  banks.  With  these  swap  facilities  the  Riksbank  can  borrow  US  dollars  against 
Swedish kronor. The Riksbank then offered its counterparties large loans denominated in US 
dollars. The loans are granted against collateral at an interest rate determined by auction, 
though no lower than a minimum rate related to the expected policy rate in the United States.  
General measures to promote liquidity 
Since the beginning of October the Riksbank has been implementing measures to support 
SEK liquidity, aimed at securing bank funding, facilitating the supply of credit and improving 
the functioning of the financial markets. 
BIS Review 140/2008 
 3
The lack of trust between banks has complicated their long-term funding, including financing 
that  only  extends  a  few  months  into  the  future.  The  banks  have  therefore  been  forced  to 
borrow in the market for shorter and shorter terms. Even though financing could be found, it 
has  become  much  more  difficult  for  the  banks  to  manage  liquidity  and  the  risks  also 
increased. In an effort to enable the banks to restore more normal conditions, the Riksbank 
has provided three- and six-month SEK loans so that funding is available at longer maturities 
than  what  the  markets  can  currently  provide  and  longer  than  what  the  Riksbank  would 
normally offer. These loans will continue for as long as the need exists.  
The Riksbank is thus offering the banks an opportunity to replace short-term financing with 
the  longer-term  funding  which  the  market  normally  provides.  These  measures  are  clearly 
aimed  at  improving  the  functioning of  the  fixed-income  market.  However,  they  should  also 
help to ensure that short-term market interest rates revert to a more normal relationship with 
the repo rate, thereby strengthening the impact of monetary policy.  
Two institutions receive special liquidity assistance 
The Riksbank can also provide liquidity to individual institutions if extenuating circumstances 
are  present.  Such  assistance  has  been  given  to  Kaupthing  Bank  Sweden  and  Carnegie 
Investment Bank. These loans are against collateral and carry an interest rate that is higher 
than  normal  borrowing  costs  (penal  rate).  Both  the  Riksbank  and  Finansinspektionen 
(Swedish Financial Supervisory Authority) consider the banks to be solvent. The Riksbank 
provided the liquidity assistance to Kaupthing because it wanted to prevent the crisis that has 
afflicted  the  Icelandic  banking  system  from  spreading  to  the  Swedish  financial  system. 
Common to both instances of liquidity assistance is that they occur in a situation in which the 
entire global financial system is characterised by great uncertainty. Against this background 
the Riksbank has deemed it necessary to provide support to these institutions, which under 
normal circumstances would not receive it. In the current situation, suspension of payments 
by  these  financial  institutions  would  pose  a  risk  of  serious  disruption  to  the  rest  of  the 
financial system and therefore lead to an undermining of confidence in the payments system. 
It  is  these  assessments,  not  concerns  about  individual  institutions,  that  motivated  the 
Riksbank in granting the assistance for which the banks in question applied. With respect to 
Carnegie,  a  few  days  ago  its  operations  were  taken  over  by  the  Swedish  National  Debt 
Office, which granted a loan that replaces the liquidity assistance previously granted by the 
Riksbank. 
Financing assistance for companies 
Another problem begging for a solution is the financing situation of non-financial companies. 
As the financial crisis escalated, the credit supply to these companies has also become more 
troublesome, which could have strong repercussions on economic activity. To alleviate these 
problems,  the  Riksbank  has  temporarily  offered  banks  the  opportunity  to  borrow  at  three 
months  against  collateral  comprising  more  commercial  papers  than  usual.  In  practice  this 
means that non-financial companies may obtain funds by issuing and selling certificates to 
the banks, which in turn use them as collateral for loans from the Riksbank. This credit facility 
is also available through an auction, where the minimum rate is the current repo rate plus a 
premium. Since it is mainly large companies that issue certificates, it is they that will benefit 
directly from the advantages of these facilities. But since banks can increase their liquidity by 
using the certificates to borrow from the Riksbank, there is less risk of them cutting back on 
loans to small and medium-sized enterprises that are directly dependent on bank financing.  
The way ahead? 
When the dust after the crisis has settled, we face a major task. We must carefully analyse 
the  crisis  and  determine  the  areas  in  which  supervision,  regulations,  etc.  need  to  be 
4 
 BIS Review 140/2008
tightened up and in which areas the problems are best solved by players from the finance 
industry.  Crises  create  space  and  acceptance  for  necessary  reforms.  At  the  same  time, 
extreme  situations  such  as  this  always  generate  demands  for  extreme  measures.  Careful 
deliberation is therefore important before implementing new regulations. It is all too easy to 
go  too  far  and  implement  regulations  that  are  too  far-reaching  and  extensive.  Such 
regulations could control and conserve market structures for a long time to come or involve 
major costs that reduce efficiency. 
This crisis will need follow-up care. In conclusion let me briefly focus on a few issues that will 
probably need to be discussed carefully, both in Sweden and on an international level. 
One  lesson  that  can  be  drawn  already  is  the  need  to  develop  and  improve  the  rules  for 
supervision and management of liquidity risks. More stringent demands for transparency in 
the financial sector will provide customers and investors with better opportunities to assess 
the risks associated with companies. 
Similarly, transparency in the structured credit instruments should be improved so that their 
associated  risks  can  be  assessed.  More  effective  trading  with  these  products  is  also 
important;  the  financial  infrastructure  needs  to  be  strengthened.  This  discussion  and  any 
resultant changes in regulations should aim to ensure that this part of the credit market can 
work efficiently once again. 
Developments in the American investment banks in particular have made us aware that even 
financial companies that do not accept deposits from the general public, and which therefore 
are  subject  to  weaker  supervision  and  regulation,  may  have  a  crucial  impact  on  financial 
stability. We should therefore consider how to design regulations and supervision of financial 
companies that do not accept deposits from the general public. 
Due  to  the  global  scope  of  the  crisis,  countries  must  coordinate  measures  to  solve  it. 
Separate  national  solutions  could  result  in  higher  crisis  management  costs  than  would 
otherwise  be  the  case.  In  all  of  these  areas  where  supervision  and  regulation  need  to  be 
improved, they must be coordinated and harmonised internationally. 
The  international  component  is  particularly  apparent  in  that  the  majority  of  banks  today 
conduct a considerable amount of business in several EU countries. At the same time, the 
responsibility  for  supervision  and  crisis  management  remains  at  the  national  level.  This 
entails  obvious  risks  of  coordination  problems  and  conflicts  of  interest  between  countries, 
which naturally do not promote financial stability. It is therefore necessary that organisations 
for supervision and crisis management be coordinated within the EU.  
Lower repo rate in the wake of the crisis 
The escalating crisis intensifies the downswing in the Swedish economy, which was already 
apparent.  As  can  be  seen  in  the  Monetary  Policy  Report  from  23  October,  our  growth 
forecast for next year has been revised sharply downward to the prospect of zero growth. To 
alleviate  the  real  economic  effects of  the  financial  crisis,  over  a  short  period  the  repo  rate 
was cut by one percentage point to the current level of 3.75 per cent. Our forecast for the 
repo rate shows that in the future it may need to be lowered by an additional half percentage 
point over the course of the next six months.  
We can do this without jeopardising the inflation target. It is mainly rising commodity prices in 
the global market, such as the price of oil and food, that have driven inflation upwards. Now 
that  the  price  trend  for  these  commodities  has  broken  and  turned  downwards,  the  rate  of 
inflation will drop rapidly. At the same time, domestic inflationary pressure will be eased by 
the  weaker  economic  trend.  We  are  in  a  situation  in  which  there  is  hardly  any  conflict 
between inflation and real economic considerations in monetary policy. Our decision to lower 
the  interest  rate  is  guided  by  normal  monetary  policy  considerations  –  in  other  words, 
"business as usual".  
BIS Review 140/2008 
 5
When  we  lowered  the  interest  rate  we  also  noted  that  the  effect  of  the  lower  rate  would 
probably be smaller than usual. This is because the confidence crisis in the financial system 
has led to high risk premiums whereby short-term market interest rates were disconnected 
from  their  normal  relationship  to  the  repo  rate,  as  I  described  earlier.  The  reduction  we 
implemented  on  8  October  did  not  lead  to  an  immediate  drop  in  interbank  rates. 
Consequently  the  mortgage  institutions'  borrowing  costs  did  not  drop  either,  neither  did 
interest rates for loans to end customers. This clearly illustrates how the impact of monetary 
policy is dependent on financial stability.  
Some closing thoughts 
The Riksbank has worked on two levels during the current crisis. Interest rates were cut to 
alleviate the effects of the financial crisis on the real economy. In addition, measures have 
been taken on an ongoing basis to improve the functioning of the financial markets and to 
support financial stability.  
The interest rate decisions have been based on essentially the same type of considerations 
as those on which monetary policy is usually based. The idea is to avoid unnecessarily large 
fluctuations in output and resource utilisation at the same time as inflation approaches the 
target within a reasonable time horizon.  
The Riksbank's other measures, such as lending denominated in both Swedish krona and 
US dollars, have resulted in a general functional improvement, primarily in the Swedish credit 
markets, thereby also creating conditions for the markets to return to more normal conditions 
and  allowing  financial  stability  to  be  maintained  –  which  in  turn  is  a  requirement  for 
conducting an effective monetary policy. 
During the current crisis the Riksbank cooperates closely with other regulatory authorities to 
handle situations that arise to achieve the best possible outcome. The Riksbank's frequent 
contacts  with  Finansinspektionen,  the  Swedish  National  Debt  Office  and  the  Government 
Offices  play  an  important  role  in  crisis  management.  Like  other  regulatory  authorities,  the 
Riksbank also has frequent contacts with its foreign colleagues. 
Central banks around the world are also working to improve the functioning of the financial 
markets.  In  addition,  governments  in  the  United  States  and  the  EU  have  adopted  bailout 
packages to support the financial system. In Sweden, the government launched a guarantee 
programme and a regulatory framework that improves the ability to handle banks in crisis in 
an orderly manner. Having such regulatory frameworks in place is extremely important.  
It is still too early to say how soon all the measures that have been taken will have an effect 
and  result  in  a  return  to  more  normal  conditions  in  the  financial  market.  Even  if  the 
Riksbank's assessment is that the most acute phase of the crisis may subside over the next 
few months, it will probably take time before conditions return to normal. Confidence must be 
restored on several levels and that takes time. 
6 
 BIS Review 140/2008
