Ignazio Visco: Retirement saving and the payout phase – how to get 
there and how to get the most out of it  
Keynote  speech  by  Mr  Ignazio  Visco,  Deputy  Director  General  of  the  Bank  of  Italy,  to  the 
roundtable  on  “The  impact  of  the  payout  phase  on  financial  markets”  at  the  OECD 
conference  “The  payout  phase  of  pensions,  annuities  and  financial  markets”,  Paris, 
12 November 2008. 
I am greatly indebted to Giuseppe Grande and Pietro Tommasino for their help and many useful discussions. 
 The  implications  of  population  ageing  for  financial  markets  have  long  been  a  subject  of 
discussion for public authorities, financial intermediaries and academics. Over time we have 
become aware that ageing has a deep impact on the structure of financial markets and, at 
the  same  time,  that  this  structure  strongly  affects  the  way  in  which  demographic  trends 
spread  through  the  real  economy.  A  leading  role  in  this  process  has  been  played  by  the 
OECD. 
Times are changing for pension funds 
1. 
Retirement-related saving schemes offered by pension funds and other intermediaries have 
developed  considerably  during  the  1990s,  as  workers  have  relied  increasingly  on  capital 
markets  to  sustain  their  consumption  in  old  age.  By  the  early  years  of  the  current decade 
some  issues  had  reached  the  forefront  of  the  policy  debate,  notably  the  importance  of 
aggregate  longevity  risk,  the  transfer  of  risk  from  governments  and  corporations  to 
households,  the  impact  on  financial  markets  of  current  and  prospective  reallocations  of 
pension fund portfolios, and the ability of the regulatory and supervisory framework to adapt 
to  the  rapid  changes  in  the  supply  of  retirement  saving  schemes.  These  issues  were 
comprehensively analysed in a G10 Report on the implications of pension system reform for 
financial markets, published in 2005.1 A wide range of policy options were drawn, along the 
three  directions  of  strengthening  the  risk  management  practices  of  providers  of  retirement 
saving, promoting the supply of suitable financial instruments, and raising the standards of 
investor protection and financial education. 
Today, those policy conclusions are all the more significant. If anything, the current financial 
crisis reinforces the need to develop effective ways of protecting retirement saving. However, 
it may make it harder to adopt appropriate instruments to hedge the risks that may in the long 
term affect the payout of pension benefits. 
The  severity  of  recent  financial  market  developments  certainly  justifies  the  tendency  to 
concentrate  on  the  short  term.  The  crisis  is  especially  costly  for  senior  workers,  whose 
pension  wealth,  both  inside  and  outside  pension  plans,  has  been  dented  by  the  sharp 
decrease in asset prices. As in previous financial markets downturns, some of these workers 
may  react  by  postponing  retirement.  In  certain  cases  this  might  not  be  enough,  and  an 
argument could be made for public intervention (for instance, in the case of workers near to 
retirement  whose  pension  benefits  would  mostly  derive  from  mandatory  private  pension 
schemes). This situation also calls, however, for measures to improve the future working of 
pension  systems.  The  current  crisis  has  only  highlighted  the  urgent  need  for  better-
functioning  markets  and  better  retirement  products,  if  future  retirees  are  to  be  guaranteed 
adequate living standards. 
                                                 
1   See Group of Ten (2005). 
BIS Review 148/2008 
 1
We  cannot  regard  the  current  events  as  just  one  more  protracted  period  of  high  financial 
market volatility, to be followed sooner or later by a return of investors’ expectations and risk 
premia to more comfortable levels. The financial crisis has already proved to be a watershed 
for  the  international  financial  system  and  it  is  changing  the  attitude  of  public  authorities 
towards banking and capital market regulation. It might also deeply affect the propensity of 
private investors to take risks. It will not be business as usual anymore. 
The pension fund industry has already been hit very badly by the crisis. In the four quarters 
ending in June 2008, in the United States the pool of assets managed by funded private and 
public pension schemes has declined by more than 9 percentage points, or almost 900 billion 
dollars.  Since  then  losses  have  probably  doubled,  given  the  collapse  of  bond  and  stock 
prices.  Pension  funds  have  also  invested  a  huge  amount  of  resources  in  troubled  assets: 
according to IMF estimates, potential write downs on US loans and securities range between 
125 and 250 billion dollars.2
The  current  financial  crisis  raises  several  questions  about  the  established  practices  of  the 
retirement saving industry. Consider, for instance, the major changes concerning credit rating 
systems,  which  play  a  key  role  in  the  portfolio  management  of  pension  funds  in  every 
country;  or  the  uncertain  perspectives  of  the  investment  banking  industry,  which  provides 
companies and investors with such essential services as securities underwriting and trading, 
asset  management,  and  M&A  advice;  or  again  the  upsurge  of  counterparty  risk  on  OTC 
derivatives, which pension fund managers have used increasingly to try to improve portfolio 
risk management. It is now difficult to figure out how financial intermediaries and markets will 
adjust to these structural changes. 
More  importantly,  the  global  banking  crisis  that  still  engulfs  intermediaries  and  markets 
threatens  to  cast  a  shadow  on  the  very  notion  that  financial  markets  could  be  a  reliable 
source  of  retirement  income.  More  than  the  never-ending  dispute  of  the  pros  and  cons  of 
equities versus bonds, the focus is increasingly on the ability of financial markets to assure 
workers  a  sufficient  level  of  retirement  income  even  over  long-term  investment  periods. 
Beyond the unresolved issue of aggregate longevity risk, we need to think whether workers 
should be left alone to deal with financial markets tail risks (i.e. the fact that extreme losses 
tend to be more frequent than it would be by chance in normal conditions).  
Even the decision to join a pension fund (where private pension plans are not mandatory) is 
likely to be seriously affected by the crisis. Investors’ confidence in the soundness of financial 
intermediaries and markets has been shaken and this may well spread disaffection among 
workers, notably with respect to pension funds’ defined contribution (DC) schemes. Workers 
may feel less able than in the past to make difficult decisions about the appropriate level of 
contributions and dependable asset allocation. 
The phases of accumulation and decumulation are closely intertwined: the optimal design of 
the former strongly depends on the latter and vice-versa. I will start from the accumulation 
phase, because before dealing with the issues posed by the payment of pensions, we have 
to be sure that workers will actually have something to decumulate when they retire.  
The importance of pension funds has continued to grow 
2.  
In this decade the pension fund industry has continued to expand relative to the size of the 
economy, although at a slower pace than in the 1990s (Table 1). At the end of 2006 total 
OECD funded pension assets (including occupational and personal arrangements) amounted 
to about 24.6 trillion dollars, or 76 percent of GDP. Asset growth has differed considerably 
                                                 
2   Table 1.1 in IMF (2008). 
2 
 BIS Review 148/2008
across OECD countries, being stronger in those economies where pension funds are well-
developed (Figure 1). 
There has also been a further move from defined benefit (DB) to DC schemes. Generally, the 
latter have been adopted in countries where private pension schemes have been introduced 
to  complement  and  compensate  the  prospective  downsizing  of  public  pension  systems. 
However, available data also show that, in countries where DB and DC schemes coexist, the 
latter  have  increased  further  as  a  share  of  total  assets  (Table  2).3  In  particular,  DB 
occupational plans have continued to lose ground in the United States, where they have a 
long tradition. According to the Employee Benefits Survey of the Department of Labor, the 
percentage  of  private  industry  workers  participating  in  defined  contribution  plans  has 
increased from 36 percent in 2000 to 43 percent in 2006. In the United Kingdom, too, there is 
evidence  of  a  further  shift  from  DB  to  DC  schemes,  in  line  with  the  findings  of  the  Turner 
Report.4
Underlying these trends there are well-known structural factors, such as those reviewed in 
the G10 Report. Ageing populations and the shrinking coverage provided by public pension 
systems call for an increase in the pool of resources channelled to capital markets to provide 
for  retirement.  In  several  countries  changes  in  labour  markets  and  concerns  about  future 
pension liabilities are prompting employers to close DB plans and offer DC plans instead. 
These profound structural changes in pension systems imply that the sources of retirement 
income in the future will differ considerably from those of current retirees. This is highlighted 
by a recent survey of US working-age and retired citizens (Table 3). While only one third of 
retirees  report  that  they  also  depend  on  some  kind  of  retirement  savings  plan,  workers’ 
expectations regarding the future sources of retirement income show a much greater role of 
both  funded  pension  schemes  (such  as  401(k)  plans  and  Individual  Retirement  Accounts) 
and  other  forms  of  personal  saving.  This  evidence  provides  further  indication  that  future 
retirees will depend heavily on savings as a source of retirement income, and specifically on 
DC pension schemes. 
Retirement saving should increase further 
3.  
The present crisis creates problems for DB pension plan sponsors (which are the residual 
risk  bearers  of  the  plan)  as  falling  asset  prices  reduce  asset/liability  ratios  and  might 
ultimately require higher contributions. Partial relief is provided by the increase in yields on 
corporate  bonds,  which  are  used  in  several  countries  to  discount  pension  fund  liabilities. 
Several  observers  have  raised  concerns  about  the  generalized  adoption  of  market-based, 
fair value accounting principles. The new accounting standards undoubtedly improve balance 
sheet transparency and comparability by limiting sponsor companies’ discretion in pension 
fund  accounting  practices.  However,  this  may  well  have  intensified  the  pro-cyclicality  of 
financial market trends, given the importance of pension funds in many countries and their 
unique  role  as  long-term  investors,  and  may  have  encouraged  pension  fund  managers  to 
focus on short-term trading.5  
Even more importantly, the crisis may make DC plan members less confident about taking 
complex decisions. DC plans require workers to make a number of difficult choices, such as 
whether  or  not  to  enrol,  how  much  money  to  contribute,  how  to  invest  it  and  when  to 
rebalance the portfolio. A serious risk that DC plan members face is not saving enough for 
                                                 
3   This indicator may be partly affected by the higher incidence of risky assets in DC schemes, mainly targeted at 
young workers. 
4   See Pensions Commission (2005) and OECD (2007). 
5   See also Annex II.1 in Group of Ten (2005). 
BIS Review 148/2008 
 3
their  old  age.  Contributions  to  DC  plans  tend  to  be  low.6  Many  factors  may  account  for 
workers’ tendency to under-save: 
• 
Left alone to decide how much to contribute, people seem short-sighted and may 
lack willpower. Recent survey evidence on a representative sample of 51-years old 
or older US citizens has shown that almost 30 percent of respondents have never 
thought  about  a  saving  plan  for  retirement.  Moreover,  only  60  percent  of  the 
“planners” were able to stick to the plan.7 
Workers  are  also  very  poorly  aware  of  the  degree  of  coverage  provided  by  their 
retirement income sources. In Italy, for instance, ten years after three reforms that 
dramatically  reduced  the  prospective  replacement  rates  of  public  pension  (i.e.  the 
ratio  between  pension  benefit  and  last  pay  at  retirement)  for  many  workers, 
adjustment to the new conditions is far from complete and is proving slower for the 
cohorts and employment groups most affected by the reforms. For example, middle-
aged  and  young  self-employed  workers  expect  a  replacement  rate  of  about  60 
percent, which is 20 percentage points higher than the rate consistent with current 
legislation.8  This  is  also  true  for  the  funded  component  of  pension  wealth,  as  US 
surveys tend to find that employees are very poorly aware of the characteristics of 
the plan they are enrolled in (e.g. whether it is DB, DC, or mixed).9 
What is worse is the fact that DC plan members are likely not even to consider the 
problem  of  setting  a  target  replacement  rate  for  their  accumulation  plan.  This  is 
especially  worrying  as  decisions  about  contribution  rates  and  asset  allocation 
depend  very  much  on  key  forward-looking  parameters,  such  as  the  foreseeable 
trend of labour income, the planned retirement date, the target pattern of retirement 
income, and the intensity of the bequest motive. Without a target replacement rate, 
workers might become aware they have saved too little only when they retire and 
are  no  longer  in  a  position  to  increase  the  pool  of  assets  available  to  fund  their 
consumption  in  old  age.  The  lack  of  retirement  goals  may  also  reflect  the  poor 
incentives  of  selling  agents,  who  have  no  contractual  obligation  to  deliver  any 
particular fund size on the retirement date10: in order to persuade workers to enrol 
they may allow them to choose contribution rates that are too low. 
Finally, it is often argued that another reason why the risk of inadequate savings is 
serious  is  that  DC  plan  members  tend  to  choose  a  fairly  conservative  asset 
allocation.  In  order  to  accumulate  a  sufficient  pool  of  funds,  they  should  save 
relatively  more  compared  with  more  equity-oriented  long-term  investors.11  At  the 
same time equity-oriented portfolios may expose investors to huge investment risks 
(see below). 
                                                    
6   See,  for  instance,  Choi  et  al  (2004),  Pensions  Commission  (2005),  Olsen  and  Whitman  (2007)  and  Blake, 
Cairns and Dowd (2008). 
7   Lusardi and Mitchell (2006). 
8   The  level  of  awareness  about  public  pension  provision  is  low,  especially  among  the  self-employed,  public 
sector  employees,  and  younger  workers.  Presumably  this  information  shortfall  also  reflects  the  general 
uncertainty  caused  by  the  protracted  reform  process,  which  has  made  more  difficult  and  burdensome  for 
savers to obtain information on how the new pension system works. See Cesari, Grande and Panetta (2008), 
updating the estimates in Bottazzi, Jappelli and Padula (2006). 
9   Gustman and Steinmeier (2004). 
10   Blake, Cairns and Dowd (2008). 
11   Choi et al (2004). 
4 
 BIS Review 148/2008
Two  widely  used  instruments  to  increase  pension  fund  enrolments  and  contributions  are 
fiscal incentives and employer-matching contributions. Both are effective means of boosting 
pension  fund  returns  and  greatly  increase  the  convenience  of  joining  a  funded  retirement 
scheme.12  Both  have  drawbacks,  however.  Fiscal  incentives  are  usually  expensive, 
regressive, and possibly prone to time inconsistency, especially when tax advantages apply 
to the payout phase. Employers’ contributions might be offset by a reduction in net wages 
and not necessarily produce an increase in the worker’s total wealth. Moreover, as they are 
typically  the  result  of  agreements  between  employers  and  trade  unions,  their  portability 
across different retirement schemes may be far from seamless. In any case, workers seem 
to exploit fiscal incentives and employers’ contributions only partially. For example, a recent 
study of a sample of DC plan members in the United States finds that each year between 20 
and  60  percent  of  these  workers  contribute  below  the  threshold  (even  if  they  could  make 
penalty-free withdrawals), losing as much as 6 percent of their annual pay – a free lunch left 
on the table.13
A  factor  discouraging  workers  from  increasing  pension  fund  contributions  is  the  relative 
illiquidity of their net equity in pension funds. DC pension schemes usually grant workers the 
possibility  to  withdraw  their  balances  some  time  before  they  retire  only  under  special 
circumstances.  Any  option  to  grant  higher  flexibility  of  early  withdrawals  (maybe  to  those 
categories  of  workers,  such  as  young  and  low-paid  workers,  that  are  more  likely  to  be 
liquidity-constrained)  has  to  be  carefully  weighted  against  the  risk  that  short-sighted  and 
time-inconsistent  workers  might  withdraw  too  much  too  early,  against  their  own  long-term 
interest.  
This naturally leads us to underline the importance of providing DC plan members with good 
investment  returns,  as  this  would  be  the  main  way  to  alleviate  the  relative  illiquidity  of 
investments in pension funds and improve the trade-off between liquidity and pension fund 
returns.  In  this  respect,  it  is  essential  to  keep  total  costs  to  savers  low;  otherwise,  the 
advantages of pension funds (investing retirement saving in financial instruments as well as 
enjoying  employer  contributions  and  tax  incentives)  will  be  seen  mainly  in  the  financial 
accounts  of  the  intermediaries  running  the  funds,  rather  than  in  better  living  standards  for 
pensioners.  Indeed,  charges  may  have  a  major  impact  on  the  final  balance  accrued  to 
workers over an extended period of time.14 The importance of keeping pension funds’ total 
costs  low  has  been  emphasized,  among  others,  by  the  Turner  Report,  which  argues  that, 
against reasonable expectations of long-term returns, annual charges of 1.5 percent (not at 
all  uncommon  in  many  countries)  are  high  enough  to  represent  a  rational  disincentive  to 
                                                 
12   According to simulations carried out by Cesari, Grande and Panetta (2008) for Italian DC pension funds, the 
benefit of the employer’s contribution provided by the recent pension fund law is substantial: over a 30-year 
accumulation  period,  even  on  the  most  unfavourable  assumptions,  the  return  obtained  by  a  pension  fund 
member each year is at least 0.6 percentage points higher, and his final accrued balance more than 6 percent 
higher, than that obtained by a non-member. Tax advantages are also very large: after 30 contribution years 
the final balance accrued to a younger worker joining a pension fund would be almost 24 percent greater than 
that accrued to a worker who invests directly in financial assets; more than half of the advantage would be due 
to the deductibility of contributions and another third to the preferential taxation of benefits. 
13   Choi, Laibson and Madrian (2005). 
14   Even small variations in charges lead to big difference in the final balance assigned to workers on retirement. 
After  30  years,  workers  who  can  invest  at  an  annual  cost  of  0.5  percent  per  annum  could,  for  the  same 
savings level, enjoy a final accrued balance more than 30 percent higher than that enjoyed by workers facing 
an annual cost of 1.5 percent. For a detailed analysis of the impact of pension fund costs on workers’ gains 
from joining a pension fund (based on the parameters of the Italian DC pension funds), see Cesari, Grande 
and Panetta (2008). 
BIS Review 148/2008 
 5
voluntary private savings and undermine the case for providing earnings-related pensions in 
a funded rather than a PAYG form.15  
Cost reductions can come not only from increasing the volume of assets under management, 
with consequent economies of scale, but also from stimulating competition among pension 
schemes. This may call for several measures including educating consumers about the effect 
of  charges  on  pension  fund  returns;  assuring  a  high  degree  of  transparency  and 
comparability of charges between different schemes; easing the transferability of employer 
contributions across different schemes, especially for people with term jobs and interrupted 
careers;  and  intensifying  competition  among  intermediaries  offering  pension  fund  asset 
management services.  
Moreover,  in  all  countries  public  authorities  have  a  powerful  (and  relatively  inexpensive) 
instrument  for  boosting  pension  fund  contributions –  namely,  the  provision  of  information. 
The better workers are informed, the quicker they revise their expectations and adjust their 
saving patterns.16 Workers should be given systematic, timely and clear information to help 
them  make  reliable  estimates  of  replacement  ratios,  taking  into  account  both  mandatory 
retirement  programmes  and  supplementary  pension  plans.  Specifically,  for  funded  defined 
contribution  schemes,  either  the  public  authorities  or  the  plan  sponsors  and  financial 
intermediaries could provide workers with an estimate of the pension scheme’s net benefits, 
based  on  reasonable,  transparent  and  standardized  assumptions  regarding  contributions 
rates,  the  growth  rate  of  earnings  for  groups  of  workers,  the  growth  rate  of  benefits,  the 
probability  of  survival,  and  the  expected  returns  on  pension  fund  assets.  Regular 
assessments should provide an indication of the contribution rates that would be consistent 
with  the  updated  scenario.  The  same  should  be  done  on  a  regular  basis  by  the  Social 
Security Department, for the first-pillar pension wealth (as happens, for example, in Sweden). 
Another powerful instrument in the hands of both employers and policymakers is the design 
of retirement plans in terms of enrolment, contribution, investment and withdrawal options. In 
defining default options, there seems to be consensus on a few general criteria such as17 
avoiding opt-in clauses (which imply that the worker is not enrolled unless he or she asks) 
and relying instead on opt-out clauses or some kind of more active decision-making; offering 
only a small number of basic investment choices, while being ready to offer a wider choice to 
those  workers  that  ask  for  it;  and  setting  employee  contribution  rates  that  rise  slowly  over 
time. All these solutions are meant to encourage long-lasting changes in behaviour and to 
overcome  inconsistencies  in  individual  decision-making  arising  due  to  short-sightedness, 
inertia, procrastination or lack of willpower. 
Should we move from unprotected to protected DC schemes? 
4.  
A  cursory  look  at  financial  market  data  (Figure  2)  shows  that  over  long  periods  of 
accumulation  higher  risks  have  on  average  been  associated  with  higher  returns. 
Accumulated returns are lowest for investment strategies that merely track consumer prices, 
highest  for  equities,  and  somewhere  in-between  for  nominal  government  bond  portfolios. 
However, as we move from the least to most rewarding investment strategy, return variability 
                                                 
15 See the discussion and the  international evidence reported  in  Chapters 1.2, 1.5  and  10.10 by the  Pensions 
Commission  (2005).  For  international  evidence  on  charges  as  well  as  policy  options,  see  also  Whitehouse 
(2005). 
16   Analysing the effects on household net (real and financial) wealth of the cuts in public pension benefits in Italy, 
Bottazzi, Jappelli and Padula (2006) find that the impact of pension benefit expectations on saving choices is 
huge.  While  for  informed  workers  the  offset  between  private  wealth  and  expected  public  pension  wealth  is 
between -0.4 and -0.8, for poorly informed workers it is much lower, ranging between -0.2 and -0.4. 
17   See, for instance, Choi et al (2004), Olsen and Whitman (2007), and references therein. 
6 
 BIS Review 148/2008
escalates as well, and in certain periods a pure equity strategy may be overtaken by a bond 
strategy.  Moreover,  holding  period  returns  clearly  indicate  that  even  over  long-term 
accumulation periods the returns from a pure equity strategy may be subject to large drops, 
as may happen when the holding period includes the first ten months of 2008. This bird’s eye 
view of financial market returns also shows that by holding a balanced portfolio of stocks and 
fixed-income instruments, long-term investors may try to increase expected portfolio returns, 
while keeping return volatility moderate. 
What  I  would  like  to  emphasize,  however,  is  that  basing  asset  allocation  on  the  past 
properties of asset returns may still leave the investor considerably exposed to investment 
risk, for at least two reasons: 
• 
First,  past  realizations  may  come  from  different  underlying  economic  regimes  or 
conceal structural breaks, so that care should be taken when using observed returns 
to estimate expected returns.18 It is generally agreed, for example, that around the 
turn of the century the equity premium declined somewhat; the term premia on long-
term interest rates may also have recorded a lasting decrease in this decade. This 
may again reverse in the near future. 
Second, even if expected returns on equities are higher than those on bonds in the 
long  term,  actual  returns  on  equities  may  turn  out  to  be  sharply  negative.  The 
probability  of  large  drops  in  asset  prices  may  be  substantially  higher  than  it  is 
assumed in standard mean-variance frameworks. Indeed, there is evidence that the 
distribution of many asset prices has fatter tails than the normal distribution (possibly 
signalling the unexpected occurrence of very large shocks that may be at odds with 
standard applications of the central limit theorem). 
 The  investment  risk  can  be  dealt  with,  to  some  extent,  by  relying  on  market-based 
instruments. DC plan members could invest a large share of their funds in risky assets at the 
beginning of their accumulation period and gradually increase the percentage of cash and 
government bonds as they approach retirement19. One difficulty of this life-cycle investment 
strategy is that individuals may find it a daunting task to change the asset allocation as they 
age (as well as to anticipate trends in the prices of risky assets). A solution is provided by 
accumulation schemes that automatically adjust risk as an investor ages (“life-cycle funds”). 
This  kind  of  solution  has  been  increasingly  adopted  for  DC  pension  plans  in  a  number  of 
countries. 
Financial  markets  also  offer  strategies  that  drastically  reduce  the  exposure  to  investment 
risk.  One  possibility  is  to  restrict  portfolio  choices  to  fixed-income  instruments,  especially 
index-linked  bonds,  or  to  use  options.  Then  there  is  recourse  to  rate-of-return  guarantees 
provided by third parties (an insurance company, the sponsor or a central reserve fund). A 
DC  pension  fund  may  also  maintain  a  reserve  to  smooth  returns  over  time:  in  good 
investment years part of the fund’s returns are placed in the reserve, which can be drawn on 
when they fall below a certain threshold. 
While financial markets offer different ways of introducing minimum return guarantees, it is 
clear  that  the  hedging  of  financial  market  risks  does  not  come  without  cost.  A  higher 
incidence  of  fixed-income  instruments  may  take  its  toll  on  portfolio  returns;  the  use  of 
derivatives  or  third-parties  guarantees  implies  the  payment  of  fees.  With  intertemporal 
smoothing  of  returns,  good  investment  years  subsidize  bad  investment  periods,  with  a 
                                                 
18   The very hypothesis of ergodicity of most economic and financial time series has been questioned from time 
to time (se, for example, Davidson, 1991) and becomes hard to believe in crisis periods. 
19   For the long-standing debate on the pros and cons of equities compared with bonds and the asset allocation 
of  long-term  investors,  see  Campbell  and  Viceira  (2002),  Siegel  (2002),  Bodie  and  Clowes  (2003),  Merton 
(2006) and Blake, Cairns and Dowd (2008). 
BIS Review 148/2008 
 7
potential  redistribution  of  investment  income  across  plan  members.  Therefore,  all  these 
forms of protection from investment risks may result in lower net-of-fees returns. If these are 
not  offset  by  higher  contributions  during  the  accumulation  phase,  they  lead  to  a  lower 
pension during the decumulation stage – i.e. lower returns imply lower consumption, either 
during working age or in retirement or both. 
More  importantly,  market-based  solutions  cannot  protect  investors  from  strong  aggregate 
shocks  hitting  several  asset  classes  and  economic  sectors  at  the  same  time.  In  such  an 
event, aggregate wealth is not only redistributed across individuals and sectors, but it is also 
destroyed. 
One might argue that in such exceptional circumstances there is a straightforward solution: a 
public rescue of pension funds by the government (especially when enrolment is mandatory 
rather  than  voluntary).  A  bail-out  of  pension  fund  members  would  always  be  an  available 
policy option, provided that it were limited to workers who are close to retirement and unable 
to take advantage of a possible recovery of asset prices over medium- to long-term horizons. 
However, a bail-out of pension fund members should always remain the last option for two 
well-known reasons: it is costly to taxpayers and it may encourage opportunistic behaviour 
by pension funds in the future. 
A more sustainable and efficient form of protection could come from some kind of collective 
inter-generational arrangement. One possibility is that of hybrid pension plans, such as those 
previously  mentioned,  in  which  participants  transform  their  risky  claims  into  guaranteed 
claims as they become older.20 In practice, younger workers would partly insure the pension 
rights  of  older  workers,  by  accepting  to  pay  higher  contributions  in  periods  of  adverse 
financial market shocks. In some countries (for example the Netherlands) these investment 
vehicles already exist.  
Another possibility would be a more active role of the State in providing insurance against 
grave  systemic  risks.  Tail  risk  in  financial  markets  is  similar  to  what  is  called  aggregate 
longevity risk, i.e. the risk of a whole cohort living longer than expected. Aggregate longevity 
risk must be kept distinct from idiosyncratic longevity risk, i.e. the risk of an individual living 
longer than his or her cohort’s average (a risk that the market can easily insure away). I will 
elaborate on these risks in the next section. 
Of course, providing insurance against catastrophic events destroying financial wealth was 
the  reason  why  PAYG  social  security  systems  were  introduced,  most  of  them  in  the 
aftermath  of  the  Great  Depression  and  of  the  hyper-inflation  following  WWII.21  However, 
social  security  systems  came  under  strain  in  most  developed  countries  for  several  well-
known reasons. In particular, the sizeable (and largely unexpected) increases in longevity, 
coupled  with  a  substantial  fall  in  fertility  rates,  put  the  financial  sustainability  of  traditional 
PAYG  schemes  under  question  in  many  countries,  unless  substantial  cuts  in  benefits  and 
increases  in  payroll  contributions  were  introduced  (and  the  effective  retirement  age 
increased).  
Yet,  there  are  other  ways  to  provide  workers  with  a  collective  protection  against  financial 
market risks. One example, is the plan put forward by Franco Modigliani and co-authors in 
various  contributions.22  While  it  is  similar  in  spirit  to  inter-generational  arrangements,  it 
includes the whole national community in the risk-sharing scheme. Basically, the proposal is 
to introduce a single funded DC pension scheme which would enter in a swap arrangement 
                                                 
20   See, for example, Boeri et al (2006). 
21   Originally, most social security systems were funded. The abrupt destruction of financial wealth due to post-
WWI and WWII hyper-inflation and asset price collapse led many countries to switch from funded to PAYG 
schemes (Perotti and Schwienbacher, 2007). 
22   See for example Modigliani, Muralidhar and Ceprini (2000), and Modigliani and Muralidhar (2004). 
8 
 BIS Review 148/2008
with  the  Treasury  each  year  so  that  the  risky  pension  fund  returns  are  exchanged  with  a 
guaranteed rate of return.  
With  respect  to  the  original  proposal,  the  swap  arrangements  may  involve  more  than  one 
pension fund, and the swap guarantee may be partial, at a price that in normal times should 
compensate  the  Treasury  for  the  risks  it  undertakes.  In  this  case,  it  would  be  especially 
important to keep pension fund fees and other expenses low, as mentioned earlier. 
One  merit  of  the  Modigliani  proposal  is  that  workers  with  similar  characteristics  would  be 
granted similar rates of return on their savings. On fairness grounds, it seems disputable that 
workers with equal pension contributions and in equal in all other relevant respects should 
end up with very different retirement wealth, due to the evolution of financial markets. 
Finally, while the feasibility of such a scheme needs to be studied in relation to the various 
existing national pension systems, it is worth noting not only that it might provide the needed 
smoothing of pension funds returns, but, more importantly, that the scheme would also put 
the burden of aggregate financial risks due to events that cannot be hedged at a cohort level 
within  a  truly  intergenerational  exchange  framework.  Obviously,  this  would  call  for  the 
introduction of measures to limit the burden on future generations caused by high and rising 
levels of public debt.  
We need cheaper and safer pay-out products 
5.  
An  adequate  level  of  pension  wealth  at  retirement  is  necessary  but  not  sufficient  to 
guarantee adequate living standards during the retirement  years. Indeed, it is important to 
ensure that such wealth is properly decumulated. Therefore, the most important choice is the 
extent of annuitization. 
It is difficult not to agree that annuitization of a significant fraction of private pension wealth is 
highly advisable. It is indeed advisable both for the individual and for the government:  
• 
At retirement, workers have to choose the level of consumption for the subsequent 
years, given the wealth accumulated over their working lives. Without annuities, they 
would  be  exposed  to  longevity  risk:  if  they  live  longer  than  expected,  they  could 
outlive their resources; if on the contrary their lifespan turns out to be shorter than 
expected, a fraction of resources would be wasted. By buying an annuity, both risks 
would be shifted onto the insurance company.  
As companies have a wide pool of clients, they can diversify away the idiosyncratic 
component  of  the  longevity  risk.  Therefore,  they  can  offer  annuities  at  convenient 
prices  for  the  investors.  However,  companies  have  to  bear  the  aggregate 
component of the longevity risk, i.e. the risk of unpredicted changes in the average 
lifespan. To cover this risk, they could ask for a premium that may substantially raise 
the overall cost of the annuity scheme. 
A  high  degree  of  annuitization  would  also  work  to  protect  public  finances  from 
opportunistic  behaviour:  individuals  may  indeed  have  an  incentive  to  consume 
resources early after retirement, and to rely on the publicly-financed safety net in the 
following years. 
  At  the  moment,  annuity  markets  around  the  world  are  rather  thin,  except  in  a  handful  of 
countries  in  which  private  pensions  are  more  developed  (such  as  in  the  United  Kingdom, 
Switzerland and Chile). This may be due to a wide range of demand and supply factors, such 
as opaque and inefficient pricing policies by insurance companies, a lack of products which 
meet  the  tastes  and  needs  of  investors,  and  the  presence  of  still  substantial  annuitized 
BIS Review 148/2008 
 9
benefits provided by public PAYG schemes.23 However, in a few years’ time the number of 
pensioners  for  which  annuities  or  annuity-like  products  will  provide  a  significant  fraction  of 
retirement income is most likely to increase. This is due both to the increased importance of 
private  pensions  and  to  the  fact  that,  in  many  countries,  the  law  now  mandates  that  a 
minimum portion of a worker’s pension fund capital should be annuitized at retirement (or it 
provides strong tax incentives to do so).  
As the demand for annuity products takes off, an efficient and well-functioning annuity market 
will become soon a policy priority. Policy action in this field should target two broad goals. 
First,  in  order  to  reduce  annuity  prices,  three  main  determinants  should  be  addressed: 
adverse selection costs, which are quite significant according to most existing studies;24 the 
premium for the aggregate longevity risk; and a possibly insufficient degree of competition. 
Second, pay-out products which protect at least in part against the risks which materialize 
during the decumulation phase should be made more widely available. At the moment, for 
example,  in  most  countries  annuity  payments  are  not  indexed  to  prices.  This  induces  a 
progressive deterioration of the relative position of pensioners with respect to the rest of the 
population (as well as an absolute reduction in purchasing power over time).  
I will now briefly discuss how we can try to achieve these goals.  
To keep the price of annuities as low as possible, governments and regulators should first of 
all promote the timely release of accurate mortality tables, as this would help to reduce the 
aggregate longevity risk. The remarkable increase in life expectancy at older ages that has 
occurred  in  the  last  half  a  century  in  industrial  countries  seems  in  fact  to  have  been 
systematically  under-predicted  by  national  statistical  agencies.  The  adoption  of  new  and 
more sophisticated methods might have produced significant improvements in projection but 
prospective life expectancy gains may still be somewhat under-predicted. Furthermore, lags 
occur  in  the  production,  adoption  and  disclosure  of  mortality  tables  and  cross-country 
variations in mortality assumptions used by company pension schemes appear at times far 
larger than warranted by their members’ profiles.25
Moreover,  tables  for  different  subgroups  in  the  population  should  also  be  made  available. 
This  would  make  it  possible  to  discriminate  between  annuity  buyers,  reducing  adverse 
selection  costs.  In  particular,  lower  prices  could  be  offered  to  disadvantaged  people,  with 
shorter-than-average  expected  life  spans.  As  good  mortality  tables  are  to  some  extent  a 
“public good”, the role of governments here is significant.  
                                                 
23   See, among others, the contributions in Brown et al (2001) and Fornero and Luciano (2004). 
24   Most  of  the  literature  measures  these  costs  using  the  so-called  “money’s  worth  ratio”,  defined  as  the  ratio 
between  the  net  present  value  of  the  expected  stream  of  benefits  and  the  amount  of  money  given  by  the 
retiree to the insurer (a synthetic indicator of the cost of the annuity). The numerator of the money’s worth ratio 
can be computed either using survival probabilities for the whole population or probabilities for the sub-group 
of  the  annuity  purchasers.  In  the  latter  case  the  ratio  would  turn  out  to  be  bigger,  as  annuitants  would  on 
average receive benefits for a longer period. The difference between the two money’s worth ratios is typically 
considered  the  most  reliable  proxy  for  adverse  selection  costs.  For  example,  Mitchell  et  al  (1999)  provide 
estimates for the United States respectively equal to 81 and 92 percent. Comparable estimates for Italy are 77 
and 87 percent (Guazzarotti and Tommasino, 2008). Of course, these estimates must be taken with caution, 
as they rely on several assumptions concerning, for example, the future evolution of interest rates.  
25   On these issues see the discussion in Visco (2007). With respect to projection methods, particularly popular is 
the  model  proposed  by  Lee  and  Carter  (1992),  where  the  possibility  of  age-specific  patterns  in  mortality 
estimates  is  specifically  taken  into  account.  Using  this  method  Tuljapurkar,  Li  and  Boe  (2000)  produced 
estimates that show average life expectancy gains for G7 countries by the year 2050 of about 7 years, twice 
as large as the average gains in official projections. Even this might be a conservative estimate, as it assumes 
a constant rate of decline in mortality. If the rate of increase in life expectancy registered in the post-war period 
were  to  be  confirmed  for  future  decades,  it  would  rise  by  2050  by  more  than  10  years.  On  cross-country 
variations in mortality assumptions, see Cass Business School (2005). 
10 
 BIS Review 148/2008
Furthermore, in order to foster competition and keep profit margins low, product prices and 
characteristics should be as transparent and comparable as possible. To guarantee a higher 
degree  of  transparency,  both  about  prices  and  about  product  characteristics,  it  would  be 
advisable to follow the path of countries such as the United Kingdom, where the FSA hosts a 
web  platform  in  which  the  different  products  are  compared,  or  Chile,  which  has  recently 
adopted a similar system. 
With reference to the inadequate range of available instruments, governments should first of 
all  remove  the  obstacles  that  prevent  companies  from  offering  inflation-indexed  annuity 
products. In particular, they could consider providing more inflation-indexed and ultra long-
term  bonds.  The  Chilean  experience,  in  which  these  bonds  are  issued  both  by  the 
government and by the corporate sector, is indicative. It also points to the fact that financial 
innovation and the development of annuity markets are two mutually reinforcing processes. 
Finally,  longevity  risk  premia  could  be  reduced  if  companies  had  access  to  longevity  (or 
mortality)  bonds,  allowing  better  asset-liability  management.  The  issuance  of  such  bonds 
should then be definitely encouraged, recent failures notwithstanding.26  
The market for reverse mortgages should also be promoted. Reverse mortgages and similar 
products  transform  into  an  annuitized  stream  of  payments  a  component  of  the  wealth  of 
elderly people which is already significant in many countries where private pension wealth is 
still small. There is a risk that the crisis, and the sharp drop in house prices, will give a hard 
blow to these products, which grew significantly in the years of the housing boom (see Figure 
3).  Better-designed  arrangements,  in  which  the  risk  is  shared  more  equally  between  the 
homeowner and the intermediary will also help.  
The main reason why there is an inadequate supply of instruments for hedging against the 
risks  incurred  in  annuity  provision  (longevity  risk,  inflation  risk,  financial  market  risk)  is  of 
course the lack of natural issuers, at least in the private sector. Due to their extended time-
horizon, governments are a natural candidate to re-insure these risks. 
However, it is not clear to what extent they could take those risks onto their balance sheets. 
After all, social security systems are being reformed mainly to spare future workers at least 
part of the expected costs of population ageing (a concern that is also behind the introduction 
in  several  countries  of  the  so-called  notional  defined  contribution  schemes  for  public 
pensions). One might argue, however, in favour of some limited form of guarantee to annuity 
providers, to cover only the risk of a “catastrophic” tail event. The use of public resources to 
provide  an  insurance  against  the  collective  component  of  longevity  risk  should  then  be 
matched by a more balanced composition of pension pillars that would limit the exposure of 
the government to the idiosyncratic component of this risk and encourage financial markets, 
to  play  a  larger  role  for  its  insurance,  even  if  with  a  possible  smoothing  role  by  the  State 
along the lines discussed in the previous section. 
The State could even intervene directly as an annuity provider. This would be likely to reduce 
administrative  costs  (thanks  to  economies  of  scale)  and  adverse  selection  costs (due  to  a 
wider  pool  of  clients),  and  correspondingly  reduce  prices  (mainly  because  profit  mark-ups 
could be kept to zero). The Swedish experience, in which the government is the monopoly 
provider of annuities both for individual investors and for pension funds, seems encouraging 
in this respect, and deserves further attention. 
                                                 
26 
 See, among others, Group of Ten (2005), Visco (2007), Antolin and Blommestein (2007). I will leave aside the 
problems  connected  to  the  management  of  duration  risk,  due  to  the  fact  that  there  might  be  a  mismatch 
between the duration of companies’ assets and liabilities. Of course, compensation for this risk is also a part of 
the  annuity  price.  Duration  risk  seems  however  more  important  for  DB  funds,  which  provide  accumulation 
vehicles and also pay pensions, than for specialized annuity providers.  
BIS Review 148/2008 
 11
Conclusions 
6.  
We  need  to  acknowledge  that  the  road  to  an  adequate  and  stable  retirement  income  is 
strewn with difficulties and hazards. Many things can go wrong: inadequate contributions and 
disappointing returns during the accumulation phase could lead to an insufficient amount of 
resources at the moment of retirement; the lack of inexpensive and safe ways to transform 
pension wealth into a stream of benefits could lead to insufficient income during the old age, 
if not immediately, after a certain number of years.  
The main point of my discussion has been that leaving individuals alone to cope with these 
risks is inefficient from an economic point of view, given that at least some of them are of a 
systemic  nature.  It  is  not  a  matter  of  redistributing  a  given  amount  of  resources  among 
individuals or across cohorts, but of adverse shocks that reduce the growth potential of the 
economy (for example in the case of population ageing) or destroy its stock of wealth (as in 
the case of a disorderly financial market crisis). The solutions that financial markets currently 
offer  cannot  effectively  address  these  risks:  they  should  be  integrated  with  collective 
arrangements involving present and future generations.  
I  believe  that  it  is  worth  exploring  whether  such  arrangements  could  take  the  form  of 
transparent, minimal guarantees provided by the government to pension funds and to annuity 
providers at prices and with other conditions that compensate the risks. 
References 
Antolin, P. and H. Blommestein (2007), “Governments and the market for longevity-indexed 
bonds”, OECD Working papers on insurance and private pensions, no. 4. 
Blake, D., A. Cairns, and K. Dowd (2008), “Turning pension plans into pension planes: what 
investment  strategy  designers  of  defined  contribution  pension  plans  can  learn  from 
commercial aircraft designers”, Pensions Institute discussion paper PI-0806. 
Bodie  Z.  and  M.  Clowes  (2003),  Worry-free  investing:  a  safe  approach  to  achieving  your 
lifetime financial goals, Financial Times Prentice Hall, London. 
Boeri,  T.,  L.  Bovenberg,  B.  Coeuré  and  A.  Roberts  (2006),  Dealing  with  the  new  giants: 
rethinking  the  role  of  pension  funds,  Geneva  reports  on  the  world  economy,  no.  8,  ICMB-
CEPR, Oxford University Press, Oxford.  
Bottazzi, R., T. Jappelli and M. Padula (2006), “Retirement expectations, pension reforms, 
and their impact on private wealth accumulation”, Journal of Public Economics, vol. 90, pp. 
2187-2212. 
Brown, J.R., O.S. Mitchell, J.M. Poterba and M.J. Warshawsky (2001), The role of annuity 
markets in financing retirement, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA. 
Campbell, J. Y. and L. M. Viceira (2002), Strategic asset allocation: portfolio choice for long-
term investors, Oxford University Press, Oxford. 
Cass  Busines  School  (2005),  Mortality  assumptions  used  in  the  calculations  of  company 
pension liabilities in the EU, City of London. 
Cesari,  R.,  G.  Grande  and  F.  Panetta  (2008),  “Supplementary  pension  schemes  in  Italy: 
features, development and opportunities for workers”, Giornale degli economisti e annali di 
economia, vol. 67, pp. 21-73. 
Choi,  J.  J.,  D.  Laibson  and  B.  M.  Madrian  (2005),  “$100  bills  on  the  sidewalk:  suboptimal 
saving in 401(k) plans”, NBER working paper, no. 11554. 
Choi, J. J., D. Laibson, B. M. Madrian and A. Metrick (2004) “For better or for worse: default 
effects and 401(k) savings behavior”, in David Wise (ed.), Perspectives in the economics of 
aging, University of Chicago Press, Chicago. 
12 
 BIS Review 148/2008
IMF,  Washington  DC 
financial  stability  report,  October  2008, 
Davidson,  P.  (1991),  “Is  probability  theory  relevant  for  uncertainty?  A  post-keynesian 
perspective”, Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol. 5, pp. 129-143. 
Fornero E. and E. Luciano (2004), Developing an annuity market in Europe, Edward Elgar 
Publishing, Cheltenham.  
Group of Ten (2005), “Ageing and pension system reform: implications for financial markets 
and economic policies”, Report prepared for the deputies of the Group of Ten by a group of 
experts  chaired  by  I.  Visco  (http://www.bis.org/publ/gten09.htm),  also  published  in  OECD, 
Financial Market Trends, no. 89 (Supplement 1). 
Guazzarotti,  G.  and  P.  Tommasino  (2008),  “The  annuity  market  in  an  evolving  pension 
system: lessons from Italy”, CeRP working paper, no.77/08. 
Gustman, A. and T. Steinmeier (2004), “What people don’t know about their pensions and 
social  security,”  in  W.  Gale,  J.  Shoven  and  M.  Warshawsky  (eds.),  Private  pensions  and 
public policies, Brookings Institution, Washington DC. 
IMF  (2008),  Global 
(http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/gfsr/2008/02/index.htm). 
Lee, R.D. and L. Carter (1992), “Modelling and forecasting the time series of US mortality”, 
Journal of the American Statistical Association, vol. 87, pp. 659-675. 
Lusardi,  A.  M.  and  O.  S.  Mitchell  (2006),  “Financial  literacy  and  planning:  implications  for 
retirement wellbeing”, Pension Research Council working paper, no. 1. 
Merton  R.  C.  (2006)  “Observations  on  innovation  in  pension  fund  management  in  the 
impending future”, PREA Quarterly, Winter. 
Mitchell, O. S., J. M. Poterba, M. J. Warshawsky and J. R. Brown (1999), “New evidence on 
the  money’s  worth  of  individual  annuities”,  American  Economic  Review,  vol.  89,  pp.  1299-
1318. 
Modigliani,  F.  and  A.  Muralidhar  (2004),  Rethinking  pension  reform,  Cambridge  University 
Press, Cambridge. 
Modigliani, F., A. Muralidhar and M. Ceprini (2000), “A solution to the social security crisis”, 
Sloan School of Management, mimeo. 
OECD (2007), Pensions at a glance, OECD, Paris. 
Olsen,  A.  and  K.  Whitman  (2007),  “Effective  retirement  savings  programs:  design  features 
and financial education”, Social Security Bulletin, vol. 67, no. 3. 
Pensions Commissions (2005), A new pension settlement for the twenty-first century – The 
second report of the Pensions commission (www.pensionscommission.org.uk). 
Perotti E. C. and A. Schwienbacher (2007) “The political origin of pension funding”, CEPR 
discussion paper, no. 6100. 
Siegel, J. (2002), Stocks for the long run, third edition, McGraw-Hill, New York. 
Tuljapurkar, S., N. Li and C. Boe, (2000), “Is there a universal pattern of morality decline? 
Evidence and forecasts for the G7 countries”, Nature, vol. 405, pp. 789-792. 
Visco,  I.  (2007),  “Longevity  risk  and  financial  markets”,  in  Balling,  M.,  E.  Gnan  and  F. 
Lierman  (eds.),  Money,  finance  and  demography:  the  consequences  of  ageing,  SUERF 
colloquium volume 2006, SUERF, Vienna.  
Whitehouse,  E.  R.  (2005),  “Testimony”,  Sub-committee  on  social  security  reform  of  the 
Committee on ways and means, U.S. House of Representatives, 16 June 2005. 
BIS Review 148/2008 
 13
Table 1. Pension fund assets in percent of GDP (1) 
(percent) 
 Belgium 
Canada 
France 
Germany 
Italy 
Japan (2) 
Netherlands 
Sweden 
Switzerland 
United Kingdom 
United States 
 
1990 
2
29
2000 
6
48
3
1
12
72
2
56
50
42
3
3
19
114
3
105
79
69
2003 
4
47
1
4
2
14
101
8
104
65
73
2006 
4 
54 
1 
4 
3 
22 
127 
9 
123 
84 
75 
 
Source: Group of Ten (2005) and OECD (Global Pension Statistics). 
(1) 
Reported assets refer to the category “autonomous pension funds”. They may not include all forms of 
retirement savings plans, in particular those provided by insurance companies.  
Data for 2003 and 2006 are estimated. 
(2) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
14 
 Pension funds’ assets/GDP across OECD countries 
Figure 1 
(percent) 
 s
d
n
u
f
 
n
o
s
n
e
p
n
 i
i
 
e
g
n
a
h
C
  1
0
0
2
n
e
e
w
t
e
b
P
D
G
s
t
e
s
s
a
  6
0
0
2
d
n
a
 50
40
30
20
10
0
0
-10
20
40
60
80
100
12
0
Pension funds' assets/GDP in 2001
Sources: OECD (Global Pension Statistics). 
BIS Review 148/2008
Table 2. Proportion of DC pension plans in selected countries 
(% share of DC pension plans in autonomous pension funds’ total assets) 
2006 
9.5
85.3
2001 
2002 
2003 
2005 
2004 
7.0
70.5
8.2
48.9
80.9
4.4
48.0
 
83.8 
14.2 
50.2 
2.4
46.4
0.2
47.2
51.7
 
Canada 
Italy 
Japan 
United States 
 
      Sources: OECD (Global Pension Statistics); OECD, Pension Markets in Focus. 
 
 
 
Table 3. Current and expected sources of income in retirement 
(percent) 
 Workers (Expected) Retirees(Reported)
Social Security 
An employer-sponsored retirement 
savings plan, such as a 401 (k) 
Other personal savings or investments 
An individual retirement account or IRA 
An employer-provided traditional 
pension or cash balance plan 
 
80 
74 
73 
69 
59 
94 
36 
48 
34 
53 
 
  Source:  Employee  Benefit  Research  Institute  and  Mathew  Greenwald  &  Associates,  Inc.,  2008  Retirement 
Confidence Survey. 
 
 
BIS Review 148/2008 
 15
 Figure 2 
Returns on financial assets: long-term indicators 
(i) Indexes: 1985=100 (1) 
1000
900
800
700
600
500
400
300
200
100
0
2008
2007
2006
2005
2004
2003
2002
2001
2000
1999
1998
1997
1996
1995
1994
1993
1992
1991
1990
1989
1988
1987
1986
1985
(ii) 10-year percentage changes (2)  
300
250
200
150
100
50
0
-50
2001
2002
2007
2008
1999
2000
2003
2004
2005
2006
1986
1987
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1985
1988
1989
1990
1991
Nominal GDP
Consumer prices
G7 Gov't Bonds
Balanced Portfolio
World Stock Markets
Sources: 
Datastream. 
1. 
IMF,  Federal  Reserve  and  Thomson  Financial 
Annual  data.  Consumer  prices  and  nominal  GDP  relate 
to  advanced  economies.  The  government  bond  index 
(Merrill  Lynch)  and  the  stock  market  index  (MSCI)  also 
take  into  account  coupons  and  dividends.  “Balanced 
portfolio” means the index of the weighted portfolio of the 
stock market and bond indexes, where the stock market 
weight is equal to the share of corporate equities to total 
financial  assets  of  the  US  private  pension  funds  at  the 
end of the previous year. 
Percentage  change  over  10  years  of  the  variables 
described in the previous footnote. 
2. 
16 
 BIS Review 148/2008
Figure 3 
Reverse mortgages in the United States 
(number of federally-insured reverse mortgage 
loans, fiscal years) 
120000
100000
80000
60000
40000
20000
0
1990
1992
1994
1996
1998
2000
2002
2004
2006
2008
 Sources: U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development; 
U.S. Mortgage Bankers Association. 
 BIS Review 148/2008 
 17
