Shamshad Akhtar: The effectiveness of monetary policy in Pakistan 
Speech by Dr Shamshad Akhtar, Governor of the State Bank of Pakistan, at the convocation 
of the Institute of Business Management, Karachi, 6 December 2008. 
 Introduction 
A. 
Economic  policies  aim  to  increase  the  welfare  of  the  general  public,  and  monetary  policy 
supports this broad objective by focusing its efforts to promote price stability. Embedded in 
this objective is the belief that persistent inflation would compromise the long term economic 
prospects of the country. The objective of monetary policy in Pakistan, as laid down in the 
SBP  Act  of  1956,  is  to  achieve  the  targets  of  inflation  and  growth  set  annually  by  the 
government. In pursuit of this mandate, SBP formulates the country’s monetary policy that is 
consistent with these announced targets. In my remarks today, I plan to provide perspective 
on: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
First, why central banks focus on price stability?  
Second, how the monetary policy transmission mechanisms work?  
Third, what are the principal features of Pakistan’s monetary policy framework? 
Fourth, selected thoughts on effectiveness of Pakistan’s monetary policy framework 
Finally,  what  measures  are  needed  to  improve  the  effectiveness  of  the  monetary 
policy framework in Pakistan?  
These  questions  have  been  a  subject  of  much  debate  lately,  as  monetary  tightening  –  an 
inevitable policy response for regaining macroeconomic stability – has aroused anxiety but 
better  public  understanding  of  this  question  will  help  them  to  appreciate  central  bank’s 
monetary policy stance. 
Why focus on price stability?  
B. 
Before  getting  into  other  intricacies  of  monetary  policy,  it  is  useful  to  bring  forth  the 
importance  of  price  stability  as  an  overriding  objective  of  monetary  policy.  Actual  inflation 
outcome in the economy is driven largely by the level of output gap (the difference between 
what  the  economy  is  demanding  and  what  it  can  potentially  produce)  and  inflation 
expectations. When the output gap widens, the actual output is more than what the economy 
can sustain in the long run with stable inflation. This reflects excessive demand for available 
resources in the economy, which pushes up general prices. In order to stem the increase in 
resource cost and the general price level in the economy, this gap needs to be narrowed or 
stabilized. This can be achieved by either reducing the demand in the short run or increasing 
the productive capacity over the medium to long run. Reducing aggregate demand, however, 
entails  reduction  in  current  output  and  an  increase  in  the  unemployment  level  in  the 
economy.  
The  famous  classical  Phillips  curve  that  captures  the  trade-off  between  stabilizing  inflation 
and controlling unemployment was criticized by Phelps and Friedman in the late 1960s. They 
argued  that  if  inflation  expectations  react  to  changes  in  actual  inflation,  then  any  trade-off 
between inflation and unemployment would be short-lived at best. If wages are set once a 
year and for some reason the output prices increase, then the producers have an incentive to 
increase  their  output  by  hiring  more  workers.  However  it  is  only  possible  if  workers' 
expectations of inflation remain unchanged during the period of increase in output prices. If 
workers  adjust  their  expectations  in  accordance  with  actual  inflation  and  demand  higher 
nominal wages, it leaves relatively little incentive for firms to increase the output.  
BIS Review 163/2008 
 1
Therefore the focus has shifted away from this trade-off and new consensus has emerged in 
the literature that price stability is key to long run growth prospects. Both theory and evidence 
suggest that monetary stimulus can only affect real economic activity in the short-run. In the 
long run, however, there is no conflict between low inflation and full utilization of economic 
resources. Ensuring price stability, in turn, requires effective management and anchoring of 
inflation expectations.  
With  stable  prices,  economic  decisions  can  be  made  with  less  uncertainty  and  therefore 
markets  can  function  without  concern  about  unpredictable  fluctuations  in  the  purchasing 
power of money. On the other hand, high and unanticipated inflation lowers the quality of the 
signals  coming  from  the  price  system  as  producers  and  consumers  find  it  difficult  to 
distinguish price changes arising from changes in the supply and demand for products from 
changes  arising  from  the  high  level  of  general  inflation.  In  the  market  economy,  prices 
represent basic means of transmission of information; the increased noise associated with 
high inflation lowers the effectiveness of the market system. High and unanticipated inflation 
makes it impossible to plan for relatively longer outlook, creating incentives for households 
and  firms  to  shorten  their  decision  horizons  and  to  spend  resources  in  managing  inflation 
risks rather than focusing on the most productive activities.  
Ben  Bernanke  argued  that  the  Fed’s  mandated  goals  of  price  stability  and  maximum 
employment are almost entirely complementary: “price stability is an end of monetary policy; 
it is also a means by which policy can achieve its other objectives”.1 This argument has also 
been supported by Keneth Rogoff (1985) who advocated that the central bank should place 
larger  weight  on  inflation  stabilization,  in  order  to  increase  the  welfare  of  the  society. 
Therefore, the competing goals of growth and price stability, which may seem to be at odds 
with each other, in fact boils down to a single objective i.e. price stability. In this backdrop, 
there is no surprise that most of the central banks aim at maintaining low and stable inflation. 
Central  banks  place  more  weight  and  demonstrate  increased  willingness  on  controlling 
inflation relative to output growth, and financial and exchange rate stability. It is important to 
acknowledge, however, that in practical policy making, adhering to revealed preferences is 
rather  difficult.  The  reason  is  that  central  banks  do  not  operate  in  a  vacuum  and  require 
coordination with other policy making institutions, in particular the fiscal authority. In addition, 
the  social  and  cultural  make-up  of  a  country  and  political  economy  considerations  often 
require  central  banks  to  accommodate  conflicting  policies.  In  other  words,  sticking  to  an 
announced rule-based monetary policy can be difficult in practice; “enlightened discretion” is 
preferred by most central banks. Thus, SBP’s decision to focus on arresting the persistent 
inflationary trends is tantamount to a pro-growth policy, not a growth retarding one.  
Monetary policy transmission mechanism 
C. 
The monetary transmission mechanism refers to a process through which monetary  policy 
decisions  affect  the  level  of  economic  activity  in  the  economy  and  the  inflation  rate. 
Understanding  the  transmission  mechanism  of  monetary  policy  is  crucial  for  appropriate 
design  and  efficient  conduct  of  monetary  policy.  As  monetary  policy  actions  affect  policy 
variables  with  a  considerable  lag  and  with  high  degree  of  variability  and  uncertainty,  it  is 
important  to  predict  the  possible  impact  and  extent  of  monetary  policy  actions  on  the  real 
variables. Thus, by its very nature, monetary policy tends to be forward-looking. 
It  is  also  important  to  know  which  transmission  channels  are  more  effective  in  terms  of 
transmitting  changes  in  monetary  policy  actions  to  ultimate  policy  goals.  Since  various 
financial  sector  developments  particularly  regarding  introduction  of  new  financial  products, 
technological changes, institutional strengthening, and expectations about future policy, etc. 
                                                 
1   http://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/bernanke2006.02.24a.htm#f3#mainNav 
2 
 BIS Review 163/2008
can potentially change economic effects of the monetary policy measures, there is a need to 
regularly update, empirically test and reinterpret monetary policy transmission channels. 
The  impact  of  monetary  policy  is  perceived  to  transmit  in  to  the  real  economic  activity 
through five channels.  
• 
The  first  channel  and  most  widely  studied  and  understood  channel  of  monetary 
policy transmission relies on the link between changes in the short-term nominal 
interest rate (induced by changes in the policy rate) and the long-term real interest 
rate that ultimately affect components of aggregate demand such as consumption 
and investment in an economy. As such, it is the changes in the long-term real 
interest  rates  that  have  its  impact  on  aggregate  consumption,  business 
investment and other components of aggregate demand. 
The second channel, known as the credit channel, involves changes in monetary 
policy that not only affects the ability of firms to borrow money (by affecting their net 
worth)  but  also  affects  the  ability  of  banks  to  lend  money.  The  strength  of  this 
channel  depends  on  the  degree  to  which  the  central  bank  has  allowed  banks  to 
extend  loans  and  the  dependence of  borrowers  on  bank  loans.  These  factors  are 
clearly influenced by the structure of the financial system and its regulation.  
The third channel of monetary policy transmission focuses on asset prices (other 
than the interest rate) such as the market value of securities (bonds and equities) 
and  prices  of  real  estate.  A  policy-induced  change  in  the  nominal  interest  rate 
affects  the  price  of  bonds  and  stocks  that  may  change  the  market  value  of  firms 
relative to the replacement cost of capital, affecting investment. Moreover, a change 
in  the  prices  of  securities  entails  a  change  in  wealth  which  can  affect  the 
consumption of households. 
Fourth,  a  policy-induced  change  in  the  domestic  interest  rate  also  affects  the 
exchange rate that in turn affects the foreign financial flows, net exports and thus 
aggregate  demand.  The  strength  of  the  exchange  rate  channel  depends  on  the 
responsiveness of the exchange rate to monetary shocks, the degree of openness 
of  the  economy,  sensitivity  of  foreign  private  inflows  and  net  exports  to  exchange 
rate variations, and the net worth of firms and thus their borrowing capacity if they 
have taken exposure to foreign currency. Moreover, exchange rate changes lead to 
changes  in  the  domestic  price  of  imported  consumption  goods  and  imported 
production inputs affecting inflation directly.  
Since expectations influence the inflation dynamics, there is a fifth channel that is 
based on the economic agents’ expectations of the future prospects of the economy 
and likely stance of the monetary policy. According to this “expectations channel”, 
most  economic  variables  are  determined  in  a  forward-looking  manner  and  are 
affected by the expected monetary policy actions. Thus, a consistent, credible, and 
transparent monetary policy can potentially affect the likely path of the economy by 
simply affecting expectations. 
    Monetary policy framework in Pakistan 
D. 
Considering the economic and financial market structure in Pakistan, SBP has for sometime 
pursued a monetary targeting regime with broad money supply (M2) as a nominal anchor to 
achieve the objective of controlling inflation without any prejudice to growth. The process of 
monetary policy formulation usually begins at the start of the fiscal year when SBP sets a 
target of M2 growth in line with government’s targets of inflation and growth (usually in the 
month  of  May)  and  an estimation  of  money  demand  in  the  economy.  The  basic  idea  is  to 
keep the money supply close to its estimated demand level, as both a significant excess and 
a shortfall may lead to considerable deviations in actual outcomes of inflation and real GDP 
BIS Review 163/2008 
 3
growth from their respective targets. Underlying this framework are two strong assumptions: 
first,  there  is  a  strong  and  reliable  relationship  between  the  goal  variable  (inflation  or  real 
GDP) and M2; and second, the SBP can control growth in M2.  
While containing the M2 growth close to its target level is the key consideration in the current 
monetary framework, the composition of the money supply does matter and at times requires 
policy  actions  even  if  these  actions  lead  to  a  deviation  in  monetary  growth  from  its  target 
level.  To  understand  this  point,  it  is  necessary  to  know  the  major  components  of  money 
supply  and  their  relative  importance.  Net  foreign  Assets  (NFA)  and  Net  Domestic  Assets 
(NDA) of the banking system are the two major components of money supply. The NFA is 
the excess of foreign exchange inflows over outflows to the banking system, or in other terms 
it  is  a  reflection  of  underlying  trends  in  the  country’s  external  Balance  of  Payment  (BoP) 
position.  It  is  estimated  by  the  projected  values  of  all  major  external  transactions  such  as 
trade, workers’ remittances, debt servicing, foreign investment, and debt flows etc. The NDA 
of the banking system, which primarily consists of credit to the government and the private 
sector, reflects changes in the fiscal and the real sectors of the economy. It is estimated as a 
residual of M2 and the NFA. Further breakup of NDA is estimated on the basis of projected 
credit needs of the government and the private sector.  
Now coming to the importance of these components of the money supply, depletion in NFA 
is  generally  considered  as  an  unhealthy  development.  Sharp  NFA  depletion  reflects 
worsening  BOP  position  and  a  pressure  on  exchange  rate.  In  such  a case,  a  higher  NDA 
growth,  though  helps  in  expanding  M2  to  reach  its  target  level,  may  further  deteriorate 
external accounts, sharper depreciation of local currency, and higher depletion of country’s 
foreign  exchange  reserves.  Although  since  FY07,  only  the  indicative  M2  growth  target  is 
being  announced,  SBP  also  takes  into  consideration  the  causative  factors  for  monetary 
expansion while pursing this target. 
Considering the changes in monetary aggregates and other economic variables, the changes 
in monetary policy are signaled through adjustments in the policy discount rate (3-day repo 
rate).  Further,  the  changes  in  the  policy  rate  are  complemented  by  appropriate  liquidity 
management mainly through Open Market Operations (OMOs) and if required changes in the 
Cash Reserve Requirement (CRR) and Statutory Liquid Reserve requirement (SLR) are also 
made.  
Effectiveness of monetary policy in Pakistan 
E. 
Significance of various channels that transmit the monetary policy shocks in Pakistan to the 
real economy has been analyzed by few economists. Ahmad et al. (2005) found that credit 
channel  is  the  most  important  conduit  for  transmitting  monetary  policy  actions  to  the  real 
economic  activity.  Evidence  confirms  transmission  through  the  active  asset  price  channel 
and  exchange  rate  channel.  According  to  this  study,  monetary  policy  shocks  impact  real 
output  after  a  lag  of  7  to  11  months.  Tasneem  and  Waheed  (2006),  on  the  other  hand, 
investigated  whether  different  sectors  of  the  economy  respond  differently  to  monetary 
shocks. The presence of sector wise differences in the monetary transmission mechanism 
has profound implications for macroeconomic management as the central bank then has to 
weigh  the  varying  consequences  of  its  actions  on  different  sectors.  Investigating  the 
transmission of changes in interest rate to seven sub sectors of the economy, the authors 
found  evidence  supporting  sector-specific  variation  in  the  real  effects  of  monetary  policy. 
They  found  that  the  interest  rate  shock  on  manufacturing,  wholesale  and  retail  trade,  and 
finance  and  insurance  sectors  transmit  after  a  lag  of  6  to  12  months.  On  the  other  hand, 
monetary  policy  shocks  have  negligible  impact  on  agriculture,  mining  and  quarrying, 
construction and ownership of dwelling sectors.  
Generally, historical evidence does reflect that Pakistan has been a high inflation and high 
interest  economy  given  its  inherent  structural  weaknesses.  The  role  and  effectiveness  of 
monetary  policy  appears  more  visible  in  the  2000s  when  financial  sector  reforms  started 
4 
 BIS Review 163/2008
bearing  fruits  in  terms  of  a  more  market  based  money  and  foreign  exchange  markets. 
Entering the 21st century, the loose monetary policy stance in the face of low inflation, low 
growth  and  low  twin  deficits,  along  with  structural  measures  to  open  up  the  economy  and 
alleviate some first round constraints, triggered the economy on a long term growth trajectory 
of above 7 percent. 
Monetary policy stance was however altered as the inflationary pressures started to build up 
in  2005.  At  the  end  of  the  fiscal  year,  the  economy,  which  had  been  showing  sustained 
steady growth since FY01, registered a historically high level of growth (9 percent), average 
inflation  rose  sharply  (9.3  percent)  and  the  external  current  account  balance  turned  into 
deficit (-1.4 percent of GDP). Coinciding with these developments, the fiscal module started 
to show signs of stress as the fiscal balance was converted into a deficit and the stock of 
external  debt  and  liabilities,  which  had  been  declining  since  FY00  after  the  Paris  Club 
rescheduling,  began  increasing.  These  indicators  largely  capture  the  high  and  growing 
aggregate demand in the economy on account of sustained increase in peoples’ income.  
With the emerging domestic and global price pressures, SBP tightened its monetary policy 
after a prolonged gap of a few  years. The efforts to rein-in inflation, however, proved less 
effective  due  to  a  rebound  in  international  commodity  prices  and  a  rise  in  domestic  food 
prices later on. The rise in the international commodity prices, particularly oil, exacerbated 
the fight against inflation. The international oil prices (Arabian Light) rose from US$27.1 at 
end 2004 to US$50.9 at end 2006, whereas international food prices rose by 24, 24 and 21 
percent during 2004, 2005 and 2006 respectively.2  
Realizing  the  complications  of  monetary  management  and  adverse  global  and  domestic 
economic  developments,  the  implementation  of  SBP  monetary  policy  during  FY06  varied 
significantly  from  the  preceding  fiscal  years.  In  addition  to  the  rise  in  the  policy  rate,  the 
central bank focused on the short-end of the yield curve, draining excess liquidity from the 
inter-bank money market and pushing up short-tenor rates. Consequently, not only did the 
overnight rates remain close to the discount rate through most of the year, the volatility in 
these rates also declined.  
These  tight  monetary  conditions  along  with  the  Government’s  administrative  measures  to 
control food inflation helped in scaling down average inflation from 9.3 percent in FY05 to 7.9 
percent  in  FY06,  within  the  8.0  percent  annual  target.  This  was  certainly  an  encouraging 
development, particularly as it was achieved without affecting economic growth as the real 
GDP growth remained strong at 6.6 percent in FY06. 
Monetary policy tightening was strengthened further. For FY07, the government set an 
inflation  target  of  6.5  percent.  To  achieve  this,  a  further  moderation  in  aggregate  demand 
during FY07 was required as the core inflation witnessed a relatively smaller decline in FY06, 
indicating  that  demand-side  inflationary  pressures  were  strong.  In  this  perspective,  SBP 
further tightened its monetary policy in July 2006 raising the CRR and SLR for the scheduled 
banks;  and  its  policy  rate  by  50  basis  points  (bps)  to  9.5  percent.  Moreover,  proactive 
liquidity management helped in transmitting the monetary tightening signals to key interest 
rates in the economy. For instance, the Karachi Inter Bank Offer Rate (KIBOR) of 6 month 
tenor increased from 9.6 percent in June 2006 to 10.02 percent at end-June 2007 and the 
banks’ weighted average lending and deposits rates (on outstanding amount) increased by 
0.93 percentage points and 1.1 percentage points, respectively, during FY07. 
In retrospect, it appears evident that monetary tightening in FY07 did not put any adverse 
impact on economic growth, as not only was the real GDP growth target of 7.0 percent for 
FY07  was  met,  the  growth  was  quite  broad  based.  At  the  same  time,  the  impact  of  the 
monetary tightening was most evident in the continued deceleration in core inflation during 
                                                 
2   Changes in annual average food price index; source: IMF commodity price data. 
BIS Review 163/2008 
 5
FY07. One measure of core inflation, the non-food non-energy CPI, continued its downtrend 
from YoY high of 7.8 percent in October 2005, to 6.3 percent at end-FY06, and to 5.1 percent 
by the end of FY07. However, much of the gains from the tight monetary policy on overall 
CPI inflation were offset by the unexpected rise in food inflation.  
On  the  downside,  however,  broad  money  supply  (M2)  grew  by  19.3  percent  during  FY07, 
exceeding  the  annual  target  by  5.8  percentage  points.  Slippages  in  money  supply  growth 
largely  stemmed  from  an  expansion  in  NFA  due  to  the  higher  than  expected  foreign 
exchange inflows.  
Equally stressful was the impact of Government borrowings from the central bank during the 
course of the year. The pressure from the fiscal account was due to mismatch in its external 
budgetary  inflows  and  expenditures.  With  the  privatization  inflows  and  the  receipts  from  a 
sovereign  debt  offering  at  end-FY07,  the  Government  managed  to  end  the  year  with 
retirement  of  central  bank  borrowings,  on  the  margin.  By  end-FY07,  SBP  holdings  of 
government papers were still around Rs 452 billion, despite a net retirement of Rs 56.0 billion 
during  the  year.  Another  major  aberration  in  FY07  emanated  from  the  high  level  of  SBP 
refinancing extended, for both working capital and long-term investment, to exporters. Aside 
from monetary management complexities, these schemes have been distorting the incentive 
structure in the economy. 
FY08 and beginning of FY09 was even more challenging 
FY08  was  an  exceptionally  difficult  year.  The  domestic  macroeconomic  and  political 
vulnerabilities  coupled  with  a  very  challenging  global  environment  caused  slippages  in 
macroeconomic targets by a wide margin.  
After a relatively long period of macroeconomic stability and prosperity, the global economy 
faced  multifarious  challenges:  (i)  hit  by  the  sub  prime  mortgage  crisis  in  U.S  in  2007,  the 
international  financial  markets  had  been  in  turmoil,  the  impact  of  which  was  felt  across 
markets and continents; (ii) rising global commodity prices, with crude oil and food staples 
prices  skyrocketing;  and  (iii)  a  gradual  slide  in  the  U.S  dollar  against  major  currencies. 
Combination of these events induced a degree of recessionary tendencies and inflationary 
pressures across developed and developing countries. Policy-makers were gripped with the 
dual  challenge  of  slowdown  in  growth  and  unprecedented  rising  inflationary  pressures. 
Central bankers faced a demanding task of weighing the trade-off between growth and price 
stability. With the exception of few developed countries, most central banks showed a strong 
bias  towards  addressing  the  risk  of  inflation  and  responded  with  tightening  of  monetary 
policies. 
On  the  domestic  front,  the  external  current  account  deficit  and  fiscal  deficit  widened 
considerably  to  unsustainable  level  (8.4  and  7.4  percent  of  GDP).  The  subsidy  payments 
worth  Rs  407  billion  by  Government,  which  account  for  almost  half  of  the  fiscal  deficit, 
shielded  domestic  consumers  from  high  international  POL  and  commodity  prices  and 
distorted the natural demand adjustment mechanism. While the government passed on price 
increase to consumers, the rising international oil and other importable prices continued to 
take a toll on the economy.  
Rising demand has cost the country dearly in terms of foreign exchange spent on importing 
large volumes of these commodities. Rising fiscal deficit and lower than required financing 
flows  resulted  in  exceptional  recourse  of  the  Government  to  the  highly  inflationary  central 
bank borrowing for financing deficit. At the same time the surge in imports persisted.  
As a result, inflation accelerated and its expectations strengthened due to pass through of 
international  oil  prices  to  the  domestic  market,  increases  in  the  electricity  tariff  and  the 
general sales tax, and rising exchange rate depreciation. These developments resulted in a 
further rise in headline as well as core inflation (20 percent weighted trimmed measure) to 25 
percent  and  21.7  percent  respectively 
the  size  of 
in  October  2008.  Considering 
6 
 BIS Review 163/2008
macroeconomic  imbalances  and  the  emerging  inflationary  pressures,  SBP  remained 
committed to achieve price stability over the medium term and thus had to launch steeper 
monetary tightening to tame the demand pressures and restore macroeconomic stability in 
FY09. SBP thus increased the policy rate from 13.5 to 15 percent.  
What needs to be done to improve the effectiveness of monetary policy? 
F. 
Apart from taking policy measures to address the emerging challenges, SBP also introduced 
structural changes in the process of monetary  policy formulation and conduct to make the 
monetary  policy  formulation  and  implementation  more  transparent,  efficient,  and  effective. 
Specifically, during the last couple of years, SBP focused on  
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
the 
However, 
management. 
1. 
Institutionalizing the process of policy formulation and conduct,  
Stepping up movement towards a more market based credit allocation mechanism,  
Developing its analytical and operational capacity,  
Improving its capabilities to assess future developments to act proactively, and  
Improving upon the communication of policy stance to the general public.  
following  areas  need  attention  and  are  key 
for  effective  monetary 
Effectiveness of monetary and fiscal coordination would be helpful. Section 9A and 
9B  of  the  SBP  Act  (amended  in  1994)  articulates  the  institutional  mechanism  for 
economic policy making and coordination and defines the ground rules for both the 
process  and  the  policy  making.  However,  the  track  record  of  the  Monetary  and 
Fiscal  Policies  Coordination  Board  (MFPCB),  established  in  February  1994  that 
requires  quarterly  meetings  of  the  SBP  and  the  government,  has  been  less  than 
satisfactory.  Furthermore,  the  sequencing  of  economy-wide  projections  is  done  in 
isolation of the budget and monetary policy making process, and the budget making 
process  has  not  respected  the  monetary  compulsions.  With  rising  spending  and 
stagnating revenues, the budget assumes at the start of the year certain recourse to 
the central bank rather than treat it as mere ways and means advances. 
For  effective  analysis  of  developments  and  policy  making,  timely  and  quality 
information  is  extremely  important.  However,  due  to  weaknesses  in  the  data 
collection  and  reporting  mechanism  of  the  various  agencies  of  the  country, 
information  is  not  available  with  desired  frequency  and  timeliness.  Also  there  are 
concerns over the quality of data. Unlike many developed and developing countries, 
data  on  quarterly  GDP,  employment  and  wages,  etc.  is  not  available  in  case  of 
Pakistan. Moreover, the data on key macroeconomic variables (such as government 
expenditure and revenue, output of large-scale manufacturing, crop estimates, etc.) 
is usually available with substantial lags. This constrains an in-depth analysis of the 
current economic situation and evolving trends, and hinders the ability of the SBP to 
develop a forward-looking policy stance. 
Unlike many countries, both developed and developing, there is no prescribed limit 
on  government  borrowing  from  SBP  defined  in  the  SBP  Act  or  the  Fiscal 
Responsibility  and  Debt  Limitation  (FRDL)  Act  2005.  Besides  being  highly 
inflationary,  government  borrowing 
liquidity 
management. Borrowing from the central bank injects liquidity in the system through 
increased currency in circulation and deposits of the government with the banks. In 
both cases, the impact of tight monetary stance is diluted as this automatic creation 
of  money  increases  money  supply  without  any  prior  notice.  Moreover,  access  to 
potentially  unlimited  borrowings  from  the  SBP  provides  little  incentives  to  the 
government  to  put  the  fiscal  accounts  in  order.  Therefore,  the  foremost  task  to 
from  SBP  also  complicates 
2. 
3. 
BIS Review 163/2008 
 7
4. 
5. 
improve  the  effectiveness  of  monetary  policy  is  to  prohibit  the  practice  of 
government  borrowings  from  the  SBP.  In  this  regard,  appropriate  provisions  are 
required  to  cease  or  limit  government  recourse  to  central  bank  financing  through 
amendments in the SBP Act and the FRDL Act 2005.  
Another  issue  is  to  make  a  clear  distinction  between  exchange  rate  management 
and monetary management. Currently, there is a general perception that the State 
Bank  is  bound  to  keep  the  exchange  rate  at  some  predefined  level  and  any 
movement  away  from  this  level  is  then  considered  as  an  inefficiency  of  the  SBP. 
There is a need to understand that for an open economy, it is impossible to pursue 
an  independent  monetary  and  exchange  rate  policy  as  well  as  allowing  capital  to 
move freely across the border. Since the SBP endeavors to achieve price stability 
through achieving monetary targets by changes in the policy rate, it is not possible 
to maintain exchange rates at some level with free capital mobility. This can only be 
achieved  by  putting  complete  restrictions  on  capital  movements,  which  is  not 
possible. SBPs responsibility is to ensure an environment where foreign exchange 
flows are driven by economic fundamental and are not mis-guided by rent seeking 
speculation. 
Finally,  based  on  experience  particularly  gained  during  the  last  two  months  is  to 
differentiate  between  liquidity  management  and  monetary  policy  stance.  Recently, 
when the banking system experienced extraordinary stress due to shallow liquidity 
in  the  system,  rumor  mongering  heightened  the  general  public  anxiety  over  few 
banks’  sustainability.  Consequently,  the  SBP  had  to  intervene  in  the  market  by 
injecting ample liquidity through various measures. In some quarters, these changes 
were deemed as a change in the Bank’s tight monetary policy stance. However, this 
was not the case and the Bank had to clearly and repeatedly communicate that the 
existing stance is being continued. Later on, the Bank further tightened its monetary 
policy.  It  must  be  understood  that  quite  often,  liquidity  management  can  drive  the 
market  interest  rates  away  from  the  direction  desired  under  the  monetary  policy 
stance. However, this has to be temporary and the interest rates are bound to move 
in  the  policy  stance  direction.  To  resolve  this  issue,  the  SBP  is  studying  various 
options, including the introduction of a “Standing Deposit Facility” to keep the inter-
bank rate within a corridor. 
In conclusion, it is imperative that above steps be taken urgently. Over the period, however, 
this  needs  to  be  complemented  with  much  deeper  structural  reforms  to  synchronize  and 
reform the medium term planning for the budget and monetary policy formulation process. 
Several studies and technical assistance have provided extensive guidance in this area, but 
the lack of capacities and short term compulsions have often withheld such reforms. What is 
important is to recognize that a medium term development strategy, independently worked 
out, would help minimize one agency interest which has often been a source of coordination 
difficulties.  It  would  also  help  the  budget  making  process  more  rule  based  than  the 
incrementally driven process to satisfy conflicting demands.  
Reference: 
Ahmed N., H Shah, A. I. Agha, Y. A. Mubarik (2005), “Transmission Mechanism of Monetary 
Policy in Pakistan,” SBP Working Paper Series No. 09, State Bank of Pakistan. 
Tasneem, A. and Waheed, M. (2006), “Sectoral Effects of Monetary Policy: Evidence from 
Pakistan.” Pakistan Development Review, Volume 45, No. 4, Part II winter.  
Khan, Mohsin S. and S. A. Senhadji (2001), “Threshold Effects in the Relationship between 
Inflation and Growth”, IMF Staff Papers, Vol. 48 (1) pp. 1-21.  
Rogoff, Kenneth (1985), “The Optimal Degree of Commitment to an Intermediate Monetary 
Target”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 100, No.4, pp. 1169-1189.  
8 
 BIS Review 163/2008
