Hamad Al-Sayari: Recent economic and financial developments in Saudi 
Arabia 
Speech  by  His  Excellency  Hamad  Al-Sayari,  Governor  of  the  Saudi  Arabian  Monetary 
Agency, to the Custodian of the Two Holy Mosques on the occasion of presenting the 44th 
Annual Report of the Saudi Arabian Monetary Agency, Riyadh, 11 October 2008. 
 It is a great pleasure for me to present to you the 44th Annual Report of the Saudi Arabian 
Monetary  Agency  which  reviews  the  latest  economic  and  financial  developments  in  the 
Kingdom. 
Custodian of the Two Holy Mosques, 
During 2007, the national economy continued its strong growth for the fifth consecutive year, 
with real GDP increasing by 3.4 percent. The roles of the private and the government sectors 
in the development process were enhanced, recording growth rates of 5.8 percent and 2.7 
percent respectively. 
The State budget witnessed remarkable improvement in 2007, resulting in a surplus for the 
fifth  consecutive  year  amounting  to  12.3  percent  of  GDP.  The  balance  of  payments 
registered a surplus for the ninth consecutive year which stood at 24.9 percent of GDP. The 
monetary  and  banking  sector  also  contributed  effectively  to  the  economy  by  providing 
adequate liquidity to finance growing and accelerated activities. Financial institutions played 
a  significant  role  in  the  growth  of  the  economy  by  providing  various  modern  financial 
services. 
Custodian of the Two Holy Mosques, 
With the establishment of the Supreme Economic Council (SEC) under your wise leadership, 
the Saudi economy has witnessed a dramatic transformation. The Council has taken a broad 
range  of  decisions  and  measures  aimed  at  restructuring  and  regulating  the  economy  and 
streamlining regulations and legislation which would help to upgrade the level of efficiency 
and competitiveness of the economy and support optimum operation of production factors. 
The objective has been to provide an advanced regulatory and administrative framework and 
an environment attractive to domestic and foreign investments. Since the establishment of 
the Council, more than 60 major restructuring reform decisions have been taken in addition 
to  more  than  130  decisions  for  regulatory,  procedural  and  administrative  development. 
Fortunately, these developments have been accompanied by remarkable improvement in the 
State  budget  and  in  the  world  oil  markets.  Consequently,  economic  performance  has 
obviously improved in recent years. An indicator of this improvement is the private sector’s 
average annual real growth rate of 5.0 percent and the rise in other non-oil exports by an 
average annual rate of 23.1 percent to 7.3 percent of GDP at the end of 2007. As a result of 
these reforms, the Kingdom has gained a high sovereign rating for its financial solvency and 
also won the United Nations Public Service Award for the year 2008 for developing SADAD 
(Bill  Presentment  and  Payment  System).  Moreover,  the  Kingdom  ranked  sixteenth  among 
181  countries  worldwide  in  terms  of  competition  in  business  and  investment  performance 
environment  according  to  Doing  Business  2009  Report  published  recently  by  IFC  and  the 
World  Bank.  Given  the  economy’s  current  position  and  its  performance  indicators,  it  is 
expected to continue its strong and comprehensive growth in the coming years. 
Custodian of the Two Holy Mosques, 
Inflation, which many countries suffer from, is a global phenomenon and it is also a natural 
and  inevitable  result  of  strong  economic  growth.  In  the  Kingdom,  inflation  growth  rates 
accelerated to 4.1 percent in 2007 and to 11.1 percent in July 2008, but then, it decreased to 
10.9  percent  in  August  2008.  This  has  posed  a  difficult  challenge  due  to  the  contradiction 
BIS Review 124/2008 
 1
between measures that control inflation, i.e. strict tightening of domestic liquidity and public 
spending, and the ambitious goals of enhancing economic growth fundamentals that require 
expansionary  fiscal  policies  to  build  and  complete  the  various  development  projects  and 
improve  citizens’  standard  of  living.  After  having  witnessed  low  levels  of  inflation, 
accompanied  by  moderate  and  sometimes  low  economic  growth  in  the  past  decades,  the 
economy began to grow strongly in response to restructuring reform policies adopted by your 
wise government since about seven years. 
Inflationary  signs  have  not  shown  up  until  2006  when  the  demand  side  for  goods  and 
services began to exceed supply, impacting prices. The wave of high prices worldwide along 
with  high  expectations  of  individuals  and  institutions  have  played  a  role  in  increasing 
pressures on available resources and, consequently, higher inflation especially following the 
considerable  improvement  in  the  government  income.  The  phenomenon  of  inflation  has 
become at the top of your concerns. Accordingly, you have instructed the various appropriate 
authorities and bodies to combat it and reduce its effects on the society, while maintaining 
the  momentum  of  development  achievements.  The  package  of  the  various  procedures, 
introduced by the government at the beginning of this year, is an appropriate preliminary step 
aimed at addressing inflation sources that directly affect the society segments who are less 
able  to  bear  its  impacts.  As  for  the  monetary  policy,  the  Saudi  Arabian  Monetary  Agency 
(SAMA) has taken steps to control excess domestic liquidity by increasing rates of reserve 
requirements many times. However, because of the dominance of the fiscal policy over the 
economy, the greater burden falls on reviewing spending priorities and its programming to be 
in  harmony  with  the  absorptive  capacity  of  the  national  economy  and  its  ambitious 
development  objectives.  It  is  hoped  that  these  procedures,  along  with  reviewing  the 
expansion in government spending, will achieve the targeted goals, and inflation will resume 
its pace and stabilize at appropriate levels in the near future. 
Custodian of the Two Holy Mosques, 
The world is experiencing a crisis that threatens economic growth and financial stability in 
several major countries of the world. This crisis has prompted authorities in these countries 
not only to take unusual measures to protect their financial stability but also to review their 
supervisory and control regulations of the financial system, while economic policies are being 
affected by competitive goals, namely, maintaining economic growth, controlling inflation and 
maintaining  financial  stability.  In  the  Kingdom,  the  conservative  policies  and  prudential 
measures  taken  by  SAMA,  to  ensure  the  strength  and  stability  of  the  national  financial 
system,  have  had  a  great  role  in  protecting  the  financial  system  from  being  affected  by 
shocks  that  it  may  face  due  to  domestic  or  international developments.  The  value  of  such 
measures may not be felt or appreciated unless the need arises. 
May Allah guide your steps to greater success. 
2 
 BIS Review 124/2008
