  Christopher Kent: Australian economic growth – the how, what and 
where 
Address  by  Mr  Christopher  Kent,  Assistant  Governor  (Economic)  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of 
Australia, to the National RSL Clubs Conference, Hobart, 11 March 2015. 
I thank Kathryn Davis, David Jacobs and James Wang for excellent assistance in preparing these remarks. 
Accompanying graphs and the table can be found at the end of the speech. 
 Introduction 
I’d like to thank the Board and members of the RSL & Services Clubs Association for their 
invitation to speak here. 
I want to consider three closely related questions I am often asked: 
1. 
2. 
How can the Australian economy become more productive? 
What  will  help  generate  additional  growth  (in  demand)  needed 
employment? 
Where is that growth going to come from? In particular, which industries will have 
the profitable opportunities that will lead to more employment and drive investment? 
It is hardly surprising that Australians are interested in these questions given the rise in the 
unemployment rate and sub-trend growth of the economy over the past couple of years. 
to  boost 
3. 
How to be more productive? 
From the middle of the previous decade, Australia enjoyed a sharp run-up in the prices of our 
key  commodity  exports.  This  led  to  an  unprecedented  boom  in  mining  investment.  The 
benefits were spread beyond the narrow confines of the mining industry in numerous ways, 
with  strong  growth  in  employment  and  wages  across  a  range  of  industries  around  the 
country.1 
But now that commodity prices and mining investment have turned down, it is natural to ask: 
how are we going to sustain and build on our standard of living over the longer term? This 
boils  down  to  two  essential  elements.  We  can  work  more  (i.e.  raise  our  labour  force 
participation). We can also work more efficiently. In other words, we can boost our (labour) 
productivity, which is the source of sustainable gains in wages and profits (in the absence of 
a  resurgence  in  commodity  prices).2  I’ve  spoken  elsewhere  about  participation,  so  let  me 
focus here on productivity.3 
There are a number of sources of growth in labour productivity (i.e. output per hour worked): 
technological  progress,  which  supports  new  business  processes  and  new 
• 
production techniques as well as more efficient use of productive resources. In other 
words, an expansion of the technological, or productive frontier 
                                                
1   See,  for  example,  Bishop J  and  V  Rayner  (2013),  “Industry  Dimensions  of  the  Resource  Boom:  “An  Input-
Output Analysis”, RBA Research Discussion Paper No 2013–02. 
2   While  I  have  couched  this  in  terms  of  labour  productivity,  that  in  turn  will  depend  on  both  multifactor 
productivity and capital deepening. 
3   Kent  C  (2014),  “Cyclical  and  Structural  Changes  in  the  Labour  Market”,  Address  on  Labour  Market 
Developments, hosted by The Wall Street Journal, Sydney, 16 June. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   additional physical capital, both private and public, some of which may embody new 
technologies 
more human capital (via education and training). 
• 
These  things  have  a  somewhat formulaic  air to them. They  suggest  that  we  just  need  the 
right combination of inputs so as to produce goods and services as efficiently as possible. 
But for that to lead to sustainable growth of incomes – of wages and profits – we need to 
make sure that the goods and services produced are those that people want at a price they 
are  willing  to  pay.  Also,  we  need  to  fund  investment  from  domestic  or  foreign  sources  of 
savings, which are provided with the expectation of a reasonable return. 
A market-based economy can achieve these things with the help of competitive and flexible 
labour  and  product  markets.4  These  provide  the  price  and  wage  signals  that  encourage 
labour  and  capital  to  move  into  profitable  opportunities  and  out  of  unprofitable  ones. 
Competitive  markets  also  encourage  companies  to  seek  out  efficiency  gains  and  pursue 
innovations.  Developing  new  products  or  processes  and  taking  advantage  of  scientific 
progress are key drivers of long-term growth. 
It helps too for those markets to be supported by a robust institutional framework, such as: 
the rule of law; effective regulation and oversight of parts of the economy, including to ensure 
the soundness of the financial system; and institutions to oversee the efficient provision of 
public  services  and  infrastructure,  and  encourage  prudent  management  of  fiscal  and 
monetary affairs. 
Productivity  growth  was  especially  strong  across  many  countries,  including  Australia,  over 
the  decade  starting  in  the  mid  1990s  (Graph  1).  There  may  have  been  some  common 
sources to this strong growth. An obvious candidate is technological progress.5 In the case of 
Australia,  and  a  number  of  other  countries,  a  range  of  earlier  economic  reforms  may  also 
have  played  a  role.  These  included  a  broad-based  deregulation  of  financial,  product  and 
labour markets, further liberalisation of international trade and a program of corporatisation 
and privatisation of public enterprises.6 While these things don’t push out the technological 
frontier, they provide an environment that encourages and enables us to get closer to that 
frontier. 
Following  this  period, there  was  time from  the mid  2000s  during  which  productivity  growth 
was considerably slower than its longer-term average. This slowdown was also common to a 
number of economies.7 
However, productivity growth has picked up in Australia over more recent years. Some of this 
reflects the move from the investment to the production phase of the mining boom, which has 
seen  a  strong  rise  in  output  combined  with  a  reduction  in  employment  in  resource-related 
activity. But the pick-up in productivity growth is broadly based across other sectors of the 
economy.  This  may,  in  part,  reflect  the  response  of  businesses  to  rising  competitive 
pressures following the period when the exchange rate had risen to very high levels, growth 
                                                
4   For cross-country evidence on the links between reforms to product and labour markets and productivity, see 
Kent  C  and  J  Simon  (2007),  “Productivity  Growth:  The  Effect  of  Market  Regulations”,  RBA  Research 
Discussion Paper No 2007–04. 
5   See Gruen D (2001), “Australia’s Strong Productivity Growth: Will it be Sustained?”, Address to CEDA/Telstra 
Economic  and  Political  Overview,  Sydney,  2  February;  Connolly  E  and  L  Gustafsson  (2013),  “Australian 
Productivity Growth: Trends and Determinants”, Australian Economic Review, 46(4), pp 473–482; and D’Arcy 
P and L Gustafsson (2012), “Australia’s Productivity Performance and Real Incomes”, RBA Bulletin, June, pp 
23–35. 
6   Gruen D and S Shrestha (eds) (2000), The Australian Economy in the 1990s, Proceedings of a Conference, 
Reserve Bank of Australia, Sydney. 
7   Connolly E and L Gustafsson (2013) and D’Arcy P and L Gustafsson (2012). 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  of  non-mining  activity  had  been  relatively  weak  and  wage  growth  relatively  strong. 
Responding  to  those  pressures  is  not  easy.  A  common  theme  from  the  Bank’s  liaison 
program  in  recent  years  has  been  the  heightened  focus  on  reducing  costs  and  improving 
productivity in response to the subdued growth in demand. In more extreme cases, however, 
it involves businesses that are not sufficiently productive going out of business and workers 
losing their jobs. 
What more could be done to secure strong productivity growth? As others have noted before 
me, the experts at the Productivity Commission have put together a “list” of what could be 
done.8  The  list  describes  how  improvements  to  incentives,  capabilities  and  flexibility  could 
enhance productivity. Again, the idea is not that these things can push out the technological 
frontier, but they can help us get closer to it. Recommendations to improve incentives largely 
focus  on  promoting  competition,  such  as  further  reducing  barriers  that  inhibit  international 
trade or new entrants to markets. Policies on capabilities focus on the development of human 
capital,  improving  infrastructure  and  government  services  as  well  as  the  institutions  for 
creating and transmitting knowledge (academic institutions and their links with the business 
community,  for  instance).  The  third  part  of  the  list  deals  with  providing  a  more  flexible 
regulatory environment and reducing unnecessary “red tape”. Any one policy will be helpful 
by itself, but it is likely that the combined effect will be greater than the sum of each of the 
parts. 
This  discussion  has  focused  on  how  economies  can  support growth  over  the  longer  term. 
You  will  note,  however,  that  I  haven’t  said  much  about  the  role  of  monetary  policy. While 
monetary  policy  can  help 
to 
macroeconomic  stability,  it  cannot  influence  the  longer-term  determinants  of  growth.  Even 
so, monetary policy has an important role in influencing economic activity over the course of 
the business cycle, which is the subject of the next question. 
inflation,  and  contribute 
low  and  stable 
to  ensure 
What will help generate additional growth in demand over the next couple of years? 
Since  about  mid  2012,  Australia’s  GDP  growth  has  been  a  bit  below  trend  and  so  the 
unemployment rate has been rising gradually (Graph 2).9 
The  Bank’s  recent  update  to  its  forecasts  has  pushed  out  the  time  at  which  we  see  GDP 
growth  picking  up  from  its  current  sub-trend  pace.  It  is  not  that  economic  growth  has 
weakened of late. But there is little to suggest that it will increase in the near term. 
This implies that the unemployment rate will rise for a bit longer and peak a bit higher than 
previously expected. The question then is what is it that will generate an improvement in the 
rate of economic growth and lead to a decline in unemployment? What are the triggers for 
such a revival? 
Part of the answer is that the very low level of interest rates is expected to sustain strong 
activity in the housing market and support household wealth. This will provide some support 
for consumption, although the response of consumption to low rates may be somewhat less 
and work in different ways from previous episodes, in part because of the higher levels of 
                                                
8   For more detail, see Banks G (2012), “Productivity Policies: The “To Do” List”, Economic and Social Outlook 
Conference, “Securing the Future”, Melbourne, 1 November. 
9   The  decline  in  the  unemployment  rate  following  the  run-up  in  the  midst  of  the  global  financial  crisis  is 
interesting  given  that  average  GDP  growth  over  that  period  was  not  especially  strong  (at  2¾  per  cent  per 
annum).  The  decline  in  the  unemployment  rate  may,  in  part,  reflect  an  unwinding  of  the  earlier  rise  in 
unemployment, which was relatively large compared with the early 2000s slowdown (for which average GDP 
growth  was  similar).  It  may have  been  that  businesses  anticipated  a more  significant  slowdown  in  demand 
during  the  global  financial  crisis  than  occurred,  leading  the  unemployment  rate  to  “overshoot”,  with  a 
correction thereafter. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  
 
household indebtedness now.10 Low interest rates also work by raising overall cash flows for 
the  household  sector  (since  households  are  borrowers  in  net  terms)  and  by  encouraging 
households to bring forward some spending and lower their saving rate a little further. 
Looking back over the past year we can see the effect of low interest rates at work. Dwelling 
investment  has  grown  strongly  and  made  a  contribution  to  demand  across  all  the  states 
(Graph 3). Consumption growth has picked up a bit, particularly in New South Wales, but it 
remains a bit below average for the nation as a whole. Consumption growth is weakest in 
Queensland and Western Australia, which are dealing with the direct effect of the decline in 
mining  investment.  Business  investment  is  making  a  positive  contribution  to  growth  in  the 
other  states.  Meanwhile,  in  line  with  fiscal  consolidation  at  state  and  federal  levels,  public 
demand has made no contribution to growth for the country as a whole, but the contribution 
is mixed across the different states. 
In  time,  a  pick-up  in  household  demand  should  encourage  businesses  (outside  of  the 
resources  sector)  to  increase  employment  and  undertake  more  investment.  When  that 
occurs, businesses will  make more use of funding that is currently readily available at  low 
cost. Also, exports, especially of resources – most notably liquefied natural gas (LNG) – are 
expected to continue to contribute significantly to growth, while declining mining investment 
and, to a lesser extent, fiscal consolidation are likely to weigh on growth over the next couple 
of years. 
It’s tempting to think that economies are well served by being directed or guided in a way that 
will produce better outcomes. There is some truth to that. Monetary policy is certainly playing 
an important role, but it guides things rather imprecisely, with the relatively blunt tool of the 
overnight cash rate. 
Other means of adjustment 
Economies  are  responsive  in  many  other  ways  that  don’t  require  the  active  input  of 
policymakers.  The  so-called  “invisible  hand”  of  markets  can  provide  the  incentives  for 
producers and consumers to alter their behaviours via a range of price signals. 
The  exchange  rate  provides  one  such  signal.  The  earlier  substantial  appreciation  of  the 
Australian dollar in response to very high prices for our commodity exports was a signal for 
labour and capital to move into the resources sector.11 But, for a time, the Australian dollar 
stayed high even after mining investment and commodity prices began to turn down. That 
meant  that  it  was  not  playing  the  usual  role  of  helping  to  rebalance  growth  towards  other 
parts of the economy. 
However, the Australian dollar has depreciated by nearly 20 per cent (on a trade-weighted 
basis)  since  its  peak  in  mid  2013  and  is  starting  to  play  a  role  in  helping  the  economy  to 
adjust. Australians and foreigners will direct more of their spending to Australian produced 
goods  and  services  (such  as  tourism  and  education)  as  they  become  relatively  cheaper 
compared with the alternatives available offshore. Along the same lines, the depreciation has 
lowered the level of Australian wages when measured in foreign currency terms; since April 
2013, they are 30 per cent lower in US dollar terms. 
While the depreciation seen to date will be helpful, our assessment is that our exchange rate 
remains relatively high given the state of our overall economy. 
                                                
10   Lowe P (2015), “Low Inflation in a World of Monetary Stimulus”, Address to the Goldman Sachs Annual Global 
Macro Economic Conference, Sydney, 5 March. 
11   Plumb M, C Kent and J Bishop (2013), “Implications for the Australian Economy of Strong Growth in Asia”, 
RBA Research Discussion Paper No 2013–03. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  A change in the growth of wages (in Australian dollar terms) is also an important source of 
adjustment. Just as wage growth picked up when conditions in the economy were stronger, 
the growth rate of wages has declined substantially since 2012 (Graph 4). The lower growth 
of wages works to depress the growth of incomes for those in employment. At the same time, 
however, lower wage growth allows for more employment than would otherwise be the case, 
which works to support the growth of total labour incomes. In a similar vein, the pick-up in 
productivity growth over recent years means that the cost of obtaining the labour required to 
produce a unit of output (the unit labour cost) has not changed for three years. 
In summary, the economy is currently operating somewhat below its productive capacity. The 
forecast is for a gradual increase in the growth of demand and employment, and eventually a 
rise in non-mining business investment, supported by the very low level of interest rates. The 
lower exchange rate will offer some support to demand for Australian produced goods and 
services.  Adjustments  are  also  occurring  along  other  dimensions,  such  as  gains  in 
productivity  and  slower  growth  of  wages,  both  of  which  will  help  place  the  economy  on  a 
stronger footing. 
So  that  is  what  I think  can  help,  in  time,  to  generate  some  more growth.  It  is  based  on  a 
macroeconomic perspective, and draws on knowledge of the history of business cycles. It’s 
only natural though to want more tangible evidence regarding the prospects for growth. That 
is, where is the growth going to come from more specifically? 
Where is the growth going to come from? 
In  some  ways  this  is  the  hardest  of  the  three  questions.  It  is  difficult  to  know  what  new 
products  and  companies  will  come  along,  and  which  products  and  companies  they  might 
displace. And while no doubt there will be further technological progress and innovation, it is 
hard to predict how this will affect specific industries, especially for those not yet in existence! 
Nevertheless, we can say a few things about the general forces and trends that are likely to 
be with us for a time. 
One  such  trend  is  the  increasing  importance  of  household  and  business  services  in  the 
economy. Over the past 30 years, households have increased the share of their spending 
devoted to services, from about 53 to 65 per cent of their total consumption (Table 1). Health 
and education account for a large part of that. Households are also spending a larger share 
of their growing incomes on recreation and leisure services, as well as communication and 
financial  services.  The  shift  in  spending  away  from  goods  reflects,  in  part,  the  fall  in  the 
relative prices of goods. In turn, that reflects stronger productivity growth for goods relative to 
services  as  well  as  the  development  of  lower-cost  manufacturers  in  emerging  economies. 
That  is,  the  world  has  become  much  better  at  producing  goods.  Mirroring  these  trends  in 
consumption and production, the share of employment in household services has increased 
from 25 to 33 per cent over the past 30 years. This includes employment in accommodation 
and food, arts and recreation, education and training, and health care and social assistance. 
These are all things we want and need more of as our appetites for goods becomes more 
easily satisfied. 
Business services have increased substantially as a share of output and employment. In part 
this is because it has become increasingly cost-effective for businesses to outsource a lot of 
their “non-core” functions to other more specialised industries. For example, accountants that 
used to work for a manufacturing firm may now be in the “business services industry” helping 
out a wide range of different companies. 
Resource  production  and  exports  are  likely  to  continue  to  grow  strongly  for  the  next  few 
years as the new LNG facilities ramp-up production. While many people across a wide range 
of industries helped to build those facilities, a much smaller workforce is required once they 
enter into production. Mining more generally is likely to continue to account for a relatively 
small share of total employment. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  Manufacturing output has increased over the past few decades as a whole, but not as much 
as output from other industries. This is common to most developed economies, reflecting the 
increased demand for services and the emergence of lower-cost manufacturers in emerging 
economies. The high level of the Australian dollar has also weighed on manufacturing over 
recent  years.12  Those  manufacturers  with  more  exposure  to  the  construction  industry 
(including in mining) and focused on more complex, highly skilled techniques have tended to 
fare  better  than  those  exposed  more  to  the  pressures  of  international  competition  from 
emerging markets. 
The  depreciation  of  the  Australian  dollar  over  the  past  year  or  so  is  expected  to  support 
expansion  of  industries  in  the  traded  sector.  This  will  benefit  both  goods  and  service 
industries exposed to trade. Exports of services, which include education and tourism as well 
as  business  services,  were  worth  about  $60  billion  in  2014,  and  at  current  prices  were  a 
touch higher than iron ore exports at the end of last year (Graph 5).13 Most of the growth in 
services  exports  is  attributable  to  rapidly  growing  economies  in  the  Asian  region.  These 
service industries should benefit from further strong growth of demand from that source, with 
many more households in Asia gaining a foothold in the middle class. While Australia has 
many strengths in these service industries, our comparative advantage here is perhaps not 
as obvious as it is in mining and agriculture, which benefit from our substantial endowments 
of  natural  resources.  This  means  that  we  will  need  to  continue  to  work  hard  to  maintain 
competitiveness in these global markets. 
Conclusions 
The Australian economy has good prospects for growth over the longer term. Among other 
things, we have the advantage of a well-educated workforce, strong population growth and a 
robust institutional framework. Also, we are closer to a rapidly developing part of the world 
than  we  are  to  many  slower  growing  developed  economies.  We  have  benefited  too  from 
earlier  reforms.  Among  other  things,  this  has  left  us  with  more  flexible  and  competitive 
product  and  labour  markets  than  we  had  in  the  past  and  helped  us  to  get  closer  to  the 
technological frontier. However, other countries will continue to pursue reforms and we can’t 
rest on our laurels. 
The Bank’s central forecast for economic activity is for growth to gradually pick up over the 
course of the next couple of years. Monetary policy has been and will continue to play its part 
in  this  regard.  The  depreciation  of  the  exchange  rate  seen  to  date  is  helpful.  And  we 
shouldn’t  forget  that  there  are  other  sources  of  adjustment,  including  the  pick-up  in 
productivity growth over recent years. 
However,  as  we’ve  emphasised  regularly, 
there  are  many 
uncertainties and better growth is not guaranteed. It is also difficult to know exactly  where 
growth  will  occur.  The  very  low  level  of  interest rates  suggests  that  the housing  market  is 
likely to remain strong. We will probably see a  continuation of trends such as the growing 
importance  of  the  services  sector  in  our  economy,  which  is  relatively  intensive  in  terms  of 
employment.  Resource  production  and  exports  are  less  employment  intensive,  but  the 
significant investment in that sector will continue to bear fruit for a long time. Finally, a lower 
exchange  rate  will  provide  support  for  demand  for  the  output  of  the  wide  range  of  firms 
operating in the tradable sector. 
 
is  difficult, 
forecasting 
                                                
12   See Downes P, K Hanslow and P Tulip (2014), “The Effect of the Mining Boom on the Australian Economy”, 
RBA Research Discussion Paper 2014–08. 
13   For a discussion of tourism exports, see Dobson C and K Hooper (forthcoming), “Insights from the Australian 
Tourism Industry”, RBA Bulletin, March. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    7 
     8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
     9 
