  Agathe Côté: Inflation expectations and monetary policy 
Remarks by Ms Agathe Côté, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Canada, to the Association 
québécoise des technologies, Mont-Tremblant, Quebec, 19 February 2015. 
 Accompanying charts can be found at the end of the speech. 
I would like to thank Michael Ehrmann and Marc-André Gosselin for their help in preparing this speech. 
Introduction 
Thank you for inviting me to be with you today. I am delighted to be here. 
At  the  Bank  of  Canada  we  need  a  thorough  understanding  of  what  is  happening  in  the 
economy – not only at the aggregate level, but also at the level of individual agents, such as 
entrepreneurs like yourselves. You have an impact on the economy, and thus on the Bank. 
Similarly,  the  Bank  has  an  impact  on  business  conditions,  and  in  turn  on  you.  This 
relationship is well illustrated by the topic of my speech today: inflation expectations and the 
role they play in the conduct of monetary policy. 
Central  banks  have  long  understood  the  importance  of  inflation  expectations.  It  is  widely 
accepted that a key benefit of an inflation-targeting system, such as the one we have had in 
Canada since 1991, is that it provides a good anchor for expectations. That being said, there 
are  still  many  questions  about  how  people  form  their  expectations.  While  central  banks 
exercise  a  great  deal  of  influence  on  expectations,  there  are  many  other  factors  that  can 
come into play. So, therefore, it is critical to carefully measure and interpret the signals sent 
by a variety of economic agents. 
In my remarks today, I will explain why inflation expectations are so important to monetary 
policy and what role they might have played in the puzzling evolution of inflation that followed 
the financial crisis. I will also talk about the survey that the Bank of Canada has just created 
to better understand the evolution of expectations. Finally, I will turn my attention to current 
events and talk about today’s inflation expectations, including those of the Bank, in the wake 
of the steep decline in oil prices. 
The surprising evolution of inflation after the crisis 
The Bank of Canada conducts monetary policy to maintain the inflation rate at 2 per cent – 
the  midpoint  of  a  1  to  3  per  cent  target  range.  Since  there  is  a  lag  in  the  transmission  of 
monetary  policy,  the  Bank  needs to  identify  the factors  that  are  likely  to  have  a  persistent 
effect on inflation. 
The main determinant of underlying inflationary pressures is the output gap – the difference 
between  actual  output  and  potential  output.  When  the  demand  for  goods  and  services 
causes  the  economy  to  operate  near  capacity,  there  is  upward  pressure  on  prices. 
Conversely, a shortfall in demand tends to put downward pressure on prices. 
However, a wide variety of factors can complicate the analysis of inflationary pressures, such 
as the transitory impact of exchange rate fluctuations or sector-specific price movements. 
In  recent  years,  the  behaviour  of  inflation  in  Canada  and  other  advanced  economies  has 
been surprising, even when we take into account these temporary factors (Chart 1). 
Indeed, following the global financial crisis, the dynamics of inflation gave rise to two puzzles. 
The first emerged in 2010–11, when inflation rates were consistently higher than expected, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
even as economic slack reached its highest level in recent history (Chart 2 and Chart 3). 
The unexpected stability (or even, in some cases, increase) in inflation during this period led 
some economists to liken inflation to the dog that did not bark in the Sherlock Holmes story.1  
The  second  puzzle  was  initially  observed  in  2012  (and  lasted  until  at  least  mid-2014): 
inflation fell rapidly at the same time that the global economy was recovering and the output 
gap was shrinking. Once again, inflation surprised us – this time by its weakness. 
The contribution of household inflation expectations 
Given  inflation’s  importance  to  central  banks,  it  is  not  surprising  that  a  number  of  studies 
have examined its unusual behaviour during the crisis. 
Several  hypotheses  have  been  proposed,  including  the  possibility  that  the  sensitivity  of 
inflation to the output gap, or to its persistence, has changed, or that the extent of excess 
capacity  had  been  misjudged.  It  is  also  possible  that  the  effects  of  exchange  rate 
fluctuations, commodity prices or the increasing trade with China were underestimated. 
Our  own  work  at  the  Bank,  as  well  as  that  of  other  researchers,  suggests  that  inflation 
expectations can help us resolve the twin puzzle. 
Using  econometric  models  that  allow  us  to  quantify  the  effect  of  individual  variables  on 
inflation,  we  learned  that  including  household  expectations  with  the  usual  determinants  of 
inflation enabled us to explain a good portion of inflation dynamics in advanced economies 
since  the  crisis.2  Household  expectations  increase  the  predictive  power  of  models,  even 
when those models already incorporate the expectations of professional forecasters. 
In the United States, household expectations help explain the apparent stability of inflation 
after the crisis, as they increased following the rapid rise in oil prices and counteracted the 
output gap’s dampening effect.3 In Europe, where the economic recovery has been sluggish 
in  recent  years  and  some  countries  have  recently  reported  negative  inflation,  falling 
household expectations have contributed to the decline in inflation. 
Households’  inflation  expectations  seem  particularly  useful  in  explaining  the  post-crisis 
dynamics  of  inflation,  because  they  have  exhibited  greater  variability  than  those  of 
professional forecasters (Chart 4). 
For  Canada,  it  is  difficult  to  say  what  role  household  expectations  could  have  played, 
because we do not measure them. I will return to this later. 
We know, however, that business expectations have remained well anchored to the target. 
Indeed, the Bank’s Business Outlook Survey shows that, since the second quarter of 2009, 
at  least  80  per  cent  of  businesses  canvassed  have  reported  that  they  expect  inflation  to 
remain between 1 and 3 per cent over the next two years. This stability contributed to the 
resilience of inflation during the years immediately following the crisis (Chart 5). 
Regarding  the  subsequent  decline  in  inflation,  the  Bank’s  analysis  has  highlighted  the 
importance  of  increased  competition  in  the  retail  sector.  Indeed,  the  expansion  of  major 
retailers  and  the  arrival  of  new  ones  in  Canada  have  profoundly  changed  the  retail 
                                                
1  
2   Friedrich,  C.  2014.  “Global  Inflation  Dynamics  in  the  Post-Crisis  Period:  What  Explains  the  Twin  Puzzle?” 
International Monetary Fund (IMF). 2013. World Economic Outlook (April), ch. 3. 
Bank of Canada Working Paper No. 2014–36. 
3   Coibion, O., and Y. Gorodnichenko. 2015. “Is the Phillips Curve Alive and Well after All? Inflation Expectations 
and the Missing Disinflation.” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 7 (1): 197–232. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  landscape.  The  growing  popularity  of  online  shopping  and  new  technologies  have  also 
contributed to intensifying competition.4  
The impact of this increased competition, together with the large output gap, helps explain 
why inflation fell into the lower zone of the target range from mid-2012 to mid-2014.5 Today, 
these same factors are contributing to underlying inflation being below 2 per cent in Canada. 
Overall, and even if Canada’s experience was slighty different, recent work suggests that the 
behaviour  of  expectations  could  explain  part  of  the  unexpected  evolution  of  inflation  in 
advanced economies since the crisis. 
The importance of inflation expectations for monetary policy 
Why are inflation expectations so important for understanding observed inflation? After all, if 
forecasts about the weather have no influence on it, why is it any different with inflation? 
In  fact,  the  observed  inflation  rate  reflects  actions  that  people  take  today  in  light  of  their 
expectations  of  future  inflation.  For  businesses,  inflation  expectations  influence  wage 
negotiations,  price  setting  and  financial  contracting  for  investment;  for  households, 
expectations have an impact on consumption and savings decisions. If workers expect that 
the prices they currently face will increase in the future, they will ask for wage adjustments 
now, and entrepreneurs will do the same for the prices of their goods or services. Moreover, 
the key role played by  household expectations in recent inflation dynamics could be partly 
explained  by  the  fact  that  they  approximate  the  expectations  of  small  and  medium-sized 
enterprises, which make up the vast majority of businesses in the developed economies. 
The importance of inflation expectations was made clear to central banks in the 1970s and 
1980s.  In  those  years,  inflation  was  high,  volatile  and  unpredictable.  Households  and 
businesses  relied  on  past  inflation  to  predict  its  future  level.  Even  with  high  interest  rates, 
central banks struggled to contain inflation, because the anticipation of high inflation was a 
self-fulfilling prophecy. 
The  adoption  of  an  inflation  target  helped  correct  the  situation.  In  Canada,  thanks  to  the 
public  commitment  made  by  the  Bank  in  1991  (and  the  Bank’s  success  in  fulfilling  it  over 
time), Canadians gradually began to expect that inflation would remain close to 2 per cent 
(Chart 6).6 Since then, Canadians have been able to make decisions about their spending 
and  savings  with  greater  confidence,  which  has  been  favourable  for  investment  and  has 
contributed to improving the functioning of the labour market. 
It is crucial that inflation expectations be well anchored, as it allows central banks to attain 
their inflation targets while reducing the volatility of other important variables, such as interest 
rates  and  output.  Among  other  benefits,  central  banks  will  be  less  likely  to  reach  the  zero 
lower bound on interest rates. 
                                                
4   Consider the growing use of smartphones, which makes shopping considerably easier by allowing consumers 
to compare prices in real time. 
5   Unlike similar work on the United States, our research on Canada has not allowed us to identify any change in 
the sensitivity of inflation to the size or persistence of the output gap. Nor have fluctuations in the exchange 
rate or the prices of imported goods helped us solve the dual puzzle. With regard to the situation in the United 
States,  see  R.  G.  Murphy,  “Explaining  Inflation  in  the  Aftermath  of  the  Great  Recession,”  Journal  of 
Macroeconomics, 2014, 40: 228–244. 
6   The  credibility  of  the  target  is  reflected,  for  instance,  in  wage  bargaining:  While  21 per  cent  of  collective 
agreements signed between 1985 and 1989 included a cost of living adjustment clause, by 2014 only 4 per 
cent of them did. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  Recent work conducted by the Bank confirms that inflation expectations are better anchored 
in  countries  that  pursue  an  inflation  target.7  Moreover,  this  research  suggests  that  the 
behaviour of expectations might be asymmetrical, depending on whether inflation lies above 
or below the target. There is a greater risk that expectations will become unanchored when 
inflation  is  persistently  low,  as  is  currently  the  case  in  a  number  of  economies. This could 
have implications for monetary policy: when inflation is low for an extended period, central 
banks might have to expect a longer delay in returning it to the target. 
types  of  economic  agents: 
Several indicators are better than one 
Given the importance of inflation expectations, central banks closely monitor the evolution of 
several indicators that measure expectations. 
We  are  of  course  interested  in  the  level  of  expectations  –  they  are  a  key  determinant  of 
future  inflation  –  but  also  in  the  degree  of  uncertainty  surrounding  those  expectations  and 
their  sensitivity  to  observed  inflation.  These  measures  provide  important  signals  about  the 
extent to which expectations are anchored at the target. 
In  addition  to  monitoring  expectations  over  various  time  horizons,  we  also  compare  the 
expectations  of  various 
financial  markets,  professional 
forecasters,  households  and  businesses.  Each  type  of  indicator  has  strengths  and 
weaknesses,8 and the signals will be more credible if they are corroborated by more than one 
indicator.9  
Expectations  are  not  static.  It  is  normal  to  see  them  fluctuate  in  response  to  changes  in 
business conditions. Currently, for example, short-term inflation expectations are decreasing 
in Canada and elsewhere, owing to the fall in oil prices.10 This is not surprising, considering 
that the prices of frequently-purchased consumption goods, such as gasoline, typically have 
a more pronounced impact on expectations.11  
However,  if  the  inflation  target  is  credible,  we  should  not  see  significant  fluctuations  in 
medium-  and  long-term expectations;  if  it  is  not,  economic  agents  will  tend  to  modify  their 
behaviour, thus compromising the effectiveness of monetary policy. 
In the second half of 2014, long-term inflation expectations derived from financial instruments 
fell in some advanced economies, including Canada, but forecasters’ expectations over the 
same  horizon  remained  stable  and  very  close  to  central  bank  targets  (Chart  7).  In  most 
economies, the risk that expectations will become unanchored therefore appears limited. 
The Bank’s new survey 
As  I  mentioned  earlier,  we  do  not  have  indicators  of  household  inflation  expectations  in 
Canada. The Bank recently decided to fill this gap by creating a new survey. 
                                                
7   Ehrmann,  M.  2014.  “Targeting  Inflation  from  Below  –  How  Do  Inflation  Expectations  Behave?”  Bank  of 
Canada Working Paper No. 2014–52. 
8   Cunningham,  R.,  B.  Desroches  and  E.  Santor.  2010.  “Inflation  Expectations  and  the  Conduct  of  Monetary 
Policy: A Review of Recent Evidence and Experience.” Bank of Canada Review (spring): 13–25. 
9   The importance of monitoring the inflation expectations of various economic agents has been recognized for a 
long time. What recent research has highlighted, however, is that we must also apply this approach to our 
models. 
10   Compared with October, the February Consensus Economics forecast for total CPI inflation for 2015 declined 
by 1.1 percentage points to 0.8 per cent. The forecast for total CPI inflation for 2016 is 2.1 per cent. There is 
also a slight downward shift in the results of the Bank’s winter Business Outlook Survey. 
11   Ehrmann,  M.,  D.  Pfajfar  and  E.  Santoro.  2014.  “Consumer  Attitudes  and  the  Epidemiology  of  Inflation 
Expectations.” Bank of Canada Working Paper No. 2014–28. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  To  that  end,  the  Bank  examined  the  various  techniques  used  to  measure  the  inflation 
expectations  of  households  elsewhere  in  the  world  and  largely  based  its  approach  on  the 
one created by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York.12  
The Bank’s new quarterly survey is an online poll of 1,000 Canadian consumers. It measures 
both the inflation expectations of participants over various time horizons and the uncertainty 
surrounding them. 
A  preliminary  analysis  of  the  responses  from  the  first  wave  of  the  survey,  conducted  last 
November, is promising. Indeed, the inflation rate perceived by households is similar to that 
measured by the CPI over the past year. As well, when households were asked to evaluate 
the probability of various inflation outcomes over the next two years, their answers centred 
around the Bank’s 1 to 3 per cent target range. This is an encouraging sign that household 
expectations are anchored to the target. 
Our new household survey also covers a wide array of other economic expectations that will 
inform the Bank, and Canadians in general, on issues ranging from labour market prospects 
to personal finances. 
The power of our new tool will truly reveal itself after we have conducted the survey several 
times, giving us the ability to compare results over time and analyze trends. We will present 
detailed findings later this year after taking the time to analyze the results carefully. 
The fall in oil prices creates disinflationary pressures 
After talking about the inflation expectations of other economic agents, I would be remiss if I 
didn’t mention the Bank’s expectations. If the expectations of households and businesses are 
central to the decisions they make, the same is also true of the Bank. 
Since mid-2014, inflation has risen to around our 2 per cent target. This increase in inflation 
is being temporarily fuelled by the depreciation of the dollar since the beginning of 2013, as 
well  as  by  some  sectoral  factors,  particularly  higher  prices  for  meat  and  communications 
services.  Since  there  is  still  material  excess  capacity  in  the  economy  and  competitive 
pressures  remain  intense  in  the  retail  sector,  the  Bank  estimates  that  underlying  inflation 
remains below target. 
On top of this, the economy is also faced with the steep decline in oil prices. Its impact is 
already being felt, and the inflation rate fell to 1.5 per cent in December. The Bank predicts 
that  this  rate  will  continue  to  decline,  bottoming  out  at  a  level  slightly  above  zero  in  the 
second  quarter  of  2015  (Chart  8).  In  light  of  the  volatility  of  oil  prices,  it  is  possible  that 
inflation will dip into negative territory for a brief interval. 
Rest  assured:  even  if  inflation  turns  negative  for  some  time,  that  would  not  constitute 
deflation,  which  requires  a  generalized  decline  in  prices.  When  inflation  expectations  are 
solidly anchored, as is now the case in Canada, there is no reason to fear deflation. 
The  repercussions  of  falling  oil  prices  will  be  felt  well  beyond  their  direct  impact  on  the 
consumer price index. As the Bank explained in its January Monetary Policy Report, lower oil 
prices will have an unambiguously negative impact on the Canadian economy. This shock 
will  delay  the  economy’s  return  to  full  capacity  by  undermining  both  investment  in  the  oil 
sector  and  gross  domestic  income.  When  oil  prices  fall,  declining  revenues  from  the  oil 
sector are transmitted to the Canadian economy through a reduction in personal wealth via 
the impact on incomes and stock holdings. Interprovincial trade is also affected. In Western 
Canada,  for  example,  purchases  of  machinery,  primary  metals  and  chemical  products 
                                                
12   The  Fed’s  survey  is  the  product  of  several  years  of  research  and  experiments  conducted  by  a  group  of 
economists and psychologists. See O. Armantier, W. Bruine de Bruin, S. Potter, G. Topa, W. van der Klaauw 
and B. Zafar, “Measuring Inflation Expectations”, Annual Review of Economics, Vol. 5 (2013): 273–301. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  manufactured  by  companies  in  Central  Canada  will  decrease.  Together,  these  effects  will 
outweigh the benefits derived from the decline in oil prices on the energy bills of households 
and businesses. 
The  net  impact  of  this  shock  is  significant:  assuming  no  monetary  policy  response  to  the 
shock, we have calculated that average household disposable income would be reduced by 
3 per cent by the end of 2016. Moreover, through its impact on the real economy, the decline 
of about 50 per cent in the price of oil since June would knock roughly one-half point off the 
underlying inflation rate during the same period. 
It is against this backdrop that the Bank lowered its key policy rate by a quarter of a point in 
January. The Bank’s policy action is intended to provide insurance against downside risks to 
the  inflation  profile  and  financial  stability  risks,  support  the  sectoral  adjustment  needed  to 
strengthen  investment  and  growth,  and  bring  the  Canadian  economy  back  to  full  capacity 
and  inflation  to  target  around  the  end  of  2016.  By  doing  so,  it  should  also  keep  inflation 
expectations well anchored to the target. 
The  concept  of  insurance  is  important  and  should  be  explained  in  greater  detail.  Policy 
insurance is a logical part of our risk management framework for monetary policy. There is 
nothing mechanical about it. The cut in policy rate is intended primarily to provide insurance 
against  the  downside  risks  to  inflation.  Many  of  the  negative  effects  of  lower  oil  prices  on 
growth happen swiftly. There will be some offsets, such as the stronger U.S. economy and a 
weaker Canadian dollar, but there are risks with regard to the timing and magnitude of these 
compensating  effects.  On  March  4  we  will  come  to  our  next  interest  rate  decision.  That 
decision  will  be  based  on  a  careful  examination  of  how  the  economy,  and  the  risks,  are 
evolving. 
Conclusion 
Allow me to conclude. 
Inflation expectations are central to the conduct of monetary policy. The Bank has recently 
developed a new indicator of inflation expectations to enhance its other indicators. We are 
therefore better equipped to closely monitor and analyze expectations. 
I hope that my remarks have given you a clearer idea of the Bank’s work and the challenges 
it faces. It is possible that, some day, one of our regional representatives will contact you to 
request  your  participation  in  the  Business  Outlook  Survey.  You  might  also  be  asked  to 
participate,  as  a  consumer,  in  our  new  online  survey.  In  either  case,  I  ask  you  to  give  us 
some of your time: this will help us to do our work better. 
The  Bank  of  Canada,  in  turn,  will  continue  to  contribute  to  the  economic  welfare  of 
households  and  businesses  by  maintaining  a  level  of  inflation  that  is  low,  stable  and 
predictable. Our  inflation  target  has gained  a great  deal  of credibility  over  time,  which  has 
helped  to  hold  inflation  expectations  near  our  goal,  but  we  are  not  taking  this  success  for 
granted – we remain vigilant. 
I thank you for your attention. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    7 
   8 
    BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    9 
     10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
