  Erkki Liikanen: Interview in Süddeutsche Zeitung 
Interview  (edited  script)  with  Mr  Erkki  Liikanen,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Finland,  in 
Süddeutsche Zeitung, conducted by Mr Markus Zydra and published on 7 February 2015. 
 Süddeutsche Zeitung: 
Mr Liikanen, why did the ECB Council decide to cut Greek banks off from ECB credit? 
Liikanen:  Greek  banks  have  a  counterparty  status  with  the  Eurosystem.  In  January,  we 
communicated that the collateral waiver based on which the Greek government bonds qualify 
as  eligible  collateral  to  Eurosystem  refinancing  assumes  a  successful  conclusion  of  a 
programme review. This could no longer be assumed. So this was a very logical decision, as 
we have to follow our rules. 
But  the  ECB  kept  Greece  in  the  emergency  liquidity  programme  via  the  Bank  of 
Greece? 
Liikanen: Every case will be treated according to ELA rules and procedures. Every bank that 
receives ELA must be solvent. 
The ECB wants to help the euro zone to recover economically. That is why the ECB 
decided  to  buy  government  bonds  for  1,1  trillion  euro?  Many  Germans  resent  the 
decision. What do you tell them? 
Liikanen:  This  was  a  decision  to  deliver  on  our  mandate  which  is  price  stability.  When 
inflation  and  as  well  as  inflation  expectations  drop  clearly  below  our  definition  for  price 
stability, and the ECB runs out of traditional monetary policy measures like lowering interest 
rates,  then  non-standard  measures,  such  as  large  scale  asset  purchases,  are  needed  to 
maintain  our  policy  target.  By  the  way,  the  arguments  in  favor  of  the  decision  were  also 
shared by most economists at home. 
And  you  have  to  do  it  rather  sooner  than  later  because  if  you  get  in  a  deflation  spiral,  it 
becomes very difficult to get out. Of course I understand the German discussion. By the way 
in Finland for example, there is also criticism that we acted too late. 
The decision was disputed – not only by the German members. How has this dispute 
changed the working atmosphere in the Council? 
Liikanen: There were different opinions among the members of the Governing Council about 
the  timing.  It  is  a  non-standard  monetary  policy  measure,  we  all  agree.  The  working 
atmosphere is and has been professional and full of substance. You can justify both, doing it 
now  or  buying  bonds  later,  but  based  among  the  best  information  we  had,  I  came  to  the 
conclusion that risks for price stability were so high that we needed to act. 
Have  Jens  Weidmann  and  Sabine  Lautenschläger  been  all  too  relentless  in  their 
criticism? 
Liikanen:  No,  it’s  been  professional.  Nobody  can  claim  for  not  having  been  heard  in  the 
Governing Council. History will tell whether our timing was right. I hope the economy in the 
euro area will turn for the better. 
The Germans admire the Bundesbank. The blueprint in the creation of the ECB was 
meant to be the Bundesbank – now there seems to be not much left of it. 
Liikanen:  I  admire  the  Bundesbank  too.  We  all  learned  the  value  of  monetary  policy 
independence by studying the history of the Bundesbank. That is what the ECB fights for. 
The spirit is there. When inflation rates were too high, I have been one of the first to support 
higher  interest  rates.  But  if  interest  rates  are  close  to  zero,  and  we  have  protracted  low 
inflation and deflationary risks, that requires early action. You have to act while you can. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  The Bundesbank thinks the ECB is going too far. 
Liikanen: There is a new question for central bankers: If our inflation is too low should you 
react with the same vigor as when it is too high? 
Should you? 
Liikanen: I am a hawk in both directions, fighting inflation and preventing deflation. There are 
people  who  say  zero  inflation  is  fine.  I  think  zero  inflation  makes  the  economy  vulnerable 
without any buffers. The ECB objective of below but close to 2 percent in the medium term is 
safer. We haven’t had this kind of a problem before, in the postwar period. Rather, inflation 
was the problem, and the Bundesbank has a great record there. 
Now we talk about the prospect of too low inflation for too long. We have to go far back in 
history to the 1930’s to understand the dangers of deflation. You would not believe how often 
the history books are being quoted among central bankers in various discussions. 
But buying government bonds always has the odor of financing government deficits? 
Don’t you agree? 
Liikanen: No, not when we are doing it the way we decided to do it. We only buy bonds on 
the secondary market, we buy according to the capital keys of the Eurosystem members, we 
buy maximum 25 percent of each issuance and maximum 33 percent of each issuer’s debt. 
And it is done for monetary policy purposes. If you take all this into account you will see there 
is not that problem to this respect. 
The programme bolsters the creation of a bubble. Investors are forced to buy stocks, 
since bonds become all to expensive due to the ECB. 
Liikanen:  That’s  a  fair  point. We  must  monitor  the  side  effects  including  in  the  real  estate 
market. In member countries macroprudential tools are in place to combat these risks. 
Will the 1,1 trillion programme do the job and bring back growth and inflation? 
Liikanen: The programme is scheduled until September 2016. Then we look at the situation. 
If  inflation  has  not  reached  the target  of  close to  2  percent,  we  will  continue  our  efforts  to 
reach our target. 
What do think about the growing power of central banks who seem to rule the world 
economy? 
Liikanen:  I  think  we  would  be  happy  to  do  less  in  the  future,  but  it  was  important  that  we 
acted in the crisis, we ensured sufficient liquidity in the market and we cut interest rates. That 
was the lesson learned from the depression of the 1930ties. 
The German saver wants higher interest rates. 
Liikanen: Well, that is going to take some time. All savers will also benefit from the recovery 
in the euro area. Stability of the economy is good for all. We have seen how the situation for 
example in Spain, Ireland and Portugal has improved, we have better budget rules, we have 
a Single Supervisory mechanism in Europe – all that is good for all in Europe, Germany as 
well. 
When will the ECB exit and drop their emergency measures? 
Liikanen: I am a marathon runner. We must keep cool and moving and finish the job. When 
the time comes, we decide about the exit on the basis of the analysis based on our strategy. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
