  Peter Praet: Interview in Neue Zürcher Zeitung 
Interview with Mr Peter Praet, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
in  Neue  Zürcher  Zeitung,  conducted  by  by  Ms  Claudia  Aebersold  Szalay  and  Mr  Peter 
A Fischer and published on 19 September 2015. 
 Mr  Praet,  you  have  been  Chief  Economist  of  the  ECB  for  the  past  four  years  now. 
During  this  period,  the  policy  of  the  ECB  has  changed  somewhat.  Does  it  make  a 
difference who the Chief Economist of the ECB is? 
Both the President and the Chief Economist have changed, but what has changed most of all 
during this period is the economic environment in which we find ourselves. At the onset of 
the crisis in 2007, we still thought we were simply dealing with an external liquidity shock. So, 
the  central  banks  across  the  globe  reacted  accordingly,  and  at  the  time  the  ECB  also 
focused on providing liquidity to banks. I can still remember the headlines back then, saying 
that the ECB was providing €100 billion in liquidity, which seemed an incredible sum at the 
time. 
The crisis nonetheless escalated. 
Yes,  it  quickly  turned  into  a  credit  crunch,  which  in  2012  escalated  into  a  euro  crisis. 
However, to come back to your first question: the circumstances have changed dramatically; 
the identity of the Chief Economist plays a minor role in that sense. ECB decisions are not a 
“one-man show”, but rather the result of discussions amongst the members of the Governing 
Council. That is an open, professional and collegial exchange, and this is the basis on which 
the ECB’s Governing Council makes its decisions. 
You  give  the  impression,  however,  that  you  take  a  more  Anglo-Saxon  approach, 
whereas your two predecessors, Issing and Stark, were rather more of the tradition of 
the  Deutsche  Bundesbank  and  were,  therefore,  more  stability-oriented  in  their 
thinking. 
I would firmly disagree. I and the entire Executive Board of the ECB have utterly committed 
ourselves to price stability. That is our mandate, the task enshrined in the European treaties. 
We see price stability as symmetrical; it works in both directions. We fight inflation – when 
prices rise too quickly – with the same determination as when prices rise too slowly. And with 
our policy  we have certainly been successful in terms of counteracting fears of deflation, I 
should  like  to  think.  All  of  our  policies,  including  the  less  conventional  ones,  are  aimed  at 
maintaining price stability. By the way, during the time of my predecessor Otmar Issing, the 
ECB defined more precisely what is meant by price stability: below, but close to, 2%. 
However, on the issue of the purchase of government bonds, there has been a true 
break with past tradition. Your predecessors were strictly against it, whereas you and 
Mario Draghi are clearly in favour of these purchases. 
Who  knows  what  my  predecessors  would  have  done  in  my  position.  They  were  not  in  a 
situation in which key interest rates had reached the lower limit, thereby leaving hardly any 
room for manoeuvre in terms of interest rates. However, I am sure that they would also have 
done everything necessary to fulfil the mandate. Besides, there was also a government bond 
purchase  programme  under  the  former  President  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  only  it  was  much 
smaller than the current one. 
Critics say that the ECB has gone too far and that, with its ultra-expansionary policy, it 
has sown the seeds of the next crisis. 
We  are  well  aware  of  the  fact  that  an  expansionary  monetary  policy  entails  some  risks  to 
financial stability. We are, nonetheless, convinced that we have acted in the right way, as we 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  have followed our mandate. As we are not seeing a strong rise in lending, nor any signs of 
widespread speculative bubbles, the risks for financial stability are currently limited. 
But monetary policy has taken over too much of the burden from politics during the 
crisis. 
It is true that too much weight has been placed on monetary policy in managing the crisis. I 
would also have liked other stakeholders to have taken more responsibility in this respect. 
But that does not change the fact that the ECB must act first and foremost in order to fulfil its 
mandate. 
The euro area has not given a good impression of itself during the crisis? 
One of the biggest problems was that the architecture of the euro area was not yet complete. 
We simply did not yet have all the institutions that are needed for quick and effective crisis 
management. The euro area already had important principles, such as the no bail-out clause, 
the prohibition of monetary financing and the no-exit clause. But serious design flaws also 
became apparent, which nurtured excesses and contributed to the scale of the crisis. 
And when several Member States faced financial difficulties… 
… the right structures were not in place in order to deal with them. No efficient mechanism 
to, if necessary, refinance public and private debt or restructure or resolve troubled banks. 
Nor were there any supranational institutions that were in a position to do so. 
Except the International Monetary Fund. 
Yes, there was the IMF, but to start with, many people in Europe were not too happy about 
the IMF being involved in the euro area. I was always in favour of having the IMF on board, 
because in Europe, we simply did not have any institution that could have taken on this role. 
In the meantime, has the institutional framework improved in the euro area? 
Yes, very much so. We now have the European Stability Mechanism, we have made good 
progress with the banking union, and we have a European supervisory mechanism. That is 
an important step and more will follow. The euro area needs more integration. 
Was the absence of an institutional framework the main problem behind the crisis? 
One of the main problems. The other problem was that the governments in the euro area had 
little fiscal room for manoeuvre in order to respond to the crisis. 
Exactly,  the  governments  had  to  save.  Was  austerity  wrong,  because  it  forced 
governments to save? 
No, the return to sound national budgets was necessary, because, during the sovereign debt 
crisis, it was all a question of regaining confidence in the public finances in the euro area in 
order  to  curb  speculation  of  a  break-up  of  the  euro.  But,  of  course,  the  fact  that  the 
governments  had  so  little  fiscal  room  for  manoeuvre  led  to  a  worsening  of  the  crisis  and 
meant the ECB had to do even more to still fulfil its mandate. 
Now the ECB is even pursuing quantitative easing, and, over the past six months, has 
been buying government bonds. Thus far, the ECB has purchased a good €400 billion 
worth of assets, by the autumn of 2016, it is supposed to amount to over €1 trillion. 
What is your assessment after six months? 
The  ECB’s  purchase  programme  is  a  success.  It  is  already  having  an  effect  in  terms  of 
inflation expectations, for example, which have recovered again, and in terms of the general 
financing conditions, which have eased somewhat. 
But Mario Draghi is already talking about expanding the programme. 
He is repeating what we have said from the beginning, i.e. that the programme is flexible and 
can be adapted if necessary. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Is there any point in already thinking about an expansion? 
The only important thing is to emphasise our readiness and our resolve to act if necessary. 
At  the  moment,  that  would  be  premature,  but  the  risks  in  the  world  economy  have  grown 
significantly. We have had to lower our economic forecasts, and we simply want to be ready 
to act if the circumstances so demand. 
Were you too optimistic with your economic forecasts in the spring? 
We were accused of that, but I don’t think so. The downward adjustment in September was 
not  large  and  was  mainly  due  to  the  correction  in  the  emerging  markets.  The  economic 
recovery in the euro area itself is intact. 
On Thursday, the US Federal Reserve System decided not to raise interest rates. Does 
this decision make life easier or more difficult for the ECB? 
The  euro  area  is  in  a  very  different  cyclical  phase  from  the  US  economy.  Therefore,  our 
monetary  policy  cycles  are  also  not  synchronised.  Nonetheless,  we  share  the  concerns 
about the prospects for the global economy. If we judged that shocks were sufficiently severe 
and persistent to weaken the inflation outlook for the euro area, we would not hesitate to act. 
How much of its growth potential did the euro area lose during the crisis? 
The  potential  had  already  weakened  before  the  onset  of  the  crisis,  because  productivity 
growth had slowed down. The crisis then made everything even  worse, so today the euro 
area is on a much lower growth path. 
But monetary policy cannot change that. 
Monetary policy can only cushion the problem by, for example, making liquidity available and 
thereby helping to avoid a banking crisis. Monetary policy cannot create sustainable growth. 
For  that,  it  is  necessary  to  have  intelligent  structural  reforms  which  strengthen  the  growth 
potential  of  the  economy.  However,  that  is  not  the  task  of  the  central  bank,  but  of  the 
governments. 
What should the latter do specifically? 
They  must  undertake  structural  reforms  to  lay  the  foundations  for  higher  productivity  and 
growth. Europe needs intelligent reforms. 
But these reforms seem to be taking a long time. 
You are being too pessimistic. We can see encouraging signs in the euro area, particularly in 
countries  like  Spain  and  Ireland,  but  also  in  Portugal.  Italy  was  admittedly  late  in  starting 
reforms, but is now on the right track. 
Are you also as confident about Greece? 
The situation in Greece is still difficult, but with the new programme we have made a step 
forwards. 
And will the new programme bring relief? 
The  programme  is  indeed  demanding,  but  we  are  convinced  that  the  reforms  will  help 
Greece to create growth again and make its way out of the crisis. However, in view of the 
forthcoming elections, I do not wish to add anything further on that. 
Let  us  focus  on  Switzerland.  It  is  clear  that  the  policies  of  the  ECB  have  a  strong 
influence on a small, open economy like Switzerland. Is it still at all possible for the 
Swiss National Bank to pursue an independent monetary policy? 
There  can  be  no  doubt  that  every  monetary  policy  also  has  an  impact  on  other  currency 
areas. However, the biggest impact on Switzerland does not come from the ECB, but from 
the  policies  of  the  euro  area  countries.  The  weak  crisis  management  by  politicians  in  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  euro area has led to investors seeking safe havens such as Switzerland, which has strongly 
pushed up the price of the Swiss franc. 
And has the expansionary policy of the ECB not played a role? 
I believe our policy has helped to allay fears, and has thus tended rather to reduce the flight 
to the Swiss franc. When the euro area does better, the Swiss franc is under less upward 
pressure. 
Are you not making it too easy for yourself? 
The  ECB  took  responsibility  in  the  crisis  and  thereby  helped  reduce  uncertainty  in  the 
financial markets and even avoid panic. In doing so, it also took the pressure off currencies 
like the Swiss franc. Naturally, all of this would have been much more effective if European 
governments had also done better with their crisis management. 
But the ECB’s quantitative easing did also weaken the euro and thereby strengthen 
the Swiss franc? 
Bear in mind that the Swiss National Bank also introduced a kind of quantitative easing and 
expanded its balance sheet – long before we did, by the way. In spite of this policy, for a long 
time the inflation rate in Switzerland has been even lower than in the euro area. It is difficult 
for a central bank in such a situation to avoid the appreciation of its currency in the long term. 
Should there also be rules governing an orderly exit from the euro area? 
I believe that there is need for a crisis management system and a resolution mechanism for 
overindebted institutions, whether private or public. 
What will the euro area look like at the end of your period of office at the ECB? 
We will again have inflation rates below, but close to, 2%, because our policy will achieve its 
goal.  And  the  banking  union  will  be  complete, meaning  that  the  resolution  regime  and the 
deposit  protection  will  be  fully  Europeanised.  For  me,  this  is  a  precondition  for  a  well-
functioning  monetary  union.  In  four  years,  Europe  will  be  in  a  much  healthier  state  than 
today. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
