  Takehiro Sato: Recent economic and financial developments and 
monetary policy 
Speech by Mr Takehiro Sato, Member of the Policy Board of the Bank of Japan, at a meeting 
with business leaders, Kofu, Yamanashi Prefecture, 10 June 2015. 
Accompanying charts can be found at the end of the speech. 
 Introduction 
Thank  you  for  giving  me  this  opportunity  to  exchange  views  with  people  representing  the 
political,  economic,  and  financial  arena  of  Yamanashi  Prefecture.  I  would  like  to  take  this 
opportunity  to  express  my  sincere  gratitude  for  your  cooperation  with  the  activities  of  the 
Bank of Japan’s Kofu Branch. 
In today’s speech, I will begin by focusing on economic and financial developments in Japan 
and  abroad,  as  well  as  the  Bank’s  recent  monetary  policy.  I  will  then  touch  briefly  on  the 
economy of Yamanashi Prefecture. Following my speech, I would like to hear your views on 
actual conditions in the local economy and on the Bank’s conduct of monetary policy. 
I. 
Recent economic and financial developments in Japan and abroad 
Developments in the world economy 
A. 
The world economy has been sluggish, despite the decline in energy prices (Chart 1). In the 
January–March quarter of 2015 in particular, it exhibited signs of a slowdown, as the growth 
rate of the U.S. economy turned negative due to the effects of the severe winter weather and 
the  labor  disputes  at  West  Coast  ports,  and  as  the  growth  rate  of  the  Chinese  economy 
remained at around 7 percent. These developments in the world economy affected Japan’s 
economy to some degree as well. 
The decline in energy prices since 2014 was initially expected to have positive effects on the 
world economy, but negative effects seem to have preceded them – such as the decline in 
income  in  commodity-exporting  countries  and  the  decrease  in  investment  in  resource 
development – due to  the rapid pace of the energy price declines. As for the  outlook, the 
world economy is expected to  see a moderate increase in its growth rate, with the recent 
improvement in soft data reflected in hard data, as positive effects of the decline in energy 
prices – such as an increase in real income in the energy-consuming countries – permeate 
gradually. 
As for the U.S. economy, a substantial deceleration in growth in the January–March quarter 
has been observed three times in the past five years. The deceleration occurred for different 
reasons  each  time,  but  there  seems  to  be  a  seasonal  pattern  of  some  kind.  Besides  the 
severe winter weather and the labor disputes at West Coast ports, the appreciation of the 
dollar  also  casts  a  shadow  on  manufacturers’  sentiment,  thereby  affecting  indicators  of 
business  fixed  investment.  The  effects  of  the  decline  in  energy  prices  on  investment  in 
resource development are also evident (Chart 2). In contrast, reflecting the improvement in 
the  employment  situation  and  the  decline  in  gasoline  prices,  consumer  sentiment  has 
generally  stayed  at  a  high  level.  It  is  a  matter  of  concern  that,  despite  the  favorable 
sentiment, private consumption remains lackluster and growth  in the April–June quarter of 
2015 has been sluggish so far. However, the economy is expected to gradually return to a 
recovery path led by private consumption on the back of a moderate increase in wages as 
the employment situation continues to improve – following more or less the same pattern of 
the past five years. The inflation rate has been stable due to the decline in energy prices, but 
the  slack  in  the  labor  market  seems  to  be  diminishing  to  a  certain  degree,  reflecting  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
decline in the unemployment rate, although there are such problems as the increases in the 
number  of  long-term  unemployed  workers  and  part-time  workers.  In  this  situation,  the 
Federal Reserve (Fed) has been communicating to the public a path toward raising the policy 
interest rate, but is taking a flexible and cautious stance that the exact timing will depend on 
future economic indicators. 
In  Europe,  manufacturers’  sentiment  has  been  picking  up  in  reflection  of  the  decline  in 
energy prices and the depreciation of the euro, and consumer sentiment has also started to 
recover (Chart 3). With the improvement in soft data, the pick-up in hard data has become 
evident, as seen, for example, in positive GDP growth for eight consecutive quarters. The 
inflation rate, which temporarily had been negative, has recovered to around 0 percent. That 
being said, given that the effects of the debt problem remain, the risk of prolongation of low 
inflation leading to a postponement of investment and consumption has receded but seems 
to  still  exist,  and  I  have  been  monitoring  these  developments  closely.  Meanwhile, 
unconventional monetary policy measures introduced by the European Central Bank (ECB) 
initially  had  significant  effects  on  the foreign  exchange  and  bond  markets;  however,  these 
markets have recently shown large fluctuations. Many points are being made regarding the 
sustainability of such large-scale asset purchases, and I will pay attention to any progress 
made regarding this matter. 
With regard to the Chinese economy, the GDP growth rate for the January–March quarter of 
2015 decelerated to 7.0 percent. Looking at recent developments in electricity consumption 
and railway freight turnover, my impression is that actual economic growth could be slower 
than suggested by the GDP figures, although we should not make a decisive judgment as 
these developments may reflect the effects of the shift toward a service economy and the 
progress  in  structural  reforms  that  are  promoted  by  the  Chinese  government  (Chart  4). 
Moreover,  manufacturers’  sentiment  has  been  dampened  further.  Movements  toward 
inventory adjustments  in Japan – in materials and related goods  such as iron and steel – 
seem to be partly affected by the slowdown in the Chinese economy. 
As for the outlook of the Chinese economy, the growth rate is likely to remain downward-
biased, owing to a sharp change in  the demographic situation  and the resultant fall in  the 
potential growth rate. However, given the typical pattern observed over the past few years – 
in  which,  once  the  economy  is  projected  to  deviate  downward  from  the growth  target, the 
government  implements  small-scale  economic  packages,  thereby  achieving  the  pick-up  in 
the economy – the same developments generally seem to be taking place this year as well. 
Meanwhile,  attention  should  be  paid  to  the  point  that  downward  pressure  on  inflation  has 
been increasing, as evidenced by the year-on-year rate of change in the GDP deflator for the 
January–March quarter of 2015 turning negative for the first time since 2009. 
Developments in global financial markets 
B. 
Taking into account  the developments in the world economy  that  I have illustrated, let me 
turn to developments in global financial markets for the time being. The first key point is how 
a hike in the policy rate in the United States affects global financial markets. In light of the 
recent  U.S.  economic  indicators,  the  timing  of  a  hike  in  the  target  federal  funds  rate  that 
market participants expect is either moving forward or backward. On the other hand, the Fed 
is working to let the markets factor in a rate hike in the near future while cautiously avoiding 
providing decisive information. Judging from pricing in the federal funds futures market, this 
intention  by  the  Fed  has  generally  permeated  the  markets,  and  the  difference  in  views 
between Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) participants and the markets – which was 
seen some time ago – is starting to be resolved (Chart 5). Of course, if market participants 
begin  to  identify  the  specific  timing  of  a  rate  hike,  global  financial  markets  might  show  a 
different  reaction  from  the  past.  This  concern  seems  to  have  materialized  in  the  market 
reaction when Fed Chair Janet Yellen mentioned the valuation in the stock and bond markets 
in early May 2015. Meanwhile, as a result of a number of financial regulations, major market 
makers’ risk-taking activities have been restricted, inducing concern regarding a decline in 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
liquidity  even  in  the  U.S.  Treasury  markets.  Given  these  circumstances,  I  would  like  to 
monitor carefully  whether, when the timing of a rate hike becomes clearer in the future, a 
change  in  the  international  flow  of  funds  will  not  cause  any  significant  repricing  or 
unexpected knock-on effects in various asset markets. 
The second key point in terms of developments in global financial markets is the effects of 
large-scale  asset  purchases  by  the  ECB  (Chart  6).  When  these  purchases  were  first 
implemented, it was considered that the effects of the purchases had already been factored 
in. However, even after the implementation, long-term interest rates in European countries 
fell  markedly;  for  example,  10-year  German  bund  yields  declined  to  around  0 percent 
temporarily.  At  the  same  time,  the  euro  depreciated  further.  Since  late  April,  however  – 
probably because of a reaction to the sharp drop in interest rates – long-term interest rates in 
Germany  have  risen  above  the  level  seen  before  the  implementation  of  the  ECB’s  asset 
purchases,  and  thus  have  exhibited  rather  volatile  movements.  This  increase  in  volatility 
appears to be related to a decline in market liquidity, resulting from the scale of the ECB’s 
purchases being massive relative to the size of sovereign bond markets. Also, in Japan, a 
rise  in  volatility  in  long-term  interest  rates  was  observed  both  after  the  introduction  of 
quantitative and qualitative monetary easing (QQE) in April 2013 and following the expansion 
of QQE at end-October 2014. Specifically, contrary to the initial intention, yields on 10-year 
Japanese  government  bonds  (JGBs)  temporarily 
jumped  up  somewhat  significantly 
immediately  after  the  implementation  of  QQE.  In  contrast,  they  declined  further  after  the 
expansion  of  QQE  and  have  recently  returned  to  around  the  level  seen  before  such 
expansion. These fluctuations in long-term interest rates appear to be attributable not only to 
monetary policy but also to external factors, and therefore should be assessed carefully. That 
being said, if the effects of monetary policy are produced by the declines in nominal or real 
interest  rates,  due  attention  should  be  paid  to  the  possibility  that  liquidity  premiums  in the 
JGB  markets  –  brought  about  by  the  Bank’s  massive  JGB  purchases  –  might  in  part  be 
weakening the effects of monetary policy. There is also a possibility that the fluctuations in 
long-term interest rates reflect the move to factor in improvement in the outlook for economic 
activity and prices. 
The third key point is also related to European factors – namely, developments in political 
and economic conditions in Greece. As the Greek government faces severe financing needs, 
negotiations  regarding  financial  assistance  to  the  country  continue.  At  this  point,  possible 
effects on peripheral European countries are limited. However, I would like to monitor future 
developments  whether  or  not  any  unexpected  knock-on  effects  emerge  in  global  financial 
markets. 
Developments in Japan’s economy 
C. 
Looking  at  developments  in  Japan’s  economy for  the  January–March  quarter  of  2015,  not 
only business fixed investment but also exports and production maintained their moderate 
improving trend. Private consumption and imports were resilient and final demand remained 
firm. For the April–June quarter, the economy is expected to continue recovering moderately 
because,  for  example,  it  seems  that  private  consumption  has  been  resilient  since  March, 
although  production  is  projected  to  be  more  or  less  unchanged,  mainly  due  to  inventory 
adjustments in some industries (Chart 7). Expectations for somewhat higher growth in the 
world economy will also serve as a tailwind for Japan’s economy. The virtuous cycle from 
income  to  consumption  and  investment  will  likely  operate,  with  its  certainty  gradually 
increasing,  on  the  back  of  the  firm  employment  situation  and  favorable  corporate  results. 
However,  we  should  probably  be  mindful  of  the  risk  that  the  increase  in  households’  real 
purchasing  power  and  the  improvement  in  corporate  profits,  both  brought  about  by  lower 
crude  oil  prices,  will  not  lead  to  an  expansion  of  spending  by  as  much  as  expected,  and 
consequently pressure for excess savings – or for an increase in current account surplus – 
will not be alleviated easily. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  
 
With regard to the employment and income situation, which forms the basis for the virtuous 
cycle  that  I  just  mentioned,  wages  continue  to  rise  moderately  in  a  situation  where  labor 
market conditions have become increasingly tight, even after the year-on-year growth in total 
cash  earnings  was  revised  downward  due  to  the  replacement  of  samples  in  the  Monthly 
Labour Survey (Chart 8). Wages are expected to continue increasing moderately, reflecting a 
base pay increase that is likely to take place for a second consecutive year. Thus, private 
consumption is expected to reach a moderately higher level as the effects of a decline in real 
income due to the consumption tax hike in April 2014 dissipate gradually. 
From  a  somewhat  longer-term  perspective,  I  focus  on  the  pace  of  increase  in  firms’ 
productivity, which is the basis for a sustainable rise in wages, as well as on the impact of the 
aging  population.  In  order  for  consumption  to  maintain  its  uptrend  in  the  medium  term,  it 
would be necessary to have a sustainable recovery in real wages of about 60 million workers 
that could offset developments in real income of about 40 million pensioners. The pace of 
recovery in private consumption will likely remain very moderate from a somewhat longer-
term perspective, even considering that wages will gradually see a higher rate of increase in 
accordance  with  a  rise  in  productivity  brought  about  by  an  increase  in  business  fixed 
investment,  and  that  confidence  in  the  sustainability  of  the  social  security  system  will 
increase because of the implementation of related reforms. 
Regarding  private  business  fixed  investment,  such  investment  on  a  GDP  basis  has  been 
slow to increase so far despite a pick-up in monthly indicators, such as shipments and the 
aggregate supply of capital goods, and the firmness in investment plans suggested by the 
results of the Tankan (Short-Term Economic Survey of Enterprises in Japan). However, fixed 
investment  overseas  has  been  marking  consecutive  double-digit  increases  recently, 
suggesting that firms’ appetite for fixed investment on a consolidated basis has been robust 
for  some  time  (Chart  9). What  matters  is  not  whether  firms  will  increase  fixed  investment 
further,  but  whether  they  will  make  investments  in  Japan.  In  this  regard,  domestic  fixed 
investment  so 
in  particular,  but  some 
manufacturers are finally beginning to increase production capacity in Japan, reflecting the 
yen’s  depreciation  the  past  two  years,  although  automobile  firms’  shifting  of  production 
facilities  to  overseas,  which  has  been  made  in  a  full-fledged  manner  since  around  2014, 
remains in some part. 
From a somewhat longer-term perspective, whether a change in firms’ production network 
strategies  will  become  widespread,  in  turn  leading  to  increasingly  building  up  production 
capacity in Japan rather than overseas, depends on their medium- to long-term projections 
for exchange rates. Specifically, if firms judge the yen’s depreciation the past two years to be 
a sustainable trend, they would proceed with increasing their production capacity in Japan. 
On the other hand, firms that have concern regarding a possible resurgent appreciation of 
the  yen  would  not  easily  change  their  production  network  strategies  even  with  the  recent 
depreciation of the yen. In this regard, the Annual Survey of Corporate Behavior, conducted 
by the Cabinet Office, provided a favorable factor: the yen-U.S. dollar rate for the next year 
forecasted  by  firms  was  119.5  yen/dollar,  marking  a  weaker  yen  forecast  for  the  third 
consecutive year (Chart 10). However, it should be noted that, when firms decide their fixed 
investment, long-term projections for the next five to ten years are important. Therefore, it is 
uncertain whether a trend of increasing production capacity in Japan will become widespread 
in the future. 
far  has  been  made  by  nonmanufacturers 
Developments in prices 
D. 
Let  me  now  turn  to  developments  in  prices.  The  year-on-year  rate  of  increase  in  the 
consumer price index (CPI) for all items less fresh food has been about 0 percent recently, 
reflecting the decline in energy prices. It is likely to be at this level for the time being, due to 
the remaining effects of the decline in energy prices (Chart 11). This suggests that consumer 
prices  also  lack  momentum  at  present.  However,  a  decline  in  general  prices  due  to  the 
decrease in energy prices exerts upward pressure on real income, and therefore I consider 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
this  to  be  a  favorable  factor  for  Japan’s  economy. What  matters  is  not  the  fluctuations  in 
monthly figures of the year-on-year rates of change in the CPI, but the underlying trend in 
inflation, which reflects the overall economic conditions. In my view, the underlying trend in 
inflation is firmly maintained. 
In a situation where the inflation rate rose mainly due to the depreciation of the yen and the 
increase  in  energy  prices  in  the  past  two  years,  various  soft  data  suggested  a  negative 
reaction by households to a rise in the inflation rate in light of sluggish growth in real wages. 
In fact, private consumption, which was also affected by the consumption tax hike, had been 
sluggish (Chart 12). This should prove that people consider it desirable to see the inflation 
rate rising in balance with wages and income as economic conditions improve, rather than 
seeing the inflation rate simply rising. I believe that the price stability target intrinsically aims 
for such desirable developments. 
A  matter  of  concern  is  whether  the  deceleration  in  the  rate  of  increase  in  the  CPI  or  the 
decline in the CPI on a year-on-year basis, which have been observed recently, will not affect 
people’s medium- to long-term inflation expectations in a backward-looking manner. In this 
regard,  judging  from  firms’  price-setting  behavior,  consumers’  spending  activity,  and  the 
recent  developments  in  wage  negotiations,  people’s  perception  of  inflation  has  been 
changing steadily despite the decline in energy prices. Moreover, a wide range of estimates 
– such as those of expected inflation derived from nominal interest rates1 and those of trend 
inflation  using  a  regime-switching  model2  –  suggest  that  medium-  to  long-term  inflation 
expectations in Japan appear to be rising since the introduction of QQE from a somewhat 
longer-term  perspective  (Chart  13).  However,  under  the  deflation  that  lasted  for  over 
15 years,  medium-  to  long-term  inflation  expectations  appear  to  consistently  remain  lower 
than those in the United States. The challenge is to re-anchor these expectations at around 
2 percent, comparable to the level in the United States. 
What I consider important as factors that determine people’s medium- to long-term inflation 
expectations are not just the past developments in the inflation rate that I mentioned earlier, 
but also developments in the overall economy and in asset prices, as well as forward-looking 
expectation formation based on, for example, wage revisions. Taking this point into account, 
I  hold  the  optimistic  view  that  it  is  less  likely  that  people’s  medium-  to  long-term  inflation 
expectations  will  be  negatively  affected  by  a  decline  in  the  inflation  rate  due  to  the  fall  in 
energy prices. 
I  would  note  that  the  recent  results  of  academic  research  on  the  methods  for  measuring 
inflation  rates  offer  valuable  suggestions  for  the  old  but  also  new  issue  of  how  to  define 
consumer prices. For example, the SRI-Hitotsubashi Unit Value Price Index, which has been 
developed by Professor Naohito Abe of Hitotsubashi University, incorporates prices of new 
goods that firms frequently introduce into markets in calculating price indexes3 According to 
the research by Professor Abe, 46–47 percent of goods do not exist in the same week of the 
previous year at the average retailers, indicating that replacement rates of goods are very 
high in reality (Chart 14). The same research also finds that some new goods are virtually 
unchanged  from  the  previous  ones,  suggesting  a  possibility  that  firms  replace  goods 
frequently as a means of adjusting prices in effect. In calculating a change in prices of goods 
                                                
1   See Kei Imakubo and Jouchi Nakajima, “Estimating Inflation Risk Premia from Nominal and Real Yield Curves 
Using a Shadow-Rate Model,” Bank of Japan Working Paper Series No. 15-E-1, April 2015. 
2   See Sohei Kaihatsu and Jouchi Nakajima, “Has Trend Inflation Shifted? An Empirical Analysis with a Regime-
Switching Model,” Bank of Japan Working Paper Series No. 15-E-3, May 2015. 
3   For details, see Naohito Abe, “Saikin no Kakaku Shisuu no Doukou to Shin Shohin no Eikyo ni tsuite (Recent 
Developments  in  Price  Indexes  and  Effects  of  New  Goods),”  Newsletter  No. 3,  the  Research  Center  for 
Economic and Social Risks (RCESR), Institute of Economic Research, Hitotsubashi University, March 2015 
(available  in  Japanese),  and  Naohito  Abe  et  al.,  “Effects  of  New  Goods  and  Product  Turnover  on  Price 
Indexes,” RCESR Discussion Paper Series No. DP15–2, March 2015. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  
 
over a particular period, general consumer price indexes only cover the goods for which price 
information is available at the beginning and the end of the period; on the other hand, the 
SRI-Hitotsubashi Unit Value Price Index quantifies the importance of the introduction of new 
goods that I have just mentioned. The research concludes that, mainly due to the effects of 
such  introduction  on  prices, the  year-on-year  rate  of  increase  in  the  SRI-Hitotsubashi  Unit 
Value Price Index for supermarkets has recently been at about 1 to 1.5 percent, which shows 
a higher rate of inflation than in CPI statistics released by the Ministry of Internal Affairs and 
Communications  (MIC) and  in  a  price  index  that  only  covers  continuing  goods  (Chart  15). 
These research results do not allow simple comparison with the CPI statistics released by 
the  MIC,  in  part  because  the  coverage  of  the  SRI-Hitotsubashi  Unit  Value  Price  Index  is 
limited  to  goods  with  point-of-sale  (POS)  data. However,  I take the  view  that  they  provide 
useful insights to firms’ price-setting behavior through the introduction of new goods and its 
effects on developments in prices, and to a divergence between the inflation rate perceived 
by households and that measured by price statistics. 
II. 
Future conduct of monetary policy 
The price stability target and conduct of monetary policy 
A. 
In what follows, I explain issues regarding monetary policy. About two years ago, the Bank 
introduced QQE to achieve the price stability target of 2 percent in terms of the year-on-year 
rate of change in the CPI at the earliest possible time, with a time horizon of about two years. 
The latest figure for the year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI is about 0 percent due to the 
decline  in  energy  prices,  and  the  baseline  scenario  outlined  in  the  April  2015  Outlook  for 
Economic Activity and Prices shows that the timing of reaching the price stability target has 
been delayed to around the first half of fiscal 2016 (Chart 16). However, the Bank’s Policy 
Board has judged that no policy actions are necessary at this point based on the view – as I 
mentioned  earlier  –  that  the  underlying  trend  in  inflation  is  firmly  maintained  under  the 
virtuous cycle of the economy. 
With regard to the timing of reaching the price stability target, I believe that the phrase “at the 
earliest possible time” represents the essence and that “a time horizon of about two years” is 
only  a  non-binding  target,  as  the  commitment  to  achieving  a  specific  price  level  within  a 
specific time frame, in my opinion, does not fit the conduct of monetary policy adopted by 
other major countries in the first place. That is, in my understanding, the price stability target 
is a rolling target with a time horizon of about two years, and this is broadly in line with the 
idea of inflation targeting adopted by major countries. From this viewpoint, the delay in the 
timing of reaching the price stability target would not be the essential problem. As I touched 
on earlier, firms and households generally have a negative reaction to mere inflation, mainly 
due to concern over a rise in costs and to the negative effects on real wages, both stemming 
from a rise in import prices. 
On the other hand, in continuing with QQE, I consider it necessary to take into account that 
this  policy  is  a  kind  of  shock  therapy  that  influences  formation  of  people’s  inflation 
expectations through the lowering of real interest rates and risk premiums brought about by 
massive asset purchases, as well as through a strong commitment. The Bank has provided 
forward  guidance  –  namely,  that  it  will  continue  with  QQE,  as  long  as  it  is  necessary  for 
achieving  the  price  stability  target  in  a  stable  manner  –  and  of  course,  the  necessity  of 
continuing  QQE  will  be  judged  in  line  with  this  guidance.  I  therefore  do  not  think  that  the 
current  policy  framework  should  be  reviewed  in  an  automatic  fashion  simply  because  two 
years have passed since the introduction. In my understanding, the price stability target is a 
flexible  concept  with  a  certain  range  for  upward  and  downward  deviations  of  the  actual 
inflation  rate  from  the  target  under  the  framework  of  forecast  targeting.  It  is  also  my 
understanding that achieving the price stability target in a stable manner does not refer to a 
state in which the year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI simply marks 2 percent, but rather 
one in which people’s medium- to long-term inflation expectations are re-anchored at around 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
2 percent – in other words, a situation in which households and firms are projected to shift 
their consumption and investment behavior to one that assumes around 2 percent inflation. 
The status of achieving the price stability target and the necessity of continuing QQE will be 
judged by the Bank’s Policy Board at each Monetary Policy Meeting. In doing so, I would like 
to take into account (1) the effects of QQE after its expansion, (2) the sustainability of the 
Bank’s massive JGB purchases, and (3) a wide range of QQE’s side effects, all of which I will 
elaborate on shortly. 
Effects of QQE after its expansion 
B. 
The  first  point  that  needs  to  be  examined  in  continuing  with  QQE  is  its  policy  effects 
(Chart 17).  After  the  expansion  of  QQE  at  end-October  2014,  the  10-year  JGB  yields 
temporarily dropped below 0.2 percent, but these recently have recovered to around the level 
seen prior to the expansion. Meanwhile, the market’s outlook for economic activity and prices 
has actually been revised downward, and therefore there is a lack of persuasive evidence of 
a further rise in inflation expectations. 
One  of  the  assumed  transmission  mechanisms  of  QQE  is  to  put  downward  pressure  on 
nominal interest rates across the entire yield curve through massive purchases of JGBs. I 
understood the expansion of QQE at end-October 2014 as an action that would strengthen 
such  a  mechanism.  In  reality,  however,  it  appears  to  me  that  the  degree  of  difficulty  in 
implementing  QQE  is  rising,  as  the  effect  of  lowering  nominal  interest  rates  has  been 
diminishing  gradually,  due  mainly  to  a  rise  in  liquidity  premiums,  despite  a  large-scale 
expansion of the Bank’s JGB purchases. 
Let me give you some background as to why  it has become difficult for long-term interest 
rates to decline. First, interest rate levels are already low, and it is becoming difficult to see a 
linear relationship between the amount of JGB purchases and interest rates. Second, there 
tends to be less demand for JGBs from final investors under extremely low interest rates. 
Third,  dealers’  risk  tolerance  is  declining,  as  there  is  an  increase  in  volatility  due  to  the 
decline in market liquidity and to the effects of overseas interest rates. 
I will explain these three factors in more detail. With regard to the first one, the key is whether 
real interest rates will decline further – in other words,  whether people’s medium- to long-
term  inflation  expectations  will  rise  further  only  with  the  Bank’s  “strong  and  clear 
commitment”  –  in  a  situation  where  it  is  becoming  difficult  for  nominal  interest  rates  to 
decline.  Of  course,  it  may  be  theoretically  possible  to  further  push  down  nominal  interest 
rates if the Bank continues its purchases of JGBs even with negative interest rates. However, 
in that case, the Bank would become the only buyer of JGBs, which would likely give rise to a 
concern over the Bank’s purchases being perceived as financing the fiscal deficit, as well as 
to  a  further  decline  in  market  functioning.  Regarding  the  second  factor,  whether  or  not 
demand  from  final  investors  will  decrease  depends  in  part  on  their  future  stance  on  JGB 
purchases. For example, a reduction in life insurance companies’ promised return for some 
insurance products that will start from July 2015 might affect investors’ future behavior (Chart 
18).  As  for  the  third  factor,  dealers’  risk  tolerance  will  likely  change  depending  on  market 
conditions. 
Taking such factors into consideration, I will pay close attention not only to the effects of the 
progress  in  the  Bank’s  asset  purchases  on  interest  rate formation,  but also  to  changes  in 
investors’ and dealers’ behavior, and closely monitor how policy effects will emerge in the 
future. 
Sustainability of the Bank’s massive asset purchases 
C. 
The second point that needs to be examined in continuing with QQE is the sustainability of 
the Bank’s massive JGB purchases (Chart 19). The Bank currently commits to purchasing 
JGBs with medium- to long-term maturities so that their amount outstanding will increase at 
an annual pace of about 80 trillion yen. On a gross basis, the Bank purchases JGBs at an 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  
 
annual pace of about 110 to 120 trillion yen, which is equivalent to about 90 percent of the 
total  amount  of  JGBs’  market  issuance.  If  final  investors  were  to  reduce  their  holdings  of 
JGBs  by  redeeming  the  bonds  each  time  they  come  to  maturity  and  not  reinvesting  the 
amount  redeemed  in  JGBs,  the  Bank’s  massive  JGB  purchases  would  be  sustainable. 
However, in reality, there is a certain level of demand for JGBs, mainly for those used as 
collateral.  For  example,  the  amount  of  JGB  holdings  by  major  banks,  which  had  been 
reduced at the time QQE was introduced, has been stable recently, and the same applies to 
the amount held by regional financial institutions. In a situation where there appears to be a 
certain level of demand by final investors to reinvest the amount redeemed at maturity, the 
sustainability of the Bank’s JGB purchases may become an issue if the Bank continues its 
massive purchases at the current pace while final investors reduce their holdings of JGBs to 
the least possible extent. This limit is dependent on the interest rate level and other factors at 
each point in time, and thus is difficult to project at this point. Nevertheless, in continuing with 
QQE,  it  is  important  to  give  consideration  to  its  feasibility  in  terms  of  the  Bank’s  market 
operations. 
Examination of side effects 
D. 
The third point that needs to be examined in continuing with QQE is the side effects of the 
Bank’s massive asset purchases. It is true that policy effects and side effects are two sides of 
the  same  coin,  and  positive  effects  cannot  be  expected  from  policies  that  have  no  side 
effects.  Having  said  that,  in  continuing  with  the  unprecedented  policy,  it  is  essential  to 
compare its positive effects and side effects and examine whether the latter do not outweigh 
the marginal effects from continuing the policy. With regard to how the increase in the share 
of  the  Bank’s  holdings  in  the  JGB  market  affects  market  functioning,  I  am  somewhat 
concerned about the results of the Bond Market Survey conducted by the Bank in February 
2015, as recovery in market functioning is considered to be the key to a smooth exit from 
QQE  from  a  somewhat  longer-term  perspective  (Chart  20).  I  also  continue  to  pay  careful 
attention to the effects of the continued extremely low interest rates on financial institutions’ 
business, and to the stability of the broadly defined settlement system. 
Importance of efforts toward fiscal consolidation 
E. 
The Bank’s massive purchases of JGBs are carried out only in the context of the conduct of 
monetary policy and not in any way to finance the fiscal deficit. In order for this explanation to 
be  persuasive,  the  government’s  efforts  toward  fiscal  consolidation  are  important.  It  also 
should be noted that the massive JGB purchases, if continued over a long period, could lead 
to  extremely  low  interest  rates  being  built  into  the  fiscal  plan,  thereby  affecting  fiscal 
discipline  –  although  the  continuation  of  such  purchases  aims  at  fulfilling  the  purpose  of 
monetary  policy.  Once market  participants  have  concern  about fiscal  discipline,  controlling 
long-term interest rates will become difficult, even for the Bank. My assessment is that QQE 
has generally been exerting its intended effects so far, but in order for QQE to gain success 
–  such  as  a  smooth  process  of  finding  an  exit  from  QQE  from  a  somewhat  longer-term 
perspective  –  the  government’s  initiatives  toward  fiscal  consolidation  are  important.  The 
government looks to formulate a new fiscal consolidation plan by summer 2015 to maintain 
its  goal  of  generating  a  surplus  in  the  primary  balance  for  fiscal  2020.  The  Bank  strongly 
expects  that  the  government  will  steadily  promote  measures  aimed  at  establishing  a 
sustainable  fiscal  structure  with  a  view  to  ensuring  the  credibility  of  the  country’s  fiscal 
management. 
Concluding remarks: Economic activity in Yamanashi Prefecture 
My concluding remarks will touch on the economy of Yamanashi Prefecture. 
A  feature  of  the  industrial  structure  of  Yamanashi  Prefecture  is  that  its  share  of 
manufacturing  –  industries  relating  to  machinery  in  particular  –  is  larger  than  that  in  the 
country overall. The prefecture’s economy has recently been recovering moderately, led by 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
manufacturing  firms  that  are  attracting  external  demand,  both  directly  and  indirectly 
(Chart 21). 
Nevertheless,  from  a  somewhat  longer-term  perspective,  there  have  been  moves  by 
manufacturing industries in the prefecture to concentrate their production sites in Japan or 
shift a part of their production overseas, for the purpose of enhancing cost competitiveness, 
mainly in response to the yen’s appreciation since the Lehman shock and to intensification of 
competition stemming from growth of Asian firms. Such moves have led to structural issues 
in the prefecture, such as a declining population as well as an aging population and declining 
birth rate. 
In  addressing  these  issues,  the  key  should  be  to  make  full  use  of  the  advantages  of 
Yamanashi Prefecture. The first advantage is that the prefecture is close to Tokyo and yet 
blessed with a bounteous nature, including Mt. Fuji and hot springs. Recently, in particular, 
the  number  of  foreign  visitors  to  the  prefecture  has  been  increasing  substantially,  partly 
owing  to  the  yen’s  depreciation.  It  also  should  be  noted  that  the  prefecture  is  a  highly 
attractive place to move to, for those who live in the Tokyo metropolitan area. I have heard 
that initiatives to take advantage of such an environment are spreading, such as improving 
tourism infrastructure and expanding a supporting system to invite those who wish to move 
to  the  area.  Moreover,  events  such  as  the  Tokyo  2020  Summer  Olympic  and  Paralympic 
Games  and  the  launch  of  the  Linear  Chuo  Shinkansen  line  will  act  as  a  tailwind  for 
Yamanashi Prefecture. 
The  second  advantage  is  the  advanced  technologies  that  firms  in  Yamanashi  Prefecture 
have developed so far. I hope that technological innovation will advance as a result of further 
brushing up these technologies, applying them to new areas, and working to integrate them 
with  other  firms’  technologies.  This,  together  with  cooperative  efforts  among  industry, 
government, academia, and financial institutions, is expected to lead to future achievements. 
I would like to conclude this speech by expressing my strong hope that the region will enjoy 
further growth in the future through the initiatives I have mentioned, while making use of its 
potential. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
    10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
    12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13 
    14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    15 
    16 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    17 
    18 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    19 
    20 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    21 
    22 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
