  Anita Angelovska-Bezoska: Macedonia’s current macroeconomic 
landscape and main challenges ahead 
Speech  by  Ms  Anita  Angelovska-Bezoska,  Vice-Governor  of  the  National  Bank  of  the 
Republic  of  Macedonia,  at the  economic  and financial  dialogue  on  the Economic  Reforms 
Programs on Western Balkan and Turkey, Brussels, 12 May 2015. 
 Dear Ministers, 
Dear representatives of the European Commission, European Central Bank and Eurostat, 
At  the  beginning,  let  me  express  our  gratitude  to  the  European  Central  Bank,  European 
Commission  and  Eurostat for their  assessment of  our  Economic  Reforms  Program for the 
period 2015–2017. Let me mention that we appreciate very much this dialogue with the EU 
institutions and the overall feedback on our policies that we have received during the process 
and we believe that it is highly beneficial regarding our preparedness for joining the EU. At 
this  point,  I  would  like  to  address  several  important  issues  related  to  the  current 
macroeconomic  landscape  of  the  Macedonian  economy,  as  well  as  the  main  challenges 
ahead. 
The growth momentum was kept in 2014, with the real GDP growth accelerating to 3.8% p.a. 
As the external environment is not sufficiently “growth-conducive”, the strong performance of 
the domestic economy is explained by country-specific factors. Firstly, it is a reflection of the 
positive fundamental shifts, with growing foreign investments, mainly in the tradable sector. 
They are helping the economy to gradually increase its resilience, by significantly increasing 
the  diversification  of  the  production  and  the  export  structure  of  the  economy,  but  also  by 
yielding positive second-round effects, improving the labor market conditions, increasing the 
know-how, integrating domestic suppliers in the production process. Secondly, the economy 
has been impacted favorably by the fiscal stimulus in the infrastructure, an area continuously 
being pinpointed as a weak spot, when it comes to the structural competitiveness. Hence, 
albeit the fiscal impulse does have positive short run effects on growth – bridging over the 
current “anemic external environment”, it also affects the long-term potential of the economy. 
The solid economic recovery is significantly improving the labor market conditions, increasing 
the labor demand, reducing the unemployment, positively impacting the participation rate, but 
also  boosting  the  productivity  growth  of  the  economy.  As  being  largely  export  and 
investment-led, the  solid  growth  does  not  create  pressures  on the  external  position  of  the 
economy,  nor  on  the  inflation.  On  the  contrary,  the  external  sector  is  in  a  relatively  good 
shape, with the current account deficit being brought down to 1.3% of GDP, hitting the low 
end of the average of around 2% in the last five years. The incessant improvement in the 
current account, to a large extent reflects the rising net-impact on trade of the new foreign 
production facilities, this particularly being the case in 2014. Yet, as the foreign demand has 
started  to  recover,  some  positive  shifts  in  the  more  traditional  export  segments  are  also 
visible. Of course, last year the fall in the oil prices was also beneficial for the trade balance. 
On  the  financing  side,  the  financial  flows  were  large  enough  to  cover  the  current  account 
deficit and to provide additional reserve accumulation. It is important to note that FDI inflows 
continued to flow in the economy, with their ratio to GDP being kept stable at 3.3% of GDP. 
Yet, the largest part of the financing flows came through the government borrowing at the 
international market, at rather favorable terms, pinpointing the perception of the investors for 
sound fundamentals and rather prudent policies in the Macedonian economy. Observing the 
inflation path, it more or less resembled the inflation pattern elsewhere, with the falling food 
and  energy  prices  pushing  prices  down.  The  average  headline  rate  for  2014  was  mildly 
negative (–0.3%), while the core inflation albeit slowing down, on average remained positive. 
The  inflation  adjustment  is  perceived  as  temporary,  driven  by  supply-side  factors,  and 
without any risks to become entrenched in the inflation expectations and to jeopardize the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
economic recovery. The fact that the negative output gap has been narrowing and the fall of 
the prices has been significantly slowing down in the first months of this year, just support the 
former notion. 
Domestic  financing  through  the  banking  sector  significantly  increased  in  2014,  with  credit 
market  recovering  much  faster  compared  to  the  previous  years.  Given  that  the  banking 
system entered the crisis with sufficient capital and liquidity buffers, the credit flows to the 
economy in fact never seized. Yet, during the last year, on the backdrop of the economic 
recovery and the improvement in the overall risks perceptions, the credit accelerated to 10% 
on an annual basis, reflecting both the supply and demand for credits. A notable rise of the 
allocation  of  credits  to  corporate  sector  compared  to  the  previous  years  was  observed. 
Hence, both the size and the structure of credits were growth supportive. The financing of the 
credit growth was underpinned by solid rise in deposits (10.4% p.a.), confirming yet again the 
reliance of the banks on domestic sources of financing, rather than on cross-border flows, 
which might be quite volatile at the current juncture. An important point here is the trend of 
rising preferences to save in domestic currency, which continued in 2014, reflecting stable 
expectations and reducing the monetary policy burden. The banking sector remained stable 
and sound, with solid liquidity and capital adequacy ratio of 15.7% at the end of 2014. Non-
performing  loans  of  the  banks  remained  at  a  moderate  level  during  the  crisis  period, 
compared with the region. In 2014, they were relatively stable, slightly decreasing to 11.3% 
at  the  end  of  the  year  and  remained  highly  provisioned.  The  actual  and  the  envisaged 
economic recovery is expected to further improve the quality and the financial soundness of 
the borrowers, and to further support the downward path of the NPLs. Yet, vigilance in this 
area is important to prevent buildup and materialization of systemic risk. Last year was no 
exception in terms of close monitoring of the soundness of the banking system, and changes 
in the prudential regulation, which were an appropriate balance between the need to support 
private sector financing, while maintaining the health of the banking system at the same time. 
What  was  the monetary  policy  stance  like  in  2014  given  the  already  elaborated  economic 
and financial conditions? In general, the accommodative stance was maintained. The main 
interest rate was maintained at the historically lowest level, the targeted measures to support 
net-exporting and electricity producing companies were extended until the end of 2015, and 
certain credit-supportive macro-prudential measures were undertaken. This relatively loose 
stance  was  maintained  as  a  consequence  of  the  “benign”  external  position,  which  did  not 
jeopardize  the  foreign  reserves,  and  enabled  a  rather  balanced  foreign  exchange  market 
during the year. Low inflation was also in favor of maintaining the accommodative stance. 
Yet, the room for monetary policy accommodation appears to be largely exhausted. 
The  outlook  for  the  2015–2016,  is  more  or  less  expected  to  resemble  the  state  of  the 
economy in the previous year. Growth of the economy is expected to accelerate to 4.1% and 
4.5% in 2015 and 2016. The fundamental factors to underpin the growth dynamics remain 
the same. The boost to the export and investment is expected by the new and the existing 
foreign  companies,  as  well  as  those  envisaged  to  enter  the  market.  Investment  cycle  is 
expected to be further strengthened by the continuation of the productive fiscal investments. 
As  the  external  demand  is  envisaged  to  recover  further,  additional  stimuli  is  expected 
through this channel. The above mentioned growth factors are expected to strengthen further 
the labor market and the disposable income of the households, hence boosting the private 
consumption as well. The growth expectations provide room for additional rise of the deposit 
potential in the banking system, which accompanied with the rise in the credit demand and 
the willingness of the banks to lend, should enable credit growth at a rate of 9–10% in the 
period  to  come.  The  inflation  is  expected  to  be  influenced  mainly  by  the  global  prices  of 
primary  commodities  and  the  consumers  prices  of  our  main  trading  partners.  An  average 
inflation of 0.5% is expected for 2015, with the current forecast indicating its reversal to 2% in 
2016, reflecting the rise in the demand and in the import prices. The structural improvements 
in the export sector are expected to continue in 2015, which along with the overall external 
recovery  and  the  much  lower  oil  prices,  are  envisaged  to  bring  about  a  moderate  current 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
account deficit of bellow 1.6% of GDP. In the following year,  widening to 3% is expected, 
reflecting  the  fall  in  private  transfers  and  import  pressures  from  the  new  investment.  The 
external financing needs, within the current scenario, are expected to be covered by further 
inflows of foreign direct investments and by the public borrowing for infrastructure purposes. 
The current forecast points to a rather stable external debt to GDP ratio. No major pressures 
are foreseen in the following two years on foreign reserves, and they are to be maintained at 
the adequate level. 
Risks surrounding this baseline macroeconomic scenario should not be neglected. For us, as 
a small an open economy, they mostly come from the external environment and our main 
trading  and  financial  partners.  Although  with  the  latest  monetary  easing  of  the  ECB  the 
downside  risks  to  the  euro  zone  growth  are  less  pronounced,  and  in  general  the  global 
growth risks are more balanced, they are still present and if being materialized, could impact 
the  economy.  Additional  source  of  risks  are  the  sharp  and  sudden  swings  in  the  primary 
commodities prices, which for country like ours, can change the envisaged economic profile 
to a large extent. A new, additional source of risks is the current domestic political context, 
which can harm the economy, if not being tackled swiftly. 
Of  course,  the  risks  are  challenging  and  are  to  be  closely  monitored.  This  is  even  more 
pronounced,  given  that  the  policies’  space  at  the  current  juncture  is  to  a  great  extent 
exhausted.  Hence,  the  continuation  of  the  structural  reforms  remains  paramount  and  a 
challenge,  as  it  can  further  increase  the  resilience  of  the  economy,  mitigate  the  risks  and 
reduce the policy burden. For us as emerging country, with foreign bank presence, the global 
financial  regulatory  reforms  also  pose  challenges,  as 
they  can  possibly  stimulate 
deleveraging, reduce access to financing and financing flows to the private sector. 
At the end, let me also avail myself of this opportunity to emphasize yet again our continuous 
efforts  to  align  with  the  EU  requirements  in  all  areas  of  operation,  especially  the  banking 
regulation and statistics, notwithstanding the efforts and the progress done in all other fields. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
