Rodrigo Vergara: The Monetary Policy Report and the Financial Stability 
Report 
Presentation by Mr Rodrigo Vergara, Governor of the Central Bank of Chile, before the 
Finance Commission of the Honorable Senate of the Republic, Santiago de Chile, 3 June 
2015. 
 Accompanying charts can be found on the Central Bank of Chile's website. 
The Monetary Policy Report of June 2015 and the Financial Stability Report of the first half of 2015 can be found 
at http://www.bcentral.cl. 
Introduction 
Mr. President of the Finance Committee of the Senate, Senator Andrés Zaldívar, senators 
members of this Committee, ladies and gentlemen. 
Thank you for inviting me to share the vision of the Board of the Central Bank of Chile on 
recent  macroeconomic  and  financial  developments,  their  prospects  and  implications  for 
monetary and financial policy making. This vision is contained in detail in the Monetary Policy 
Report of June 2015 and the Financial Stability Report of the first half of 2015. 
The  macroeconomic  scenario  shows  minor  changes  with  respect  to  forecasts  in  March. 
Annual inflation declined between February and April, but it remains above 4%. Output and 
demand continue to grow at a moderate pace, and the first quarter was better than expected, 
but  incoming  data  suggest  that  the  remainder  of  the  year  will  be  somewhat  less  dynamic 
than previously estimated. 
In the global economy, the growth outlook showed no major changes either. The weaker US 
figures  early  in  the  year  and  the  consolidation  of  better  prospects  in  Europe  are  worth 
mentioning. The dollar lost some of the strength it had gained during the first months of the 
year, while the market has pushed back its expectations regarding the beginning of the US 
monetary  tightening  process.  Nevertheless,  long-term  rates  rose  in  the  US,  as  in  most 
developed markets. The prices of most commodities rose, especially oil. 
In this context, the Board has held the monetary policy rate (MPR) at 3 percent, maintaining 
a significantly expansionary monetary policy stance. 
Let me now describe our baseline scenario and the main risks we have identified in the two 
reports I am presenting today. 
Macroeconomic scenario 
In recent months, core inflation (i.e. the CPIEFE, which excludes the prices of energy and 
foodstuffs)  has  brought  no  major  surprises  and  its  behavior  continues  to  be  largely 
determined by the effects of the peso depreciation and the usual indexation of the economy. 
However, annual CPI and CPIEFE inflation is still above 4% and, the same as in March, the 
baseline scenario of this  Monetary Policy Report assumes that it will hover around 4% for 
some months. After the publication of the previous Report, private inflation expectations for 
this year increased in line with that Report and have remained at a higher level since then. At 
one to two years’ term, expectations remain at or around 3%, which is the target set by the 
Central Bank (figure 1). 
In the first quarter, domestic output and demand grew slightly more in annual terms than was 
expected in March. This was visible in private and public consumption, and in investment in 
construction and other works, with the resulting increase in growth in construction, trade and 
some services. However, March figures and incoming indicators suggest that the recovery of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
1 
  growth in the remainder of the year will be somewhat slower than expected. This is reflected 
by  several  indicators,  such  as  retail  sales,  imports  of  consumer  goods  and  business  and 
consumer  expectations. Particularly  worrisome  is  the  possibility  of  consumer  and  business 
confidence  remaining  in  clearly  pessimistic  territory,  a  situation  that,  if  not  reversed,  will 
hinder the recovery of growth in the second half of the year (figure 3). The evolution of credit 
also reflects weak private spending. Annual growth of consumer and commercial loans is still 
bounded, despite the low interest rates. 
Job creation in the private sector has also been in line with the economic slowdown. Hiring in 
the most cycle-sensitive sectors, such as manufacturing and construction, post negative y-o-
y  rates  of  variation,  which  however  have  moderated  in  recent  months.  Nevertheless,  the 
stronger increase in employment in agriculture and services, especially some linked to the 
public sector, has led total employment to grow by about 1% annually. The unemployment 
rate remains low, because the slower employment growth is matched by also slower growth 
in the labor force (figure 4). 
Nominal  wages  continue  to  grow  strongly,  slightly  more  than  7  percent.  The  empirical 
evidence suggests that this owes mainly to the indexation to higher past inflation. Although 
this phenomenon is not as intense as it was in past decades, it is still significant. There is still 
the risk, however, that if wages remain high, the convergence of inflation may take longer. 
Another risk is that the evolution of wages may be reflecting a narrowing of output gaps with 
respect to the baseline scenario and, therefore, increased inflationary pressures. 
World economic data have shown lower growth in the US and a strengthening of the more 
positive  outlook  in  the  Eurozone.  Although  the  worsened  US  data  for  the  first  quarter  are 
believed to be mostly temporary, as I said, the moment when the market expects the Fed to 
begin adjusting the policy rate has been postponed. Nevertheless, long-term interest rates 
have risen, although with some reversal in recent days, and the yield curve has steepened in 
the  US  and  several  other  economies  (figure  5).  This  phenomenon  is  partly  related  to  the 
change  in  the  macroeconomic  outlook-the  recovery  process  in  the  developed  world  and 
higher  inflation-,  but  also  to  the  decompression  of  the  low  term  premiums  associated  with 
portfolio  reallocations.  Still,  external  financing  conditions  remain  favorable  by  historic 
standards. 
In  Chile,  with  ups  and  downs,  the  peso  has  appreciated  in  nominal  and  real  terms.  The 
peso/dollar  parity  is  around  615  as  of  the  closing  of  the  Monetary  Policy  Report,  and  has 
risen further to a little over 620 pesos to the dollar since. This, after surpassing CLP 640 in 
March and standing near CLP 600 in May. At the same time, the real exchange rate (RER) 
has  fallen from  around  97  in  February  to  a  value  near  its  last  fifteen  years’  average  most 
recently (figure 6). Long-term nominal interest rates have fluctuated less than their external 
counterparts have. 
In the emerging economies, the growth outlook is not very different from the one foreseen a 
few  months  ago,  confirming  the  slowdown  in  China.  Latin  America  remains  the  region 
suffering  the  most  profound  and  continuous  deterioration,  which  is  particularly  intense  in 
Brazil. Inflation remains low in a large part of the world, but not in Latin America where it is 
still  high.  Moreover,  the  prices  of  most  commodities,  although  with  fluctuations,  are  higher 
than those included in the March Report. Copper, after trading around US$2.9 per pound for 
a  few  days,  moved  closer  to  US$2.8  at  the  statistical  cutoff  date  (although  recently  it  has 
approached 2.7), while WTI oil is trading near $60 per barrel. This contrasts with the decline 
in food prices. 
I  should  note  two  important  trends  that  are  being  observed  in  the  world,  implying  greater 
convergence of growth. On one hand, while the US is expected to continue to grow faster 
than  Europe,  the  gap  between  the  two  regions  has  been  narrowing.  On  the  other  hand, 
emerging markets will continue to outgrow developed economies, but this gap is also closing. 
Turning  to  our  estimates,  the  baseline  scenario  foresees  that  this  year  GDP  will  grow 
between 2.25% and 3.25%, a range that is somewhat lower than estimated in the last Report 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  (table 3). This projection considers that the floods in the north of the country and one-time 
effects on important mines reduce the mining growth estimate, with a downward incidence on 
the  estimate  for  annual  GDP  growth  of  one  tenth  of  one  point  compared  with  the  March 
forecast.  Meanwhile,  since  the  partial  data  of  recent  months  show  weaker  private 
expenditure, it is foreseen that the recovery that was expected for the second half will occur 
at a slower pace than was projected in March. The Business Perceptions Report of last May 
confirmed bounded expectations regarding the performance of businesses and investments 
in 2015. Moreover, the CBC’s survey continued to point to a fall in valued projects for this 
year compared with 2014 (table 1). 
On the external front, our projection assumes trading partners’ growth to drop by one tenth of 
a point in 2015 and 2016, to 3.3% and 3.7%, respectively. This adjustment responds largely 
to the reduced projection for the US. In the Eurozone, prospects remain unchanged because 
first quarter data brought no surprises other than some differences within the region. Growth 
is revised down for China and Latin America, because of actual first-quarter data and weaker 
prospects. As for the terms of trade, our estimate continues to assume an improvement over 
2014,  although  not  as  big  as  was  expected  before.  In  the  baseline  scenario,  in  2015  and 
2016  copper  and  oil  are  expected  to  trade  at  somewhat  higher  prices  than  we  thought  in 
March (table 2). 
The  Chilean  economy  has  made  a  major  adjustment  in  recent  quarters,  improving  its 
external position and laying the foundation for a recovery without imbalances. This projection 
assumes that monetary policy will remain significantly expansionary and that fiscal policy will 
continue to contribute to expenditure growth in accordance with the fiscal rule and with the 
objectives  set  by  the  Administration.  It  also  considers  that  the  exchange  rate  depreciation 
accumulated since 2013 will continue to boost those tradable sectors that are more sensitive 
to the exchange rate. In addition, the price of fuels, which runs below the average of previous 
years, will continue to help reduce business costs and improve household income, even if its 
effects are smaller than expected a few months ago. 
As for inflation, in the baseline scenario the CPI should hover around 4 percent annually still 
for some months, and stabilize near 3 percent during 2016. The CPIEFE is expected to post 
an annual variation of close to 3 percent in 2016 and stay near that figure until the end of the 
projection horizon, this time the second quarter of 2017 (figure 7). 
This  trajectory  considers  that  the  transmission  to  prices  of  the  peso  depreciation 
accumulated in the past year will be in line with its historical patterns; that real wages will be 
adjusted  as  a function  of  productivity;  and  that  output gaps  will  remain  over  the  projection 
horizon. For the RER, the methodological assumption used is that, the same as now, it will 
fluctuate  in  the  upper  part  of  the  range  believed  to  be  consistent  with  its  long-term 
fundamentals. 
As  for  the  MPR,  the  working  assumption  is  that  the  gradual  withdrawal  of  the  monetary 
impulse  will  be  similar  to  what  is  suggested  by  surveys  over  a  one-year  horizon,  meaning 
that monetary policy should start normalizing by the turn of next year (figure 8). 
The baseline scenario reflects those events that are believed to be the most likely to occur 
with the information at hand at the closing of this Report. There are risks, however, which, if 
materialized, may reshape the macroeconomic outlook and, therefore, may alter the course 
of monetary policy. 
Abroad,  the  main  sources  of  risk  remain,  only  more  moderate.  The  possibility  of  specific 
events  generating  episodes  of  high  volatility  in  global  financial  markets  persists,  affecting 
funding costs, the exchange rate and the short-term inflation outlook. 
On  the  one  hand,  any  surprises  regarding  the  timing  or  the  pace  at  which  the  Fed  will 
increase  its  benchmark  rate  can  cause  fluctuations  in  asset  prices.  On  the  other,  there 
remains  the  risk  of  a  default  in  Greece  having  an  impact  on  global  financial  markets  and 
GDP growth in the Eurozone. While these are still significant risks, the ability of the larger 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  central banks to handle these situations has improved, reducing to some extent the intensity 
of the negative impact of such events. This is not to say that there are no associated risks or 
that their persistence for so long would have lesser effects. 
A  positive  note  is  the  more  consolidated  growth  in  the  Eurozone,  which  has  helped  to 
configure a more balanced global economic scenario. 
In the emerging economies, there are still significant risks. While the risk of commodity prices 
dropping  further  seems  to  have  eased,  Latin  American  economies  have  been  weaker  for 
longer  than  expected.  This  has  occurred  in  a  context  where  the  high  fiscal  and  current 
account  deficits  persist  in  many  economies,  making  the  necessary  adjustments  expensive 
and  difficult  to  implement.  The  risk  of  slower  growth  in  China  and  its  implications  for  the 
copper prices remains, although the Chinese authorities have given proof of their ability and 
desire to avoid abrupt corrections in their economy. 
Domestically, the economic recovery in the second half of the year should be accompanied 
by a significant improvement in confidence indicators, but so far it has not happened. To the 
extent that this situation continues, it is possible that domestic output and expenditure will fail 
to  show  the  greater  dynamism  that  is  expected  in  the  baseline  scenario.  Conversely,  a 
scenario  where  expectations  improve  significantly  would  allow  for  a  faster  recovery  of  the 
economy, particularly in 2016. 
Regarding  inflation,  pressures  are  somewhat  milder  than  expected  in  March,  due  to  lower 
activity and the fact that, although with volatility, the peso has not continued to depreciate. 
However,  in  a  context  of  persistently  high  inflation,  with  bounded  margins,  strong  wage 
growth,  higher  fuel  prices  and  external  risk  scenarios  that  can  drive  a  significant  further 
depreciation of the peso, inflationary risks remain important. As we are permanently aware of 
our legal mandate, this is one risk we analyze and monitor with special care. 
After evaluating these risks, the Board estimates that the risk balance is unbiased for both 
output and inflation. 
Summing  up,  inflation  remains  high,  despite  some  decline  in  recent  months.  Domestic 
activity  picked  up  in  the  first  quarter,  but  the  outlook  for  the  second  half  of  the  year  has 
moderated.  As  has  been  mentioned  before,  macroeconomic  policies  have  played  a 
countercyclical role. In particular, the stronger monetary impulse translated into a reduction 
of 200 basis points off the monetary policy rate,  which helped to drive the long-term rates 
close to their historic lows. 
The not so buoyant economy and the gradual decline in  inflation-in line with expectations- 
suggest  that,  under  the  assumptions  of  the  baseline  scenario,  the  discussion  about  the 
gradual  withdrawal  of  the  monetary  stimulus  could  be  delayed  with  respect  to  March 
expectations.  Overall,  any  future  changes  in  the  MPR  will  depend  on  the  evolution  of 
domestic  and  external  macroeconomic  conditions  and  their  implications  for  the  inflation 
outlook.  Indeed,  if  inflation  is  higher  and  more  unrelenting  than  we  have  foreseen,  the 
normalization should be anticipated; but if the convergence of inflation to the target is faster 
than foreseen, the opposite should happen. 
Let me now present a brief review to the main issues in our Financial Stability Report. 
The Financial Stability Report 
Our Financial Stability Report discloses, on a half-yearly basis (in June and December), the 
recent  macroeconomic  and  financial  developments  that  might  have  an  incidence  on  the 
Chilean  economy’s  financial  stability.  The  Report  we  present  today  examines  the  same 
external risk scenarios I have just described. 
As I said, monetary policy in developed economies remains expansionary. The measures of 
the  ECB  and  other  central  banks  that  cut  down  their  benchmark  rates  have  continued  to 
push down sovereign long-term rates, although lately they have shown some reversal. This, 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  plus  still  bounded  risk  premiums,  have  led  to  increased  issue  of  debt,  mainly  corporate. 
Thus,  an  environment  of  low-cost  funding  and  incentives  to  risk  taking  persists,  where 
vulnerabilities  may  be  incubating  that  could  emerge  as  the  global  financial  situation 
approaches normality. 
Again,  the  outlook  for  emerging  economies  has  continued  to  deteriorate.  Despite  a  very 
recent  increase,  the  prices  of  commodities-especially  oil-are  below  their  levels  of  recent 
years, affecting net exporting countries. Meanwhile, the growth prospects for China, Russia, 
and  particularly  Latin  America  are  also  declining  motivated  by  idiosyncratic  elements. 
Therefore,  there  is  the  risk  that,  beyond  the  real  channel,  commercial  links  and  direct 
investments by Chilean companies, one cannot rule out financial contagion episodes in the 
prices of some assets, such as the exchange rate and sovereign spreads. 
Internally,  the  note  of  caution  of  previous  Reports  with  respect  to  the  situation  of  the 
corporate sector is maintained. Indebtedness as a percentage of GDP reached 114 at the 
end  of  2014.  This  increase  came  mainly  from  a  higher  external  debt  and  the  peso 
depreciation (figure 9). Financial strength indicators of the companies reporting to the SVS 
are similar to those described in previous Reports, but low compared with historical averages 
(figure 10). This reflects a loss in the sector’s resilience to the possibility of a less favorable 
macroeconomic environment. Finally, some bank payment indicators have also deteriorated, 
with varying effects across banks, but especially affecting medium-sized ones. 
Activity  in  the  residential  housing  market  remains  strong,  with  prices  still  on  the  rise.  The 
moderation of production costs and anticipated purchases facing the upcoming enactment of 
the tax reform could be behind the sustained dynamic of the residential sector; meanwhile, 
price indicators continue to grow, although some moderation is observed in specific areas. 
In  the  office  space  sector,  new  square  meters  built  were  not  matched  by  an  equivalent 
increase in demand, generating a significant increase in the vacancy rate, as we warned in 
previous Reports. These levels could remain for a prolonged period due to the inertia of the 
market and the incorporation of new projects (figure 11). 
Aggregate household indicators remain relatively stable, but with some of them showing a 
marginal  deterioration.  The  debt  over  disposable  income  rose  in  2014,  while  the  financial 
burden  remained  around  14  percent  of  income,  due  to  low  interest  rates  (figure  12).  The 
lower interest rates facing households are also the result of a change in debt composition, 
away  from  higher-rate  consumer  loans  to  lower-rate  mortgage  loans.  No  changes  in 
indicators  of  bank  default  are  seen,  whereas  in  non-bank  lenders  a  new  increase  is 
observed. This latter phenomenon is partly explained by regulatory adjustments, although a 
worsening of the credit portfolios of said lenders cannot be ruled out. 
Commercial  and  consumer  credit  exhibit  bounded  growth  rates,  not  so  mortgage  loans, 
which remain strong (figure 13). The behavior of commercial and consumer loans is in line 
with  the  slower  growth  in  private  spending.  Demand-side  factors  could  be  behind  these 
dynamics, as suggested by the Bank Lending Survey. The expansion of mortgage lending is 
largely explained by the increase in the average debt, which is consistent with the dynamic of 
housing prices and debt to collateral ratios, which have remained stable. 
Bank  financial  indicators  have  been  stable.  Operating  income  continues  to  be  the  primary 
contributor  to  the  profitability  of  banks,  which  fell  from  the  end  of  2014,  to  16  percent  of 
equity  in  March.  This  was  due  to  the  reversal  of  the  temporary  impact  of  inflation  on  the 
indexation  margin  and  a  reduction  in  interest  rate  spreads.  Bond  issues  by  the  banks 
contribute  to  the  diversification  of  funding  sources,  but  medium-sized  banks  remain  highly 
dependent on wholesale funding. Stress tests yield that the levels of capitalization permit to 
absorb the materialization of a scenario of severe conditions (figure 14). 
In  short,  the  internal  and  external  scenarios  are  virtually  unchanged  from  the  last  Report, 
although  the  persistence  of  very  favorable  global  financing  conditions  can  incubate 
vulnerabilities that would emerge if and when such conditions disappear. This would have a 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  significant  impact  on  global  financial  markets,  particularly  in  emerging  economies,  whose 
growth prospects have been on a downward trend. 
In this context, the increasing indebtedness of domestic credit users (firms and households) 
translates into lower resilience to possible financial stress events, or to a deterioration of the 
macroeconomic  environment.  Chile  maintains  adequate  solvency  and  external  liquidity  to 
confront international financial stress scenarios. However, this does not insulate the country 
from such developments and their effects. 
I would like to finish with some final thoughts. 
Final thoughts 
The  macroeconomic  outlook  has  not  changed  much  with  respect  to  projections  in  March. 
Output  and  demand  are  posting  moderate  annual  growth  rates,  but  still  with  some 
improvement over the second half of last year. This is good news. However, marginal data 
show  some  loss  of  strength  which,  combined  with  low  confidence  indicators  for  firms  and 
households, leads us to estimate that the recovery foreseen for the second half of this year 
will  proceed  at  a  slower  pace.  Accordingly,  we  have  adjusted  our  growth  forecast  for  this 
year downward, by one fourth of a point. 
Inflation  has  moderated  but  is  still  high  and  thus  it  is  our  main  worry.  In  our  baseline 
scenario,  we  have  it  around  4  percent  for  some  months  to  later  descend  toward  our  3 
percent target. 
About the risks facing financial stability, the Report shows no big changes either. Corporate 
borrowing  continued  to  rise  in  the  past  few  quarters.  Although  there  are  obvious  factors 
behind  this  trend,  such  as  increased  external  borrowing-a  logical  development  given  the 
good credit conditions-and the depreciation of the peso, we must not relent in our efforts to 
closely monitor these tendencies. Anyway, figures also show that the households’ and firms’ 
financial  burden  has  not  increased,  largely  because  interest rates  are  low,  in  line  with  our 
clearly expansionary monetary policy. 
The external scenario has also behaved as we outlined in March. The recovery of developed 
economies  looks  more  balanced  across  countries,  boosting  confidence  in  consolidated 
growth of the developed world. Emerging markets continue to show some further weakening, 
especially  in  our  region.  Global  financial  conditions  are  still  on  the  favorable  side  from  a 
historical perspective, which in no case means that a sudden turnaround cannot happen. As 
a  matter  of  fact,  the  consequences  on  global  financial  markets  of  a  negative  outcome  in 
Greece or the ever closer rise in US interest rates are still significant risk situations which, 
despite having been on the horizon for so long, must not be overlooked or forgotten. 
Chile, as we have said time and again, has been able to confront the changes in external 
and  internal  conditions  via  a  significant  and  quick  adjustment.  The  absence  of  large 
imbalances,  combined  with  the  proper  macroeconomic  policy  framework,  are,  in  our  view, 
key elements, although not sufficient, to generate the conditions required to resume growth 
levels that allow us to reach the desired development of our country. 
In  this  context,  I  would  like  to  note  that  I  fully  endorse  what  the  Finance  Minister  said 
recently,  that  fiscal  stimulus-and  I  would  add  monetary  stimulus  as  well-cannot  by  itself 
persistently maintain the growth of the economy. On the fiscal front, it is clear that, as stated 
by the appropriate authority, to honor the commitments on the matter, spending cannot grow 
eternally  at  the  rates  projected  for  this  year.  On  the  monetary  front,  given  the  baseline 
scenario, the convergence of inflation is inconsistent with a bigger impulse than the present 
one. Thus, beyond any minor adjustments, which depend on the evolution of the business 
cycle, it is clear that both monetary and fiscal policies have already done their job and there 
is not much room for either one to do more. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Thus,  to  resume  growth,  we  need  to  create  the  environment  that  allows  investment  to 
recover, resource allocation to gain efficiency and productivity to improve. One key element 
of this task is for households and businesses to regain confidence in that the economy will 
provide the proper environment to carry out their projects. Sadly, and against our predictions, 
this is taking longer than we thought. 
For our part, we will continue to do our best efforts to smooth the business cycle, but always 
with  price  stability  as  the  primary  objective.  This  is  why,  as  I  mentioned  earlier,  inflation 
remains our primary concern, and although it has dropped as we projected, it is still high. In 
that context, as has been our assessment since late last year, we see no room for further 
cuts to the monetary policy rate. And while the current conditions make it more likely that the 
gradual withdrawal of the monetary stimulus will take place in the first months of 2016, I want 
to  emphasize  that  it  will  depend  on  actual  and  inflation  projected  for  the  months  ahead 
behaving in line with our estimates. 
And  last  but  not  least,  on  behalf  of  the  Board,  I  wish  to  stress  that  we  will  conduct  our 
monetary policy to ensure that inflation stands at 3 percent over the policy horizon, and we 
insist  on  the  need for  every  participant  in  the financial  system  to thoroughly  evaluate  their 
borrowing and lending decisions. In addition, we will continue to contribute with what is our 
task, i.e., safeguarding the stability of the currency and the normal functioning of internal and 
external payments, to Chile’s development and welfare. 
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
