  Øystein Olsen: The conduct of monetary policy 
Introductory  statement  by  Mr  Øystein  Olsen,  Governor  of  Norges  Bank  (Central  Bank  of 
Norway), at the hearing before the Standing Committee on Finance and Economic Affairs of 
the Storting (Norwegian parliament), Oslo, 4 May 2015. 
 Please note that the text below may differ from the actual presentation. 
Accompanying charts can be found at the end of the speech or on the Norges Bank’s website. 
I would like to thank the Chair of the Committee for this opportunity to report on the conduct 
of monetary policy. My introduction here today is based on Norges Bank’s Annual Report for 
2014 and our monetary policy assessments up to the monetary policy meeting in March. 
Chart: Inflation and projected capacity utilisation 
Monetary  policy  in  Norway  is  oriented  towards  keeping  inflation  low  and  stable.  The 
operational target is consumer price inflation of close to 2.5 percent over time. The inflation 
target provides the economy with a nominal anchor. Inflation has edged up in recent years 
and  hovered  around  2.5  percent  through  2014.  When  inflation  expectations  are  firmly 
anchored,  monetary  policy  can  serve  as  the  first  line  of  defence  when  the  economy  turns 
down. 
Monetary  policy  seeks  to  be  robust  and  takes  into  account the  risk  of particularly  adverse 
economic  outcomes.  The  goal  is  to  avoid  an  abrupt  economic  downturn  and  higher 
unemployment. In the event of major shocks, for instance a sharp drop in oil prices, this may 
imply  a  more  active  monetary  policy  than  normal.  The  consideration  of  robustness  also 
implies that monetary policy seeks to mitigate the risk of a build-up of financial imbalances. 
Hence, house price inflation and debt growth are also important for monetary policy. Norges 
Bank weighs the different types of risk against each other. 
Six years have now passed since the global economy was hard hit by the financial crisis. The 
Norwegian economy has fared well in the years following the financial crisis, stimulated by 
vigorous activity in the petroleum industry. Growth has slowed in recent years and a decline 
in  oil  investment  will  result  in  low  growth  for  a  period.  Against  the  background  of  weaker 
growth  prospects  for  the  Norwegian  economy  and  reduced  foreign  interest  rates,  Norges 
Bank lowered its forecast for the key policy rate through 2014 and reduced its key policy rate 
in December 2014. 
Chart: Money market rates for trading partners 
Global economic growth remains moderate, but there are wide differences across countries. 
The  sharp  fall  in  oil  prices  is  positive  for  most  of  our  trading  partners,  but  is  dampening 
activity in oil-producing countries at the same time. Growth in the US is now on a firm footing, 
even though developments have been slightly weaker recently. An expansionary monetary 
policy  appears  to  be  working  and  both  consumption  and  investment  have  picked  up. 
Unemployment has declined. 
Euro area activity is picking up, but growth remains low. Household consumption is on the 
rise, while business investment remains at a low level. High unemployment and continued 
deleveraging  in  the  private  and  public  sector  will  likely  weigh  down  on  the  euro  area 
economy for a long period ahead. 
Growth is slowing in China, partly reflecting weaker investment in the real estate sector. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  In  April,  the  IMF  published  a  new  assessment  of  the  world  economic  outlook.  The  IMF 
forecast for global growth was revised down by ¼ percentage point, owing to weaker growth 
prospects for  emerging economies. The IMF  projects global  GDP growth  at  3.5  percent  in 
2015, rising to 3.8 percent in 2016 and judges that financial stability risks have increased, 
with greater volatility in both financial markets and foreign exchange markets. 
Consumer price inflation is low among most of our trading partners and close to zero in many 
countries. The oil price decline is contributing to holding down inflation. Many central banks 
have responded to the low level of inflation by further monetary policy easing. Policy rates 
are negative in some countries. The European Central Bank (ECB) and Sveriges Riksbank 
have,  in  addition,  taken  unconventional  measures  to  counter  the  risk  of  deflation  and 
stimulate activity, with large-scale purchases of securities, including government bonds. 
Long-term government bond yields have continued to fall in many countries. Expansionary 
monetary policies, including that of the ECB, have likely contributed to the fall in long-term 
interest rates. The rise in international interest rates has been pushed further out in time. Low 
foreign interest rates influence developments in the krone and hence the inflation outlook in 
Norway. This is contributing to keeping interest rates low in Norway too. 
Chart: Oil price and import-weighted exchange rate index (I-44) 
The sharp fall in oil prices since summer 2014 has affected the outlook for the Norwegian 
economy.  The  fall  in  oil  prices  came  on  top  of  a  planned  downscaling  of  activity  in  the 
Norwegian oil sector. After expanding rapidly over several years, oil investment and activity 
in the sector are now set to be at a considerably lower level over the next few years. This will 
have negative spillover effects on the mainland economy. 
Monetary  policy  cannot  assume  a  primary  responsibility  for  delivering  necessary  structural 
changes in the economy. But through the effects on the exchange rate, monetary policy can 
provide  a  push  to  restructuring  in  the  business  sector.  The  prerequisite  for  a  pronounced 
weakening  of  the  krone  concurrent  with  low  interest  rates  is  continued  confidence  that 
inflation will remain low and stable over time. 
Let me now turn to a more detailed account of the monetary policy pursued over the past 
year. 
Monetary  policy  in  2014  was  marked  by  steadily  lower  foreign  interest  rates  and  weaker 
domestic growth prospects. 
Chart: Petroleum investment 
The  Norwegian  economy  broadly  followed  the  path  projected  at  the  start  of  2014.  But  the 
picture  changed  just  before  summer.  Ahead  of  Norges  Bank’s  monetary  policy  meeting  in 
June, information indicated that oil investment would fall markedly in 2015. High cost growth 
and focus on improving profitability prompted oil companies to scale back their investment 
plans.  Against  this  background,  there  were  prospects  that  the  Norwegian  economy  would 
grow at a slower pace than expected earlier. At the June monetary policy meeting, Norges 
Bank kept the key policy rate unchanged, but lowered the projected path for the key policy 
rate. We gave weight to the possibility of a further weakening of the growth outlook for the 
Norwegian economy, which might warrant a reduction in the key policy rate. 
Through autumn oil prices declined markedly to around USD 70 per barrel at the beginning 
of December, or to a level at about 35 percent below the average for the first six months of 
2014. At the same time, the krone depreciated considerably. A weaker krone leads to higher 
import prices. At the same time, the competitiveness of Norwegian trade-exposed industries 
improves. The depreciation of the krone thereby dampens the effects of a lower oil price on 
the Norwegian economy. The outlook for the Norwegian economy had nevertheless clearly 
weakened.  At  the  monetary  policy  meeting  on  10  December  2014,  Norges  Bank  gave 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  particular weight to reducing the risk of a pronounced downturn in the Norwegian economy 
as  a  result  of  the  sharp  fall  in  oil  prices.  The  key  policy  rate  was  thus  reduced  by  0.25 
percentage  point  to  1.25  percent.  The  analysis  in  the  December  2014  Monetary  Policy 
Report implied a key policy rate at that level or somewhat lower in the coming years. 
Chart: Projections for the key policy rate in various Monetary Policy Reports 
In  the  period  to  the monetary  policy  meeting  in  March  2015,  the  Norwegian  economy  had 
moved broadly in line with the path projected in December 2014. Inflation remained close to 
2.5 percent. Unemployment had remained stable and  was slightly  lower  than expected. At 
the same time, the outlook ahead was weaker than envisaged in December. Oil prices had 
continued  to  slide  and  activity  in  the  petroleum  industry  appeared  to  be  falling  more  than 
previously anticipated both this year and next. Wage growth in 2014 turned out to be lower 
than  assumed  and  there  were  prospects  of  somewhat  lower  wage  growth  ahead  than 
projected earlier. 
At the monetary policy meeting in March, Norges Bank gave weight to that fact that the key 
policy rate had been reduced in December to counter the risk of a pronounced downturn in 
the  Norwegian  economy  as  a  result  of  lower  oil  prices.  So  far,  the  effects  on  the  real 
economy had been relatively small. At the same time, house prices had continued to rise at a 
rapid  pace.  The  rapid  rise  in  property  prices  may  lead  to  higher  debt  growth.  That  may 
increase  household  vulnerability  and  trigger  or  amplify  a  downturn  in  the  economy  further 
ahead.  Based  on  an  overall  assessment,  Norges  Bank  chose  to  leave  the  key  policy  rate 
unchanged.  If  developments  in  the  Norwegian  economy  are  broadly  in  line  with  that 
projected in the period ahead, there are nevertheless prospects that the key policy rate will 
be reduced further in the course of the first half of this year. 
The  analysis  in  the  latest  Monetary  Policy  Report  suggests  that  capacity  utilisation  in  the 
Norwegian economy will decline ahead. Moreover, there are prospects that unemployment 
may  increase  somewhat,  but  reduced  labour  immigration  will  likely  limit  the  increase.  The 
krone deprecation since autumn 2014 will contribute to underpinning inflation in the coming 
period, but inflation is projected to move down further ahead. 
In  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy,  we  seek  to  mitigate  the  risk  of  a  build-up  of  financial 
balances, but monetary policy cannot assume a primarily responsibility for financial stability. 
Should  financial  imbalances  build  up  further,  the  required  countercyclical  capital  buffer  for 
banks  may  be  increased.  Rapid  rises  in  house  prices  and  debt  may  also  require  the 
implementation of other, more targeted measures in order to mitigate the risk associated with 
the high level of household debt. 
In March this year, the Ministry of Finance requested Finanstilsynet (Financial Supervisory 
Authority  of  Norway)  to  consider  whether  it  would  be  appropriate  to  implement  measures 
aimed  at  limiting  growth  in  credit  and  house  prices.  Norges  Bank  submitted  its  comments 
today  where  we  endorse  Finanstilsynet’s  proposal  while  underlining  the  importance  that 
regulation  should  give  the  banks  flexibility  –  and  responsibility  for  conducting  sound  credit 
assessments. Norges Bank recommends that the maximum limit for the loan-to-value ratio 
be set at 85 percent as a regulatory requirement, but that banks are also permitted to extend 
a certain proportion of loans with a loan-to-value ratio higher than 85 percent. Such quotas 
for  new  loans  that  exceed  the  regulatory  limit  are  commonly  referred  to  as  speed  limits. 
Norges Bank recommends that the tightened requirements for principal repayments for loans 
with high loan-to-value ratios and for debt servicing be set out in the form of guidelines rather 
than in the form regulations. The prudent lending requirements strengthen the robustness of 
banks and households and should be regarded as a permanent structural measure. 
Let me conclude by turning back to the present situation and challenges for the Norwegian 
economy.  Oil  prices  have  nearly  halved  since  last  summer.  So  far,  the  effects  on  the 
mainland economy have been relatively small. Nevertheless, the Norwegian economy must 
now adapt to lower demand from the oil sector and lower oil revenues. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  The shift to an oil-driven economy with a high wage capacity was a comfortable journey. The 
journey  forward,  where  the  oil  service  industry  must  downscale  and  other  trade-exposed 
industries must grow, will be more challenging. 
The  point  of  departure  for  coping  with  the  period  of  restructuring  we  are  now  facing  is 
favourable. We have economic policy leeway. Inflation expectations are firmly anchored and 
the  krone  exchange  rate  is  functioning  as  a  stabiliser.  And  perhaps  most  important  of  all: 
Norwegian  businesses  and  the  social  partners  have  previously  shown  an  ability  to 
restructure. That ability will also be decisive this time. 
Thank you for your attention. 
 
 4 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    5 
    6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
