  Dimitar Bogov: Addressing structural rigidities in view of monetary 
policy transmission effectiveness 
Address by Mr Dimitar Bogov, Governor of the National Bank of the Republic of Macedonia, 
at the 4th Research Conference “Addressing structural rigidities in view of monetary policy 
transmission effectiveness”, Skopje, 23 April 2015. 
 Dear Governors, Your Excellences, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, Dear guests, 
It is my pleasure to welcome you all, on our fourth Research Conference, entitled Addressing 
Structural  Rigidities  in  View  of  Monetary  Policy  Transmission  Effectiveness.  Just  like  the 
previous years, we hope that the topic of this conference is both interesting and challenging 
to provide an interactive framework for discussion and research-based policy advices for the 
central bankers. 
Structural rigidities, indeed, are related to a wide range of economic segments. Therefore, 
today  we  will  try  to  tackle  different  economic  issues,  enlightening  their  importance  for  the 
monetary  policy  transmission  effectiveness.  Transition  economies  have  undergone  many 
structural changes in the ongoing reshaping of the economies, which to some extent have 
influenced  the monetary  policy  decision  making or  monetary  policy  transmission  channels. 
Globalization is yet another factor that tends to produce changes in the economic structure 
and  at  the  same  time,  affects  the  markets  functioning  or  economic  agents’  behavior.  The 
labor  market  rigidities,  wage  and  price  settings,  financial  market  imperfection,  impact  of 
foreign  direct  investments  and  many  other  issues  must  be  appropriately  taken  into 
consideration in the monetary policy implementation and probably we have all put in a great 
deal of effort to accommodate our models to capture these specifics. 
The last global crisis, with its overall severity, time length and countries coverage reactivated 
the importance of structural issues for the advanced economies too, pointing to the fact that 
not always same measure fits any situation, not always same risk affects in a same way and 
not  always  same  threshold  is  valid  for  everyone.  Nowadays,  we  speak  about  flexible  and 
innovative monetary policy, designed on a broadly based information platform, incorporating 
structural  features  of  the  economies  and  all  specifics  of  the  monetary  policy  transmission 
mechanism. Since the onset of the crisis, we have tried to better incorporate financial stability 
aspects into monetary policy decision making. In addition, we learnt that zero lower bound 
rate in the advanced economies or historically lowest interest rates in emerging economies 
were  not  able  to  revive  credit growth,  until  we  moved  towards  renovating  our  toolkit.  Non-
standard  monetary  policy  measures  in  different  modalities  have  been  widely  used  by  the 
central  banks  around  the  globe  during  the  crisis  period,  with  the  ultimate  goal  to  capture 
countries’ specific structural features. These tailor made measures proved to have ability for 
more effective monetary signals transmission, considering the additional impairments of the 
traditional transmission channels during the crisis. 
Taking  care  about  financial  stability  risks  when  conducting  monetary  policy,  is  one  of  the 
most  important  lessons  learnt  from  the  global  crisis.  In  the  highly  globalized  world,  in 
practice,  it  means  that we  need  to follow  interlinks  between  domestic  banking  system  and 
international  financial  markets  in  view  of  financing  structure  as  well  as  its  risk  exposure 
considering  traditional  versus  complex  market  products.  Countries  of  the  region,  with 
relatively large share of foreign ownership in the banking system, probably to some extent 
experienced  certain  deleveraging  pressure  on  the  group  level  in  the  past  years  that 
unavoidably  affected  domestic  subsidiaries’  behavior.  Strengthening  of 
regulatory 
requirements and their implementation in practice, as well as restructuring processes of the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  instruments, 
EU  banks  hit  by  the  crisis,  impose  additional  challenges  to  the  financial  stability  and  the 
monetary policy, as well. 
On the backdrop of the lessons from the crisis and still fragile global environment, monetary 
policy  should  be  designed  carefully  and  implemented  flexibly.  Besides  the  traditional 
transmission channels, we must be aware of the expectations channel as well as the risk-
taking channel. Therefore, in implementing our policy measures within the targeting horizon 
we need to take into account the market expectation as well as the risk perceptions of the 
economic  agents.  A  mix  of  standard  and  non-standard 
intensified 
communication with the public, a broad overview of financial stability risks and the effects of 
macroprudential regulation, regular monitoring of the external factors’ potential spillovers to 
the domestic economy, are probably the best options for securing effective implementation of 
the monetary policy. 
Although being far away from the acute stage of the crisis, the current global environment is 
marked  with  relatively  weak  and  uneven  growth  outlook,  especially  in  the  advanced 
economies, which led to different paths of their monetary policy stance. While ECB has just 
started  its  large-scale  quantitative  easing  program,  FED  is  just  about  to  exit  the 
accommodative monetary policy stance. These contrasting growth prospects of the leading 
economies  underpin  the  risk  of  global  financial  markets  volatility  in  view  of  eventual 
rebalancing  positions  between  the  main  world  currencies.  On  the  other  hand,  there  is  a 
group of emerging economies with better growth performances and prospects for the future, 
including the Macedonian economy, which in the recent years has shown sound recovery, 
taking into account the significant ongoing structural changes in the economy as well as the 
fiscal  space  from  the  previous  years.  A  common  feature  for  the  current  surroundings  are 
disinflationary or deflationary pressures around the globe in light of the fall of oil prices, with 
potential  impact  on  the  monetary  policy  cycle,  additionally  increasing  uncertainty  about 
external  environment.  At  this  point,  monetary  policy  must  broaden  its  scrutiny  to  involve 
every important aspect from the external environment, domestic economic cycle as well as 
structural features important for the future monetary policy stance. 
The bottom line is that in a dynamic external environment we must take care about structural 
bottlenecks, regardless of whether they are related to the transitional stage of our economies 
or induced by the global crisis. I have tried to tackle some of them, which I believe will be 
discussed  further  on  the  high  level  Governors  panel  or  additionally  elaborated  in  the  next 
sessions within the research papers. As I mentioned at the beginning, this is a broad topic, 
which  is  very  important  for  the  monetary  policy  transmission  effectiveness.  Therefore,  I 
appreciate your attendance and contribution to our Conference, in sharing experiences and 
broadening our overall knowledge on these issues. 
I wish you interesting conference and fruitful discussion! 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
