  Jeffrey M Lacker: Economic outlook, January 2015 
Speech by Mr Jeffrey M Lacker, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond, at a 
conference,  sponsored  by  the  Virginia  Bankers  Association  and  the  Virginia  Chamber  of 
Commerce, Richmond, Virginia, 9 January 2015. 
I would like to thank Roy Web for assistance in preparing these remarks. 
 Highlights 
• 
While  GDP  growth  in  2015  may  revert  to  its  post-recession  average  of  around 
2 ¼ percent, there are reasons to believe that growth could rise to between 2 ½ and 
3 percent this year. 
We  have  seen  pickups  at  other  times  during  this  expansion,  only  to  see  them 
subside, but the recent strength in consumer spending and the decline in the saving 
rate  suggest  the  current  higher  growth  rate  can  be  sustained.  Many  labor  market 
indicators also have strengthened. 
The  economy  still  faces  some  challenges,  however,  including  sluggishness  in  the 
housing market, potentially weaker exports and declines in government spending. 
Inflation  is  currently  below  the  FOMC’s  target  of  2  percent  but  is  likely  to  move 
closer to 2 percent after energy price movements subside. 
The  FOMC  has  no  pre-set  timetable  for  raising  the  federal  funds  rate  target. 
Policymakers  should  strive  to  look  through  transitory  phenomena  to  assess  the 
appropriate path for interest rates.  
    It’s a pleasure to be with you to discuss the economic outlook this afternoon. Before I begin, I 
would like to emphasize that these are my own views and should not be attributed to anyone 
else in the Federal Reserve System. 
To put the current outlook in context, it helps to take a glance at the rearview mirror. This 
expansion has been much slower than any other expansion that anyone in this room is likely 
to remember. Real GDP, for example – our best single gauge of overall economic activity – 
has increased at an annual rate of 2 ¼ percent per year since the recession ended in the 
second quarter of 2009. In contrast, the half century before the recession began – including 
both  expansions  and  recessions  –  saw  real  GDP  grow  at  an  average  rate  of  around 
3 ½ percent. That lengthy period of rapid growth naturally encouraged a strong sense that 
growth ought to be at least 3 percent and that anything less is disappointing. 
Two  fundamental factors  contribute  to GDP growth  over  the  longer  run.  One  is  population 
growth, which has slowed appreciably in recent years. Since the end of the recession, the 
so-called  prime  working  age  population,  which  consists  of  individuals  ages  25  to  54,  has 
actually  declined.  Baby  boomers  are  moving  out  of  the  age  ranges  associated  with  peak 
labor force participation. In contrast, in the 50 years before the recession, the prime working 
age population grew at a rate of 1.3 percent per year. Thus a good part of the recent slowing 
of GDP growth is simply slower population growth. 
The other fundamental component of growth is the increase in real GDP per worker, which is 
a measure of productivity. Since the end of the recession, this measure of productivity has 
increased at a 1.4 percent annual rate, well below the average rate over the five decades 
before  the  recession.  So  a  good  portion  of  the  recent  slowing  of  GDP  growth  is  also 
attributable to slower productivity growth. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  The  remainder  of  the  difference  between  pre-  and  post-recession  growth  is  much  smaller 
and is accounted for by the change in the ratio of employment to population – in other words, 
the combined effect of changes in unemployment and labor force participation. 
As  the  economy  recovered  from  the  Great  Recession  and  real  GDP  growth  continued  to 
disappoint, most economists scaled back their expectations regarding future growth. In fact, 
one  plausible  scenario  is  for  U.S.  economic  performance  over  the  near  term  to  closely 
resemble  the  average  experience  over  the  last  five  years  –  that  is,  real  growth  around 
2 ¼ percent per year. 
A  somewhat  brighter  scenario  is  looking  more  plausible  to  me  now,  however.  In  recent 
quarters growth has been noticeably better than the post-recession average. Real GDP has 
increased  by  2.7  percent  over  the  last four quarters,  versus  2.1  percent  over  the  previous 
three  years.  Payroll  employment  rose  by  an  average  of  246,000  jobs  per  month  over  the 
12 months ending in December, whereas it rose by an average of 185,000 jobs per month 
over the previous three years. 
Granted, we’ve seen short-run growth spurts before during the course of this expansion, only 
to see the pace of growth subside. But some recent developments that were largely absent 
during previous spurts have improved the likelihood that the recent pickup in growth will be 
sustained. 
I would point first to consumer behavior. Household spending represents about two-thirds of 
GDP, and thus it is critical to headline growth. From the end of the recession to November 
2013, consumer spending rose at an average annual rate of 2.4 percent. Over the 12 months 
ending in November 2014, however, consumer spending has expanded by 2.8 percent. And 
over  the  six  months  ending  in  November,  consumer  spending  has grown  at  a  4.3  percent 
annual rate, the highest six-month growth rate since the middle of 2005. 
This  pickup  in  household  spending  was  accompanied  by  an  increase  in  real  disposable 
income over the last year. But the increase was not as large as the rise in spending in recent 
months, and thus the personal saving rate has fallen. A declining saving rate in this situation 
typically signals consumer confidence that the increase in incomes is solidly based and likely 
to continue. And other indicators point to the same conclusion. In the latter half of last year, 
the major survey measures of consumer sentiment all moved back to levels not seen since 
before  the  recession  began.  In  particular,  survey  components  related  to  expectations 
regarding future income and finances have shown notable strength. 
Direct readings on labor market conditions suggest that consumers may have good reason 
for  improved  confidence  in  their  employment  prospects.  I’ve  already  mentioned  last  year’s 
improvement in employment growth. The decline in the headline unemployment rate, which 
peaked at 10 percent in 2009, also picked up pace last year and was down to 5.6 percent in 
December. And the number of persons who were unemployed for over 26 weeks has fallen 
by 57 percent since 2010. 
We’ve seen noteworthy improvements in measures of turnover in labor markets as well. The 
number of job openings is up 20 percent year-over-year, and the hiring rate has increased 
significantly. Moreover, “quits” are up 20 percent year-over-year, suggesting that workers are 
becoming more confident in their job prospects. The fact that these indicators of labor market 
“flows” are showing strong improvement is significant, I think. During this expansion, some 
observers  noted  that  measures  of  labor  market  “fluidity”  or  “dynamism”  appeared  to  be 
depressed  relative  to  historical  standards.  In  that  context,  the  recent  flow  data  suggests 
some progress toward restoring the vitality of labor markets. 
We  also  know  that  a  substantial  improvement  in  labor  markets  has  been  associated 
historically  with  stronger  wage  and  salary  growth.  The  employment  cost  index,  which  is  a 
comprehensive measure of wages and benefits for private-sector workers, has increased at 
a 3 percent annual rate over the last two quarters. That is well above its 1.9 percent annual 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  growth over the previous five years. I should caution that a similar acceleration is not evident 
in other prominent measures of wages, so this is just tentative evidence at this point. 
If labor market conditions continue to improve in the months ahead, it should provide further 
support to  household  incomes  and  confidence. The  improvement  we’ve  seen  in  consumer 
finances  in  recent  years  should  also  bolster  growth.  The  value  of  household  assets  has 
increased by 38 percent since early 2009, while household liabilities have fallen slightly over 
the same time period. While the process of balance sheet repair may not yet be complete, 
substantial progress clearly has been made. 
Recent advances in consumer sentiment and financial wherewithal have not invigorated the 
housing  market,  however.  Over  the  last  12  months,  new  home  sales  have  fallen  by 
1.6 percent  and  new  housing  starts  have  fallen  by  7  percent.  Much  of  this  sluggishness, I 
believe, is due to factors that are unlikely to change quickly. The fall in home prices during 
the  recession  has  given  households  a  greater  appreciation  of  the  risks  of  leveraged 
investments in housing. This is contributing to what appears to be a relatively persistent shift 
in  preferences  away  from  ownership  of  single-family  detached  homes.  So  while  I  expect 
some  gains  in  housing  activity  in  2015,  I  don’t  think  we  should  look  for  housing  to  make 
major contributions to overall growth. 
In contrast, business investment in plant, equipment and intellectual property has been a 
solid contributor to this expansion. Coming out of the recession, this measure of investment 
grew  rapidly  for  a  couple  of  years,  then  more  moderately,  but  it  picked  up  steam  in  the 
second quarter last year. Business investment seemed to be carrying good momentum into 
the year-end, and in my view is likely to continue to contribute to growth in overall activity in 
2015. 
Net exports are likely to be more of a challenge this year. Over the last year, the value of the 
dollar  in  foreign  exchange  markets  has  risen  by  8  percent.  That  makes  imports  more 
attractive here and domestic producers less competitive globally, which can be expected to 
increase our trade deficit and slow the growth of overall economic production. 
Finally, federal government spending on goods and services is likely to continue to restrain 
growth. Over the last three years, we’ve seen such spending fall at a 2.5 percent annual rate. 
That may sound surprising, but note that this is only spending for goods and services, and it 
excludes transfer payments, such as Medicare or food stamps. These transfer payments do 
not add directly to GDP; their only effect is through household incomes. Most forecasters are 
projecting federal spending to contract further in 2015 and beyond. 
You are probably well aware of the importance of federal spending on goods and services for 
Virginia; for example, close to 13 percent of all federal contract spending in fiscal year 2014 
landed in the commonwealth. Northern Virginia has been hit hard by reduced spending with 
government contractors, and the Hampton Roads area has been hit hard by defense cuts. 
Virginia’s revenue stream has been significantly affected as well, which will make this year’s 
legislative session particularly challenging. The broader context to bear in mind, though, is 
that the state generally fared better than the rest of the nation prior to and during the most 
recent recession. 
To  sum  up,  the  key  consumer  sector  has  picked  up  in  recent  months,  and  I  believe  the 
growth  we’ve  seen  recently  is  more  solidly  based  and  is  likely  to  continue.  Business 
investment  should  also  contribute  to  growth  this  year,  but  residential  investment  probably 
won’t add much. Federal spending and net exports will likely subtract from overall activity. 
Taking stock of the recent data, I believe the odds are better now that the current pickup in 
growth will be sustained. In this higher-growth scenario we could see real GDP grow by 2 ½ to 
3 percent in 2015. We should not completely dismiss, however, a more temperate scenario in 
which  growth  reverts  once  again  to  the  post-recession  average  of  around  2 ¼ percent. 
Throughout this expansion we have seen periods of growth that were vigorous enough to get 
our hopes up but were followed by lower growth intervals that left the average growth rate fairly 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  low. On balance, though, while we don’t have enough evidence to rule out a return to a more 
moderate growth path, I am leaning toward the higher-growth scenario as more likely. 
Turning to inflation, let me start by noting that in 2012 the Federal Open Market Committee 
stated that its inflation goal was for the price index for personal consumption expenditures to 
rise at a 2 percent annual rate over time. Over the last 25 years that measure of inflation has 
averaged  2.06  percent per  year.  I  am  old  enough  to  remember  when  the  president  of  the 
United States declared that inflation was “Public Enemy Number One.” So I am grateful that 
the  Fed  took  responsibility  for  inflation  and  has  kept  inflation  under  control.  That  long-run 
record may explain why survey measures of expected inflation have been remarkably stable 
over  the  last  several  years,  despite  the  turmoil  of  the  Great  Recession  and  widespread 
media speculation about deflation or inflation. 
At short time horizons, inflation can be volatile, however, and over the last year inflation has 
only  averaged  1.2  percent.  As  you  probably  suspect,  much  of  that  weakness  reflects  the 
decline in energy prices. Prior to the fall in energy prices, the 12-month PCE inflation rate 
was 1.7 percent – not that far from 2 percent. To get a sense of the near-term direction of 
inflation,  many  economists  look  at  core  price  indices,  which  exclude  the  volatile  food  and 
energy categories. Core inflation over the last year was 1.4 percent – a bit higher than overall 
inflation but still below 2 percent and down a bit from earlier last year. In past episodes of 
large  energy  price  movements,  we  have  seen  some  bleed  through  into  core  inflation,  and 
that seems to be happening again. As a result, inflation trends may be a bit more difficult to 
discern  in  coming  months.  Nonetheless,  I  expect  inflation  to  move  tolerably  close  to  the 
FOMC’s 2 percent target after the fall in energy prices has played out. 
I’ll conclude with a few remarks on monetary policy. The Fed entered 2015 with a balance 
sheet of unprecedented size – around $4.5 trillion – and interest rates very close to zero. We 
are  widely  expected  to begin  raising  interest  rates  this  year,  and  in  September  the  FOMC 
issued a statement outlining how it will go about doing that. Here are the key takeaways from 
that document. When the time comes, the Committee will raise its target range for the federal 
funds rate (the market interest rate on interbank loans). Currently, the target range is zero to 
25  basis  points.  Second,  the  Fed  will  move  the  federal  funds  rate  into  the  target  range 
primarily by adjusting the interest rate it pays to banks on excess reserve balances, which is 
currently 25 basis points. Third, sometime after raising the interest rate target, the Fed will 
begin gradually reducing its balance sheet by allowing maturing security holdings to run off, 
rather than be reinvested, as is current practice. And fourth, the Fed will move in the longer 
run  toward  holding  only  U.S.  Treasury  securities  and  will  hold  no  more  securities  than 
necessary to implement monetary policy efficiently and effectively. 
That basic framework pertains to how the Fed intends to move toward more normal levels of 
interest rates and asset holdings. I suspect some of you are just as avidly interested, if not 
more so, in when and how rapidly the Fed will raise rates. I hate to disappoint you, but the 
truth  is  nobody  knows  yet.  There  is  no  pre-set  timetable  for  raising  rates.  The  FOMC’s 
actions genuinely will depend on the economic data available at the time. So I cannot tell you 
when and, more importantly, how rapidly our rate target will rise. 
I  will  share  an  observation,  however.  The  economic  outlook  can  change  rapidly,  and 
judgments  about  appropriate  policy  need  to  respond  accordingly.  It’s  not  hard  to  find 
historical  examples:  The  outlook  for  real  activity  shifted  dramatically  from  late  1998,  when 
overseas turmoil was thought to jeopardize U.S. growth, to early 1999, when it became clear 
that  the  effects  would  be  minimal  and  activity  was  accelerating.  Similarly,  the  outlook  for 
growth and inflation shifted significantly from mid-2003, when inflation seemed to be sinking 
below 1 percent, to early 2004, when growth and inflation were clearly rising. Arguably, the 
Fed  fell  at  least  somewhat  behind  the  curve  in  each  case.  The  lesson,  I  believe,  is  that 
policymakers  should  strive  to  look  through  clearly  transitory  phenomena  to  assess  the 
underlying real economic developments that – as long as inflation is anchored – determine 
the appropriate path for interest rates. And they need to be prepared to respond promptly. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
