  Charles I Plosser: A perspective on the economy and monetary policy 
Speech  by  Mr  Charles  I  Plosser,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve  Bank  of  Philadelphia,  to  the  Greater  Philadelphia  Chamber  of  Commerce, 
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, 14 January 2015. 
The views expressed are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or the FOMC. 
 Highlights 
• 
   President Charles Plosser gives his views on the U.S. economy and discusses the 
importance of four principles to sound monetary policy. 
President  Plosser  believes  that  the  appropriate way  to  make  policy  systematic, or 
rule-like, is to base policy decisions on economic conditions. Monetary policy should 
be data dependent, not date dependent. 
He thinks policymakers should describe the reaction function that determines how 
the current and future policy rates will be set depending on economic data. 
President Plosser proposes the creation of a regular monetary policy report to help 
improve communication while enhancing the transparency and accountability of the 
Fed. 
Introduction 
Thank you, Richard (Green, CEO and vice chairman of Firstrust). I am delighted to speak 
with so many of Philadelphia’s business leaders this morning. A couple of years ago, Richard 
served on the Philadelphia Fed’s advisory council of community bankers and as our District’s 
representative  to  a  similar  council  at  the  national  level.  So,  he  knows  firsthand  about  the 
intricacies  of 
the  Fed’s  structure  as  America’s  decentralized,  central  bank,  with 
12 independently chartered Federal Reserve Banks, overseen by the Board of Governors in 
Washington, D.C. 
It is a model that has worked for a century, bringing together a rich mosaic of perspectives as 
we discuss policy. Yet, it requires that I remind the audience that the views I express today 
are  my  own  and  do  not  necessarily  reflect  those  of  the  Federal  Reserve  System  or  my 
colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC). 
I  will  begin  with  a  brief  overview  of  the  economy.  Yet,  because  you  have  already  heard 
several views of the year ahead – including the report of your membership survey – I plan to 
spend  most  of  my  time  giving  you  a  longer-term  perspective  on  what  I  think  is  a  sound 
approach to monetary policy. 
Economic overview 
We  began  2014  with  a  severe  winter,  which  led  to  a  first-quarter  decline  in  GDP  of 
2.1 percent. After that bleak start, though, we saw robust GDP growth in the second and third 
quarters  of  4.6  percent  and  5.0  percent,  respectively.  The  third-quarter  estimate  was  the 
strongest  quarterly  growth  in  more  than  a  decade.  More  important,  four  of  the  past  five 
quarters have seen growth rates of 3.5 percent or more, with only the wintry first quarter as 
the  exception.  The  Philadelphia  Fed’s  Survey  of  Professional  Forecasters  estimated  that 
fourth-quarter  growth  would  moderate  to  2.7  percent.  Some  recent  tracking  estimates  are 
now placing it over 3 percent. We won’t know what the official first estimate will be until the 
end of this month, but even that slight slowdown would lead to full-year growth in 2014 that is 
a bit higher than many had expected. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Looking  forward,  I  believe  we  will  see  growth  averaging  about  3  percent  in  2015  before 
edging down to a long-term trend growth rate of about 2.4 percent. 
Recent data also show a stronger contribution from consumer spending, which accounts for 
more than two-thirds of the GDP. Significant improvement in household balance sheets and 
a  stronger  employment  picture  have  helped  support  a  more  confident  consumer.  Real 
personal consumption expenditures (PCE) have grown at a 4.5 percent annual pace over the 
past three months. 
Manufacturing also continues to show strength. Recent figures from the Philadelphia Fed’s 
Manufacturing  Business  Outlook  Survey,  the  national  ISM  manufacturing  index,  and 
industrial  production  all  indicate  that  the  manufacturing  sector  is  expanding  at  a  healthy 
pace. 
Strong consumer and business spending has supported consistent gains in the labor market. 
Nonfarm  employment  expanded  by  252,000  jobs  in  December,  giving  us  11  consecutive 
months  of  200,000-plus  job  growth.  For  the  full  year,  we  had  average  monthly  gains  of 
246,000 in 2014, compared with 194,000 in 2013. In fact, we added nearly 3 million jobs in 
2014, the most in a calendar year since 1999. Those job gains have led to a steady decline 
in  the  unemployment rate,  which  is  now  5.6  percent,  down  more  than  a  point from  a  year 
ago.  Even  the  broader  measure  of  unemployment,  referred  to  as  U-6,  which  includes 
marginally attached workers and those working part time for economic reasons, has fallen to 
11.2 percent. 
Inflation  is  running  at  about  1.5  percent,  which  is  below  the  Fed’s  long-term  target  of 
2 percent, as measured by the year-over-year change in the price index for PCE. Yet, I and 
many other economists anticipate that inflation will gradually move toward the target as the 
transitory effects of lower oil prices fade. 
In summary, I believe the economy has returned to a more normal footing, and as such, I 
believe that monetary policy should follow suit. In doing so, I believe we should strengthen 
our  commitment  to  four  fundamental  principles  of  sound  central  banking.  During  the  past 
eight years, I have spoken and written frequently about ways to improve the framework we 
use for making monetary policy decisions. In my view, the monetary policy framework is most 
effective when the central bank: 
• 
commits to a set of clearly articulated objectives that can be feasibly achieved by 
monetary policy; 
conducts monetary policy in a systematic, rule-like manner; 
communicates its policies and actions to the public in a clear and transparent way; 
and 
protects its independence by being transparent and credible in pursuit of its goals. 
  Clearly articulating objectives 
Let’s  consider  these  four  principles,  beginning  with  clearly  articulating  the  objectives  of 
monetary policy. Congress set our monetary policy goals in the Federal Reserve Act, which 
specifies that the Fed “shall maintain long run growth of the monetary and credit aggregates 
commensurate  with  the  economy’s  long  run  potential  to  increase  production,  so  as  to 
promote  effectively  the  goals  of  maximum  employment,  stable  prices,  and  moderate  long-
term interest rates.” Since moderate long-term interest rates generally result when prices are 
stable,  many  have  interpreted  these  goals  as  a  dual  mandate  to  manage  fluctuations  in 
employment in the short run while preserving price stability in the long run. 
In my view, this dual mandate has contributed to a view that monetary policy can accomplish 
far more than perhaps it is capable of achieving. I believe that assigning multiple objectives 
for  the  central  bank  has  opened  the  door  to  highly  discretionary  policies,  which  can  be 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  justified  by  shifting  the  focus  or  rationale  for  action  from  goal  to  goal.  That  is  why  I  have 
argued that Congress ought to redefine the Fed’s monetary policy goals to focus solely, or at 
least primarily, on price stability. I base this on two facts: Monetary policy has a very limited 
ability to influence real variables, such as employment. Even the FOMC’s own statement of 
longer-run  goals  adopted  in  2012  notes  that  the  maximum  level  of  employment  is  largely 
determined by nonmonetary factors, such as changing demographics and changing tax and 
regulatory policies that influence the labor market. Conversely, in a regime with fiat currency, 
only  the  central  bank  can  ensure  price  stability.  Indeed,  it  is  the  one  goal  that  the  central 
bank can achieve over the longer run. 
Setting clear, achievable objectives is the first part of the framework. Asking policymakers to 
pursue those objectives in a systematic, rule-like approach is the second key principle. 
The benefits of systematic monetary policy 
So,  what  do  I  mean  by  a  systematic  approach  to  policy?  Quite  simply,  I  mean conducting 
policy in a more rule-like manner. You often hear Fed officials say that policy decisions are 
“data dependent” and, indeed, they are. This means that future policy actions are conditional 
on  how  the  economic  data  unfold. We may  not know  what  the future  holds  or  what future 
policy  decisions  will  be,  but  we  can  choose  to  make  those  decisions  in  a  systematic  way 
based  on  the  incoming  economic  data.  I  have  long  advocated  this  approach  to  “rule-like” 
policymaking.1  
Of course, the alternative to rule-like policy is discretionary policy, in which policymakers are 
free to choose whatever action seems appropriate or convenient at the time. Rules act as 
restrictions on policymakers’ choices – limiting the degree of discretion. But this is not a bad 
thing; rather, it can result in better economic outcomes in the long run. This is accomplished 
in part by reducing the risk of very bad discretionary decisions, such as those that occurred 
in the 1970s. Moreover, for more than 30 years, we have known that a credible commitment 
by policymakers to behave in a systematic rule-like manner leads to better outcomes than 
discretion by reducing policy uncertainty.2  
More  specifically,  rules  work  better  than  discretion  because  they  are  transparent  and 
therefore allow for simpler and more effective communication of policy decisions. 
This allows households and businesses to more accurately form expectations and thus make 
better  decisions.  As  a  result,  systematic  policy  promotes  a  more  stable,  predictable,  and 
efficient economy. 
I want to emphasize that monetary policy should be data dependent, not date dependent. In 
my last vote as a member of the FOMC in December, I dissented, in part because I believe 
the  language  of  the  statement  was  still  trying  to  communicate  policy  in  terms  of  time. 
Whether the Committee states that it will be “patient” or that it will wait a “considerable time,” 
the language continues to stress the passage of time as a key determinant of policy, rather 
than making clear that policy will depend on the data. Describing policy in terms of time could 
also risk limiting the Committee’s flexibility to respond to the data if we continue to see an 
improving economy. 
Instead,  I  believe  we  should  describe  how  we  will  respond  to  the  data;  that  is,  we  should 
describe  a  reaction  function.  I  frequently  consider  such  reaction  functions  as  I  think  about 
policy. These are typically Taylor-like rules, named for Stanford University economist John 
                                                
1  See Charles I Plosser, “The Benefits of Systematic Monetary Policy,” speech given to the National Association 
for Business Economics, Washington Economic Policy Conference, Washington, D.C. (March 3, 2008). 
2  Finn E Kydland and Edward C Prescott, “Rules Rather Than Discretion: The Inconsistency of Optimal Plans,” 
Journal of Political Economy, 85 (June 1977), pp. 473–491. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  Taylor  who  first  proposed  them  in  the  early  1990s. These  policy  rules  typically  call  for  the 
targeted  funds  rate  to  respond  to  deviations  of  inflation  from  some  desired  goal  and  to 
deviations of output from some measure of potential – sometimes referred to as economic 
“slack”  or  the  “gap.”  Sometimes  such  gaps  are  translated  into  deviations  from  full 
employment. 
Such robust rules recognize that data are measured imprecisely and are subject to revision. 
Moreover,  they  have  been  shown  to  perform  well  in  a  variety  of  models  and  conditions.  I 
believe  these  robust  rules  can  be  useful  guideposts  for  policymakers  and  the  public  in 
assessing the stance of monetary policy and its expected path. Communicating about such 
guideposts would enhance transparency and help make policy more systematic. 
However, I don’t believe that we need to follow rules mechanically. Judgment will always be 
required. Yet, policymakers and the public should be very cautious when they call for policy 
rates to  deviate  in  significant  ways  from  these guideposts.  Making  such  judgments  should 
require  careful  analysis,  and  the  justification  for  deviating  from  the  guidelines  should  be 
clearly communicated to the markets and to the public. Thus, policymakers will still be able to 
exercise  discretion,  but  using  rules  as  guideposts  will  enhance  transparency  and  effective 
communication. 
Improving transparency 
This leads me to my third important principle for monetary policy – communicating in a clear 
and  transparent  way.  In  recent  speeches,  I  have  proposed  that  the  FOMC  could  improve 
communication  and  transparency  by  publishing  a  more  comprehensive  monetary  policy 
report on a regular basis, perhaps quarterly.3  
This  report  could  incorporate  a  discussion  of  such  robust  systematic  rules  I  referred  to  a 
moment ago in its description of the underlying policy framework. The rules could serve as a 
benchmark  for  the  current  stance  of  policy  and  the  expected  path  of  policy,  based  on 
economic data. 
At the end of December, the Philadelphia Fed issued an example of what such a discussion 
might look like in a monetary policy report. We used a set of policy rules to benchmark the 
current stance and path of policy and discussed the implications.4  
The  report  showed  that  the  federal  funds  rate  is  no  longer  constrained  by  the  zero  lower 
bound under a number of these rules. In fact, the rules indicate that maintaining the federal 
funds rate at the zero lower bound is unusually accommodative by historical standards. The 
benchmarks suggest that as the economy transitions to full employment and moves closer to 
its long-run inflation target, we should begin to gradually reduce accommodation by raising 
the  funds  rate  target.  Delaying  liftoff  runs  the  risk  of  requiring  more  aggressive  future 
monetary policy than would otherwise be needed. 
However, if the Committee felt it was desirable to further delay the initiation of interest rate 
increases, such a report would provide the opportunity, indeed the obligation, for a thorough 
and  thoughtful  discussion  about  why  discretionary  deviations  from  the  guideposts  were 
appropriate. 
Thus, publishing a monetary policy report with an assessment of the likely near-term path of 
policy  rates,  in  conjunction  with  its  economic  forecast,  would  be  a  useful  exercise  and 
                                                
3  See Charles I Plosser, “Systematic Monetary Policy and Communication,” remarks to the Economic Club of 
New  York,  New  York,  NY,  June  24,  2014;  and  Charles  I  Plosser,  “Monetary  Rules:  Theory  and  Practice,” 
remarks to the Hoover Institution, Stanford, CA, May 30, 2014. 
4  See  http://www.philadelphiafed.org/research-and-data/publications/special-reports/2014/1231-using-rules-for-
benchmarking.pdf. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  enhance communications. It would also provide added discipline for policymakers to stick to 
a systematic, rule-like approach. And it would force policymakers to think more deeply and 
systematically about policy and the justification for significant deviations from the guideposts. 
leads 
to  better  economic  outcomes.  But 
Preserving independence 
I believe such communication would ultimately  strengthen the independence of the central 
bank,  which  is  the  fourth  and  final  principle  of  sound  central  banking.  Central  bank 
independence 
in  a  democratic  society, 
independence must be accompanied by accountability. 
Transparent  and  clear  communication  of  monetary  policy  goals  and  a  decision-making 
framework  help  ensure  accountability  and  preserve  central  bank 
independence. 
Transparency can also enhance a central bank’s credibility. A central bank that is transparent 
will  be  less  willing  to  make  promises  it  cannot  keep.  And  accountability  is  more  easily 
achieved when there is transparency. The public can best hold a central bank accountable 
when its goals are clearly stated and achievable. Broad, ill-defined goals, on the other hand, 
reduce accountability and invite discretionary policies that can undermine the public trust and 
thus jeopardize independence. This is one reason why I have been concerned about credit 
allocation  initiatives  by  the  Fed  that  treated  some  creditors  more  favorably  than  others  in 
bailouts  and  that  sought  to  provide  special  support  to  the  housing  sector  through  its 
purchases  of  mortgage-backed  securities.  Such  credit  allocation  decisions  more 
appropriately  rest  with  the  fiscal  authorities,  not  the  central  bank.  By  pushing  these 
boundaries, the Fed puts its independence at risk. 
Conclusion 
In conclusion, the U.S. economy continues to improve. Although we have not witnessed the 
strong bounce back from the depths of the recession that some anticipated, the recovery has 
been remarkably steady. 
Labor markets continue to heal, and their stronger-than-expected recovery should serve to 
underpin continued economic expansion. Consumer balance sheets are much improved, and 
households  have  regained  much  of  the  wealth  they  lost  during  the  crisis.  That  gives  me 
additional confidence that the economy is now operating normally and so should monetary 
policy. 
As  we normalize policy, I believe  we should follow four principles. The Fed should ensure 
that it has clearly articulated objectives that can be achieved by monetary policy, with price 
stability  as  the  primary  objective.  It  should  pursue  its  objectives  in  a  systematic,  rule-like 
manner  and  help  the  public  understand  how  policy  will  react  systematically  to  changes  in 
economic conditions. 
I  believe  a  detailed  monetary  policy  report  could  be  a  useful  vehicle  for  such  enhanced 
communication of policy, which will improve the transparency and predictability of monetary 
policy,  which  ultimately  reduces  policy  surprises.  Businesses  and  consumers  are  more 
informed  about the  course  of monetary  policy  because  they  understand  how  policymakers 
are  likely  to  react  to  changing  economic  circumstances,  even  if  they  are  not  certain  what 
those economic conditions might be. 
Equally  important  in  my  view  is  that  greater  clarity  about  policymakers’  reaction  function 
strengthens accountability. So, systematic policy, communicated transparently, strengthens 
accountability and credibility and, thus, serves to preserve the central bank’s independence. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
