  Glenn Stevens: Remarks at the launch of the Official Australian 
Renminbi Clearing Bank 
Remarks by Mr Glenn Stevens, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, at the launch of 
the Official Australian Renminbi Clearing Bank. Sydney, 9 February 2015. 
 Premier, Consul General, Mr Chen, distinguished guests, colleagues, ladies and gentlemen, 
thank you for the invitation to say a few words on the occasion of the launch of the Bank of 
China (Sydney) as the official renminbi clearing bank here in Australia. 
Today’s events mark an important step in the further development of a local renminbi – or 
RMB – market. But more than that, they mark one more step in a lengthy and very important 
journey  that  has  seen  the  flowering  of  trade  relations  between  China  and  Australia,  and 
which promises benefits from the maturing of financial ties. 
On its own, the key direct benefit of the official Australian RMB clearing bank is that it can 
more efficiently facilitate transactions between Australian firms and their mainland Chinese 
counterparts using the Chinese currency. Bank of China (Sydney)’s “official” status – which 
was  granted  by  the  People’s  Bank  of  China  (PBC)  –  affords  it  more  direct  access  to  the 
Chinese  financial  system,  with  flow-on  effects  for  local  financial  institutions  and  their 
customers. 
But  an  official  Australian  RMB  clearing  bank  also  confers  some  indirect  benefits  on  the 
Australian financial sector and its customers, particularly when viewed as one element of a 
broader range of initiatives. 
In  particular,  the  establishment  of  the  clearing  bank  helps  to  raise  awareness  among 
Australian firms that the local financial system has the capacity to effect cross-border RMB 
transactions on their behalf. This is important, because over the long run, Chinese firms may 
increasingly wish their trade with Australian firms to be settled in RMB. To be sure, today the 
bulk of global trade is settled in US dollars. But with China now a very large trading nation, 
and continuing to grow into a “continental sized” economy, it would be surprising if at some 
point  we  do  not  see  much  more  use  of  China’s  currency  for  trade  purposes.  Already  its 
usage is growing quickly, if only from a small base. So Australian firms and the Australian 
financial system need to be well prepared. 
To that end, the RBA has been directly involved in several initiatives, with the aim in each 
instance being to ensure that there are mechanisms in place that allow the private sector to 
increase its use of the Chinese currency as and when it chooses to do so. This of course 
included  the  signing  of  a  Memorandum  of  Understanding  with  the  PBC  to  enable  the 
establishment of an official RMB clearing bank in Australia, in November last year following 
the G20 Leaders’ Summit in Brisbane. 
In addition, there was the establishment of a bilateral local currency swap line with the PBC 
in  2012,  which  is  designed  to  provide  confidence  to  both  Chinese  and  Australian  financial 
institutions that appropriate RMB and AUD liquidity arrangements are in place in the event of 
dislocation in the market. 
More  recently,  there  was  the  negotiation  of  a  quota  to  allow  financial  institutions  based  in 
Australia  to  invest  in  approved  mainland  Chinese  securities  under  the  Renminbi  Qualified 
Foreign Institutional Investor Scheme – better known as RQFII. 
Finally,  I  note  the  RBA  has  invested  a  small  proportion  of  Australia’s  foreign  currency 
reserves in RMB. 
Official initiatives like these help to lay the groundwork. But ultimately, the development of an 
RMB market in Australia will depend on the extent of benefit the private sector sees in using 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  increasingly 
important  drivers  of 
RMB for trade settlement and investment purposes. It is worth noting that private sector-led 
initiatives  are  now  becoming 
the  RMB  market’s 
development.  For  example,  forums  such  as  the  Australia-Hong  Kong  RMB  Trade  and 
Investment  Dialogue  and  the  “Sydney  for  RMB”  Working  Group  are  beginning  to  have  a 
more prominent role in raising awareness of the financial sector’s capacity to conduct RMB 
business  and  in  identifying  any  further  market  development  issues  that  may  need  to  be 
addressed. 
Looking ahead, and as my colleague, Deputy Governor Philip Lowe has noted a number of 
times, the process of RMB internationalisation and the associated opening of China’s capital 
account are likely to have significant implications for the global financial system – much like 
the  opening  up  of  China’s  current  account  has  had  a  very  large  impact  on  the  global 
economy.1  The  Chinese  authorities  have  indicated  that  they  intend  to  continue  RMB 
internationalisation  and  capital  account  liberalisation  in  the  coming  years.  As  a  result,  the 
opportunities for Australian and Chinese investors to invest in each other’s financial markets 
could grow significantly in the coming years. By increasing their familiarity with the RMB as 
an international transaction currency, local financial institutions, investors and firms are likely 
to be better placed to take advantage of these future opportunities as they arise. 
I congratulate the Bank of China (Sydney) on the official launch of RMB clearing facilities in 
Sydney. This is a further important step in what continues to be a fascinating journey. 
                                                
1   For example, see: Lowe P (2014) “Australia’s RMB Policies and Future Direction”, Introductory Remarks at the 
RMB  Internationalisation  Roundtable,  Sydney,  23  July;  and  Lowe  P  (2014)  “Some  Implications  of  the 
Internationalisation of the Renminbi”, Opening Remarks to the Centre for International Finance and Regulation 
Conference on the Internationalisation of the Renminbi, Sydney, 26 March. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
