  Peter Praet: Structural reforms and long-run growth in the euro area 
Intervention  by  Mr  Peter  Praet,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  European  Central 
Bank, on panel “Long-run growth, monetary policy and financing of the economy” at the 43rd 
Economics Conference of the Central Bank of the Republic of Austria, Vienna, 15 June 2015. 
 Summary 
As  the  ECB’s  accommodative  monetary  policy  is  playing  its  part  in  the  euro  area  recovery,  structural 
reforms  are  the  domain  where  there  is  more  still  to  do  to  create  the  conditions  for  sustainable  long-run 
growth, which is critical to the integrity of our monetary union. There is however no “one size fits all” model 
for  how  countries  should  go  about  tackling  structural  challenges.  While  there  are  principles  that  apply 
across countries,  each  economy  is  different  and  reforms  have  to  be  tailored  to  national  conditions. As a 
central bank, our interest is not in how countries implement reforms, but whether they succeed in doing so. 
There are two main channels through which structural reforms can support long-run growth in the euro area, 
namely through increasing the adjustment capacity of the economy and through raising its potential growth 
rate. Put differently, reforms can raise both the trend of long-run growth and reduce the fluctuations around 
that  trend.  Both  aspects  are  particularly  important  in  a  monetary  union,  which  makes  structural  reforms 
commensurately more pressing. The environment for introducing structural reforms is better today than for 
several years: all the conditions are in place for governments in the euro area, individually and collectively, 
to begin addressing their long-term challenges. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
Thank  you  very  much  for  inviting  me  to  participate  in  this  panel  on  “long-run  growth, 
monetary policy and financing of the economy”. 
For  some  this  may  seem  like  an  unusual  combination  of  topics,  as  it  is  often  argued  that 
monetary policy has no long-run effects. Monetary policy can however affect long-run growth 
in  several  ways.  First,  by  increasing  certainty  over  the  future  price  level  it  can  support 
investment and efficient resource allocation. Second, by reducing fluctuations in the business 
cycle it can help forestall hysteresis effects. Third, if one takes a “leaning against the wind” 
view of monetary policy, it can play a role in tempering the financial cycle and misallocation 
of resources that often comes with it.  
But monetary policy is already playing its part in the euro area, so I do not want to dwell on 
this topic today. I will focus instead on an area where there is more still to do to create the 
conditions for sustainable long-run growth – that is, structural reforms in the euro area. 
The main point I would like to make is as follows. For many euro area countries structural 
reforms are central to higher long-run growth. And that each economy achieves this is in turn 
critical  to  an  efficient  implementation  of  monetary  policy  and,  over  time,  to  the  integrity  of 
monetary union. But there is no “one size fits all” model for how countries should go about 
tackling  structural  challenges. While  there  are  principles  that  apply  across  countries,  each 
economy is different and reforms have to be tailored to national conditions. 
As  a  central  banker,  my  interest  is  therefore  not  in  how  countries  go  about  strengthening 
their  economies.  This  is  for  governments  individually  and  collectively  to  decide  who  know 
their national challenges best. My interest is in whether they succeed in doing so, due to the 
impact this has on price stability and on the cohesion of the union as a whole. 
In the remainder of my remarks I will elaborate on these points, focusing on the two main 
channels through which structural reforms can support long-run growth in the euro area. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Increasing adjustment capacity 
The  first  is  through  increasing  the  adjustment  capacity  of  the  economy.  This  means  two 
things: first, that output is less affected by shocks because relative prices adjust quickly; and 
second,  that  the  recovery  in  output  is  faster  because  the  economy  is  able  to  reallocate 
resources  in  a  more  efficient  way.  Adjustment  capacity  is  important  in  itself,  but  it  also 
supports long-term growth insofar as it reduces the depth of recessions and the duration of 
unemployment, lessening labour and capital hysteresis. 
When countries do not have an independent monetary policy and exchange rate, as in the 
euro  area,  the  ability  to  adjust  to  shocks  in  this  way  becomes  commensurately  more 
important. To avoid large increases in unemployment it is crucial that national institutions can 
facilitate  a  smooth  adjustment  process.  In  other  words,  the  need  for  a  higher  degree  of 
“resilience” comes automatically with membership of a monetary union.  
While  this  is  first  and  foremost  a  national  responsibility,  it  is  also  of  common  interest  in  a 
monetary  union.  If  some  members  consistently  rebound  more  slowly  from  shocks  than 
others, it complicates the achievement of price stability at the euro area level. The risk also 
increases that differences in structural unemployment become entrenched across the Union. 
And insofar as this weakens the political rationale for monetary union – that all members are 
better off over time inside the Union than they would be outside – it also weakens its long-
term cohesion. That has negative spillovers for all member economies. 
It is in this context that several of my colleagues on the ECB Executive Board have recently 
called for stronger common governance at the European level over economic policies.1 The 
ability of all countries to adjust well to shocks is not only key for the delivery of our mandate, 
it is vital for the integrity of the currency. This is an area of legitimate interest for the central 
bank which is the guardian of that currency.  
However, it is important to stress that the ECB’s interest in structural reforms should not be 
misinterpreted as a call for centralisation along a “one size fits all” model. We do not need all 
euro area countries to adopt identical structural reforms. What we need is a framework that 
takes into account both how countries differ based on their national conditions, and how they 
are similar by virtue of being in a monetary union. Within those parameters there are various 
combinations of country-specific institutions that can produce smooth adjustment.  
Let me illustrate what I mean by focusing on one example: labour markets. 
Theory suggests that, in a monetary union, there are certain principles that should apply to 
labour  markets  across  countries.  For  instance,  without  the  option  of  exchange  rate 
devaluation, maintaining wages in line with productivity over time is thought to be central to 
sustaining competitiveness and avoiding painful internal devaluations. Ensuring that wages 
can respond to changes in labour demand or supply is also seen as a key element in limiting 
the employment cost of shocks. If firms have the scope to cut costs on the intensive margin – 
i.e. wages, bonuses and working time – they are less likely to cut costs through the extensive 
margin, that is, labour shedding.  
Wage-productivity links have indeed proven to be an important factor in countries’ external 
positions. France, for example, has experienced large losses in export market shares since 
the  start  of  monetary  union  in  1999,  and  part  of  the  reason  for  this  is  that  labour  market 
institutions  have  allowed  wages  and  productivity  to  de-link  across  firms.  Micro-level  data 
show that wages have grown almost as much in the least productive French firms over the 
last decade as they have in the most productive. By contrast, in Germany there is clear wage 
dispersion according to firm productivity.  
                                                
1  For  instance,  see  Draghi,  Mario  (2015).  “Structural  reforms,  inflation,  and  monetary  policy.”  Introductory 
speech at the ECB Forum on Central Banking, 22 May 2015. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Moreover, while the strength of the crisis shock has inevitably led to high job destruction, the 
employment  cost  does  appear  to  have  been  influenced  by  the  margins  of  adjustment 
available to firms. On the whole those that had scope to adjust on the intensive margin have 
cut jobs less. For example, new micro level research from the Eurosystem finds that firms 
with flexibility at the plant-level have reduced employment less during the crisis than those 
bound  by  centralised  wage  bargaining  agreements,  partly  because  they  have  been  more 
able to adjust wages and working time to economic conditions.2  
Labour market policies that reflect such principles may therefore be beneficial in most euro 
area countries. But it does not follow from this that there is an optimal model for the labour 
market  that  all  must  emulate.  Economies  are  complex,  and  how  labour  markets  function 
depends  on  manifold  interactions  at  the  national  level.  Designing  structural  reforms  thus 
requires a nuanced and country-specific approach.  
For example, how the labour market adjusts to shocks depends not only wage formation, but 
on the overall constellation of labour market institutions within national economies. That is, 
how the adjustment margins interact with other features such as unemployment insurance, 
employment  protection  and  active  labour  market  policies  –  the  latter  being  particularly 
important in the current context of a “cleansing” recession requiring substantial reallocation 
and  retraining  of  workers.  And  we  know  from  international  experience  that  different 
combinations of labour market institutions can produce similar employment outcomes.  
If  one compares, for  example, the  largest  euro area  economy,  Germany,  with  the  US  and 
Denmark, we can see that they have different levels of public expenditure on labour market 
protection (0.1% in the US, 0.7% in Germany and 2.1% in Denmark), different levels of union 
density (US 11%, DE 19%, DK 69%) and a different percentage of employees covered by 
wage bargaining agreements (US 13%, DE 62%, DK 80%). Unemployment rates in all three 
countries have nonetheless been on a downward trend since 2009.  
Moreover,  how  labour  market  institutions  affect  adjustment  also  depends  critically  on 
interactions  with  other  policy  areas.  In  Greece,  for  example,  it  took  around  two  years  for 
lower labour costs to translate into lower prices, largely because product markets were highly 
protected and did not react. Due to structural factors the responsiveness of the economy to 
price changes has also been relatively low: Greece ranks below most other small economies 
in  terms  of  both  share  of  foreign  trade  to  GDP  and  elasticity  of  exports  to  price 
competitiveness. Policy objectives like raising competitiveness therefore have to take broad 
set of national conditions into account: competition in product markets, the quality of judicial 
systems and public administration, the ease of doing business, to name but a few. 
There are of course other factors that are relevant as well, in particular the role of demand 
policies.  But  the  key  point  is  about  diversity.  It  is  not  enough  to  give  one-dimensional 
prescriptions such as that the all labour markets must become more flexible. What matters is 
that  the  combination  of  policies  and  institutions  within  each  country  produces  an  outcome 
that is satisfactory for its citizens and sustainable for the euro area as a whole. 
Underscoring this message is important, otherwise it can wrongly seem as though monetary 
union  deprives  citizens  of  democratic  choice.  One  could  get  the  idea  that  which  political 
orientation a country opts for is unimportant, as it will have to implement to same structural 
reforms  anyway.  There  are  some  minimum  requirements  that  come  with  being  part  of  a 
monetary union. But there are various ways of meeting them. This is perhaps a notion that, in 
the future, we could do a better job of conveying. 
                                                
2  di  Mauro,  F.,  and  Ronchi,  M.  (2015).  “Centralisation  of  wage  bargaining  and  firms’  adjustment  to  the  great 
recession: A micro-based analysis.” CompNet Policy Brief, No. 8, May 2015. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  Reinforcing supply capacity 
Alongside  adjustment  capacity,  structural  reforms  contribute  to  long-run  growth  through  a 
second  channel:  by  increasing  the  supply  capacity  of  the  economy,  or  its  potential  growth 
rate.  Well-designed  structural  policies  not  only  increase  the  quantity  of  inputs  to  the 
production process – i.e. higher labour supply and capital growth – but they can also foster 
the more efficient use of those inputs across and within sectors, that is, higher total factor 
productivity (TFP).  
The supply capacity channel is also especially important in a monetary union. In the absence 
of large-scale fiscal transfers and with limited labour mobility across countries, all member 
economies need to be able to sustain high levels of growth and employment for the Union to 
be cohesive over the long-term.  
Potential growth is however weak in many euro area countries. This is in part because the 
crisis has lowered both capital growth, through a steep fall in investment, and labour supply, 
through  higher  structural  unemployment.  But  it  also  reflects  weak  long-term  trends  in 
productivity. For example, between 2000-14 TFP increased cumulatively by only 1.5% in the 
euro  area,  while  in  the  US  it  rose  by  10.9%  in  the  same  period.  This  not  a  situation  over 
which we can be complacent, not least given the substantial damage that still remains from 
the crisis. 
Structural reforms can play an important role, in different ways, in addressing the challenges 
related to each production factor. 
Labour supply in the euro area will inevitably be affected by the impact of ageing societies. 
Yet with high structural unemployment there is clear scope to increase quantities, especially 
through  labour  market  policies  targeted  at  reactivating  the  long-term  unemployed.  In 
Portugal,  for  example,  ECB  internal  estimates  find  that  active  labour  market  policies  can 
explain  about  one-third  of  the  improvement  in  employment  since  the  trough.  The  2012 
Spanish  labour  market  reform  is  also  estimated  to  have  a  saved  the  destruction  of  about 
60,000 jobs in the short term, and had a medium-term impact of some 300,000 fewer jobs 
destroyed.3 These are admittedly relatively small gains relative to the scale of the challenge, 
but they provide an indication that determined actions in this area can produce results. 
Though the investment-to-GDP ratio in the euro area is currently still 3.5 pp below its pre-
crisis  level,  capital  growth  is  projected  to  bounce  back  as  the  economy  strengthens  and 
accelerator effects take hold. However, there are two key risk factors to this outlook, both of 
which structural reforms can help mitigate. 
The first is that pessimism among firms about future growth prospects continues to weaken 
the  business  case  for  higher  investment.  5  years  ahead  growth  expectations  among 
forecasters have been falling continuously since 2001, from around 2.7% then to 1.4% today, 
which may have filtered through into “animal spirits”. In this context, structural reforms that 
raise  expectations  over  the  path  of  potential  growth  can  have  an  important  psychological 
impact, insofar as they reduce uncertainty and dislodge negative sentiment. 
The second risk factor is that the persistence of a debt overhang in parts of the euro area 
continues to act as a major drag on firm and household spending. Here structural reforms 
can be supportive both through their positive effect on GDP – the denominator effect – and 
through  facilitating  nominal  debt  reductions  –  the  numerator  effect.  In  the  latter  case,  this 
comes down to issues such as improving the efficiency of insolvency regimes, out-of-court 
restructuring frameworks and judicial systems.4  
                                                
3  BBVA (2013). Revista Situación España, 2013 Q2. 
4  For more on this point see speech by Peter Praet, “Repairing the bank lending channel: the next steps”, 17 
November 2014. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  However, we know that it is not just raising the quantity of investment that matters for long-
term growth; the quality of investments, and how they contribute to TFP growth, is just as 
significant. Indeed, it is telling that since 2000 total investment has been slightly higher as a 
percentage  of GDP  in  the  euro  area  than  in  the  US,  while  producing  a  much  inferior TFP 
performance. Two factors can help explain this discrepancy: first, the relatively higher share 
that  US  firms  have  invested  ICT  capital,  and  second,  the  efficiency  with  which  they  have 
turned  that  investment  into  productivity  gains.  And  it  is  structural  factors  which,  at  least  in 
part, account for these two differences. 
First, while there is variance within the euro area, on the whole there is a relatively higher 
proportion of micro and small firms in Europe than in the US. European firms are also more 
static, in the sense that they do not grow or shrink over time. For example, the average size 
of a manufacturing sector start-up in the US and Italy is roughly the same within its first two 
years – 5–10 employees. After ten years, however, the average US firm has grown to around 
75 employees, while the average Italian still has below 15 employees.5  
This matters because the size and growth rate of firms tends to have strong impact on ICT 
diffusion. Small firms are generally characterised by a relatively lower accumulation of ICT 
capital due to the higher fixed costs they face.6 They also tend towards higher risk aversion 
and encounter greater difficulties in collecting resources to finance more innovative projects.7 
An economy populated by small firms that do not grow is therefore likely to be one with lower 
investment in ICT, and therefore lower TFP growth. 
The  reasons  why  euro  area  firms  grow  more  slowly  are  complex,  but  structural  policies 
certainly  play  a  role.  In  Italy,  for  example,  regulations  that  kick-in  at  the  15  employees 
threshold appear to have encouraged firms to stay small (although these are de facto now no 
longer in force).8 A similar phenomenon has been observed in France, where size-contingent 
regulations appear to cause firms to cluster below 50 employees.9  
Wider product and labour market regulations may also affect firm growth by hindering firm 
entry  and  exit  and  hence  discouraging  reallocation.  For  example,  differences  in  product 
market protection are associated with differences in ICT adoption and diffusion in the service 
sector.10 Recent evidence suggests that the quality of institutions can also affect reallocation: 
enhancing  the  efficiency  of  civil  justice  can  lead  to  higher rates  of firms'  market  entry  and 
attract foreign direct investment.11 In this sense, the incentives for within-firm innovation may 
be closely linked to the capacity for between-firm reallocation.12  
                                                
5  Criscuolo  et  al.  “The  dynamics  of  employment  growth:  new  evidence  from  18  countries.”  CEP  Discussion 
Papers, No. 1274, June 2014. 
6  Pellegrino, B., and Zingales, L. “Diagnosing the Italian disease.” Unpublished manuscript, September 2014. 
7  Amatori,  F.,  Bugamelli  M.  and  A.  Colli  (2011),  “Italian  Firms 
in  History:  Size,  Technology  and 
Entrepreneurship”,  Banca  d’Italia  Economic  History  Working  Papers,  No.  13,  October  2011.  See  also 
Bugamelli,  M.,  Cannari  L.,  Lotti  F.  and  S.  Magri  (2011),  “Il  Gap  Innovativo  del  Sistema  Produttivo  Italiano: 
Radici e Possibili Rimedi”, Banca d’Italia Occasional Papers No. 121, April 2012. 
8  Schivardi,  F.,  and  Torrini,  R.  (2004).  “Firm  size  distribution  and  employment  protection  legislation  in  Italy.” 
Banca d’Italia Economic Working Paper, No. 504, June 2004. 
9  Garicano  L.,  LeLarge  C.  and  J.  Van  Reenen  (2012)  “Firm  size  distortions  and  the  productivity  distribution: 
Evidence from France.” NBER Working Papers, No.18841, March 2012. 
10  Dabla-Norris, S., V. Haksar, M. Kim, K. Kochhar, K. Wiseman, and A. Zdzienicka (2015) “The New Normal: A 
Sector-Level Perspective on Productivity Trends in Advanced Economies” IMF discussion Note 
11  Lorenzani, D. and Lucidi, F. (2014), “The Economic Impact of Civil Justice Reforms” EC Economic Papers No. 
530. 
12  Andrews,  D.  and  Criscuolo,  C.  “Knowledge-based  capital,  innovation,  and  resource  allocation.”  OECD 
Economics Department Working Papers, No. 1046, May 2013. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  However – and this brings me to second point – even in euro area countries that have kept 
pace with the US in terms of ICT capital, firms have been less able to exploit the productivity 
potential  of  their  investments.  For  example,  between  2001-07  the  average  annual 
contribution of ICT capital to GDP growth was identical in the US and Belgium (0.38 pp), yet 
TFP contributed 0.53 pp more to GDP growth in the US. Structural and institutional factors 
can in part explain these differences too. 
One  key  element  is  differences  in  the  quality  of  human  capital.  The  impact  of  ICT  on 
productivity is crucially mediated by the quality of management and its ability to implement 
the  necessary  organisational  changes  required  by  new  technologies.  While  the  US  ranks 
highly in terms of management quality, with some such as Germany close behind, most euro 
area  countries  are  estimated  to  have  average  or  below-average  management  practices.13 
This  clearly  weighs  on  productivity  growth.  Indeed,  one  study  finds  that  management 
practices account for about one quarter of cross-country and within country TFP variations.14  
Addressing this human capital gap above all requires structural policies linked to education 
and  training.  But  it  also  has  a  broader  dimension  linked  to  ownership  structures  and 
meritocracy.  For  instance,  rigid  family  ownership  structures  have  been  found  to  be 
associated with lower management quality, as they limit the talent pool from which firms can 
draw.15 Such structures also tend to reinforce firm smallness.16  
In sum, structural reforms that address the nexus between firm size, organisation and ICT 
are central to raising TFP growth in the euro area. But let me stress that what I am talking 
about  is  not  an  agenda  to  promote  digital  technology  firms  or  build  “Silicon  Valleys”,  as 
important  as  that  might  be.  What  is  most  crucial  for  TFP  growth  is  the  diffusion  of  new 
technology  into  the  ICT-using  sector  –  namely  services  –  where  the  euro  area  lags  most 
behind the US. As the largest part of the euro area economy, exploiting ICT in this sector is 
critical for the euro area to significantly boost its aggregate productivity.  
Raising  productivity  is  not  a  challenge  that  we  can  take  lightly.  It  is  not  only  central  for  a 
cohesive  monetary  union  based  on  real  economic  convergence.  It  is  also  a  necessary 
condition of supporting ageing societies. As the European Commission’s new Ageing Report 
shows, the economic age dependency ratio – the ratio between the inactive elderly (65+) and 
total  employment  –  is  projected  expected  to  rise  from  44.6%  in  2013  towards  66.4%  in 
2060.17 Only with higher productivity growth can so few sustainably support so many. 
Conclusion 
Let me conclude. 
What I have argued today is that structural reforms can raise long-run growth in two ways: by 
raising  the  trend  of  long-term  growth,  and  by  reducing  the  fluctuations  around  that  trend. 
Both these aspects are particularly important for economies in a monetary union. This makes 
structural reforms commensurately more pressing. 
                                                
13  Bloom, N., Sadun, R., and J. Van Reenen. “Americans Do IT Better: US Multinationals and the Productivity 
Miracle.” American Economic Review, Vol. 102, No. 1, February 2012. See also Pellegrino, B., and Zingales, 
L. “Diagnosing the Italian disease.” Unpublished manuscript, September 2014. 
14  Ibid. 
15  Bloom,  N.,  and  Van  Reenen,  J.  “Measuring  and  Explaining  Management  Practices  Across  Firms  and 
Countries.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics Vol. 122, No. 4, November 2007. 
16  Bugamelli,  M.,  Cannari  L.,  Lotti  F.  and  S.  Magri  (2011),  “Il  Gap  Innovativo  del  Sistema  Produttivo  Italiano: 
Radici e Possibili Rimedi”, Banca d’Italia Occasional Papers No. 121, April 2012. 
17  European Commission (2015), The 2015 Ageing Report. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  This is not to say that all the euro area’s problems are structural. Demand policies remain 
crucial  to  close  a  still-large  output  gap  and  to  secure  a  strong  cyclical  recovery.  And  it  is 
possible that some issues that are currently considered to be structural, such a high long-
term  unemployment,  could  reverse  in  a  stronger  demand  environment.  That  is  to  say,  if 
hysteresis operates in the downswing, it may also reverse in the upswing. 
Yet according to all estimates potential growth in the euro area is weak, and has been on a 
declining trend for at least 15 years. A strong and sustained recovery cannot therefore come 
from demand policies alone. It has to entail reforms that improve the allocative efficiency of 
the economy and unlock its supply capacity. 
The  environment  for  introducing  structural  reforms  is  better  today  than  for  several  years. 
Monetary  policy  is  extremely  accommodative.  Activity  is  recovering.  And  credit  supply 
constraints  are falling,  allowing finance  to flow  quickly  to  the  new  investment  opportunities 
that  reforms  create.  All  the  conditions  are  therefore  in  place  for  governments  in  the  euro 
area, individually and collectively, to begin addressing their long-run challenges. 
 
[1]  
 
[3] 
[4] 
[5] 
[6] 
[7] 
[8]  
[9] 
[10]. 
[11] 
[12] 
[13] 
[14] 
[15] 
[16 
[17] 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  7 
