  Takehiro Sato: The Bank of Japan’s efforts toward overcoming deflation 
Remarks by Mr Takehiro Sato, Member of the Policy Board of the Bank of Japan, at the 7th 
Japan Securities Summit, London, 11 February 2015. 
Accompanying slides can be found at the end of the speech. 
 I am truly honored to have this opportunity to be a panel member at the 7th Japan Securities 
Summit. 
Japan’s economy has continued to recover moderately as a trend with a virtuous cycle from 
income to spending operating steadily in both the household and corporate sectors. As for 
the outlook, it is expected to continue its moderate recovery trend. In the Bank of Japan’s 
January 2015 interim assessment of the Outlook for Economic Activity and Prices (hereafter 
the Outlook Report), the median of the Policy Board members’ forecasts for the growth rate 
for fiscal 2015 and 2016 were revised upward from the forecasts presented in the October 
2014  Outlook  Report,  partly  due  to  the  drop  in  crude  oil  prices  and  the  effects  of  the 
economic measures by the government. 
On the price front, the inflation rates in major countries, including Japan, have been declining 
as  a  trend  mainly  due  to  the  recent  drop  in  crude  oil  prices.  Under  those  circumstances, 
central banks in major countries have a common concern that major economies are trapped 
in a feedback-loop – the decline in the inflation rates would lead to a fall in people’s medium- 
to  long-term  inflation  expectations,  and  it  would  result  in  a  further  decline  in  the  actual 
inflation rates. That is why the Bank decided to expand the QQE last October. 
As I cast a dissenting vote on that decision, I may not be an appropriate person to explain 
this policy. However, I share the Bank’s firm resolution to overcome deflation. In this session, 
I will share with you my views on the effects of the QQE, the Bank’s price stability target, and 
the importance of the government’s effort toward fiscal consolidation to ensure the ultimate 
success of the QQE. 
First  of  all,  the  effects  of  the  QQE  have  been  increasing  in  a  cumulative  manner  with  the 
progress  in  the  asset  purchases  by  the  Bank.  The  Bank  purchases  the  Japanese 
government bonds (JGBs) so that their amount outstanding increases at an annual pace of 
about 80 trillion yen. This amount, “about 80 trillion yen”, substantially exceeds the planned 
amount of new financial resource bonds by the government, which means that final investors 
decrease  their  outstanding  holdings  of  JGBs.  However,  Japanese  institutional  investors’ 
preference for JGBs is strong partly in response to the international financial regulations, and 
partly due to a lack of attractive domestic investment opportunities. Therefore, as the Bank 
continues to purchase large-scale assets, that effect on the interest rate formation has been 
more strongly pronounced especially after the expansion of the QQE. In fact, the yield curve 
has  flattened  further,  with  the  yield  in  the  medium-term  zone  falling  into  negative  territory 
albeit  temporarily,  and  the  super-long  end  of  the  yield  curve  also  declining  considerably. 
Meanwhile,  an  increase  in  the  volatility  of  the  interest  rate  has  been  observed  recently.  I 
have been monitoring carefully how that shape of the yield curve will influence a variety of 
asset prices and investors’ asset allocation as a policy effect. On the other hand, I have been 
monitoring the side effects – such as the effects on financial system stability, including the 
broadly-defined settlement system, and the market functioning. Also a smooth restoration of 
markets’ price discovery function will be an issue from somewhat a longer perspective, in the 
process  of  seeking for  an  exit  from QQE,  as  the  Bank  purchases  about 90  percent  of the 
total amount of JGBs’ market issuance on a gross basis. 
Second, my understanding is that in the assessment of the achievement of the Bank’s price 
stability  target,  what  is  important  is  not  to  focus  on  the  specific  price  indicators,  but  to 
examine  whether  various  economic  entities  such  as  firms  and  households  change  their 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  behavioral patterns based on the assumption of a certain level of inflation with monitoring a 
wide range of indicators including those related to wages carefully. It seems that there is no 
silver bullet for estimating people’s medium- to long-term inflation expectations, and therefore 
whether  or  not  they  have  started  to  heighten  their  expectations,  which  have  consistently 
remained  lower  than  those  in  the  United  States  and  the  Euro  Area,  can  only  be  judged 
qualitatively from various economic entities’ behavioral patterns. In that regard, households 
have had an outstandingly sticky preference for extremely inexpensive goods and services 
under  deflation.  However,  such  preference  is  not  so  strong  as  that  in  the  past,  and  firms’ 
price-setting  behavior  has  also  been  changing  in  a  positive  manner.  More  importantly,  a 
basic wage-setting mechanism – base salaries are revised in line with price increases, which 
was  almost  forgotten  under  deflation  –  has  started  to  revive  in  labor-management  wage 
negotiations. It could lead to a breakthrough in changing people’s fixed idea under deflation 
that base salaries would not rise. That would have positive effects on peoples’ medium- to 
long-term inflation expectations. 
In addition, my understanding is that what is essential to achieve the price stability target is a 
rise  in  productivity  by  the  efforts  of  various  entities  to  carry  out  structural  reform  and  a 
resultant increase in the potential growth rate as well. On that basis, the inflation rate would 
increase  moderately  and  wages  would  continuously  improve  in  line  with  the  increase  in 
productivity,  and  consequently  people  would  enjoy  benefits  from  the  overcoming  of  the 
deflation. The driving force for an increase in productivity is capital investment, and I expect 
that the recent tight labor market conditions are likely to act as a catalyst for the change of 
firms’ behavior. 
Third,  securing  the  credibility  of  fiscal  management  is  important  in  ensuring  the  ultimate 
success  of  the  QQE.  In  that  regard,  the  joint  statement  by  the  government  and  the  Bank 
released in January 2013 stated that the government will steadily promote measures aimed 
at  establishing  a  sustainable  fiscal  structure.  My  understanding  is  that  the  government 
continues to make efforts toward fiscal consolidation in the fiscal 2015 budget draft. 
The Bank’s purchases of JGBs are curried out only in the context of the conduct of monetary 
policy and not in any way to finance the fiscal deficit. It is thanks to the government’s efforts 
toward  fiscal  consolidation  that  the  Bank’s  such  explanation  is  persuasive.  If  market 
participants  have  concern  over  the  government’s  efforts  toward  fiscal  consolidation,  the 
effects  of  the  QQE  will  be  dampened,  due  to  an  expansion  in  risk  premiums.  Once  risk 
premiums  expand,  it  would  be  difficult  to  control.  Some  market  participants  mention  that 
there is little room for the expansion in risk premiums in the JGBs market due to the Bank’s 
large-scale purchases. However, the expansion in risk premiums may not be limited to the 
JGBs market. 
The government’s efforts toward fiscal consolidation are likely to be important from a longer-
term perspective as well, when the Bank achieves the price stability target and seeks for an 
exit from the QQE. The Bank expects that the government will continue to steadily promote 
measures aimed at establishing a sustainable fiscal structure. 
The  QQE  is  a  highly  difficult  policy.  While  containing  a  rise  in  nominal  rates  through  the 
massive  purchases  of  the  JGBs,  the  Bank  is  trying  to  heighten  the  people’s  inflation 
expectations which would result in lowering the real interest rates. My assessment is that the 
QQE  has  been  exerting  its  intended  effects  so  far.  Positive  changes  have  started  to  be 
observed in the asset markets and households’ and firms’ behavioral patterns. The Bank will 
continue with the QQE, aiming to achieve the price stability target of 2 percent, as long as it 
is necessary for maintaining that target in a stable manner. It will examine both upside and 
downside risks to economic activity and prices, and make adjustments as appropriate. In my 
view, the criteria for such judgment is that whether various economic entities such as firms 
and households change their behavioral patterns based on the assumption of a certain level 
of inflation as I have stated earlier. 
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
     3 
     4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
     5 
     6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
