  Vítor Constâncio: Financial stability risks, monetary policy and the need 
for macro-prudential policy 
Speech  by  Mr  Vítor  Constâncio,  Vice-President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the 
Warwick Economics Summit, Warwick, 13 February 2015. 
 The  financial  crisis  has  shown  that  price  stability  is  not  sufficient  to  guarantee  financial 
stability. The financial cycle and the business cycle are not synchronised, implying that risks 
can emerge especially in the periods of “disconnect” between the two cycles. In the run-up to 
the  financial  crisis,  imbalances  were  building-up  while  inflation  was  low  and  stable.  At 
present, the search for yield phenomenon continues against the very low inflation, subdued 
growth and low interest rate environment. 
Monetary  policy  aims  at  ensuring  price  stability  in  the  market  for  goods  and  services.  It 
should  not  be  used  to  address  pockets  of  instability  in  asset  markets. This  falls  under  the 
remit of macro-prudential policy, aimed at safeguarding stability of the financial system and 
containing  systemic  risk.  At  present,  in  advance  economies,  monetary  policy  needs  to 
stabilise prices and to continue supporting real activity, while macro-prudential policy needs 
to tame the financial sector in asset market segments showing signs of exuberance or where 
imbalances could be forming. 
Financial stability objectives can only be achieved with an effective macro-prudential policy. 
This  requires  policy  interventions  in  a  timely  and  bold  manner,  significantly  affecting  the 
normal behaviour of financial markets or financial institutions. This poses great challenges. 
First, measures would need to be admittedly intrusive, going well beyond the new capital and 
liquidity  regulatory  framework.  Secondly,  the  macro-prudential  tool-kit  that  has  been 
legislated – including the one entrusted to the ECB/SSM – is not complete, it is centred on 
banks. Instruments would need to address other financial activities and institutions, notably 
pertaining to the steadily growing “shadow banking” sector. Advanced economies will only be 
able to ensure financial stability with effective macro-prudential policy interventions. 
*** 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
It is a great pleasure to speak at this special conference and to discuss with young people 
like you about current and potential challenges which our economies, with their ever evolving 
financial  systems,  are  facing  at  present  or  will  likely  be  facing  in  the  future.  In  my  lecture 
today, I will talk about policies to safeguard financial stability and in particular about the role 
of macro-prudential policy in achieving this task. 
The  financial  crisis  has  changed  our  understanding  of  the  interactions  between  the  real 
economy and the financial system, and of the risks which these interactions may bring. In 
fact, the crisis did not only require a major policy response in order to contain the damage 
done to our societies. It has also triggered a re-design of our policy framework to safeguard 
financial stability in the future. 
In  my  remarks  today,  I  will  first  explain  why  macro-prudential  policy  aimed  at  addressing 
systemic risk is essential for an economy. Even more so if a country is part of a monetary 
union.  I  will  discuss  the  main  elements  of  macro-prudential  policy  targeting  the  banking 
sector. I will then focus on the growing importance of the shadow banking sector, the specific 
risks that emerge from these unregulated activities and the challenges they pose to macro-
prudential  policies.  In  this  context,  I  will  conclude  with  remarks  on  analytical  priorities  for 
academic research in this area. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Systemic risk, financial cycles and the objectives of macro-prudential policy 
1.  
The financial crisis generated a big recession and had enormous costs in terms of lost output 
and  unemployment.  In  2008,  it  led  many  to  think  that  deep  reforms  of  the  international 
monetary  and  financial  governance  would  follow  the  acknowledged  failure  of  the  financial 
regulation  in  place.  Two  well-known  specialists  in  the  field,  Barry  Eichengreen  and  Eric 
Helleiner have very recently published two books explaining why a transformative reform of 
the international system has indeed not occurred.1 Eichengreen explains it the following way:  
“…depression  and  financial  collapse  were  avoided,  if  barely.  This  fostered  the 
belief that the flaws of prevailing system were less. It weakened the argument for 
radical action….. Success thus became the mother of failure.” 
This sounds perhaps too harsh because good work has been done in adopting measures in 
the domains of capital, liquidity and resolution of banks in order to increase the resilience of 
the  banking  sector,  within  the  financial  system.  However,  much  less  has  been  achieved 
beyond  banks,  notably  in  what  regards  OTC  derivatives  or  non-bank  entities,  including 
activities  of  the  shadow  banking.  Also,  no  changes  were  introduced  in  the  international 
monetary  system.  The  G20  and  the  Financial  Stability  Board  do  not  have  the  full 
competences  to  fulfil  the  role  of  the  “fourth  pillar”  of  international  economic  governance, 
contrary to what was initially announced by U.S. Treasury Secretary Tim Geithner. 
As  remarked  by  Helleiner,  a  promising  innovation  emerging  from  the  crisis  is  the  macro-
prudential policy, a policy that uses regulatory measures to deal with system-wide financial 
risk. 
Systemic  risk  “refers  to  the  risk  that  financial  instability  becomes  so  widespread  that  it 
impairs the functioning of a financial system to the point where economic growth and welfare 
suffer  materially.”2  Systemic  risk  may  originate  from  three  types  of  sources:  significant 
macro-economic shocks that can make the financial sector vulnerable; contagion that may 
stem from default of a few financial institutions as a result of the growing interconnectedness 
within the system; finally, the development of endogenous financial imbalances associated 
with  credit  booms,  excessive  leverage  and  risk  taking  by  financial  institutions.  One  of  the 
lessons from the crisis was that a good capital and liquidity situations at the level of individual 
institutions, as monitored by micro-supervision, does not guarantee the stability of the system 
as a whole. 
In this context, macro-prudential policy has two main objectives: to enhance the resilience of 
the whole system and to smoothen the financial cycle, i.e. the fluctuation of credit, leverage 
and asset prices that may lead to boom-bust episodes. The instruments available for macro-
prudential  policy  include  most  of  the  micro-supervision  instruments  related  to  capital  and 
liquidity, when applied to the system as a whole, but extend to other categories, like limits to 
loan-to-value ratios in housing credit, counter-cyclical capital buffers, global leverage ratios, 
or haircuts and margin requirements in securities’ transactions or clearing activities. 
The financial cycle, which is an updated version of the old concept of the credit cycle, tends 
to  have  larger  amplitude  than  the  normal  business  cycle,  implying  that  long  periods  of 
“disconnect”  between  the  two  cycles  can  materialise.3  The  financial  cycle  refers  to  the 
fluctuations of credit, leverage and the more relevant asset prices. The business cycle refers 
basically to the fluctuations of real economic activity as measured by the GDP. In the past, 
                                                
1   Eichengreen,  B.  (2015),  “Hall  of  mirrors:  The  great  depression,  the  great  recession  and  the  misuses  of 
history”,  Oxford  University  Press  USA;  Helleiner,  Eric  (2014)  “The  status  quo  crisis:  Global  financial 
governance after the 2008 meltdown” Oxford University Press USA. 
2   ECB (2009), “The concept of systemic risk”, Special feature in the ECB Financial Stability Review, December. 
3   See Drehmann M., C. Borio and K. Tsatsaronis (2012), “Characterising the financial cycle: don’t lose sight of 
the medium term!” BIS Working Paper No. 380. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  the separation between the two was not considered likely. In particular, it was thought that 
price stability in the market of goods and services would be sufficient to guarantee financial 
stability in the market for assets. The present situation, and the period of the so-called Great 
Moderation  ahead  of  the  crisis,  should  be  sufficient  to  dispel  such  traditional  concepts. 
Before  the  crisis,  while  inflation  was  low  and  stable,  significant  financial  imbalances  were 
building-up  as  the  relatively  deregulated  financial  system  engineered  a  credit  boom  and  a 
highly  risky  leverage  situation.  Likewise,  at  present,  the  very  low  inflation  and  subdued 
growth environment is accompanied by some froth in financial asset markets resulting from 
“search for yield” in an environment of low interest rates. 
This  “disconnect”  between  the  financial  and  the  business  cycle  creates  a  dilemma  to 
traditional  macro-economic  policy  and  especially  to  monetary  policy.  The  main  remit  of 
monetary policy refers to the relevant variables of the business cycle: inflation in the market 
of  goods  and  services  and  the  level  of  real  economic  activity.  The  level  of  real  economic 
activity is a direct consideration for central banks with a dual mandate, like the U.S. Fed. It is 
an  indirect  one  in  the  case  of  a  hierarchical  mandate,  like  the  one  of  the  ECB,  where  the 
level of economic slack in the economy is one of the drivers of inflationary (or deflationary) 
pressures. The most common monetary policy framework around the world is l the inflation 
targeting regime, where there is no role for any target related to asset prices. More generally, 
no  central  bank  has  objectives  explicitly  referred  to  asset  prices  in  its  mandate.  After  the 
crisis,  there  has  been  a  trend,  albeit  without  legislative  expression,  to  attribute  an  explicit 
goal of financial stability to central banks. Nevertheless, in order to be justified, central banks 
have to be entrusted with a new set of tools of a macro-prudential nature, that can be applied 
to the financial system as a whole. 
There are two different reasons why monetary policy cannot, and should not, be used to deal 
with financial instability in asset markets. The first relates to the fact that the priority goals of 
monetary policy may require an expansionary (restrictive) stance when asset markets would 
require restrictive (expansionary) measures. Monetary policy cannot abandon its priorities as 
clearly stated in the mandate of central banks. More generally, as Mervyn King once stated, 
it  would  be  highly  controversial  if  a  restrictive  central  bank  policy  adopted  for  reasons  of 
asset market risks would create “mini-recessions” in real activity and unemployment, when 
the  level  of  inflation  would  be  compliant  with  the  defined  and  publicly-known  target.  The 
second  argument  questions  whether  monetary  policy,  through  its  main  policy  instrument  – 
short term interest rates – can effectively target asset market prices. There is no theory or 
model establishing a reliable relationship between interest rates and asset price targets.4 
Macro-prudential policy is therefore essential in any economy as the business and financial 
cycles  are  not  synchronised.  Even  more  so  in  a  monetary  union  where  vulnerabilities 
identified  in  each  country  can  be  addressed  with  macro-prudential  policy,  allowing  for  the 
appropriate heterogeneity, while countries remain subject to a single monetary policy. 
Monetary policy simultaneously affects all sectors of the economy and can therefore be an 
ineffective  tool  to  cope  with  specific  imbalances  in  the  financial  sector.  Finally,  by 
independently  addressing  financial  stability  concerns,  macro-prudential  policy  provides 
monetary policy with additional room for manoeuvre to better focus on ensuring price stability. 
Take the present moment. The search for yield continues in global financial markets. Flows 
to  high-yield  bond  and  emerging  market  funds  turned  positive  in  January  after  recording 
significant outflows in the second half of 2014. Credit spreads have narrowed. At the same 
time,  issuance  of  European  leveraged  finance  products  (high  yield  bonds  and  leveraged 
loans)  has  surpassed  pre-crisis  levels.  Issuance  of  leveraged  loans  has  reached  a  seven-
year  high  in  the  fourth  quarter  of  2014.  Furthermore,  a  growing  correlation  of  asset  price 
                                                
4   See  Donald  L.  Kohn  (2006),  “Monetary  policy  and  asset  prices”  speech  at  a  European  Central  Bank 
Colloquium, March 16, 2006, http://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/kohn20060316a.htm. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  movements across market segments is reducing the investors’ ability to hedge via portfolio 
diversification. Nevertheless, it should be noted that the situation of froth in asset prices is 
less  marked  in  the  euro  area  than  in  other  parts  of  the  world.  For  instance,  stocks  prices 
reflect  the  historical  level  of  price-earnings  ratios  and  model-based  valuation  of  normal 
corporate bonds does not show indications of over-valuation. 
In such a situation, monetary policy needs to stabilise prices and to continue supporting real 
activity. Macro-prudential policy needs to tame the financial sector in asset market segments 
showing  signs  of  exuberance  or  parts  of  the  financial  system  where  imbalances  could  be 
forming.  Monetary-  and  macro-prudential  policy  instruments  are  thus  two  different  sets  of 
tools, that sometimes have to adopt different stances but whereas in some situations, may 
share common goals. There are anyhow important synergies and interactions between the 
two policy functions. This also supports the rationale for placing the macro-prudential policy 
function under the responsibility of central banks, as reflected in the macro-prudential policy 
framework adopted for the ECB/SSM. 
Monetary  policy  must  prioritise  the  goal  of  price  stability  and  not  deal  with  the  emergent 
financial  stability  issues.  The  Treaty  does  not  mention  stability  in  asset  market  prices  as 
being  included  in  the  ECB’s  mandate.  The  separation  principle  implies  that  both  fiscal 
dominance as well as financial stability dominance of monetary policy should be avoided by 
the central bank. 
This  conceptual  view  was  behind  the  recent  ECB  decision  to  increase  the  expansionary 
stance  of  monetary  policy,  thus  not  yielding  to  the  voices  that  claimed  we  should  first 
consider the risks for asset prices and for the risk-taking transmission channel of monetary 
policy.5  In  order  to  tackle  the  threat  to  price  stability  created  by  a  long  period  of  very  low 
inflation,  which  is  contradictory  to  our  mandate,  we  decided  to  enlarge  the  scope  of  our 
programme of outright purchase of assets to sovereign bonds. In the present circumstances, 
the  additional  stimulus we  are  providing  to  aggregate  demand  will  also  help  to  reduce  the 
negative output and unemployment gaps. 
The  transmission  channels  of  a  Large  Scale  Asset  Purchase  (LSAP)  programme  include 
signalling and influencing inflation expectations, exploring spill-overs resulting from investors 
using  the  cash  received  to  buy  other  assets  and  finally,  the  freeing-up  of  space  in  banks’ 
balance sheets to increase credit to the real economy. Therefore, the counter-argument that 
the  policy  would  not  be  effective  on  account  of  already  low  sovereign  yields  is  not  well 
founded. The transmission goes well beyond the direct effect on the yields of the purchased 
securities. Even less valid is the argument that sovereign bond purchases would ease the 
pressure on governments to do structural reforms. It is not the task of a central bank to exert 
more or less pressure on governments to adopt policies for which they are responsible. They 
should implement the reforms that are necessary. In order for central banks to deserve their 
independence they have to fulfil their responsibility of ensuring price stability in the medium-
term,  an  objective  that  monetary  policy  has  the  power  to  achieve.  To  be  credible,  central 
banks must act in a symmetric way, avoiding either too high or too low inflation. 
As  mentioned,  monetary  policy  cannot  cope  with  two  different  objectives  and  the  need for 
macro-prudential  policy  has  become  more  acute  with  the  realisation  that  advanced 
economies are very likely faced with a prolonged period of low real and nominal growth. In 
such an environment, monetary policy has to remain accommodative, with low interest rates, 
which foster search for yield and froth in asset markets, making the use of macro-prudential 
policy to tame the financial cycle and to pre-empt asset bubbles even more necessary. 
                                                
5   Borio,  C.  and  H.  Zhu  (2008),  “Capital  regulation,  risk-taking  and  monetary  policy:  a  missing  link  in  the 
transmission mechanism”, BIS Working Paper No. 268. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  The trend for lower GDP and productivity growth and for ever lower real interest rates has 
continued for quite some time. For instance, the U.S. annual productivity growth was 2.36% 
from 1890 to 1972. Then it declined to 1.67% from 1972 to 2004 and to 1.33% from 2004 to 
2013. I use the U.S. figures because this development cannot be explained by the absence 
of  structural  reforms,  as  often  done  by  economists  in  relation  to  other  countries.  On  the 
contrary, the U.S. is normally used as a benchmark by those economists, since it is a much 
liberalised  and  lightly  regulated  advanced  economy.  Trying  to  explain  that  trend,6  Robert 
Gordon, in two well-known papers, has attributed it to the slowing down and lower economic 
traction of technological innovation. 
On the other hand, we have seen that 10 year sovereign interest rates in real terms came 
down  globally  on  average  from  5%  in  1980–1990;  to  3.2%  in  1991–2000;  to  1.8%  from 
2001–2007 and 0.4% in 2008–2013.7 This reflects a worldwide tendency for planned savings 
to  exceed  planned  investment,  which  then  depend  on  a  host  of  other  factors  such  as 
demographics  to  differential  riskiness  of  equities  and  bonds  or  to  real  investment 
opportunities. 
The  extreme  view  of  these  two  trends  corresponds  to  what  has  been  called  the  Secular 
Stagnation  Hypothesis  that  would  cloud  the  future  of  advanced  economies  at  present, 
particularly Europe.8 This hypothesis has two  versions. One is more related to the supply-
side,  stressing  technological  and  demographic  factors  behind  the  growth  slowdown;  the 
other,  underlines  the  demand-side  related  to  excess  savings  and  lower  investment 
prospects.9 The extreme view of this demand-side version points to the possibility that the 
real interest rate, that would be the equilibrium rate at full employment, could turn negative 
during some periods of time. This negative real rate could not be engineered by monetary 
policy in view of the zero lower bound of nominal rates, leading monetary policy to use large 
scale asset purchase programmes to try to stimulate the economy. 
In any case, even disregarding the extreme situations, it should be acknowledged that the 
monetary  regime  of  low  interest  rates  and  large  asset  purchases  that  became  necessary, 
can originate search for yield in asset markets, making it essential to find other instruments, 
like macro-prudential policy, to safeguard financial stability. 
Without  the  effective  use  of  macro-prudential  policy,  advanced  economies  would  face 
instability, asset bubbles and further financial crises. It is more crucial to pre-empt financial 
cycle booms than to adopt a passive policy of just “mopping-up” with liquidity provision, in the 
aftermath of crises because we have learned how disastrous they can be. 
There is some scepticism about the possible effectiveness of macro-prudential policy. This 
scepticism  may  be  related  to  a  reluctance  to  accept  that  a  set  of  regulatory  and 
administrative  measures  interfering  with  the  free  functioning  of  financial  markets  became 
necessary to tame the excesses of finance. Once again, the crisis convincingly showed that 
finance  cannot  be  self-regulated  and  its  frequent,  endogenous  imbalances  can  be  very 
disruptive to the real economy and the livelihood of millions. 
                                                
6   Gordon, R. (2012), “Is U.S. Economic Growth Over? Faltering Innovation Confronts the Six Headwinds” NBER 
Working Paper No. 18315; Gordon, R. (2014), “The Demise of U.S. Economic Growth: Restatement, Rebuttal, 
and Reflections” NBER Working Paper No. 19895. 
7   See IMF World Economic Outlook, April 2014. 
8   See  Teulings  C.  and  R.  Baldwin  (ed)  (2014),  “Secular  Stagnation:  Facts,  Causes  and  Cures”  Edited  by 
VoxEU.org. 
9   Krugman, 
P., 
Secular 
http://krugman.blogs.nytimes.com/2013/09/25/bubbles-regulation-and-secular-stagnation; 
Speech at the IMF Economic Forum on 8 November 2013. 
September 
Regulation 
“Bubbles, 
2013, 
and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 Stagnation” 
Summers, 
in 
L., 
5 
  
 
In reality, there is no alternative to making macro-prudential work effectively10 and, for that 
purpose, it needs to be applied in a timely, bold and intrusive manner, affecting the normal 
behaviour  of  financial  markets  or  financial  institutions.  This  brings  about  some  big 
challenges. First, the policy has to be intrusive. This can take the form of imposing caps to 
loan-to-value or debt-to-income ratios in credit to housing, regulating haircuts and margins in 
securities  transactions,  introducing  limits  to  large  exposures  to  specific  sectors,  prohibiting 
proprietary  trading  to  commercial  banks,  or  other  types  of  structural  measures.  One  can 
easily see how this genre of policies would confront doctrinal refusal. However, without them, 
simple measures related to capital charges may indeed not be effective to contain the boom 
phase of the financial cycle. Second, the macro-prudential tool-kit that has been legislated is 
not complete – notably the one entrusted to the ECB/SSM – because it is mostly centred on 
banks and excludes other activities and institutions, namely the so-called “shadow banking”. 
Let me briefly recall the set-up of the macro-prudential policy function in the euro area before 
coming back to these points. 
Macro-prudential policy in the euro area 
2.  
Major  steps  have  been  made  to  enhance  financial  stability  in  Europe,  notably  the 
establishment  of  a  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism  (SSM).  In  2013,  the  European  Council 
established a set of regulations, including the Capital Requirements Directive (CRD IV), the 
Capital  Requirements  Regulation  (CRR)  and  the  SSM  Regulation,  that  all  form  the 
framework  for  a  harmonised  bank  micro-prudential  and  macro-prudential  oversight  in 
Europe. Based on these regulations, the ECB conducted a comprehensive assessment that 
was a health check of 130 banks’ balance sheets, including a stress test exercise using, inter 
alia, its own stress testing modelling framework.11 On 4 November 2014, the SSM became 
operative and now houses bank supervision in a single European institution. An agreement 
has  also  been  reached  among  Member  States  to  establish  another  key  element  of  the 
Banking Union – the Single Resolution Mechanism. 
The SSM Regulation also confers the ECB with macro-prudential powers. The ECB may top-
up  specific  macro-prudential  measures  if  it  considers  actions  by  national  designated 
authorities as insufficient to mitigate systemic risks. As in the past, the ECB will also continue 
to  detect  and  assess  systemic  risks  at  the  euro  area  level.  However,  in  view  of  the  new 
macro-prudential  mandate,  this  task  is  now  also  being  enhanced  by  a  more  granular, 
country-level approach. 
In terms of instrument tool-kit, the ECB may use all macro-prudential instruments laid down 
in the Union acts. It covers capital instruments, such as the counter-cyclical capital buffer, the 
systemic  risk  buffer,  capital  surcharges  of  systemically  important  institutions  as  well  as 
liquidity  instruments,  such  as  the  liquidity  coverage  ratio.  In  addition,  the  ECB  can  also 
increase risk weights on real estate exposures or set higher limits on large exposures. 
In  a  single  currency  area,  macro-prudential  policies  are  particularly  important  to  deal  with 
sectoral  and  regional  risks  that  cannot  be  accounted  for  by  a  common  monetary  policy. 
Measures  such  as  the  caps  on  loan–to-value  (LTV)  or  debt-to-income  (DTI)  ratios  are 
suitable  instruments  to  address  these  developments.  In  this  context,  recent  research 
suggests that exposure-based measures, such as LTV and DTI could be more efficient than 
capital-based  measures.12  Indeed,  the  experiences  of  Korea,  Singapore  and  Hong  Kong 
                                                
10   Constâncio, V. (2014), “Making macro-prudential policy work” Speech at high-level seminar organised by De 
Nederlandsche Bank, 10 June 2014, http://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2014/html/sp140610.en.html. 
11   See Henry and Kok (2013). 
12   See Żochowski (2014). 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
confirm that LTV and DTI are efficient tools to address local house price misalignments.13 On 
the  other  hand,  they  may  generate  important  cross-border  spill-overs  and  leakages,  and 
moreover, are now solely with national authorities. Implementing them will therefore require 
co-ordination and the ECB will play an active role to facilitate this in the euro area. 
3.  
Importance of the growing market-based credit system and measures to 
address its risks 
With the more regulated banking system, the risks that regulation is circumvented by shifting 
activity to the unregulated sector are increasing. This is even more important since the size 
of this new market-based credit system has been growing almost uninterruptedly throughout 
the  crisis  –  at  least  partially  compensating  for  the  reduction  of  the  credit  from  traditional 
banks. 
According  to  the  ECB  Banking  Structures  Report  published  last  October,14  the  size  of  the 
shadow  banking  sector  more  than  doubled  over  the  past  decade.  The  total  assets  of  this 
sector in the euro area amounted to €23 trillion in mid-2014 (from €19 trillion at the end of 
2013), against €30 trillion for the banking sector. If the shadow banking sector continues to 
grow at the same rapid pace as in the past decade and the bank credit remains stagnant, the 
assets of the unregulated shadow banking sector may then become larger than the regulated 
banking sector already within five years. This has actually already happened in Luxembourg, 
in the Netherlands and in Ireland. 
Providing credit through non-bank channels helps transform the euro-area economy into a 
more U.S.-style market-based funded system. This can be beneficial as it contributes to the 
wider  risk  diversification  in  the  economy  and  may  alleviate  the  impact  of  real  shocks,  by 
providing additional source of credit in times when banks are under stress.15 Nevertheless, 
non-bank  credit  channels  can  also  become  a  source  of  systemic  risk  or  contribute  to  the 
aggravation of the initial shock.16 
Let  me  now  discuss  the  most  important  techniques  through  which  shadow  banks  provide 
credit  to  the  real  economy,  the  main  systemic  risks  which  the  unregulated  banking  sector 
may pose, and which macro-prudential tools may be used to address these risks. 
Supposedly,  provision  of  lending  to  the  real  economy  via  the  shadow  banking  sector  is 
contained. Out of €23 trillion assets of the sector I mentioned, only €2.2 trillion were in loans 
to the euro area non-financial sector. While direct lending is increasing rapidly and already 
accounts for 18% of bank credit, this is not the most important technique for providing credit 
to  the  real  economy.  The  primary  sources  of  funding  of  the  real  economy  by  the  shadow 
banking  are  securitisation,  repos  to  finance  securities  transactions  and  funding  indirectly 
provided via OTC derivatives. While Financial Vehicle Corporations (FVCs) shrunk by more 
than one-fifth since the crisis erupted, still more than 12% of all loans extended by monetary 
and financial institutions (MFIs) granted to euro area households are secured through euro 
area conduits, which hold €1.9 trillion in assets. Moreover, euro area bond funds hold almost 
a  quarter  of  all  outstanding  debt  securities  issued  by  euro  area  non-financial  corporates, 
while equity funds hold almost half a trillion in equities of euro area non-financial corporates. 
                                                
13   See Igan and Kang (2011) and Kuttner and Shim (2013). 
14   See:  Banking 
structures 
bankingstructuresreport201410.en.pdf. 
report,  ECB,  October  2014,  https://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/pdf/other/ 
15   De  Fiore  and  Uhlig  (2015)  reach  a  similar  conclusion  in  a general  equilibrium  model  where  firms  optimally 
chose among bank and non-bank sources of finance. 
16   See, among others, Aoki and Nikolov (2014) for an analysis of the implications of a growing shadow banking 
sector on financial stability. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  In addition, hedge funds and mixed funds provide additional funding to the real economy via 
off-balance sheet transactions, such as repos and credit commitments and OTC derivatives. 
Let  me  put  a  word  of  caution  on  the  numbers  I  quoted. They  refer  only  to  assets  held  by 
money  market  funds,  investment  funds,  financial  vehicles  corporations  and  some  special 
purpose vehicles that are domiciled in the euro area. The figures would be much higher if we 
also  had  statistics  on  non-euro  area  shadow  banking.  They  would  be  even  higher  if  off-
balance  sheet  activities,  such  as  securities  funding  transactions  and  derivatives  were 
accounted for. 
The recent  substantial  increase  in the  size  of the  shadow  banking  sector  in  the  euro  area 
was fostered by three factors. First, in an environment of globally low interest rates, among 
other  financial  institutions,  investment  funds  and  hedge  funds  were  instrumental  in  the 
general search for yield. Second, the supply of credit has been weak due to impaired banks’ 
balance sheets, which led to the expansion of the unregulated credit market. Third, a more 
stringent banking regulation in anticipation of the implementation of new capital and liquidity 
rules under Basel III could have, in itself, induced a shift of lending to the unregulated sector. 
From  a  financial  stability  perspective,  a  raise  of  the  shadow  banking  sector  may  create 
systemic risks that need to be better understood and measured. The sector is engaged in 
maturity transformation the same way as banks are. It was the proneness of banks to deposit 
runs that led the U.S. regulators, back in 1930s, to introduce deposit insurance to mitigate 
that risk. What we now witness is the emergence of the shadow banking sector that is also 
vulnerable  to  runs.  Shadow  banks  do  not  hold  deposits  and  are  mostly  funded  via  equity. 
However,  they  are  subject  to  the  short-term  redemption  risk.  If,  for  any  reason,  shadow 
banks experience substantial redemptions, they may be forced to promptly sell assets to fulfil 
their obligations, which may give rise to fire sales. This is particularly worrisome, since 98% 
of  almost  95  thousand  non-money  market  investment  funds  operating  in  the  euro  area  in 
2014 are open-ended funds, which means that the investors can redeem their shares in the 
funds at any time. Moreover, the funds’ buffer of liquid assets that can absorb the equivalent 
of a run on shadow banks has dropped in recent years increasing the illiquidity risks. 
The  risks  stemming  from  the  shadow  banking  sector  are  sometimes  understated  on  the 
ground that potential losses would be suffered by equity holders, who should be aware of the 
risks they are taking. The systemic risk arising from the shadow banking sector cannot be 
easily  ring-fenced.  This  is  because  of  the  interconnectedness  of  shadow  banks  with  the 
regulated  part  of  the  financial  system.  Stress  in  the  shadow  banking  sector  can  be 
transmitted  to  the  banks  both  through  direct  and  indirect  channels:  banks’  exposures  to 
shadow banks through equity investments, credit claims or liquidity lines. Credit claims are 
often related to prime brokerage services allowing de facto non-bank financial institutions to 
increase their leverage. Undrawn  liquidity  lines can also be activated once the redemption 
risk materialises. Banks also rely on funding received from shadow banks, which often invest 
in bank debt securities or provide liquidity through repo transactions or through provision of 
collateral.  More  importantly,  stress  in  the  shadow  banking  could  be  propagated  through 
financial  markets  via  common  exposures  to  assets.  The  price  of  those  assets  would  be 
depressed in the case of a run on shadow banks, in an extreme case leading to a fire sale. 
It is important to protect the border between shadow and non-shadow banks, which implies 
that  a  macro-prudential  regulator  could  introduce  large  exposures  limits  on  exposures  of 
regulated institutions to shadow banks. Similarly, we could introduce margin requirements for 
repo  transaction  with  shadow  banks.  These  are  non-direct  instruments  and  may  not  be 
efficient in addressing the risks emerging in the shadow banking sector. 
The  U.S.  Fed  has gained  the  competence to  transfer  non-bank financial  institutions to  the 
supervised perimeter. We do not have this powerful tool implemented in Europe. Certainly, 
some  shadow  banks  grew  too-big-to-fail  and  hence,  they  should  be  subject  to  the  same 
surveillance as Global Systemically Important Banks (G-SIBs). In fact, the Financial Stability 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Board  is  preparing  a  methodology  for  identifying  Global  Systemically  Important  Non-bank 
Financial Institutions (G-SINFIs). 
Another  possible  macro-prudential  tool  to  address  excessive  leverage  in  conducting 
securities  funding  transactions  and  not-centrally-cleared  OTC  transactions  could  be  to 
introduce  margin  requirements  for  these  transactions.  Shadow  banks  could  in  principle  be 
subject to direct regulations. In this context, cash buffer requirements and redemption fees or 
gates have already been discussed by expert groups and cannot be excluded. 
Finally, in order to mitigate the risk of regulatory linkages, any macro-prudential instrument 
operating via the demand for loans, such as the LTV or DTI ratios should be imposed at the 
borrower level, possibly by introducing restrictions in the consumer protection legislation and 
not  via  the  bank  regulations.  This  would  allow  for  the  extension  of  the  perimeter  of  these 
macro-prudential instruments to beyond the regulated banking sector. 
Challenges for macro-prudential policy with an ever-evolving financial sector 
4.  
I have argued that central banks should be given a strong macro-prudential policy mandate 
and  an  adequate  set  of  tools  to  address  the  build-up  of  financial  risks,  in  particular  in 
situations when monetary policy is accommodative. CRD IV and CRR provide the necessary 
framework for regulating the banking sector. Nonetheless, as I mentioned, risks may develop 
outside the banking system. Macro-prudential policy is a new field for research that should 
attract young economists. 
Addressing those risks is challenging. Firstly, because shadow banking is an elusive concept 
that is hard to quantify with available statistics. Secondly, as I have argued, the tools needed 
to  prevent  the  building-up  of  excessive  risks  in  that  sector  are  currently  not  in  the  set  of 
instruments available to the ECB or to macro-prudential authorities at large – and some need 
yet to be devised. 
An important role of research is to break frontiers by providing underpinnings for policies that 
have not been used before. At the ECB, we realised the need for deep analytical foundations 
of  macro-prudential  policy  already  in  2010,  when  the  Macro-prudential  Research  Network 
was  established  for  this  purpose.  One  of  the  network’s  key  contributions  was  the 
development of a series of macro-economic models featuring financial instability and apt to 
the  evaluation  of  bank  regulation,  something  that  was  virtually  absent  from  the  economic 
literature before the crisis. An important achievement was the build-up of a model that allows 
the  assessment  of  benefits  and  costs  of  capital  adequacy  regulation  in  a  micro-founded, 
general  equilibrium  setup.17  On  the  empirical  side,  the  network  developed  a  coincident 
indicator  of  systemic  financial  instability  as  well  as  several  early-warning  indicators  of 
banking crisis, which confirmed the important role of credit growth and leverage in capturing 
the rise of imbalances in the financial system.18 
The Macro-prudential Research Network was concluded in 2014 but efforts to improve the 
foundations of macro-prudential policy and to provide empirical evidence on its effectiveness 
continue at the ECB, in other central banks but also in the wider profession. 
Let  me  mention  three  main  areas  where  progress  would  be  particularly  welcome: 
interconnectedness  of  shadow  banking  with  the  banking  sector:  implications  for  macro-
prudential policy; cross-country spillovers of macro-prudential policy and their interaction with 
financial cycles; identification of specific risks in the shadow banking sector and respective 
statistical challenges. 
                                                
17   Clerc et al. (2014). 
18   A  summary  of  the  network’s  research  output  and  conclusions  can  be  found  in  its  final  report: 
http://www.ecb.europa.eu/events/pdf/conferences/140623/MaRs_report.pdf. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
 4.1  
Interconnectedness of shadow banking with the banking sector: implications 
for macro-prudential policy 
 The first area relates to the interconnectedness of shadow banking with the banking sector 
and the implications for macro-prudential policy. 
I  have  argued  above  that  financial  cycles  and  business  cycles  are  generally  de-
synchronised.  Recent  research  has  shown  that  business  cycle  recessions  do  not  always 
correspond  to  troughs  in  the  financial  cycle  and  are  typically  much  shorter  than  financial 
contraction phases.19 This supports the idea that central banks should use monetary policy to 
stabilise  the  general  price  level  over  the  business  cycle  and  macro-prudential  policy  to 
prevent the build-up of risk over the financial cycle. 
However,  the  macro-prudential  instruments  currently  available  to  the  ECB  mainly  operate 
through their effect on banks. The extent to which those instruments can smooth the financial 
cycle crucially hinges on the importance of the banking sector relative to shadow banking in 
driving financial fluctuations, notably credit and asset price developments. A limited role of 
shadow  banking  would  reinforce  the  motivation  for  the  use  of  banking  regulation  as  a 
dedicated policy tool to address financial instability. Conversely, evidence that the financial 
cycle is to a large extent driven by non-bank activities would forcefully suggest the need to 
enlarge  the  perimeter  of  financial  institutions  subject  to  regulatory  action.  More  empirical 
research  on  the  main  drivers  of  the  “disconnect”  between  business  and  financial  cycles 
would be useful. 
Traditional  banks  and  shadow  banks  are  interconnected  not  only  via  direct  exposures  but 
also via exposures to common markets. Channels of propagation of possible shocks in the 
shadow banking sector to traditional banks is another analytical avenue worthwhile exploring. 
Research  in  this  respect  is  on-going  at  the  ECB.  Some  preliminary  results  suggest  that  a 
relatively  large  shadow banking  sector  could  exacerbate fire-sales  and  increase  incentives 
for traditional banks to behave more like shadow banks.20 
Another aspect that deserves further research relates to the implications of shadow banking 
for  the  effectiveness  of banking regulation.  On  the  one  hand,  a  rise  in  the  size  of  shadow 
banking can hinder the desirability of capital regulation, even if the latter would be optimal in 
the absence of non-bank financial activities. A tightening of capital requirements can induce 
banks  to  exploit  regulatory  arbitrage  opportunities  and  migrate  some  activities  outside  the 
regulated sphere, resulting in a higher aggregate risk exposure of the financial sector.21 On 
the other hand, increased competition from shadow institutions can generate non-monotonic 
welfare  effects  of  capital  requirements  on  banks.22  At  relatively  low  levels  of  those 
requirements,  competition  from  shadow  banking  institutions  in  the  financing  of  profitable 
projects  may  induce  banks  to  “search  for  yields”  and  to  take  up  risky  investments,  with 
adverse implications for social welfare. At sufficiently high levels, however, banks’ increased 
“skin in the game” may reduce the profitability of risk-shifting strategies, restoring the positive 
effect of capital regulation on financial stability and welfare. 
4.2  
Cross-country spillovers of macro-prudential policy and their interaction with 
financial cycles 
A second area which is particularly relevant in the euro area context and where research is 
also  needed,  relates  to  the  cross-country  spillovers  of  macro-prudential  policy  and  their 
                                                
19   See Drehmann et al (2012) and Schüler et al. (2015). 
20   See Ari, Kok, Paries and Żochowski (2015). 
21   Plantin, G. (2015). 
22   Harris,Opp and Opp (2014). 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  interaction  with  financial  cycles.  This  is  also  because  cross-country  spillovers  tend  to  be 
stronger the more integrated financial systems are. They might thus gain in importance with 
the launch of the banking union. 
Macro-prudential  policies  could  be  weakened  or  strengthened  because  of  cross-border 
spillovers.  Spillovers  depend  on  the  behaviour  of  both  borrowers  and  lenders  following  a 
macro-prudential  policy  action.  Positive  spillovers  reduce  risks  to  financial  stability,  while 
negative  spillovers  raise  these  risks.  Let  me  give  you  an  example.  If  a  country  (say, 
country A)  raises  capital  requirements  in  response  to  excessive  domestic  credit  growth,  a 
neighbouring  country  that  also  experiences  excessive  credit  growth  (say,  country  B)  might 
benefit from this measure. If financial markets are integrated, banks in country A will reduce 
their lending in country B, thus contributing to a slowdown in financial exuberance. However, 
if financial markets are segmented, or if financial cycles are not synchronised and country B 
is experiencing weak credit growth, the sign of the spillovers from the same macro-prudential 
measure may turn from positive to negative. 
Negative spillovers clearly pose a threat to the effectiveness of macro-prudential policy. For 
policy-makers, it is therefore crucial to be aware of the possibility of such spillovers and their 
respective propagation channels, co-ordinate policies to the best extent possible and apply 
mitigating measures to minimise leakages. 
The  sign  and  the  strength  of  these  spillovers  depend  on  the  type  of  macro-prudential 
instrument, the linkages between the two economies and their financial sectors as well as the 
level of the synchronisation of the cycles. To add another layer of complexity, the spillovers 
from LTV policy could be qualitatively different than those from capital policy. Following the 
introduction  of  a  LTV  cap,  banks  may  find  it  profitable  to  reallocate  lending  abroad,  thus 
generating negative spillovers on the neighbouring country. Based on the available literature, 
the empirical quantification of cross-border spillovers remains limited. Some evidence based 
on the U.K. experience suggests however, that resident foreign branches increased lending 
after  capital  requirements  were  tightened  for  local  banks.  Additional  evidence  based  on 
European  emerging  markets  shows  that  tighter  regulatory  restrictions  on  non-core  bank 
activities  (like  bank  involvement  in  securities markets,  insurance,  real  estate,  ownership  of 
non-financial firms, etc.) and higher minimum capital requirements are associated with lower 
bank lending standards abroad.23 
Moreover,  macro-prudential  policy  may  leak  due  to  regulatory  arbitrage.  Credit  could  be 
provided to the economy via less capital-intensive channels, for instance via securitisation.24 
Macro-prudential measures can also encourage the so-called “race to the bottom”, whereby 
capital  and  liquidity  is  moved  around  within  the  group  to  the  country  with  the  lowest 
requirements.  In  both  cases,  the  shadow  banking  sector  may  play  an  important  role  in 
facilitating  such  a  regulatory  arbitrage  Measures  can  and  should  be  envisaged  to  prevent 
“regulatory  leakages”  of  macro-prudential  policies.  For  instance,  CRD  IV  introduces 
automatic reciprocity for countercyclical capital buffer up to 2.5%. This means that if any of 
the EU countries introduces a countercyclical capital buffer to smoothen the financial cycle in 
its economy, all other EU countries are bound by law to impose the same capital surcharge 
on banks’ cross-border exposures to the country introducing the measure. This prevents the 
so-called negative in-ward spillovers, whereby branches of foreign banks increase lending to 
circumvent  the  restrictions  set  by  the  macro-prudential  authority  on  local  banks.  Without 
reciprocity, macro-prudential policy is prone to leakages. 
                                                
23   Ongena, Popov and Udell (2013). 
24   See Żochowski (2014). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
  Enhancing the transparency of the shadow banking sector 
4.3  
A third area where substantial progress needs to be made is the statistical treatment of the 
shadow  banking  sector.  The  ability  of  macro-prudential  policy  to  address  the  risks 
materialising  in  the  financial  system  is  hindered  by  the  opaqueness  of  that  sector.  A  key 
priority  for  the  ECB  and  the  European  System  of  Central  Banks  is  to  enhance  its 
transparency  and  to  develop  a  statistical  system  able  to quantify  its  size,  composition  and 
risk exposure. 
A main challenge in measuring the role of shadow banking is to define a perimeter for the 
activities  it  performs.  For  the  euro  area,  a  measure  can  be  obtained  using  the  quarterly 
ECB/Eurostat euro area accounts and the ECB’s monetary statistics.25 
However,  measures  of  the  size  of  the  shadow  banking  sector  based  on  these  data,  face 
several drawbacks. First, a large share of the total assets intermediated by shadow banking 
entities  belongs  to  a  residual  category  that  refers  to  all  non-bank  financial  intermediaries 
except  money  market  funds  and  financial  vehicles  corporations,  for  which  no  further 
information  is  available.  Second,  the  relevance  of  shadow  banking  entities  is  measured 
through  the  size  of  their  balance  sheets,  so  their  exposure  to  risk  is  likely  to  be 
underestimated. This is because shadow banks tend to increase leverage and risks typically 
through derivatives and off-balance sheet vehicles.26 Third, the approach misses significant 
non-core  banking  activities  performed  by  the  banks  themselves,  thus  providing  an 
incomplete picture of shadow banking and of its potential vulnerabilities.27 Finally, the data 
only  capture  financial  institutions  domiciled  in  the  euro  area,  thus  understating  the  overall 
relevance of shadow banking. 
Enhancing  the transparency  of the  shadow  banking  sector  in the  euro area  requires more 
granular  information  on  particularly  important  activities,  such  as  securitisation,  repo 
transactions and derivatives trading. In this respect, some progress has been made through 
recent  initiatives.  One  among  them  –  the  European  Market  Infrastructure  Regulation  – 
introduces an obligation in the EU to report the details of all derivatives to authorised trade 
repositories, which in turn have to provide this information to regulatory authorities (including 
the ECB). 
Understanding  the  relevance  of  shadow  banking  also  requires  improving  the  available 
statistical  information  on  repo  markets.  To  this  purpose,  in  2014  the  EU  Commission 
published a proposal for a regulation on reporting and transparency of securities financing 
transactions. The initiative aims at facilitating the monitoring of the build-up of systemic risks 
related to those transactions, and the disclosure of this information to the relevant investors. 
Finally,  since  2014,  the  European  System  of  Central  Banks  collects  new  statistics  on 
securities  holdings.  The  data  provide  granular  information  on  securities  held  by  the  sector 
“other  financial  institutions”  (e.g.,  financial  vehicle  corporations  and  investment  funds 
including  money  market  funds),  and  on  securities  issued  by  this  and  other  sectors  of  the 
economy. 
                                                
25   One  possible  approach  is  to  exclude  financial  intermediaries  whose  liabilities  are  largely  based  on  equity 
rather than debt, such as insurance corporations, pension funds and most investment funds, while including 
money  market  funds.  A  proxy  for  the  size  of  the  shadow  banking  sector  can  then  be  calculated by  adding 
money market funds to the sector “non-monetary financial intermediaries other than insurance corporations 
and pension funds”, and by subtracting other investment funds. See the article “Enhancing the Monitoring of 
Shadow Banking”. ECB Monthly Bulletin, February 2013. 
26   A similar point is made by Brunnermeier et al (2011). 
27   An  alternative  statistical  approach  addresses  this  concern  by  providing  a  measure  of  shadow  banking  that 
encompasses all non-core liabilities of both banks and non-bank financial institutions (see e.g. Harutyunyan et 
al., 2015). 
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Conclusions 
5.  
Let  me  conclude.  Macro-prudential  policies  are  key  to  cope  with  systemic  risk  and 
endogenous cycles in the financial sector. They are particularly important in the euro area at 
the current juncture, as the global environment of low interest rates and the rise in shadow 
banking activities exposes the financial sector to increased risks. 
Macro-prudential  policy  and  monetary  policy  rely  on  separate  tools  and  aim  to  achieve 
different objectives. Yet, they need to be co-ordinated, which is a non-trivial task given that 
financial  and  business  cycles  could  be  de-synchronised.  For  these  reasons,  as  I  have 
already highlighted, macro-prudential policy should also be under the responsibility of central 
banks. 
Finally, let me repeat the warning that without an effective macro-prudential policy, advanced 
economies will not be able to ensure financial stability. It is therefore an important endeavour 
to keep fighting for the appropriate policies to smoothen the financial cycle and to sufficiently 
tame finance in order to avoid crises that threaten the future of our economies. 
Thank you for your attention 
References 
Aoki, H. and K. Nikolov (2014), “Bubbles, Banks and Financial Stability”, Journal of Monetary 
Economics, 
Ari, A., C. Kok, M. Paries and D. Żochowski (2015), “Shadow banking in general equilibrium”, 
mimeo, European Central Bank. 
Borio, C. and H. Zhu (2008), “Capital regulation, risk-taking and monetary policy: a missing 
link in the transmission mechanism”, BIS Working Paper No. 268 
Brunnermeier,  M.  K,  G.  Gorton,  and  A.  Krishnamurthy  (2012),  “Risk  Topography”,  NBER 
Macroeconomics Annual 2011 26: 149–176. 
Clerc,  L.,  C.  Mendicino,  S.  Moyen,  A.  Derviz,  K.  Nikolov,  L.  Stracca,  J.  Suarez  and  A. 
Vardoulakis  (2014),  “Assessing  Capital  Regulation  in  a  Macroeconomic  Model  with  Three 
Layers of Defaults”, mimeo, European Central Bank. 
Constâncio, V. (2014), “Making macro-prudential policy work”, speech at high-level seminar 
organised  by  De  Nederlandsche  Bank,  10  June  2014,  http://www.ecb.europa.eu/ 
press/key/date/2014/html/sp140610.en.html. 
De Fiore, F. and H. Uhlig (2015), “Corporate Debt Structure and the Financial Crisis”, Journal 
of Money, Credit and Banking, forthcoming. 
Drehmann, M., C. Borio, and K. Tsatsaronis (2012), “Characterising the financial cycle: don't 
lose sight of the medium term!”, BIS Working Paper No. 380. 
ECB  (2009),  “The  concept  of  systemic  risk”,  Special  feature  in  the  ECB  Financial  Stability 
Review, December 2009. 
Eichengreen, B. (2015), “Hall of mirrors: The great depression, the great recession and the 
misuses of history” Oxford University Press, USA 
Farhi,  E.,  Tirole,  J.  (2012),  “Collective  Moral  Hazard,  Maturity  Mismatch  and  Systemic 
Bailouts”, American Economic Review 102, No. 1: 60–93. 
Gordon, R. (2012), “Is U.S. Economic Growth Over? Faltering Innovation Confronts the Six 
Headwinds” NBER Working Paper No. 18315; 
Gordon,  R.  (2014),  “The  Demise  of  U.S.  Economic  Growth:  Restatement,  Rebuttal,  and 
Reflections” NBER Working Paper No. 19895 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13 
  16, 
2006, 
(2013), 
“Bubbles,  Regulation 
Harutyunyan A., A. Massara, G. Ugazio, G. Amidzic, and R. Walton (2015), “Shedding Light 
on Shadow Banking”, IMF Working Paper 15/1. 
Harris,  M.,  C.  Opp,  and  M.,  Opp  (2014),  “Macroprudential  Bank  Capital  Regulation  in  a 
Competitive Financial System”, mimeo. 
Henry,  J.  and  C.  Kok  [editors]  (2013),  “A  macro  stress  testing  framework  for  assessing 
systemic risks in the banking sector”, ECB Occasional Paper No. 152, October 2013. 
Igan,  D.,  and  Kang,  H.,  (2011),  “Do  Loan-to-Value  and  Debt-to-Income  Limits  Work? 
Evidence from Korea”, IMF Working Paper No. 11/297. 
IMF (2014) World Economic Outlook, Chapter 3, April 2014. 
Kohn,  D.  (2006),  “Monetary  policy  and  asset  prices”  speech  at  a  European  Central  Bank 
Colloquium,  March 
http://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/ 
kohn20060316a.htm. 
Krugman,  P., 
and  Secular  Stagnation” 
http://krugman.blogs.nytimes.com/2013/09/25/bubbles-regulation-and-secular-stagnation. 
Kuttner, K., and I. Shim (2013), “Can Non-Interest Rate Policies Stabilize Housing Markets? 
Evidence from a Panel of 57 Economies”, BIS Working Paper No. 433, Bank for International 
Settlements. 
Ongena, S., A. Popov and G. Udell (2013), “When the Cat's Away the Mice Will Play: Does 
Regulation  At  Home  Affect  Bank  Risk  Taking  Abroad?”,  Journal  of  Financial  Economics, 
108(3), 727–750. 
Plantin,  G.  (2015),  “Shadow  Banking  and  Bank  Capital  Regulation”,  Review  of  Financial 
Studies, 28 (1): 146–175. 
Schüler,  Y.,  P.  Hiebert  and  T.  Peltonen  (2015),  “Characterising  Financial  Cycles  across 
Europe: One Size does not fit All”, mimeo, ECB. 
Teulings,  C.  and  R.  Baldwin  (ed)  (2014),  “Secular  Stagnation:  Facts,  Causes  and  Cures” 
Edited by VoxEU.org 
Żochowski,  D.  (2014),  “Macroprudential  policy  in  a  monetary  union”,  mimeo,  European 
Central Bank. 
Summers, L., Speech at the IMF Economic Forum on 8 November 2013. 
in 
14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
