  Ravi Menon: A smart financial centre 
Keynote  address  by  Mr  Ravi  Menon,  Managing  Director  of  the  Monetary  Authority  of 
Singapore, at the Global Technology Law Conference 2015, Singapore, 29 June 2015. 
 The Honourable Chief Justice Sundaresh Menon,  
The Honourable Justice Lee Seiu Kin,  
Distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen, good morning. 
 And to all our foreign guests, a warm welcome to Singapore. 
“The Geeks Shall Inherit the Earth” 
Technology is changing the way we live, work, and play.  
• 
Robots and unmanned drones are becoming more common.  
– 
– 
Robotic cleaners like iRobot have lightened the load of household chores.  
Pizza  restaurants  in  cities  ranging  from  Mumbai  to  Moscow  have  started  to 
deliver pizzas using drones. 
 Digital payment systems are taking off rapidly, especially in developing countries.  
– 
Kenya  launched  in  2007  M-Pesa:  a  simple  and  low-cost  service  that  allows 
users to deposit and transfer funds through SMS text messages. 
 When  the  legal  profession  is  organising  a  conference  on  technology,  you  know  that 
something  momentous  is  brewing!  I  congratulate  the  Singapore  Academy  of  Law  for  its 
acumen in setting technology as the theme for its conference. 
A sector where I believe technology is going to be fundamentally transformative is financial 
services.  In  fact,  there  is  a  new  buzzword:  “FinTech”  –  financial  technologies  or  the 
integration of finance and technology. Two things are happening. 
First, non-financial players are using technology to offer innovative solutions that mirror the 
services traditionally offered by financial institutions (“FIs”).  
• 
Payments – Apple, Google, Paypal, Amazon, and Alibaba have payment solutions 
that replace physical wallets and credit cards. 
Lending  -  Zopa,  Lending  Club,  and  Funding  Circle  offer  peer-to-peer  lending 
solutions that match lenders and borrowers on their online platforms. 
Investment – “robo-advisers” like WealthFront use data analytics to dispense online 
personal financial advice and investment management services. 
Indeed, these non-financial firms look set to disrupt the financial industry. 
• 
The second thing that is happening is that FIs are fighting back.  
• 
As a senior banker in the US puts it: “People need banking, not banks”. 
As  disintermediation  threatens  FIs,  they  are  being  pushed  into  a  rethink  of  their 
business models.  
Rising costs, shrinking margins, and the weight of new regulatory requirements are 
pressing FIs to look into more cost-efficient ways of running their businesses.  
They are increasingly turning towards innovation and technology for solutions.  
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  In  an  ironic  way,  the  FinTech  insurgency  is  forcing  change  among  the  incumbent 
FIs. 
 Leveraging  on  their  size  and  networks,  FIs  are  using  technology  much  more  intensely  to 
enhance their product offerings and service delivery. 
• 
Example: US insurance companies, Progressive and Allstate, are using telematics 
to develop usage-based motor insurance, also known as Pay-As-You-Drive (or Pay-
How-You-Drive).  
Instead of rewarding past good driving behaviour, these insurers are able to price 
premiums contemporaneously with current driving habits. 
 What does all this mean? As a powerpoint slide used by a FinTech company in Silicon Valley 
rather  immodestly  proclaims:  “the  geeks  shall  inherit  the  earth!”.  It  is  no  doubt  an 
exaggeration. But the message is clear: 
• 
In  the  years  ahead,  countries,  businesses,  and  people  who  know  how  to  use 
technology and innovate will have a keen competitive advantage. 
Why this time is different 
Now, have we not heard this story before – that technology will transform banking and then 
nothing changed fundamentally? Indeed there have been false starts in the past.  
• 
In the 1990s, we thought that electronic money would replace cash and cheques. 
That has not happened.  
– 
In most parts of the world, including the US, Japan, Europe, and Singapore, 
notes  and  coins  in  circulation  outside  banks  has  been  increasing  steadily 
every year.  
 In  2000,  some  of  us  were  quite  sure  that  Internet-only  banks  would  eventually 
replace brick-and-mortar branches. This too has not happened.  
But this year, however, we saw “e-angpows” being given out for the first time.  
Could this be a sign of things to come?  
The most obvious evidence that both beliefs were manifestly wrong occurs year after year, 
when lines of Singaporeans form at bank branches to obtain new notes for “angpows”, to be 
given out during the Chinese New Year celebrations.  
• 
• 
Technology  takes  time  to  proliferate.  More  importantly,  it  is  the  interaction  among  related 
technologies that often creates transformation – and that takes time.  
There  is  reason  to  believe  that  this  time  is  different:  that  technology  will  indeed  transform 
financial services in a way that has not happened before. It has much to do with the concept 
of mobility. 
First, mobility of technology.  
• 
• 
Mobile devices, such as smartphones and tablets, have become common-place.  
People do not just connect and surf from their home computers anymore – they also 
do so from their mobile devices, while on the go. This has profound implications for 
how financial services are offered and consumed. 
Second, mobility of ideas.  
• 
Today,  online  platforms  provide  a  variety  of  social  networking  and  peer-to-peer 
services. And people are increasingly comfortable using these services.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   These  services  have  compressed  time  and  space:  interaction  is  real-time  and 
information exchange transcends physical boundaries. 
They  allow  information,  knowledge  and  ideas  to  be  shared  widely  across 
communities and geographies.  
 Third, mobility of payments.  
• 
   In  the  past,  it  used  to  take  several  days  and  cost  quite  a  bit  to  pay  someone  in 
another country or currency. 
Today, online payment services have made it possible for people and businesses to 
transfer funds safely at very low cost.  
This has not only allowed e-commerce to flourish, but also enabled faster and more 
efficient cross-border financial services, like lending and borrowing. 
We are looking at a financial services industry that will be increasingly driven and powered 
by technology. 
digital and mobile payments 
authentication and biometrics 
block chains and distributed ledgers 
cloud computing 
big data 
learning machines 
The big trends in technology affecting finance 
What  are  the  big  trends  in  technology  affecting  the  financial  industry?  Let  me  cite  six 
technologies that appear potentially transformative: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
First, mobile and digital payments.  
Payment  services  are  increasingly  being  enabled  by  mobile  applications  and  near-field 
communications (NFC).  
• 
• 
Gone are the days of the clunky cash register.  
Today, accepting payments can be as simple as attaching a small dongle, no bigger 
than a matchbox, to a tablet or smartphone.  
This is only the beginning.  
• 
Payments  at  stores  and  restaurants  may  increasingly  not  even  require  physical 
touch points, and could take place entirely over the Internet, using the customer’s 
smart device to effect payments. 
Further  out,  we  can  look  to  a  future  of  seamless  payments,  where  technology 
automatically  recognises  the  customer,  checks  out  the goods,  and  charges  to  the 
customer’s account as he walks out of the store. 
Second, authentication and biometrics.  
Authenticating one’s identity is critical to gaining access to a variety of financial services and 
performing  many  financial  transactions.  As  authentication  technology  progresses,  we  can 
look forward to more secure and efficient solutions to authenticate identity.  
Biometric authentication is making good advances.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
       In  the  future,  we  may  not  have  to  remember  complex  passwords  or  worry  about 
password compromise. 
Fingerprint,  iris,  facial  and  voice  recognition,  and  even  palm  vein  and  heartbeat 
recognition systems are being explored for authentication purposes. 
Biometric ATMs have been deployed in several parts of the world, including the UK, 
Japan, China, Brazil, and Poland.  
Banks  in  Singapore  have  launched  mobile  applications  that  utilise  the  TouchID 
function of the iPhone for fingerprint authentication.  
Some have also been exploring the use of voice biometrics in their phone banking 
and call centre services. 
For users who are concerned about their privacy or have physical challenges, token-based 
authentication offers an alternative means of security: 
• 
Tokens embedded within mobile devices, or perhaps on wearable technology, are 
viable options. 
And  where  stronger  security  is  required,  these  could  be  used  together  with 
biometrics to provide multi-factor authentication. 
 Third, block chains and distributed ledgers.  
Digital currencies – like Bitcoins – have attracted much interest. 
• 
Payments using Bitcoins are much faster and potentially cheaper than conventional 
bank transfers and, its advocates argue, just as safe. 
Whether digital currencies will take off in a big way remains to be seen. 
But  it  is  a  phenomenon  that  many  central  banks  are  watching  closely,  including 
MAS. 
And if they do take off, one cannot rule out central banks themselves issuing digital 
currencies some day! 
  But the bigger impact on financial services, and the broader economy, is likely to come from 
the technology behind Bitcoins – namely the block-chain or, more generally, the distributed 
ledger system. 
• 
• 
A block chain is essentially a decentralised ownership record. 
It allows a document or asset to be codified into a digital record that is irrevocable 
once it has been committed into the system.  
The  digital  record  can  be  accessed  and  verified  by  other  parties  in  the  system 
without going through a central authority.  
The potential benefits of such a distributed ledger system include:  
– 
– 
– 
faster and more efficient processing;  
lower cost of operation; and  
greater resilience against system failure. 
  There are many potential applications of distributed ledger systems in the financial sector: 
• 
Ripple in the US offers a solution, based on distributed ledgers, for real-time gross 
settlement, currency exchange, and remittance.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  The  same  solution  could  potentially  allow  regulators  to  plug  into  the  network  to 
conduct surveillance of risks and to track transactions to detect money laundering or 
terrorist financing. 
 In  fact  -  and  this  would  be  of  interest  to  the  lawyers  gathered  here  -  distributed  ledger 
systems could potentially be applied in any area which involves contracts or transactions that 
currently rely on trusted third parties for verification.  
• 
• 
Honduras is developing a land title registry system based on distributed ledgers 
Other  potential  applications  talked  about  include  registry  of  intellectual  property 
rights, supply chain management, electronic voting systems, medical records, etc. 
Fourth, cloud computing.  
Cloud  computing  is  an  innovative  service  and  delivery  model  that  enables  on-demand 
access to a shared pool of computing resources. It provides economies of scale, potential 
cost-savings,  as  well  as  the  flexibility  to  scale  up  or  down  computing  resources  as 
requirements change.  
There is a view among some quarters that “MAS does not like the cloud”. This is an urban 
myth, not true. 
• 
• 
Well, MAS did have concerns about cloud computing previously.  
This  was  because  cloud  services  were  at  the  time  not  sufficiently  secure  to 
safeguard the sensitive information that FIs held.  
But  cloud  technology  has  evolved  considerably  and  there  are  now  solutions 
available to address these concerns.  
– 
For  example,  FIs  can  now  implement  strong  authentication  and  data 
encryption to protect their data in the cloud.  
MAS has been in dialogue with both FIs and cloud service providers  
Providers have now become more aware of our security considerations while 
we  have  gained  a  deeper  understanding  of  the safeguards  they  have  put  in 
place. 
 I am pleased to say that several FIs in Singapore have successfully rolled out cloud 
solutions in the past two years. 
Fifth, big data.  
The world is exploding with information.  
• 
Data generated by online social networking and sensor networks, and data collected 
by governments and businesses amount to a universe of digital information that is 
growing at about 60% each year.  
There is also a global trend – including in Singapore – towards “open data” in which 
data are freely shared beyond their originating organisations 
At  the  same  time,  the  cost  of  storing  and  processing  data  has  been  falling 
dramatically. 
These  trends  have  created  the  opportunity  to  use  data  to  understand  the  world 
around us with a clarity and depth that was not possible before. 
Some FIs are investing in and using this big data to derive useful and actionable insights. 
• 
JP  Morgan  Chase  and  MasterCard,  to  cite  two  examples,  are  using  big  data 
techniques to derive insights from consumer spending patterns.  
Visa is using big data techniques to detect fraud in financial transactions. 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
       Sixth, learning machines. 
This might well be the  most impactful technological change of the future – computers that 
can think. 
• 
Traditional  computing  machines  and  algorithms  are  programmed  to  carry  out 
specific  tasks  in  response  to  defined  circumstances  according  to  the  software 
programme that is written into them. 
We are now moving into the age of cognitive machines which are designed to learn 
from the data that they hold and be able to, in a sense, programme themselves to 
perform new tasks.  
They continuously adapt to new data as well as feedback and inputs gathered from 
their experiences, including interactions with humans.  
  We are already beginning to see examples in the financial industry: 
• 
In  equity,  commodity,  and  FX  markets,  some  traders  are  using  self-learning 
algorithms  
– 
they  not  only  analyse  historical  data,  predict  price  movements  and  make 
trading decisions, but continually upgrade and adjust their trading strategies in 
the light of new evidence and market reactions. 
 In  lending,  learning  machines  have  been  used  to  construct  models  for  consumer 
credit risk and improve the prediction of loan defaults. 
The legal minds assembled here might want to reflect on where the legal liabilities arising 
from the actions – or inactions - of such learning machines lie. 
The six technologies that I have outlined have the potential to transform the financial industry 
globally. There could well be others that I have not mentioned. 
The  important  thing  for  our  FIs  is  to  be  alert  to  these  and  other  technology  trends, 
understand  their  possible  implications,  and  seize  the  opportunity  to  apply  relevant 
technologies  safely  and  efficiently  -  to  boost  productivity,  gain  competitive  advantage,  and 
serve consumers better. 
Smart nation needs a smart financial centre 
At the national level, Singapore has set its sights on becoming a Smart Nation – one that 
embraces  innovation  and  harnesses  info-comm  technology  to  increase  productivity  and 
improve  the  welfare  of  Singaporeans.  The  Smart  Nation  Programme  under  the  Prime 
Minister’s Office has brought together stakeholders from the government and the industry to 
identify issues and develop solutions with this objective in mind. 
Government agencies have been rolling out a steady pipeline of Smart Nation initiatives. 
• 
The  Housing  Development  Board  has  trialled  a  new  system  that  utilises  home 
sensors to monitor elderly folks who are staying alone and alert caregivers should 
an emergency arise.  
The Land Transport Authority is studying the use of autonomous vehicles that can 
self-drive with the help of environmental sensors and navigation systems.  
The Urban Redevelopment Authority has been utilising geospatial information and 
data analytics for urban design and land-use planning.  
  A Smart Nation needs a Smart Financial Centre. Indeed, the financial sector is well placed to 
play  a  leading  role  given  that  financial  services  offer  fertile  ground  for  innovation  and  the 
application of technology. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  MAS will partner the industry to work towards the vision of a Smart Financial Centre, where 
innovation is pervasive and technology is used widely to: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
MAS will seek to achieve this vision together with the industry through two broad thrusts: 
• 
increase efficiency,  
create new opportunities,  
manage risks better, and  
improve people’s lives. 
a  regulatory  approach  conducive  to  innovation  while  fostering  safety  and  security; 
and 
development  initiatives  to  create  a  vibrant  ecosystem  for  innovation  and  the 
adoption of new technologies. 
 financial crime and illicit transactions;  
loss of data or compromise of confidentiality;  
glitches that damage reputation, disrupt business, or worse, cause systemic crisis. 
Smart regulation for a smart financial centre  
First and foremost, a smart financial centre must be a safe financial centre. Technology can 
be a double-edged sword. If not managed well, it can potentially lead to a variety of risks in 
the financial industry:  
• 
• 
• 
The first priority on our journey towards a Smart Financial Centre is therefore to continually 
strengthen the industry’s cyber security. 
As  more  financial  services  are  delivered  over  the  Internet,  the  frequency,  scale,  and 
complexity of cyber attacks on FIs have increased globally. Hackers and cyber criminals are 
constantly probing IT systems for weaknesses to exploit.  
There are two reasons for concern: 
• 
First,  the  connectedness  among  FIs  mean  that  a  serious  cyber  breach  in  one 
institution can potentially escalate into a more systemic problem. 
Second,  repeated  cyber  breaches  could  diminish  public  confidence  in  online 
financial services and reduce people’s willingness to use FinTech in general. 
 MAS and the financial industry in Singapore take cyber security seriously. 
• 
FIs are expected to:  
– 
implement  controls  and measures  to  preserve  the  confidentiality  of sensitive 
data 
maintain the integrity and availability of their systems 
conduct  regular  vulnerability  assessments  and  penetration  tests  to  evaluate 
the robustness of their cyber defences  
   MAS  conducts  regular  onsite  inspections  of  key  FIs’  technology  risk management 
processes and controls to check that they meet these requirements. 
FIs have also established Cyber Security Operations Centres to enhance their cyber 
surveillance and gather cyber intelligence. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  But  cyber  threats  will  not  go  away.  Like  a  cat  and  mouse  game,  both  hackers  and  cyber 
defenders  have  been  enhancing  their  tools  and  techniques  along  with  advances  in 
technology as well as in response to one another.  
• 
As part of this evolution, a new wave of next-generation cyber security solutions is 
emerging, in areas such as trusted computing, security analytics, threat intelligence, 
active breach detection, and intrusion deception. 
The financial industry needs to keep abreast of these developments. 
• 
While  seeking  to  ensure  cyber  security,  MAS’s  regulatory  approach  towards  fostering 
innovation and the adoption of new technologies will take three forms.  
First, innovation owned by FIs.  
In matters of innovation, time to market is critical. FIs are free to launch new ideas without 
first seeking MAS’ endorsement, as long as they are satisfied with their own due diligence.  
• 
A  recent  case  that  went  on  this  approach  was  a  mobile  banking  application  that 
utilised fingerprint authentication for balance enquiries. 
The bank went ahead, did not need MAS approval.  
• 
What does this approach entail? 
• 
   FIs’ board and management should take the responsibility to ensure that the risks of 
new innovative offerings are well identified and managed. 
The compliance people should ideally be involved early in the innovation process. 
However, they should avoid second-guessing MAS by taking an overly conservative 
stance that might nip innovation in the bud. 
If the FI encounters a specific issue on which it needs MAS’ guidance, we will be 
happy to help.  
But the FI must offer its own assessment of the risks in what it proposes to do and 
take ownership for its decisions.  
It cannot rely on MAS to do its due diligence.  
• 
Second, innovation in a “sandbox”.  
Sometimes,  it  is  less  clear  whether  a  particular  innovation  complies  with  regulatory 
requirements.  In  such  cases,  FIs  could  adopt  a  “sandbox”  approach  to  launch  their 
innovative products or services within controlled boundaries.  
• 
The  intention  is  to  create  a  safe  space  for  innovation,  within  which  the 
consequences of failure can be contained.  
FIs  can  seek  MAS’  guidance  and  concurrence  on  the  boundary  conditions  –  for 
example, the time period, customer protection requirements, etc.  
 Third, innovation through co-creation.  
MAS  has  a  long  tradition  of  active  consultation  with  industry  on  proposed  new  rules  or 
initiatives. More recently, we have engaged industry players more directly to co-create rules 
and guidance – in other words, to jointly come up with proposals.  
• 
An  example  is  the  Private  Banking  Industry  Code  –  developed  by  industry 
practitioners but in close consultation with MAS. 
Such  co-creation  is  particularly  relevant  for  developing  rules  or  guidance  on  new 
technologies whose benefits and risks are not fully known and where a more flexible 
approach may be desired. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 8 
   A  further  possibility  in  co-creation  might  be  MAS  and  the  industry  working  together  to 
develop common technology infrastructure that meets regulatory requirements. The aim is to 
clarify and address issues and uncertainties upfront during the course of development.  
MAS is not seeking a zero-risk regime. And we understand that failure is part of the learning 
process.  
• 
If things do go wrong with an innovative product or service, and there will no doubt 
be some failures, the FI will need to review its implementation and draw lessons.  
MAS will examine the facts to assess if there is any systemic or deeper issue that 
needs to be addressed, and determine if any action needs to be taken. 
 a Financial Sector Technology & Innovation scheme to provide financial support; 
a multi-agency effort to guide the development of efficient digital payments systems; 
a technology-enabled regulatory reporting system and smart surveillance; 
supporting a FinTech ecosystem; and 
building skills and competencies in technology. 
Development initiatives for a smart financial centre 
Besides  providing  a  conducive  regulatory  environment,  MAS  will  work  closely  with  the 
industry to chart strategies for a Smart Financial Centre. Let me sketch some of the initiatives 
we have embarked on: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
First, the Financial Sector Technology & Innovation or “FSTI” scheme. 
I am happy to announce that MAS will commit $225 million over the next five years under the 
“FSTI” scheme to provide support for the creation of a vibrant ecosystem for innovation. 
FSTI funds can be used for three purposes: 
• 
innovation  centres:  to  attract  FIs  to  set  up  their  R&D  and  innovation  labs  in 
Singapore. 
institution-level projects: to catalyse the development by FIs of innovative solutions 
that have the potential to promote growth, efficiency, or competitiveness. 
industry-wide  projects: 
industry-wide 
infrastructure that is required for the delivery of new, integrated services. 
the  building  of 
to  support 
technology 
  Several FIs have already set up their innovation centres or labs in Singapore, some under 
the FSTI: 
• 
• 
Some examples of FSTI-supported institution-level projects that are ongoing include: 
• 
DBS, Citibank, Credit Suisse, Metlife, UBS,  
as well as a couple of others that are in the pipeline.  
a decentralised record-keeping system based on block chain technology to prevent 
duplicate invoicing in trade finance; 
a shared infrastructure for a know-your-client utility; 
a cyber risk test-bed; and  
a natural catastrophe data analytics exchange.  
• 
• 
• 
We look forward to see more such innovation projects coming on-board. 
Second, digital payments.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
  Changes in the payments scene in Singapore have picked up pace in recent years: 
• 
Our  retail  banks  have  released  their  own  flavours  of  mobile  wallets  or  mobile 
payment applications:  
– 
DBS  PayLah!,  UOB  Mobile  Cash,  OCBC  Pay  Anyone,  StanChart  Dash, 
Maybank Mobile Money 
 With  the  launch  of  Fast  And  Secure Transfers or  “FAST”  in  March  2014,  we  now 
have a ready infrastructure that allows customers of the participating banks to make 
domestic fund transfers to one another almost instantaneously from their computers 
or mobile devices. 
But there is a lot more we need to do on the digital payments front. 
First, payments at stores and restaurants. 
• 
This is almost a Uniquely Singapore phenomenon  
– 
Many  of  our  stores  and  restaurants  have  multiple  Points-of-Sale  (“POS”)  at 
their payment counters.  
This  not  only  clutters  valuable  real  estate  but  also  makes  life  difficult  for 
customers and merchants.  
  As  more  stores  and  restaurants  introduce  self-checkout  facilities  to  improve 
productivity, we need a unified POS – a single terminal, preferably mobile – that will:  
allow merchants to enhance efficiency by simplifying front-to-back integration; 
– 
and 
enhance the shopping or dining experience of customers. 
 Second, reduce the use of cash and cheques. 
• 
• 
It costs as much as $1.50 to process each cheque.  
The cost of cash is less obvious but just as real: in transportation, collection, delivery 
and protection.  
We need to promote greater adoption of new payments technologies, including:  
– 
– 
electronic Direct Debit Authorisation; and 
fund transfers using mobile numbers or social networks 
 The aim is to make payments swift, simple and secure. 
The vision is less cash, less cheques, fewer cards.  
MAS  and  the  Ministry  of  Finance  have  been  co-leading  a  multi-agency  effort  to  address 
these issues and guide the development of efficient digital and mobile payment systems. 
• 
• 
Third, regulatory reporting and surveillance.  
As the financial system becomes increasingly complex and inter-connected, MAS needs to 
sharpen  its  surveillance  of  the  system  with  more  timely,  comprehensive  and  accurate 
information to identify and mitigate emerging risks.  
The vision is an interactive, technology-enabled regulatory reporting framework which will: 
• 
reduce  ongoing  reporting  costs  through  the  use  of  common  data  standards  and 
automation; 
enable  the  dissemination  of  anonymised  information  to  industry  analysts  and 
academics for deeper analysis of the financial system and its risks. 
 10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  We are still in early days on this initiative and will work with the industry on how best to take 
this forward. 
Fourth, supporting a FinTech ecosystem.  
The effort to grow a Smart Financial Centre must go beyond the financial industry, to help 
nurture a wider FinTech ecosystem. We need a strong FinTech community that can: 
• 
• 
generate ideas and innovations that FIs could adapt and adopt; and 
provide  a  platform  for  collaborations  with  the  industry  to  produce  innovative 
solutions for defined problems and needs. 
For those of you who are not aware, we have a pretty vibrant FinTech start-up community 
that is growing over at the “Launchpad” in Ayer Rajah Industrial Estate. MAS looks forward to 
engaging  FinTech  start-ups  more  actively  –  to  better  understand  emerging  innovations  as 
well  to  help  them  design  their  solutions  bearing  in  mind  the  regulations  and  risk 
considerations that apply to the financial industry. 
Fifth, building skills and competencies in technology.  
Technology will disintermediate and make obsolete many jobs in the financial sector, but it 
will also create new ones. Finance professionals will need new capabilities. And the industry 
will need skills and expertise from other disciplines traditionally not associated with finance.  
MAS and the financial industry must work together to prepare for the changes ahead on the 
jobs and skills front. Building capabilities and opportunities in FinTech will be a key area of 
focus in the financial sector’s SkillsFuture drive. 
• 
MAS  will  work  with  the  financial  industry,  the  Institute  of  Banking  and  Finance, 
training  providers,  and  the  universities  and  polytechnics  to  provide  learning 
pathways relevant for a Smart Financial Centre.  
We will also provide FIs funding and other support for training opportunities, to help 
our people acquire specialist capabilities in the relevant areas of FinTech. 
 Conclusion 
Let  me  conclude.  I  have  said  much  about  technology  and  FinTech.  The  larger  picture  is 
really about promoting a culture of innovation in our financial industry.  
• 
• 
Such innovation is not always about high-tech.  
It is about designing better work processes and creating new business models that 
will deliver higher growth, more enriching jobs, and better services for the consumer.  
Technology  is  very  likely  to  be  a  key  enabler  for  all  this,  and  we  must  make  a 
concerted effort to understand it and use it effectively. 
 Thank you. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
