  Graeme Wheeler: The outlook for the New Zealand economy 
Speech  by  Mr  Graeme  Wheeler,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  New  Zealand,  to  the 
Canterbury Employers’ Chamber of Commerce, Christchurch, 4 February 2015. 
 Good  morning  and  thank  you  for  the  invitation  to  meet  with  you.  It’s  become  an  annual 
tradition  to  begin  the  New  Year’s  speaking  engagements  with  the  Canterbury  Employers’ 
Chamber  of  Commerce.  The  Reserve  Bank  has  been  speaking  regularly  at  this  event  for 
22 years, and it’s my great pleasure to join you again. 
We have often discussed how the Reserve Bank is viewing the state of the economy. As we 
enter 2015 my colleagues have several questions on their mind. What might we expect from 
the global economy and how could it affect us, what are the prospects for our economy and 
the main areas of risk, and how might monetary policy unfold in the future? 
In  essence,  the  New  Zealand  economy  is  performing  well  in  many  respects  and  the 
prospects are good for continued steady growth, falling unemployment and low inflation. But 
the risks and uncertainties around the global economy are becoming more complex, and this 
presents considerable challenges for New Zealand enterprises, including the Reserve Bank. 
I  will  discuss  the  main  issues  that  we  are  currently  focusing  on  in  the  Reserve  Bank  – 
especially in relation to dairy prices, oil prices, house prices, and the exchange rate, and their 
implications for monetary policy. 
Let me turn first to the global outlook. 
A more risky and uncertain global economy 
We expect economic growth in New Zealand’s trading partners of around 3 ¾ percent this 
year – a little higher than last year and slightly above the average growth rate over the past 
30 years. 
Growth in trading partner economies 
(Annual percentage change) 
Source: Haver Analytics, RBNZ estimates. 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  While  this  might  sound  like  business  as  usual,  it’s  also  a  more  risky  and  uncertain 
environment. Why is this? 
• 
First, the divergence in growth between countries has become more marked. This 
has  taken  place  on  two  levels:  the  diminishing  contribution  of  the  advanced 
economies to global growth, and the wide disparities in growth within this group of 
countries. 
During 1995 – 2007 the advanced contributed around 60 percent of global growth. 
Since  2008,  this  has  reversed  with  the  emerging  economies  accounting  for  about 
70 percent of global growth. 
Advanced  economies  are  experiencing  their  weakest  recovery  in  70  years.  The 
good news is that the US economy finally has momentum and has been expanding 
at  an  annualised  rate  of  4  percent  since  April  2014,  despite  the  weaker  fourth 
quarter. By contrast, Japan and the 19 economies that form the Euro-area (which, 
when combined, are similar in size to the US economy), have grown about a third as 
fast as the US economy over the past 5 years. 
The disparities in economic performance are particularly great within the euro-area. 
For example, the unemployment rate in Spain and Greece, at around 25 percent, is 
at  a  post  war  high.  On  the  other  hand,  Germany’s  unemployment  rate,  at 
4.9 percent, is at a post-reunification low. Real per capita GDP remains below 2007 
levels in several European economies and in Italy it is back to 1997 levels. 
Second,  even  though  the  Federal  Reserve  completed  its  quantitative  easing  in 
October,  the  expected  scale  of  quantitative  easing  by  the  Bank  of  Japan  and  the 
European Central Bank means that total central bank asset purchases in 2015 are 
likely to be the highest since 2011. 
Estimated annual change in major central bank balance sheets  
USD trillion 
Source: Bloomberg, RBNZ estimates. 
(Note: estimated increase in balance sheets of the Bank of England, Bank of Japan, 
ECB and Federal Reserve.) 
 Extensive  monetary  easing  by  central  banks  has  stimulated  asset  prices  globally, 
reduced risk spreads, and until recently, generated extremely low levels of market 
volatility. For example, the S&P 500 Index ended the year at historic highs and the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
     2 
   Nikkei  225  Index  increased  by  68  percent  during  the  past  2  years.  Yields  on 
Japanese  and  German  10  year  government  bonds  fell  to  historic  lows  of 
0.20 percent  and  0.35  percent  respectively  (German  yields  are  negative  for 
maturities up to six years). Yields on 10 year sovereign bonds are also at historic 
lows in France and Spain, most European two-year rates are now negative, and the 
policy  rate  at  the  Bank  of  England  is  at  its  lowest  level  since  the  Bank  was 
established in 1694. 
 10-year sovereign bond yields 
Source: Reuters. 
 Third,  consumer  price  inflation  is  very  low  and  below  the  monetary  policy  target 
bands  in  several  advanced  economies.  Consumer  price  inflation  has  been  falling 
steadily  in  many  advanced  economies  over  the  past  four  years  due  to  the  high 
levels of excess capacity, the global oversupply of capital goods and manufactured 
products, and falling prices of information technology. But the 58 percent decline in 
oil  prices  in  US  dollars  and  the  26  percent  decline  in  a  wide  range  of  commodity 
prices  since  the  end  of  June  mean  several  countries  will  experience  negative 
headline inflation over the coming year1. 
                                                
1  The Bloomberg Commodity Index recently hit its lowest level since August 2002. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  World oil price 
(Brent crude) 
 Source: Haver Analytics. 
 And  fourth,  financial  markets  have  been  surprised  by  several  developments  in 
recent weeks. Although quantitative easing by the ECB had long been anticipated, 
the planned scale of asset purchases is at the upper end of market expectations. In 
the last three weeks we have seen the Swiss National Bank abandon its exchange 
rate cap, interest rate cuts by the Danish Central Bank, the Bank of Canada, and the 
Reserve Bank of Australia, (and twelve other central banks), a victory by the Syriza 
Party in Greece, and marked differences in view among commentators around the 
timing of interest rate increases by the FOMC. 
What might this mean for financial markets? 
Almost  seven  years  after  the  onset  of  the  Global  Financial  Crisis,  central  banks  are 
increasingly  operating  in  uncharted  waters.  Many  continue  to  search  intensively  for 
mechanisms to help inflate their economies and return inflation expectations to their desired 
ranges. And they are doing so at a time when they, like financial markets, are unsure to what 
extent the weakness in commodity prices and particularly oil prices, reflects the possibility of 
weaker global growth. 
Market volatility, as reflected in exchange rate movements, interest rate spreads, and equity 
returns has increased in recent weeks, and we expect the rise in volatility to be sustained 
through 2015. There are two main reasons for this. 
• 
Yields  on  long  term  bonds  in  many  countries  are  now  so  low  that  the  primary 
transmission  mechanism  for  expanded  quantitative  easing  is  likely  to  be  through 
exchange rate adjustment. Exchange rate tensions among countries will increase if 
market shares are materially affected by countries seeking lower exchange rates. 
US  dollar  liquidity  has  tightened  since  the  Federal  Reserve  completed  its  asset 
purchases  and  will  continue  to  do  so  as  US  interest rates  start  to  increase.  A  re-
rating of credit and liquidity risk is underway and lending spreads are likely to widen 
for  countries  and  businesses  with  large  international  funding  needs.  In  addition, 
regulatory changes in recent years have reduced the ability of banks to underwrite 
or intermediate risk. 
 Let me now offer some thoughts on the prospects for our economy. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Outlook for the New Zealand economy 
In many respects, our economy is performing very  well. The Bank’s current forecast is for 
real  GDP  growth  of  around  3  percent  in  2015,  falling  unemployment,  and  continued  low 
inflation.  One  concern  is  the  balance  between  the  traded  and  non-  traded  sectors  of  the 
economy, a subject I will return to in commenting on the exchange rate. 
Over the past three years the economy’s productive capacity has been increasing, primarily 
through increases in labour force growth and business investment2. 
• 
The labour force has increased by 4.6 percent, labour force participation is around 
historic highs, and the annual increase in net permanent and long-term migration, 
currently running at 50,000, is also at an historic high. 
The  investment  share  of  real  GDP  has  been  rising,  having  increased  from 
21 percent in 2011 to 24 percent in 2014. Investment has been increasing steadily, 
particularly  commercial  and  residential  construction  in  Auckland  and  Christchurch, 
but  also  as  businesses  take  advantage  of  declining  capital  goods  prices  and 
expanding demand. 
 SNA total construction expenditure 
(Seasonally adjusted, percent of potential output) 
Source: Statistics New Zealand, RBNZ estimates. 
 Domestic demand growth has maintained its momentum despite the [52] percent decline in 
whole  milk  powder  prices  since  February.  Prices  for  meat  and  wool  have  provided  some 
offset  and  farmers  continue  to  show  an  extraordinary  capacity  to  absorb  shocks.  Private 
consumption and construction spending have remained strong, and interest rates remain low 
by historic standards. 
Two other factors will affect demand growth. The fall in oil prices should provide an income 
boost to the economy in the order of 1 percent of GDP, and fiscal consolidation, equivalent to 
around 0.2 percent of GDP, is expected to take place during the 2015/16 financial year3. 
                                                
2  Total factor productivity and labour productivity have been fairly flat over 2012–2014. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  Risks and uncertainties 
As with any economic forecasts, there are several risks and uncertainties, but I will comment 
only on the main ones we think about. These relate to the Chinese economy, and four key 
prices – dairy prices, oil prices, house prices and the exchange rate. 
• 
 
A significant slowdown in growth in China. 
China is pivotal in the global trading system as it’s the world’s largest trading nation 
and  the  number  one  or  two  trading  partner  for  over  100  countries.  Australia  and 
China  are  our  main  trading  partners  and  account  for  around  38  percent  of  our 
merchandise exports. We are particularly vulnerable to any major downturn in China 
as China is also Australia’s main trading partner (absorbing 37 percent of Australia’s 
merchandise exports). 
There are question marks around developments in China such as: the effects of the 
current  slowdown  in  demand  growth  and  declining  property  prices  across  major 
cities;  the  exposure  of the  shadow  banking  system  to the  construction  sector;  the 
decline  in  the  working  age  population;  the  implications  of  population  aging  and 
stricter  environmental  standards for future  public  spending; the  impact of  the  anti-
corruption  campaign;  the  declining  return  on  capital;  and  the  commitment  to  the 
extensive economy-wide reforms that emerged from the Third Plenum. 
But China is, unquestionably, the greatest global economic success story over the 
past 35 years – with real GDP growth averaging 10 percent in the 30 years to 2010 
and then transitioning to a trend rate of growth of around 7 to 7.5 percent. 
China’s growth will almost certainly slow to a more moderate trend rate: the issue is 
when  and  how  successfully  it  can  make  this  transition.  As  an  increasingly  higher 
wage economy it needs to produce higher value added products in its export mix, 
become  more  dependent  on  internal  sources  of  demand  for  its  economic  growth, 
and balance the expectations of its vast populous for prosperity and other goals. 
Although  this  transition  will  inevitably  be  accompanied  by  a  range  of  economic 
shocks,  there  are  grounds  for  confidence.  China’s  54  percent  urbanisation  rate  is 
still a long way below the 75–90 percent urbanisation rate seen in most advanced 
economies.  China  also  has  enormous  scope  for  exploiting  catch-up  technology 
given its very low ranking in international surveys, it has foreign exchange reserves 
of almost USD 4 trillion, and it has had 35 years of successful and pragmatic policy 
making. 
Continuation of low dairy prices 
Dairy  exports  account  for  about  a  third  of  our  merchandise  exports.  We  are  the 
world’s largest exporter of whole milk powder (WMP), China is the largest importer 
of  dairy  products,  and  about  90  percent  of  China’s  WMP  imports  are  from  New 
Zealand. 
The  international  auction  price  for  WMP  has  fallen  sharply  from  a  peak  of  USD 
5,200 per metric tonne in October 2013 to USD 2,400 per metric tonne now. 
                                                                                                                                                         
3  Based on Treasury’s December 2014 Economic and Fiscal Update. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   Dairy sector payout and international auction prices 
(USD/metric tonne) 
  Source: Global Dairy Trade, Fonterra, USDA, RBNZ estimates 
(Note: Payout figures in chart include dividends) 
The  drop  in  global  prices  is  expected  to  lower  dairy  farmers’  incomes  by 
NZD 6 billion  compared with  the  2013/14  season.  However,  the  effect  on farmers’ 
spending  in  2015  is  likely  to  be  much  smaller  than  that: farmers  normally  smooth 
spending through swings in income, and there are signs that last season’s record 
pay-out was used by many to bolster farm balance sheets. 
If  prices  do  not  recover  as  expected,  there  is  a  risk  that  spending  will  slow  more 
sharply in 2016 as additional pressure comes on balance sheets and land prices. 
Dairy  farm  debt  has  trebled  since  2003,  and  around  half  of  the  debt  is  held  by 
10 percent of the farmers. 
Agricultural lending by sector 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  7 
         8 
  Estimates of the medium-term market clearing price for WMP tend to range around 
USD$3200 – 3800 a metric tonne. How long prices take to recover will depend on 
how quickly current demand/supply imbalances work through global markets. 
The imbalances reflect a number of factors. In 2013, global –especially Chinese – 
dairy  inventories  rose  sharply  following  the  perfect  storm  of  a  drought  in  New 
Zealand, global production shortages, and in China the rationalisation of small dairy 
producers  and  an  episode  of  foot  and  mouth  disease.  In  2014,  with  inventories 
already high, global supply rebounded strongly in response to good weather and the 
high prices of the previous year. Adding to downward pressure on prices has been 
the  diversion  of  trade  from  the  Russian  market  after  the  imposition  of  trade 
sanctions. 
With  household  demand  in  China  remaining  solid,  global  dairy  analysts  expect 
Chinese  import  demand  to  recover  from  mid-2015  as  inventories  are  run  down, 
supporting a recovery in prices. 
A further risk to farm incomes stems from dry weather in several of New Zealand’s 
dairy  regions  recently.  The  recent  dry  weather  has  caused  Fonterra  to  reduce  its 
milk volume forecast for the 2014/15 season to 3.3 percent below that collected last 
season. 
Oil Prices 
A key uncertainty is whether we have moved into a new era in the global oil market. 
Oil  prices  have  fallen  by  58  percent  since  the  end  of  June  2014  and  35  percent 
since  the  end  of  November  2014.  While  both  demand  and  supply  factors  help 
explain the fall in oil prices since mid-2014, commentators disagree about the exact 
balance and several influences are commonly cited. We put most weight on supply 
side explanations. A ramp up in global supply due to increased US oil production, 
lower  than  expected  supply  disruptions  in  the  Middle-East,  and,  importantly,  the 
OPEC decision to not change supply quotas have all played a role in pushing prices 
lower.  Lower  energy  demand  has  also  contributed,  reflecting  in  part  a  weaker 
growth outlook in emerging Asia and Europe, and also changing demand patterns 
due to aging populations and ongoing increases in energy efficiency. 
Lower oil prices should bring several benefits to our economy. If supply-side factors 
are  the  major  cause  and  oil  prices  remain  around  USD  50  per  barrel,  the  cost of 
New  Zealand’s  annual  petroleum  imports  would  fall  by  about  NZD  2.3  billion  or  1 
percent of nominal GDP compared with the price in mid-2014. It would represent a 
significant  boost  to  household  disposable  income  of  around  $600  per  annum  per 
household.  If  the  main  driver  is  weakening  global  demand,  this  would  point  to 
ongoing weakness in New Zealand’s export incomes. 
Lower  oil  prices  pass  directly  and  quickly  into  New  Zealand  prices  for  petrol.  For 
example,  in  the  December  quarter  petrol  prices  detracted  0.3  percentage  points 
from headline CPI inflation, and we expect a larger effect in the March quarter. Over 
following quarters, lower petrol prices pass into lower input costs and lower prices 
for  other  firms  –  e.g.  through  lower  freight  costs.  An  important  issue  is  how 
significant these indirect impacts of lower fuel prices might be, and to what extent 
they reduce households’ expectations of future inflation. We will analyse this in the 
March Monetary Policy Statement. 
Oil  inventory  levels  are  increasing,  and  supply  remains  high,  so  oil  prices  are 
unlikely to recover in the near term. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
      Housing 
We will be talking more about the housing market over the next few months. 
Our concern about house price inflation is based on the risk it poses to financial stability 
and the broader economy. Although it has not been a major factor in recent years, high 
rates  of  house  price  inflation  can  spill  over  into  stronger  spending  and  pressure  on 
consumer price  inflation.  And  the  more  that  house  prices  get  out  of  line  with  historic 
relativities, the greater the risk of a sharp correction, leading to financial instability. 
Analysis by the IMF in 2013 indicated that New Zealand, along with Norway, had the 
greatest  deviation  in  house  price  to  income  ratios  from  its  historic  trends  among 
several advanced economies. 
International house price-to-income ratios 
(deviation from historical average, 2013) 
Source: IMF 
 Our  focus  is  mainly  on  the  Auckland  and  Christchurch  markets  as  they  represent 
around half of the national real estate market: they are where the housing shortages 
are  greatest  and  where  market  pressures  are  the  most  intense.  Auckland  and 
Christchurch  house  prices  are  39  and  27  percent  respectively  above  their  2007 
levels. 
House price inflation slowed as the Loan-to-Value ratio restrictions and the rise in 
mortgage interest rates helped to constrain demand, but appears to be increasing 
again in Auckland due to rising household incomes, falling interest rates on fixed- 
rate  mortgages,  strong  migration  inflows  and  continued  market  tightness4.  Annual 
house price inflation measured on a three-month moving average basis is currently 
10.9 and 7.4 percent in Auckland and Christchurch respectively, and 1.1 percent in 
the  rest  of  New  Zealand.  We  will  have  a  clearer  assessment  when  the 
February/March REINZ data is available. 
                                                
4  Data on inventories, days-to-sell and sales all point to continued price pressures. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
      10 
 House price inflation 
(annual, 3-month moving average) 
  Source: REINZ, RBNZ estimates. 
Resolving the housing shortages is key. In Christchurch this issue is expected to be 
resolved,  albeit  with  longer  delays  than  originally  anticipated.  In  Auckland,  much 
more  needs  to  be  done,  especially  in  creating  opportunities  for  residential 
construction in Auckland central. Auckland’s housing shortage is estimated to have 
increased  over  the  past  year  to  between  15,000  and  20,000  dwellings,  and  the 
Auckland Council estimates that 10,000 houses a year will be required for the next 
3 decades.  Residential  building  permits  are  currently  running  at  an  annual  rate  of 
7,700 – a 70 percent increase over 2012 and twice the 2011 level, but well short of 
the increase that needs to be sustained over a long period. 
We  will  continue  to  monitor  housing  developments  carefully,  and  the  role  that  the 
banking system may be playing in contributing to pricing pressures in the housing 
market. 
Exchange rate 
The  New  Zealand  dollar  exchange  rate  is  at  exceptional  levels  compared  with  its 
history. The Trade Weighted Index (TWI) is above its 90th percentile calculated from 
historical  data.  Relative  to  the  yen  and  Euro  the  exchange  rate  is  above  the 
90th percentile. It is close to the 90th percentile against the Australian dollar. 
The upward pressure on the TWI reflects several influences but primarily investors 
have been attracted by the broad strength of the economy and our higher interest 
rates.  The  strong  exchange  rate  has  boosted  the  real  disposable  income  of 
consumers  but  been  a  significant  headwind  for  export  firms  that  are  not 
experiencing high international prices for their products, and for manufacturers and 
other businesses that compete with foreign imports. 
Within the overall TWI some important adjustments have occurred. We welcome the 
11  percent  depreciation  of  the  New  Zealand  dollar  against  the  US  dollar  over  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   
 
past year5. However, the New Zealand dollar has appreciated by 7 percent and 4 
percent respectively against the euro and the yen during this time. This reflects the 
impact  of  considerable  policy  easing  by  the  ECB  and  Bank  of  Japan,  which  has 
further widened long term interest rate differentials with New Zealand. 
While the New Zealand dollar has eased recently on a TWI basis, the exchange rate 
remains  unjustified  in  terms  of  current  economic  conditions,  particularly  export 
prices,  and  unsustainable 
long-term  economic 
fundamentals.  We  believe  that,  over  time,  New  Zealand’s  growth  differentials  will 
narrow  vis  a  vis  the  advanced  economies,  making  the  New  Zealand  dollar  more 
likely to undergo a significant downward adjustment. 
terms  of  New  Zealand’s 
in 
Reflections on monetary policy 
So what might this mean for monetary policy going forward? 
Annual consumer price inflation is currently running at 0.8 percent. The low rate of headline 
inflation  is  driven  by  the  high  exchange  rate,  low  global  inflation,  and  falling  oil  prices. 
Inflation  in  the  tradables  sector  has  been  negative  for  much  of  the  past  2½  years  and 
remains very weak. Our pricing models point to further declines in headline inflation over the 
coming year as a direct result of this weakness in traded goods prices. 
Non  tradables  inflation  –  the  more  persistent  component  of  inflation  that  is  driven  by 
domestic  demand  pressure  and  government  charges  –  has  been  running  at  around 
2½ percent. This  inflation  has  come from  varied  sources  including  construction,  household 
utilities and property maintenance, and taxes on tobacco and alcohol. 
CPI inflation and components 
(annual) 
Source: Statistics New Zealand, RBNZ estimates. 
 We  are  currently  undertaking  analysis  for  the  March  MPS,  but  annual  CPI  inflation  is 
expected to be below the band and could become negative for a period during 2015 as the 
                                                
5  The US dollar has appreciated by 15 percent on a TWI basis since June 2014. The New Zealand dollar has 
depreciated by 16 percent against the US dollar since June 2014. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
  direct and indirect impacts of falling oil prices feed through the economy. We regard the fall 
in the oil price as a positive supply shock that will temporarily lower headline inflation. We 
then  expect  inflation  to  increase  and  move  back  towards  the  middle  of  the  1  percent  to  3 
percent target band, albeit more gradually than previously anticipated. 
We increased the OCR by 100 basis points in the period March 2014 to July 2014 because 
consumer  price  inflation  was  increasing  as  the  output  gap  became  positive  and  was 
expected to increase further. Since July, the OCR has been on hold while we assessed the 
impact of the policy tightening and the reasons for the lower-than-expected domestic inflation 
outcomes. 
The inflation outlook suggests that the OCR could remain at its current level for some time. 
How  long  will  largely  depend  on  the  development  of  inflation  pressures  in  both  the  traded 
and  non-traded  sector.  The  former  is  affected  by  inflation  in  our  trading  partners  and 
movements in our exchange rate; the latter by capacity pressures in the economy and how 
expectations  of  future  inflation  develop  in  the  private  sector  and  affect  price  and  wage 
setting. 
In  our  OCR  statement  last  Thursday  we  indicated  that  in  the  current  circumstances  we 
expect  to  keep  the  OCR  on  hold  for  some  time,  and  that  future  interest  rate  adjustments, 
either up or down, will depend on the emerging flow of economic data. 
Some commentators have suggested that a cut in interest rates would be appropriate at this 
stage. With a sizeable positive supply side shock, such as a major fall in the price of oil, a cut 
in interest rates can be appropriate if there is sufficient capacity to accommodate additional 
demand. Monetary policy settings could also warrant easing if domestic demand deteriorated 
and domestic price pressures abated further, perhaps in response to drought or a worsening 
in external economic circumstances. 
However,  in  our  current  situation  there  are  important  considerations  why  a  period  of  OCR 
stability is the most prudent option. 
Commodity  price  declines  reduce  headline  inflation  for  a  period  but  do  not  deliver  a 
sustained  decline  in  inflation.  Weak  or  even  negative  headline  inflation  that  could  be 
observed in 2015 is not reflective of underlying cost pressure in the non-tradables sector of 
the economy, and our medium term forecasts and measures of core inflation are well within 
the target band. 
New  Zealand  is  the  only  country  among  the  advanced  economies  that  has  had  a  positive 
output  gap  in  the  past  two  years,  our  unemployment  rate  is  low  and  falling,  net  inward 
migration  and  labour  force  participation  is  at  record  levels,  and  business  and  consumer 
confidence surveys remain strong. In addition, we have already seen some effective easing 
of credit conditions with declines in fixed-rate mortgages, at a time when we have financial 
stability concerns about accelerating house prices in Auckland. 
Similarly,  before  any  decision  to  raise  interest  rates,  we  would  need  to  be  confident  that 
capacity  utilisation  and  labour  market  pressures  were  generating,  or  about  to  generate,  a 
substantial increase in inflation. 
Concluding comment 
New  Zealand’s  economy  is  in  a  strong  position  with  continued  steady  growth,  falling 
unemployment, and inflation at low levels. The drivers of growth look sustainable, particularly 
in  light  of  the  increase  in  productive  capacity  that  has  occurred  in  recent  years.  Monetary 
policy remains in a strong position to continue supporting ongoing low inflationary growth in 
the New Zealand economy. 
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
