  Jerome H Powell: Financial institutions, financial markets, and financial 
stability 
Speech by Mr Jerome H Powell, Member of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve 
System, at the Stern School of Business, New York University, New York City, 18 February 
2015. 
 The views expressed here are my own and not necessarily those of others in the Federal Reserve System. 
It has now been over six years since the most acute phase of the financial crisis. Over the 
intervening  years,  market  structures  have  evolved,  and  financial  firms  have  changed  their 
business  models  in  important  respects.  Authorities  around  the  world  are  implementing 
reforms  that  address  the  painful  lessons  of  the  crisis,  while  at  the  same  time  keeping  the 
evolution of markets and firms in mind.  
Today,  I  will  briefly  summarize  this  sweeping  reform  program  as  it  relates  to  large,  global 
systemically  important  banks  (G-SIBs),  critical  financial  market  infrastructure,  and  money 
markets.  In  my  view,  the  basic  agendas  in  these  areas  are,  to  different  degrees,  well 
developed,  although  a  great  deal  of  implementation  remains.  In  contrast,  I  will  argue  that 
thinking  about  financial  stability  in  the  context  of  credit  markets  is  less  advanced  and 
presents  difficult  challenges  for  supervisors.  I  will  consider  a  range  of  factors  that  may 
address  those  challenges,  illustrated  with  a  discussion  of  recent  developments  in  the 
syndicated  leveraged  loan  market.  And  I  will  argue  that  the  standard  for  regulatory 
intervention in the credit markets should be higher than for the other three areas. 
Financial institutions: Even  before  the financial  crisis  ended,  it  was  clear  that  reforms  to 
strengthen the most systemically important firms and their regulation and supervision needed 
to be the first order of business. I will mention four critical elements of that program. First, 
these institutions are required to hold, and now do hold, much higher levels of higher-quality 
capital,  as measured  by  both risk-based  ratios and  a  much  more  comprehensive  leverage 
ratio. Under the “enhanced prudential standards” of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and 
Consumer  Protection  Act  (Dodd-Frank),  the  fully  phased-in  capital  requirements  will  be 
meaningfully  higher  for  these  institutions  because  of  the  greater  threat  their  failure  would 
pose to the financial system and to the broader economy. Second, these institutions are for 
the  first  time  becoming  subject  to  rule-based  liquidity  regulation,  including  the  Liquidity 
Coverage  Ratio,  the  Net  Stable  Funding  Ratio,  and  liquidity  stress  testing.1  These 
innovations  are  in  part  designed  to  address  the  firms’  vulnerabilities  to  damaging  runs  on 
their  short-term  financing,  runs  that  occurred  repeatedly  during  the  crisis  and  clearly 
increased its severity. Third, we now have rigorous, forward-looking capital stress testing that 
recognizes  the  dynamic  nature  of  the  financial  system  and  guards  against  the  excessive 
optimism that can build during a credit boom. 
These three reforms are well advanced and, in my view, have left the G-SIBs far stronger 
than they were before the crisis. Together, they significantly reduce the probability of a large 
bank failure. But they would leave us short of meeting the overriding objective of eliminating 
the  too-big-to-fail  conundrum  without  a fourth  reform  –  a  viable  resolution  mechanism that 
could  handle  the failure of  these  institutions  without  severe  damage to  the  economy.  Until 
recently, no nation has had a way of handling such failures without that degree of damage. 
                                                
1  For more information, see Daniel K. Tarullo (2014), “Liquidity Regulation,” speech delivered at the Clearing 
House 2014 Annual Conference, New York, November 20. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Authorities around the world have been working to develop an approach to resolving large 
financial firms that credibly imposes losses on shareholders and debt holders consistent with 
the basic tenets of our capitalist system, but does so in a way that protects the rest of the 
financial  system  and  the  real  economy  from  severe  damage.  The  single-point-of-entry 
approach  developed  by  the  Federal  Deposit  Insurance  Corporation  (FDIC)  in  conjunction 
with  other  U.S.  supervisors  is  a  promising  innovation,  especially  in  combination  with  the 
recent  proposal  of  the  Financial  Stability  Board  to  increase  the  “total  loss  absorbency 
capacity” of systemically important firms in terms of their total levels of equity and long-term 
debt.  When  fully  worked  out,  these  new  regulatory  regimes  should  permit  a  large, 
consolidated  entity  that  owns  banks  or  broker-dealers  to  continue  to  function  even  if  the 
ultimate holding company ceases to be viable and must be recapitalized or wound down. 
As I said at the outset, these reforms directed at the G-SIBs are well advanced. But much 
implementation remains, including, most notably, addressing cross-border issues associated 
with  the  failure  of  complex  global  firms.  It  will  take  time  and  continued  international 
cooperation to complete this task.2  
Infrastructure: The crisis exposed a number of important weaknesses in the infrastructure 
of the financial markets – what might be more plainly called the plumbing. Reforms aimed at 
addressing  these  weaknesses  receive  less  public  attention  than  those  focused  on  the  
G-SIBs, and are in some respects less advanced in their conception and execution. But they 
are, in my view, of great importance. 
I will mention two important sets of reforms in the U.S. context, one well advanced and the 
other  still  under  development.  The  first  concerns  the  triparty  repurchase  agreement  (repo) 
market, which is a principal source of overnight financing for the largest securities dealers. 
Before the crisis, the functioning of this market was critically dependent on the extension of 
large  volumes  of  discretionary  intraday  credit  by  two  clearing  banks.  When  confidence  in 
Bear  Stearns  collapsed  in  March  2008,  the  vulnerability  of  this  market  and  its  settlement 
procedures  in  particular  became  very  clear.  Today,  almost  seven  years  later,  in  no  small 
measure thanks to the leadership and persistence of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, 
the  triparty  repo  settlement  process  has  been  substantially  reengineered,  with  reliance  on 
discretionary  intraday  credit  essentially  eliminated.3  In  addition,  a  smaller  fraction  of  the 
market  now  involves  the  financing  of  lower-quality  collateral,  and  far  less  of  the  overall 
funding  is  provided  overnight  and  thus  subject  to  daily  rollover  risk.4  Dealers  in  general 
manage their short-term funding risk far more conservatively than before the crisis, including 
by  carrying  substantially  higher  levels  of  liquidity,  in  part  because  of  the  introduction  of 
prudential liquidity standards that I mentioned earlier. 
Second, as I have discussed at some length in other venues, in the run-up to the crisis, the 
highly  opaque  and  fast-growing  market  for  over-the-counter  derivatives  gave  rise  to  an 
underappreciated  and  largely  invisible  buildup  of  risk,  which  proved  a  major  source  of 
instability  when  the  crisis  broke.5  In  light  of  this  experience,  authorities  around  the  world 
                                                
2  For  a  more  complete  treatment  of  these  issues,  see  Daniel  K.  Tarullo  (2015),  “Advancing  Macroprudential 
Policy Objectives,” speech delivered at “Evaluating Macroprudential Tools: Complementarities and Conflicts,” 
a conference cosponsored by the Office of Financial Research and the Financial Stability Oversight Council, 
held in Arlington, Va., January 30. 
3  For  more  on  this  topic,  see  William  C.  Dudley  (2014),  “Welcoming  Remarks  at  Workshop  on  the  Risks  of 
Wholesale Funding,” speech delivered at “Workshop on the Risks of Wholesale Funding,” sponsored by the 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York, New York, August 13. 
4  There have also been reforms to the money market funds that provide most of the funding in this market, as 
discussed later. 
5  See  Jerome  H.  Powell  (2013),  “OTC  Market  Infrastructure  Reform:  Opportunities  and  Challenges,”  speech 
delivered  at  the  Clearing  House  2013  Annual  Meeting,  New  York,  November  21;  and  Jerome  H.  Powell 
(2014), “A Financial System Perspective on Central Clearing of Derivatives,” speech delivered at “The New 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  in  2009 
that  standardized  derivatives  should  be  cleared 
agreed 
through  central 
counterparties  (CCPs),  and  that  noncentrally  cleared  derivatives  should  be  subject  to 
minimum margin requirements. 
Central  clearing  holds  the  promise  of  enhancing  financial  stability  through  the  netting  of 
counterparty risks, creating greater transparency, and applying stronger and more consistent 
risk-management  practices.  But  this  reform  program  will  only  succeed  if  CCPs,  in  which 
counterparty  credit  risks  are  concentrated,  are  strong  enough  to  withstand  severe  but 
plausible stress scenarios, including, for example, the failure of multiple clearing members. 
Achieving  this  degree  of  resiliency  will  require  robust  liquidity  risk-management  practices, 
including  the  maintenance  of  substantial  buffers  of  liquid  resources  that  can  quickly  be 
tapped.  In  addition,  adequate  loss  absorption  capacity  is  essential,  including  through 
substantial initial margin requirements and default funds. A framework for such requirements 
has been agreed upon at the international level through the Principles for Financial Market 
Infrastructures.6  Vigorous  implementation  at  the national  level  is  essential.  There  is  also  a 
need  for  greater  transparency  for  clearing  members  and  the  public  regarding  the  risk-
management practices of CCPs, for heightened stress testing, for consideration of “skin-in-
the-game” requirements, and for credible recovery and resolution plans. A great deal of work 
remains to be done to finalize and implement these additional reforms in all of the important 
CCPs around the world. 
Money markets: Money markets involve money-like investments such as commercial paper 
and  repo.  Investors  in  these  markets  include  money  market  funds,  corporations  and  other 
large  holders  of  excess cash  seeking  a safe return  in  the  short  term, frequently  no  longer 
than  overnight.  Borrowers  in  money  markets  include  banks,  securities  dealers  and  other 
financial  companies,  nonfinancial  corporations,  and  governments.  By  linking  investors 
seeking  a  safe  return  with  borrowers  needing  short-term  credit,  money  markets  do  what 
commercial banks have always done, but without deposit insurance and other aspects of the 
safety net provided for regulated depository institutions. After Lehman failed and the Reserve 
Fund “broke the buck,” money market fund investors realized that their investments were not 
as safe and liquid as “money” after all. There were widespread runs in these markets, and it 
took a U.S. Treasury guarantee, augmented by a number of unprecedented liquidity facilities 
established by the Federal Reserve, to stabilize the money market fund industry and, more 
importantly, stave off a sudden stoppage of the flow of credit to households and businesses. 
This  experience  tells  us  clearly  that  disruptions  in  the  money  markets  can  threaten  the 
broader financial system. Regulation to increase the resilience of the money markets needs 
to reflect their systemic importance. Some important steps have been taken to address the 
most  immediate  risks  –  for  example,  through  the  liquidity  standards  for  large  institutions  I 
mentioned  earlier.  But  the  risks  associated  with  dislocations  in  the  money  markets  go  far 
beyond the large banks. 
The  Securities  and  Exchange  Commission  (SEC)  has  taken  some  important  steps  to 
address  the  money  market  fund  issue,  notably  through  its  2014  rule  amendments.7  To 
address so-called repo runs, the Financial Stability Board is in the final phases of developing 
a framework of margin rules designed to be applied uniformly across nations for securities 
financing  transactions  involving  nongovernmental  securities.  These  minimum  standards 
                                                                                                                                                   
International  Financial  System:  Analyzing  the  Cumulative  Impact  of  Regulatory  Reform,”  a  conference 
cosponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago and the Bank of England, Chicago, November 6. 
6  See  Committee  on  Payment  and  Settlement  Systems  and  Technical  Committee  of  the  International 
Organization of Securities Commissions (2012), Principles for Financial Market Infrastructures (PDF) (Basel, 
Switzerland:  Bank  for  International  Settlements  and  International  Organization  of  Securities  Commissions, 
April). 
7  The 2014 SEC rule amendments are available at www.sec.gov/rules/final/2014/33–9616.pdf. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  should  increase  the  resiliency  of  those  markets  and  mitigate  the  pressures  on  terms  that 
inevitably  emerge  during  benign  periods.  We  expect  to  propose  regulations  implementing 
these rules in the United States in due course. 
Credit markets: That brings me to the credit markets, where households, businesses and 
governments  engage  in  borrowing  to  fund  their  purchases  and  operations.  These  markets 
figured  importantly  in  the  crisis,  most  notoriously  through  securities  collateralized  by 
subprime mortgages. The story is by now well known. Lenders offered these loans to retail 
borrowers,  often  with  negligible  or  simply  fraudulent  underwriting.  Many  of  our  largest 
financial institutions packaged the loans into marginally capitalized securitization structures 
that were rated highly by the credit rating agencies and thus generally viewed as suitable for 
purchase  by  a  range  of  investors  –  including  the  most  risk  averse.  As  conditions  in  the 
housing  market  deteriorated,  the  threat  of  significant  mortgage  defaults  emerged  in  2007. 
The panic began in earnest when it became apparent that exposure to subprime mortgages 
was ubiquitous, from the balance sheets of key financial intermediaries and their supposedly 
“off balance sheet” vehicles to the investment portfolios of other institutional investors around 
the world. Although the total losses were initially thought to be not so large as to threaten the 
system, some of these toxic mortgage-backed securities (MBS) were financed with the types 
of  short-term,  confidence-sensitive  funding  mechanisms  I  have  just  described,  which 
amplified the dislocations once the run in funding markets began and caused great harm to 
the broader economy. 
As the crisis has receded, supervisors – not to mention market participants, commentators, 
and  the  general  public  –  have  eyed  financial  markets  with  a  heightened  sensitivity  to 
anything  that  resembles  the  buildup  of  risks  that  occurred  in  the  run-up  to  the  crisis  –  a 
natural  and  useful  exercise  in  pattern  recognition.  In  that  spirit,  the  Fed,  the  Office  of  the 
Comptroller of the Currency (OCC), and the FDIC have focused significant attention on the 
origination activities of depository institutions in the syndicated leveraged loan market, where 
some of the troubling patterns that were evident in subprime MBS have been observed. 
These conditions prompted policymakers first to ask questions and then to act. Fed officials 
raised  concerns  publicly  as  early  as  2011.8  The  Fed,  the  OCC,  and  the  FDIC  issued 
supervisory guidance emphasizing these concerns in 2013.9 In 2014, the agencies clarified 
the  guidance  through  published  FAQs  and  began  to  exercise  intensive  supervision  at  the 
largest regulated banks emphasizing the need to improve underwriting standards and credit 
risk management on safety and soundness grounds.10  
The  case  of  the  leveraged  loan  market  is  an  interesting  one,  because  it  sits  at  the 
intersection  between  core  financial  institutions  and  credit  markets  and  illustrates  the 
challenges supervisors face in thinking about intervention in credit markets. I will turn to that 
market now in some detail. 
                                                
8  See,  for  example,  Janet  L.  Yellen  (2011),  “Assessing  Potential  Financial  Imbalances  in  an  Era  of 
Accommodative Monetary Policy,” speech delivered at “Real and Financial Linkage and Monetary Policy,” an 
international conference sponsored by the Bank of Japan, June 1. 
9  See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and Office 
of the Comptroller of the Currency (2013), “Interagency Guidance on Leveraged Lending (PDF),” March 13. 
10  Along  with  the  Shared  National  Credit  results,  the  Fed,  along  with  the  OCC  and  the  FDIC,  released  on 
November  7,  2014,  an  FAQ  document  (PDF)  regarding  the  guidance.  Also  see  Board  of  Governors  of  the 
Federal  Reserve  System,  Federal  Deposit  Insurance  Corporation,  and  Office  of  the  Comptroller  of  the 
Currency (2014), “Credit Risk in the Shared National Credit Portfolio Is High; Leveraged Lending Remains a 
Concern,” joint press release, November 7. 
The guidance covers a wide range of risk-management issues and generally aims tighter scrutiny at deals with 
leverage over six times pre-tax cash flow, or with forecast debt paydown of less than 50 percent over a five-to-
seven-year period; differences across industries and companies are also to be taken into consideration. 
 4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  The term portions of leveraged loans are typically not held in the arranging banks’ portfolios, 
but  rather  sold  to  a  wide  range  of  institutional  investors  –  collateralized  loan  obligations 
(CLOs),  retail  loan  funds,  pension  funds,  insurance  companies,  hedge  funds,  and  others 
(figures  1  and  2).  This  “originate-to-distribute”  model  is  now  dominant  across  a  range  of 
markets  and  reflects  the  movement  over  several  decades  of  credit  intermediation  from 
portfolio lending (from the firm’s perspective, the “storage business”) to the capital markets 
(the “moving business”). This practice transfers and disperses credit and liquidity risks from 
the core of the financial sector to capital market investors that are willing to bear such risks 
for what they deem appropriate compensation. While the risks do not disappear, the system 
can, in principle, be safer if the ultimate institutional investors pose lower risk to the system 
than  banks.  For  example,  movement  of  credit  exposure  to  speculative  grade  firms  from  a 
bank’s  balance  sheet  to  a  vehicle  that  is  stably  funded  by  sophisticated,  deep-pocket 
institutional investors could be a net gain to financial stability. Movement of such loans to a 
highly leveraged, runnable vehicle beyond the regulatory perimeter could have the opposite 
effect. 
Pre-crisis conditions in leveraged finance markets were, with the benefit of hindsight, clearly 
in bubble territory. Deal leverage was at historically high levels (figure 3), and spreads were 
at historic lows (figure 4). Interest coverage ratios were quite low (figure 5). Unusually large 
leveraged buyouts were common. Banks entered into very large, long duration commitments 
to  fund  deals  that  faced  significant  regulatory  and  other  requirements  before  they  could 
close.  Estimates  vary,  but  when  the  crisis  emerged  and  liquidity  in  these  markets 
evaporated, large dealers were left holding roughly $350 billion in loans and commitments in 
their  pipelines  that  they  could  not  sell,  and  these  positions  remained  on  banks’  balance 
sheets  for  a  time.  As  loan  values  declined  an  unprecedented  40  percent  (figure  6),  there 
were  significant  mark-to-market  losses  on  these  assets,  which  may  have  contributed  to 
doubts about the condition of institutions at the core of the system. Subsequent default rates 
were not outsized by historical standards, and recovery rates were in line with past averages 
(figure  7).  Of  course,  the  Fed’s  monetary  policy  eased  financial  conditions  across  the 
economy and enabled the refinancing of many of these loans at lower rates and with issuer-
friendly terms. 
Because leveraged loans were generally not held in investment structures that used short-
term, confidence-sensitive funding, these investments were not a principal focal point of runs 
such  as  those  that  plagued  MBS  funding  structures.  CLOs  were  the  largest  institutional 
investors in leveraged loans, holding over 50 percent of loans outstanding. These structures 
are  funded  with  stable  capital,  with  both  equity  and  debt  tranches  committed  for  several 
years – a longer duration than that of the underlying loans. 
This  picture  of  the  pre-crisis  leveraged  lending  market  is  one  of  a  sharp  decline  in 
underwriting standards and a breakdown of risk management, resulting in a large risk buildup 
involving  many  of  the  G-SIBs  –  something  the  Fed  and  other  regulators  want  to  avoid. 
Leveraged loans may not have been a material cause of the crisis, and leveraged lending 
alone would likely not have threatened the overall health of the large institutions. But caution 
on the part of supervisors is certainly understandable here. It is worth remembering that the 
destructive potential of the subprime mortgage market was not obvious in advance and not 
fully reflected in real-time measures of balance sheet exposure. In light of that demonstrated 
uncertainty, since the crisis, supervisors have opted to react earlier and more aggressively to 
the buildup of risk. 
Let’s now turn to post-crisis market conditions, which exhibit both similarities and differences 
compared with the pre-crisis period. Borrowing through leveraged loans by speculative-grade 
companies  has  been  brisk  since  2010,  with  about  $800  billion  of  institutional  loans  now 
outstanding  (figure  8).  Over  much  of  the  post-crisis  low  interest  rate  period,  demand  for 
higher-yielding  assets  has  been  very  strong,  often  outstripping  supply.  Price  and  nonprice 
terms in the syndicated leveraged loan market have been highly favorable to borrowers, as 
credit spreads declined, albeit not to particularly low levels (figure 4), and leverage multiples 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  increased  (figure  3).  The  share  of  loan  agreements  that  lack  traditional  maintenance 
covenants increased to historic highs (figures 9 and 10).11  
CLOs  and  other  stably  funded  investors  continue  to  be  the  primary  owners  of  leveraged 
loans. But in recent years, mutual funds that invest in fixed income assets have seen large 
inflows  and  have  become  more  significant  investors  in  this  market.  Some  of  these  funds, 
including those holding syndicated leveraged loans and high-yield bonds, provide investors 
with  what  is  called  “liquidity  transformation”  –  providing  daily  liquidity  even  when  the 
underlying assets are relatively illiquid. The risk is that, in the event of a shock or a panic, 
investors  will  demand  all  of  their  money  back  at  the  exact  time  when  the  liquidity  of  the 
already  illiquid  underlying  assets  deteriorates  even further.  Investors may  not  anticipate  or 
recognize this problem until it is too late – the so-called liquidity illusion. 
Bank  loan  funds,  which  attract  retail  investors  and  offer  daily  liquidity,  now  total  about 
$150 billion,  or  20  percent  of  institutional  leveraged  loans  outstanding  (figure  11).  The 
liquidity  transformation  provided  by  these  funds  has  not  created  problems  so  far  despite 
recent outflows from bank loan funds, but supervisors and market participants have raised 
valid  concerns  that  stressful  times  could  well  bring  large-scale  redemptions  and  threaten 
runs  (figure  12).  Chair  Mary  Jo  White  has  made  liquidity  concerns  regarding  open-ended 
mutual funds a priority for the SEC.12  
While it is possible to observe the characteristics of cash market investments, it is far more 
challenging to assess comparable positions in the derivatives and secured lending markets. 
Investors may take highly leveraged positions in leveraged loans through total return swaps 
and secured funding transactions, and a substantial buildup of these positions could present 
run and fire-sale risks if asset values started to fall. Today, the evidence suggests that such 
positions  are fairly  limited,  but  challenges  in  measurement  and  data  make  it  hard  to get a 
clear picture. 
While some of these conditions evoke the pre-crisis bubble period and thus raise red flags, 
there are important differences as well. The large institutions that arrange these loans have 
significantly  reduced  both  the  size  and  duration  of  their  leveraged  loan  commitments 
(figure 13). Thus, they  are  not  exposed  to the  large  “pipeline  risk”  they faced  as  the  crisis 
broke.  In  addition,  banks  now  routinely  limit  their  risk  by  including  “flex”  provisions  that, 
among other things, enable them to increase the interest rate on a loan offered for sale by 
150 basis points or more, at the borrower’s expense. So far, we have not seen the very large 
transactions  of  the  pre-crisis  period.  In  these  and  other  respects,  the  leveraged  finance 
markets have evolved,  probably because of supervision as  well as lessons learned by the 
banks themselves. Given these changes, banks at the core of our financial system seem less 
likely to experience stress should conditions in leveraged lending deteriorate. Of course, the 
guidance now stands in the way of a return to pre-crisis conditions. 
Let’s  now  step  back  from  the  leveraged  loan  market  to  ask  the  broader  question  of  how 
supervisors should address a clear deterioration of credit market conditions. I will consider 
three factors that are often discussed in considering the broader question of when and how 
                                                
11  Highly accommodative monetary policy, while far from the only cause of ebullient credit market conditions, is 
designed  to  support  economic  activity  by  creating  incentives  to  take  credit  and  duration  risk.  See  Ben 
S. Bernanke (2013), “Semiannual Monetary Policy Report to the Congress,” statement before the Committee 
on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate, February 26. 
12  See  Mary  Jo  White  (2014),  “Enhancing  Risk  Monitoring  and  Regulatory  Safeguards  for  the  Asset 
Management  Industry,”  speech  at  the  New  York  Times  DealBook  Opportunities  for  Tomorrow  Conference, 
New York, December 11. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  to  intervene  in  the  credit  markets  to  promote  financial  stability  through  institution-specific 
supervisory policy.13  
First,  do  conditions  present  a  threat  to  the  safety  and  soundness  of  financial 
institutions at the core of the system? 
It hardly needs saying that we must to be alert to the buildup of risks in the credit markets 
that  could  undermine  the  safety,  soundness,  or  solvency  of  the  G-SIBs  or  the  broader 
system. If deterioration in one or more of the key credit markets would credibly raise such 
threats, the Fed and the other supervisors should react preemptively. An object lesson in this 
regard  is  the  damage  done  by  the  accumulation  of  excessive  exposures  to  high-risk  MBS 
and  other  mortgage-related  assets  in  the  years  leading  up  to  the  crisis.  The  originate-to-
distribute  model  of  mortgage  lending  on  its  face  promised  a  social-welfare-enhancing 
distribution  of  mortgage  credit  risk  away  from  banks  and  toward  stable  capital  market 
investors.  But  the  banks  remained  profoundly  exposed  through  contractual  putback  rights, 
mortgage  and  MBS  litigation,  residual  balance  sheet  holdings,  and  implicit  support  to 
sponsored investment vehicles. 
Since the crisis, there have been significant and eminently justified legislative and regulatory 
actions to assure that mortgage originators follow minimum underwriting standards and that 
banks are better protected from exposure to high-risk mortgages. These efforts include the 
Dodd-Frank risk retention rules and ability-to-pay standards, much higher capital and liquidity 
requirements,  stricter  accounting  rules  that  limit  off-balance-sheet  treatment  for  sponsored 
vehicles, and a much greater supervisory focus on litigation and reputational risk. 
Second,  is  there  use  of  run-prone  financing  by  other  investors  that  can  lead  to 
damaging fire sales? 
Supervisors should be highly alert to the reemergence in the markets – that is, not on the 
balance sheets of the large banks – of structures that are prone to runs and damaging fire 
sales  triggered  by  sharp  declines  in  asset  values.  As  I  mentioned  earlier,  two  different 
features can create vulnerability to runs and fire-sale risk. The first involves funding of volatile 
assets  with  high  leverage  that  includes  short-term,  confidence  sensitive  debt.  These 
structures  were  widely  used  before  the  crisis  in  the  funding  of  MBS.  The  second  involves 
“liquidity transformation,” in which the investment structure provides investors daily liquidity, 
but the underlying assets are far less liquid and prone to becoming quite illiquid in times of 
stress.  Either  or  both  of  these  features  can  be  replicated  in  the  derivatives  or  securities 
lending  markets,  which  provide  less  visibility  to  market  participants  and  supervisors. 
Financial markets evolve constantly in response to market conditions, financial engineering, 
and regulation. It will be important to keep up with trends in these markets that may give rise 
to this threat. 
Third, if left unaddressed, is it likely that conditions will risk meaningful damage to the 
real economy when the credit cycle turns? 
A positive answer on either of the first two questions should raise red flags for supervisors. 
Let’s say, for the sake of argument, that the answers to these questions were negative. One 
might still try to make the case for supervisory intervention into the credit markets to avoid 
the risk of meaningful damage to the economy down the road. History shows that excesses 
that occur at the height of a credit boom can result in substantial losses not just to financial 
                                                
13  This  approach  is  consistent  with  the  financial  stability  framework  in  Adrian,  Covitz,  and  Liang  (2013),  and 
emphasizes  the  importance  of  leverage,  maturity  transformation,  and  common  risks  and  behaviors  in  the 
financial system that can amplify credit losses and harm the real economy. See Tobias Adrian, Daniel Covitz, 
and Nellie Liang (2013), “Financial Stability Monitoring,” Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2013–21 
(Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  firms and market investors, but also to households and businesses, when that boom turns to 
bust.14  
The question of whether to “lean against” the credit cycle through supervisory policy – and 
when, and with what tools – is a difficult one.15 An important threshold question is whether 
supervisors will be able to correctly and in a timely manner identify “dangerous” conditions in 
credit  markets,  without  too  many  false  positives  and  without  unnecessarily  limiting  credit 
availability  by  interfering  with  market  forces.  Interesting  recent  research  seeks  to  identify 
observable variables that could be used to monitor credit conditions and detect trends that 
could  threaten  the  performance  of  the  real  economy  in  the  future.16  This  research  is 
promising, and it could be used by supervisors to inform their thinking as it develops further. 
In the meantime, unless there is a plausible threat to the core of the system or potential for 
damaging fire sales, I would set a high bar for supervisory interventions to lean against the 
credit cycle. Such interventions would almost surely interfere with the traditional function of 
capital  markets  in  allocating  capital to  productive  uses  and  dispersing risk  to  the  investors 
who willingly choose to bear it. 
Finally, another issue to consider when contemplating such intervention is that, particularly in 
the United States, activity is free to migrate outside the commercial banking system into less 
regulated entities. As supervisory scrutiny has increased in recent years, a growing number 
of nonbanks have become involved in the distribution of leveraged loans. Migration of this 
activity could be either a net positive or a net negative for financial stability, depending on 
whether  it  actually  transfers  risk  irrevocably  from  the  core  of  the  financial  system,  and 
whether the institutions to which activity migrates rely on funding that is stable and robust to 
fire sale dynamics. 
Conclusion 
To  wrap  up,  I  believe  that  sustaining  financial  stability  requires  supervisors  to  consider 
financial markets, in addition to financial institutions and infrastructure. That is most obviously 
so  when  conditions  threaten  the  safety  and  soundness  of  the  financial  system  through 
leverage,  liquidity  transformation,  or  deterioration  of  credit  underwriting  or  other  risk-
management standards. At the same time, financial stability need not seek to eliminate all 
risks. We need to learn, but not overlearn, the lessons of the crisis. I believe there should be 
a high bar for “leaning against the credit cycle” in the absence of credible threats to the core 
or the reemergence of run-prone funding structures. In my view, the Fed and other prudential 
and market regulators should resist interfering with the role of markets in allocating capital to 
issuers and risk to investors unless the case for doing so is strong and the available tools 
can achieve the objective in a targeted manner and with a high degree of confidence. 
                                                
14  See, for example, Moritz Schularick and Alan M. Taylor (2012), “Credit Booms Gone Bust: Monetary Policy, 
Leverage Cycles, and Financial Crises, 1870–2008,” American Economic Review, vol. 102 (2), pp. 1029–61. 
15  The  U.S.  banking  agencies,  following  the  lead  of  the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision,  created  a 
countercyclical capital buffer that could be activated during periods of excess aggregate credit growth. The 
Basel proposal can both “lean against the cycle” and create a capital cushion to absorb losses from the likely 
increase in defaults. 
16  See Robin Greenwood and Samuel G. Hanson (2013), “Issuer Quality and Corporate Bond Returns,” Review 
of  Financial  Studies,  vol.  26  (June),  pp.  1483–525;  and  David  López-Salido,  Jeremy  C.  Stein,  and  Egon 
Zakrajšek (2014), “Credit-Market Sentiment and the Business Cycle,” slide presentation. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    9 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
      10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
     BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
    12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13 
 14 
    BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 15 
