  Fabio Panetta: The European Banking and Capital Markets Unions – 
challenges and risks 
Remarks  by  Mr  Fabio  Panetta,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Italy,  at  a  conference 
organized  by  the  Fondazione  Italianieuropei  and  the  Foundation for  European  Progressive 
Studies, Rome, 6 February 2015. 
 Introduction 
1.  
I  would  like  to  thank  the  Fondazione  Italianieuropei  and  the  Foundation  for  European 
Progressive Studies for inviting me to this conference. It is a pleasure to be here to discuss 
the  opportunities  and  risks  associated  with  the  European  Banking  Union  (BU)  and  Capital 
Markets Union (CMU). It is a very topical subject. In order to relaunch economic growth in the 
eurozone, the policies adopted at both national and European levels must be complemented 
by adequate financial support to the real economy. The institutional set up of the BU and the 
CMU is crucial to this end.  
I will first give an account of what has been achieved so far at the European level to foster 
the reintegration of the financial markets and spur economic growth in the Euro area. I will 
concentrate  on  the  project for  Banking  Union  (BU),  arguing  that  its first  stage,  namely  the 
Single  Supervisory  Mechanism  (SSM)  has  been  crucial  to  reaffirm  the  commitment  of  all 
eurozone  member  countries  to  the  single  currency  and  to  foster  financial  integration.  This 
means  that  the  SSM  has  already  contributed  to  the  sustainable  growth  of  output  and 
employment in Europe, even if that contribution is hard to pinpoint or measure. Second, I will 
offer  a  reflection  on  the  further  steps  we  have  to  take  in  order  to  ensure  that  the  project 
delivers on its stated objectives. Finally, I will touch upon some of the Capital Markets Union 
initiatives,  concentrating  on  those  designed  to  increase  access  to  finance  for  small  and 
medium-sized enterprises.  
Banking Union: the main achievements  
2.  
We  must  not  underestimate  what  has  already  been  accomplished  by  the  BU  project.  This 
thorough  overhaul  of  the  euro  area  supervisory  architecture  took  place  in  –  indeed,  was 
motivated  by  –  an  environment  marked  by  unsatisfactory  economic  growth,  increasing 
perceptions of sovereign risk and mounting doubts on the very survival of the euro.  
The BU project has already helped the stabilization efforts in the Eurozone, which is a pre-
requisite  for  economic  growth.  First,  it  gave  an  important  signal  of  the  willingness  of  the 
member countries to forge ahead with unification. In itself, this provided a potent antidote to 
the sovereign debt crisis, whose key determinant had been lack of confidence in the single 
currency project. Second, common supervision and a centralized resolution authority lay the 
basis for financial stability. 
Banking  Union,  together  with  other  national  and  European  policies  –  in  particular,  the 
monetary  policy  measures  recently  decided  by  the  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB  –  is 
already contributing to the normalization in credit conditions for firms and households. The 
comprehensive  assessment  of  the  balance  sheets  of  the  largest  euro  area  banks,  which 
preceded the launch of the (SSM), enhanced transparency and dispelled doubts about the 
banks’  resilience.  Further  progress  is  expected  as  the  SSM  brings  harmonization  of 
supervisory  and  business  practices,  reducing  investors’  perception  of  risks.  Although 
complete normalization in credit conditions will likely require definitive exit from the crisis and 
a return to stable economic growth, signs of gradual improvement can already be discerned 
in the surveys conducted by the Eurosystem and in other indicators.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Banking  Union  has  imparted  a  strong  impulse  to  the  efficiency  of  the  financial  system  by 
fostering competition across euro area countries. Consider for example the recent decree on 
the governance of the cooperative banks in Italy. The initiative is the product of a good many 
years of reflection on the shortcomings of the cooperative structure for listed or very large 
banks; at the same time, it can be read as part of a broader reform effort to bring the Italian 
economy up to the best European standards of efficiency.  
How to consolidate a promising start  
3.  
The important steps already taken need to be followed by further progress, on several fronts. 
Since the list would be long, I shall mention just one general issue and two specific ones. 
The  overarching  issue:  further  progress  towards  European  integration  is  essential.  We 
should not forget that the current crisis was provoked, in part, precisely by lack of progress in 
European  integration  following  the  adoption  of  the  single  monetary  policy.  The  BU  project 
has gotten the process started again, helping to defuse the crisis. But we must not make the 
same mistake twice; the integration process cannot be allowed to stall again. Progress in this 
direction is particularly difficult at present, because national centrifugal forces seem strong. 
They  are  visible  in  various  forms:  growing  support  for  anti-euro  or  euro-skeptical  political 
parties  in  several  countries,  for  one,  and  the  difficulties  encountered  by  European  and 
Eurozone  institutions  in  discussing  issues  from  an  area-wide  perspective,  for  another. 
National  interests  and  perspectives  are  strong.  Take,  for  instance,  the  distinction  between 
core  and  periphery,  which  has  become  standard  in  many  discussions  and  official 
publications.  
If unification is to advance, we must reinforce mutual trust at the international level. This must 
be achieved over time, through consistent behavior on the part of all parties and recognizing 
that  it  is  in  the  interest  of  every  member  state  to  factor  in  the  need  to  reduce  negative 
spillovers from one economy to the others. If we succeed, it will gradually become clear that 
there is no conflict between European financial integration and financial stability; indeed, that 
by favoring the cross-border diversification of risks, financial integration will foster financial 
stability.  
Let me now turn to some specific issues.  
Micro- versus Macroprudential policies. Throughout 2014 and since the launch of the SSM, 
the European supervisory authorities have focused mainly on the capital position of banks. 
This  emphasis  on  strong  capitalization  was  necessary  to restore  confidence.  Now  that the 
comprehensive  assessment  has  shown  that  the  European  banking  system  is  solid,  it  is 
essential to avoid inducing pro-cyclical behavior by banks, curtailing lending to the economy. 
Let me elaborate on this issue.  
Any  bank,  taken  individually,  may  have  an  incentive  to  strengthen  its  capital  adequacy  by 
curtailing  lending.  This  does  not  have  strong  counterindications  if  other  banks  have 
incentives to expand lending. But if all the banks seek to deleverage at the same time, this 
could trigger a credit crunch, with adverse repercussions on the economy and ultimately on 
the  banking  system  itself.  The  crisis  drove  this  simple  lesson  in  externalities  home 
emphatically, prompting the creation of macroprudential authorities in most countries.1 And 
as  we  know,  the  incentives  of  micro-  and  macroprudential  authorities  are  aligned  during 
economic  expansions  (both  policies  should  be  tightened,  to  strengthen  the  resilience  of 
single  banks  and  to  “lean  against  the  wind”  of  an  aggregate  credit  boom).  However,  they 
tend  to  diverge  during  downturns,  when,  as  I  just  now  observed,  the  macroprudential 
authority should be wary of imposing stiffer capital requirements.  
                                                
1   See the de Larosière report, 2009. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  The  present  state  of  the  economy  in  the  Eurozone  offers  a  textbook  case  of  the  potential 
tension between micro- and macroprudential policies. There is broad agreement (eg within 
the ESRB) that macro risks – low nominal growth in particular – are among the more serious 
threats  to financial  stability.  In  the  Eurozone  credit  growth  is  negative,  and  the  credit/GDP 
gap (the main indicator set by the Basel rules to steer the countercyclical capital buffer) is 
amply negative in most countries. Fully aware that relaunching nominal economic growth in 
the  Eurozone  is  the  paramount  objective,  the  ECB  has  embarked  on  a  program  of 
quantitative easing.  
In this environment, macroprudential policy needs to lean decisively against the wind and act 
to rekindle credit and economic growth. But in practice it is not doing so. Indeed, most recent 
macroprudential  actions  at  national  level  have  further  tightened  capital  requirements,  in 
response  to  national  problems.  Coupled  with  the  ongoing  micro-level  tightening,  these 
measures could ultimately aggravate the risks of persistently low nominal growth.  
There are certainly good reasons, on which I shall not elaborate here, for leaving area-wide 
macroprudential instruments on hold. At the same time, since under the Regulation the SSM 
has both micro- and macroprudential responsibilities, I believe that reflection on this issue is 
warranted.  
The  complexity  of  the  European  system  of  financial  supervision  is  extraordinary.  This 
complexity  follows  from  two  main  factors.  First, there  are  a  large  number  of  actors  on  the 
stage  –  at  both  national  and  supranational  levels,  with  both  micro-  and  macro-prudential 
objectives  –  and  in  interaction  with  one  another.  Legislators,  perfectly  well  aware  that  the 
new  set  of  rules  that  originated  the  system  may  need  some  fine  tuning,  incorporated  the 
deadlines  of  a  revision  process  in  the  rules  themselves.  Time  and  experience  will  tell  just 
how  much  room  there  is  for  simplification.  Second,  EU  member  countries  are  still 
characterized  by  different  accounting  and  legal  regimes.  Convergence  is  necessary  for 
company, insolvency and taxation law in particular, but a gradual approach will be inevitable. 
Meanwhile,  an  effort  by  all  stakeholders  will  be  necessary  to  get  the  system  to  work 
effectively and to ensure a level playing field.  
Heterogeneity is found in the area of supervision as well, but here I am confident that the 
SSM will bring relatively swift convergence in supervisory practices. My own very preliminary 
assessment of the functioning of the SSM is positive. The progress achieved in such a short 
time has been amazing. Nonetheless, we are still at the very first stages, and adjustments 
may  well  be  necessary.  We  need  to  avoid  the  risks  of  inefficiency  that  stem  from  the 
complexity  of  the  machinery.  A  huge  number  of  issues  –  and  of  related  decisions  –  are 
brought  to  the  attention  of  the  Supervisory  Board;  this  threatens  to  deflect  attention  from 
proper  reflection  on  the  more  important  issues.  I  am  sure  that  we  shall  be  able  to  flexibly 
adapt the framework as needs arise. 
The Capital Markets Union 
4.  
That  European  firms  rely  too  heavily  on  banks  for  external  funds  has  been  known  for 
decades,  but  the  crisis  has  now  thrown  the  dangers  of  this  model  into  sharp  relief, 
highlighting  the  need  to  enhance  the  role  of  market  funding.  The  Capital  Markets  Union 
(CMU) initiative is directed to this ambitious goal. Further development of non-bank sources 
of  funding  seems  possible,  if  we  compare  the  European  to  the  more  market-oriented 
economies. European businesses get the bulk of their financing from banks, while in the US 
market-based financing is much more highly developed, even for SMEs.  
The Commission has set an ambitious agenda in this field, with the aim of channeling funds 
to  Europe’s  businesses,  particularly  SMEs.  The  agenda  includes  an  effort  to  revitalize  the 
market  for  sound  (simple)  securitizations  (which  requires  work  at  EU  level  to  design  a 
consistent  framework  and  avoid  regulatory  arbitrage);  harmonization  of  the  market  for 
covered bonds, building on the successful experiences of some European countries in order 
to  generalize  best  practices;  stimulation  of  crowd-funding  initiatives,  gradually  eliminating 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  significant  national  differences  in  legislation  and  supervisory  approaches;  enhancement  of 
the  small-scale  corporate  bond  markets  via  mini-bonds;  and  endorsement  of  the  efforts  to 
identify a common framework for private placement transactions.2 The Commission is also 
working to improve and standardize information on firms, in particular SMEs, and the related 
disclosure and transparency requirements. The scarcity of such comparable information is a 
deterrent  to  cross-border  financing,  which  cuts  across  the  different  market  segments  and 
types of instruments.  
In  the  medium  to  long  term,  the  CMU  can  bring  significant  benefits:  broadening  and 
diversifying 
its  resilience,  efficiency  and 
competitiveness; eliciting greater long-term financing; and enhancing the supply of equity, to 
encourage euro-area firms to rely less on bank credit and to rebalance their capital structure.  
In  the  short  term,  the  efforts  to  enhance  market-based  sources  of  funding  are  part  of  the 
policy response to pronounced bank deleveraging within the EU and the attendant anemic 
credit growth. Some of the items on the Commission’s agenda may be crucial to this end. 
Indeed,  bank  deleveraging  itself,  together  with  the  search  for  higher  yields  by  institutional 
investors,  may  be  a  powerful  catalyst  for  the  development  of  these  alternative  sources  of 
external funds.  
financial  market, 
improving 
the  EU 
thus 
 To conclude, a lot has been achieved but a lot remains to be done in order to create a stable 
and efficient financial market in the Eurozone. In order to succeed, we must avoid piecemeal 
policies  and  work  in  order  to  reinforce  mutual  trust  at  the  international  level.  A 
comprehensive view of all the trade-offs entailed in the various policy measures is required in 
order  to  safeguard  the  stability  of  individual  financial  institutions,  with  the  key  objective  of 
ensuring the availability of resources for investment and economic growth.  
                                                
2   This  effort  is  being  undertaken  by  the  Pan-European  Private  Placement  Working  Group,  led  by  the 
International Capital Market Association. The European Council has welcomed these initiatives and invited the 
Commission to take stock of their outcome and consider at the same time how policy actions could play a 
supportive role in the development of a sustainable private placement market in the EU.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
