  François Groepe: The South African economy, policy mandates and 
international central bank cooperation 
Address by Mr François Groepe, Deputy Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at the 
Tenth  Annual  International  Operational  Risk  Working  Group  (IORWG)  Conference,  Cape 
Town, 22 April 2015. 
 Introduction 
Good evening ladies and gentlemen. I wish to extend a warm and hearty African welcome to 
you and I hope that you will thoroughly enjoy tonight’s gala dinner. 
It is my privilege and honour to host this gala dinner on the occasion of the Tenth Annual 
International  Operational  Risk  Working  Group  (IORWG)  Conference.  I  wish  to  personally 
thank  the  co-chairperson,  Ms  Donna  Brenner,  for  supporting  the  South  African  Reserve 
Bank’s  (SARB)  bid  to  host  this  important  conference  in  this  wonderful  city.  I,  furthermore, 
wish  to  express  my  sincerest  gratitude  to  all  the  delegates  and  their  spouses,  many  who 
have travelled from abroad for gracing us with your presence and contributing to the debates 
and the discussions. 
The SARB has enjoyed a long and beneficial relationship with the IORWG and all its member 
central  banks  and  it  is  my  wish  that  this  conference  will  further  cement  the  strong  and 
mutually beneficial bi- and multi-lateral relationships that have been built over many years. 
Before we proceed with dinner, I would like to share with you some thoughts about the South 
African economy and our policy mandates and the importance of international cooperation 
among central banks. 
South Africa and the global economy 
South Africa is a small open economy with a population of 54 million and a GDP of some 
USD  350  billion.  This  equates  to  a  GDP  per  capita  of  USD  5  900  and  USD  12  100  on  a 
purchasing power parity basis. The tertiary sector has expanded rapidly over the last decade 
or two and now accounts for nearly two thirds of the economy. One of the huge challenges 
the  country  faces  is  structural  unemployment,  which  is  around  24  per  cent  with  youth 
unemployment as high as 50 per cent. In order for the country to keep unemployment levels 
stable, the economy needs to grow at approximately 3 per cent per annum. 
The country’s economic recovery after the global financial crisis was initially broadly in line 
with the global recovery with economic growth registering at 3,0 per cent and 3,2 per cent in 
2010  and  2011,  respectively.  Since  2011,  the  economic  recovery  has  slowed  with  growth 
slowing to 2,2 per cent and 1,5 per cent in 2013 and 2014, respectively. 
Growth for 2015 is projected at 2,2 per cent and is notably lower than the pre-crisis growth 
rates.  In  recent  years  the  lower  growth  rates  was  attributable  to  significant  supply  side 
constraints and disruptions. The most recent electricity load shedding has become a more 
pronounced drag on real output and unfortunately is likely to be a binding constraint over the 
short to medium term. 
South Africa’s current account deficit has improved slightly from 5,8 per cent of GDP in 2013 
to  5,4  per  cent  in  2014.  Although  this  is  often  described  as  a  vulnerability,  it  is  somewhat 
mitigated by the fact that the public debt to GDP ratio is manageable at approximately 45 per 
cent,  a  fairly  small  percentage  of  the  public  debt  is  foreign  denominated  and  lastly,  the 
country’s net international investment position, (i.e. external financial assets minus liabilities) 
stood at only –R438 billion in the final quarter of 2014. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  The  South  African  Government  released  the  National  Development  Plan  some  two  years 
ago.  This  plan  offers  a  long-term  perspective  on  how  to  eliminate  poverty  and  reduce 
inequality  by  2030  by,  inter  alia,  growing  an  inclusive  economy,  building  capabilities,  and 
enhancing the capacity of the state. Should significant aspects of this plan be successfully 
implemented  over  the  next  decade  or  so,  it  will  contribute  positively  towards  lifting  the 
potential growth rate of the economy and causing unemployment and poverty levels to drop 
in a meaningful way. 
The slow growth rate referred to above, however, has not only been impacted by domestic 
idiosyncratic  factors  only.  Certain  exogenous  factors,  such  as  the  moderation  in  emerging 
market economies growth rates, weaker external demand and lower commodity prices have 
certainly contributed to the more pedestrian growth outcomes. 
The  unprecedented  extent  of  unconventional  monetary  policy  adopted  by  the  advanced 
economies  and  the  subsequent  commencement  by  the  US  on  the  path  towards  monetary 
policy normalisation has led to significant spill-over effects. This is as a result of the extent of 
global trade and the integration of financial markets and has contributed to the high levels of 
volatility seen in the foreign exchange markets. The rand/dollar exchange rate has depreciated 
by 4,96 per cent since the beginning of this year, but has appreciated by 7,25 per cent against 
the euro and hence, on a trade weighted basis the rand had been relatively stable. 
The  volatility  in  the  foreign  currency  exchange  markets  is  likely  to  persist  and  will  be 
amplified should the timing of the so-called lift-off differ from market expectations, or a Grexit 
occur.  The  emerging  market  economies  are  likely  to  be  affected  significantly  by  these 
developments  and  countries  with  weak  macro-economic  fundamentals  and  indicators  in 
particular are likely to be most vulnerable. 
The role of the SARB in the economy 
The Constitution mandates the SARB to protect the value of the currency in the interest of 
balanced  and  sustainable  economic  growth.  We  strive  to  achieve  this  objective  within  a 
flexible inflation targeting framework as it is widely believed that price stability is a necessary 
pre-condition for balanced and sustainable growth. The global financial crisis has, however, 
demonstrated that price stability in, and of its own, is not sufficient to ensure that financial 
stability is achieved. 
This  resulted  in  the  Bank’s  mandate  of  price  stability  being  expanded  to  include  the 
additional  responsibility  of  overseeing  and  maintaining  the  stability  of  the  broader financial 
system. South Africa has opted to shift to a Twin Peaks model of financial sector regulation 
which  represents  a  move  away  from  a  fragmented  regulatory  approach  (based  on  the 
institution  or  activity)  towards  a  regulatory  and  supervision  model  based  on  objectives.  In 
terms  of  proposed  legislation,  the  Bank  will  house  the  Prudential  Authority,  which  would 
supervise  the  safety  and  soundness  of  banks,  insurance  companies  and  other  financial 
institutions,  while  the  market  conduct  authority  would  supervise  the  way  in  which  financial 
services firms conduct themselves and treat their customers. 
These  reform  forms  part  of  the  current  broader  overhaul  of  the  global  regulatory  system, 
which  aims  to  address  the  too-big-to-fail  problem  of  systemically  important  financial 
institutions,  building  resilient  financial  institutions,  reducing  the  opacity  of  over-the-counter 
derivatives markets, mitigating the impact of shadow banking on financial stability, enhancing 
financial benchmark transparency, and promoting the convergence of accounting standards. 
The importance of international dialogue and ERM frameworks for central banks 
The increased connectedness of the world, within which we operate, has necessitated closer 
cooperation and coordination within the central bank community. The need for this has once 
again been highlighted by the global financial crisis and the subsequent attempts to not only 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  restart  the  global  economy  but  also  to  undertake  an  ambitious  global  regulatory  reform 
agenda in order to address and avoid the excesses and imbalances that led to it. 
This  illustrates  the  importance  of  collaboration  between  central  banks.  Without  strong 
international leadership and active collaboration it would not have been possible to progress 
the overhaul of the global regulatory system to the extent that had been achieved. 
The expanded mandate of central banks may in the longer-term lead to demands for greater 
accountability and potentially attempts to curtail their independence. It is, therefore, important 
that central banks are proactive in further improving accountability and transparency and to 
ensure that their governance standards are beyond reproach. Central to such a governance 
framework is the risk management policy framework. 
This conference provides a platform for collaborating, sharing experiences and thoughts and 
addressing  common  challenges  together.  It  provides  a  useful  opportunity  to  leverage  and 
learn from the experiences of how best to ensure that the risks, that inhibit achievement of 
our objectives, are properly identified and mitigated. 
It is generally accepted that central banks were late movers into the area of true Enterprise 
Risk Management (ERM), due to the strong emphasis on financial risk management. It soon 
became apparent that this is not sufficient and that operational risk management had to be 
brought into sharper focus. It is important that central banks move to the next phase which 
would  require  a  greater  appreciation  of  the  importance  of  integrating  all  risk  management 
across a central bank’s operations in the mould of a true ERM approach. This will assist in 
ensuring that strategic risks, policy risks, and reputational risks are holistically integrated with 
operational risk management. 
The  IORWG  has  played,  and  I  believe  will  continue  to  play,  a  vital  role  facilitating  this 
broadening of the risk management frameworks within the broader central bank community. I 
have further been encouraged by the fact that many of you are appreciative of the need to 
move in that direction. There is no doubt that there may be some resistance to the expansion 
of the risk management frameworks to cover policy risks within central banks. 
I  am,  therefore,  proud  that  I  am  able  to  share  with  you  that  South  Africa  has  recently 
expanded its risk management framework to cover policy risks and we have completed an 
assessment  of  monetary  policy  risks.  We  further  envisage  incorporating  financial  stability 
policy  into  our  risk  management  framework  once  we  have  implemented  the  proposed 
financial regulatory architecture reforms. 
In the light of what I have said, I hope you would forgive me for being so bold as to suggest 
that the IORWG may wish to consider changing its name to better reflect this structural shift. 
It may choose to consider replacing the word OPERATIONAL with ORGANISATIONAL in the 
IORWG acronym. 
Conclusion 
Central  banks  have  many  functions  and  operations  that  underlie  their  primary  goals. 
Enterprise risk management is a key assurance activity that allows central banks to pursue 
their mandates effectively and efficiently. This is vital given the escalation in the challenges 
that they face such as the growing threat of concerted cyber-attacks to name but a single 
example. 
I, therefore, challenge you to take forward the many themes covered here this week and to 
continue to collaborate in the cooperative spirit you have shown in the past to find ways to 
meet the  threats facing us  all.  Your  institutions, your  countries,  your fellow  countrymen,  in 
fact the whole world will thank you for assisting your institutions in realising their mandates in 
support  of  economic  growth,  keeping  prices  stable,  achieving  and  maintaining  financial 
stability and keeping unemployment levels in check. 
Thank you for your attention, and enjoy the rest of the evening with us in this lovely setting. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
