  Muhammad bin Ibrahim: Shariah issues and Malaysia’s Islamic financial 
sector 
Speech  by  Mr  Muhammad  bin  Ibrahim,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Malaysia 
(Bank Negara Malaysia), at the “Muzakarah Cendekiawan Syariah Nusantara Ke-9”, Jakarta, 
10 June 2015. 
 I  would  like  to  express  my  gratitude  to  Allah  Almighty  for  His  grace  that  the  9th  Regional 
Shari’ah Scholar Dialogue could be held here in the city of Jakarta. This is the second time 
the Dialogue is held in Jakarta since 2009. 
I would like to congratulate the organizers; Universitas Islam Negeri Syarif Hidayatullah (UIN) 
Jakarta  and  the  International  Shariah  Research  Academy  for  Islamic  Finance  or  ISRA  for 
their initiatives in organising this Dialogue. 
This Dialogue was initiated in 2006 by Bank Negara Malaysia and subsequently led by ISRA. 
Our sole intention has always been to promote mutual understanding and close collaboration 
among  Islamic  scholars  in  this  region  on  issues  relating  to  fiqh  muamalat  and  Islamic 
finance. Through this platform, the vision is to generate new ideas and views among scholars 
in  an  atmosphere  of  tolerance  and  mutual  respect,  irrespective  of  our  different  cultures, 
economic and political structures. 
Today, I would like to share my views on the following three areas: - 
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
Strengthening the role of Shariah scholars; 
Fostering the dynamism of ijtihad in a contemporary setting; and 
Cultivating the spirit of mutual respect within the diversity of Shariah interpretations. 
Strengthening the role of Shariah scholars 
The Islamic financial landscape today has undergone various transformations and progress 
over the last 10 years. This transformation can be testified in the increase of global banking 
assets  that  had  reached  nearly  USD1.5  trillion,  total  outstanding  sukuk  amounting  to 
USD295  billion,  Islamic  fund  assets  amounting  to  USD76  billion  as  well  as  the  takaful 
contributions of USD21 billion (Source: IFSB: 1H 2014). In addition, there has been a marked 
increase in the participation from non-Muslim jurisdictions in Islamic finance, particularly in 
sukuk issuances, reflecting the increasingly positive reception of Islamic finance among the 
global  community.  The  sukuk  instrument,  in  particular,  is  among  the  most  innovative 
instruments and favoured by governments and multinational corporations. 
In response to these developments, the role of and the expectation on Shariah scholars will 
be  more  challenging  in  finding  solutions  to  emerging  new  Shariah  issues  that  require 
immediate  responses  from  the  Shariah  fraternity.  To  me,  changes  in  the  Islamic  financial 
landscape should be viewed as a golden opportunity for the Shariah experts to demonstrate 
the  dynamism  of  the  Islamic  religion  as  perpetually  modern  and  evolving  through  time. 
Therefore, it is my hope that the role of the Shariah scholars could be further enhanced and 
not confined solely to only ensuring and monitoring the Shariah compliance aspects. 
In  relation  to  this,  I  am  also  of  the  opinion  that  researches  and  thorough  deliberations  on 
Shariah  need  to  consider  other  fields  of  disciplines  in  order  for  the  ijtihad  (reasoning)  or 
Shariah  decisions  to  be  comprehensive,  inclusive  and  practical.  This  will  become 
increasingly  important  when  it  involves  strategies  and  positioning  of  the  “ummah”  in  the 
economic sector. Shariah assessments that include input and findings of multiple disciplines 
as  well  as  variations  of  insights  will  provide  more  added  values  to  a  particular  Shariah 
research. This effort can be implemented through active involvement of professionals in the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  process of researching Shariah issues. I am confident that through this approach, we will be 
able  to  formulate  a  collective  ijtihad  that  is  comprehensive,  in  comparison  to  ijtihad  that  is 
peripheral and exclusive. 
In  the  Malaysian  context,  we  have  decided  to  encourage  the  combined  expertise  and 
experience between Shariah members and professionals through the Shariah committees of 
Islamic  financial  institutions.  In  fact,  we  also  encourage  qualified  Shariah  scholars  to  be 
appointed  as  members of  Board  of  Directors  at  Islamic financial  institutions,  specifically  to 
form  a  “bridge”  or  point  of  connection  between  the  Board  and  the  Shariah  Committee 
members,  and  to  allow  them  to  gain  greater  exposure  to  the  operational  situation  in  the 
management  of  Islamic  financial  institutions.  The  process  of  knowledge  sharing  and 
discussions on Shariah as well as on other realms of Islamic knowledge among the Board 
members  of  a  particular  financial  institution  will  enrich  the  justifications  of  a  particular 
deliberation before a decision is made. 
Another  key  aspect  is  the  importance  of  Shariah  scholars  to  thoroughly  understand  the 
impact  of  ijtihad  on  the  growth  of  the  Islamic  finance  industry  and  society  at  large.  Every 
ijtihad should always be geared towards fostering harmony and not widening the differential 
gaps.  If  a  gap  exists  even  in  the  matter  of  perception,  it  may  raise  doubt  and  reduce  the 
effectiveness  of  a  Shariah  decision. In this  context,  the  majority  of the Shariah  Committee 
members in the Islamic financial institutions in Malaysia are currently undergoing the Shariah 
Leadership  Education (SLE)  programme that  commenced  early  this  year. This  programme 
aims  to  provide  exposure  to  the  Shariah  members  on  the  fundamentals  of  finance  and  to 
foster  greater  understanding  on  their  roles  and  responsibilities  in  shaping  the  direction  of 
Islamic  finance  in  Malaysia.  The  objective  is  also  to  ensure  that  all  operational,  legal  and 
Shariah aspects are taken into consideration before any Shariah decision is made. 
Aspect of Ijtihad in a contemporary setting 
The  second  point  that  I  would  like  to  share  is  on  the  aspect  of  ijtihad  in  a  contemporary 
setting. In line  with the maturity of the Islamic financial industry, issues  relating to Shariah 
have also becoming increasingly complex and challenging. Fundamentally, the ijtihad formed 
by the Shariah experts need to be based on the rules and principles of Islamic law. At the 
same  time,  the  Shariah  Committee  members  need  to  also  examine  and  understand  the 
contemporary  environment 
field  of 
communication technology. 
I would like to cite the following legal maxim: 
is  constantly  changing  especially 
that 
the 
in 
which means “the law on a matter depends on the perspective on the matter.” 
 states that “the law may change over time, place and background.” The application of this 
method is more evident in matters relating to ijtihad where the preservation of the benefit of 
the  society  is  paramount.  I  always  believe  that  when  the  contemporary  environment  and 
current reality are taken into consideration in any Shariah research, the ijtihad will be more 
substantive and mature while not compromising with the principles of Shariah. 
 2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  It is also important to stress on the need to document the decisions and resolutions of the 
Shariah  in  a  structured  and  orderly  manner,  supported  by  the  richness  of  the  debates  in 
arriving to the decisions. This is integral as a starting point to facilitate discussions among 
Shariah experts, either domestically and internationally to encourage greater understanding 
and clarity of this treasure of knowledge. It can also serve to provide guidance and culture of 
knowledge that can be inherited by future generations. And more importantly, opinions and 
justifications for a particular deduction must be documented. 
The spirit of mutual respect within the diversity of Shariah interpretations 
The third point that I wish to share is fostering mutual respect in dealing with diverse Shariah 
interpretations. Differences in views and opinions among scholars are inherent in the area of 
Shariah, particularly in fiqh. In ibadah (worship), there are times when differences of opinions 
become a blessing as they provide us a way out of a difficulty in performing a particular act of 
worship. In addition, specific act of worship deals with our relationship with Allah. Even in the 
history of Islamic civilisation, the differences in opinions and views were the main reasons for 
the Islamic civilisation to progress rapidly. 
In  the  context  of  the  muamalat,  differences  of  views  would  be  more  prevalent  due  to  the 
diversity  in  the  background,  culture,  and  society  that  will  inevitably  result  in  various 
interpretations  on  a  particular  issue.  On  one  hand,  this  could  be  deemed  positive  as  it 
broadens the scope for Shariah scholars to make references and to understand the reasons 
and wherefores of the Shariah law. On the other hand, in the context of muamalat, it may 
lead to difficulties in managing transactions given that different interpretations may hamper 
parties to contract seamlessly. This is particularly evident in an Islamic financial system that 
is regulated by the central bank that usually places emphasis on standardising in its policies 
and market practices as to ensure consistency in compliance among the financial institutions. 
In this regard, I would like to suggest the following points which could serve as basis for the 
solutions to the impediments that I have mentioned earlier: - 
i. 
This Dialogue should strive for all scholars to agree on important Shariah issues that 
can be used as basis and guidance for the industry practitioners. For example, all 
jurists in the region could agree that the tawarruq contract can be used in certain 
circumstances, and cannot be used in other circumstances; 
This  Dialogue  could  agree  to  disagree  on  specific  Shariah  issues,  and  not  only 
taking respect those of different views, but also to defend the right of a jurisdiction in 
the region using arguments that may be seen controversial to others. Let’s assume 
Malaysia  allows  the  use  of  Bai  ‘Dayn  in  certain  circumstances,  but  another 
jurisdiction  disagrees  with  this  decision.  Nevertheless,  the  decision  made  by  the 
Malaysian jurists to allow Bai ‘Dayn is respected and in the spirit of Nusantara, will 
defend Malaysia’s right to use such contract as it is made in accordance with the 
culture, tradition as well as existing economic system and legislation. 
This  Dialogue  should  explore  a  collaborative  approach  to  develop  a  Shariah 
framework that is standardised at the regional level. Malaysia has embarked on this 
initiative with the development of 13 Shariah standards. It would be desirable if other 
countries in the region can also develop equivalent standards that could eventually 
be consolidated as Shariah standards that are applicable to the whole region and to 
even serve as benchmarks to other Muslim countries. 
ii. 
iii. 
Conclusion 
The rapid transformation of the Islamic financial sector will certainly affect the ascertainment 
of  Islamic  law  on  contemporary  issues.  This  change  requires  the  readiness  of  Shariah 
scholars to play a greater role and to interact with others from various disciplines to enrich 
and  enhance  ijtihad  with  new  perspectives,  against  the  backdrop  of  a  contemporary 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  landscape.  This  innovation  will  only  be  generated  through  the  openness  of  minds  and  a 
paradigm shift, based on sound understanding of the Shariah objectives. As the vanguard of 
Islamic finance, it is the responsibility of Shariah scholars to promote best practices in the 
Shariah  fraternity  through  an  inclusive  and  contemporary  ijtihad,  in  line  with  the  rapidly 
evolving operating environment. 
Finally, I pray that the discussions will run smoothly and will achieve the intended objectives. 
On this note, I end my speech with the words of Imam Ibn Taymiyyah,: 
“Surely among the main thrusts in a religion is the union of hearts, the unison of 
views and easing of disputes conducted in a good way.” 
Wabillahi taufik wal hidayah. Assalamu’alaikum warahmatullahi wabarakatuh. 
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
