  Muhammad bin Ibrahim: Malaysia’s “My Ringgit” mobile app and the use 
of ink staining technology for ATMs 
Keynote  address  by  Mr  Muhammad  bin  Ibrahim,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of 
Malaysia (Bank Negara Malaysia), at the Launching of “My Ringgit” Mobile Application and 
Ink-Stain Technology, Kuala Lumpur, 11 May 2015. 
 I wish to welcome you to this event, first to launch a mobile app My Ringgit which aims to 
provide members of public with a tool to obtain information on the security features of our 
currency;  and  second  to  launch  an  ink  staining  technology  as  an  innovative  solution  or 
approach against any attacks on our ATMs. 
Malaysia has one the lowest counterfeit rates in the world. Indeed, if compared to developed 
economies.  Malaysia’s  counterfeit  rate  is  2  per  million  pieces  compared  to  development 
economies which range between 48 to 100 pieces to a million. Our counterfeit rate is only a 
fraction of the rate experienced by these countries. Most counterfeits found in circulation in 
Malaysia  were  of  low  quality  produced  using  colour  printers  without  any  security  features. 
Empirically no counterfeit notes have ever passed through the sophisticated cash processing 
machines used by Bank Negara or financial institutions. This is because there is a spectrum 
of advanced security features embedded in our currency. 
Nevertheless, from time to time we keep hearing cases that the general public inadvertently 
receive counterfeit notes in the course of doing business. In most cases, counterfeit notes 
managed  to  pass  through  because  the  victims  were  too  busy  and  casual  to  check  their 
currency  notes  properly.  This  is  indeed  unfortunate  and  certainly  avoidable  if  we  are  a  bit 
more vigilant and aware of some security features found in our currency. 
Our currency notes are designed to protect against any forms of counterfeiting from the most 
basic  to  the  most  sophisticated.  However,  even  the  best  security  features  and  technology 
that are available will not help unless members of the public are adequately educated on the 
basic security characteristics of our currency notes. 
The security features in our currency notes utilise the latest technology and have stood the 
test  of  time.  For  example,  “Intaglio”  or  raised  printing  effect,  one  of  the  most  well-known 
security element found in almost every currency in the world, have never been featured on 
any counterfeits generated by colour printers. If only the general public is aware and able to 
identify of this particular security feature, they should be able to detect ninety nine percent of 
counterfeits in Malaysia and the world over. 
Intaglio  by  no  means  is  the  only  security  feature.  There  are  many  more  watermark, 
electrotype  numeral,  see-through  register  mark,  windowed  colour  shifting  security  threads 
with texts, hologram stripe, gold patch, to name a few, are among the basic security features 
that  we  should  know  on  our  currency  notes.  All  this  features  can  be  easily  be  verified  or 
authenticated using the “FLTC” method, that is to Feel, Look, Tilt and Check without using 
sophisticated devices. 
Indeed, it will take only a few seconds to authenticate our currency notes. For example, to 
apply the simplest “Look” technique, what is needed is only for us to hold the currency notes 
against  a  light.  This  will  allow  us  to  verify  simultaneously  at  least  four  important  security 
features in all of our currency notes; the 3D Agong’s watermark, bright electrotype numeral, 
perfectly register see-through mark or windowed colour shifting security threads with texts. 
This  technique  is  the  easiest  and  the  simplest  manner  as  no  special  gadget  is  required. 
Coupled with a few other techniques contained in the My Ringgit apps we can make a firm 
conclusion on the authenticity of the currency notes. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
Similarly,  our  new  coins  are  also  sufficiently  protected  by  unique  security  features.  In  the 
course of designing the coins, the Bank had engaged with various stakeholders to ensure 
that  the  new  coins  are  not  only  practical  but  sufficiently  protected  as  well.  Each  coin 
denomination  is  unique  in  term  of  size  and  security  features  to  ensure  no  fake  coins  can 
pass through the coin authentication machines. 
As part of our financial education effort, Bank Negara today is launching a mobile application 
called  My  Ringgit.  This  application  enables  the  general  public  to  learn  about  the  most 
practical and easiest techniques to authenticate our currencies and learn in greater detail the 
security  features  found  in  our  currency  notes.  There  are  numerous  security  features  but 
fortunately,  we  need  to  know  only  a  few  major  ones  to  enable  us  to  tell  the  difference 
between genuine and counterfeit notes. It would be in our interest to download and use this 
application  so  that  we  are  able  to  differentiate  a  genuine  and  a  counterfeit  note.  In  the 
process, we will get to know and appreciate better our unique characteristics of the design 
and security features of our currencies. 
The  My  Ringgit  application  also  contains  useful  information  on  the  locations  of  the  coin 
deposit machines of participating institutions throughout Malaysia. Users of this app will also 
receive a “Push Notification” message from time to time on news relevant to our currency like 
issuance of a new commemorative coin. 
Protecting our currency against being forged is critical but protecting it against being stolen is 
also as important. In the last few years, our ATMs have been the frequent target of criminals 
that  has  impacted  the  general  public  perception  on  the  security  of  the  banking  industry’s 
ATMs. Many defective and preventive measures have been taken by financial institutions to 
protect the safety of ATMs such as relocating the ATMs to a safer location, strengthening the 
ATM security panel, installing bollards or even replacing obsolete ATMs. We are appreciative 
of  the  police  who  have  played  a  significant  role  in  improving  the  ATMs’  security.  Bank 
Negara and financial institutions will always stand ready to assist the police in ensuring the 
security of our ATMs. 
We are very pleased to note collaboration by all parties in particular the financial industry has 
brought positive result with the declined number of ATM robberies being reported last year 
compared to 2013. I am also very pleased to note the industry continues to collaborate to 
enhance ATMs’ security. 
Today,  marks  another  significant  milestone  in  our  payment  system  progression  with  the 
launching of an ink staining technology for our ATMS. ATMs fitted with this technology are 
protected  by  a  security  device  containing  a  special  ink  that  will  smear  the  currency  note. 
When there is an attempt to temper the protected ATM, the security device will be triggered 
to release the ink, staining the currency notes on all corners. This ink is indelible and can be 
traceable  to  a  particular  financial  institution that  dispensed  the  currency  notes; thus  it  can 
assist  the  police  more  effectively  in  their  course  of  investigation.  More  importantly  stained 
currency  notes  will  lose  their  legal  tender.  Stained  currency  notes  are  valueless  to  the 
criminals  but the  owner of  the  currency  notes (the financial  institutions) can  exchange  the 
currency notes with the Central Bank. These stained currency notes cannot be brought back 
to circulation as they are not a legal tender anymore. 
To make the initiative effective and our ATMs safe, members of the public also have a civic 
duty to play. They must be vigilant when receiving stained currency notes, which most likely 
are stolen currency notes. Under section 24(1) read together with section 25 of the Central 
Bank  of  Malaysia  Act  1958  (Part  III  of  this  Act  is  still  in  force),  such  defaced  or  stained 
currency notes are no longer legal tender and therefore should be rejected by members of 
the public. Bank Negara has issued a clear guideline on how financial institutions and the 
general public should treat and handle ink stained currency notes. Read together with the 
Panel Code (S411) it is an offence to dishonestly receive or retain any stolen property with 
knowledge or reasons to believe that it is a stolen. Therefore, it is an offence to retain or hold 
dye-stained  currency  notes  which  mostly  are  involved  in  a  robbery.  To  help  the  public,  in 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
identifying stained banknotes, we shall conduct awareness program to educate the public on 
this matter. 
It is with great pleasure that I launch the  My Ringgit apps and the use  of the ink staining 
technology for our ATMS. 
See also: Frequently Asked Questions. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
