  Luis M Linde: The current macroeconomic setting and outlook for the 
Spanish economy 
Testimony  by  Mr  Luis  M  Linde,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Spain,  before  the  Parliamentary 
Budget Committee in relation to the draft State Budget for 2016, Madrid, 18 August 2015. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
I appear before this Committee at the start of the discussion and approval process for the 
State Budget for 2016, the draft legislation for which was approved by the Government on 31 
July.  Let  me  begin  by  referring  to  the  current  macroeconomic  setting  and  outlook  for  the 
Spanish economy, after which I will move on to the core content of the draft Budget and to 
the relationship between fiscal policy and recovery in our economy. 
The external setting of the Spanish economy 
The international financial setting is marked by a degree of volatility. The ups and downs of 
the  negotiations  between  the  Greek  authorities  and  European  institutions  and  the  IMF, 
doubts over the economic situation in China and expectations about the normalisation of US 
monetary policy have given rise to uncertainty in the principal markets, leading to movements 
in share prices, long-term interest rates and exchange rates. 
The  agreement  reached  by  the  euro  area  Heads  of  State  and  of  Government  on  13  July 
paved the way for a third financial assistance programme for Greece. This agreement has 
reaffirmed  the  commitment  to  monetary  union,  patent  both  in  the  supportive  efforts  of  its 
members and in the observance of the common stability rules governing the functioning of 
the Monetary Union. 
The  negotiations  for  the  Third  Bailout  Programme  for  Greece  unfolded  as  scheduled,  and 
there is every indication the Programme will be launched immediately and that the day after 
tomorrow,  on  20  August,  the  Greek  authorities  will  be  able  to  meet  their  ECB  payments, 
thereby avoiding a default with dire consequences. 
This  third  bailout  is,  perhaps,  the  most  complex  and  demanding  of  those  so  far  agreed 
between Greece and the European authorities and the IMF. This is so, among other things, 
because  it  will  include  measures  to  reinforce  the  Greek  banking  system,  which  has  been 
greatly  affected  by  events  in  recent  months.  Evidently,  it  is  in  the  interest  of  all  euro  area 
members that the new Programme should be properly adhered to, and follow schedule, so 
that assessments of its implementation before year-end may be positive and provide for its 
full effectiveness and continuity. Needless to say, the fulfilment of this third programme will 
boost the growth of the Greek economy – the central and fundamental objective of this third 
assistance programme – and will strengthen the euro area and its stability as a whole. 
Recent  developments  on  the  international  economic  front  are  positive  in  terms  of  growth. 
While growth in both the Asian and Latin American emerging economies remains below par, 
the  latest  indicators  show  that  the  United  States  and  the  United  Kingdom  appear  to  have 
picked up speed, following the weak first-quarter results this year. 
Economic recovery is also holding up in the euro area. GDP grew by 0.4% in the first quarter 
of  this  year  and,  on  the  latest  preliminary  estimate  released  last  Friday,  by  0.3%  in  the 
second  quarter.  For  the  year  as  a  whole,  projections  envisage  figures  of  around  1.5%, 
considerably  up  on  end-2014  estimates.  Private  consumption  continues  to  be  the  driving 
force here, while the contribution of private investment remains moderate. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Turning to inflation, both actual and projected euro area rates have now turned around from 
the declining trajectory marking their path throughout 2014, but inflation is still some way off 
the ECB’s reference level of 2% for the euro area. 
The  favourable  performance  of  euro  area  economic  activity  and  prices  is  underpinned  by 
certain external factors, such as the pick-up in the global economy and lower oil prices, but 
also  by  other  factors  whose  origin  lies  in  the  economic  policy  decisions  adopted  by  the 
national governments and the European authorities. These include most notably the reforms 
undertaken in different countries and the more neutral stance of fiscal policies. 
In  any  event,  mention  should  be  made  of  the  contribution  of  monetary  policy  and  the 
significance of the decision adopted in January this year to enlarge the securities purchase 
programme with the inclusion of government debt securities. Since then, we have witnessed 
not only further monetary easing and the depreciation of the euro, but also a more uniform 
transmission of expansionary impulses to the various countries in the area and, in particular, 
to  those  such  as  Spain  which  were  comparatively  more  affected  by  the  fragmentation  of 
European financial markets. 
The latest monetary policy measures have translated into a significant improvement in the 
Spanish  economy’s  financing  conditions.  This  improvement  is  visible  not  only  in  the  lower 
cost of new funds, but also in a progressive –  but slow – normalisation of credit in Spain. 
Aggregate balances continue to post negative rates of change, reflecting the headway in the 
deleveraging  of  our  households  and  firms;  however,  these  rates  are  increasingly  less 
negative and are compatible with the growth of new financing flows. 
Performance of and outlook for the Spanish economy 
On preliminary estimates in late July, the Spanish economy is expected to have grown by 1% 
in the second quarter of this year. This growth rate highlights the dynamism of the current 
recovery phase, now under way for two years. 
Recent indicators suggest this expansionary trajectory will hold in the second half of the year. 
On the latest Banco de España estimates, GDP growth should be slightly over 3% this year 
and somewhat below that figure in 2016, meaning that growth in our economy will continue 
to outpace the euro area average. 
In  terms  of  composition,  national  demand  has  continued  to  expand  strongly.  After  several 
years of containment in household spending plans, the favourable course of their disposable 
income  coupled  with  brighter  job  prospects  and  readier  access  to  credit  have  been 
conducive to the growth of consumption. Real estate market indicators show a recovery in 
the sector which, while moderate and uneven across market segments and regions, is also 
contributing  to  rekindling  household  spending.  The  buoyancy  of  final  demand  and  the 
progressive normalisation of financial conditions have continued exerting a positive effect on 
business investment. 
The firming of the recovery in the euro area economy has helped compensate for the recent 
loss  of  momentum  in  some  non-Community  markets,  meaning  that  exports  maintain  high 
growth rates. Ongoing contributing factors are the gains in competitiveness in our economy, 
which reflect the containment of costs in recent years by Spanish firms and, more recently, 
the depreciation of the euro. Nonetheless, imports have responded forcefully to the pick-up in 
domestic spending (we should remember that gains and losses in competitiveness are felt 
abroad  but  also  at  home,  in  respect  of  imports),  which  has  led,  in  net  terms,  to  external 
demand generally not contributing to the increase in activity. 
The recovery in output has come in step with a more expansionary behaviour of employment 
than might have been foreseen on past patterns. According to official Spanish labour force 
data, from the second quarter of 2014 to the same period this year numbers employed are 
estimated to have increased by more than half a million, making for an appreciable reduction 
in the unemployment rate. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  The greater flexibility enjoyed by firms, following the reforms approved in 2012, in adjusting 
their  working  conditions  to  the  macroeconomic  and  competitive  setting  has  no  doubt 
provided for the creation of new jobs and, therefore, for the expansion of economic activity. If 
the  dynamics  of  the  past  18  months  hold,  the  increase  in  employment  might  place  the 
unemployment rate at around 20% in the fourth quarter of 2016. 
As to prices, the increases in activity and employment have been accompanied by very low 
inflation rates. The fall in oil prices has prompted declines in the general level of prices over 
much of the past year. Yet core inflation, the indicator that excludes energy and fresh food 
prices, has moved on a rising course over the year. And while still at moderate levels, this 
indicator’s recent trajectory suggests the risks of entering an overly prolonged period of very 
low inflation have progressively been dispelled. 
While in July the overall price index posted growth of 0.1%, influenced by fuel prices, inflation 
at the end of the year is expected to be around 1%. In any event, the still-high spare capacity 
in the economy presages a gradual recovery in inflation over the next two years. 
The factors underpinning the recovery 
The  path  of recovery  of  growth  and  employment  has  essentially  been  underpinned  by  the 
restoring of macroeconomic and financial equilibria, which were severely eroded in the crisis. 
Progress  has  been  visible  in  the  correction  of  the  external  imbalance,  the  deleveraging  of 
households and firms, the redressing of fiscal balances towards levels more compatible with 
the  sustainability  of  public  finances  and  the  restructuring  and  consolidation  of  the  banking 
sector. Unemployment, too, is showing clear signs of a correction. 
The  reforms  undertaken  within  Spain,  along  with  the  headway  in  economic  and  monetary 
union  and  the  application  of  the  highly  expansionary  monetary  policy  by  the  ECB,  have 
proven  key  to  restoring  confidence  and  providing  for  the  progressive  absorption  of  the 
imbalances.  By  way  of  illustration,  the  proportion  of  Spanish  public  debt  held  by  non-
residents  has  risen  from  30%  in  2012  to  44%  at  present,  an  increase  indicative  of  the 
improved confidence in our economy, but also of its dependence on the perception abroad of 
the  soundness  and  continuity  of  our recovery.  Despite  what  has  been  achieved  in  growth, 
employment  and  restoring  equilibria,  we  are  far  from  having  overcome  all  the  factors  of 
vulnerability.  Doubts  over  the  continuity  of  the  macroeconomic,  fiscal  and  financial  re-
balancing drive might curtail and lead to backtracking from these achievements. 
We must not forget that the legacy of the crisis is still burdensome. Our unemployment rate 
remains above 22%; households and firms are speedily reducing their high debt, but public 
debt as a proportion of GDP has increased by over 60 pp since 2007; and the economy’s 
financial dependence on the external sector remains high, with a net debtor position of close 
to 100% of GDP, far higher than in the other major euro area economies. Admittedly, though, 
a portion of the recent increase in this latter ratio is due to the recovery in the relative value 
of Spanish assets. 
It is thus essential to persevere with the policies that strengthen confidence in our economy. 
In  particular,  a  swifter  reduction  in  unemployment  and  ensuring  that  the  correction  of  the 
external imbalance continues calls for maintaining and, where possible, deepening gains in 
competitiveness. Budgetary policy, for its part, should provide for the stabilisation, first, and 
the  reduction,  subsequently,  of  the  public  debt/GDP  ratio.  I  shall  now  turn  to  budgetary 
policy. 
Budgetary policy in 2016 
The macroeconomic forecasts accompanying the draft State and Social Security Budget for 
2016  entail  the  prolongation  of  the  current  expansionary  phase.  They  estimate  a  3.0% 
increase in GDP in 2016, after a projected 3.3% increase for this year, rates that are slightly 
up  on  the  latest  Banco  de  España  forecast  but  that  are  of  course  feasible  in  the  current 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  setting. Based on these forecasts, growth will be accompanied by a mild pick-up in inflation, 
whose rate could average close to 1.1%, measured by the private consumption deflator. As a 
result, the increase in nominal GDP would be around 4%. 
At end-2015 the overall general government deficit target (4.2% of GDP) is expected to be 
met. For 2016, a deficit of 2.8% of GDP is targeted, which would involve attaining – for the 
first time since 2007 – a figure close to the 3% ceiling established in the Stability and Growth 
Pact. In turn, the public debt/GDP ratio would stand at 98.2% in 2016, having posted a figure 
of 98.7% at end-2015, which would mean a decline in this ratio for the first time since 2007. 
The macroeconomic scenario used to devise the Draft Budget is, as I earlier stated, and with 
slight upward differences, similar in terms of rates and composition to that I described when 
referring  to  the  Banco  de  España  forecasts  and,  more  generally,  to  the  consensus  of 
analysts. 
It  is  reasonable  to  expect  the  improved  cyclical  position  and  the  reduction  in  public  debt 
yields to have a positive direct effect on public finances. In this respect, the upward revision 
of  the  Spanish  economy’s  growth  prospects  means  that  the  budgetary  drive  required  to 
further  the  fiscal  consolidation  process,  measured  by  the  change  in  the  primary  structural 
balance,  will  be  very  limited,  in  line  with  the  latest  Updated  Stability  Programme,  which 
anticipated that the fiscal policy stance would be essentially neutral in the 2015–2018 period. 
Naturally, any slippage in growth or rise in financing costs would hamper fiscal consolidation, 
making the process more demanding. 
In  2016,  according  to  the  draft  State  Budget, the  planned  reduction  in  the  deficit  will  stem 
firstly  from  lower  public  spending,  whose  ceiling  for  the  year  as  a  whole,  excluding  that 
derived from local and regional government financing arrangements, will entail a reduction of 
4.4% in relation to that set for 2015. 
The key expenditure-side measures are the 1% increase in the remuneration of public sector 
employees  and  the  refund  in  2016  of  the  remaining  50%  of  the  extra  salary  payment 
eliminated in 2012. With regard to public employment, a standard 50% replacement rate has 
been established for public-sector vacancies, rising to 100% in priority sectors. Overall, these 
measures would lead to growth of 2.7% in wage expenses in the State Budget relative to the 
2015  Budget  outturn  projection.  The  restrictions  on  current  expenditure  on  goods  and 
services are maintained, with a 14% reduction. 
Notable with regard to the Social Security system is the 0.25% revaluation of pensions, in 
keeping  with  the  provisions  of  the  2013  reform.  The  projected  growth  in  spending  on 
contributory pensions in relation to the initial 2015 budget is rather higher, at 2.8%. This is as 
a result of the foreseeable increase in the number of pensions and of the substitution effect 
in terms of new pension claimants as opposed to deregistered pensioners, meaning that the 
weight of pensions spending relative to total consolidated spending of the State and Social 
Security  system  rises  to  38.5%  (37.8%  in  2015).  Mention  should  also  be  made  of  the 
reduction  in  spending  on  unemployment  benefits,  by  21.9%  relative  to  the  initial  2015 
Budget. This is due to the fall in unemployment and in the coverage rate of the contributory 
benefit, which is partly offset by a shift in beneficiaries to non-contributory benefits, such as 
reinsertion scheme income and economic assistance under the activation programme for the 
unemployed. 
Finally, a further decline in the interest burden on government debt is foreseen as a result of 
the reduction in interest rates. 
On the revenue side, the main measures include the application of the second phase of the 
corporate income tax reform, and the impact over a full year of the related personal income 
tax reform. It is estimated the budgetary cost of these measures will be offset by the increase 
in  revenue  attributable  to  greater  economic  activity.  Specifically,  tax  revenue  before 
assignment to local and regional governments is expected to increase by 6.2% relative to the 
2015 budget outturn projection, and Social Security contributions by 6.6% compared with the 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  initial  budget  for  2015,  which,  given  the  macroeconomic  forecast  and  the  impact  of  the 
aforementioned tax reforms, would signify a greater response by revenue to the pattern of 
economic activity than that historically observed. 
The uncertainty habitually surrounding estimates of the impact of tax changes, which peaks 
at times of marked cyclical swings, will call over the rest of 2015 and in 2016 for a monitoring 
of revenue that enables risks of slippage to be identified and pre-emptive action to prevent 
such risks materialising. 
Notably, in a country as decentralised as Spain where more than 40% of public spending is 
by  local  and  regional government,  the  Budget  affecting  central government  and the  Social 
Security system offers a partial view of the budgetary policy for next year. We must wait until 
October for the 2016 budgetary plan for the overall general government sector, including the 
regional  and  local  governments.  It  is  that  document  which  will  allow  a  full  analysis  of  the 
budgetary  forecasts  for  next  year  and  which  is,  indeed,  the  draft  on  which  basis  the 
European  Commission  will  deliver  judgement  in  autumn,  under  the  new  European 
governance arrangements. 
Meeting  our  fiscal  consolidation  commitments  remains  the  best  anchor  for  preserving 
credibility  and  for  ensuring,  first,  the  stabilisation  of  the  level  of  public  debt  and, 
subsequently, its reduction. In this respect, the different tiers of government (central, regional 
and local) must fulfil these commitments to the same degree of stringency. The Budgetary 
Stability Law has instruments at its disposal to achieve this aim. 
Conclusions 
I  shall  now  sum  up.  Compared  with  past  experience  in  Spain,  we  are  currently  in  a  fairly 
exceptional  situation:  GDP  and  employment  are  growing  at  over  3%,  and  the  economy  is 
maintaining  its  gains  in  competitiveness  vis-à-vis  the  external  sector,  whereby  our  exports 
continue to increase their market share and we continue to run a substantial external surplus. 
This  combination,  which  has  arisen  solely  over  very  short  periods  in  Spain’s  economic 
history in recent decades, obviously does not in itself guarantee any continuation, nor does it 
mean that Spain has managed to sufficiently overcome the consequences of the crisis that 
broke in 2007, as indeed the unemployment and foreign debt figures, among others, testify. 
Continuing to pursue fiscal consolidation policies – the only means of containing the increase 
in public debt relative to GDP and bringing about its subsequent reduction – and the policies 
that  have  brought  about  our  gains  in  competitiveness  will  prove  pivotal  to  controlling  our 
financing  costs,  our  balance  of  payments  and,  of  course,  the  capacity  of  our  economy  to 
generate employment. 
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
