  Denton Rarawa: Launch of Solomon Islands’ new $100 banknote 
Speech  by  Mr  Denton  Rarawa,  Governor  of  Central  Bank  of  Solomon  Islands,  on  the 
occasion of the launch of Solomon Islands’ new $100 banknote, Honiara, 10 April 2015. 
 PS Fanega: PS Ministry of Development Planning & Aid Coordination 
Senior Government Officials 
City Mayor of Honiara, Hon Alfrence Fatai 
Archbishop Adrian Smith 
Diplomatic Corps 
CBSI Board of Directors – past and present 
De La Rue Regional Manager – Ms Brooke Banks 
Bank Managers – ANZ, BSP, WBC & POB 
Managers of non-bank financial institutions and SOEs 
Representatives of SMEs and SIWIBA 
Members of the Press 
Ladies and Gentlemen; 
On behalf of the Board of Directors, Management and Staff of the Central Bank of Solomon 
Islands, it is with great pleasure that I welcome you all to this event marking the launch of the 
new  $100  banknote  this  afternoon  in  Honiara.  I  understand  that  many  people  in  the  rural 
areas are tuning into SIBC to listen to this program. I thank you for doing so and, welcome 
you  to  this  program.  I  also  acknowledge  the  presence  of  Ms  Brooke  Banks,  Regional 
Manager – Oceania Region, De La Rue Currency on this occasion. Thank you for availing 
your time, to come and celebrate another milestone in the history of our Banknotes and, of 
course, the history of CBSI. 
Theme & design of the banknote 
The theme of the $100 banknote is rural life and copra as a major economic activity in the 
rural areas. As you will observe, we are not making significant changes to the major design 
theme of the $100 note. The Bank decided that the major theme on the new $100 banknote 
carries  significant  historical  developments  in  the  country’s  economic  journey  since  it  came 
under British Protectorate some one hundred twenty odd years ago1. During those days, the 
European  export  economy  was  based  on  pearl-shell  and  turtle  shell,  bêche-de-mer  and  a 
small amount of copra. Hence one can imagine what the Solomon Islands colonial economy 
was founded on in the early days. Even at independence in 1978, copra accounted for one 
quarter  of  the  new  nation’s  export  earnings.  Thirty-six  years  on,  copra  still  accounts  for  a 
descent amount of the country’s export base. 
Hence, it is only fitting that we commemorate the copra industry on our high value banknote. 
Additionally,  we  continue  to  value  the  contributions  of  people  living  in  rural  areas,  thus 
maintained the secondary theme of rural livelihood on the $100 denomination. You will agree 
with me this afternoon that most of us working and living in Honiara have connections with 
                                                
1  C M Woodford, the first Resident Commissioner, arrived in 1896. The Protectorate over the southern islands 
was declared in 1893 and administration of the Protectorate was done from Suva, Fiji. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  our  rural  communities.  Some  of  us,  in  our  early  days,  relied  on  the  little  income  that  our 
parents  and  grandparents  obtained  from  selling  copra  and  marine  products  to  pay  for  our 
school fees and the basic necessities we needed at school. In most rural villages today, the 
income they got from selling copra still sustains the family and pays for school fees, church 
contributions  and  pocket  money.  Hence,  it  is  not  questionable  that  the  coconut  tree  is 
referred to as the tree of life as it does not only provide income and food but parts of the tree 
are  useful  to  the  rural  man  and  woman  for  weaving  baskets,  fishing,  building  houses, 
medicine, a form of alcohol beverage, jam and the list goes on. 
Contributions to the economic base 
At the national government level, successive governments have encouraged rural people to 
participate  in  economic  development  activities  through  the  agriculture  sector.  Copra  being 
one  of  the  key  export  revenue  earners  continues  to  get  the  attention  of  responsible 
authorities  in  the  government  and  the  private  sector.  In  terms  of  contribution  to  export 
receipts, copra ranks 5th highest amongst other products that are exported by the country. 
About a third of the country’s population depend on copra as a source of income. In 2014, 
copra production totalled 19,101 metric tonnes or 3.2% as a share of total exports. This is a 
notable increase from 1.8% in 2013 in terms of share of total exports. The statistics speak 
volumes of the level of sustainability and resilient of this sector despite strong competitions 
from other agricultural products that fetch higher prices on the international market. On the 
other  hand,  the  relatively  slow  growth  in  the  industry  signals  the  dire  need  to  clean  the 
plantations  which  perhaps  are  ageing,  invest  in  more  efficient  methods  of  copra  drying  to 
achieve  quality  output,  support  local  businesses  who  are  currently  going  into  downstream 
processing of copra and protect our coconut plantations from pests. 
Our new $100 banknote 
Now,  let  me  turn  to  the  new  $100  banknote.  To  ensure  that  our  new  notes  benefit  from 
technical  advances  that  have  been  introduced  in  banknote  security,  the  Bank  decided  to 
have the optiks security feature on the new $100 banknote. This feature, which is a super 
wide security thread with a transparent “window” that is highly secure and extremely difficult 
to replicate successfully, is the most visible security feature on the $100 note. 
With  regards  to  the  design,  the  note  designers  have  added  some  attractive  motifs  to  the 
designs  on  the  existing  $100  banknote  to  gives  us  yet  another  beautiful  banknote  that 
portrays  the  unique  and  diverse  cultural  heritage  of  our  happy  isles.  In  that  connection,  I 
would  like  to  acknowledge  Professor  Les  Tickle,  Dr  Adrian  Allen,  Ms.  Barbara  House  and 
late Sister Claire O’Brian for their contributions in terms of the motifs from the book ‘Images 
and Islands’ that they co-authored which some of the designs now feature on our notes. You 
will find some of these designs on both the top and bottom pattern bars on the new $100 
note. 
Today, looking at the beautiful note in front of me, I can confidently say that all the work that 
went into this project has been worth the time and effort spent. 
On behalf of the Board of Directors, management and Staff of the CBSI, I would like to thank 
all those  who have helped us to make this project successful. In particular, I would like to 
thank the Government for supporting our recommendation. I would like to thank the Board of 
CBSI for having faith in the Bank’s ability to deliver this reform. I would like to thank members 
of the Currency Committee, chaired by Deputy Governor, Mr Gane Simbe, who have worked 
tirelessly to meet the Project milestones. I would also like to register my thanks to Mr. Daniel 
Haridi,  Chief  Manager  Currency  &  Banking  Operations  Department,  who  provided  the  link 
between  the  Bank  and  De  La  Rue  in  matters  relating  to  this  project.  On  the  same  tone,  I 
would like to thank our note supplier, De La Rue Currency, who is represented here today by 
its Regional Manager responsible for the Oceania region, Ms Brooke Banks and also sincere 
thanks to Ms. Gill Sugg – the Manager responsible for this project in the United Kingdom. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Thank you so much for your professional assistance that has helped the Bank to meet its 
deliverables since the concept stage of the project about two years ago. 
Conclusion 
In closing, I would like to remind the good people of Solomon Islands that the Government 
spends a lot of money each time it replenishes its stock of currency notes and coins. Hence, 
people  must  be  responsible  for  currency  notes  and  coins  in  their  possession.  Again,  I 
reiterate  that  people  must  USE  the  notes  and  not  store  them  in  containers  and  under 
mattresses. 
Our  currency  notes  and  coins  fuel  economic  activities  for  a  vibrant  Solomon  Islands. 
Solomon Islands is indeed a vibrant nation that is forward looking but has not forgotten its 
cultural heritage. 
Thank you all for sharing this day with us. We greatly value and appreciate your presence 
here. 
Official launch 
With these few words, Your Excellencies, Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I  now  have  the  honour  and  privilege  to  call  upon  PS  Fanega  –  senior  government 
representative  and  former  PS  of  Finance  –  whose  signature  is  also  on  the  new  $100 
banknote, to join me unveil the new $100 banknote. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
