  Ashraf Mahmood Wathra: Financing agriculture in Pakistan 
Keynote address by Mr Ashraf Mahmood Wathra, Governor of the State Bank of Pakistan, at 
the International Conference on Innovative Agriculture Financing, Islamabad, 28 April 2015. 
 Hon’ble Senator Mohammad Ishaq Dar, Federal Finance Minister  
Hon’ble Mr. Sikandar Malik Bosan, Federal Minister for National Food Security and Research  
Mr. Patrick T. Evans, Country Representative, FAO of United Nations  
Mr.  Chamnong  Siriwongyotha,  General-Secretary,  Asia-Pacific  Rural  &  Agriculture  Credit 
Association (APRACA)  
Mr. Saeed Ahmad, Deputy Governor, State Bank of Pakistan (SBP)  
Our esteemed experts/guests from overseas  
Distinguished  CEOs/Presidents/Executives  of  banks,  MFBs,  Representatives  of  Farmers  & 
Business Associations, and Academia.  
Colleagues, ladies and gentlemen.  
Assalam-o-Alaikum and Good Morning!  
1. I extend a very warm welcome to all the participants in today’s International Conference on 
Innovative  Agriculture  Financing  and  to  Islmabad.  I  am  particularly  grateful  to  our 
international  speakers  who  have  taken  out  time  to  travel  long  distances  to  attend  this 
conference; and share their knowledge and insights with us on a topic which is crucial to our 
national food security, growth and well-being. I would like to express my special gratitude to 
our  Chief  Guest  Senator  Mohammad  Ishaq  Dar  and  Guest  of  Honor  Mr.  Sikandar  Malik 
Bosan  whose  presence  here  today  is  a  reflection  of  the  focus  and  importance  that  the 
country’s leadership places on the development of Agriculture sector.  
2. Honorable Finance Minister: we are grateful for all the support that you have provided to 
the promotion of inclusive finance in the country. We all know that you have great passion 
and  high  commitment  for  expanding  the  contribution  of  agriculture  in  the  economy.  In  line 
with  your  vision  of  a  progressive  and  equitable  economy,  the  Government  has  initiated 
unprecedented  programs  and  schemes  for  the  promotion  of  financing  to  agriculture, 
especially to small farmers. SBP and banks are striving to optimally leverage these initiatives 
to make far-reaching impact on financial inclusion and economic development.  
3. Honorable Minister for Food Security, Mr. Sikandar Malik Bosan: The importance of your 
office and its contributions to the development of agriculture sector are widely acknowledged. 
The crucial role that your Ministry is playing for the growth and development of Agriculture 
with  special  focus  on  providing  relief  to  small  farmers  by  linking  them  to  the  market; 
introducing cutting edge farm technology and state of the art high yield seed varieties and 
numerous  other  innovations  for  the  promotion  of  agri-based  exports  for  the  uplift  of 
agriculture in the country.  
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
4. Majority of the world’s poor, an astounding number of over two billion people share one 
common profession: farming. But where agriculture harbors so many of the world’s poor; it 
also  offers  the  key  to  graduate  economies  out  of  the  vicious  cycle  of  poverty  and  food 
insecurity. Beyond direct links to rural livelihood, agricultural sector has strong links to rest of 
the economy, and this is one of the most powerful ways in which it generates overall growth 
and  reduces  poverty.  Empirical  evidence  suggests  that  investment  in  agriculture  is  2.5  to 
3.0 times  more  effective  in  increasing  the  income  of  the  poor  than  is  non-agricultural 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  investment. Based on this premise, State Bank of Pakistan (SBP) is making relentless efforts 
to promote agriculture finance.  
My dear fellows and colleagues,  
5.  In  our  efforts  to  promote  financial  services  to  the  agriculture-based  community,  we  are 
faced with the challenge of removing numerous stumbling blocks to meet the financial needs 
of the agri-sector.  
6. However, with the Grace of Allah Almighty, the financial sector has not only stood strong 
against  these  challenges  but  has  also  registered  remarkable  growth.  Over  the  years,  we 
have moved away from the ‘mandatory-credit regime’ where force-feeding of targets to highly 
regulated  commercial  banks  was  the  norm;  towards  a  more  open  and  ‘market  led’  model 
where State bank has adapted itself into the role of a facilitator and developmental partner of 
financial institutions to accelerate the growth of agriculture finance in its natural eco-system.  
7. Today, more than ever before, banks are successfully exploiting business opportunities in 
agriculture financing. We started off with a hand-full of banks as reluctant financiers of agri-
sector  but  now  we  have  33  institutions,  including  Islamic  and  Microfinance  banks  that  are 
providing financing efficiently to their agri-clientle.  
8.  Agri  credit  has  demonstrated  a  consistent  rise  with  annualized  average  growth  rate  of 
16.2 percent for last three years. As a result agri credit increased to Rs 391 Billion in 2013-14 
with  Agriculture  Credit  Advisory  Committee  (ACAC)  pushing  the  limits  to  even  more 
aggressive credit disbursement target of Rs 500 Billion to be achieved during FY 2014-15. It 
is  encouraging  to  note  that  banks  have  already  disbursed  Rs  326  Billion  during  the  first 
9 months, which is 65% of the target of FY 14-15, and is 28 % higher than the same period 
last year.  
It is also heartening that the portfolio quality of banks agri portfolio has also improved over 
the  recent  period.  I  believe  that  the  banks  would  be  able  to  further  improve  the  portfolio 
quality  of  agri-lending  by  using  innovative  lending  models  supported  with  their  experience 
curve.  
9.  It  has  been  through  the  collaborative  efforts  of  all  stakeholders  that  the  banks  have 
improved  their  actual  agri  disbursement  to  financing  requirements  ratio  from  37%  to  53% 
over the last 5 years and we are working to improve it even further so that more and more 
farmers can free themselves from the shackles of exploitative informal credit.  
In  order  to  make  it  happen,  SBP  has  taken  initiatives  to  promote  agri-financing  to  bring 
depth, inclusion, efficiency and stability into the system:  
• 
Innovations  in  agri-financing  are  being  promoted  by  adoption  of  value  chain  and 
warehouse receipt financing through constant guidance and pilot projects.  
Enhanced  risk  management  through  crop  and  livestock  loan  insurance  schemes 
and  credit  guarantee  schemes,  to  help  banks  venture  into  providing  financing  to 
farmers, particularly the smaller ones.  
SBP has been extensively involved in capacity building of farmers through offering 
financial literacy programs and financial service providers, through engagement of 
local  and  international  experts  who  are  helping  the  financial  service  providers  to 
tailor their approach for improved service delivery and increased profits.  
  Distinguished guests!  
10. Yes State Bank views positively at the recent increasing momentum, but we should not 
lose  sight  of  the  fact  that  our  long  journey  in  agri-credit  market  has  just  started.  In  this 
context, I feel we will be wrong if we say that Rs. 500 billion is a big target. Let us not forget 
that this is only 53% of our credit demand.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  11.  Going  forward,  the  most  critical  challenges  are  inclusion  of  majority  small  and 
marginalized  farmers,  addressing  geographical  imbalances  and  financing  to  non-crop 
activities, which  will lead to enhancing the share of agri credit in banks’ advances. SBP is 
committed to continue its efforts to deliver real benefits to the farming community and it is 
hoped that with the joint efforts of policy makers and the industry, agri-financing would soon 
emerge as a sound, scalable and sustainable business segment for banks in Pakistan.  
12.  In  the  end  I  would  like  to  sincerely  thank  FAO  for  their  remarkable  support  in 
collaborating with SBP for organizing this event. FAO has long played a strong role for the 
development of agriculture sector in Pakistan through introduction of innovation and technical 
assistance and this event is a mark of their continued commitment to the cause of developing 
an exceedingly  vibrant  agriculture sector in Pakistan. I am also grateful to UKAID for their 
continued  and  long-term  support  to  advance  financial  inclusion  in  Pakistan.  Let  me  also 
express our gratitude to Asia-Pacific Rural and Agricultural Credit Association (APRACA) for 
the  importance  and  attention  that  you  always  give  to  Pakistan  and  SBP  in  the  regional 
initiatives.  
Ladies & Gentlemen,  
13. I wish you all a pleasant participation in the conference and hope that this experience will 
invigorate  the  spirit  of  transformation  that  challenges  the  conventional  beliefs  and  fosters 
innovative thinking to find lasting solutions to the problems of agriculture-financing.  
Thank you our Chief Guest Senator Muhammad Ishaq Dar, Finance Minister, and the Guest 
of Honour Federal Minister Mr. Sikandar Malik Bosan, and all the participants and speakers! 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
