  Andreas Dombret: The savings bank sector – challenges and 
opportunities 
Speech  by  Dr  Andreas  Dombret,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Deutsche 
Bundesbank,  at  the  Handelsblatt  Annual  Conference  “Future  strategies  for  savings  banks 
and Landesbanken”, Berlin, 26 February 2015. 
 1. 
Introduction 
President Fahrenschon 
ladies and gentlemen 
Thank you for your invitation. I am delighted to be able to speak to you again today at the 
Handelsblatt  Annual  Conference,  and  I  hope  that  this  year’s  prestigious  event  will  be  as 
successful as those in the past. 
The  title  of  this  year’s  Annual  Conference  is  “Future  strategies  for  savings  banks  and 
Landesbanken”. So let’s take a brief look at what the future might hold in store and discuss 
the key challenges that lie ahead for the savings bank sector. 
Do you know Swimmy, a parable by the author and illustrator Leo Lionni? It’s a story about a 
shoal of red fish swimming together through the vast and wide ocean. Now, I can’t say for 
sure if the shade of red is HKS 13 – the business colour famously associated with savings 
banks  –  but  I  can  nonetheless  make  out  a  number  of  clear  parallels  to  the  savings  bank 
sector. 
Leo  Lionni’s  parable  tells  us  that  the  fish  can  only  overcome  the  many  dangers  and 
challenges they face on their journey through the ocean if they stick together as a shoal. It 
also shows us that each fish has a role to play within the shoal. 
And equally, it’s fair to say that the “shoal of savings banks” has navigated the choppy waters 
of  the  financial  crisis  pretty  well  –  aided  not  least  by  the  savings  banks  association’s 
compartmentalised  structure.  Germany’s  savings  banks  are  generally  highly  trusted 
institutions,  not  least  on  account  of  their  strong  commitment  to  their  local  area  and  their 
close, often long-term customer relations. However, some savings banks have most certainly 
fared better than others, and the same can indeed be said for the Landesbanken. 
And  in  the  wake  of  the  financial  and  sovereign  debt  crisis,  new  challenges  are  already 
looming on the horizon for the savings bank sector, and I would like, if I may, to discuss the 
two  most  pressing  issues.  The  first  concerns  the  outside  world  –  the  ocean  in  which  the 
shoal of fish is swimming, if you will. The other is about the internal make-up – that is to say, 
the structure of the shoal. 
Impact of the low-interest-rate environment 
2. 
Let us start off by looking at the ocean. The German economy is in good shape. Or, to stay 
with the metaphor, the economic waters are pretty calm. Enterprises in Germany have their 
costs under control, their debt is not particularly high, and they have an attractive range of 
products to offer the global markets. Moreover, German economic activity is being bolstered 
by consumption – unemployment is low, households are not burdened by excessive debt and 
real wages are rising appreciably owing to low inflation. 
In the Bundesbank’s December projection, we forecast that Germany’s real gross domestic 
product  would  rise  by  1.0%  this  year  and  1.6%  next  year.  However,  the  price  of  oil  has 
continued to plummet since we prepared that forecast. If oil prices persist at their current low 
levels, economic growth could prove to be markedly higher this year and next. Because at 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  the end of the day, the low oil price has the effect of a small stimulus package. So projections 
such  as  the  one  prepared  by  the  European  Commission  which  suggests  that  Germany’s 
economy will expand at a rate of 1.5% in 2015 are probably pretty close to the mark. 
Economic activity will naturally also be buoyed by the highly accommodative monetary policy 
– we are, after all, in a persistent spell of low interest rates. There’s no denying that the low 
interest rates are very annoying for savers and a major burden for banks. And the savings 
banks are no exception – so in spite of the upbeat economic backdrop, the shoal of fish finds 
itself in rather shallow waters. 
But there’s one thing we need to be aware of – the task of monetary policy is to set the policy 
rate  such that  equilibrium  is  restored  in  the  economy  and  the  objective  of  price  stability  is 
achieved. Where exactly that point of equilibrium lies is determined not by the central bank, 
however, but by politicians. 
At the end of the day, it is politicians who set the ground rules that determine the economy’s 
fortunes  –  in  their  fiscal  and  labour  market  policies,  say,  but  also  in  competition  policy  or 
investment in education and research. All these factors impact on economic growth and on 
real earnings, too, which are the source of savings. 
Ultimately, the status quo mainly indicates that in a low-interest-rate setting, a savings culture 
which  is  built  around  savings  accounts  will  sooner  or  later  reach  its  limits.  It  becomes 
apparent  that  investors  can  benefit  from  diversifying  their  savings  through  greater  capital 
market  exposure  –  I  assume  that  the  savings  banks  are  advising  their  customers 
accordingly. 
And as for monetary policy, you can take my word that the Bundesbank, as a member of the 
Eurosystem,  will  push  for  interest  rate  hikes  and  an  exit  from  the  non-standard  monetary 
policy measures as soon as the objective of price stability makes this necessary. 
But that point in time is still some way off. In fact, we will have to get used to the idea that low 
interest rates will be with us for a while yet, or, to use the ECB Governing Council’s exact 
words, for an “extended period of time”. What’s more, the extensive government bond-buying 
programme will be kicking off shortly, putting more pressure on the German yield curve – that 
will present quite a challenge for domestic institutions engaged in maturity transformation. 
So the big question facing savings banks and other credit institutions right now is how they 
can overcome the challenge posed by low interest rates, and how they intend to go about it. I 
would  urge  you  to  take  a  sober  view  of  the  interest  rate  situation  –  not  with  a  sense  of 
anxiety, just realistically. 
It’s obvious that net interest income will generally continue to diminish – the Bundesbank’s 
analyses and projections point quite clearly in that direction, and all of you here today know 
that just as well as I do, if not better. While it is true that the vast majority of savings banks 
are comfortably capitalised and their internal capital adequacy is sound, some of them have 
aligned their business strategies with the prospect of interest rates climbing again relatively 
quickly. So I would urge you not to think purely in terms of where you stand right now, which 
for many of you may still appear comfortable. A strategy can’t be to live off ever-diminishing 
resources – even if the savings banks’ resources can see them through a spell of low interest 
rates.  So  I  would  reiterate  my  urgent  appeal  to  you  –  consider  your  earnings  situation 
realistically, from a dynamic angle. 
Because there’s barely any prospect of interest rates picking up again in the medium term. 
So  the  question  is  this  –  how  can  savings  banks  and  other  credit  institutions  generate  a 
sustained flow of stable earnings under these circumstances as well? 
There’s no straightforward answer to that question. The answer is most certainly not to take 
on more and more risk in the search for yield. In the worst case, that kind of “quest for yield” 
can contribute to the formation of price bubbles. Looking ahead, I want to be able to count on 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  the savings banks to run their lending business prudently and responsibly – not least in the 
real estate segment. 
And  as  for  the  possible  answer  that  savings  banks  should  charge  their  own  depositors 
negative  interest  rates  –  that  is  something  which  banks  alone  should  decide  at  their  own 
discretion, not banking supervisors. As supervisors, we have no intention of intruding on your 
decisions. 
The response to the current challenges can probably be found primarily on the cost side – 
staff resources can be deployed even more efficiently, and operating outlay can be reduced. 
As  a  case  in  point,  there  are  some  savings  banks  which  still  run  a  relatively  large  branch 
network,  and  a growing number  of them  will  probably  be  wondering  whether that  is  still  in 
keeping with customer demand, demographic change and changes in customer behaviour. 
To sum up: like it or not, we will have to get used to the idea that the persistent low-interest-
rate  environment  will  take  a  heavy  toll  on  savings  banks’  bottom  line.  Particularly  the 
pressure  on  net  interest  income  is  likely  to  intensify  further,  pushing  down  savings  banks’ 
operating results. 
The good news is that many savings banks do have sufficient resources to hold their own in 
the medium term, even amid such inclement conditions – provided they aren’t hit by a huge 
wave of write-downs in the future. 
All things considered, savings banks now need to adopt a strategic and operational stance 
that will guide them through these choppy waters as best they can. Incidentally, it is not just 
the low interest rates which are forcing credit institutions to rethink their strategic alignment – 
developments like the growing digitalisation of banking business also need to be considered. 
Reforming protection schemes 
3. 
Let’s now turn our gaze inwards on the shoal’s structure. It’s clear that the structure of the 
savings bank sector will have to change. The reason for this is the need to comply with the 
requirements  of  the  EU’s  new  Deposit  Guarantee  Directive  and  the  German  Deposit 
Guarantee  Act.  These,  in  turn,  necessitate  a  swift  reform  of  the  sector’s  institutional 
protection and joint liability schemes. 
The new EU directive requires all credit institutions to provide their depositors with statutory 
deposit protection cover of €100,000 by the middle of this year. Owing to their institutional 
protection scheme, savings banks, Landesbanken and state building and loan associations 
had  previously  been  exempted  from  this  requirement,  and  thus  also  from  mandatory 
membership of the statutory compensation scheme. They must therefore now adapt in order 
to  comply  with  the  statutory  requirements,  which  also  entails  adapting  their  institutional 
protection scheme. 
Incidentally,  people’s  banks  and  Raiffeisen  banks  are  required  to  adapt  for  the  same 
reasons. However, due to their relatively centralised organisational structure, this adjustment 
ought to be comparatively easy. 
By contrast, the decentralised organisation of the savings bank sector makes an adjustment 
more challenging. This has not only to do with economic and legal difficulties, but also, above 
all,  because  the  savings  bank  sector  fundamentally  sees  itself  as  a  regionally-oriented 
grouping. 
To a certain extent, savings banks must now show their true colours – and by this I mean 
beyond their particular shade of red. Are they a group with all the advantages of a group, and 
thus  some  centralised  elements?  Or  are  they  a  collection  of  decentralised,  more  or  less 
autonomous  institutions  that  only  swim  in  a  shoal  as  long  as  there  is  something  in  it  for 
them? 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  I have to admit that I have always tended to regard savings banks as a collective. It seems to 
me that savings banks swim in a shoal out of conviction, which is a source of their strength – 
yet they have decentralised decision structures that almost border on a type of grass-roots 
democracy.  Indeed,  I  have  never  had  the  impression  that  savings  banks  were  a 
“corporation”. 
We, as supervisors, take a neutral position on the matter. I can assure you that we will work 
closely and openly with the savings bank sector on this topic. However, allow me to use this 
opportunity  today  to  mention  a  few  general  points  that  are  key  to  an  effective  institutional 
protection scheme. 
The cornerstone of any protection scheme is that it is credible. Otherwise it will be unable to 
fulfil  its  purpose.  If  depositors  lack  faith  in  the  scheme,  this  could  lead  to  a  bank  run  in  a 
worst case scenario, which is the very thing that the system is supposed to prevent. 
In  order  for  a  protection  scheme  to  be  credible,  its  members  must  be  given  the  right 
incentives  to  prevent  an  excessive  build-up  of  risks.  A  balance  needs  to  be  found  here 
between  liability  and  control,  which  is  what  the  Bundesbank  is  calling  for  in  the  currency 
union as well. 
The incentives of a protection scheme are affected by the way that contributions are decided. 
Ideally,  members  should  pay  contributions  in  line  with  their  individual  burden  of risk.  Risk-
based  contributions  are,  incidentally,  also  what  the  EU  directive  and  the  German 
implementing act require. 
For a joint-liability scheme such as that operated by the savings bank sector, it is essential 
that the contributions made by the leading institutions in the group are commensurate with 
their  respective  risk  levels.  In  my  opinion,  the  system  of  contributions  proposed  by  the 
European Banking Authority gives too much weight to covered deposits, with the result that 
the  central  institutions,  which  have  smaller  deposit  levels,  are  not  adequately  taken  into 
account. 
However, incentives are not affected solely by the system of contributions. Intra-group claims 
– in other words the lending relationships between the individual members of the protection 
scheme  –  also  play  a  role.  It  can  be  assumed  that  the  savings  bank  sector  will  aim  to 
continue treating intra-group claims on a privileged basis. 
This makes perfect sense for a collective, as the redistribution of liquidity is one of its central 
functions.  However,  this  provides  incentives  to  build  up  high  levels  of  reciprocal  claims, 
above  all  within  the  collective.  A  balance  needs  to  be  struck  here  between  an  internal 
redistribution of liquidity and an excessive build-up of internal financial relations, which could 
be a source of stability risk. 
The right incentives are therefore crucial for the stability of a protection scheme. Specifically, 
this means that the protection system as a whole must be able to manage risks. In this vein, 
the  Capital  Requirements  Regulation  requires  institutional  protection  schemes  to  have 
centralised  risk  management.  It  is  only  through  this  centralised  structure  that  liability  and 
control can be brought into balance. 
I do, of course, understand that it is difficult to square this type of centralised approach with 
the regional responsibilities and decision-making channels of the savings bank sector, and, 
not least, its decentralised self-conception. Nevertheless, I believe that a tenable solution can 
be found, and I would warmly welcome it if all group partners would commit to achieving this. 
A balance must be found between those who benefit from a protection scheme and those 
who are disadvantaged by it. However, time is of the essence, as the statutory requirements 
must be fulfilled by July of this year. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Conclusion 
4. 
As the philosopher Pericles said in 500 BC, “It’s not a matter of predicting the future, but of 
being prepared for it.” And this still applies today. 
I am confident that the savings bank sector is adequately preparing for the future – both in 
terms of the continued low-interest-rate environment and the issues of deposit protection and 
joint liability. 
The  low  interest  rates  mean  that  adjustments  are  needed  at  both  the  strategic  and  the 
operational level. However, the compartmentalised structure of the savings bank sector has 
been,  and  continues  to  be,  its  strength.  At  the  same  time,  the  joint-liability  scheme  is  an 
important  element  for  the  savings  bank  sector  in  bolstering  the  confidence  of  depositors. 
Ultimately, each savings bank benefits from the trust placed in the savings bank “brand”. 
In order to maintain this system, the savings bank sector must adapt to the new European 
requirements. The challenge here is to bridge the gap between the centrality required by the 
directive and the sector’s decentralised structure. At its most basic level, a protection scheme 
of any kind must first and foremost be credible, which necessitates the right incentives being 
set for all members. 
One  thing,  however,  is  certain:  with  the  right  structure,  the  shoal  of  savings  banks  will 
continue to be able to safely navigate shallow and choppy waters. And despite our neutrality, 
this is of course also important for us as supervisors. After all, we have a keen interest in 
savings banks having a stable earnings position and an efficient protection scheme. 
On this note, I would like to thank you very much for your attention and wish you a successful 
and productive savings bank conference 2015! 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
