  Elisabeta Gjoni: Innovation in the banking sector 
Speech  by  Ms  Elisabeta  Gjoni,  First  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Albania,  at  the 
conference on “Innovation in the banking sector”, Tirana, 14 May 2015. 
 Good  morning  and  welcome  at  the  Bank  of  Albania  to  discuss  about  innovation  in  the 
banking sector. 
The Ministry of Innovation and the Bank of Albania, under the auspices of the Minister for 
Innovation  and  Public  Administration,  Ms  Milena  Harito,  and  the  Governor  of  the  Bank  of 
Albania,  Mr  Gent  Sejko,  in  collaboration  with  the  Albanian  Association  of  Banks,  organise 
this  activity  jointly  in  a  common  approach  to  work  together  and  discuss  ideas  among  the 
main stakeholders of innovation in financial services. 
Honourable  Minister  Harito,  Honourable  Chairman  of  the  Albanian  Association  of  Banks, 
Your  excellencies  ambassadors,  representatives  of  banks  and  businesses,  and  of  the 
Albanian private sector, dear colleagues, I take this opportunity to thank you, on behalf of the 
Bank of Albania for your commitment and collaboration for this activity. 
We are living in a new phase of banking that is frequently qualified as a silent revolution in 
the way  we do things, and the way  we  live,  which poses challenges to any developing or 
influencing stakeholder. 
People use technology for the new ways of communication it offers: to create social groups, 
purchase online and why not, to use banking and financial services. That certainly implies a 
wide  spectrum  of  actions:  from  generating  online  the  account  statement  to  transfers  and 
payments via electronic platforms from various institutions, which are different from banks, 
digital money or virtual currency. Physical and digital worlds are intertwining rapidly. What do 
we imply with financial innovation, while speaking about financial technology ( Fin Tech)? An 
expert of this field says than Fin Tech should not indispensably be a rather complicated or 
sophisticated  technical  concept.  Fin  Tech  supports  business  to  be  more  effective  and  the 
systems to function better and faster, or simply to make life easier to individuals/businesses 
through the use of efficient financial services. 
Authorities have a decisive role in being committed to and supporting innovation. Advanced 
countries,  such  as  Great  Britain,  are  a  good  example  of  this  approach.  In  the  United 
Kingdom,  the  volume  of  transactions  has  grown  by  74%  since  2008,  compared  to  27% 
growth for the whole  world or 13% for Silicon Valley. The British success is driven by the 
large support of government strategies and programs, from the regime of the points of sales, 
initiative to encourage investments and the establishment of the regulatory framework that 
provide  grounds for the success  of  new  initiatives,  the  possibility  to  access  credit  data for 
small-size enterprises, in the payment system and equal participation in the free competition. 
What can a Central Bank do? In its role as the regulator, the Bank of Albania’s vision is to 
contribute  to  the  future,  aiming  to  establish  a  highly  adequate  environment  for  boosting 
financial innovations and modernising the financial structure. Our regulatory regime aims at 
fostering innovation, being a positive catalyser and not a barrier. 
We aim at being avant-garde for a modern financial infrastructure. But experience shows that 
technology always is a step ahead and rapidly spreading. Technology has no limits and we, 
as  regulators,  should  adopt  rules  and  laws  that  these  technologies  be  used  by  the 
consumers, individuals or businesses. At the same time, we should be aware of the risks that 
accompany  these  new  technologies.  Finding  a  perfect  balance  between  the  promotion  of 
new  ideas  and  the  regulatory  prudence  constitutes  one  of  the  major  challenges  in  this 
regard. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
Bank of Albania has designed a payments regulatory framework, which paved the way for 
the development and modernisation. This framework provides all banks or other suppliers of 
financial  services  with  the  possibility  to  access  the  payment  system  in  an  equal  and 
transparent  way,  thus  contributing  to  the  development  of  a  competitive  payment  industry, 
without any asymmetry. 
Bank of Albania welcomes the contribution of innovation and technology in financial services 
as a support for achieving its strategic objectives for financial inclusion and reduction of cash 
use  in  the  economy.  These  objectives  serve  crucially  to  both  the  transmission  of  the 
monetary policy and the safeguarding of financial stability. The international experience has 
shown  that  the  employment  of  innovative  means  in  the  banking  and  financial  system 
contribute to reducing social costs in the economy from 1% to 2% of GDP. In the case of 
Albania, this figure may be higher, as cash use in economy is considered to be high. 
Allow me to highlight some of the considerable developments of banking system. 
Nowadays, businesses and individuals are increasingly using banking services, mainly in the 
payments  market,  where  the  adaptation  of  information  technology  to  the  development  of 
banking services and products is more substantial. 
In recent years, the use of banking cards has been rising, not only for basic services, but 
also  as  a  means  of  payment.  This  is  followed  by  the  development  of  the  necessary 
infrastructure, such as PoS and ATM devices. As reported by banks, the number of PoS and 
ATM devices currently stands at 6.427 and 811, respectively. The number of physical Points 
of Sale grew 19% in 2014, compared to 2010. Recently, we have also seen an increase in 
virtual services through the development of infrastructure for the realisation of e-commerce. 
The  expansion  of  infrastructure  for  the  use  of  cards  is  accompanied  by  the  considerable 
increase in the number of debit and credit cards in circulation. In 2014, 777.195 debit cards 
and  84.824  credit  cards  were  issued,  or,  in  relative  terms,  increasing  103%  and  20%, 
respectively  from  2010.  Notwithstanding  the  innovations,  cards  in  the  world  remain  very 
convenient, preferred and secured instruments. (While these tendencies show progress, in 
Britain statistics reveal a decrease in the volume of transactions via cards, due to electronic 
transactions via mobile phone or other means.) 
The  increasing  use  of  electronic  services  such  as  home  banking  is  a  considerable 
development.  Thus,  in  the  last  years,  these  services  were  more  used  and  the  users’ 
spectrum expanded, including not only businesses, which where the target group at the start 
of supplying this service, but also by individuals. At the end of 2014, the number of accounts 
accessible via internet stood at 145211, from 27368 at the end of 2010, followed by fourfold 
increase of such transactions conducted via these accounts. 
The encouragement of the use of payment instruments is reflected in the increase of activity 
of settlement and clearing systems operated by the Bank of Albania. In 2014, the activity of 
the Albanian Interbank Payment System (AIPS) grew by about 1.5 times, compared to the 
beginning of operations of this system in 2004. Also, the Albanian Electronic Clearing House 
System  (AECH)  shows  a  considerable  increase.  The  value  of  transactions  cleared  in  this 
system,  during  2014,  was  10  times  higher  than  the  value  of transactions  cleared  in  2005, 
when this system started to operate. The measures taken by the Bank of Albania in March 
2011 contributed to the use of the clearing and settlement systems. The measures consisted 
in the reduction of commissions applied to the users for transactions in the Albanian lek. 
I would like to underscore that large spaces still exist for improvement and narrowing the gap 
between the Albanian market and the advanced markets, and to some extent between the 
regional markets, .They should, therefore, constitute our common challenge for the future. 
In  the  framework  of  encouraging  market  towards  these  innovative  services,  the  Bank  of 
Albania as the regulator and catalyser has undertaken recently a set of measures. In more 
concrete terms, the establishment of legal and regulatory basis for the e-money institutions, 
followed  by  the  licensing  of  the  first  institution  of  this  type  in  March  2015,  constitutes  a 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
premise  to  introduce  the  innovative  services  in  the  Albanian  market  of  payments.  The 
regulation of the activity of these institutions is based on the European practices not only in 
the framework of Albania’s adherence to the Single European Market, but also as one of the 
most optimum solutions in terms of security and efficiency at national level. 
The liberalisation of the payment systems market through the Law on Payment Systems will 
boost the development of the market. This legal framework provides the necessary space for 
private enterprises, and lays down the standards in terms of security and efficiency, and will 
support  the  development  of  a  contemporary  financial  structure.  That  is  shown  by  the 
licensing of the first operator of the national payment system by cards, which also plays the 
role of the local processor, and we hope to have a direct impact on promoting the use of 
cards  as  a  means  of  payment.  A  priority  in  the  near  future  for  the  Bank  of  Albania  is  to 
establish regulatory framework and provide for the operation of private payment clearing and 
settlement systems. 
This year marked the establishment of the central Albanian Financial Instrument Settlement 
and  Registration  (AFISaR)  system  of  government’s  securities.  The  new  system  provides 
premises for the development of the securities market, rendering these assesses more liquid 
and,  consequently,  promotes  their  use  in  the  commercial  exchanges  in  the  domestic 
economy. 
Bank of Albania is aware that the needs for further and more programmed interventions are 
still  high  considering  the  low  level  of  penetration  of  either  financial  services  or  relevant 
innovations. Banks, various operators and suppliers of services have great potentials for new 
mechanisms and instruments. 
In the framework of institutional architecture and understanding the need for coordinating of 
efforts  at  national  level,  in  2014,  Bank  of  Albania  approved  the  regulatory  base  for  the 
establishment and organisation of the National Committee of Payments, which includes the 
Ministry of Innovation, Ministry of Economy, Ministry of Internal Affairs and representatives of 
the  banking  system.  The  committee  that  will  be  convened  soon,  will  provide  considerable 
contribution 
for  strengthening  security, 
sustainability and effectiveness of the national payment system in Albania. 
Wishing for an open and fruitful discussion, I look forward, and I think I am not the only one, 
to listening attentively and hope that the following issues will be addressed: 
• 
• 
• 
Advancements that banks will adopt for the payments in the next 5–10 years; 
Barriers, problems, opportunities and risks that prevent the progress; 
Views of traditional banks about the payments via mobile phones supplied by mobile 
phone  companies  and  assessment  of  the  preparation  degree  of  banks  for 
cooperation or competitiveness; 
New trends for the increase of payments security. Which is the place of biometric 
elements? 
to  promoting  collaboration  and 
interaction, 
 Congratulations and Thank you for the work you do. You are part of the future. We all are 
looking  forward  to  the  next  meeting  of  a  continuous  discussion  on  the  forthcoming 
innovations. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
