   
Luis M Linde: Presentation of the Bank of Spain’s Annual Report for 2014 
Testimony  by  Mr  Luis  M  Linde,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Spain,  before  the  Parliamentary 
Committee on Economic Affairs and Competitiveness, Madrid, 24 June 2015. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
I appear before this Committee on the occasion of the presentation of the Banco de España 
Annual Report for 2014. 
Let me begin by reviewing developments in the Spanish economy, the factors underpinning 
its  recovery  and  the  economic  policy  challenges  of  strengthening  recovery.  I  shall  then 
address  aspects  relating  to  the  start-up  of  the  Banking  Union  and  the  situation  of,  and 
outlook for, the Spanish banking system. 
Economic situation and outlook 
In mid-2013, the Spanish economy initiated a recovery phase that firmed last year and has 
continued to do so in 2015 to date. In 2014, GDP grew at a rate of 1.4% while employment 
did so at 1.2%, the first positive figure since the start of the crisis. 
In its Quarterly Report to be published tomorrow, the Banco de España will present a new 
set of macroeconomic projections. 
According to these, the Spanish economy will grow at a rate of 3.1% on average in 2015, an 
upward revision of 0.3 pp on the projections published in March. On the basis of this change, 
activity is performing better than projected three months back. Following quarter-on-quarter 
growth  in  GDP  of  0.9%  in  the  first  quarter,  the  latest  information  indicates  that  activity  is 
expected to maintain a strong rate of expansion, whereby a further slight quickening in output 
is estimated in the second quarter, to 1% in quarterly terms. Average growth in the first half 
of the year, in annualised terms, is thus expected to be around 4%. 
The  projections  for  the  rest  of  2015  and  for  next  year  point  to  continuing  dynamism,  with 
Spain clearly outpacing most of its euro area partners. However, this momentum might be 
slightly contained by the weakening of some of the expansionary impulses, such as the fall in 
oil prices and the depreciation of the euro. For 2016, the projections estimate average growth 
of 2.7%, with greater uncertainty naturally accompanying the longer time ahead involved. 
In  terms  of  the  composition  of  spending, the  most  recent  phase  of  the recovery  has  been 
marked by the growing weight of national demand, which has replaced external demand as 
the main net contributor to growth. Foreseeably, in the near future, this pattern will continue, 
with a contribution by the external sector to the increase in GDP that is practically neutral in 
net terms. Exports, particularly to the euro area, are expected to post higher growth, while 
the tempo of imports will slacken somewhat. 
Turning to prices, inflation, which has been in negative territory virtually since the recovery 
began, has undergone a progressive correction since the start of this year, standing at –0.2% 
in May further to a rise in the energy component and a gradual pick-up in core inflation. The 
decline in prices in Spain is proving more marked than in the Monetary Union as a whole, 
meaning  that  the  inflation  differential  will  continue  to  help  in  bringing  about  an  ongoing 
improvement in our economy’s competitiveness. 
Inflation  might  be  running  at  a  moderately  positive  rate  at  the  end  of  2015  owing  to  a 
combination of several factors. Firstly, the progressive petering out of the effect induced by 
the  heavy  fall  in  oil  prices  in  the  closing  stretch  of  2014  is  expected  to  bring  about  an 
automatic rise in the energy component of the CPI in the closing months of this year. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
1 
   
And further, the depreciation of the euro will impact non-energy goods and services prices. In 
any event, the persistence of considerable slack in the economy, i.e. of substantial unused 
capacity,  means  a  mild  recovery  in  the  inflation  rate  over  the  next  two  years  is  to  be 
expected. 
The factors underpinning growth 
The favourable growth outlook is underpinned, above all, by the restoring of macroeconomic 
equilibria.  The  progress  made  and  the  measures  underpinning  it  have  allowed  the 
confidence of both external investors and of Spanish households and firms to be restored. 
Improved  confidence  has  also  benefited  from  the  changes  in  certain  external  conditioning 
factors, such as those linked to the ECB’s monetary policy and to the progress in economic 
and monetary union, which have prompted an easing in financing conditions. On top of these 
are other more transitory effects, such as those linked to the low level of oil prices or to the 
depreciation of the euro. 
I shall continue with the analysis contained in the Annual Report, briefly reviewing the key 
factors behind the recovery. 
Budgetary consolidation 
Firstly, regarding public finances, the general government deficit met the objective set by the 
European Council (5.8% of GDP) for the third year running. In 2014, fiscal policy had a less 
restrictive impact than in the preceding years and was a less prominent conditioning factor of 
macroeconomic developments. 
The reduction in the deficit in 2014 came about as a result of the greater adjustment made at 
the central and local government levels, since most of the regional governments exceeded 
the  targets  set.  The  budgetary  improvement  was  also  the  consequence  of  a  similar-sized 
contribution by revenue and public spending (once the impact of the financial assistance to 
the banking system is stripped out of spending). The tax take progressively picked up during 
the year, in step with the cyclical improvement and the change in the composition of GDP. In 
turn,  the  budgetary  consolidation  measures  and  the  cyclical  improvement  in  the  economy 
have  brought  about  a  decline  in  the  public  spending/GDP  ratio,  largely  owing  to  the 
improvement  in  spending  once  interest  on  debt  is  discounted.  Interest  payments  as  a 
proportion  of  GDP  held  at  a  similar  level  to  2013,  despite  the  significant  decline  in  the 
Treasury’s financing costs, owing to the increase in public debt. 
The  public  debt/GDP  ratio  rose  in  2014  to  97.7%,  thereby  meeting  forecasts.  The  latest 
Updated  Stability  Programme  (which  confirms  the  deficit  targets  to  2017)  presages  a 
continuing increase in debt this year to 98.9% of GDP, with a reduction commencing in 2016, 
although the better growth now projected for 2015 may improve these projections. 
 
 2 
  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   
Private-sector deleveraging 
Secondly,  there  has  been  headway  in  correcting  private-sector  indebtedness.  Spanish 
household  debt  stood  at  end-2014  at  71%  of  GDP,  10  pp  above  the  euro  area  average, 
when in 2010 we were 20 pp above it; non-financial corporations’ debt stood at the end of 
last year at 92% of GDP, 8 pp above the euro area average, when in 2010 the gap was 35 
pp. 
In the coming years, the nominal growth of the economy will make for a readier adjustment 
and will ease the pressure still exerted by past debts on new financing flows. Indeed, new 
lending  was  seen  to  expand  in  2014,  and  this  has  continued  into  the  opening  months  of 
2015. 
Labour market and competitiveness 
Thirdly, some of the most visible and significant features of the current phase of recovery are 
the  high  rate  of  job  creation  and  the  reduction  in  unemployment  by  almost  half  a  million 
people during 2014. 
The pick-up in employment is partly related to firms’ greater capacity to adapt their working 
conditions to the cyclical and competitive situation. This environment has helped usher in a 
period of wage moderation and an adjustment of relative costs relative to the euro area as a 
whole, which largely explains the gains in competitiveness recently attained by the Spanish 
economy. 
Turning to prices, the Annual Report pays particular attention to the factors underpinning the 
recent disinflationary phase in Spain. The analysis concludes that, beyond the influence the 
prolonged  weakness  of  spending  and  the  fall  in  oil  prices  may  have  had,  there  has  been 
greater  responsiveness  by  prices  to  changes  in  the  economic  situation,  which  might  be 
attributed, at least in part, to the reforms in certain markets and services. 
Retaining  this  greater  degree  of flexibility  in  price-  and  wage-setting  is  vital  so  that,  in  the 
face  of  adverse  shocks,  adjustments  may  be  made  through  relative  prices  and  not  at  the 
expense of economic activity and employment, as has traditionally occurred in the Spanish 
economy in recent recessions. 
There has likewise been a notably sharp correction of the external imbalance, with external 
surpluses  being  attained  in  the  past  three  years,  albeit  of  a  smaller  amount  in  2014. 
Nonetheless, the correction of the International Investment Position (IIP), a debtor position 
equivalent to 93.5% of GDP at the close of 2014, is proving very gradual, which denotes the 
need  to  maintain  the  gains  in  competitiveness  achieved,  so  as  to  improve  the  current 
account balance and reduce our still-high level of external debt. 
The role of external conditioning factors 
Let me now refer to the external conditioning factors in the recovery of the Spanish economy. 
The  world  economy  lost  momentum  in  2014,  particularly  so  in  the  euro  area.  Euro  area 
growth was very weak in the second and third quarters of the year and only thereafter did it 
begin to show somewhat greater strength. On this occasion, moreover, Germany and France 
–  the  area’s  two  biggest  economies  and  two  of  our  biggest  trading  partners  –  were  also 
affected. The latest ECB projections point to a moderate recovery, whereby the area’s GDP 
is expected to grow 1.5% this year and 1.9% in 2016. These are, then, clearly lower rates 
than those projected for our economy. 
Other external developments have provided a boost to activity. I have already mentioned the 
fall  in  oil  prices.  Unquestionably,  though,  the  most  durable  positive  external  impulses 
stemmed from the ECB’s monetary policy and the start-up of the Banking Union. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
3 
   
Throughout last year and in 2015 to date, the ECB has continued to deepen its expansionary 
monetary policy stance. Once again, it has combined conventional measures, cutting official 
interest rates and placing the deposit facility in negative territory, with other, unconventional 
measures, such as a new private-sector credit-linked lending programme and the launch of 
an ambitious plan to purchase private- and public-sector securities, which is expected to run 
until September 2016 and, in any event, until inflation resumes a path more in keeping with 
its medium-term objective, namely around 2% for the ECB. 
These expansionary monetary impulses, along with the expectations of a change in the US 
monetary  policy  stance  and  of  an  interest  rate  increase  by  the  Federal  Reserve,  have 
depreciated  the  euro  and  reduced  the  Spanish  economy’s  financing  costs.  The  market 
fragmentation  caused  by  the  crisis  may  be  considered  to  have  been  reversed.  Such 
fragmentation was hampering the full transmission of the expansionary monetary measures 
to our economy. The start-up of the Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM), the first step of 
the Banking Union, has played an important role in this process of financial normalisation. 
The start-up of the Single Supervisory Mechanism 
In November last year the SSM commenced operating and, since then, with the participation 
and  support  of  the  national  authorities,  the  ECB  has  taken  control  of  banking  supervision 
throughout the Monetary Union. 
As  a  prior  step,  an  ambitious  comprehensive  assessment  of  European  banks  was 
undertaken in 2014, whose positive results contributed to increasing investor confidence in 
the  European  banking  system.  As  is  known,  our  banks  comfortably  passed  the  test, 
confirming the favourable results of the restructuring and recapitalisation programme carried 
out in 2012 and 2013 with the agreement and assistance of our EU partners. 
The comprehensive assessment of significant euro area banks was twin-pronged, entailing 
an  asset  quality  review  and  stress  tests  to  determine  banks’  resilience  in  hypothetical 
adverse scenarios. 
The results obtained by Spanish banks were favourable. First, I should highlight the fact that 
Spanish  banks  are  those  with  fewest  adjustments to make  as  a  result  of  the  asset quality 
review which, unlike the stress tests, is not based on hypotheses but on a detailed balance 
sheet review. As regards solvency, only one bank stood slightly below the thresholds set in 
one  part  of  the  exercise  and,  in  any  event,  that  same  bank  had  already  adopted  capital-
strengthening measures in 2014 on a scale far exceeding that needed to cover the shortfall 
identified. 
In the course of 2014, both the ECB and the national authorities made a significant effort to 
address  the  challenge  posed  by  adaptation  to  the  new  supervisory  framework.  In  this 
respect, to make our joint work easier, the Banco de España has reorganised its Directorate 
General of Banking Supervision, creating a structure that mirrors that of the ECB’s SSM. 
In 2015, its first year of operation, the SSM has defined a list of priorities, bearing in mind the 
environment  and  the  main  risks  to  the  banking  sector.  These  include  most  notably 
profitability. 
European  credit  institutions  have  operated  in  recent  years  under  adverse  macroeconomic 
conditions. In a market characterised by low interest rates, bank margins have been subject 
to  downward  pressure  which,  combined  with  asset  impairment  losses,  has  affected  their 
capacity to obtain profits. One of the priorities of European supervision for 2015 is to identify 
the  determinants  of  profitability  and  to  attempt  to  detect  aggressive  strategies  contrary  to 
financial stability. 
In the prudential realm, one of the main challenges is for banks to adapt to the stricter capital 
requirements of the new Basel III solvency regime. The SSM, like the Banco de España in 
4 
  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   
previous  years,  issued  a  recommendation  of  prudence  to  banks  in  connection  with  the 
distribution of its dividends. In our case, having regard to the difficult economic and banking 
situation  in  2013,  dividend  payments  above  25%  of  profits  were  broadly  restricted;  the 
European supervisor’s recommendation imposes restrictions solely on banks facing a tighter 
situation in terms of solvency. 
One priority matter is the review of the national discretionality and options permitted under 
European  solvency  regulations,  in  order  to  harmonise  the  legislation  applicable  to  SSM-
supervised banks. The review has begun recently and is being jointly tackled by the ECB and 
the national competent authorities. 
The second element of the Banking Union, prepared in 2014 with a view to its entry into force 
in 2015, is the Single Resolution Mechanism (SRM), which establishes a common European 
framework for the restructuring and resolution of credit institutions. 
The aim is, should the case arise, to provide for the management of situations of bank non-
viability  while  preserving  the  stability  of  the  financial  system,  minimising  public  financial 
support,  safeguarding  depositors  and  ensuring  the  continuity  of  the  critical  economic 
functions of the banks in question. All of the foregoing might influence the management of 
bank balance sheets and have a particular bearing on the composition of their liabilities, part 
of which must be eligible for absorbing losses and for their recapitalisation. 
The SRM comprises two elements: the Single Resolution Board and the Single Resolution 
Fund. The latter, by means of contributions from the banking sector, is expected to amount to 
€55 billion in 2024. 
In  the  national  arena,  the  recently  approved  legislation  on  the  recovery  and  resolution  of 
credit institutions and investment services firms distinguishes between pre-emptive resolution 
functions, which correspond to the Banco de España in the case of credit institutions and to 
the National Securities Market Commission (CNMV) in that of investment services firms, and 
enforcement resolution functions, attributable to the Fund for the Orderly Restructuring of the 
Banking Sector (FROB), which sits moreover on the SRM Board, with the Banco de España 
having observer status. 
Performance of credit institutions in 2014 
Before concluding, I shall review the recent performance of Spanish credit institutions. 
The  year  2014  saw  an  improvement  in  financial  conditions  and  a  recovery  in  activity  and 
employment. Lending to the resident private sector in Spain continued to shrink in 2014, in 
line with the need for the deleveraging of the Spanish economy; that said, the rate of decline 
of lending eased (from 8.3% in 2013 to 6.4% in 2014). At firms not engaging in construction 
and real estate activities, credit fell much less, shifting from a negative rate of 9% in 2013 to 
a still-negative rate of 1.5% in 2014. The figures available for 2015 suggest that the year will 
conclude with credit running at a rate of change very close to zero or in positive territory for 
the first time since 2009. 
One key aspect in 2014 was the fact that non-performing loans (NPLs) to the resident private 
sector fell both in absolute terms (by more than €24 billion) and in terms of the NPL ratio, 
which declined by almost 1 pp to 12.9%. 
In 2015 to date, this trend is holding, as NPLs have fallen to 12.3%. Resident private-sector 
refinanced exposures have fallen by 4.5% and account for 14% of the total, a proportion still 
highly  influenced  by  forborne  exposures  to  real  estate  development  and  construction 
companies. 
It is also worth pointing out that households and non-financial corporations are changing the 
composition of their savings in response to the very low interest rate environment, meaning 
that bank deposits have declined while units in investment funds have increased significantly. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
5 
   
Spanish banks’ attributed profits in 2014 increased by close to 34%, continuing the recovery 
initiated in 2013. Despite the backdrop of declining credit and low interest rates, net interest 
income rose by almost 5% owing to financing costs falling at a swifter pace than the return 
on financial products. Also, the containment of operating expenses and the decline in asset 
impairment losses have contributed to the improvement in results. 
However, the persistence of the environment of very low interest rates and the presence of a 
significant  volume  of  non-productive  assets  will  continue  to  bear  down  on  the  income 
statement.  That  will  lead  banks  to  reflect  on  a  sustainable  business  model,  involving  the 
application  of  new  technologies,  new  activities  and  an  office  and  staffing  structure  better 
tailored to attaining this model. 
In  December  2014,  the top-quality  common  equity  tier  1  (CET1)  capital ratio  of  our  banks 
stood  at  11.8%.  This  ratio  rises  to  13.6%  for  total  capital.  Both  figures  amply  exceed  the 
regulatory minimum levels. Even if the standards scheduled to be in force from 2018 – when 
Basel  III  becomes  fully  applicable  –  were  to  be  applied,  these  percentages  would  remain 
above the minimum levels (9.9% and 12.1%, respectively). Moreover, the recourse by banks 
to Eurosystem funds continues to fall. 
Notwithstanding this positive assessment, Spanish banks must continue strengthening their 
capital  and  their  loss-absorption  capacity  in  order  to  withstand  the  new  macroeconomic 
environment, heightened competition and the new, more demanding and complex regulatory 
framework. 
Conclusions 
Overall, the outlook for the Spanish economy has improved in the recent period. Its degree of 
vulnerability to potential shocks has progressively diminished as headway has been made in 
correcting its imbalances, strengthening economic activity and generating employment. 
Nonetheless, the effects of the crisis have been very serious and condition our economy’s 
growth  capacity  in  the  short  and  medium  term.  Accordingly,  economic  policy  measures 
should be geared to shoring up the foundations of the recovery and to seeing through the 
correction of imbalances. 
The cyclical situation in the euro area and in Spain means the maintenance of a demand-
side policy mix supportive of the recovery is foreseeable. In the case of monetary policy, this 
is because of the commitments assumed by the ECB, which I referred to earlier. And in the 
case of budgetary policy, because adhering to the fiscal consolidation path will be compatible 
with a progressively less contractionary or more neutral contribution by the public sector to 
growth. 
In the current economic circumstances, it will continue to be necessary to complement these 
measures with reforms aimed at enhancing competitiveness and lowering the obstacles to a 
more  rapid  absorption  of  unemployment.  Such  actions  take  on  particular  significance  in  a 
situation like the present in which the aggregate level of debt in the economy is still high and 
further gains  in  competitiveness  come  up  against  a  less  propitious  environment, given  the 
low inflation in the euro area and the envisaged low growth in productivity. 
Reducing unemployment, which is at a very high rate despite the favourable developments in 
Social  Security  registrations  and  the  reduction  in  registered  unemployment,  remains  our 
major economic policy task. In this connection, wage bargaining must allow for the different 
situation of different firms and sectors to be taken into account, avoiding as far as possible 
the return to now-superseded wage indexation practices. 
Considerable progress has been made in correcting the fiscal imbalance, without forgetting 
the constraints that such a high level of public debt imposes. In the short and medium run, 
6 
  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   
perseverance  with  fiscal  consolidation  on  the  basis  of  a  growth-conducive  revenue  and 
spending mix that ensures compliance with the Budgetary Stability Law will be unavoidable. 
I should like to conclude with some thoughts on the challenges posed by long-term growth 
for the Spanish economy. 
In Spain, as in most of the countries affected, the crisis has had a large-scale impact on the 
level of output, as a result of sizeable capital and job destruction. The future growth of the 
Spanish economy will be influenced by how we manage to overcome these effects, but also 
by the capacity to raise productivity, whose low pace of growth has continuously affected us. 
Against  this  background,  it  is  vital  to  continue  with  and  deepen  reforms  that  boost 
investment, lower the obstacles to competition and remove the barriers preventing a suitable 
reallocation  of  productive  resources towards  the firms  and  sectors  with  the  highest growth 
potential. 
The  Annual  Report  concludes  that  these  barriers  are  the  outcome  of  various  factors: 
inappropriate regulations, small firm-size, limited regional and sectoral job mobility, a degree 
of  educational  mismatch  between  labour  supply  and  demand,  and  insufficient  innovative 
capacity.  Overcoming 
that  are  not  always 
straightforward or simple either in technical or political terms. But it should be stressed that 
these  reforms  can  bring  about  positive  synergies  with  the  expansionary  monetary  policy 
being  pursued  by  the  ECB,  even  in  the  short  term,  owing  to  their  impact  on  growth 
expectations. 
Thank you. 
these  constraints  calls 
for  responses 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
7 
