  Andreas Dombret: Sitting it out is not an option – what does 
digitalisation mean for Germany’s banking sector? 
Opening speech by Dr Andreas Dombret, Member of the Executive Board of the Deutsche 
Bundesbank, at the Bundesbank symposium on “Banking supervision in dialogue”, Frankfurt 
am Main, 8 July 2015. 
 1. 
Introduction 
Ladies and gentlemen 
Welcome to the Bundesbank’s 19th banking symposium. I’m delighted to see that we have a 
full  house  again  and  that  you  have  come  from  all  across  Germany  to  join  us  here  in 
Frankfurt. I’d  like  to  extend  a  warm  welcome  to  my  Executive  Board  colleagues  Johannes 
Beermann, Joachim Nagel and Carl-Ludwig Thiele. Ms Buch and Mr Weidmann would also 
like to have been here today, but have prior engagements and send their best regards. 
The banking sector in transition 
2. 
Ladies and gentlemen, the computer on board America’s first lunar module weighed around 
30  kg.  It  had  the  processing  power  of  a  pocket  calculator,  which  you  can  now  pick  up 
anywhere for a couple of euro – unless of course you just use the calculator app on your 
mobile phone or tablet. 
Around  the  time  of  the  US  moon  landing,  well  over  40  years  ago,  the  computer  gradually 
started to become a part of life, both at work and, later, at home. Then, almost 20 years later, 
the internet began to take off too. These days, it’s no longer just the manufacturing industry – 
under the umbrella of Industry 4.0 – but also banks and other financial service providers that 
are caught up in a new wave of digitalisation. 
The  question  we  have  to  ask  ourselves  –  you,  as  bankers,  and  my  colleagues  and  I  as 
Bundesbankers – is what can our sector do to keep this wave of advancement from dragging 
us down and instead allow it to propel us forward into new territory? 
Don’t get me wrong, the majority of banks started to set up sophisticated IT infrastructures 
for their core banking business decades ago, with online banking now part of the standard 
package. However, the current wave of digitalisation is not only simplifying and speeding up 
individual processes, but also changing many of the rules of the game in banking business. 
What  is  the  driving  force  behind  this  wave  of  digitalisation?  It  essentially  consists  of  three 
elements  which  I  will  discuss  in  my  speech  today,  namely  technology,  competition  and 
customers. 
It goes without saying that the digitalisation of the financial sector has been fuelled, to a large 
extent, by the development of highly effective, state-of-the-art technologies. 
Thanks to broadband networks, smartphones and advances in data processing, the technical 
boundaries  are  shifting  so  quickly  that  they  practically  no  longer  exist.  Thoughts  are  now 
turning towards how to  put that to good use. Economically speaking, there are all sorts of 
advantages to digitalisation. With intelligent and well applied IT solutions, you can automate 
processes  and  reduce  variable  costs.  No  time  is  wasted  in  processing,  combining  and 
analysing  information.  At  the  same  time,  today’s  IT  landscape  is  helping  us  to  eliminate 
complexity.  Last  but  not  least,  it  enables  us  to  tailor  services  to  our  customers’  individual 
needs. 
Another element of the driving force is the emergence of new sources of competition. Gone 
are  the  days  when  it  was  just  banks  positioned  in  what  surfers  call  the  line-up,  waiting  to 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  catch the best waves. In recent years, companies leading innovation in financial technology, 
or  FinTech  companies,  have  developed  a  large  number  of  IT-based  business  models  for 
payment transactions, credit brokerage and investment advice. 
Generally, only a small proportion of these innovative ideas and start-ups ever actually make 
it off the ground. The creativity and innovation of FinTech companies is nevertheless proof of 
the development potential to be unlocked in the banking sector. 
In addition to technology and competition, we must not forget that customers too are part of 
the driving force. In the past, people considered banking to be something that could only be 
done in person. Nowadays, encouraged by how information technology has improved other 
areas  of  their  lives,  bank  customers  are  becoming  increasingly  open  to  –  and  sometimes 
even  request  –  new  technological  solutions  for  doing  their  banking.  As  I’ve  already  said, 
many  people  now  take  online  banking  for  granted,  and  it  is  becoming  ever  more  widely 
accepted,  owing  to  innovative  concepts  such  as  online  video  consultation  services,  digital 
credit brokerage and the incorporation of social media into banking. 
There is no doubt about it, the digitalisation of the financial sector has clearly taken a huge 
leap  forward  and  there’s  no  going  back.  But  what  will  the  sector  move  on  to  next? 
Suggestions extend to “banking without banks”, that is to say, creating an efficient financial 
sector  without  banks.  Sometimes  the  media  even  pitch  banks  against  their  “digital” 
competitors in a battle to survive. 
But of course we still need banks – don’t let anyone persuade you otherwise. First, given the 
variety of accounts they have on offer, they are indispensable, even to innovative financial 
service providers. Second, they too have a competitive edge when it comes to digitalisation. 
For  example,  they  are  able  to  cover  the  entire  range  of  services  and  lines  of  business, 
thereby  creating  synergies  for  customers  and  the  institution  alike.  People  also  still  have 
immense trust in banks and savings banks when it comes to data security – at least that’s 
what  the  surveys  say.  They  also  continue  to  appreciate  the  personal  contact  with  banks, 
particularly when dealing with more complex financing issues. 
In any case, I think it is very unwise to think about the future in black and white terms. Banks 
are  already  working  together  with  start-ups  and,  in  some  cases,  are  developing  highly 
innovative  concepts  on  their  own.  Moreover,  many  FinTech  companies  first  need  a 
convincing business model before they can really launch an offensive against banks. Lastly, 
who knows what the sector’s next move will be. The recent competition posed by streaming 
services in the music industry shows how the tables can be turned, even years after the start 
of digitalisation. That’s why, at this juncture, I’m not going to venture a look into the crystal 
ball, which has become somewhat outdated in the meantime. 
Banks and savings banks, however, should be careful not to underestimate developments. 
Particularly in the field of computer technology, it is sometimes the case that even experts 
are wrong in their predictions. For example, in 1995 Bill Gates described the internet as just 
a  “passing  fad”.  And  in  1943  the  then  CEO  of  IBM  made  an  even  more  unfortunate 
prediction,  saying  that  he  thought  there  was  a  world  market  for  maybe  five  computers.  In 
business,  therefore,  the  old  adage  still  stands:  if  you  don’t  jump  on  the  bandwagon,  you’ll 
soon be left behind. 
Virtues in the digital age 
3. 
It is obviously not the supervisors’ job to offer you advice on the right strategy for dealing with 
digitalisation. The successful fate of a business model can be put down to entrepreneurial 
skills.  Ultimately,  the  markets  decide.  Nevertheless,  I  would  like  to  pass  on  two  key 
messages that I consider particularly important given the digitalisation megatrend. 
The first relates to what I was just saying: “sitting it out is not an option”. It may seem like a 
virtue  to  concentrate  on  what  you’re  good  at  and  to  sit  back  quietly  waiting  to  see  what 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  changes come. In a period of rapid change, though, this approach would probably lead you 
to a dead end. If you don’t move forwards, you end up going backwards. 
Take a look at the industries where digitalisation has already well and truly made its mark. 
Whether it’s the photo and film industry, the music industry or the telecommunications sector, 
digitalisation  has  not  only  made  these  industries  introduce  a  new  medium,  but  it  has  also 
forced  them  to  gain  new  core  competencies.  Established  enterprises  that  have  been 
successful up until now are not necessarily failing because they are unwilling to innovate, but 
rather because they are not prepared to undergo a complete strategic realignment. 
Kodak is often mentioned as a cautionary example here. As a producer of film for analogue 
cameras, Kodak found itself in major financial difficulties when digital photography started to 
take  over.  In  2012,  the  company  had  to  file  an  insolvency  petition  and  only  managed  to 
survive thanks to a radical restructuring. 
The risk of being caught off guard goes hand in hand with time pressure. During a period of 
change,  fundamentally  new  standards  and  new  customs  are  formed.  Once  the  first  trails 
have  been  established  in  the  field  of  digitalisation,  there  seems  to  be  little  point  worrying 
about plotting a course. 
Take  the  area  of  payment  transactions  as  an  example.  Competitors  such  as  PayPal  or 
recently  Apple  have  implemented  payment  systems  tailored  to  consumers  in  the  digital 
environment.  Once  customers  become  used  to  a  new  way  of  paying,  competitors  offering 
similar products certainly have a difficult job trying to convince them to switch providers. With 
their collective push for online payment transactions, German credit institutions therefore find 
themselves in the unaccustomed role of the attacker. This is precisely why it’s so important 
that members of the German banking community work together to increase their chances. 
In summary, I can only recommend that the German banks and savings banks avoid sitting 
back and waiting for changes to occur, but instead that they actively and intensively tackle 
the  issue  of  digitalisation  and  ascertain  its  implications  for  their  institution.  But  I  get  the 
impression that there is no real tendency in Germany to sit around and wait. 
My next message is, in short, “learn the new game rules”. Imagine for a moment that you are 
a football coach. Your team has all the right tactics in place and is doing well this season. 
Next  season,  however,  the  rules  of  the game  are  set  to  change  –  perhaps  the  number  of 
goals on the pitch is going up, or more than two teams are to compete on the pitch at one 
time, or the surface is changing from grass to something else. How would you prepare your 
team? One thing is clear: you first need to learn and understand the new rules before you 
can develop a successful game plan. 
Let’s  look  at  three  of  the  new  game  rules  that  I  believe  could  have  a  huge  impact  in  a 
digitalised financial sector. You could say that they are the basic digital principles you need 
to understand in order to find the right tactics. 
Game rule number one: the individual needs and wishes of customers are taking on a whole 
new  level  of  significance.  Easily  accessible,  transparent  and  personalised  services  are 
becoming the norm. In social networks, when shopping online or searching for information, 
consumers are already used to having their own needs catered to. Customers also want their 
banking to fit in and keep up with their lifestyle in future – this is especially, but not only, true 
for the younger generation. 
Providers  aiming  for  success  need  to  get  into  the  habit  of  looking  at  things  from  the 
customer’s perspective. Above all, this means being able to cater to different lifestyles and 
social  trends.  Companies  that  manage  to  build  relationships  with  their  customers  by 
providing comfort and accessibility tend to come up trumps. It’s no longer about the average 
customer, but about each individual. The number of goals on the pitch has, without a doubt, 
increased. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  This  brings  us  to  game  rule  number  two.  Not  only  is  the  number  of  goals  increasing,  but 
there are now more players on the pitch, who, incidentally, do not come with the traditional 
background and qualifications. Competition is becoming more global and more transparent, 
the  competitors  more  diverse.  Online,  the  customer’s  next  provider  is  probably  just  a  few 
clicks away – even across national borders. 
And a quick look at the banking supervisor’s website won’t even help you to identify all these 
competitors  anymore.  In  addition  to  FinTech  companies,  other  industries  with  a  strong  IT 
focus  are  only  one  step  away  from  the  banking  world. We  are  already  seeing  established 
online  enterprises  starting  to  link  their  enormous  customer  bases  and  their  experience  in 
digital processes and data management with banking services. The lines between industries 
are blurring. Now more than ever, banks need to be aware of what the competition is doing 
so that they can review and refine their own strategies. 
Game  rule  number  three  relates  to  adaptability.  If  you  go  from  playing  on  a  hard  pitch  to 
artificial 
flexible.  The  digital  world  welcomes 
experimentation,  is  prone  to  sudden  trends,  and  is  constantly  changing.  Although  the 
banking industry may not always be subject to all of this constant movement, adaptability is 
definitely becoming more important and relies on a flexible IT infrastructure, for example, to 
support it. Business models can also be more open and flexible in structure; just think of the 
“digital  ecosystem”  strategies  banks  are  now  employing.  With  these  strategies,  the  bank 
provides a digital platform, the contents of which customers and other service providers can 
have a hand in shaping. 
If you want to survive in the digital financial sector, you need to embrace and play by its new 
game rules. It’s not just the strategy itself you need to examine, but also the thought process 
on which it is based. If you don’t think “digitally”, you’re going to find it difficult to compete for 
digital customers. 
tactics  need 
turf,  your 
remain 
to 
Digitalisation from a banking supervisor’s perspective 
4. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  supervisors  are  interested  in  credit  institutions  that  are  stable  and 
profitable in the long term. At this point in my speech, you may see digitalisation as nothing 
but  a  threat  to  your  usual  business.  But  I  would  encourage  you  to  see  it  from  a  different 
perspective – one from which digitalisation is not the problem but rather the solution. 
What currently concerns us, as supervisors, as much as it does you, as bankers, is the lack 
of  profitability  in  the  German  banking  system,  the  main  cause  of  which  is  the  prolonged 
period  of  low  interest  rates.  Solving  the  problem  of  weak  earnings  is  key  to  ensuring  the 
stability of the financial system – and as you know, this is especially true for Germany. In this 
regard, digitalisation may very well be part of the solution. 
The  careful  use  of  information  technology  can,  for  example,  open  up  new  business  areas 
and boost profitability in the medium term. From easy-to-use, everyday IT applications to “big 
data”  analyses,  a  large  number  of  potential  sources  of  income  are  being  explored  at  the 
moment.  And  practical  add-on  services  ensure  that  customers  remain  loyal  to  their  bank 
even if competition becomes fiercer. Stability does not mean standing still, which is why it is 
probably in the interest of the supervisors if banks adapt to new demands in order to retain or 
even increase their profitability. 
But digitalisation also has an impact on the cost side. For instance, the branch network in 
Germany is still relatively close-knit and therefore expensive. Digitalisation may help banks to 
continue to reach a large number of customers, even with a less dense network of branches. 
I look forward to hearing what Mr Buschbeck and his panel have to say on this matter later. 
Digitalisation  may  ultimately  also  benefit  risk  management.  Making  prompt,  well-informed 
decisions is more challenging than ever. Just think of the increasingly complex connections 
between  markets,  countries  and  products,  and  the  growing  dynamism  of  the  markets. 
Efficient IT architecture – by which I mean systems that are consistent, flexible and accurate 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  – can give institutions a quick overview of their activities and risks. Well-informed decision-
makers  increase  their  own  chances  of  success and  also  protect the financial  system  as  a 
whole from speculation and knee-jerk reactions. 
However,  supervisors  must  also  be  aware  of  potential  risks  to  the  stability  of  the  financial 
system. The new playing field and the new players are highly likely to entail new risks. As 
regulators, we are already committed to protecting critical infrastructures, together with other 
authorities and the relevant providers. And you may be sure that we will also keep an eye on 
the new, largely unregulated competitors such as FinTech companies, for example. 
Nonetheless, digitalisation also creates new risks for individual banks. The most innovative 
digital solutions are of little use if they simultaneously open the gates to huge risk. Cyber risk 
has  increased  considerably  over  the  last  few  years. This  is  because  the  amount  of goods 
that need protecting has grown: as well as financial assets, personal data and hence access 
to services are now saved in “cyberspace”. 
These  days,  targeted  attacks  on  IT  systems  can  originate  from  anywhere  in  the  world. 
Hackers often need little more than a laptop with internet access. A large number of reasons 
can  motivate  cyber  attacks,  which  range  from  simple  attacks  by  amateurs  to  meticulously 
planned  attacks  with  an  economic  or  political  background.  At  the  same  time,  new  hacking 
methods spread through the net at lightning speed and are constantly evolving. 
Of  course,  this  is  an  issue  that  banking  supervisors  are  also  dealing  with.  IT  security  is 
therefore one of the focal points for European banking supervisors in 2015. As always, the 
Bundesbank and the ECB are working together closely and successfully in this area. At the 
same  time,  experts  from  the  Bundesbank  recently  visited  the  United  States  of  America  to 
exchange ideas and experiences with banking supervisors there. This exchange will continue 
after the summer break. 
But it’s not just targeted attacks that pose a risk. In complex IT systems, in particular, even 
small system errors can quickly cause enormous damage. Felix Hufeld will address the topic 
of “cyber risk” in his presentation, so I will make just one final comment. It seems to me that 
an awareness of these risks does not yet exist at all levels of management at banks. They 
urgently  need  to  catch  up  and  vastly  improve  the  protection  of  IT  systems  and  customer 
data. 
Conclusion 
5. 
Ladies and gentlemen, my speech has dived briefly into the wave of digitalisation that has 
only recently gathered pace and that will inevitably carry the financial sector to new shores. 
Everyone involved can benefit from digitalisation, but none more so than private customers in 
the  short  term.  New  technology  and  stronger  competition  mean  businesses  that  are  even 
better  tailored  to  their  personal  needs.  Ladies  and  gentlemen,  you  must  all  work  towards 
ensuring that Germany’s banking sector does not remain a blank spot on the digital world 
map. 
From my point of view, this requires four things. 
• 
• 
First, every bank needs a “digital agenda” and a flexible strategy. 
Second, every bank must find a balance between existing strengths and new types 
of banking business. 
Third, every bank must be aware of the problem of IT security and must also pass 
this awareness on to its customers. 
Fourth,  every  bank  must  modernise  its  IT  infrastructure  as  necessary  and  ensure 
that the systems are secure. 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  Both  we,  as  supervisors,  and  you,  as  representatives  of  Germany’s  banks  and  savings 
banks,  have  an  interest in  a  banking  system that  is  stable  and  profitable  in  the  long  term. 
Learning to play by the new rules and actively shaping the process of change is essential if 
we are to stay on top of the wave of digitalisation. This applies not only to you, but also to the 
supervisors, because it is not just about detecting and taking advantage of new opportunities, 
it  is  also  about  recognising  and  limiting  new  risks.  If  we  can  achieve  this,  we  will  all 
successfully ride the wave of digitalisation. 
Thank  you  very  much  for  listening.  The  Bundesbank’s  19th  banking  symposium  is  now 
underway. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
