  Sukhdave Singh: Financial governance and economic growth 
Keynote address by Dr Sukhdave Singh, Deputy Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia 
(Bank Negara Malaysia), at the Malaysian Economic Convention “Financial Governance and 
Economic Growth”, Kuala Lumpur, 28 September 2015. 
 It  is  indeed  an  honour to  be  speaking to  such a  distinguished  audience.  It  is  also  a  great 
pleasure for me to be here this morning and join my colleagues in the Economics fraternity at 
this 2015 Malaysian Economic Convention. 
To begin, let me share with you a story. 
Twenty years ago, on 28 January 1986, the NASA space shuttle Challenger was launched. 
Seventy-three  seconds  into  its  flight,  spectators  were  horrified  as  the  space  shuttle  broke 
apart in a fiery display and disintegrated over the Atlantic Ocean. Seven astronauts died. The 
catastrophe was traced to the failure of a single O-ring – a simple seal at a joint on one of the 
rocket boosters. The O-ring failed due to the unusually cold temperatures on the morning of 
the  launch.  Relative  to  the  highly  sophisticated  technologies  involved  in  building  and 
launching the shuttle, the O-ring was considered established technology, one with a patent 
history  of  90  years  by  the  time  the  Challenger  was  launched.  It  was  as  ironic  as  it  was 
instructive  that  such  a  complex  machine,  incorporating  the  most  advanced  aerospace 
technology of its time, failed and combusted due to a component as trivial and basic as an 
O-ring. 
Six years later, Michael Kremer, an economist at Harvard University, formulated the O-ring 
theory  of  economic  development1.  According  to  him,  if  strategic  complementarity  is 
sufficiently strong within a system, O-ring effects can create low-production traps. Financial 
Times columnist Tim Hartford relates Kremer’s theory to the concept of weak links2. When 
systems  have  a  strong  element  of  interdependence,  weak  links  begin  to  have  a  more 
multiplicative effect, rather than an additive effect, on the overall outcomes of the system. A 
musical  band  is  only  as  good  as  its  least  experienced  player.  A  dance  troupe  is  only  as 
synchronised as its worst dancer. 
Today’s  economies  and  financial  systems  have  undoubtedly  become  more  intricately 
interlinked across agents, markets and nations. This progression brings benefits as it unlocks 
new  synergies  and  uncovers  diverse  sources  of  growth.  However, 
increased 
interdependence also increases the potential for O-ring type effects. Any single component 
within this complex web of economic and financial relationships can become the weak link of 
the system, with highly detrimental effects on the system’s stability and on economic growth. 
The financial crisis of 2008–2009 in the advanced economies was a good illustration of an 
O-ring  weak  link,  whereby  a  seemingly  small  segment  of  the  US  financial  system  –  the 
subprime mortgage market – triggered an economic crisis that reverberated around the world 
and the effects of which are still being felt today. In many ways, the build-up of vulnerabilities 
that  led  to  the  crisis  arose  from  a  series  of  bad  financial  decisions  made  by  borrowers, 
bankers,  investors  and  regulators.  This  brings  forth  the  importance  of  sound  financial 
governance as a fundamental element of robust economies and financial systems, one that 
ensures that the possibility of the existence of weak links within the system is minimised. 
the 
                                                
1   Kremer,  M.  (1993).  The  O-Ring  Theory  of  Economic  Development.  The  Quarterly  Journal  of  Economics 
(Oxford University Press) 108 (3): 551–575. 
2   Hartford, T. (2015). Teamwork gives us added personbyte. Financial Times 19 June 2015. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
Today,  I  would  like  to  discuss  three  inter-related  issues  relevant  to  the  theme  of  this 
conference.  First  and  briefly, the  issue of  global financial  governance. Then  I  will  focus  at 
greater length on the relationship between financial governance and economic growth at the 
national level. The third and final part of my remarks will cover the governance of finance. 
Global financial governance: a lack of urgency 
Let me start with global financial governance. I will be brief on this as much of the discussion 
has been had elsewhere at various other platforms. Since the demise of the Bretton Woods 
system  in  the  1970s,  while  the  global  monetary  and  financial  system  has  become  more 
integrated  and  sophisticated,  global  financial  governance  has  changed  little.  The  financial 
crisis in the advanced economies and the years since have clearly delineated the fault lines 
in the global system and accentuated the dire lack of effective global financial governance. 
One would think that there would be a greater sense of urgency in collaborating to ensure 
that weak links in the system do not have wide-spread contagion. Unfortunately, there is no 
such  sense  of  urgency.  At  its  core,  the  global  system  remains  uneven,  unanchored  and 
unorganised. Let me elaborate. 
First, the foundations of the international financial architecture are uneven. As everyone is 
aware, there is an over reliance on the US dollar as the reserve currency and by extension, 
an  over-concentration  of  risk  with  the  US  economy  and  financial  system.  The  burden  of 
adjustment  is  asymmetrical  across  countries  –  between  deficit  and  surplus  countries, 
between debtors and creditors and between governments and the private sector. Despite the 
higher contribution of emerging economies to world growth, global policy priorities, decision 
making and standard setting remain largely the domain of the advanced economies. 
Second,  the  system  is  unanchored  and  crisis  prone.  With  no  guideposts,  automatic 
corrective  mechanisms  or  coordination  to  facilitate  adjustment,  the  system  is  prone  to 
excesses  and  is  perpetually  facing  disequilibrium  conditions,  resulting  in  persistent  global 
imbalances in terms of both the current and capital accounts, and the unsustainable build-up 
of debt. With no means to correct itself, adjustments often occur through costly upheavals in 
the form of balance of payments or financial crises. 
Third,  the system  is  unorganised  with  inadequate  global  response mechanisms. There  is 
neither an effective platform nor an established framework for policy coordination or for crisis 
containment, management and resolution. There is also no true global lender of last resort as 
the IMF itself has only limited resources. 
This  has  led  to  the  rise  of  governance  innovations  amongst  many  economies,  including 
Malaysia and its neighbours. Since the Asian Financial Crisis of 1997, various initiatives have 
fostered stronger regional cooperation, including information sharing and alternative liquidity 
support  arrangements  that  are  bilateral  or  regional  in  scope.  While  these  efforts  have 
reinforced  the  region’s  defences  against  external  shocks,  they  have  not  reduced  the 
vulnerability  of  individual  economies  to  external  shocks.  Were  the  fault  lines  in  the  global 
monetary and financial system to widen, there is no guarantee that emerging economies like 
ours will not be dragged into those crevices. Given the lack of global initiatives to close those 
fault lines, what economies like Malaysia must do is to ensure that our house is strong. We 
must build-up our defences and have the resilience to withstand the volatility and headwinds 
created by the global economic and financial environment. 
One important source of that resilience is having sound financial governance at all levels of 
our society: the government, the corporate sector and the household sector. 
Financial governance: foundation of sustainable economic growth 
Financial  governance  sets  the  stage  for  sound  financial  decision-making.  Broadly  defined, 
strong  financial  governance  is  a  sum  of  many  parts  including  strong  institutions,  efficient 
processes, and effective rules, regulations and norms. It affects the way financial decisions 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
are  made,  including  decisions  relating  to  savings  and  spending,  borrowing  and  lending, 
investment  and  profit  distribution,  and  it  is  relevant  to  all  economic  agents,  be  they 
households, businesses or governments. 
Soundness of financial governance is a critical prerequisite for the sustainable growth of any 
economy. Having said that, we also have to recognise that the process of economic growth 
itself is an outcome of a system that is highly complex and adaptive, and that a country’s 
economy,  polity  and  society  –  and  the  institutions  that  underpin  each  of  these  –  are 
embedded  within  a  complex  network  of  interdependencies.  Therefore,  there  cannot  be  a 
one-size-fits-all prescription of what constitutes good financial governance for all economies. 
Nevertheless, I do believe that we can recognise the presence or absence of good financial 
governance based on broad characteristics. In this regard, three key inter-related features 
are typically present when there is good financial governance. 
Firstly, effective financial governance ensures that financial decisions take into account all 
externalities arising from the decisions. Financial decisions often have consequences that 
are not fully borne by the decision maker. Financial decisions that may appear rational at the 
individual level, may in fact be collectively unsustainable. For instance, corrupt practices may 
be  optimal for  the  individual  perspective,  but they  are  clearly  detrimental  to  the  welfare  of 
society and the economy. In order to avoid the misallocation of resources, these externalities 
have to be internalised either by aligning the incentives of the decision maker; introducing a 
more  representative  decision-making  process;  putting  in  place  the  appropriate  institutional 
arrangements;  having  effectively  enforced  laws,  rules  and  regulations;  or  occasionally,  by 
societal norms. 
Secondly,  sound  financial  governance  encourages  discipline  in  adhering  to  the  budget 
constraint.  All  economic  agents  are  bound  by  inter-temporal  budget  constraints,  and 
adherence  to  it  when  making  financial  decisions  is  key  to  sustainability.  This  is  particular 
relevant  when  the  repercussions  of  financial  decisions  fall  on  parties  who  are  not 
represented – for example, decisions that shift a large debt burden onto future generations. 
Thirdly, strong financial governance has robust external checks and balances. To ensure 
sound decision making, especially when externalities are involved, decision makers, and the 
decision making process, must be subjected to scrutiny by external parties. In this regard, 
accountability, 
take 
the  empowerment  of 
consequential action are key to effective financial governance. 
All  these  principles  apply  fully  to  the  management  of  public  finances.  Sound  public 
financial  governance  is  the  legitimate  use  of  authority  in  the  management  of  a  country’s 
financial resources with integrity to promote sustainable development. 
At the heart of it all, sound governance practices in the Government can be traced back to 
the  concept  articulated  by  French  Enlightenment  political  philosopher  (Baron  de) 
Montesquieu in the 18th century. The separation of power between the legislative, executive 
and  judicial  arms  of  the  government  safeguards  against  authority  being  excessively 
centralised  in  any  particular  party. It  is the  effective  separation  of  power  that  provides  the 
checks  and  balances  that  ensure  that  there  is  strong  financial  governance  at  all  levels  of 
government. It is the effective separation of power that ensures that the decision maker not 
only considers his or her self-interest but also that of the society at large. It is the effective 
separation  of  power  that  ensures  that  the  risk  of  abuse  or  misuse  of  public  funds  is 
minimized.  Therefore,  if  you  want  to  know  the  state  of  public  financial  governance  in  a 
country, the first question to ask is whether there is effective separation of power. 
To  a  great  extent,  the  current  state  of  public  finances  reflects  the  past  track  record  of 
financial  governance  in  the  public  sector.  If  the  state  of  fiscal  health  in  the  crisis-affected 
economies  had  been  in  a  better  condition,  monetary  policy  would  not  have  had  to  do  so 
much heavy lifting, QE may not have seen the light of day, and we may now be having better 
economic  growth.  When  there  is  an  imbalance  in  macroeconomic  policies,  or  when  such 
the  external  party 
transparency,  and 
to 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  
 
policies are used as substitutes for structural reforms, the long-term outcomes will always be 
sub-optimal, not least because of the distortions and imbalances that are created. 
It  is  certainly  the  case  that  the recent  crisis  has  been  a  key  factor  behind  the  increase  in 
government indebtedness. In the aftermath of the crisis, governments in the crisis affected 
economies  had  to  use public  funds  to rescue  troubled  banks.  For  example,  Ireland  had  a 
government debt to GDP ratio of just 24% in 2007, but due to its banking crisis and its impact 
on the Irish economy, that number jumped to 111% by 20113. In fact, even for countries that 
were not at the centre of the financial crisis, fiscal spending to stimulate domestic demand 
was increased to offset the negative real sector shock created by the crisis. The low growth 
environment also reduced the tax revenues of governments, further eroding public finances. 
So, the crisis certainly played a role in the worsening of public finances. 
But that is not the complete story. In many countries, public finances were already stretched 
even before the crisis. This surely says something about the state of financial governance in 
the public sector of these economies. In the advanced economies, ageing populations and 
over-generous health and pension benefits were a major source of strained fiscal positions. 
Although the threat of demographics to fiscal sustainability is at this juncture most imminent 
for  countries  such  as  Japan,  Spain,  Italy  and  Greece,  where  the  old  age  populations  are 
rising most sharply amid already high levels of debt, it is only a matter of time before many 
emerging market economies will also face similar issues. That includes countries in ASEAN. 
It is therefore imperative that the public financial governance adequately embed such longer-
term considerations into financial decisions being made today. 
In  many  emerging  market  economies  that  have  endowments  of  resources,  the  state  of 
financial governance is also reflected in how governments managed the riches that flow from 
these  resource  endowments,  especially  in  terms  of  providing  for  future  generations  and 
saving  for  bad  times.  Sadly,  there  are  too  many  examples  of  countries  that  have  badly 
managed their resource wealth. Not only have they failed to save for the future, even their 
use  of  the  resource  wealth  has  contributed  minimally  to  supporting  sustainable  economic 
growth,  often  because  much  of  that  wealth  is  pillaged  by  those  responsible  for  its 
management. 
The  practise  of  good  public  financial  governance  is  evidenced  not just from  the  pattern  of 
spending  but  also  from  the  effectiveness  of  implementation  and  the  achievement  of 
outcomes.  For  example,  education  and  talent  development  is  a  key  priority  in  many 
countries,  emerging  as  well  as  developed.  Large  amounts  of  public  funds  are  devoted  to 
education.  On  the  surface,  it  may  look  like  good  financial  governance  to  spend  so  much 
money on such a socially and economically desirable objective. Yet, much of that spending 
goes to waste if there are no accompanying measures to bring about other complementary 
changes such as raising standards and professionalism, addressing incentives, and ensuring 
that what is taught meets the needs of the economy. High spending of public funds and the 
persistence of mediocrity will go hand-in-hand if no one is likely to be held accountable for 
failure to achieve outcomes. Therefore, good financial governance must be measured in the 
achievement of specific and measurable outcomes. If the outcomes fall short, then tax-payer 
money cannot be considered to have been well spent. 
When there is a lack of financial governance in the public sector, it means that government 
contracts are awarded based on who you know rather than who can give the best value for 
the money. As a result, government projects often become costly, poorly delivered and fail to 
provide  the  incentives  for  increased  proficiency  and  productivity.  Not  only  that,  a  pool  of 
vested interest develops to feed on the lack of financial governance, and any threats to their 
privileged  livelihood  are  met  with  great  hostility.  It  is  the  privileged  position  of  this  vested 
                                                
3   Source: IMF’s Fiscal Monitor Database. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
interest that makes government reform so difficult. The end result is that the intention to have 
an economy that is driven by efficiency and increasing productivity remains unattainable. 
There  are  countries  that  have  gotten  it  right  when  it  comes  to  good  public  financial 
governance. For resource rich economies, Norway is one example, where since 1990, the 
government has put aside its oil income in a fund that at the end of 2014 was worth almost 
US$1 trillion4. The sustainability of the fund has been supported by a fiscal rule that specifies 
that over the course of the business cycle, the government can only spend the expected real 
return on the fund but it cannot use any of the fund’s capital. For another example, this time 
of  a  country  that  does  not  have  any  significant  resource  endowments,  Singapore  is 
considered to have prudent public financial governance. Again the fiscal rectitude is guided 
by legal constraints. For example, the country has adopted a legal constraint to balance the 
budget  over  the  government’s  term  in  office.  It  also  maintains  an  internal  discipline  of 
keeping  government  spending  at  below  20%  of  GDP5.  By  comparison,  most  developed 
countries have government spending at around 40–50% of GDP. So, good public financial 
governance  is  possible,  assuming  there  is  the  political  will  to  put  in  place  the  appropriate 
mechanisms. 
What about financial governance in the private sector? The financial crisis in the advanced 
economies  and  the  years  since  have  shown  how  unsustainable  household  finances  can 
drag  down  economic  growth  for  many  years.  Excessive  leverage  and  high  household 
indebtedness often have negative economic implications. In pondering the issue of financial 
governance at the individual and household level, I am reminded of Leo Tolstoy’s infamous 
quote from Anna Karenina, “All happy families are alike; each unhappy family is unhappy in 
its own way.” There are indeed numerous causes of unhappiness, but being confronted with 
the  consequences  of  bad  financial  decisions  made  in  the  past  must  surely  be  a  common 
cause of much unhappiness among many families. 
This issue is especially pertinent in the current environment of prolonged low interest rates. 
Sound  financial  decisions  are  needed  to  ensure  that  households  do  not  live  beyond  their 
means and accumulate excessive debt. This is essential to ensure the sustainable growth in 
consumption,  rather  than  having  debt-fuelled  consumption  binges  followed  by  prolonged 
slumps. It is these types of considerations that have made Bank Negara Malaysia maintain a 
level  of  interest  rates  that  we  believe  balances  between  supporting  the  economy  and 
discouraging  excessive  risk  taking.  This  has  been  supplemented  with  other  policy  tools, 
including macroprudential policies, to manage risks within the financial system and economy. 
Therefore, it is not only national governments themselves that must practice sound financial 
governance,  they  must  also  promote  it  as  a  key  priority  within  the  society  and  not  create 
incentives that lead to unsustainable financial behaviour among economic agents. 
Turning now to the corporate sector, at the surface, corporate financial governance appears 
to have ample checks and balances. Management is accountable to boards and boards are 
accountable to shareholders. For publicly listed companies, there is the market discipline of 
the share price taking a beating for any perceived shortfalls in financial governance. 
Unfortunately, history is replete with incidences of the failure of such checks and balances, 
including  the  repeated  failure  of  markets  to  impose  financial  discipline  on  corporations. 
Notable examples of the failure of corporate financial governance include the Carrian Group 
in  1983,  Enron  in  2001,  Worldcom  in  2002,  and  the  numerous  examples  from  the  recent 
financial  crisis.  The  narrow  fixation  on  profit  maximisation  has,  in  many  cases,  led  to  the 
                                                
4   Source:  https://www.regjeringen.no/en/topics/the-economy/the-government-pension-fund/market-value-of-the-
government-pension-f/id699635/. 
5   Source:  https://www.mti.gov.sg/AboutMTI/Documents/app.mti.gov.sg/data/pages/507/doc/ERC_Comm_Main-
Report_Part2_v2.pdf, page 77. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  
 
misallocation of resources, including the channelling of funds towards unproductive activities 
for purposes of rent extraction and speculation. This harms economic growth as productive 
segments are under-invested in. 
The  functioning  of  markets  also  needs  to  be  improved.  Given  the  widespread  abuse  and 
attempts at manipulation, I believe that appropriate regulations, and their enforcement, can 
help to ensure that markets function as intended, and support the greater good of society, 
rather than just the greed and self-interest of the market participants. 
There is one final aspect of corporate financial governance I would like to mention, and this 
has to do with what I consider to be one of the biggest threats to future economic growth – 
environmental sustainability. 
The  damaging  effects  of  activities  such  as  deforestation,  over-fishing  and  excessive 
emissions on the environment, have wide-ranging implications not just on the future quality of 
economic activity, but on the quality of life itself. Progress has been made both in terms of 
regulations  and  the  increased  sensitivity  of  corporations  to  their  environmental  footprint. 
However,  the  progress  is  relatively  small  and  developing  economies  are  particularly 
vulnerable to being made the choice location for the so-called dirty industries. The pursuit of 
profit  is  a  powerful  motivation  for  corporate  existence  and  unfortunately,  it  often  leads  to 
short-sighted behaviour. The ongoing Volkswagen scandal is a clear example of this. Again, 
it  reinforces  the  need for  sound  government  regulation  in  ensuring that financial  decisions 
taken by corporations are not only good for those corporates but also for society as a whole. 
Let  me  now  move  on  to  the  last  part  of  my  speech,  which  relates  to  the  governance  of 
finance.  After  all,  the  availability  of  finance  is  a  key  constraint  for  economic  agents  and 
therefore, a key determinant of economic activity. 
institutions 
Governance of finance: anchoring finance in the real economy 
The  need  to  maintain  sound  financial  governance  of  financial 
is  best 
demonstrated through the impact of its absence. The recent crisis is a stark reminder that 
weak  financial  governance  of  financial  institutions  can  result  in  unsustainable  levels  of 
leverage, excessive maturity mismatches and underpricing of risk within the financial system, 
ultimately  leading  to  widespread  wealth  destruction  and  economic  dislocation.  In  the  US 
alone,  conservative  estimates  have  placed  the  loss  from  the  financial  crisis  at  between 
$6 trillion to $14 trillion, or 40 to 90 per cent of the annual economic output6. 
In response to the global crisis, more extensive international reforms have been pursued to 
strengthen the financial buffers of financial institutions through, among others, stricter capital 
and liquidity requirements. These reforms have helped to strengthen the balance sheets of 
financial  institutions  and  sustained  their  ability  to  support  orderly  financial  intermediation. 
While I acknowledge the importance of these reforms, there is an even more important issue 
related to the overall “governance of finance”. The financial crisis contains many lessons on 
how  governance  of  finance  failed  as  well  as  the  consequences  of  such  failure.  The 
governance of finance relates to the behaviour of financial institutions and their determinants 
from the perspective of organisational arrangements, incentive structures and ethics, as well 
as  the  regulatory  and  market  environment.  When  these  factors  are  correctly  aligned,  the 
financial system plays its role in supporting sustainable economic growth; when they are not, 
the financial system creates risks that can potentially undermine economic growth. Central to 
the 
institutional 
arrangements that provide effective checks and balances to facilitate sound decision-making. 
At 
this  entails  well-defined  responsibilities  and  accountabilities, 
institutions  are  strong 
robust  governance 
framework  of 
the  broadest 
financial 
level, 
                                                
6   Luttrell, Atkinson and Rosenblum (2013). Assessing the Costs and Consequences of the 2007–09 Financial 
Crisis and Its Aftermath. Economic Letter 8(7), Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
underpinned  by  a  clear  separation  between  board  oversight  and  management.  While  this 
may  appear  to  be  a  rudimentary  feature  of  any  governance  arrangement,  it  may  be 
challenging  in  organisations  that  are  large  and  have  complex  or  opaque  reporting  lines, 
resulting in boards and senior management that are too far removed from the issues on the 
ground. “Too big to manage” is a real concern. In their reflection of banking practices leading 
up  to  the  crisis,  the  United  Kingdom’s  Parliamentary  Commission  on  Banking  Standards 
found  that  an “unclear, complex  and  confusing allocation  of  responsibilities”  among  senior 
management had posed challenges in identifying individuals who were responsible for poor 
decisions and more importantly, in holding them to account7. This is an important lesson to 
keep  in  mind  for  Asia,  as  our  financial  institutions  continue  to  significantly  expand  their 
operations across sectors and geographical boundaries. 
In ensuring the effectiveness of governance structures, none is more important than having 
competent and committed individuals at the helm of financial institutions. The members of 
the board of directors must have a sound understanding of the business, the risk profile of 
the  financial  institution,  and  the  operating  environment.  The  board  must  also  be  ready  to 
challenge  executive  management  and  hold  it  to  account.  This  demands  a  combination  of 
experience, confidence and character – elements which were found lacking among financial 
institutions in the recent crisis. A Financial Times report in 2008 found that most directors at 
several large and troubled institutions had no significant experience in financial services8. An 
undue deference to management by directors was also prevalent in banks such as Northern 
Rock, HBOS and RBS, where the boards did not adequately challenge the management’s 
pursuit of aggressive, high-risk strategies. 
It  is  for  these  reasons  that  Bank  Negara  Malaysia  undertakes  rigorous  and  frequent 
supervisory  engagements  with  the  boards  of  financial  institutions.  Such  engagements  are 
crucial  to  developing  a  better  understanding  of  board  dynamics  and  their  effectiveness  in 
their governance role. As a matter of practice, prospective directors of financial institutions in 
Malaysia  are  subjected  to  close  scrutiny  through  rigorous  interviews  by  the  Bank.  This 
approach was also recently adopted by the UK’s Prudential Regulatory Authority9. 
Governance  arrangements  in  financial  institutions  must  also  be  reinforced  by  a  corporate 
culture  which  values  and  reinforces  considerations  for  risk,  ethics  and  compliance  at  all 
levels of the financial institution. This starts with the right “tone from the top”, whereby the 
board and senior management shape the core values for the firm. A common theme in the 
findings across various inquiries into the crisis is a breakdown in culture, where a disregard 
for prudence and ethics was tolerated. In some cases, individuals bearing red flags were not 
only  ignored,  but  punished.  The  Financial  Crisis  Inquiry  Commission  launched  by  the  US 
government  chronicles  two  such  instances10.  In  Lehman  Brothers,  the  Chief  Risk  Officer 
(CRO) was stripped of her role in risk matters after warning against too much risk in the face 
of  growing  pressure  to  compete  against  other  investment  banks.  Similarly,  repeated 
warnings  raised  by  the  business  chief  underwriter  of  Citigroup  against  large  purchases  of 
defective  loans  did  not  translate  into  action;  instead,  he  was  downgraded  in  performance 
reviews and subsequently demoted. 
Another  major  component  in  the  governance  of  finance  is  how  individual  incentives  are 
influenced through compensation. The global financial crisis offers a telling display of how 
                                                
7   Parliamentary Commission on Banking Standards (2013). Changing Banking for Good: First report of session 
2013–14. Vol. II, HL Paper 27-II HC 175-II (London: HMSO), paragraph 553. 
8   Guerrera, F. and P. T. Larsen. Gone by the board? Why bank directors did not spot credit risks. Financial 
Times 25 June 2008. 
9   Source: https://www.fca.org.uk/static/documents/consultation-papers/cp14–13.pdf, paragraph 7.6. 
10   Financial Crisis Inquiry Commission (2011). The Financial Crisis Inquiry Report: Final Report of the National 
Commission on the Causes of the Financial and Economic Crisis in the United States. Washington, D. C. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  
 
incentives were misaligned through the widespread adoption of compensation systems that 
rewarded  short-term  performance.  In  the  US,  loan  officers  at  Washington  Mutual  were 
rewarded  more  for  originating  higher  risk  loans,  while  loan  processing  personnel  were 
compensated  according  to  the  speed  and  number  of  loans  processed,  rather  than  loan 
quality.  Meanwhile,  AIG  Financial  Products  compensated  its  employees,  including  risk 
officers,  on  the  basis  of  revenues  brought  in  rather  than  profits.  At  Lloyds,  incentive 
schemes which pressured sales staff to meet targets or face demotion also encouraged mis-
selling of payment protection insurance. In all these instances, executives were inclined to 
focus on immediate outcomes such as revenues and sales targets in order to deliver visible 
results  quickly,  without much regard for  the risks  assumed.  Major  efforts  have  since  been 
undertaken  internationally  to  address  these  issues.  The  essence  of  these  reforms  is  two-
pronged: the first is a greater emphasis on the governance of the compensation framework 
by the board and senior management; the second is a greater alignment of compensation 
practices with prudent risk-taking. As risks undertaken today may materialise much later in 
the  future,  the  latter  entails  deferring  portions  of  compensation  and  subjecting  them  to 
adjustments, such as bonus-malus and clawbacks. 
Finally, a strengthened role of market discipline can also shape the governance of finance for 
the better by reducing information asymmetries between the market and financial institutions. 
Again,  regulations  can  play  a  part  by  enhancing  the  scope  and  quality  of  mandatory 
disclosures,  such  as  in  respect  of  key  information  relating  to  risk  exposures,  risk 
management  policies  and  capital  ratios.  A  relevant  emerging  trend  among  investors  and 
consumers  has  been  an  increasing  focus  on  more  sustainable  approaches  to  finance, 
including  those  which  consider  environmental,  social  and  governance  concerns.  For 
example,  large  institutional  investors,  including  sovereign  wealth  funds,  have  started  to 
channel more funds to firms with sustainability commitments. Admittedly, the progress made 
on this front has been rather modest thus far, but it does have the potential to enable a wider 
range  of  stakeholders  to  determine  the  sustainability  of  finance  and  its  role  in  facilitating 
sustainable economic growth. 
Conclusion 
I have not actually finished my story on the Challenger shuttle disaster at the beginning of my 
speech. After the harrowing accident, President Reagan formed the Rogers Commission to 
investigate the incident, and it was found that the accident could have been avoided entirely. 
The  special  commission  reported  that  NASA’s  organisational  culture  and  decision-making 
processes were key contributing factors to the catastrophic event. NASA managers had been 
aware  of  the  potentially  fatal  flaw  in  the  O-rings  since  1977,  but  did  not  respond 
appropriately.  And  on  that  fateful  morning,  warnings  from  engineers  about  the  risks  of 
launching  in  the  low  temperatures  were  met  with  contempt,  and  the  superiors  were  not 
adequately notified of these technical concerns. 
Therein  lies  the  importance  of  governance  structures  and  how  decisions  are  made. 
Governance  influences  decisions,  and  decisions  shape  outcomes.  It  is  no  different  for 
financial governance. Be it financial decisions at the international or national level, public or 
private,  corporates  or  financial  institutions,  households  or  individuals,  sound  financial 
governance  is  the  bedrock  of  stable  and  robust  economies.  The  fact  that  a  lack  of  good 
financial  governance  increases  the  likelihood  of  O-ring-like  accidents,  with  potentially 
devastating effects on the economy, should make sound financial governance an economic 
and political priority. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
