  Emmanuel Tumusiime-Mutebile: The implication of the exchange rate 
depreciation for inflation and monetary policy 
Remarks  by  Mr  Emmanuel  Tumusiime-Mutebile,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Uganda,  at  the 
10th Private Sector Foundation Uganda International Trade Expo, Lugogo, 25 August 2015. 
 Good morning ladies and gentlemen. 
I would like to begin by commending the Private Sector Foundation for organising this Trade 
Expo, which performs an important role in promoting trade and industry in Uganda. In this 
address I want to take the opportunity to explain the macroeconomic policies which the Bank 
of Uganda is currently implementing to address the shocks facing the economy and ensure 
that it remains stable. 
As you all know, Uganda’s exchange rate has faced repeated bouts of pressure since the 
first half of 2014. On a trade weighted basis, the exchange rate has depreciated by around 
23  percent  since  August  2014.  The  main  reason  for  this  depreciation  is  that  Uganda  has 
suffered  several  external  shocks  which  have  affected  exports,  tourism  and  foreign  direct 
investment,  while  at  the  same  time  demand  for  imports  has  remained  quite  strong.  We 
suffered a wider current account deficit in the last financial year and this deficit was not fully 
covered by surpluses on the financial account of the Balance of Payments. 
Uganda is far from unique in facing exchange rate pressures. Many emerging markets and 
developing economies around the world, including in Africa, have seen their currencies fall 
sharply in value over the last year, mainly because of lower commodity prices and a reversal 
of capital flows. 
The  depreciation  of the exchange  rate  has  implications for the macroeconomy  and for the 
different sectors of the economy. I will discuss the macroeconomic implications first and then 
address the sectoral implications. 
Before discussing the impact of the depreciation on the macroeconomy I want to emphasise 
two  important  features  of  our  macroeconomic  framework.  The  first  is  that  the  primary 
objective of the Bank of Uganda’s monetary policy is the control of inflation. This is because 
inflation is such an important variable in the economy, directly affecting the welfare of all the 
population  as  well  as  the  business  environment  for  the  private  sector  and  because  it  is  a 
variable  which  it  is  feasible  for  monetary  policy  to  control,  at  least  over  a  medium  term 
horizon. 
Our target for annual core inflation is 5 percent. It is not realistic to control core inflation to 
5 percent in every single month – sometimes it will be lower and sometimes higher – but it is 
realistic to aim for an average core inflation of 5 percent over a medium term horizon of two 
to  three  years.  Over  the  last  three  years,  since  August  2012,  core  inflation  has  averaged 
4.7 percent. 
The main tool of monetary policy is our policy interest rate which we call the Central Bank 
Rate  (CBR).  Ceteris  paribus,  if  we  believe,  on  the  basis  of  our  economic  forecasts,  that 
inflation will rise in the future, we will normally raise the CBR, and vice versa. 
The  second feature  of  our  macroeconomic framework  that  I  want  to  emphasise  is  that  we 
have  a  flexible  exchange  rate. We  don’t  attempt  to  control  the  level  of  the  exchange  rate 
because it is neither feasible in a small open economy subject to external shocks nor is it 
desirable, as I will explain later when I discuss the sectoral effects of the depreciation. 
The BOU restricts its interventions in the foreign exchange market to dampening volatility in 
the exchange rate when this becomes excessive. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  The  exchange  rate  depreciation  is  a  negative  supply  shock  for  the  economy.  It  raises  the 
cost  of  supplying  goods  and  services  in  the  Ugandan  economy,  because  many  of  these 
goods  and  services  are  either  directly  imported  or  are  produced  locally  but  use  imported 
inputs  in  their  production.  Such  a  shock  will  unavoidably  raise  inflation,  although  it  usually 
takes up to a year for the full effect of an exchange rate depreciation to be felt on domestic 
prices.  The  questions  which  macroeconomic  policy  makers  must  address  are:  how  much 
additional inflation should be tolerated? And what can be done to curb the rise in inflation? 
Core  inflation  is  still  at  very  moderate  levels;  it  was  5.4  percent  in  July.  But  given  the 
magnitude of the exchange rate depreciation over the last 12 months, and the fact that this 
depreciation has not yet fed through fully into higher domestic prices, there would be a strong 
danger  that  inflation  would  rise  to  around  15  percent  if  the  BOU  had  not  tightened  its 
monetary policy in recent months. That is why we have raised the CBR, in three steps, from 
11 percent in April 2015 to 16 percent earlier this month. Core inflation will inevitably rise to 
some extent over the next 12 months, but by raising the policy interest rate we aim to restrain 
this rise and keep inflation within single digits. We believe that core inflation will begin to fall 
back towards five percent in the second half of 2016. We are determined to avoid any repeat 
of 2011 when core inflation rose to 30 percent. 
The  increase  in  the  CBR  is  intended  to  influence  other  interest  rates  in  the  economy, 
including bank lending rates; otherwise it would not work to curb inflation. We have already 
seen commercial banks raise their prime lending rates. 
The average prime lending rate of the commercial banks is currently just under 23 percent 
compared to 21 percent in January of this year. 
Higher interest rates will reduce borrowing by the private sector and thus dampen demand 
for goods and services in the economy, which will help to alleviate inflationary pressures. In 
addition,  raising  the  CBR  has  a  signalling  effect  which  we  hope  will  influence  the 
expectations of the private sector. If private sector agents expect that inflation will be kept 
under control, actual increases in wages and prices are more likely to be moderate. 
The increase in the CBR and consequent reduction in the growth of demand will also have a 
temporary impact on the growth of real output. Hence we now expect that real growth in the 
current financial year will be lower than the 5.8 percent forecast at the time of the budget in 
June, and will probably be around 5.4 percent. 
Unfortunately,  if  we  want  to  control  inflation  in  the  face  of  an  adverse  supply  price  shock, 
some costs in terms of lower real growth cannot be avoided. However, we expect that real 
GDP growth will climb towards 6 percent over the medium term. 
Let  me  now  discuss  the  sectoral  impacts  of  the  exchange  rate  depreciation,  which  differ 
between  the  traded  goods  and  the  non-traded  goods  sectors  of  the  economy.  The  traded 
goods  sectors  are  those  which  produce  for  export  or  which  produce  goods  that  compete 
against imports in the domestic market. What matters for the competitiveness of the traded 
goods  sectors  is  the  real  effective  exchange  rate,  which  is  a  measure  of  changes  in  the 
nominal exchange rate of the Ugandan Shilling against the currencies of our trading partners 
adjusted  for  differences  in  inflation  rates.  Over  the  course  of  2014/15,  the  real  effective 
exchange rate depreciated by about 13 percent, thereby boosting the competitiveness of the 
traded goods sectors of our economy. 
This  illustrates  one  of  the  most  important  benefits  of  a flexible  exchange  rate;  it  helps  the 
economy to adjust to external shocks. Although the real effective exchange rate is not the 
only factor which affects the competitiveness of traded goods industries, the depreciation is 
still important, because it strengthens the price incentives facing traded goods industries. 
We need to strengthen the performance of our traded goods industries. In the six years since 
the global economic crisis broke out in 2008/09, the growth of Uganda’s goods exports has 
been weak, averaging only 3 percent per annum in dollar terms. Services exports have done 
much better, with average growth of 16 percent over the last 6 years, but this has not been 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  sufficient to prevent the trade deficit in goods and services from widening from $2.2 billion in 
2008/09 to almost $3 billion in the last financial year. 
Over  the  medium  term  the  growth  of  Uganda’s  demand  for  imports  is  likely  to  be  robust 
especially because of the large requirements for capital investment. If we are to avoid our 
trade  deficits  widening  further,  it  is  imperative  to  strengthen  the  growth  of  exports  and  of 
industries which can compete with imports. I hope that the real exchange rate depreciation 
that has occurred over the last 12 months will contribute to an improved performance of the 
traded goods sectors. 
A real depreciation of the exchange rate has the opposite impact on the non-traded goods 
sectors of the economy; these are sectors which sell their output on the domestic market and 
do  not  face  competition  from  imports.  The  real  depreciation  will  squeeze  their  profitability, 
ceteris paribus, just as it strengthens the profitability of the traded goods sectors. From the 
standpoint of the long term interests of the economy, shifting relative price incentives from 
the non-traded goods sectors to the traded goods sectors is necessary if we are to achieve 
lower trade deficits. 
To conclude, I want to emphasise that our economy has to adjust to the external shocks that 
it is facing. Adjustment of some sort is unavoidable, but policymakers have some choice over 
the  nature  of  the  adjustment  to  the  shock.  Our  policy  responses  to  the  shock  prioritise 
controlling  domestic  inflation  because  inflation  has  such  a  critical  impact  on  everyone  in 
Uganda,  including  everyone  in  the  business  sector.  We  will  ensure  that  inflation  remains 
firmly under control. 
Thank you for listening. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
