  Henry A Kofi Wampah: Ghana – macroeconomic developments and 
outlook for 2015 
Address  by  Mr  Henry  A  Kofi  Wampah,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Ghana,  at  the  2014 
Chartered Institute of Bankers (GH) Annual Bankers’ Dinner, Accra, 29 November 2014. 
 Mr. Chairman, 
The President of the Chartered Institute of Bankers, Ghana,  
The Deputy Governor, 
CEOs of Banks,  
Distinguished Bankers,  
Distinguished Guests, 
Members of the Press,  
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It  gives  me  great  pleasure  to  be  in  the  midst  of  esteemed  bankers  and  colleagues  to 
exchange  views  and  information  on  the  banking  system  and  to  share  with  you  some 
perspectives on monetary policy and banking sector developments over the past year as well 
as  the  Bank  of Ghana’s  policy  vision  for the  coming  year.  I feel  particularly  honoured  and 
thankful for your kindness in naming this evening’s event Governor’s Day. 
Mr. Chairman, it is not an understatement to say that 2014 has been a very challenging year 
with external sector shocks and domestic macroeconomic imbalances, which reflected in a 
steep depreciation of the cedi and rising inflation. As bankers, I know you faced your own 
challenges and had to dig deep into your arsenal of knowledge and experience to navigate 
the turbulent waters. I believe that as a country, we came to the edge of the precipice, but 
through  our  collective  efforts,  enterprise,  and  determination  we  have  pulled  through  and 
would turn the tide and restore this economy to a sustainable growth path as we continue to 
work  together  on  the  remaining  challenges.  Even  though  the  challenges  are  not  over,  I 
believe that at least the level of despair has diminished and confidence is rebounding. 
Before I move on to give you a sense of the policy direction for 2015, let me quickly review 
the  macroeconomic  landscape  and  developments  in  the  banking  sector  in  the  year  that  is 
fast drawing to a close. 
Macroeconomic developments 
Growth and inflation 
Several factors, both global and local, have contributed to lower than expected growth for the 
review year. The Bank of Ghana’s assessments of growth in the first three quarters of 2014 
show  that  energy  sector  challenges,  in  particular,  have  lingered  and  adversely  impacted 
economic activity in Ghana. 
The latest release of GDP figures by the Ghana Statistical Service showed some moderation 
in economic activity. Real GDP growth declined to 5.3 percent in the second quarter of 2014, 
compared  with  10.8  percent  recorded  in  the  same  period  last  year.  The  major  subsectors 
contributing to the drag on growth were manufacturing, electricity production, and hotels and 
restaurants. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  In the third quarter, indicators of economic activity reflected by the Bank’s Composite Index 
of Economic Activity (CIEA) declined to 7.8 percent compared with 9.6 percent in the third 
quarter of 2013. 
On  a  positive  note,  however,  the  latest  business  and  consumer  surveys,  point  to 
improvements  in  both  business  and  consumer  sentiments,  as  economic  conditions  turned 
around in the later part of the third quarter. 
Consumer price inflation has trended upwards steadily since the beginning of the year. From 
13.1 percent (year-on-year) in October 2013, inflation increased to 16.9 percent in October 
2014. The rising inflation rate was on account of fiscal imbalances that generated abundant 
liquidity  that  fed  demand  pressures,  the  pass-  through  effects  of  a  rapidly  depreciating 
Ghana cedi, and upward adjustments of petroleum and utility prices. Together, these factors 
fuelled a surge in prices. The first- and second-round effects of these elevated the inflation 
profile relative to the Bank of Ghana’s medium-term target of 8±2 percent. 
Consequently,  the  Bank’s  Monetary  Policy  Committee  (MPC)  has  maintained  a  tight 
monetary policy stance in 2014 to reduce inflation and re-anchor inflation expectations. To 
this effect, the MPC has raised the monetary policy rate by a cumulative 500 basis points 
during the year to 21 percent in November 2014. This was done in concert with other macro-
prudential measures to address liquidity problems in both the money and foreign exchange 
markets. 
Exchange rates and external sector developments 
The foreign exchange market experienced increased volatility in the first half of the year, as 
demand  pressures  mounted  alongside  softening  of  international  commodity  prices  and  a 
decline  in  BOG’s  international  reserves.  The  cedi’s  depreciation  has  slowed  considerably 
since  April  and  particularly  from  May,  with  an  appreciation  recorded  in  October  –  a 
development which has improved the sentiments of foreign exchange market participants as 
well as business confidence according to the latest market surveys. 
The  slower  paced  cedi  depreciation  observed  in  recent  times  has  been  largely  due  to  the 
policy  measures  taken  to  reduce  volatility  in  the  foreign  exchange  market  amidst  easing 
supply  constraints  on  the  back  of  inflows  from  the  cocoa  pre-finance  facility  and  the 
Eurobond issue. In addition, the on-going negotiations with the IMF have to a large extent 
calmed market sentiments. 
In  the  external  sector,  provisional  estimates  point  to  improvements  in  the  trade  deficit  to 
US$681.3 million in the first nine months of 2014, compared to a deficit of US$2.7 billion in 
the same period in 2013. The improvement was due to a sharp decline in total imports (by 
US$2.3  billion),  which  more  than  offset  the  reduction  in  total  export  receipts  (by 
US$293.3 million). Gross international reserves increased to US$5.9 billion at end-October 
2014,  a  build-up  of  US$314.2  million  since  end-  December  2013.  These  positive 
developments  have  provided  some  support  to  the  current  stability  observed  in  the  foreign 
exchange markets. 
Banking sector developments 
Mr Chairman, Ladies and Gentlemen, let me now turn to some developments in the banking 
sector. 
The banking industry grew strongly and exhibited some resilience in the past year. At end-
September 2014, total assets of the industry was GH₵47.8 billion or 51.0 percent of GDP. 
Credit  to  the  private  sector  continued  to  expand,  growing  by  52.0  percent  year-to-date  to 
GH₵21.7 billion or 18.9 percent of GDP. The industry also continued to show a strong capital 
position, with the capital adequacy ratio averaging 17.0 percent – well above the minimum 
10-percent requirement. The liquidity position of the industry was comfortable, although the 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  upward  adjustment  of  the  cash  reserve  ratio  put  some  stress  on  a  few  banks. The  recent 
downward  revision  of  the  ratio  should  minimize  the  pressure  on  these  banks.  As  at 
September  2014,  the  combined  net  profits  of  banks  was  GH₵1.51  billion  which  translated 
into an annualised 34-percent return on equity. 
Despite  the  impressive  industry-level  performance,  pockets  of  challenges  remain  in  the 
banking industry that need to be addressed. A number of banks have high and growing non-
performing loans (NPLs), thin capital buffers for risk absorption, and have manifested liquidity 
challenges and thus resorted to frequent inter-bank borrowing. The 2009–12 recapitalizations 
helped to shore up banks’ capital, enabling them contain these difficulties. However, inflation 
and the cedi’s depreciation over the period meant some capital erosion. This, combined with 
growing demands for liquidity as a result of oil business, implies that banks must grow their 
capital buffers to increase their relevance in the industry. Already a number of banks have 
taken steps to attain, and even exceed, the new minimum capital level of GH¢120 million set 
for new entrants into the banking industry, and this is commendable. 
Mr.  Chairman,  in  order  to  provide  a  transparent  framework  and  level  playing  field  for  loan 
write-offs,  the  Bank  of  Ghana  issued  a  notice  to  all  banks  on  12th  September  2014.  In 
essence, the notice requires banks to apply to the central bank for approval to write off loans 
that have been non-performing for a period. Let me emphasize that a write-off of a loan does 
not  automatically  confer  forgiveness  to  the  obligor  and  the  notice  was  clear  on  this  by 
requiring that the banks provide evidence of structures put in place for recovering such loans, 
including periodic reporting on recovery efforts. Further, in line with existing guidelines, loans 
written off are to be reported to the credit reference bureaux so that prospective lenders are 
forewarned  of  such  delinquent  borrowers  when  they  search  the  bureaux  data  base  for 
information to aid their credit decisions. It is expected that the blacklisting of such borrowers 
by  the  credit  reference  bureaux  would  discourage  such  behaviour  and  minimize  loan 
delinquency. 
Outlook for 2015 
the 
first 
Monetary and exchange rate initiatives 
Mr. Chairman, the central bank has noted the rather challenging economic conditions under 
which  commercial  banks  have  operated  within 
three  quarters.  Although 
developments indicate some gains on the foreign exchange front, there are still risks to the 
inflation  outlook  amid  continued  macroeconomic  pressures.  We  will  continue  to  vigilantly 
monitor  and  take  the  needed  steps  to  sustain  macroeconomic  stability  and  strengthen 
financial stability. 
Since the last quarter of 2013, fiscal pressures, the pass-through effects of fuel adjustments, 
and exchange rate depreciation steadily pushed up inflation further away from the medium-
term target band of 8±2 percent. Going forward, the main monetary policy objective for the 
Bank  would  be  to  lower  inflation,  re-anchor  inflation  expectations  and  restore  the 
effectiveness of the IT framework and bring back inflation into the medium-term target band. 
The central bank will continue to primarily use its monetary policy rate to signal the monetary 
stance,  supported  by  other  instruments  as  needed.  The  disinflation  process  would  be 
supported by fiscal consolidation and a lower financing of government budget deficit by the 
central bank. Fiscal consolidation will be strengthened and enhanced by the IMF supported 
programme  which  will  bring  in  additional  resources  to  support  both  the  budget  and  the 
balance of payments. For 2015, the Bank of Ghana will aim for a progressive convergence to 
the  medium-term  inflation  target  range,  with  inflation  projected to  decline  to  an  end  period 
rate of 11.5 percent by end-2015. 
As  the  Bank  of  Ghana  maintains  a  tight  policy  stance  to  achieve  the  inflation  target,  we 
anticipate that our efforts would be fully complemented by yours in responding appropriately 
to the policy signals. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  Treasury initiatives 
Allow  me  now,  Mr.  Chairman,  to  share  some  thoughts  on  policies  and  measures  to  be 
implemented from the treasury perspective in the ensuing year. 
In 2015, our preoccupation will be to ensure that a vibrant foreign exchange market is well 
established  to  facilitate  a  well-referenced  exchange  rate  determination.  To  this  end,  the 
Reuters trading – the information and dealing tracking platform that has been established – 
will be enhanced further to accommodate all significant foreign exchange transactions to help 
in  determining  the  reference  exchange  rate  for  the  market.  The  strict  cooperation  of  all 
authorized dealer banks and traders in meeting reporting requirements in a timely manner is 
expected to ensure that the foreign exchange market is well-deepened and anchored. 
The  Bank  is  also  considering  other  measures  to  help  deepen  liquidity  of  the  foreign 
exchange market. Some of the surrender receipts that currently flow to the Bank of Ghana 
are likely to be gradually redirected to the authorized dealer banks. This measure will only be 
introduced after full consultations with the banks to minimize any adverse effects. 
Another area of policy focus of the Bank in the coming year relates to the development of 
appropriate monetary instruments and tools to make liquidity management more effective. To 
this end, the Bank will revise its monetary operations by introducing a 2-Week Fixed Rate 
BOG-bill linked to the Monetary Policy Rate and 56-day BOG-bill issued as a complementary 
sterilization instrument with the same features as the existing 56-day instrument. As usual, 
we expect your maximum cooperation in patronizing these instruments and also getting all 
the other policy measures carried through. 
Payments systems initiatives 
On payments systems – Mr. Chairman, as you are aware – the Bank launched a Payment 
System  Strategy  in  August  this  year  to  drive  the  development  of  the  country’s  payments 
system over the next seven years. The strategy comprises initiatives such as the Divestiture 
of GhIPSS, Instant Pay Facility, and Electronic Money Issuers/Agent Guidelines. 
It  is  the  Bank’s  intention  to  allow  banks  to  be  shareholders  of  GhIPSS  to  enable  them 
participate more meaningfully  in  the  running  of the  institution  and  partner  the  central  bank 
better in developing the payments system. 
On Instant  Pay  Facility, Mr.  Chairman,  at  a meeting  with  heads  of  banks  early  this  year,  I 
noted that an Instant Pay Product was needed in Ghana. GhIPSS took the matter up and has 
put in place the necessary structures for this product to be deployed. We are looking to going 
live early next year. I will, therefore, urge you to get your systems ready for the take-off. Even 
if  three  or  four  banks  finalize  their  developments,  we  will  go  live  and  that  will  give  those 
banks a competitive edge over the rest. 
Mr.  Chairman,  two  guidelines  on  Electronic  Money  have  been  finalized.  These  are 
Guidelines  for  E-Money  Issuers  and  Agent  Guidelines.  These  guidelines  are  to  promote 
electronic  money  as  a  retail  payment  medium  with  the  potential  to  increase  financial 
inclusion. They also specify necessary safeguards and controls to mitigate risks associated 
with e-money business and ensure consumer protection safeguards. The two guidelines will 
come into effect in December 2014. 
Banking sector initiatives 
Mr.  Chairman,  a  critical  review  of  our  banking  sector  indicates  that  while  banks  have 
weathered the recent macroeconomic challenges well, there are some red flags appearing in 
the horizon. The non-performing loans ratio of the banking industry has stagnated around 12 
percent over the last one year in spite of loan write-offs and banks undertaking a number of 
loan  re-structuring/re-scheduling.  The  results  of  stress  tests  conducted  by  our  Financial 
Stability  Department,  which  was  recently  discussed  with  banks,  also  show  that  credit 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  delinquency  is  a  major  threat  to  banking  sector  solvency.  In  the  absence  of  an  explicit 
recapitalization program steps have to be taken to conserve internally generated capital by 
minimizing the distribution of profits, improving risk management and efficiency of resource 
use. 
Mr.  Chairman,  in  order  to  build  the  buffers  that  will  cushion  banks  against  the  likely 
deterioration in bank’s solvency position, the central bank encourages all banks to observe 
the  prudential  capital  adequacy  buffer  ratio  of  13  percent  in  making their  dividend  pay-out 
decisions. Banks whose CARs are below 13 percent must ensure that in addition to making 
the appropriate statutory provisions and full provision for non-performing loans, they restrict 
their dividend payments to no more than 50 percent of distributable profits in the year. This is 
to allow them build the necessary buffers to contain any unanticipated shocks to the banks’ 
capital. Furthermore, banks that currently benefit from single obligor waivers, implying they 
do  not  have  sufficient  capital  for  the  risks  they  underwrite,  should  also  restrict  dividend 
payments to no more than 50 percent of distributable profits in the year and this policy shall 
apply until the waivers are withdrawn. 
Although there was no immediate requirements for existing banks to achieve the new capital 
level of GH¢120 million, we encourage banks not meeting this capital level to put in place 
plans  to  achieve  this  capital  level.  The  need  for  ongoing  capital  build-up  cannot  be  over-
emphasized. 
Mr. Chairman, regarding the legal and regulatory framework, you may recall that the central 
bank  has kick-started  a process to revise  the  Banking  Act to  better govern  the  conduct of 
banking  business  in  Ghana.  The  Bank  recently  submitted  a  final  draft  of  the  Banks  and 
Specialized Deposit-taking Institutions Bill and the Deposit Protection Bill together with the 
accompanying  Memoranda  to  the  Minister  of  Finance.  We  hope  that  these  bills  would  be 
approved  by  Cabinet  shortly  and  proceed  to  the  lawmakers.  The  Bills  benefited  from 
comments from stakeholders such as banks, non-bank financial institutions, the Institute of 
Chartered Accountants, and the Ministry of Finance. 
The  new  bills  address  a  number  of  regulatory  imperatives,  including  provisions  on 
consolidated  supervision,  dealing  with  cross-border  and  cross-sector  collaboration  in 
banking, and outlining a clear framework for dealing with distressed banks. They also seek to 
strengthen the central bank’s powers in licensing, dealing with illegal banking and providing a 
transparent  procedure  for  regulatory  issuances  and  handling  of  disagreements  with  the 
Bank’s decisions. It is my hope that the Chartered Institute of Bankers, as a body of banking 
professionals, will take active interest in the process and make relevant inputs so as to give 
us a solid legal and regulatory framework for banking in Ghana. 
The  Bank of Ghana  is also  considering  implementing  Basel II/III  accords. To this  end, the 
Bank  will  begin  consulting  the  banking  industry  on  the  transition  in  2015.  This  will  be  in 
addition to a review of the implementation of IFRS, so as to ensure that we do not unduly 
dilute the Bank’s prudential framework. In this regard, the Bank has secured the assistance 
of a long-term advisor to help the Banking Supervision Department strengthen its supervisory 
processes.  The  Bank  of  Ghana  will  continue  to  dialogue  with  both  domestic  and  external 
stakeholders  in  these  efforts  to  develop  a  well-functioning  banking  system  to  support  the 
growth and development objectives of the country. 
Mr. Chairman, the issue of request for waivers of the single obligor limit has persisted largely 
because no bank has the capacity to single-handedly finance most oil-related transactions. In 
the absence of a workable syndication system in the industry, the central bank has often had 
to flout its own rules in risk management. 
This practice cannot continue. The new banking bill has eliminated the clause that allows the 
central bank to grant these waivers. Banks that want to undertake transactions that cannot 
be supported by their balance sheets must either seek syndication partners or begin to look 
for commensurate capital to support such transactions. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  Allow  me  now,  Mr.  Chairman,  to  turn  to  a  sector  that  has  been  the  backbone  of  Ghana’s 
economy  for  years  but  receives  minimal  bank  credit  –  i.e.  the  agriculture  sector.  Mr. 
Chairman, I am happy to say that the banks, together with the Bank of Ghana, have agreed 
to set up an Equity Fund dedicated to developing this sector – particularly the rice, maize and 
poultry sub-sectors. We look forward to the Equity Fund becoming operational in 2015. 
Conclusion 
In conclusion, Mr. Chairman, the relatively unfriendly macroeconomic conditions that existed 
in the first half of the year is seeing a turnaround. On the real sector, even though energy 
sector challenges adversely impacted economic activity, the latest business and consumer 
surveys point to improvements in both business and consumer sentiments. 
The banking industry has been resilient and profitable in the year, albeit amidst pockets of 
vulnerabilities. To address these vulnerabilities, the Bank of Ghana will continue to create the 
enabling  business  and  regulatory  environment  for  the  industry  to  flourish  to  support 
economic growth and job creation. 
In  support  of  this  process,  Mr.  Chairman,  the  Bank  of  Ghana  will  roll  out  the  policies  and 
initiatives outlined earlier, and others not mentioned here as we deem necessary. We count 
on your usual cooperation in getting the desired outcomes from these policies and initiatives. 
The BOG will also continue to regularly engage with you to share ideas on emerging trends, 
including on the regulatory landscape. 
Ghana, as a member of international bodies such as the IMF, is committed to developing its 
financial sector in line with international standards. To this effect, the BOG will continue to 
require  banks  in  Ghana  to  adopt  international  best  practice  in  their  operations  and  stop 
seeking regulatory forbearance at the earliest sign of distress. 
I  thank  you  all  for  listening.  Enjoy  your  meal  and  I  wish  you  a  Merry  Christmas  and  a 
Prosperous New Year in advance. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
