Thomas C Baxter: The rewards of an ethical culture 
Remarks  by  Mr  Thomas  C  Baxter,  Executive  Vice  President  and  General  Counsel  of  the 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York, at the Bank of England, London, 20 January 2015. 
 These remarks are personal and do not necessarily represent the official position of the Federal Reserve Bank of 
New York, or any other component of the Federal Reserve System. 
Introduction 
Let me begin by thanking Sir William Blair and the Bank of England for inviting me to participate 
in this Project and at this Conference. At the New York Fed, we have made ethical culture a 
priority for financial services. We have done this not as a formal part of a supervisory program, 
but more as a call for reform. In the short time that I have this afternoon, I will speak about the 
reasons why I believe reform is necessary, highlight some of the important practical features of 
a strong ethical culture, and conclude by setting out a few of the rewards that might result from 
it. 
Bad behavior in the financial services industry prompted the New York Fed’s call for a stronger 
ethical  culture  in  banking.  My  list  of  the  most  serious  transgressions  is  probably  not  much 
different  from  anyone  else’s.  It  includes  the  evasion  of  taxes  and  economic  sanctions; 
conspiracy  and  market manipulation  with  respect  to  LIBOR  and  foreign  exchange  rates;  and 
misselling  financial  products,  including  residential  mortgages  and  insurance,  to  people  who 
should not have acquired them. This list is only illustrative. It is not by any means exhaustive. 
The traditional means to address bad behavior are enforcement actions against the bad actors 
and the organizations where they worked.1 This traditional response, in my view, is appropriate 
and I strongly support the actions that have been taken and that will continue to be taken. All 
enforcement  actions,  though,  are  essentially  retrospective.  Of  course,  we  like  to  think  that 
enforcement  actions  will  not  only  punish  but  also  deter.  But  I  wonder  if  this  hope  is  really  a 
prospective  strategy.  We  would  better  serve  the  public  good  if  we  could  do  something  – 
anything – more forward looking, and complementary to what our enforcement colleagues are 
doing to deter future bad behavior. 
Ethical culture 
The new emphasis on an ethical culture within financial services firms arises from the policy 
interest in preventing some of the bad behavior that has been observed. Now I use the phrase 
“some of the bad behavior” deliberately. I fully embrace the goal of eliminating all bad behavior. 
But  we  cannot  let  the  goal  of  perfection  become  the  enemy  of  progress.  We  need  to  start 
making progress, so let us agree that perfection is probably not realistic. Even an organization 
with  the  strongest  ethical  culture  will  have  episodic  bad  behavior.  Although  culture  is  no 
panacea, I believe that the ethical culture of an organization can improve the behavior of the 
people who work there. Strengthening the ethical culture of financial services should therefore 
reduce the volume of bad behavior we have been seeing. 
Some of the skeptics say, “Prove it.” I confess that proof is hard to come by. Yet, I am not alone 
in  the  fundamental  belief  that  a  strong  ethical  culture  will  lead  to  better  behavior.  A  2010 
Corporate  Executive  Board  survey  of  more  than  500,000  respondents  shows  a  widespread 
                                                
1   To call enforcement traditional is not to say that it is static. Eric Holder, the Attorney General of the United States, 
recently  recommended  that  Congress  create  new  criminal  liability  for  bank  officers  who  were  in  a  position  to 
detect and deter illegal conduct, but failed to do so. That is, individual executives could be criminally liable for 
failings  within  their  organization  without  specific  bad  intent.  See  Eric  Holder,  Remarks  on  Financial  Fraud 
Prosecutions at NYU School of Law, September 17, 2014. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
view  that  corporations  with  strong  ethical  cultures  experience  less  misconduct.2  This  makes 
intuitive sense even in the absence of empirical proof.3 Further, the natural tendency to go with 
the intuitive is bolstered by the potential benefit of a reduction in enforcement actions against 
financial  services  firms,  and  by  a  healthy  change  in  the  public  perception  of  the  financial 
services  industry.  And,  of  course,  there  is  ready  evidence  for  the  contrapositive  view.  Few 
would disagree with the following: The bad behavior that contributed to the Financial Crisis was 
evidence of a culture that was not strongly ethical. 
Let me also pose a challenge to those who are skeptical about the benefits of a strong ethical 
culture:  If  this  is  not  a suitable  method to  prevent  bad  behavior  by  bankers,  what  alternative 
proposal do you advocate? The status quo is not acceptable. As a wise man once said, “Plan 
beats no plan.” 
The components of a strong ethical culture 
So  what  are  the  key  components  of  a  strong  ethical  culture?  It  is  said  that  lawyers  love  a 
metaphor,  and  this  lawyer  is  no  exception. I  like  to think  about  ethical  culture  as  if  it  were  a 
package. The culture that we will have is derivative of what we put into the package, and there 
are clear choices to be made. The contents depend upon the type of organization, the kinds of 
people, and the nature of the skills needed to conduct the organization’s activities. Time will not 
permit me to cover this thoroughly, so let me cover a few items with a very broad brush. 
What goes in 
For  starters,  the  conduct  of  the  people  in  any  organization  will  be  strongly  influenced  by 
incentives. Let me mention the “big three.” Bankers, like lawyers, want to do [1] quality work, [2] 
with people they like and respect, and [3] receive fair recognition in return. I will touch on all 
three but will focus on two species of recognition: compensation and promotion. Each should 
be  tied  to  ethical  considerations.  If  the  only  consideration  with  respect  to  compensation  and 
promotion  is  how  much  money  the  individual  made  for  the  firm,  then  that  communicates  a 
message that is inhospitable to a strong ethical culture. 
A second key component is what I call “character at the top.” The usual expression is “tone at 
the top,” and it refers to the message from the people who occupy the upper most positions in 
any organization (the board of directors and the “C” Suite). My worry with the typical expression 
is that it tends to focus on words, rather than conduct. The implication is that if you sing the 
right  notes  in  the  right  key  then  all  will  be  fine.  I  do  not  believe  this.  Employees  will  be 
influenced by the actions of key management, and not merely by the songs they sing. If those 
actions are in harmony with stated mores, then the combination should foster a strong ethical 
culture. But if the observed actions are not congruent with the words (or, worse, conflict with the 
words), then employees will follow suit: They may say the right things, but they will not behave 
the right way. Worse still, they will sense that they work for a firm lacking in integrity. This has 
long‐term,  deleterious  consequences.  Recall  that  one  of  the  key  attractions  in  working  for  a 
particular organization is association with people who are liked and respected. Do people like 
collecting sources). 
                                                
2   See  Corporate  Executive  Board,  Research  Reveals  That  Integrity  Drives  Corporate  Performance:  Companies 
With Weak  Ethical  Cultures  Experience  10x  More  Misconduct  Than  Those With  Strong Ones,  Press  Release, 
September  15,  2010.  See  also  Anthony  Salz,  Salz  Review:  An  Independent  Review  of  Barclays’  Business 
Practices, 189‐191 (App’x C) (discussing the impact of culture on two archetypes of employee behaviors, and 
3   Somewhat tautologically, the proof of a good culture might be the absence of bad behavior. As Bill Dudley, the 
President of  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank of  New  York,  has observed:  “How  will  a  firm know  if  it  is making  real 
progress [on culture]? Not having to plead guilty to felony charges or being assessed large fines is a good start.” 
William  C.  Dudley,  Enhancing  Financial  Stability  by  Improving  Culture  in  the  Financial  Services  Industry, 
Remarks at the Workshop on Reforming Culture and Behavior in the Financial Services Industry, October 20, 
2014. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
and  respect  leaders  who  lack  integrity?  Good  luck  attracting  top  talent  in  that  kind  of 
organization. 
A third key component in a strong ethical culture is values. Most firms elaborate rules of proper 
rules can be difficult and tedious, like the rules for conflicting interests and for avoiding trading 
on insider information. In better run firms, the rules are built on a foundation of the shared and 
behavior,  often  in  well‐crafted  codes  of  conduct.  In  some  large,  complex  organizations,  the 
well‐understood  values  of  the  institution.  These  values  reflect  a  bank’s  public  function  as  a 
financial intermediary and recognize the privileges that come with a banking charter.4 In other 
firms,  however,  compliance  rules  can  be  undermined  by  the  values  of  the  organization, 
resulting in an unhealthy dissonance. For example, if there are elaborate rules for complying 
with  the  tax  laws  of  a  particular  jurisdiction,  but  the  organizational  value  is  to  facilitate  flight 
capital,  a  mixed  message  may  be  sent  that  tax  compliance  rules  are  just  technicalities. 
Similarly, in the area of economic sanctions, if the sanction is perceived as something technical 
and implicating only a single currency, the bank might be sending an unintended message – 
that  we  comply  with  the  sanction  only  because  it  represents  a  mandatory  but  silly  rule  of  a 
single sovereign issuing a specific currency, and not because the sanction seeks to address a 
problem that all should find abhorrent, like financing a jurisdiction engaged in genocide.5  
What to leave out 
Thinking  about  culture  like  a  package,  there  are  some  things  that  I  would  leave  out.  Again, 
without being exhaustive, here are three examples. 
First, I would leave out any depiction of the persons that an organization does business with as 
“counterparties.” If you went to your doctor and overheard her refer to you in conversation with 
office  personnel  as  a  “counterparty,”  rather  than  as  a  “patient,”  would  you  worry?  I  would. 
Similarly, if you went to your personal lawyer and overheard him refer to you in conversation 
with his associate as a “counterparty,” rather than as a “client,” would you worry? You should. 
My point here is not that banking is a profession like medicine or law. My point is about how you 
see your customer and the service provided to that customer. A counterparty is not someone 
needing your help; “it” represents a profit opportunity – something to be exploited. Their loss is 
your gain. A customer, by contrast, is someone to be served. It is right to charge a fee to a 
customer,  client,  or  patient,  but  the  transaction  is  driven  by  the  other  person’s  needs.  Many 
financial services firms, however, refer to the people they do business with as counterparties. 
This  is  no  accident. It characterizes  the  way  in  which  the  organization  views  the  person  it  is 
facing in its businesses. Viewing customers as profit opportunities is inconsistent with a strong 
ethical culture. In my experience, firms that consider their operational model as service provider 
tend to have a better culture than those firms that consider their operational model as money 
maker. 
The second item that I would leave out is a conception of a bank as a money making machine. 
This is not to say that I would ignore profitability; that would be foolish and would destine a firm 
to a short life. But a bank’s goal should be to provide service to its customers through financial 
intermediation, as Mark Carney has explained so eloquently.6 Christine Lagarde sees this as a 
                                                
4   Cf. E. Gerald Corrigan, Are Banks Special? Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Annual Report, January 1983, 
(“[T]he presence of the public safety net uniquely available to a particular class of institutions also implies that 
those institutions have unique public responsibilities and may therefore be subject to implicit codes of conduct or 
explicit regulations that do not fall on other institutions.”). 
5   See Thomas C. Baxter, Jr., Reflections on the New Compliance Landscape, Remarks at “The New Compliance 
Landscape: Increasing Roles – Increasing Risks” Conference, July 24, 2014. 
6   See  Mark  Carney,  “Inclusive  Capitalism:  Creating  a  Sense  of  the  Systemic,”  Address  to  the  Conference  on 
Inclusive Capitalism, May 24, 2014. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
question  of  animating  purpose  –  of  “telos”  –  and  I  agree.7  Similarly,  the  Archbishop  of 
Canterbury,  Justin  Welby,  has  called  for  financial  institutions  to  reset  to  the  first  principle  of 
service, playing a role in the world that contributes to “human flourishing.”8 If you don’t believe 
me,  listen  to  the  Archbishop:  It  is  possible  to  do  good  and  do  well  at  the  same  time.  And 
remember  one  of  attributes  that  attracts  the  best  and  the  brightest  to  an  organization  is  the 
prospect of quality work. Having a work force that feels they are contributing to the greater good 
should  benefit  the  organization  in  its  effort  to  recruit  the  best  minds,  but  also  in  the  effort  to 
recruit those with the best hearts (who presumably will be less likely to become malefactors). 
The last item that I will leave out is “short termism.” Permit me to describe the concept. With 
increasing  frequency,  people  working  in  a  financial  services  firm  have  no  loyalty  to  their 
employer  because  they  do  not  intend  to  work  there  long.  Instead,  the  idea  is  to  get  some 
experience and a decent bonus and then move to the next employer – or, if the bonus is large 
enough,  to  work  for  oneself.9  10  Given  the  specialization  that  tends  to  accompany  various 
financial services, people with near‐term career horizons tend to develop loyalty to the special 
group  of  individuals  with  whom  they  transact  business  and  who  might  provide  the  next  job 
opportunity.  These  specialized  bankers  or 
independent 
contractors  or  freelancers  –  careerists  with  no  institutional  loyalty.  In  foreign  exchange,  for 
example, we saw people orchestrating a manipulative scheme across a network of individuals 
at  many  institutions.  This  is  all  rational  and  understandable  –  specialists  need  the  long-term 
allegiance  of  their  network  to  continue  to  ply  their  trade,  and  this  allegiance  is  far  more 
consequential than loyalty to the organization currently employing them. So, when in conflict, 
career  trumps  institution.  Some  of  this  is  simply  generational;  there  is  more  employment 
mobility now than thirty years ago. But compensation plans bear some degree of responsibility 
as  well.  Annual  bonuses  that  reward  immediate  book  value  without  reflecting  tail  risk  to  the 
organization  reinforce  short  termism.  Changing  the  time  horizon  for  compensation  will  be  a 
significant feature of meaningful cultural reform.10  
increasingly  resemble 
traders 
Conclusion 
The  principal  benefit  to  a  financial  services  firm  in  having  a  strong  ethical  culture  is  the 
avoidance  of  bad  banker  behavior.  Bad  banker  behavior  often  leads  to  enforcement  actions 
that  can  carry  significant  monetary  fines,  that  can  inflict  destructive  damage  to  the 
organization’s  reputation,  and  in  the  worst  case,  that  can  cause  the  death  of  a  franchise 
(recalling that all financial services firms depend upon public confidence to survive). A strong 
ethical culture also attracts the best and the brightest personnel, who will seek out the bank as 
the place to build a career doing high quality work, for fair compensation, with people they like 
and  respect.  As  for  those  with  whom  the  bank  does  business,  they  may  come  to  see  the 
organization  as  customer  focused,  looking  to  serve  them  well,  and  not  turning  them  into  the 
next “profit opportunity.” Finally, from the perspective of the supervisory community, an industry 
comprising personnel who have a strong ethical culture will be a safer and sounder industry, 
certainly safer and sounder than an industry full of miscreants. This could be a powerful factor 
toward financial stability. Thank you for your kind attention. 
                                                
7   Christine  Lagarde,  “Economic  Inclusion  and  Financial  Integrity,”  Address  to  the  Conference  on  Inclusive 
Capitalism,” May 27, 2014. 
International  Monetary  Fund  2014  Annual  Meetings.  A  video  of 
8   The  Archbishop  offered  these  comments  at  an  October  12,  2014  panel  discussion  that  was  part  of  the 
is  available  at 
http://www.archbishopofcanterbury.org/articles.php/5426/archbishop‐to‐take‐part‐in‐imfworld‐bank‐panel‐
onethics‐and‐finance. Notably, the Archbishop described his role at the conference as a “lion in a den of Daniels.” 
contributed  to  excessive  risk‐taking  in  financial  institutions  and  that  excessive  bonuses  paid  on  anticipated 
accounting profit at the time of deal origination distorted decision‐making and resulted in asymmetric riskholding.” 
9   Even the skeptics of cultural reform concede that there is “almost universal accord that remuneration structures 
Paradigm Risk Consulting, To boldly supervise . . . , February 2014. 
10   See Dudley, Enhancing Financial Stability by Improving Culture in the Financial Services Industry, supra n.4. 
that  discussion 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
