  Már Guðmundsson: Financial integration and central bank policies in 
small, open economies – what are the key lessons from the crisis? 
Remarks by Mr  Már Guðmundsson, Governor of the Central Bank of Iceland, in a plenary 
session on monetary policy and policies of central banks at the Singapore Economic Review 
Conference, Singapore, 5 August 2015. 
 A  revised  and  extended  version  of  this  talk  will  be  published  in  a  forthcoming  Singapore 
Economic Review. 
Chairman and participants, 
I  would  like  to  thank  the  organisers  for  inviting  me  to  speak  at  your  conference  here  in 
Singapore, a country that I have long respected for its economic management. 
My remarks today bear the title Financial integration and central bank policies in small, open 
economies: what are the key lessons from the crisis? They are motivated by my experience 
as  a  policy-maker  from  a  very  small,  open,  and  what  used  to  be  financially  integrated 
economy, and my tenure at the Bank for International Settlements.1 
There  is  a  widespread  sense  that  global  financial  integration  can  be  problematic  for  the 
conduct of monetary policy in small, open economies. Why is that? 
It  is  well  known  that  the  transmission  mechanism  of  domestic  monetary  policy  evolves  as 
domestic financial markets develop, and that this in turn affects the relative effectiveness of 
different  monetary  instruments.  The  same  applies  to  external  liberalisation  of  domestic 
financial systems and the cross-border financial integration it gives rise to. Initially, it can give 
a boost to domestic financial market development. But as it progresses and we at the global 
level get closer to the limiting case of free and frictionless capital movements, then real risk 
adjusted  asset  returns  increasingly  become  equalised  across  countries.  As  that  happens, 
less and less of the transmission of monetary policy goes through what I call the interest rate 
channel. There would still be an interest rate channel at the global level, but that would be 
determined  by  the  big  countries.  The  small,  open  economies  that  have  adopted  a  floating 
exchange rate could still achieve their inflation targets through the exchange rate channel. 
The scope for short run output stabilisation would be more limited, however. 
Is this necessarily a problem? If the exchange rate channel were relatively well behaved – 
i.e.,  if  it  provided  smooth  adjustment  based  on  fundamentals  and  uncovered  interest  rate 
parity broadly held over relevant horizons – then the answer might be no. The problem is, 
however,  that  experience  has  shown  that  uncovered  interest  parity  does  not  hold  except 
perhaps over long horizons. Interest rate differentials give rise to widespread carry trading, 
which is by nature a bet against UIP. Exchange rates therefore diverge from fundamentals 
for protracted periods, followed by sharp corrections. So the exchange rate often seems to 
be as much a source of shocks and instability as a tool for adjustment and stabilisation. 
In what I have said so far, there is no presumption that small, open, and financially integrated 
inflation-targeting  countries  with  floating  exchange  rates  cannot  reach  whatever  inflation 
target  they  choose  and  determine  short-term  domestic  interest  rates.  You  might  then  ask: 
how is it that their capacity to affect long-term domestic rates is undermined, and how is this 
consistent  with  the  theory  that  long-term  rates  are  determined  by  expected  short-term 
interest  rates  (with  the  addition  of  risk  premia)?  The  answer  is  that,  insofar  as  the  theory 
                                                
1  This talk is thus based partly on my paper entitled “Financial globalisation: key trends and implications for the 
transmission mechanism  of monetary  policy”.  BIS  Papers No.  39.  April 2008.  http://www.bis.org/publ/bppdf/ 
bispap39c.pdf. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  holds, it is global short-term rates that increasingly drive domestic long-term rates in small, 
open economies as global financial integration comes closer to the limiting case. 
Enough of theory. To what degree does the evidence support that this was indeed relevant 
for monetary policy in small, open, and financially integrated economies during the build-up 
to the GFC? There is significant literature on this, including one or two pieces of my own. 
Overall,  the  data  are  consistent  with  the  suggestion  that  a  significant  progress  of financial 
globalisation took place during the decade and a half before the GFC. This could be seen by 
quantity measures such as gross external positions and saving-investment correlations. The 
correlation  of  asset  returns  also  reached  high  levels.  In  some  advanced  IT  countries,  the 
correlation  of  changes  in  domestic  long-term  interest  rates  with  US  rates  was  very  strong 
(over 90%), at the same time as the correlation of domestic short-term rates with long rates 
was weak – and even non-existent, if lags were taken into account. The GFC reversed this 
process  somewhat,  as  risk  premia  skyrocketed,  cross-border  banking  retreated  back  to 
home base, and restrictions on capital movements were in some cases reintroduced. But it 
has come back to a significant degree. 
There  is  an  important  caveat  here,  which  is  that  the  observed  patterns  could  have  other 
explanations. Thus co-movements in asset returns could be due to common shocks and the 
low  level  of  correlation  between  short  and  long  rates  due  to  monetary  policy  credibility. 
Looking at the totality of the evidence and case studies, however, it seems difficult to escape 
the  conclusion  that  global  financial  integration  was  a  big  underlying  driver,  although  there 
were also other factors at play. New Zealand appears to be a relevant example here. During 
significant parts of the 2000s – before the GFC – the policy rate in New Zealand was raised 
to  counteract  demand  pressures  at  the  same  time  as  the  US  maintained  an  easy  stance. 
New Zealand’s long rates were flat or falling for most of this period. I could tell a similar but 
slightly more complicated story from my own country. 
The  tendencies  that  I  have  described  can  be  problematic  in  their  own  right  but  in  no  way 
fatal, as the experience of New Zealand and others attests to. It is when they interact badly 
with other economic and financial risks that can face small, open and financially integrated 
economies  –  such  as  the  global  credit  cycle,  domestic  financial  vulnerabilities,  policy 
conflicts, and asymmetric shocks – that we can have a lethal cocktail. This was the case in 
Iceland. 
To demonstrate this, let me take a stylised example which is, I admit, heavily influenced by 
the  experience  of  my  own  country.  A  small,  open,  and  financially  integrated  economy 
develops a positive output gap that is larger than in the rest of the world. The economy is 
booming and is seen as a good investment by outside investors. This occurs in a situation 
where the global credit cycle is in a strong upswing. The result is capital inflows and upward 
pressures on the exchange rate. The country has a floating exchange rate and has adopted 
a flexible inflation targeting regime. Monetary policy therefore reacts by raising interest rates 
due to the risks that the booming economy poses for future inflation. This, however, widens 
the  interest  rate  differential  vis-à-vis  the  rest  of  the  world  and  sucks  in  even  more  capital 
through  carry  trade  and  other  channels.  The  currency  therefore  appreciates  further.  This 
helps  to  limit  inflation,  both  directly,  through  lower  imported  inflation  in  terms  of  domestic 
currency, and indirectly, by directing demand abroad. But the effect of monetary tightening 
on  domestic  demand  is  limited  through  the  processes  I  have  described,  where  long  rates 
react weakly to the increase in the policy rate. In addition, firms and households increasingly 
borrow  in  foreign  currency  in  order  to  avoid  even  those  limited  increases  in  domestic 
borrowing  costs  that  take  place.  This  foreign  currency  borrowing  is  intermediated  by  the 
domestic banking system, where the financing is more short-term than the lending. Thus the 
banking  system  has  a  growing  balance  sheet  in  FX,  with  a  maturity  mismatch  but  limited 
LOLR facilities to backstop it. In short, financial risks are accumulating, both in the financial 
sector and among firms and households. At the same time, the economy is increasingly in an 
unsustainable  position,  with  an  overvalued  currency  and  big  current  account  deficit.  The 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  in 
Iceland.  The  offshore  activities  of 
whole  thing  then  comes  crashing  down  when  foreign  financing  comes  to  a  sudden  stop, 
heralding a currency crisis and even a banking crisis as well. 
Before I go further, let me warn you, though, that this is only part of the explanation of the 
financial  crisis 
the  banks  and  old-fashioned 
macroeconomic mismanagement were equally important, if not more so. On this topic, I refer 
you to other speeches and publications by myself and others.2 
What  can  and  should  be  done  about  the  problems  I  have  laid  out?  In  answering  that 
question, we should take into account that the biggest problems occur when global factors – 
cross-border financial integration and associated capital flows – and domestic vulnerabilities 
interact negatively. In principle, solutions could be directed at any or all of these. Some are 
obvious  in  their  design  and  relatively  easy  to  implement,  especially  if  they  can  be 
implemented unilaterally by individual countries. Others are more complex in their design or 
require global, regional, or big-country action that is not necessarily forthcoming. 
One  potential  solution  is  to  enter  a  monetary  union,  thus  eliminating  the  small  country 
monetary  policy  problem.  It  would  also  reduce  the financial  risks  emanating from currency 
mismatches  and  foreign  currency  maturity  mismatches  in  the  balance  sheets  of  domestic 
banks. But as this is currently not on the agenda in my own country and recent developments 
have  demonstrated that  it  is  no  panacea  –  with  pros  and  cons  that  extend far  beyond  my 
topic her – I will not dwell on it further. 
There is no doubt that flaws in the international monetary and financial systems exacerbate 
the problems that I have mentioned. Reforms that would reduce the current asymmetries in 
the  adjustment  burdens  of  surplus  and  deficit  countries,  or  would  to  a  greater  degree 
internalise  the  global  externalities  of  the  monetary  policies  of  central  banks  issuing  major 
reserve  currencies,  could  reduce  the  volatility  of  capital  flows.  However,  in  spite  of 
widespread  unease  about  the  current  state  of  affairs,  such  reforms  do  not  seem  likely 
anytime soon. Furthermore, there are complex unsolved issues involved regarding potential 
conflicts between domestic and global objectives. 
That leaves us with what individual countries can do. In principle, they have three avenues to 
mitigate the problem. The first is to adjust macroeconomic policy frameworks. The second is 
to use prudential regulation and supervision aimed at reducing vulnerabilities and increasing 
resilience in face of volatile capital flows. The third is to introduce tools aimed directly at the 
financial  integration  part  in  order  to  regain  greater  monetary  independence  and  shift  the 
effect of monetary policy more to the interest rate channel and towards the non-traded goods 
sector. This could, for instance, be some form of a variable tax or reserve requirement that 
would  make the  relevant  capital  inflows  more  expensive  and  thus  limit  the  increase  in  the 
effective  interest  rate  differential  vis-à-vis  abroad  when  domestic  interest  rates  are  raised. 
There are complex design, governance, and international issues involved that I do not have 
time  to  expand  on  here.  What  should  be  stressed,  however,  is  that  it  is  not  optimal  that 
countries are increasingly forced to take unilateral action in this domain. Credible and reliable 
co-insurance is better than self-insurance. At least, the IMF should monitor the process, and 
further ahead, some rules of the game regarding capital flows would be welcome so that we 
are not faced with excessively sub-optimal outcomes and unintended consequences for the 
global system. 
                                                
2  See for instance Már Guðmundsson and Thorsteinn Thorgeirsson, “The Fault Lines in Cross-Border Banking: 
Lessons  from  the  Icelandic  Case”  SUERF  Studies  05/2010,  European  Money  and  Finance  Forum  (2010); 
Már Guðmundsson,  Keynote  address  at  the  Eighth  High-Level  Meeting  for  the  Middle  East  &  North  Africa 
Region:  Recent  Policy  Developments  for  Strengthening  the  Resilience  of  the  Financial  Sector,  Abu  Dhabi, 
28 November  2012.  www.cb.is;  and  Már  Guðmundsson‘s  speech  at  the  IIEA  conference  in  Dublin,  Ireland, 
“Iceland‘s crisis and recovery: facts, comparisons, and the lessons learned”, 27 April 2015. www.cb.is.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  Let me conclude by telling you what we are contemplating in Iceland in this regard, as this 
issue is very much on the agenda as we prepare to lift the comprehensive controls on capital 
outflows that were introduced at the peak of the crisis. 
We will work through all of the avenues that I have just mentioned, and many of the reforms 
have already been implemented. What I call IT-plus – or plus-plus – will replace IT of the pre-
crisis type. A managed float has already taken the place of the free float. Foreign exchange 
intervention is thus used to reduce excess volatility in the FX market and lean against capital 
flow  cycles.  The  financial  stability  framework  has  been  strengthened,  and  macroprudential 
tools are being developed that should mitigate adverse interactions between capital flows, on 
the one hand, and domestic credit growth and asset prices, on the other. Foreign currency 
borrowing  by  unhedged  domestic  agents  will  be  very  much  restricted.  Prudential  limits  on 
banks’ FX balance sheets, in the form of specific LCR and NSFR in FX, have been imposed. 
In  practice,  this  will  greatly  limit  the  size  of  their  FX  balance  sheets  and  the  associated 
maturity mismatch that was the proximate cause of the demise of the old banks that failed 
during the crisis. Finally, a tax or other equivalent measure of the type I just mentioned is 
being contemplated.3 
Taken together, this will amount to a very different paradigm for economic management than 
the  one  prevailing  before  the  crisis.  History  will  tell  whether  it  is  sufficient  to  preserve 
monetary and financial stability in the rougher seas of freer capital movements that we intend 
to embark upon. In any case, we need to strike a balance between dynamism and freedoms, 
on the one hand, and stability, on the other. 
Thank you very much. 
                                                
3  Further  details  on  these  proposals  can  be  found  in  Central  Bank  of  Iceland  Special  Publication  no.  5: 
Monetary policy in Iceland after capital controls, December 2010, and no. 6: Prudential rules following capital 
controls, report of the Central Bank of Iceland to the Minister of Economic Affairs, August 2012. www.cb.is.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
