  Jon Cunliffe: Macroprudential policy – from Tiberius to Crockett and 
beyond 
Speech by Sir Jon Cunliffe, Deputy Governor for Financial Stability of the Bank of England, 
at TheCityUK, London, 28 July 2015. 
 Historians still argue about the exact causes of the financial crash of AD 33 that rocked the 
Roman Empire. The commentators of the day did not unfortunately have, let alone record, 
the vast amounts of data that we have become used to today. But in a world still painfully 
extricating itself from the crash of 2008, the key features look eerily familiar, as a number of 
modern  day  commentators  have  observed.  An  extension  of  credit  across  the  empire,  a 
sudden deleveraging, debtors failing and bank closures in a number of Roman provinces, the 
total drying up of liquidity in the financial system and widespread panic. 
The  remedies  look  familiar  too.  The  Emperor  Tiberius  was  not  able  to  rely  on  a  modern 
independent  central  bank  with  the  ability  to  print  money  to  staunch  the  crisis.  But 
notwithstanding that immense shortcoming, Tiberius took effective action, injecting into the 
system a huge amount of liquidity stored in coin in his treasury, setting interest rates at zero 
for a three year period – an early example of forward guidance – and doubling loan to value 
requirements  for  property  loans.  He  also  executed  those  he  thought  most  responsible: 
though some might advocate that today, I think in that respect at least we have moved on 
from AD 33. 
Systemic financial crises, as this episode shows, are not new. The invention of credit and the 
development of banking and financial systems have been key to the improvement of human 
living standards throughout history. But they bring with them the boom and bust extremes of 
the credit cycle, driven by greed and fear, and the risk of systemic crises which can badly 
damage the real economy. 
As  financial  systems  have  developed  and  spread,  public  authorities,  from  Tiberius’ 
administration  to  the  Financial  Policy  Committee  (FPC)  of  the  modern  Bank  of  England 
today,  have  had  to  adapt  both  to  deal  with  financial  crises  when  they  occur  and  to  try  to 
prevent them occurring in the first place. It has often been an unequal struggle. 
I want today to review a little of that history from the Bank of England’s perspective. I will 
draw  out  the  development  of  what  –  following  the  great  financial  crisis  of  2008–9  –  has 
become known as “macroprudential” policy. Put simply, this is the regulation and supervision 
of the financial system as a whole rather than just the “micro” regulation and supervision of 
the firms and the markets that go to make up the system. 
In doing so, I want to review the progress of macroprudential policy and the FPC of the Bank, 
which  is  the  UK macroprudential  authority.  Have  we  built  a  more  resilient financial  system 
and  one  that  can  provide  the  financial  stability  that  is  essential  for  sustainable  economic 
growth? 
I hope I will be able to show that while many of the problems we face and the tools we have 
are familiar, the development of macroprudential policy and the FPC since the crisis is not 
just old wine in new bottles. There is new and important wine here also. 
The Bank and financial stability 
The Bank of England is not, of course, a newcomer to this scene. In the centuries following 
the  Bank’s  creation  in  1694,  the  British  financial  system  mushroomed  as  the  industrial 
revolution took hold and the empire grew. As the financial system grew, so did the incidence 
of crises and panics that required the Bank – often reluctantly – to intervene. In the financial 
crisis  of  1825  –  a  crisis  attributed  by  many  to  low  interest  rates,  abundant  liquidity  and  a 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  search for yield that drove investors into emerging market bonds – England was said by one 
observer  to  be  “within  24  hours  of  a  state  of  barter”.  To  get  liquidity  into  the  system  and 
restore confidence, the Bank according to one of its directors “lent money by every possible 
means and in modes we had never adopted before”. 
Again,  much  of  this  sounds  eerily  familiar.  The  Bank  since  its  inception  has  been  at  the 
centre of the response to every financial crisis in the UK. And since its inception, the Bank 
has played a role in shaping the development of the financial sector in the UK and using its 
influence  to  promote  financial  stability.  For  much  of  its  history,  that  role  was  not  one  of 
statutory regulation and supervision. The Bank exercised its influence behind the scenes on 
the small club of actors that dominated the financial system. Indeed, the UK came rather late 
to the idea that banks and financial firms needed to be regulated by law rather than steered 
by the eyebrows of the Governor of the Bank of England. 
The Macmillan Committee (1931), which inquired into financial policy in the wake of the Wall 
Street Crash, did not advocate statutory regulation. Rather it endorsed the informal role of 
the Bank in guiding the banking sector, commenting that “financial policy can only be carried 
into effect by those whose business it is”. 
30 years, a Great Depression and a world war later, the 1959 Report of the Radcliffe inquiry 
into the monetary system concluded similarly that “it is on this relationship, and on the mutual 
trust and confidence that are the basis of the relationship, rather than on formal power…that 
the Bank has relied in seeking to inform itself about and influence the policies of the clearing 
banks”. 
In the immediate post war period it was not necessary to do a great deal to promote financial 
stability or the supervision of financial firms. In the post war economy with closed capital and 
current  accounts  the  banking  system  was  tightly  controlled  by  government.  It  was  an 
instrument of macroeconomic management and of financial repression in order to repay the 
national debt. As the Chairman of Lloyds Bank at the time described it, “It was like driving a 
powerful car at twenty miles an hour. The banks were anaesthetised – it was a kind of dream 
life”. 
But, from the beginning of the 1970s, as the financial sector was increasingly liberalised and 
globalised, the old risks returned. It became apparent by 1979 that the Governor’s eyebrows 
needed  to  be  bolstered  with  statutory  regulation  and  supervision  of  banks.  As  capital 
accounts  were  increasingly  opened  up  and  cross  border  competition  grew,  the  need  for  a 
more  level  playing  field  between  internationally  active  banks  became  more  apparent. 
Liberalisation led to a shift towards more explicit prudential standards starting with the 1975 
Basel Concordat – the forerunner of today’s Basel standards. 
The focus was very much on promoting the safety and soundness of individual firms. Much 
less attention was given to the fact that the risks in the financial system are greater than the 
sum of the risks in its parts. Central banks were no strangers to such systemic risks. Indeed, 
they were recognised at the time – the forerunner of today’s Basel Committee identified them 
and  even  coined  the  term  “macro-prudential”  risks  to  distinguish  and  separate  them  from 
“micro-prudential” or firm specific risks that were the subject of the Basel Accords. They then 
concluded it was for someone else to address macroprudential risk. 
The trail of macroprudential policy goes rather cold at this point. The prevailing view seems 
to have been that if the regulation and supervision of individual firms was right and if central 
banks had the necessary Tiberius-like instruments to intervene in crises, sufficient stability 
could be ensured. It was the realisation in the last years of the last century that an ever more 
liberalised and globalised financial sector was generating ever more difficult financial crises 
that  led  to  the  reawakening  of  interest  in  macroprudential  policy.  This  was  led  by  Andrew 
Crockett, then the General Manager of the Bank for International Settlements and a former 
Executive Director of the Bank of England. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  The development of macroprudential policy 
As set out by Crockett and others1, the basic principles of macroprudential policy are that: 
• 
assuring  the  stability  of  individual  financial  firms  will  not  by  definition  assure  the 
stability  of  the  overall  financial  system;  indeed  there  will  be  times  in  which  what 
makes good sense for a specific firm makes bad sense for the system as a whole; 
the underlying prudential standards – the reserves of capital and liquid assets that 
individual banks and other firms need to hold to enable them to withstand bad times 
– should be set not simply in relation to the risks in the individual firm, but also to 
reflect the importance of the firm to the financial system and the cost to the economy 
as a whole if the system fails; 
the financial system does not simply respond to the economic cycle, growing as the 
economy grows and vice versa. It also feeds on its own exuberance in good times 
and on its fear in bad times which can in turn drive the real economy to extremes, as 
we have witnessed in recent years. The underlying causes of this phenomenon are 
interactions, feedback loops and amplifiers that exist within the financial system that 
can act as turbo chargers in both directions; 
the  aim  of  macroprudential  authorities  should  be  to  prevent  these  dynamics  from 
driving up financial stability risks in good times and driving the system down in bad 
times.  That  requires  not  only  setting  the  overall  framework  of  standards  and 
regulation in the right place to address systemic risk; it requires also adjusting the 
framework in response to the buildup of risk as the turbo chargers inherent in the 
financial system begin to kick in; and 
a  recognition  that  what  distinguishes  “macroprudential”  from  “microprudential”  and 
from  “macroeconomic”  is  its  objective  of  financial  system  stability  rather  than  the 
instruments  it  deploys.  Macroprudential  authorities  like  the  FPC  use  many  of  the 
same  instruments  as  microprudential  regulators  such  as  bank  capital  standards. 
And  in  the  very  final  resort,  monetary  policy  may  need  to  be  used  to  counter 
financial stability risk. But the objective of ensuring the financial system as a whole 
is  stable  is  different  to  the  objective  of  promoting  the  safety  and  soundness  of 
individual firms or that inflation is kept at target. 
    With the benefit of hindsight, policymakers and regulators should all have paid a great deal 
more attention to these ideas in the early years of the century while the great financial crisis 
was  in  the  making.  In  fact,  it  is  difficult  to  find  any  newspaper  reference  at  all  to 
macroprudential policy in those years. The opposite is true today. Last year there were over 
350 newspaper references in the UK alone. The great financial crisis validated these ideas 
for many policymakers world-wide. 
It  was  clear  with  hindsight  that  we  had  not  only  mis-estimated  the  risks  in  individual 
institutions.  More  importantly,  we  had  not  really  understood  the  risks  created  by  the 
dynamics  of  the  system  including  from  outside  the  core  banking  system,  namely  the 
amplifiers and feedback mechanisms that drove the system down in the same way that they 
had  driven  it  up.  Or  the  devastating  effect  all  of  this  would  have  not  just  on  the  financial 
system but on the broader economy. 
The dynamics of the system itself create risks and costs that markets and firms do not – and 
cannot – take fully into account in their decisions and their pricing. For example, in a financial 
crisis individual banks will try to cut lending – to deleverage – to preserve their funds. But if 
                                                
1  See  Crockett,  A  (2000)  ‘Marrying  the  micro-  and  macroprudential  dimensions  of  financial  stability,  BIS 
Speeches,  21 September.  Also,  see  Borio,  C  (2003)  “Towards  a  macroprudential  framework  for  financial 
supervision and regulation?”, BIS Working Papers, No.128. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  all  banks  do  that  then,  as  we  saw,  the  economy  will  suffer  which  damages  all  banks.  I 
suspect central banks over the centuries had an intuitive understanding of these risks. But 
they were never so great before the development of a truly global, liberalised financial sector 
in  a  digital  age.  And  they  were  never  clearly  identified  but  instead  were  wrapped  up  with 
many other risks in the historically opaque world of the central banker. 
One key outcome of the crisis was the recognition that in the modern global economy, there 
is a need for international standards to cover macroprudential as well as microprudential risk. 
These  have  been  developed  and  coordinated  by  the  Financial  Stability  Board,  which  was 
itself created in response to the crisis. 
And  there  is  likewise  a  need  for  national  public  authorities  that  are  clearly  responsible  for 
managing these risks. Macroprudential bodies, in various shapes and sizes, have been set 
up  in  around  40  jurisdictions.  In  the  UK,  the  FPC  of  the  Bank  of  England  was  formally 
established in 2013 having existed in an interim form since 2011. 
How well have we done? 
Seven years on from the crisis and four years from the establishment of the FPC in the UK it 
is  fair  to  ask:  how  well  have  we  done  so  far?  Have  we  put  in  place  the  machinery  –  the 
institutions and the rules – to manage macroprudential risk? Have we, as some argue with 
increasing volume, gone too far and achieved stability at the expense of growth? 
The first area to look at is whether the framework of regulation has now been set to address 
systemic  as  well  as  firm  specific  risks.  The  new  framework  has  largely  been  set  by 
international standards, and for the UK by the incorporation of those standards in EU law. 
The Basel reforms to bank capital and liquidity standards have very materially strengthened 
the protection of capital and liquidity reserves that individual banks hold to meet bad times. 
Regulatory capital requirements are set to be up to ten times higher than before the crisis for 
the most systemically important institutions and banks will face internationally agreed liquidity 
ratios  for  the  first  time.  In  the  UK  and  other  jurisdictions,  leverage  ratios  have  been 
introduced in advance of an international standard that is in train and structural separation 
measures  are  being  implemented.  These  reforms  have  strengthened  the  position  of 
individual firms and in doing so the resilience of the system as a whole. 
But the Basel and other reforms have also recognised explicitly that these levels of protection 
need to be set not only to protect investors in individual firms but also to protect all of us, the 
whole economy, from the damage to the system that can be done when systemic firms get 
into trouble. 
Banks that are globally systemic are now required to hold more resources – equity capital – 
that can absorb losses if and when things go wrong. The extra protection is graded by the 
systemic  importance  of  the  firm.  The  aim  is  that  these  systemically  important  players  can 
continue to operate within the system, serving the real economy, even in bad states of the 
world. 
And if, despite all the extra protection they do fail, we need to ensure they can be “resolved” 
– by which I mean revived or sold or broken up or wound down – in a way that does the least 
damage to the economy and that does not require taxpayer bailouts. We are now close to 
the agreement of an international standard requiring systemic banks to hold a set amount of 
debt in a form that can be readily “bailed-in” to recapitalise and stabilise the firm if it fails, so 
that it can be resolved over time without doing wider damage. 
Macroprudential  policy  is  about  more  than  banks.  Other  parts  of  the  financial  system  can 
drive  up  booms  and  amplify  busts.  Derivatives  traded  between  financial  firms  acted  as  an 
amplifier of the crisis when their values changed very quickly and the firms did not have the 
resources to compensate each other for the change. We are now shifting bilaterally traded 
derivatives  onto  central  counterparties  where  there  is  better  identification  and  protection 
against  the  risks  of  sudden  changes  in  value.  Similarly,  minimum  standards  on  lending 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  against securities, another amplifier in the crisis, are being introduced to reduce the impact 
on firms when the value of those securities changes quickly. 
Seven years on from the crisis, the contours of the new regulatory framework are clear and 
in the main agreed; we are well into the implementation of many of its main standards. The 
standards not only reinforce the safety and soundness of individual firms. In contrast to the 
development of prudential framework before 2007, we now endeavour to address specifically 
the risks generated by the financial system as a whole. In other words, the framework is not 
just stronger. It is macroprudential in a way that was not true at all before the crisis. 
Of  course,  knowing  where  to  set  the  detailed  prudential  standards  that  make  up  the 
framework  is  as  much  an  art  as  a  science.  It  is  one  thing  to  know  that  before  the  crisis 
systemic banks were not holding enough capital to absorb losses and keep functioning – one 
has only to look at the failures, the bailouts and the impact on the real economy. It is quite 
another to determine how much capital a systemic bank needs to hold to be able to continue 
to operate through a crisis. As with most things in life, policymakers have looked to the past – 
for example to the losses suffered by banks and others in this and in previous crises – to 
guide the future. But we know that it is a useful but an imperfect guide. To paraphrase Mark 
Twain, history only rhymes, it does not repeat itself. 
That  brings  me  to  the  second  main  element  of  macroprudential  policy.  The  standing 
framework can only go so far in addressing risk. The role of macroprudential authorities, like 
the FPC, is not just to ensure the framework addresses systemic risk. It is to monitor and 
identify the buildup of risk and the development of new types of risk. And to take action to 
address them. 
Here I think macroprudential policy is at a much earlier stage of development. In part this is 
probably because having crystallised in the crisis, the risks in the core banking system have 
been  muted  in  the  aftermath.  And  because  the  development  of  the  new  framework  of 
regulation  has  consumed  so  much  of  policymaker  and  regulator  energy.  The  FPC  has 
certainly  spent much  of its  short  life so far  on  the  development  and  implementation  of  the 
new framework of regulation. 
But  it  is  also  due  to  the  fact  that  there  is  still  a  great  variety  of  views  as  to  how 
macroprudential policy should identify and respond to changing risks in the financial system. 
There  is  no  consensus  about  which  risks  it  should  care  about  and  which  instruments  are 
most  effective  in  addressing  them.  There  is  not  yet  the  extensive  body  of  practice  and  of 
theoretical and empirical research that exists, for example, in the world of monetary policy. 
As  I  mentioned,  there  are  now  macroprudential  authorities  in  around  40  jurisdictions.  But 
there are very different views among policymakers as to what time-varying, countercyclical 
macroprudential should and could do. Some believe macroprudential policy should actively 
tighten  regulation  to  lean  heavily  against  the  powerful  dynamics  of  the  credit  cycle  as  the 
amplifiers  in  the  financial  system  drive  up  credit  booms  and  risks.  A  more  restrained 
approach would be to use countercyclical policy not so much to lean against the cycle but to 
increase the resilience of the system further by putting in more protection as risks build up in 
exuberant  times.  Others  remain  unconvinced  that  there  is  much  of  a  role  for  time-varying 
macroprudential policy at all and argue that it is better to bake all the necessary resilience 
into a very strong standing framework of standards and rules. There is certainly no easy way 
to estimate where we are in the credit cycle and the impact of macroprudential tools – while 
there are guides there are no simple rules. 
Against  that  background,  I  want  to  highlight  some  of  the  steps  the  FPC  has  taken  in  this 
area. 
First,  using  macroprudential  policy  to  address  changing  risks  depends  upon  a  clear 
assessment of risks and of the action necessary to address them. The institutional incentives 
will inevitably tend to drive macroprudential authorities to the identification of all possible – 
and  if  we  are  not  careful,  some  impossible  –  risks.  Failure  to  spot  a  risk  is  worse  than 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  spotting one too many. The outcome of this dynamic, however, can too easily be a lack of 
clarity and focus: an assessment that identifies everything but actually identifies nothing. 
With this in mind, the FPC has changed the structure and content of its bi-annual Financial 
Stability  Report  (FSR).  The  FSR  aims  to  set  out  publicly  the  FPC’s  view  on  risks,  its 
assessment of the resilience of the system and to explain its policy. In its new form, the FSR 
will focus on no more than a handful of risks, the ones the Committee judges are the most 
important and the most prominent.2 And it will then set out what, given the level of resilience 
in the system, the Committee thinks should be done about those risks. The intention is that 
such  a  shorter,  more focused  report  will  create  a  discipline  for  the  FPC’s  thinking,  help  to 
communicate what the FPC is truly concerned about and make it easier for others to hold us 
to account. 
Second, the Committee is developing the use of stress testing to assess macroprudential as 
well  as  microprudential  risk.  Last  year,  the  FPC,  together  with  the  PRA  ran  the  first  ever 
stress test of the UK banking sector as a whole. The aim was to test not just the resilience of 
individual banks but what happened to the system if all of the major banks faced a severe but 
plausible stress scenario at the same time. We are conducting a similar test this year. 
The Committee intends to set out later this year how  we  want to develop macroprudential 
stress testing to help us respond to the ever changing level of risks in the financial system. At 
present we are using stress testing to help us judge how resilient the banking system is to 
different severely adverse, but plausible, scenarios. A development of this approach would 
be  to  use  stress  testing  more  countercyclically.  Rather  than  testing  every  year  against  a 
scenario of constant severity, the severity of the test, and the resilience banks need to pass 
it, would be greater in boom times when credit and risk is building up in the financial system 
and it has further to fall and then reduced in weaker periods when there is less risk in the 
system and the economy needs the banking system to maintain lending. 
Third,  macroprudential  risk  goes  wider  than  the  banking  system.  Risks  can  arise  in  other 
parts of the financial system and in the real economy. A year ago, the UK housing market 
was  clearly  developing  significant  momentum.  Prices  were  growing  much  faster  than 
incomes.  Borrowers  were  increasingly  driven  to  borrow  a  greater  amount  relative  to  their 
annual  income.  The  amount  of  such  new  mortgages  at  high  loan  to  income  (LTI)  ratios  – 
borrowers borrowing over 4 times their annual income – had exceeded its pre-crisis peak. 
The risk the Committee saw was that if the number of high LTI mortgages continued to grow, 
there  would  be  increasing  numbers  of  highly  indebted  households  very  vulnerable  to  a 
change in economic circumstances. This would increase both macroeconomic volatility and 
systemic  risk.  The  Committee  came  to  the  view  that  this  was  a  macroprudential  risk  that 
needed to be insured against. It recommended the introduction of limits on the proportion of 
new mortgages at high LTI ratios. 
The momentum in the housing market cooled and the limits have not so far been reached. It 
is impossible to say how much this was a result of the Committee’s action; a number of other 
important factors were also in play. But it is an example of the FPC’s approach to adjusting 
policy  to  respond  to  changing  risks.  And  it  is  also  an  example  of  the  Committee  taking  a 
broad view of financial stability that goes wider than direct risks to the banking system. 
A further example of how macroprudential risk can develop outside the banking system is the 
lending and investment that happens through financial markets rather than through banks. 
To take one example, the global asset management sector has grown by 60% since 2003 
and is now a similar size to the global commercial banking system. This will probably be one 
                                                
2  The July 2015 FSR identified the following major risks facing the UK financial system: the global environment 
notably Greece and China; market liquidity; UK current account deficit; UK housing market; misconduct; and 
cyber risk.  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  of the new frontiers of macro (and micro) prudential regulation. The FPC is exploring whether 
there  are  significant  risks  from  changes  in  these  markets  and  in  particular  how  asset 
managers  manage  liquidity  to  meet  redemptions  in  times  of  stress.  There  is  also  work 
underway on this internationally. 
Macroprudential policy is still a work in development. Over the past few years much of the 
FPC’s  work  has  been  learning  by  doing.  As  we  learn,  we  will  have  to  set  out  clearly  and 
publicly  the  development  of  our  overall  policy  framework  –  how  resilient  we  believe  the 
system needs to be, how we think about macroprudential risk, what risks we believe fall into 
the domain of macroprudential and how we will use our policy instruments. As part of this, 
the  Committee  intends to  set  out  by  the  end  of the  year  our  view  on  the  adequacy  of the 
overall capital framework for banks, now that the main post crisis reforms have been set. 
Have we gone too far? 
Financial  crises  are  unruly  affairs.  The  great  crisis  of  2008–9  was  certainly  no  exception. 
Risks crystallised in unexpected ways and moved between parts of the financial system that 
we  had  not  appreciated  were  connected.  A  large  number  of  regulatory  reforms  were 
launched to address the many and dangerous 
fault-lines that the crisis exposed. 
It is only now, as we move through the implementation of these reforms, that we can start to 
see the whole picture of how they work together in practice. Inevitably, as the new framework 
starts to bite, the question is asked whether the reforms, as they interact in practice, produce 
“unintended  consequences”  that  are  worse  than  the  risks  they  are  trying  to  reduce.  And, 
more  fundamentally,  with  economic  activity  still  below  pre-crisis  trends,  whether  we  have 
gone too far and whether regulation is now preventing the financial system from doing its job 
to support growth in the real economy? 
I imagine this debate will be widespread internationally and will last for some time. In the light 
of how and why macroprudential policy has developed and where we now are, I would make 
the following observations. 
First, we should accept that the complex, interlocking set of reforms of recent years will need 
fine tuning and adjustment as they are implemented. There will be issues we have to revisit. 
Indeed, this process is already beginning. The Bank of England and the ECB have together 
launched  a  review  of  the  treatment  of  securitisation.  The  FPC  and  the  international 
community is looking at the issue of liquidity in financial markets which many argue has been 
adversely  affected  by  regulation.  Following  up  the  Fair  and  Effective  Markets  Review,  the 
Bank  of  England  will  host  an  Open  Forum  to  take  stock  of  the  reform  agenda  in  financial 
markets. And the European Commission has just launched its review of the EU regulation on 
bank capital. 
Indeed, given the depth and complexity of the financial crisis and the corresponding depth 
and complexity of the reforms, we should expect rather than be surprised that we will need to 
refine and adjust some of the regulatory reforms. 
Second, however, while we may need to look at how the key elements of the reforms work in 
practice  and  interact,  we  should  not  change  our  overall  appetite  for  the  risk  of  financial 
instability or seek to trade off between financial stability and growth. 
Indeed, the more time that elapses since the crisis the more we learn about its cost, not just 
in financial terms but in terms of lost economic activity and, perhaps even more important, 
loss of growth potential. 
The financial system plays a crucial role in a modern economy directing resources to where 
they can be most productive and can generate the greatest return. When the dynamics of the 
system  itself  distort  incentives  and  judgments  of  risk  and  return,  there  can  be  a  huge 
misallocation  of  resources  in  the  economy.  And  when  the  bubble  bursts  and  the  economy 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  has  to  adjust,  a  damaged  financial  system  cannot  guide  the  necessary  reallocation  of 
resources – indeed, as we have witnessed, it can slow it down. 
The overall economic cost is well known. As we now know, the impact of the crisis on UK 
productivity growth as well as economic growth has been devastating. Seven years on and 
output per person has only just reached its pre-crisis level. We have not even recovered the 
pre-crisis rate of annual growth in productivity of around 2.3% and the level of productivity of 
our economy is around 15% lower than it would have been on pre-crisis trends. There is now 
a growing body of evidence on the very damaging impact of financial crises on the productive 
capacity of economies. 
Third, we should not imagine that there is some recent halcyon world of banks supporting the 
real economy to which  we can quickly return if the regulatory straitjacket is loosened. The 
system was badly distorted in the long run up to the crisis. The post crisis world requires a 
major  adjustment  in  bank  business  models.  This  is  not  some  unintended  consequence  of 
overzealous regulation. It is a necessary, if painful adjustment to a new reality. 
Some  numbers  from  the  UK  illustrate  this  point  starkly.  In  the  long  upswing  of  the  credit 
cycle, the stock of domestic lending by UK banks in the UK grew enormously from 95% in 
1997  to  170%  of  GDP  in  2008.  The  stock  of  non-property  lending  to  companies  as  a 
proportion  of  GDP,  however,  grew  only  modestly  from  19%  in  1997  to  23%  in  2008. 
Meanwhile,  mortgage  lending  increased  from  45%  to  70%  of  GDP;  lending  to  real  estate 
tripled from 5% to 15% of GDP; and lending to the UK non-bank financial sector – including 
institutions  like  hedge  funds,  securities  dealers  and  insurance  companies  –  shot  up  from 
25% of GDP to 60%. And these numbers do not count the explosion in UK-owned banks’ 
overseas exposures which more than quadrupled between the end of the 1990s and 2008.3 
In other words the massive increase in the stock of lending – an increase of £1.7 trillion in 
absolute terms – did not lead to very much of an increase in productive investment at all. Of 
course there are benefits in enabling people to buy their homes. And much of the financing of 
financial markets almost certainly came back to productive investment in the form of market 
investments in business. But as we discovered in the crisis much of the lending appears to 
have financed the increase in house prices and a large part of the market investment was 
simply misallocated and lost.4 
Nor did this increase in lending drive a commensurate increase in economic growth in this 
particular credit cycle. Over the period 2000–2007 GDP growth averaged little more than its 
long-run average of around 2.8%. In fact, business investment over the period averaged just 
1.3% a year and it appears that most of this was related to commercial real estate. 
Conclusion 
The financial  system can  be  a  powerful  engine  for growth  and  prosperity.  But  its  ability  to 
generate systemic crises means it can also be a powerful destroyer of those as well. This 
has  been  true  throughout  history  but  never  more  so  than  for  today’s  highly  complex, 
globalised and digitalised financial system. 
We  should  not  therefore  see  economic  growth,  or  productivity  as  somehow  opposed  to 
effective  financial  regulation.  Strong  sustainable  growth  requires  not  only  a  strong  and 
vibrant  financial  system;  it  requires  the  controls  and  safety  buffers  to  ensure  that  the 
                                                
3  For  more  information  on  UK-owned  banks’  overseas  exposures  see  Broadbent,  B  (2012)  ‘Deleveraging’, 
speech at Market News International, 15 March.   
4  The Chancellor has recently asked the Governor of the Bank of England, working with HM Treasury, to initiate 
research to create better measurement of ‘finance for productive investment’ covering all asset classes and all 
stages of finance, with a view to publishing the data on a regular basis. See “Fixing the foundations:  creating 
a more prosperous nation”, HM Treasury, July 2015. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  dynamics of the system do not generate periods of illusory growth and prosperity followed by 
periods of destruction of the same. 
The  financial  system  has  come  a  long  way  since  the  time  of  Emperor  Tiberius.  While  we 
have relearned some familiar lessons in recent years, we have also learned some new ones. 
We  have  had  to  develop  a  new  regulatory  framework,  macroprudential  institutions  like the 
FPC and new policy approaches. 
Over the next few years we will certainly need to refine all of these. The implementation of 
the detailed reforms will inevitably throw up unforeseen effects in particular places and where 
it  is  justified  we  will  need  to  revisit  issues.  But  we  should  be  careful  about  talking  about 
turning back the overall regulatory dial or trying to trade off the risk of financial instability for 
short term growth. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
