  Christian Noyer: The size of Central Bank balance sheet – how relevant 
(important) is it? 
Speech by Mr Christian Noyer, Governor of the Bank of France and Chairman of the Board 
of  Directors  of the  Bank for  International  Settlements,  at the GIC (Global  Interdependence 
Center)/Bank  of  France  annual  seminar  “New  Policies  for  the  Post  Crisis  Era”,  Session  I 
“Putting a Context on Monetary Policy – On Both Sides of the Pond”, Paris, 23 March 2015. 
 1.   A widespread increase in CB balance sheet 
In all major economies, Central Banks’ balance sheets have dramatically increased in size 
and as a percentage of GDP. That movement was temporarily reversed in the euro area, but 
our balance sheet is set to increase again following the recently decided -and implemented – 
asset purchase programs, most notably the Public Sector Purchase Programme (PSPP). 
Since 2007, the aggregate size of central banks’ balance sheets over the world has tripled, 
reaching the amount of 22 trillion dollars at the end of 2014. Interestingly, this increase has 
been  almost  equally  split  between  advanced  and  emerging  economies.  In  advanced 
countries, Central Banks have acquired domestic assets. On average, their balance sheets 
have  grown  from  10  to  20%  of  GDP  over  the  last  seven  years.  In  emerging  economies, 
accumulation of foreign exchange reserves accounts for most of the expansion. Situations 
remain  very  diverse  among  advanced  economies:  while  the  balance  sheet  of  the  Bank  of 
Canada amounts to 5% of its nation’s GDP, the Swiss National Bank holds assets equivalent 
to 80% of the Swiss GDP. 
Discretionary and technical factors both explain those differences and evolutions. The former 
holds for countries that choose to accumulate foreign exchange reserves. The latter is topical 
in the case of the euro area: the ECB’s balance sheet performs an intermediation function 
between National Central Banks through the so-called Target 2 system. So, as a mechanical 
phenomenon, balances in the system tend to grow in times of market segmentation i.e. an 
impaired interbank market and strong capital flows inside the euro area. Similarly, conducting 
monetary operations via open market or via repos makes the size of the balance sheet more 
or less dependent on the size of the interbank market. 
However,  the  recent  increase  in  size  mainly  results  from  a  shift  in  the  monetary  policy 
regime.  Central  Banks  have  taken  a  proactive  –  rather  than  purely  passive  –  approach  to 
their  balance  sheets.  They  have,  according  to  the  common  parlance,  “put  these  balance 
sheets  to  work”.  And,  as  a  result,  in  the  formulation  of  monetary  policy,  “quantities”  –  the 
amounts  of  assets  and  liabilities  –  have  come  to  play  an  increasing  role  as  compared  to 
“prices” – the level of interest rates. 
This,  of  course,  is  a  component  and  a  consequence  of  unconventional  monetary  policies. 
Traditional channels, – through interest rates- have become ineffective: first of all because 
economies have hit the zero lower bound; and in some case, like in the euro area, because 
transmission – through credit – has been clogged. The expansion of balance sheets results 
from attempts to overcome those limits and allow monetary policies to fulfill their mandates 
via large scale of assets purchases. 
Is it the size of the balance sheet or the means of its increase that matter? 
2.  
The causes and consequences of changes in balance sheets size are rather diverse. Broadly 
speaking,  both  liabilities  and  assets  of  Central  Banks  matter.  An  expansion  of  liabilities 
occurs when, as the Eurosystem did in many instances, the Central Bank increases liquidity 
provision  to  the  banking  sector,  with  the  explicit  objective  of  easing  pressures  on  funding, 
reducing its costs, and ultimately, influence lending behavior. Expansion of liabilities may be 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  more passive though when setting an exchange rate floor such as in the case of the SNB. 
Looking,  now,  at  the  asset  side,  asset  purchases  bring  down  risk  premia,  they  trigger 
portfolio rebalancing, flatten the yield curve, increase risk taking in the private sector and shift 
expectations in a more positive territory. As you all know, the Eurosytem has now embarked 
into a major purchase program, the PSPP, that follows other programs of smaller sizes for 
asset-backed securities (ABSPP) and covered bonds (CBPP3). 
There are many technical discussions. Some people would argue that the stocks of assets 
held by Central Banks matter more than the flows of purchases. Others would contend that 
the composition and size of purchases are the real levers. The issue boils down to whether 
an  expansion  in  the  monetary  basis  is  enough  to  trigger  credit  expansion  or  whether  the 
latter is correlated to banks willingness to expand credit and more importantly to the appetite 
of economic agents to borrow. Based on how monetary policies have been conducted for the 
past several decades, banks have always had the ability to expand credit at a given level of 
interest rate irrespective of the size of the Central Bank’s balance sheet. Being at the ZLB 
does not change that simple reality. Hence I would tend to argue that, given the transmission 
channels of an asset purchase program, its composition and length may matter as much as 
its size. 
In any event, increasing the size of the Central Bank’s balance sheet, via large scale asset 
purchases, sends very important signals. This “signaling” operates at several levels. It may 
contribute  to  strengthening  forward  guidance  on  the  policy  rate.  More  importantly,  it  may 
have a direct impact on inflation expectations, therefore contributing to lowering real interest 
rates.  When  the  balance  sheet  size  is  explicitly  linked  to  the  achievement  of  an  inflation 
objective as in Japan, it may prove an effective tool to communicate the monetary authority’s 
determination – what economists would call a “commitment device”. 
Signals on the Eurosystem’s balance sheet have played a great role in the recent past. In 
November 2014, the Governing Council stated that the balance sheet was expected to move 
toward the dimensions it had at the beginning of 2012. Markets started to anticipate an asset 
purchase  program.  More  recently,  the  asset  purchase  program  which  will  last  until  end-
September 2016 has been an important and clear signal of the expansionary monetary policy 
stance over an extended horizon. 
Those  signaling  effects  have  been  very  effective  and  following  the  announcement  of  the 
expanded  asset  purchase  program  on  22  January,  significant  movements  took  place  on 
financial markets with, inter alia a decline in the forward interest rates across all maturities, a 
decline in government and corporate debt yields, and a rise in equity prices. 
3.   Are there drawbacks to be feared from the increase in CB Balance sheets? 
The  active  use  of  their  balance  sheets  by  major  Central  banks  has  raised  a  number  of 
concerns. I shall focus on three questions. 
First, when unconventional monetary policies started to be implemented, many analysts were 
worried  that  the  expansion  of  the  monetary  base  would  trigger  inflationary  pressures  and 
Central Banks would lose control over price stability. As we all know, the reverse happened. 
Broad money aggregates have been basically flat – in the euro area- over the last eighteen 
months, the money multiplier collapsed and inflation has decreased well below our definition 
of price stability. 
Second, other, stronger, questions are raised as to the “quasi fiscal” implications of Central 
Banks’ balance sheets. There is a perception that expanded balance sheets create a new 
environment  where  the  relationship  between  Central  Banks  and  governments  gets  more 
complicated.  Basically,  the  expansion  would  expose  Central  Banks  to  new  risks,  increase 
their vulnerability and compromise their independence. 
Third, there is a huge theoretical literature on Central Banks’ solvency. I read the conclusions 
as follows. Nearly all analysts agree that a Central bank cannot go technically bankrupt as it 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  can issue as much currency and reserves as needed to face its payments and commitments. 
Indeed, a few Central banks with great reputation have operated in the past with negative net 
equity  for  long  periods  of  time.  Most  economists  would  point,  however,  that  unlimited 
issuance of base money would certainly endanger price stability in ordinary circumstances. 
So,  while  the  existence  of  a  Central  bank  cannot  be  put  into  danger  by  its  technical 
insolvency, its ability to fulfill its mandate might certainly be compromised. And so would its 
independence as the Central bank would depend on the Government to rebuild its capital. 
It  is  very  important  to  understand  that  the  Eurosystem  is  fully  protected  against  such  a 
contingency.  It  has  been  created  with  a  solid  capital  base  and  has  kept  strengthening  it 
through  retained  profits  and  occasional  recapitalizations.  The  Eurosytem  is  unique,  in  this 
regard, amongst advanced economies. Both its independence and ability to fulfill its mandate 
are guaranteed even  in  very  adverse  economic circumstances. While  it should  not  lead to 
complacency  and  negligence,  the  existence  of  such  buffers  should  alleviate  any  concerns 
about the potential risks that the expansion of the balance sheet may entail. 
Finally,  huge  Central  Banks’  balance  sheets  may  be  seen  as  influencing  the  allocation  of 
resources, or effecting implicit fiscal transfers, an issue of special sensitivity inside the euro 
area. To discuss this question, it is useful to refer to the famous Musgrave classification of 
public policies between three purposes: allocation, distribution and stabilization. There is no 
doubt that monetary policy is only and exclusively concerned with stabilization – and a very 
focused part of it : price stability. No monetary policy action should be taken for any other 
purpose. So to the extent that “unconventional” tools are implemented, there should be no 
ambiguity as to their close link with the Central Bank’s mandate of price stability. I believe 
that has been the case in all major countries and certainly so in the Eurozone. 
4.   How to mitigate unintended consequences? 
The  truth  is,  however,  that  the  real  world  does  not  always  fit  perfectly  with  the  beauty  of 
Musgrave’s classification. Some public policies may aim at several objectives. Others may 
inadvertently,  have  unintended  side  effects.  All  public  policies  with  no  exception,  health, 
energy, infrastructures, unwillingly affect some citizens more than others. 
Those  side  effects  should  be  minimized,  but  cannot  always  be  totally  avoided.  Monetary 
policy  is  not  immune  from  the  complexity  of  the  real  world.  For  instance,  some 
unconventional policies may have had unintentional distributional consequences by pushing 
up asset prices, hence benefiting some households with important financial wealth. On the 
other hand, fostering economic recovery and reducing unemployment goes in the direction of 
helping the most vulnerable part of the population. In other cases, strong intervention may 
raise legitimate moral hazard concerns. Should Central Banks have refrained from acting at 
the risk of not fulfilling their mandate? 
Those simple questions remind us that decision making always involves some tradeoffs. It is 
all  the  more  important  that  policy  makers  keep  a  clear  focus  on  their  ultimate  objective. 
Central  Banks  should  do  their  utmost  to  avoid  any  undesirable  allocation  or  distribution 
effects  of  their  policies.  Those  policies  should  be  designed  as  neutrally  as  possible.  This 
being  said,  the  possibility  of  unintended  side  effects  should  not  paralyze  decision  making 
when required by the situation in order to fulfill their mandates. 
The  Eurosystem  has  faced  such  a  situation  when  deciding  on  its  program  of  large-scale 
asset  purchases. I  believe  the  decisions  taken  reflect  an  appropriate  balance  between  the 
necessity  of  achieving  the  mandate  and  the  desire  to  avoid  undesirable  side  effects.  Key 
principles  underlying  the  implementation  of  the  PSPP  have  been  the  minimization  of 
unintended consequences and full neutrality, as illustrated for instance by the choice of the 
capital key to allocate purchases between various Governments debts. 
It  is  also  important  to  note  that  unwanted  side  effects  can  be  minimized  if  different  public 
authorities operate in a well-defined and respected framework. We have such a framework in 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  the Eurozone. It is based on fiscal discipline leading to debt reduction. If those disciplines are 
not respected or implemented with insufficient vigilance, then monetary policy through public 
sector debt securities purchases may be perceived as creating strong moral hazard, thereby 
weakening the necessary consensus and compromising its efficiency. 
When fiscal transfers take place between countries of the Eurozone, they are implemented 
through mutually agreed and conditional programs. There are permanent temptations to blur 
the  distinction  between  those fiscal  programs  and  the monetary  and  liquidity  operations  of 
the  Central  Bank.  Those  temptations  should  be  resisted.  This  is  the  reason  why  the 
Eurosystem has been extremely rigorous in implementing its collateral rules in a transparent 
and neutral way. 
Let me conclude. 
Unconventional monetary policies are necessary but complex. They create more interference 
with markets than policies conducted in ordinary times. As a consequence, it becomes more 
difficult  to  avoid  unintended  spillovers  of  stabilization  policies  on  the  allocation  and 
distribution of resources. This reality should not prevent Central Banks from acting decisively 
when there are risks for price stability. But such actions demand rigor and precision in their 
implementation.  For  Central  Banks,  their  balance  sheet  has  become  the  main  tool  of 
monetary policy for the foreseeable future. It has proven effective. It can and will be deployed 
all the more efficiently that the rest of the policy environment remains sound. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
