  Ravi Menon: Building a culture of trust in the financial industry 
Opening  address  by  Mr  Ravi  Menon,  Managing  Director  of  the  Monetary  Authority  of 
Singapore, at the Monetary Authority of Singapore-Singapore Academy of Law Conference, 
Singapore, 23 January 2015. 
 Chief Justice Sundaresh Menon 
Justice Steven Chong 
Mr Timothy Massad, Chairman, US Commodity Futures Trading Commission 
Distinguished guests, colleagues, ladies and gentlemen, 
Bad behaviour in finance 
Six  years  ago,  the  Global  Financial  Crisis  tipped  national  economies  into  recession  and 
brought to their knees some of the most hallowed names in the financial industry. But the 
biggest casualty of the Crisis could well be trust: 
• 
• 
• 
trust between regulators and financial institutions; 
trust among financial institutions; and 
trust that the public places in the financial industry – that their bankers are honest 
and their financial advisors are acting in the best interest of their clients. 
And six years after the Crisis broke, the global industry continues to be dogged by shocking 
revelations of financial malfeasance, mis-selling, and dishonesty. 
• 
In the US, large banks are paying billions of dollars to settle charges against them 
for  mis-selling  mortgage-backed  securities  which  led  to  massive  losses  for  their 
buyers. 
In the UK, over 13 million complaints have been made against retail banks for the 
aggressive mis-selling of so-called Payment Protection Insurance (PPI). 
We read of traders in banks circumventing internal rules to make outsized market 
bets that subsequently resulted in large losses for these banks. 
And  in  financial  centres  across  the  world,  including  Singapore,  regulators  have 
uncovered  attempts  by  traders  at  several  major  global  banks  to  manipulate  key 
financial benchmarks used to set rates for loans and foreign exchange contracts. 
   Little wonder that global surveys show that levels of trust in the financial industry are lower 
than ever. 
• 
According to Edelman, a public relations firm, banking and financial services ranked 
last among 15 industries that the public trusted “to do what is right”.1 
In countries most affected by the financial crisis and its aftermath, levels of trust are 
lower still – barely 30% of the public in Europe trust their banks. 
                                                 
1  Edelman Trust Barometer, 2013 and 2014. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Why trust is critical to finance 
Financial products and transactions can be quite complex and information asymmetries often 
place financial institutions in a more advantageous position compared to their customers. 
• 
Trust  that  the  bank  is  sound  is  critical  for  savers  to  keep  their  monies  in  bank 
accounts and for borrowers to make long term investment decisions. 
Trust that financial advisers and insurance agents are dealing fairly is important for 
consumers committing large portions of their savings for a long period of time. 
Trust that asset managers and investment brokers are acting in the clients’ interest 
and not front-running them is key to the investment process. 
  The licensing and regulation of financial institutions confers a degree of legitimacy on them. 
But being a bank, an insurance company or a capital markets intermediary is not just about 
holding an official stamp to collect and manage funds. 
• 
• 
As Mark Carney puts it, financial institutions also need a social licence to operate.2 
They  earn  this  social  licence  through  a  track  record  of  exemplary  conduct  and  a 
reputation for integrity and prudence. 
Their obligations towards their customers and counterparties must be based on not 
just a contractual obligation but a moral one as well. 
 Getting the culture right 
What  accounts  for  the  repeated  cases  of  misconduct  in  the  global  financial  industry? 
Weaknesses  in  governance,  risk  management,  and  operational  controls  have  allowed 
unbridled risk-taking and encouraged some individuals to push, and in several cases, break 
the  bounds  of  what  is  permissible.  Since  the  financial  crisis,  the  international  regulatory 
community  has  issued  directions  and  guidance  to  tighten  financial  institutions’  governance 
standards and curb excessive risk-taking. 
But weaknesses in governance and control, grave as they were in some financial institutions, 
cannot fully account for the spate of misconduct. There are deeper issues of trust, ethics and 
culture in the financial industry that we need to confront. 
First,  finance  is  at  risk  becoming  more  “de-personalised”.  Long-term  relationships  with 
customers are being replaced by more transient transactions with counterparties. 
• 
Raghuram  Rajan  observes  how  increasing  product  complexity  and  reliance  on 
technology has created a detachment from the customer. 
It ultimately leads to a reductionist view of finance where “money is the measure of 
all worth”, a state that is hardly conducive for ethical conduct.3 
 Second, compensation structures tend to over-emphasise profits as performance measures. 
Excessive  focus  on  sales  targets  and  commissions  has  incentivised  a  “trading  mentality” 
which is often associated with too much risk taking or scant regard for client interests or the 
sustainability of relationships. 
Third, and more fundamentally, departures from ethical conduct are too easily tolerated as 
the norm. 
                                                
2  Mark Carney, “The Future of Financial Regulation”, MAS Lecture, Singapore, 2014. 
3  Raghuram  Rajan,  “Where  Money  is  the  Measure  of  All  Worth”  in  Fault  Lines:  How  Hidden  Fractures  Still 
Threaten the World Economy, 2010. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
      In a global survey of financial sector executives by the Economist Intelligence Unit, 
more than half the respondents felt that their career progression would be difficult 
without being “flexible on ethical standards”. 
If you look at the email and chat room messages between traders involved in the 
rigging of financial benchmarks, they betray a lack of any sense of guilt or wrong-
doing. 
In  fact,  traders  were  congratulating  and  complimenting  each  other  on  their 
manipulation. 
And when subsequently questioned by their superiors or regulators, they offered an 
array of self-justifications, chief of which is “everybody does it”. 
But everybody does not do it. I believe the vast majority of people working in the financial 
industry are committed to serving their clients or customers fairly and with integrity. But the 
unethical actions of a few have undermined trust and created instability. 
Reform  of  the  financial  industry  will  not  be  complete  until  this  issue  of  trust  and  ethics  is 
addressed. This requires “getting the culture right”. And by culture, I mean the shared values, 
attitudes and norms that guide actions. 
There is increasing international regulatory guidance to improve risk governance and align 
compensation  schemes  with  long-term  sustainability  and  customer  interests.  This  is 
necessary  but  not  sufficient.  There  are  limits  to  what  externally  imposed  rules  can  do  to 
promote the right values in financial firms. 
• 
Because culture develops from within a firm, it invites a certain resonance from the 
members of that firm – in a way that will be difficult for an externally imposed set of 
rules to achieve. 
For the same reason, the behavioural norms that a firm’s culture and value system 
promotes  are  more  amenable  to  internal  governance  and  self-policing  than  rules 
that rely on external enforcement. 
 In short, rules tell us what we can do, but values tell us what we should do. A mechanistic 
compliance  with  rules  cannot  be  an  adequate  substitute  for  an  internalised  sense  of 
responsibility  and  basic  morality  that  a  finance  professional  owes  to  his  client  or 
counterparty. 
How can we build a culture of trust and strong values in the financial industry? We need an 
ecosystem to do so – with a role for regulators, the industry, and most important, the firm 
itself. 
What can regulators do? 
First,  the  role  of  regulators.  The  international  regulatory  community  has  been  intensifying 
efforts to ensure that financial institutions foster a sound risk culture and conduct themselves 
in a prudent and socially responsible manner. But instituting a good risk culture is not merely 
about slapping on more rules or adopting a perfunctory, checkbox approach to compliance. 
MAS  therefore  takes  an  intensive  supervisory  approach  to  risk  governance  and  culture  in 
financial institutions. We prefer this to an overly prescriptive regulatory approach based on 
one-size-fits-all  rules  that  may  be  less  effective  in  addressing  idiosyncratic  risks.  Financial 
firms differ widely in goals, activities, and culture. 
Instead,  close  supervision  –  consisting  of  both  onsite  inspections  and  offsite  reviews  – 
provides MAS with a good view of a firm’s risk governance and culture and practices on the 
ground. This allows us to assist the board and management in identifying emerging areas of 
vulnerabilities and to take pre-emptive corrective actions where necessary. Let me cite two 
areas we focus on: compensation and fair dealing. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  is  an 
important  mechanism 
Compensation 
incentives  and  behaviours. 
Compensation  structures  must  motivate  not  only  high  performance  but  also  high  ethical 
standards. 
• 
Some jurisdictions have placed restrictions on bonus payments – how much can be 
paid or over how long a period. 
to  shape 
MAS  has  put  in  place  rules  and  guidelines  that  are  consistent  with  the  Financial  Stability 
Board’s  principles  for  sound  compensation  practices.  They  require  the  compensation  of  a 
bank executive to be aligned with not only the risks that the bank undertakes, but the time 
horizon  of  those  risks.  But  we  have  chosen  not  to  cap  bonus  payments  or  be  overly 
prescriptive  in  our rules.  Such  measures may  have  unintended  consequences  or could  be 
easily circumvented. 
Instead,  MAS  has  stepped  up  its  supervisory  intensity  of  financial  institutions’  overall 
compensation policies and practices. 
• 
We assess the effectiveness of the firm’s compensation system, its relationship with 
the firm’s governance framework, and its impact on risk-taking behaviour. 
We  intend  to  conduct  deeper-dive  reviews,  to  examine  how  a  firm  makes 
compensation decisions in practice, as well as the extent to which the firm’s board 
and management deal with issues relating to compensation and risk culture. 
 A  second  area  of  focus  is  fair  dealing:  are  firms  dealing  fairly  with  customers?  MAS  has 
issued guidance on fair dealing principles and outcomes that financial firms should achieve. 
• 
We  assess  whether  the  board  and  management  have  put  in  place  initiatives  to 
foster a corporate culture of fair dealing. 
We evaluate the processes in place to ensure that clients and customers are offered 
products and services that suit their needs. 
We  monitor  the  volume  of  customer  complaints  of  mis-selling  and  examine  how 
complaints are dealt with. 
  What can industry do? 
But even the most intrusive supervision can only go so far in promoting a culture of ethics. 
The industry must itself take collective responsibility to promote higher ethical standards. It is 
better  that  industry  develops  codes  of  good  conduct  that  take  into  account  operational 
realities that they know best and that holds firms accountable to their peers, than wait for the 
regulator to set rules that may be impractical or too onerous. 
The industry has already begun to do so. 
• 
In  the  UK,  high  street  banks  have  set  up  the  Banking  Standards  Review  Council 
(BSRC), which aims to work with the industry to improve banking practices in three 
broad areas: culture, competence and customer outcomes. Participating banks will 
be required to commit to a programme of improvement and report to the BSRC on 
their performance every year. 
In  the  Netherlands,  the  Dutch  Banking  Association  is  exploring  plans  for  a 
disciplinary  system  for  ethics  violations,  similar  to  what  the  medical  profession  is 
subject to. 
 I am pleased to note that in Singapore, our industry associations have not lagged behind. 
The Association of Banks in Singapore (ABS) has published guidance for its member banks 
and minimum service standards that customers can expect from their banks. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    The  Code  of  Consumer  Banking  Practice  commits  member  banks  to  treat  their 
customers “fairly and reasonably”. 
A  separate  Private  Banking  Code  of  Conduct  sets  out  standards  for  financial 
advisors,  not  only  for  professional  competency  but  ethical  conduct  as  well. 
The  Singapore  Foreign  Exchange  Market  Committee  (SFEMC),  an  industry 
association of major foreign exchange market participants, has published a guide to 
conduct and market practices for treasury activities. More commonly known as the 
Blue  Book,  the  guide  has  recently  been  updated  with  instructions  on  the 
governance,  requirements  on  professional  conduct  and  best  practices 
for 
participants in benchmark rate settings. 
The industry could consider going further in promoting and reinforcing ethical standards and 
good practices: 
• 
Industry  may  want  to  consider  a  mechanism  or  process  by  which  firms  could  be 
benchmarked  against  and  held  accountable  to  industry  standards  on  ethical 
behaviour and professional conduct. 
Industry may also want to conduct periodic surveys on stakeholders’ views on risk 
culture, governance, and market conduct, to help identify potential blind spots and 
emerging areas of risk. 
 What can firms do? 
But ultimately it is the financial institution that must bear responsibility for getting the culture 
right. This requires setting the right moral tone from the top. Many financial firms have issued 
values  statements  and  codes  of  conduct  espousing  principles,  norms  and  behaviours  that 
apply universally across the firm. It is important to have such a tangible point of reference for 
standards of conduct, but setting the right tone requires more than lofty exhortations for good 
behaviour. 
First, lead by example. Management must take time and effort to clearly articulate the firm’s 
core values and purpose. They have to demonstrate commitment and credibility by “walking 
the talk” with concrete policies, processes and actions. The firm’s leaders must themselves 
be  seen  to  be  guided  by  those  same  qualities  they  want  their  staff  to  emulate.  And 
programmes to build a culture of trust and ethics cannot be a one-off exercise to fend off bad 
publicity or to placate the regulator. Shaping culture demands a sustained effort. 
Second, create a safe environment for whistle-blowing. This means providing the necessary 
mechanisms to challenge, question, and report ethical breaches. 
• 
A number of banks in Singapore have put in place new channels for whistleblowing 
and enhanced the escalation and investigation processes to facilitate staff reporting. 
Third,  align  human  resource  policies  to  a  culture  of  trust  and  ethics.  I  have  already 
mentioned  compensation  as  being  an  important  way  to  create  incentives  for  the  right 
behaviour.  But  the  incentives  for  ethical  conduct  must  go  beyond  compensation  and 
encompass  all  HR  policies:  recruitment,  on-boarding,  appraisal,  training  and  coaching, 
promotion, and career development. 
• 
An  organisation’s  HR  policies  and  practices  are  the  clearest  demonstration  of  its 
value system, the qualities it regards as important. 
In  financial  firms,  it  is  important  that  these  policies  and  practices  dispel  the 
perception  of  good  ethics  as  a  constraint  on  profitability  or  hurdle  to  career 
advancement. 
 We are beginning to see some progress. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
     Performance appraisals in some banks now take into account how an employee’s 
conduct is consistent with the banks’ avowed principles and values. 
Others  have  developed  balanced  scorecards  for  remuneration  that  go  beyond 
traditional measures of financial performance to include indicators relating to culture 
and controls. 
Yet  others  take  into  account  a  business  unit’s  record  on  compliance,  customer 
experience, internal audit findings and other relevant considerations to underscore 
the organisation’s behavioural expectations of staff. 
Conclusion 
Let me conclude. 
The  global  financial  industry’s  standing  with  the  public  is  at  an  inflection  point.  It  could 
continue a downward spiral of mistrust with yet more egregious misconduct, or it could seize 
this opportunity to restore high ethical standards. 
Thankfully, we are in a better place in Singapore. The financial industry here is generally well 
regarded and trusted. But we have not been immune to some of the egregious practices in 
global finance, for example, attempts to manipulate financial benchmarks and the mis-selling 
of  financial  products.  We  must  be  on  our  guard,  and  work  to  further  strengthen  ethical 
standards and a culture of trust in the industry. 
• 
We  must  foster  a  culture  in  the  industry  that  looks  beyond  the  question  “is  this 
legal?” to the larger question “is this right?”. 
For  without  sound  ethics,  there  can  be  no  trust.  Without  trust,  there  can  be  no 
confidence. And without confidence, there can be neither growth nor stability. 
 We are gathered here to discuss the future of financial market regulation. May I suggest that 
restoring  a  culture  of  trust  based  on  strong  ethical  standards  is  imperative  to  securing  a 
bright future for a purposeful financial industry. 
Thank you and I wish you all fruitful deliberations. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
