  R Gandhi: Asset reconstruction and NPA management in India 
Keynote  address  by  Mr  R  Gandhi,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the 
“The  Economic  Times  ReModel  in  India  –  Asset  Reconstruction  &  NPA  Management 
Summit”, Mumbai, 15 September 2015. 
 Assistance  provided  by  Shri  A  K  Choudhary,  Smt.  Chandana  Dasgupta  and  Shri  B.  Nethaji  is  gratefully 
acknowledged. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, Very Good Morning. 
It  is  indeed  a  pleasure  to  be  present  here  and  interact  with  you  on  the  important 
2. 
issue  of  management  of  non-performing  assets  in  India.  Such  events  are  quite  important 
especially when there is a surge in stressed assets in banking in the recent times. 
Current Position 
3. 
However, if we look a little far back, the asset quality of the Indian banking system 
was  not  like  this;  it  had  actually  been  improving  significantly  since  the  implementation  of 
reforms  in  the  banking  sector  and  introduction  of  prudential  norms,  enactment  of  the 
Securitisation and Reconstruction of Financial Assets and Enforcement of Security Interest 
Act  2002,  Credit  Information  Companies  Act,  etc.  The  gross  NPAs  ratio  steadily  declined 
from  15.7  per  cent  in  1996–97  to  2.36  percent  in  2010–11.  However,  the  amount  of  non-
performing assets witnessed spurt subsequently and as on March 2015, it was at 4.62 per 
cent  of  the  gross  advances  of  the  banks  in  comparison  with  2.36  per  cent  of  the  gross 
advances  as  at  March  2011.  The  growth  in  NPAs  was  much  higher  than  the  growth  in 
advances during the last four years. In addition, the ratio of restructured standard assets to 
gross advances grew to 6.44 per cent as at the end of March 2015 from 5.87 per cent of 
gross advances as on March 2014. The total stressed assets (i.e., NPAs plus Restructured 
Assets) as on March 2015 were 11.06 per cent of gross advances. 
 
  4. 
The sharp increase in stressed assets has adversely impacted the profitability of the 
banks. The annual return on assets has come down from 1.09 per cent during 2010–11 to 
0.78  per  cent  during  2014–15.  Considering  the  effect  it  has  on  both  capital  and  liquidity 
position of the bank, there is an urgent need for banks to reduce their stressed assets and 
clean up their balance sheets lest they become a drag on the economy. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
    
Managing asset quality is always very important and becomes a prominent objective 
5. 
especially  during  a  period  of  economic  downturn.  Recognising  the  importance  of  effective 
asset quality management, Reserve Bank has issued various guidelines to banks, from time 
to time, on various aspects of asset quality management. 
c) 
d) 
Reserve Bank has advised banks that the management of credit risk should receive 
Preventive Management 
6. 
the top management’s attention and the process should encompass: 
a) 
b) 
Measurement of risk through credit rating / scoring; 
Quantifying the risk through estimating expected loan losses and unexpected loan 
losses 
Risk pricing on a scientific basis; and 
Controlling  the  risk  through  effective  Loan  Review  Mechanism  and  portfolio 
management. 
7. 
Further, Reserve Bank has also advised the banks to put in place a robust credit risk 
management system which is sensitive and responsive to various factors affecting credit risk. 
The guidelines entail involvement of top Management, including the Board of Directors of the 
bank in actively managing the credit risk of the banks. Banks are required to put in place 
proactive  credit  risk  management  practices  like  annual  /  half-yearly  industry  studies  and 
individual obligor reviews, credit audit which entails periodic credit calls that are documented, 
periodic  visits  of  plant  and  business  site,  and  at  least  quarterly  management  reviews  of 
troubled exposures / weak credits. 
Recently, 
In  January  2014, 
the  Reserve  Bank  of 
Recent regulatory initiatives 
8. 
India  had  released  a 
comprehensive  “Framework  for  Revitalising  Distressed  Assets  in  the  Economy”.  The 
Framework outlines a corrective action plan that will incentivise early identification of problem 
cases, timely restructuring of accounts which are considered to be viable, and taking prompt 
steps by banks for recovery or sale of unviable accounts. In addition, to address the issue of 
information  asymmetry  as  also  to  identify  the  problem  early,  a  Central  Repository  of 
Information  on  Large  Credits  (CRILC)  to  collect,  store,  and  disseminate  credit  data  to 
lenders,  was  set  up.  Under  this  arrangement,  banks  are  reporting  credit  information, 
including  classification  of  an  account  as  SMA  to  CRILC  on  all  their  borrowers  having 
aggregate fund-based and non-fund based exposure of ₹50 million and above with them. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
9. 
While having a proper credit risk management is very important for managing asset 
quality, another issue which is equally important is proper structuring of the credit facilities 
extended  to  various  borrowers.  While  granting  credit  facilities,  banks  should  set  realistic 
repayment schedules on the basis of a proper analysis of cash flows of the borrowers. This 
would go a long way to facilitate prompt repayment by the borrowers and thus improve the 
record  of  recovery  in  advances.  A  “one  size  fits  all”  approach  and  providing  plain  vanilla 
loans to all clients may not be in the interest of banks as well as its customers. 
10. 
In order to effect a structural change in the way project loans are granted by banks, 
and considering the need to facilitate banks to offer long term project financing, which may 
ensure long term viability of infrastructure and core industries sector projects by smoothening 
the cash flow stress in initial years of such projects, Reserve Bank has issued guidelines on 
flexible structuring of long term project loans with periodic refinancing option. Reserve Bank 
has also introduced the concept of “standby credit facility” to fund cost overruns in projects. 
Such  “standby  credit  facilities”  are  sanctioned  at  the  time  of  initial  financial  closure;  but 
disbursed  only  when  there  is  a  cost  overrun.  At  the  time  of  initial  credit  assessment  of 
borrowers / project itself, such cost overruns are assessed, agreed to be disbursed in the 
eventuality of cost over runs, and the Debt Equity Ratio, Debt Service Coverage Ratio, Fixed 
Asset Coverage Ratio, etc. are determined accordingly. Thus, there may not be any need for 
the borrower to approach the banks at a later stage for additional finance. 
Restructure / rehabilitation 
11. 
However, despite proper credit appraisal and proper structuring of loans, slippages 
in  the  asset  quality  may  not  be  unavoidable,  especially  when  the  economic  cycles  turn 
worse. Hence, once a weak account is identified, banks need to consider various remedial 
actions.  One  of  the  remedial  options  is  restructuring.  In  spite  of  their  best  efforts  and 
intentions,  sometimes  borrowers  find  themselves  in  financial  difficulty  because  of  factors 
beyond their control and also due to certain internal reasons. For the revival of the viable 
entities  as  well  as  for  the  safety  of  the  money  lent  by  the  banks,  timely  support  through 
restructuring in genuine cases is called for. The objective of restructuring is to preserve the 
economic value of viable entities that are affected by certain internal and external factors and 
minimize the losses to the creditors and other stakeholders. 
12. 
Such  support  to  borrowers  who  are  in  temporary  financial  difficulties  need  not  be 
contingent  upon retention  of  asset classification status  as  “standard”. There  is  a  tendency 
among  banks  to  withdraw  their  support  once  an  account  is  classified  as  NPA.  Mere 
classification of an account as non-performing asset need not result in withdrawal of support 
to  viable  borrowal  accounts.  The  purpose  of  asset  classification  and  provisioning  is  to 
present a true picture of bank’s balance sheet and not to stigmatize accounts / borrowers. 
However,  while  considering  their  support  to  accounts  under  stress,  banks  should  make 
proper distinction between willful – defaulters / non-cooperative / unscrupulous borrowers on 
the one hand, and on the other hand, borrowers defaulting on their debt obligations due to 
circumstances beyond their control. 
As  you  may  be  aware,  Reserve  Bank  has  withdrawn  special  asset  classification 
13. 
benefits available to restructuring of assets with effect from April 1, 2015 to align our norms 
on restructuring with international best practices. Subsequent to that there is a sudden drop 
in  the  assets  being  “restructured”  and  it  seems  that  banks  have  become  very  choosy  in 
restructuring loans to borrowers who are under stress. One of the reasons cited for drop in 
restructuring of assets is that “banks have no incentive in restructuring”. We feel that decision 
of the banks in restructuring should be driven by their motivation to revive an account which 
is  under  temporary  financial  difficulties  and  preservation  of  the  economic  value  of  viable 
entities in the interest of both the creditors and borrowers, rather than merely concentrating 
on asset classification and provisioning benefits. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  Recovery / exit 
14. 
As a first step towards effective recovery / exit framework from accounts which are 
beyond revival, banks should have a well -defined loan recovery policy which sets down the 
manner of recovery of dues depending upon the circumstances of each account. Banks may 
resort to either opt for legal avenues or non-legal avenues for exiting the account. Banks may 
enter into compromise settlements in terms of their Board approved policy for compromise 
settlement of NPAs. However, adequate care should be taken to ensure that the compromise 
settlements are done in a fair and transparent manner. Banks may also sell their NPAs to 
other banks (which happens outside the SARFAESI Act). There are a few banks which have 
better recovery expertise and we have seen instances of them purchasing NPAs from other 
banks. 
15. 
In the event of failure of the above mentioned measures, banks could resort to filing 
suits  with  Debt  Recovery  Tribunals  or  invoke  the  provisions  of  the  Securitisation  and 
Reconstruction  of  Financial  Assets  and  Enforcement  of  Security  Interest  Act,  2002.  An 
alternate option to enforcement of security interest is that of selling the NPAs to securitisation 
companies  /  reconstruction  companies  (SCs  /  RCs)  registered  under  the  SARFAESI  Act. 
SCs / RCs are expected to do a specialized task of recovering and reconstructing the NPAs 
thereby  reducing  the  NPAs  in  the  system.  The  purpose  of  creation  of  SCs  /  RCs  was  to 
resolve NPAs of banking system by using their expertise. 
Asset reconstruction companies 
16. 
As  on  date  15  SCs  /  RCs  are  registered  with  Reserve  Bank.  Sale  of  NPAs  to 
SCs / RCs  which  was  relatively  sporadic  has  picked  up  substantially  during  the  last  two 
financial years. 
 
 
 
17. 
However,  only  a  few  of  them  appear  to  be  successful  in  acquiring  assets  from 
banks. Of 15 registered SCs / RCs, asset size in respect of top three SCs / RCs (viz., ARCIL, 
“JM  Financial”  and  “Edelweiss”)  account  for  more  than  two  thirds  of  total  assets  of  all 
SCs / RCs. 
 4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
18. 
An analysis of purchase of NPAs by SCs / RCs indicate that acquisition cost as a 
percentage to book value of assets increased sharply from 20.8 per cent as on March 2013 
to 44.5 per cent as on March 2015. In other words, the discount rate at which SCs / RCs are 
acquiring  NPAs  from  the  banks  /  FIs  decreased  considerably,  possibly  on  account  of 
(i) developing  of  improved  NPA  recovery  methods  by  banks  (ii) selling  of  relatively  fresh 
NPAs (iii) outsourcing the valuation of NPAs (iv) presence of competition among SCs / RCs 
while auctioning NPAs. 
19. 
On the recovery  side, the  performance  is  not  very  encouraging.  As  on March  31, 
2015, the average recovery rate (assets resolved as a % to assets acquired) of SCs / RCs 
was at 31.0 per cent. One of the reasons for a dip in the average recovery rate is due to the 
fact that substantial part of the assets under management of SCs / RCs is acquired recently. 
Further, a wide variation in recovery rates among SCs / RCs is also observed for the same 
reason. 
20. 
An  analysis  of  investor  class  in  security  receipts  (SRs)  does  not  depict  any 
divergence. It is observed that seller banks / FIs have been subscribing majority of SRs. On 
an average seller banks / FIs have been subscribing 74 per cent of total SRs issued during 
the  period  March  2010  to  March  2015.  In  past  two  years,  seller  banks subscribed  around 
80 per cent of total SRs. 
 
 
 
 
21. 
The  aggregate  asset  size  of  SCs  /  RCs  witnessed  sharp  growth  of  64.8  per  cent 
during 2014–15 on top of 21.3 per cent growth witnessed in the previous year. In numerical 
terms, aggregate asset size of SCs / RCs stood at ₹ 6920 crore as on March 31, 2015. The 
reported average Return on Assets of SCs / RCs was at 3.48 per cent while the average 
Return on Equity stood at 4.48 per cent during the period March 2010 to March 2014. 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
    22. 
RBI  has  recently  taken  various  steps  to  improve  the  system’s  ability  to  deal  with 
distressed  assets  of  banks  and  financial  institutions.  Reserve  Bank  has  issued  various 
guidelines  relating  to  the  operations  of  SCs  /  RCs  as  also  to  make  transactions  between 
them and banks more transparent. These guidelines were further strengthened with floors on 
transaction  prices  and  prevention  of  collusions  with  promoters  in  buy  back  deals.  The 
modified guidelines mandated SCs / RCs to have an increased skin in the game by making it 
compulsory for them to invest and hold minimum 15% (as against 5% hitherto) of the security 
receipts issued by them. 
23. 
In  order  to  promote  the  business  of  asset  reconstruction  in  India,  foreign  direct 
investment cap on SCs / RCs has been increased from 49 per cent to 74 per cent under the 
automatic route. While foreign institutional investors have also been allowed to participate in 
the equity of the SCs / RCs, the maximum shareholding by FIIs cannot exceed 10% of the 
paid up capital of the SC / RC. With a view to facilitate debt consolidation, SCs / RCs are 
now permitted to acquire debt from other SCs / RCs. SCs / RCs have also been permitted to 
convert a portion of the debt into shares of the borrower company as a measure of asset 
reconstruction. Consent threshold for security enforcement actions has been brought down 
to  60  per  cent  of  the  amount  outstanding  to  a  borrower  as  against  75  per  cent  hitherto. 
SCs / RCs with acquired assets in excess of ₹ 500 crore can float a fund under a scheme 
and utilize upto 25% of funds raised from the qualified institutional buyers for restructuring of 
financial assets acquired. Promoters of the defaulting company / borrowers or guarantors are 
allowed to buy back their assets from the SCs / RCs subject to certain conditions that are 
helpful in the resolution process and minimization of cost. Guidelines on Uniform Accounting 
Standards  for  SCs  /  RCs  has  been  issued  for  reckoning  Acquisition  cost,  Revenue 
Recognition, Valuation of SRs, etc. to induce transparency in the books of SCs / RCs. Norms 
for  calculation  of  management  fee  has  also  been  rationalised.  Management  fee  will  now 
have to be based on the net asset value of the SRs rather than the outstanding SRs issued 
24. 
With these regulatory changes, SCs / RCs will need to focus on actual redeeming of 
security receipts as it is no longer possible for them to base their profit model on the basis of 
management fees. In the near term, SCs / RCs may find it difficult to align their pricing to the 
expectations of the selling banks and the selling banks also may not have yet reconciled to a 
realistic  sale  price  expectation  for  the  assets  that  they  want  to  offload,  resulting  in  the 
reduction  in  sales.  The  rationale  behind  these  regulatory  changes  was  to  incentivise  the 
process of recoveries / restructuring, as net asset values of SRs is calculated on the basis of 
the likely rate of recovery of stressed assets. 
The RBI has also advised that the banks using auction process for sale of NPAs to 
25. 
ARCs  should  be  more  transparent,  including  disclosure  of  the  Reserve  Price  specifying 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
clauses for non-acceptance of bids, etc. If a bid received  is above the  Reserve Price and 
also fulfils the other conditions specified, acceptance of that bid would be mandatory. 
26. 
It  is  expected  that  these  amendments  to  the  regulations  will  improve  recovery 
prospect  for  SCs  /  RCs.  Membership  of  JLF,  lower  threshold  for  consent  to  enforce  the 
SARFAESI Act, more time set to conduct due diligence and greater disclosures will enhance 
transparency and lead to better resolution of NPAs. It would also result in lower vintage of 
NPAs being sold by banks and quicker debt aggregation. 
NPA Management – New Thoughts 
27. 
management. 
Let me now share with you some of the thoughts we have been discussing on NPA 
Enhancing Credit Appraisal Capacity 
28. 
One of the fundamental issues that hampers NPA Management is the inadequacies 
in the credit appraisal capacity of banks, more specifically on project appraisal. As we know, 
there  is  just  one  technical  consultancy  firm,  besides  some  specific  desks  in  some  banks. 
With the requirement of independent evaluation for JLFs and the number of JLFs, there is a 
crying  need  for  emergence  of  additional  technical  capabilities  to  undertake  evaluation  of 
projects, restructuring schemes, etc. Banks will have to strengthen their in-house desks as 
well. Reserve Bank through the Centre for Advanced Financial Research and Learning has 
taken initiative to organise capacity building program for bankers. 
Number of members in a consortium 
29. 
Another  suggestion  that  has  come  relates  to  limiting  the  number  of  banks  and 
financial institutions that should be permitted in a consortium or even in a multiple banking 
arrangement. It is said that the banks with very meagre share neither have incentives nor 
inclination to independently assess the proposal and they typically and blindly go by one that 
has bigger share. Even if the bank has in-house technical capabilities, with a small share its 
voice  is  not  strong  enough.  Therefore,  the  suggestion  is  to  have  a  regulatory  limit  on  the 
number of members in a consortium or multiple banking arrangements so that every member 
has  at  least  10%  of  the  exposure  and  therefore  will  have  serious  independent  credit 
appraisal  and  credit monitoring. There  are counter  views  about  this  suggestion,  especially 
with  regard  to the freedom  to  be  available  for  a  bank  or  borrower  to  take the  commercial 
decision on a loan. 
Ready list of management and technical experts / specialists 
30. 
Yet  another  suggestion  is  to  prepare  a  ready  list  of  management  and  technical 
experts and specialists whose services can be availed by banks, financial institutions or the 
asset  reconstruction  companies  whenever  the  JLFs  decide  to  change  the  management 
under a CAP. Perhaps IBA can prepare and update such a ready list. 
31. 
view. 
All these suggestions need further exploration and discussion before we take a final 
Issues faced by SCs / RCs 
Capital 
32. 
There is no denying the fact that SCs / RCs need capital and that too on continuing 
basis to be able to grow and be meaningful players in the sector while avenues of raising 
capital  is  limited.  The  networth  of  15  ARCs  is  only  around  ₹4000  crore  whereas  stressed 
assets  in  the  system  run  into  lakhs  of  crore.  The  industry  being  a  capital  intensive  one, 
SCs / RCs  are  struggling  to  raise  capital.  Deep-pocket  investors  are  interested  in  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  
 
business  but  cautious  on  account  of  slow  pace  of judicial  and  administrative  environment. 
While  there  is  limited  appetite  among  the  existing  sponsors  and  shareholders,  the  limit  of 
50 percent on individual shareholding and the stipulation that the sponsor should not have 
any controlling interest in the SCs / RCs (as stipulated by the SARFAESI Act) are proving to 
be stumbling blocks in this regard. However, it needs to be mentioned here that it would not 
be an easy option for SCs / RCs to raise funds through IPO for the reason that while on the 
one  hand,  there  is  an  apparent  lack  of  investor  appetite  in  the  domestic  market  in  the 
distressed space, the performance of SCs / RCs has, so far, remained dismal for a variety of 
reasons and this may prove to be a road block. SCs / RCs that can raise capital in a timely 
manner will be better positioned to play an active role in the field. SCs / RCs need to explore 
more in this regard especially through FDI route. There has also been a demand from the 
industry that subordinated debts like loans from the sponsors should be designated as Tier II 
capital  and  should  be  taken  into  account  while  calculating  the  capital  adequacy  of  the 
SCs / RCs. 
Pricing of NPAs 
33. 
The  other  important  issue  is  pricing  of  NPAs.  Currently  there  is  no  meeting  point 
between price expectation of sellers and bid price by SCs / RCs, which is also evident from 
the low success rate of auctions. This also proves to be a hindrance while bringing in more 
investors  willing  to  invest  in  the  SRs  being  issued  by  the  SCs  /  RCs  to  raise  funds  for 
acquisition  of  NPAs.  Investors  in  stressed  asset  portfolios  expect  high  returns,  based  on 
high-risk, high-reward principle which SCs / RCs find impossible to offer if the assets being 
acquired are not realistically priced. Equilibrium in offer and bid prices is essential for revival 
of  the  NPA  market.  This  issue  is  best  resolved  by  market  forces  and  participants.  Indian 
Banks Association in consultation with Association of Asset Reconstruction Companies may 
draw contours of mutually acceptable methodology for reserve price valuation. Discovery of 
fair  price  for  NPAs  may  definitely  help  in  more  deals  going  through  auctions  and  also 
generate interest from secondary investors like distress asset funds which can participate via 
SCs / RCs. 
Need of secondary market for SRs 
34. 
In  the  absence  of  third  party  investor  money  which  is  an  automatic  fall-out  of  a 
virtually non-existent secondary market, the bank that sells NPAs doubles up as investor in 
SRs. A meaningful solution would have been to delink investment in security receipts from 
only  a  select  group  of  qualified  institutional  buyers  (QIBs)  (as  mandated  under  the 
SARFAESI Act) and throwing it open for all institutional players in debt trading. Further, as 
pointed  out  by  the  SCs  /  RCs,  in  terms  of  Guidelines  issued  by  SEBI,  High  Networth 
Individuals  (HNIs)  are  already  allowed  to  participate  in  the  SR  market  as  Alternate 
Investment Funds (AIFs) have been notified as QIBs, eligible for investment in SRs issued by 
SCs  /  RCs.  One  possibility  is  that  they  may  be  allowed  to  participate  directly  in  the 
SR market,  as they  have  necessary  risk  capital  and  risk  appetite. This measure  may  help 
widen  investor  base  and  infuse  greater  depth to  the  secondary market for  SRs.  An  active 
secondary  market  for  SRs  will  attract  special  situations  funds  and  QIBs  to  this  market. 
Reserve  Bank  has  already  suggested  to  the  Government  of  India  that  Section  7  of  the 
SARFAESI  Act  may  be  amended  by  giving  power  to  RBI  to  specify  the  category  of  the 
investors from time to time in consultation with SEBI. 
Debt Aggregation 
35. 
While  sale  of  NPAs  by  banks  depend  on  various  factors  like  security  package 
available,  best  price,  etc.,  and  therefore  many  times  sale  with  respect  to  debt  of  a  single 
borrower to a single SCs / RCs may not be possible, sale of entire debt of one borrower to 
single SC / RC would help in effective and efficient resolution. Piece meal sale of an asset 
particularly  with  turn  around  potential  by  different  lenders  defeats  the  purpose  itself  as  it 
results  not  only  in  delays  but  also  pricing  hiccups  and  derails  resolution  process. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
Alternatively,  SCs  /  RCs  may  also  need  to  evolve  mechanism  to  coordinate  in  successful 
resolution of those assets, in the best interest of all stake holders. 
Judicial delays 
36. 
An  important  factor  affecting  recovery  performance  of  SCs  /  RCs  is  the  delay  in 
judicial process: be it under SARFAESI Act or at the level of debt recovery tribunals. A fast 
and efficient judicial system is a sine qua non for effective resolution of NPAs. Realising the 
importance  of  having  a  strong  bankruptcy  framework  in  improving  the  ease  of  doing 
business,  Government  of  India  has  constituted  a  Bankruptcy  Law  Reforms  Committee  to 
study the corporate bankruptcy legal framework in India. The Committee has submitted an 
Interim Report in February 2015 for immediate action and its Final Report is expected to be 
submitted within 12 months, recommending a Bankruptcy Code. Reserve Bank expects that 
recommendations  of  the  Committee,  when  implemented,  would  result  in  significant 
improvement in the bankruptcy framework of the country and enable banks / SCs / RCs to 
resolve their stressed assets in an effective manner. 
Conclusion 
37. 
I am sure that with the efforts of the Government in bringing in a strong bankruptcy 
framework and various regulatory initiatives being taken by the Reserve Bank of India, the 
effectiveness of the SCs / RCs would improve to a great extent. At the same time, I hope that 
the  market  participants  iron  out  the  frictions  which  are  best  resolved  among  themselves, 
without looking for regulatory solutions to such issues. 
38. 
I find that you have  a technical session  on regulatory limitations on unlocking the 
potentials of NPAs, solutions for managing NPAs and even preventive measures. I wish the 
event  a  great  success  and  will  look  forward  to  receive  your  considered  suggestions  and 
comments. 
39. 
Thank you very much for your patient attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
