  Ignazio Visco: Advancing European financial integration 
Keynote address by Mr Ignazio Visco, Governor of the Bank of Italy, at the Euromoney – The 
Italy Conference, Milan, 15 September 2015. 
 I would like first of all to thank Euromoney for inviting me today and I wish a warm welcome 
to  all  participants.  The  conference  program  is  ambitious,  spanning  from  the  European 
economic  outlook  to  key  issues  for  Italy  such  as  public  debt,  competitiveness,  structural 
reforms and the banking system. 
I will start by briefly reviewing some of the most recent economic developments. I will then 
offer  some  thoughts  on  the  objective  of  advancing  the  integration  of  European  financial 
markets.  Indeed,  beyond  the current cyclical  developments,  completing the  Banking  Union 
and diversifying the sources of financing for households and non-financial firms by setting up 
a Capital Markets Union remain the priorities to deepen European financial integration, foster 
higher and more sustained growth and help prevent the repetition of crises whose very high 
economic and social costs we are still having to face. 
The economic outlook and the ECB monetary policy 
The growth recovery in advanced economies is facing the impact of a further slowdown in 
emerging  market  economies,  hit  by  declining  commodity  prices,  less  favourable  external 
financing  conditions  and  a  sudden  reassessment  of  China’s  growth  prospects  and 
subsequent global repercussions. Slower growth in advanced economies in the first half of 
the  year  reflected  weakened  exports  and  a  deceleration  in  domestic  demand.  Since  the 
summer, the major correction in Chinese equity markets has triggered a wave of volatility in 
global financial markets and a renewed drop in commodity prices. 
Weakening foreign demand is not just a major concern for exports but can also endanger the 
tentative recovery of investment, which hinges on the prospects for trade. Further downward 
pressures on oil and other commodity prices, on top of other supply factors, may also push 
down inflation and inflation expectations, raising real interest rates. 
Global financial markets are also being conditioned by the expectation that the first increase 
in the federal funds rate is approaching, which would reflect a further strengthening of the US 
economy. Financial conditions in advanced economies remain accommodative nevertheless 
and a modest pickup in growth is projected by the IMF this year and in 2016. 
In the euro area, the economic recovery is expected to continue, albeit, perhaps, at a weaker 
pace. Growth is also being held back by the process of balance sheet adjustment that is still 
undergoing across a number of sectors. But the ECB asset purchase programme exerts a 
positive impact on the cost and availability of credit for firms and households. Recent sharp 
fluctuations  in  financial  and  commodity  markets  are  under  close  monitoring  in  order  to 
assess their possible impact on the outlook for prices. At its meeting of September 3 the ECB 
Governing  Council  recalled  that  the  programme  provides  sufficient  flexibility  in  terms  of 
adjusting its size, composition and duration; it reaffirmed its willingness and ability to act, by 
using all the instruments available within its mandate, if necessary, in particular to counter an 
unwarranted  tightening  of  monetary  conditions  or  a  material  worsening  of  the  inflation 
outlook. 
In Italy, the recovery is expected to proceed at a moderate pace. More favourable financing 
conditions,  following  the  very  easy  monetary  policy  stance  that  has  resulted  from  the 
decisions  progressively  taken  since  the  summer  of  last  year,  and  increased  confidence 
would finally also support domestic demand and capital accumulation. Private consumption 
should  also  benefit  from  lower  oil  prices  and  stronger  household  income,  boosted  by 
government’s measures and by the improvements in labour market conditions. Recent data 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  on economic activity and households’ spending go in the direction of confirming the overall 
improvement in growth prospects. 
Credit conditions and credit quality 
Credit conditions in the euro area continued to improve, albeit slowly, reflecting an easing in 
credit standards as well as an increase in loan demand. In July, both the annual growth rates 
of loans to households and non-financial corporations increased to 1.9 per cent and 0.9 per 
cent, respectively, while heterogeneity of credit conditions across countries has narrowed. 
In Italy, credit demand among firms is picking up for the first time since 2011, while demand 
among  households  has  also  strengthened.  However,  both  credit  conditions  and  loan 
dynamics remain heterogeneous across sectors of economic activity. According to the Bank 
Lending Survey for the second quarter of 2015, Italian banks kept easing credit standards for 
both  firms  and  households,  as  balance  sheet  and  liquidity  conditions  have  improved  and 
competition among banks has increased. As a result, in July the 3-month annualized growth 
rate of loans to firms turned positive (0.7 per cent, from –0.2 per cent) for the first time since 
November 2011 and the growth rate of credit to households further increased. 
However, despite improvements prompted by monetary policy measures, bank credit in the 
euro area remains subdued, partly as a consequence of high levels of non-performing loans 
(NPLs).  This  is  especially  the  case  for  Italy,  where  the  volume  of  non-performing  loans 
(NPLs)  has  trebled  since  the  start  of  the  global  crisis,  largely  due  to  the  major  fall  in 
economic activity (close to 10 per cent for GDP and 25 per cent for industrial production). It 
also reflects structural problems, including an inefficient legal system and particular features 
of the tax system.  
As  a  result,  a  lasting  solution  to  the  NPL  problem  requires  a  comprehensive  strategy: 
removing  the  inefficiencies  plaguing  the  bankruptcy  and  foreclosure  system  that  prevent  a 
faster recovery of credit as well as kick-starting the markets for NPLs. In August, the Italian 
government passed a law with two sets of key measures. A first set amends the insolvency 
and  foreclosure  system.  These  new  measures  will  reduce  the  length  of  legal  proceedings 
and increase the recovery rate of creditors’ claims. A second set of measures allows for the 
immediate,  rather than deferred, fiscal  deductibility  of  banks’  write-downs  and  loan  losses, 
aligning the Italian fiscal rules to those prevailing in the main euro area countries. These new 
provisions  put  an  end  to  the  long-standing  regime  of  deferred  deductibility  of  loan  losses, 
which created disincentives for banks to provision; as a consequence, no new deferred tax 
assets in connection with loan loss provisions will be created. 
As  these  measures  address  some  of  the  root  causes  of  the  high  stock  of  NPLs,  they  are 
expected  to  have  positive  effects  on  NPL  prices,  further  reducing  the  price  gap  between 
banks  and  potential  buyers  and  helping  the  development  of  a  secondary  market for these 
loans.  However,  this  market  is  still  extremely  thin  and  opaque;  prices  may  not  be  fairly 
determined. The launch of an Asset Management Company (AMC), which would buy NPLs 
(specifically  “bad  loans”)  from  banks,  would  contribute  to  kick  start  the  market  for  NPLs, 
increase the transparency of banks’ assets and improve the conditions at which they raise 
capital and funding. 
The  AMC  would  be  different  from  similar  vehicles  set  up  in  other  countries,  where  banks 
were in a state of crisis and were forced to participate. First, in Italy the project is aimed at 
solvent  banks,  hence  participation  would  have  to  be  voluntary.  Second,  unlike  previous 
cases, its design would have to be such that assets are transferred at market prices. This 
rules  out  a  transfer  of  losses  from  the  banks  to  the  State,  which  would  trigger  the 
consequences  of 
important  differences 
substantially increase the complexity of the scheme, whose feasibility is still being studied. 
This is the object of the current interaction with the European Commission. 
the  European  State-aid 
regulation.  These 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  European financial integration and the crisis 
Ongoing efforts on several fronts to fully restore the functioning of credit markets in the euro 
area are relevant not only to support growth via an adequate flow of credit but also, from a 
central  bank’s  perspective,  because  diversified  and  integrated  financial  markets  help  to 
improve the smooth and uniform transmission of monetary policy. 
Following  the  introduction  of  the  common  currency  in  1999,  European  financial  integration 
achieved remarkable progress, most notably in those market segments that are closer to the 
single  monetary  policy,  but  also  in  markets  for  government  and  corporate  bonds.  The 
unsecured  money  market,  a  key  segment  of  interbank  markets,  had  reached  a  stage  of 
“near-perfect”  integration  almost  immediately  after  the  adoption  of  the  euro.  The  standard 
deviation of the EONIA lending rates across euro area countries had fallen sharply to close 
to zero and had remained stable until the beginning of the global financial crisis in July 2007. 
The global and euro area sovereign debt crisis provoked a sudden reversal of this progress. 
Reflecting  the  incompleteness  of  the  euro  project,  “redenomination”  risks  materialized 
through very high credit and sovereign spreads, undoing financial integration and replacing it 
with financial fragmentation along national lines, which came to represent a hallmark of the 
euro area crisis. 
Over  the  last  three  years  or  so,  the  European  response  has  brought  financial  integration 
back to a level comparable to pre-sovereign debt crisis levels, although some fragmentation 
still  remains.  A  comprehensive  monetary  policy  response,  national  efforts  towards  fiscal 
consolidation, a reinforcement of euro area banks’ balance sheets and major reforms of the 
European economic governance, most notably the launch of the Banking Union, have eased 
financial conditions and greatly reduced financial fragmentation. 
The Banking Union 
Banks remain the backbone of the euro area financial system: their health is paramount in 
effectively providing financing for firms, notably small- and medium-sized enterprises, and for 
the economy as a whole. 
The Banking Union is a landmark step towards deeper financial integration. Its first pillar, the 
Single  Supervisory  Mechanism  (SSM),  has  been  up  and  running  since  November  2014. 
Drawing on the EU single rulebook, it provides a euro-area approach to supervision, as well 
as better monitoring of cross-border banking groups. The ECB has also been equipped with 
new  macroprudential  powers  and  tools  that  may  complement  instruments  available  to 
national  competent  authorities  in  addressing  systemic  risks,  such  as  those  that  may  arise 
from the procyclicality of credit supply, a key driver of many detrimental boom-bust cycles. 
The  benefits  of  the  SSM  became  visible  even  before  it  came  in  operation.  The 
comprehensive  assessment  that  preceded  it  has  stimulated  a  substantial  strengthening  of 
euro  area  banks’  balance  sheets,  setting  the  preconditions  for  their  renewed  ability  to 
adequately  finance  the  economy.  The  ECB  and  the  national  supervisors  are  working  to 
gradually remove national discretions and heterogeneities. The final objective should be to 
further foster financial integration so that banks operate in a full level playing field.  
The Single Resolution Mechanism (SRM), the second pillar of the Banking Union, will be fully 
in place as of January 2016. Ensuring the timely and effective resolution of failed banks is a 
crucial  component  of  a  stable  financial  system.  By  promoting  better  crisis  resolution,  the 
SRM will also improve market discipline and reduce excessive risk-taking. 
The  SRM  will  make  use  of  the  harmonized  tools  provided  by  the  EU  Bank  Recovery  and 
Resolution  Directive.  The  inclusion  of  a  bail-in  provision  in  the  Directive  marks  a  radically 
new approach to resolving bank crises, whereby the necessary resources should be drawn 
first of all from the bank’s shareholders and creditors in order to avoid or minimize potential 
costs for the taxpayers. Let me recall that bank deposits protected by the deposit insurance 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  system are excluded from bail in. Besides these deposits, other deposits held by individuals 
and  by  small-  and  medium-  sized  enterprises  would  receive  preferential  treatment  with 
respect to other instruments. 
We are aware that the introduction of bail-in tools may have an impact on the banks’ funding 
costs. In addition, in placing their securities, banks must be most careful to comply with the 
investor protection rules, since subscribers may be called on to contribute to the resolution 
costs. Customers must be given exhaustive information on the characteristics of the different 
instruments,  the  riskiest  of  which  should  be  expressly  reserved  solely  to  institutional 
investors. 
But  resolution  is  just  the  final  step  when  a  financial  institution  is  undergoing  a  crisis. 
Recovery is as, if not more, important. In order to avoid having to resort to resolution – or, 
should resolution become necessary, to make it efficient and avoid undermining the provision 
of important financial services – banks are required to be prepared in advance to confront 
stress, and must make recovery plans readily available – a set of actions that the bank itself 
would undertake in order to restore or maintain its viability and financial soundness. 
It is the responsibility of supervisory authorities to assess the quality and credibility of these 
recovery plans and to require their implementation as an early intervention measure. On the 
other hand, resolution authorities will draft resolution plans to identify the resolution strategy 
that best fits the organizational and operational structure of the bank and adopt measures to 
improve  resolvability,  where  adjustments  are  required.  Given  the  need  to  duly  take  into 
account  the  impact  on  the  ongoing  business  and  the  stability  of  banks,  supervisory  and 
resolution authorities should cooperate closely in defining such measures. 
Finally, completing the Banking Union requires further steps, including the construction of its 
third pillar, the proposed European Deposit Insurance Scheme. A common, privately-funded 
scheme  would  be  consistent  with  the  main  idea  underpinning  the  Banking  Union,  i.e.  that 
effective crisis management is in the best interest not only of the Member States in which 
banks  operate  but  also  of  the  euro  area  as  a  whole  given  the  interconnections  that 
characterize a financially integrated market. 
It is expected that the establishment of the Banking Union will foster structural changes in the 
European banking sector, for example consolidation via cross-border M&As. The structure of 
the sector might also be affected by the adoption of the European Commission’s proposal 
that sets limitations for the biggest and most complex banks in risky proprietary trading and 
the possibility for supervisors to require separation between certain potentially risky trading 
activities and deposit- taking business in case of threats to financial stability. 
Given the impact of the past financial crisis, measures to make the system more resilient are 
welcome and the structural measures add to the toolkit to address this objective. At the same 
time,  a  too-harsh  design  such  as  the  outright  ban  on  proprietary  trading  might  have 
unintended  consequences  on  the  smooth  functioning  of  markets;  therefore,  the  milder 
European  solution  –  separation,  as  opposed  to  an  outright  ban  for  proprietary  trading  – 
represents a balanced outcome. 
The Capital Markets Union and the complementarities between bank and market 
financing 
The  crisis  has  not  only  underlined  the  need  for  revising  and  strengthening  prudential 
regulation and aiming for higher standards of bank supervision but has also made evident 
the  limits  of  a  financial  system  that  relies  excessively  on  banks,  thus  highlighting  the 
importance of diversifying the sources of financing. Going forward, capital markets and non-
financial  intermediaries  will  have  to  take  on  a  larger  role  in  financing  investment  and 
economic activity. This goal is even more important given that the crisis-induced reforms of 
the  international  regulatory  framework  impose  tighter  capital,  liquidity  and  leverage 
requirements on banks with the objective of building a safer financial sector and with long-
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  the 
rather 
than  considering 
term  effects  on  their  lending  capacity.  Overall,  banks  will  become  more  selective  in  their 
credit decisions and will adjust their business models accordingly. 
The  European  Commission  proposal  unveiled  last  February  to  establish  a  Capital  Markets 
Union (CMU) by 2019 has among its primary objectives the lowering of barriers to accessing 
equity  and  bond  markets.  Obstacles  are  particularly  severe  in  the  case  of  small-  and 
medium-sized enterprises aiming at raising risk capital. This objective implies that particular 
attention  should  be  given  to  the  complementarities  between  bank  financing  and  market 
financing, 
two  as  obvious  alternatives.  And  such 
complementarities are indeed numerous, both at a macro and a micro level. 
At a macro level, the CMU must be seen as a natural complement to the Banking Union in 
providing macro-financial stability. At the risk of oversimplifying, we may say that the latter 
addresses the sovereign-bank negative feedback loop that epitomized the euro area crisis 
while  the  CMU  contributes  to  tackling  another  potential  circle  that  can  be  at  least  equally 
vicious:  the  firm-  bank  loop,  whereby  the  funding  difficulties  of  banks  –  or,  even  worse, 
pressures to deleverage – translate into more costly or less financing for creditworthy firms; 
in the reverse situation, when firms face problems in servicing bank credit, non-performing 
loans increase, weakening banks’ balance sheets and impairing their lending capacity. 
At a micro level, the CMU can complement the banking sector in fostering innovation while 
also strengthening firms’ financial structures. Research has long documented the fact that, 
among external sources, equity financing is best suited to foster innovative activities, for a 
number  of  familiar  reasons.  Start-up  firms  display  stronger  information  asymmetries  and 
have  typically  low  or  even  no  tangible  assets  to  offer  as  collateral  for  bank  loans; 
furthermore,  private  equity  or  venture  capital  financiers  foster  innovation  not  only  by 
providing capital but also managerial expertise and deeper knowledge of innovative sectors. 
There is evidence that equity financing spurs innovation also for Italian firms. 
The benefits of broader capital markets also extend to those which in principle can be seen 
as competitors, i.e. banks. High quality securitization, one of the CMU’s short-term priorities, 
can  free  up  banks’  regulatory  capital  and  increase  their  lending  while  allowing  them  to 
manage  credit  risks  more  efficiently.  And  broadening  financing  sources  for  SMEs  can  be 
beneficial not only for these firms but also for banks. By facilitating firms’ access to non-bank 
financing,  notably  equity  capital,  and  improving  their  financial  structure,  CMU  helps  make 
firms  more  creditworthy,  thus  safeguarding  banks’  balance  sheets.  Besides,  banks  can 
increase fee-based revenues by providing consulting services to firms that want to access 
capital markets. 
The CMU project is ambitious and prioritization is the key to advancing it effectively. In the 
short term, priorities should include: the simplification of the prospectus Directive, so as to 
facilitate listing for firms, especially SMEs; the standardization of information on credit quality; 
the development of a market for simple and transparent securitizations, possibly subject to 
favourable  prudential  treatment;  the  promotion  of  cross-border  investments  in  venture 
capital; and the creation of a European private placement market, a form of financing that 
allows firms to place their bonds with one or more institutional investors at a lower cost than 
that of issuing securities to the public. 
Challenges are stronger over the longer term, as a full CMU requires harder tasks such as 
harmonization  of  the  various  countries’  company  and  bankruptcy  legislation  as  well  as 
reduction  in  the  differences  between  the  tax  treatment  of  capital  gains.  Legislative 
harmonization  will  inevitably  be  a  gradual  process;  a  modular  approach  seems  the  most 
reasonable  course  of  action  to  follow,  starting  with  the  easiest  reforms  and  then  gauging 
where there is room to tackle more ambitious challenges. 
I have recently highlighted the distinctive importance of the CMU project for Italy. The country 
is a case in point as to the risks of relying excessively on a single source of financing, namely 
bank credit. Several years of financial crisis, a major effort to restore fiscal sustainability and 
two recessions have severely impacted on the Italian economy and its banking system. In 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  turn,  banks’  difficulties  hit  Italian  firms  strongly  as  they  are  generally  more  dependent  on 
bank credit and less capitalized than their European counterparts. 
By  favouring  access  to  non-bank  financing,  CMU  can  complement  legislative  measures 
adopted over the last few years that are underpinning progress towards a stronger financial 
structure for Italian firms. The introduction in 2011 of an Allowance for Corporate Equity and 
its  further  extensions  have  almost  completely  eliminated  the  previous  fiscal  incentive  for 
debt;  this  should  stimulate  firms’  raising  of  equity  capital.  Also,  new  stock  market  listings 
have increased, the volume of bond issues has gone up, including for medium-sized firms, 
and the number of mini- bond issuers has been rising. 
Obviously  a  key  goal  of  the  CMU  is  to  support  and  complement  the  Investment  Plan  for 
Europe. Business investment remains sluggish and weaker external and domestic demand is 
hampering a stronger recovery. 
Conclusions 
Due  to  the  incompleteness  of  the  European  construction,  the  recent  crises  dramatically 
exposed the reversibility of even the major progress towards European financial integration 
made since the introduction of the euro. Even worse, at one point the sovereign debt crisis 
threatened the very survival of the euro project itself. 
As part of the multi-faceted European strategy to respond to the crisis, the establishment of 
the Banking Union and the launch of the Capital Markets Union proposal are complementary 
milestones  and  are  part  of  the  efforts  we  are  all  engaged  in  towards  completing  the 
Economic and Monetary Union and making it stronger. 
The establishment of the Single Supervisory Mechanism has been an important step towards 
overcoming  the  euro  area  sovereign  debt  crisis  and  a  key  driver  in  underpinning  a  major 
strengthening of banks’ balance sheets. This has paved the way for improving their capacity 
to  finance  the  euro  area  economy.  In  the  medium  term,  however,  banks’  capital 
strengthening has to stem from economic recovery. Efforts are therefore needed at all levels 
– both national and European – to promote growth. 
The  Single  Resolution  Mechanism  and  the  Bank  Recovery  and  Resolution  Directive  are 
ushering in a new framework for managing bank crises; equally important, they can play a 
role in crisis prevention by promoting market discipline. By broadening non-bank sources of 
financing for firms and households, the Capital Markets Union will further advance European 
financial integration while fostering economic growth and financial stability. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
