  Vítor Constâncio: Presentation of the ECB Annual Report 2014 to the 
Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs of the European 
Parliament 
Introductory remarks by Mr Vítor Constâncio, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, 
to the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs of the European Parliament, Brussels, 
20 April 2015. 
 Mr Chairman, 
Honourable members of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs, 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
I am honoured and pleased to be back in this Committee to present the ECB’s Annual Report 
2014  today.  This  event  underlines  once  again  the  importance  of  the  dialogue  with  the 
European Parliament to ensure the accountability and transparency of the ECB’s activities. 
And  it  is  precisely  because  the  ECB  considers  transparency  to  be  such  a  vital  aspect  of 
accountability  and  effectiveness  that  we  have  this  year  started  to  publish  accounts  of  our 
monetary policy meetings. 
The publication of the Annual Report complements our efforts towards greater transparency 
by describing the actions that the ECB undertook in 2014 with a view to fulfilling its mandate 
in a challenging environment. 
Forceful  action  by  the  ECB  was  needed  to  respond  to  the  impairment  of  the  transmission 
channels of our monetary policy and to the low inflation environment. 
Our monetary policy action was complemented by another major achievement in 2014: the 
preparations for and start of operations of the Single Supervisory Mechanism. The specific 
regime foreseen by the  Inter-Institutional Agreement between the ECB  and your  institution 
takes into account the need for enhanced accountability for this new task for the ECB. 
Today, I will first look back at the measures taken by the ECB since the beginning of last 
year to fulfil its mandate. I would then like to discuss the capital markets union project, which, 
if  pursued  with  sufficient  ambition,  could  unleash  the  benefits  of  more  robust  financial 
integration and improve the transmission of our monetary policy. 
The ECB’s monetary policy 
From a monetary policy perspective, the environment we faced in 2014 was very complex 
and demanding. The muted recovery that had begun in 2013 did not accelerate as initially 
expected. For the year as a whole, we saw GDP growing by 0.9% in the euro area. Money 
growth  remained  subdued  and  credit  continued  to  contract,  albeit  at  a  gradually  declining 
pace. Tight credit standards, combined with elevated and sticky bank lending rates in a large 
part of the euro area, were viewed as one of the principal causes of the persistent economic 
slack at the euro area level and, indirectly, as a major source of ongoing disinflation. 
In  response  to  these  impairments  in  the  monetary  policy  transmission  mechanism,  the 
Governing  Council  adopted  a  package  of  measures  between  June  and  October.  This 
package  included  three  main  elements:  first,  two  reductions  in  the  key  ECB  interest  rates 
bringing them to their lower bound; second, the announcement of a series of eight targeted 
long-term  refinancing  operations;  and  third,  two  purchase  programmes  for  asset-backed 
securities and covered bonds. 
Despite the positive contribution of these measures to an easing of credit conditions across 
the euro area, inflationary pressures showed no sign of strengthening. On the contrary, the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  declining  trend  in  headline  inflation  accelerated  towards  the  end  of  the  year.  While  the 
considerable fall in oil prices in the second half of 2014 contributed to this development, it 
came  at  the  end  of  a  prolonged  trend  that  had  already  brought  inflation  to  historically  low 
levels, heightening risks of second-round effects. 
In  order  to  forestall  the  setting-in  of  a  self-perpetuating  process  which  could  pose  serious 
risks to price stability, the Eurosystem decided on 22 January 2015 to expand its purchase 
programmes  to  include  public  sector  securities.  The  purchases  under  the  expanded  asset 
purchase programme are intended to be carried out until end-September 2016, and in any 
case until the Governing Council sees a sustained adjustment in the path of inflation which is 
consistent with its aim of achieving inflation rates below, but close to, 2% over the medium 
term. 
Taken  together,  the  policy  measures  adopted  have  contributed  to  lower  interest  rates  in 
capital  markets  and  have  helped  to  transmit  these  favourable  developments  through  the 
entire  financial  intermediation  chain.  They  have  produced  a  visible  improvement  in  the 
transmission of the ECB’s accommodative monetary policy stance to the real economy. This 
has meant a further considerable easing of financing conditions for households and firms, as 
evident in a significant decline in the levels of lending rates and in a material compression of 
their  dispersion  across  the  euro  area.  Bank  lending  rates  have  declined  sharply  since 
summer 2014 (by 40 to 50 basis points), and the nominal cost of external financing for euro 
area  non-financial  corporations  has  declined  further,  standing  at  4.1%  in  February.  This 
should in turn promote and strengthen a revival in credit and investment. Bank credit to non-
financial firms increased in the last three months (to February 2015) at an annualised rate of 
about  2%,  compared  with  a  negative  rate  last  year  of  less  than  –2%.  A  broad-based 
turnaround  in  loan  dynamics  occurred  around  the  second quarter  of  2014,  in  particular for 
non-financial  corporations.  The  robust  growth  of  narrow  money  (M1),  which  is  a  leading 
indicator for economic growth, confirms this view. This assessment is further supported by 
the euro area bank lending survey, which has shown a strengthening in the demand for loans 
by households and enterprises and an easing of credit standards throughout the year. 
Our policies are working and the economic recovery is becoming self-sustained. According 
with our staff projections the still negative output gap will be closed by 2017. This is helping 
the evolution of inflation and inflation expectations to levels compatible with our mandate in 
spite of the effect of the oil price shock implying that the process of normalizing inflation is 
still at an early stage. 
However,  monetary  policy  does  not  operate  in  isolation,  and  other  policy  initiatives  are 
equally important. 
For  this  reason,  the  start  of  the  activities  of  the  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism  and  the 
completion  of  the  comprehensive  assessment  were  critical  steps  in  helping  to  achieve  a 
healthier monetary policy transmission process. In general, the SSM within the banking union 
–  and  in  combination  with  the  actions  of  the  Single  Resolution  Mechanism  and  the  Single 
Resolution  Fund  –  will  further  contribute  to  breaking  the  nexus  between  sovereigns  and 
banks. 
Moreover,  the  euro  area  needs  a  coherent  and  comprehensive  strategy  to  create  the 
conditions  for  a  sustained  recovery,  based  on  investment,  job  creation  and  productivity 
growth. Fiscal policies should support economic growth, while ensuring debt sustainability. At 
the same time, structural reforms should be implemented promptly and with determination, 
as firms and households must be not only able but also willing to invest. We keep repeating 
this call because the combination of sound fiscal policies and improved economic structures 
has the potential to make monetary policy more effective by encouraging economic actors to 
take advantage of improved financing conditions and increase investment. Monetary policy 
can  and  will  smooth  and  accelerate  the transition  to  a  sustainable  growth  trajectory,  but  it 
cannot lift that trajectory. For this to happen, it is essential that available financial resources 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  are  well  allocated  and  used  productively.  In  this  regard,  the  capital  markets  union  agenda 
can also make an important contribution. 
A capital markets union has great potential – but only if pursued with ambition 
The  Commission  intends  to  establish  the  main  building  blocks  of  a  capital  markets  union 
(CMU)  in  the  current  legislative  period.  From  our  perspective,  such  a  project,  if 
comprehensive and well designed, could indeed bring significant benefits to the EU. 
CMU is a means of enhancing the integration of capital markets and making that integration 
more  robust.  Integrated  capital  markets  can  strengthen  financial  stability  by  increasing 
private risk sharing, thereby facilitating the absorption of shocks throughout the EU. At the 
same time, well-functioning capital markets facilitate the transmission of our monetary policy. 
Financial integration therefore features prominently in the Eurosystem’s mission statement. 
CMU is also an agenda for an increase in the diversity and size of capital markets through 
the  further  development  of  certain  market  segments.  Deeper  and  more  diverse  capital 
markets  provide  alternative  sources  of  funding.  For  example,  financing  tools  could  be 
developed to better account for the specific needs of small and medium-sized enterprises, 
infrastructure  projects  or  long-term  financing.  Moreover,  the  reduction  of  the  economy’s 
dependence  on  bank  financing  would  widen  the  set  of  tools  available  for  the  conduct  of 
monetary policy. 
However, there is a real danger of failing to explicitly identify the necessary conditions for the 
CMU to achieve its objectives. 
Let’s  be  clear:  a  genuine  CMU  means  achieving  a  high  level  of  financial  integration  in 
completing the Single Market in this area. In a genuine CMU, all market participants with the 
same relevant characteristics should face a single set of rules, have equal access to a set of 
financial instruments or services, and be treated equally when they are active in the market. 
The  EU’s  capital  markets  union  therefore  needs  to  be  underpinned  by  a  single  legal  and 
regulatory framework that provides a level playing field and allows markets to integrate and 
develop. 
This has a number of implications. 
First, the goal of having such a capital markets union is in itself very ambitious. Hoping that 
CMU  will  bring  the  expected  benefits  without  accepting  the  prospect  of  full  regulatory 
harmonisation  is  wishful  thinking.  Getting  halfway  there  will  not  be  enough.  In  fact,  half  a 
capital  markets  union  is  still  no  capital  markets  union.  This  was  one  of  the  lessons  of  the 
crisis,  in  particular  regarding  the  interplay  between  the  Single  Market  and  an  incomplete 
regulatory and supervisory framework for banks. There is no reason to doubt that what holds 
for banking also applies to capital markets. 
Second,  developing  a  genuine  single  rulebook  for  capital  markets  would  also  mean 
addressing barriers in policy areas that are relevant beyond capital. These include politically 
sensitive  areas  such  as  insolvency  and  corporate  laws  as  well  as  taxation  of  financial 
products. Where legislative progress is for the moment not possible at the EU level, we need 
determined and concerted action at the national level to lower cross-border barriers. 
Third, the single rulebook would also need to be complemented over time by the common 
implementation  and  enforcement  of  rules  as  the  deeper  interconnectedness  generated  by 
CMU  increases  risks  of  contagion  and  consequently  requires  enhanced  oversight  and 
supervision of markets and institutions. 
The European Parliament as co-legislator has a pivotal role to play in this process, and I trust 
that it will be a key contributor to the creation of a genuine CMU. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  Conclusion 
Let me conclude. 
The major efforts undertaken since the beginning of 2014 as regards both monetary policy 
and  the  banking  union  demonstrate  that  Europe  can  deliver  when  determined  action  is 
needed. 
Nevertheless, we need to go further. Sound fiscal and structural policies at the national level 
and further steps to reinforce the institutional underpinning of Economic and Monetary Union 
would  allow  the  euro  area  economy  to  become  more  resilient.  Moreover,  decisive  actions 
and reforms are needed to support the creation of a genuine capital markets union with a 
view to unleashing the full benefits of more robust financial integration. These developments 
will play a key role in paving the way to a sustained recovery and a stronger monetary union, 
resilient to shocks and a guarantee of stability and prosperity. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
