  Jessica Chew Cheng Lian: Integrated risk management approach for 
maintaining resilience & sustainability 
Speech  by  Ms  Jessica  Chew  Cheng  Lian,  Assistant  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of 
Malaysia  (Bank  Negara  Malaysia),  at  the  Business  Continuity  Management  Conference 
“Integrated  Risk  Management  Approach for  Maintaining  Resilience  &  Sustainability”,  Kuala 
Lumpur, 15 September 2015. 
 I would like to thank the Disaster Recovery Institute, Malaysia and Sterling Risk Solutions for 
the invitation to speak at this Business Continuity  Management (BCM) conference. Today, 
the  ability  of  corporations  to  effectively  manage  risks  has  become  a  key  factor  that 
determines  the  agility  and  resilience  of  businesses.  Business  imperatives  are  changing  so 
dramatically that risk management has become a more significant part of most organisations 
out of sheer necessity – largely driven by regulation, the desire to avoid costly sanctions, or 
to  respond  to  increasing  environmental  and  political  risks.  In  leading  organisations,  the 
successful integration of risk management with strategic and commercial decision-making is 
creating  important  competitive  advantages  that  are  likely  to  be  sustained  over  the  longer 
term.  This  distinct  organisational  strength  is  one  that  cannot  be  easily  replicated  for  the 
simple reason that building and maintaining a complete organisational response to strategic 
risk  management,  unlike  say  introducing  a  new  product  or  marketing  strategy,  is  not 
something that is accomplished within a short period of time. 
This morning, I would like to talk about some of the changes we are seeing in the practice of 
risk management and reflect on important priorities for risk management as observed from 
our  work  at  Bank  Negara  Malaysia  with  the  financial  industry.  I  will  then  offer  some  brief 
perspectives on business continuity management and close with some final thoughts on the 
prospects for the insurance industry in Malaysia to contribute towards the advancement of 
risk management capabilities across Malaysian businesses. 
Changing practices in risk management 
Since the financial crisis, risk management practices have come under intense scrutiny. The 
spectacular failures in risk management in the lead up to the crisis prompted deep reflections 
on  what  had  gone  wrong  with  risk  management  systems  and  practices  –  not  least  of  all 
among  companies  that  had  invested  heavily  in  sophisticated  risk  measurement  and 
management systems only to have them ultimately fail to detect or control risk exposures. 
Closer  to  home,  businesses  in  Malaysia  are  currently  facing  a  set  of  challenging  business 
conditions and some are likely to find themselves ill-prepared to respond to the challenges, 
with important implications for their future prospects. 
So  what  can  we  learn  about  the  changing  practice  of  risk  management  from  these 
experiences? A first observation to my mind concerns the importance of building a strong risk 
culture  supported  by  governance  arrangements  that  are  explicitly  aligned  to  a  firm’s  risk 
appetite. It is striking that, in the last five years, global standard setting bodies such as the 
Basel Committee on Banking Supervision have moved to address risk culture, risk appetite 
setting  and  risk governance  more  explicitly  in  regulatory  standards. This  was  not  the  case 
prior to the crisis, when emphasis was predominantly placed on risk management processes 
and systems, believing that this ought to be sufficient. Organisations largely failed to take into 
account behavioural biases that play such an important role in senior management decisions 
which  ultimately  affect  the  risks  that  a  company  will  be  willing  to  take  or  tolerate.  These 
decisions  include  how  performance  targets  are  set  for  staff,  how  incentive  structures  are 
designed,  and  the  stature  and  resources  that  are  provided  to  risk  management  functions 
within the organisation – all of which can create a constant uphill struggle for risk managers 
to have any meaningful impact on risk outcomes. To illustrate the point, a report published by 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  to  regularly  review 
institutions  are  also  required 
the  Office  of  Financial  Research  in  the  United  States  observed  that  much  of  the 
advancements in risk management over the last decade have resulted in a highly analytical-
focused  discipline,  while  largely  ignoring  the  fundamental  drivers  of  risk-taking  that  are 
rooted in more subtle behavioural characteristics. 
Within the financial industry, financial institutions in Malaysia are required to establish a well-
resourced  independent  risk  management  function  that  reports  directly  to  a  board  risk 
committee, and take active measures to promote a prudent risk culture in the organisation. 
This  includes  properly  designed  incentive  structures  that  must  reflect  risk  outcomes. 
Financial 
their  risk  management 
methodologies and processes to account for the changing business environment. This aims 
to ensure that risk management does not become something one does to check off a box on 
a list and then forgets about. 
A  second  notable  observation  has  been  the  broader  focus  of  risk  management.  While 
financial  risks  remain  a  key  focus  of  risk  management  practices,  risks  from  reputational, 
human capital and environmental concerns can have equally significant repercussions for a 
firm’s  business.  Recovering  from  reputational  damage  is  a  hugely  expensive  endeavour, 
takes a long time, and success is often not assured. We have observed in our own work that 
where  institutions  take  a  broader  view  of  risk  management  in  these  areas,  conversations 
around the role of risk management at the senior management and board levels are more 
likely to shift beyond avoiding losses, to enhancing strategic opportunities for improving the 
institution’s competitive position. This itself can have a mutually reinforcing effect of directing 
more resources towards risk management and creating better synergies between business 
and risk functions. 
While  more  firms  are  acknowledging  the  importance  of  reputational,  human  capital  and 
environmental risks, actions however have generally not measured up. Many companies still 
have  weak  succession  plans  in  place  and  remain  vulnerable  to  key-man  risks.  Few 
companies have robust risk management frameworks that incorporate measures of how their 
products and services affect the well-being of consumers or if consumers are being treated 
fairly,  as  long  as  legal  exposures  are  contained.  And  efforts  to  adopt  triple  bottom  line 
approaches  to  reporting  firm  performance  are  only  beginning  to  gain  traction. Within  Asia, 
fewer  than  10  banking  institutions  today  subscribe  to  the  Equator  Principles  for  assessing 
and managing the environmental and social risks for projects. 
Clearly  the  gap  between  the  existing  risk  management  practices  and  a  whole-of-business 
approach  which  fully  embraces  broader  aspects  of  risks  remains  large.  Regulation  and 
greater shareholder activism will remain important drivers of change, and in my view, so will 
a  new  breed  of  risk  managers  who  effectively  integrate  traditional  and  emerging  risk 
perspectives, and who can speak to these perspectives in a compelling and cohesive way to 
an organisation’s key stakeholders. 
A third observation that I want to make today relates to the increasing importance of viewing 
risks over a longer-term horizon, and imagining the unthinkable. I mention these together for 
a  reason. When  one  is  focused  on  looking  both  backward  and  forward  over  a  reasonably 
long  horizon,  the  universe  of  what  is  unthinkable  becomes  smaller  and  our  vision  is  less 
likely to be blinkered by limited experiences of only the most recent past. We are also likely 
to become more open to broader possibilities of new and emerging risks on the horizon. In 
the world of creative arts, it is often said that we are limited only by our imagination. I think 
the same can be said of risk management. If we can stretch our imaginations a little further, 
then  there  is  a  higher  chance  that  risk  management  will  be  more  proactive  in  anticipating 
future  problems,  especially  problems  that  we  may  have  never  encountered  before.  This 
requires risk managers to go beyond estimating the probability of risk events occurring, and 
allowing a greater role for uncertainties, no matter how remote, to feature more prominently 
in risk management approaches. While easier said than done, innovations like reverse stress 
testing  and  the  increasing  degree  of  internal  and  external  collaboration  that  goes  into 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  constructing stress testing scenarios are positive indications of how firms are responding to 
this challenge. On this score at least, risk management is increasingly proving to be more of 
an art than an exact science. 
Organisations also continue to face significant challenges in efforts to break down risk silos 
and  achieve  an  integrated  view  of  organisational  risks  that  adequately  takes  into  account 
operational  dependencies  and  common  exposures  that  can  significantly  amplify  risk 
outcomes.  A  key  challenge  often  overlooked  is  the  failure  to  effectively  integrate  human 
resource  management  strategies  with  enterprise-wide  risk  management  goals.  This  can 
create significant inertia, with organisations often falling back to managing risks in silos as 
the default position. Successful organisations have recognised that silos are fundamentally a 
cultural phenomenon. If we can build and nurture people within an organisation to be always 
attuned to risks that may affect the organisation, whatever their nature or origins, then there 
is  a  good chance that  any  system,  process  and framework constraints will  be  more  easily 
overcome  and  less  likely  to  inflict  major  losses  on  the  organisation.  When  faced  with 
challenging business and financial conditions and a highly dynamic environment, it is always 
more important to have excellent people than excellent models. 
BCM as part of enterprise risk management 
This  brings  me  to  the  more  specific  area  of  business  continuity  management,  or  BCM.  A 
paper  published  in  2008  by  the  Chartered  Management  Institute  of  the  United  Kingdom 
found  that  76  percent  of  the  survey  respondents  reported  that  business  continuity 
management is seen as important in their organisations but only less than half revealed that 
they have specific business continuity plans. There are several reasons for this which I will 
not get into here, but a major one is the lack of metrics to measure success in the absence of 
a  major  institutional  crisis.  One  commentator  put  it  this  way  –  the  return  on  investment  is 
simply that business stays open. 
Two  contrasting  examples  of  BCM  help  to  underscore  this  point.  Investigations  by  the 
Japanese Government into the Fukushima tsunami disaster revealed material inadequacies 
in the handling of complex risks associated with managing a nuclear power plant. This was 
demonstrated in poorly executed emergency procedures in evacuating residents during the 
incident.  Consequently,  the  operations  of  the  power  plant  were  suspended.  In  contrast, 
during  the  9/11  attacks  on  the  World  Trade  Centre,  a  sustained  commitment  by  a  large 
multinational  financial  service  provider  to  strengthen  its  BCM  and  continuously  improve  its 
evacuation  procedures  over  almost  a  decade,  enabled  it  to  reduce  the  time  taken  to 
evacuate its employees from four hours to 45 minutes, saving thousands of lives. 
Within the financial sector, a key focus of reforms since the global financial crisis has been 
on the development of recovery plans which aim to protect the continuity of critical functions 
and  core  business  lines  in  a  situation  of  financial  stress.  Work  has  also  been  initiated  to 
implement this in Malaysia. Financial institutions are expected to develop a menu of options 
for recovering from events of severe stress in order to restore business to a stable condition. 
These  plans  must  be  regularly  updated  to  reflect  changes  in  a  firm’s  business  model  and 
operational  arrangements.  At  its  most  basic  level,  recovery  plans  are  helping  financial 
institutions  to  better  understand  their  operational  and  financial  interdependencies  and  how 
this  can  affect  recovery  options  that  are  available  to  the  institution.  Some  institutions  are 
finding  through this  process  that  their  operations  have  become far too  complex  to  support 
credible recovery strategies. These institutions are taking or considering steps to restructure 
parts  of  the  business  to  achieve  wider  options  for  recovery.  Indeed,  an  important 
development  emerging  in  the  recent  period  has  been  the  more  explicit  consideration  of 
implications  for  recovery  plans  in  key  strategic  decisions,  such  as  decisions  to  hub 
operations at a particular location or service provider. 
As  much  as  organisational  resources  are  put  into  enhancements  of  business  continuity 
management, it is important for businesses to always keep in mind the inherent limitations of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  business continuity plans and not be lulled into a false sense of confidence that these plans 
may provide. Scenarios featured in these plans are often based on assumptions, which are a 
simplification  of  reality  at  best.  Such  scenarios  should  always  be  rigorously  challenged  to 
account  for  changing  conditions.  Business  recovery  or  resumption  actions  should  also 
contemplate a range of conditions to build agility within the organisation to execute required, 
but potentially untested, responses. Firms should expect that they will rarely get to a point of 
precision in their scenario planning and BCM responses. This does not mean that BCM is 
necessarily reduced to an exercise in futility. A commitment to continuous improvements in 
BCM is almost certainly likely to prepare firms better for disasters and tail risk events even if 
those specific events were not exactly contemplated. This is because the organisation will be 
naturally better at coming together in a crisis, and would be able to leverage on some of the 
core elements of response plans that have already been developed and tested. 
The  world  today  is  encountering  more  extreme  disasters  such  as  epidemics  and 
unpredictable  weather-related  calamities.  In  our  own  country,  the  worst  flood  disaster 
experienced in decades last year saw over 250 thousand people displaced with estimated 
costs of more than two billion ringgit to repair damaged infrastructure. This presents a sober 
reminder of the responsibility of all corporations to ensure that they are well prepared for and 
remain  resilient  against  calamities,  not  just  for  their  own  survival,  but  in  the  interest  of 
employees and the community that depend on them. 
Role and prospects of the insurance industry in advancing risk management 
The  cost  associated  with  negative  tail-risk  events  will  only  escalate  as  business  networks 
grow  in  complexity.  The  use  of  insurance  continues  to  be  an  important  way  in  which 
companies  can  reduce  this  cost  by  transferring  risks  to  insurance  providers.  Insurers  are 
well-placed  to  assume  such  risks  given  their  long  standing  history  in  risk  analytics  which 
enables  them to  effectively  exploit  the  law  of  large  numbers  and  benefit from risk  pooling. 
Among emerging economies, however, there is still a sizeable protection gap in spite of the 
increased 
frequency  and  severity  of  weather  related  disasters  and  other  natural 
catastrophes. In 2014, insured losses in Asia only covered about 10 percent of total losses 
incurred  as  a  result  of  natural  and  man-made  disasters.  Combined  insurance  premiums 
written from emerging markets  accounted for  only  18  percent  of global  premiums  in  2014, 
against  82  percent  recorded  from  the  advanced  economies.  Given  the  concentration  of 
growth  and  development  in  emerging  economies,  going  forward,  the  extent  of  under-
insurance is a concern. In many of these economies, efforts are being aggressively pursued 
to  increase  awareness  of  the  importance  of  insurance  protection  in  helping  one  manage 
risks, and to develop an effective insurance market to meet these needs. 
The insurance industry in Malaysia currently stands at crossroads of implementing important 
reforms  being  introduced  by  Bank  Negara  Malaysia  both  in  the  general  and  life  insurance 
sectors.  The  objective  of  the  reforms  is  to  further  enhance  the  competitiveness  of  the 
industry,  ensure  its  continued  resilience,  and  encourage  greater  innovation  in  solutions 
offered for households and businesses to better manage risks. To this end, two aspects of 
the reforms are significant. The first is the progressive strengthening of prudential standards 
that  aim  to  improve  underwriting  and  risk  assessment  capabilities  within  insurance 
companies,  while  substantially  strengthening 
to  differentiate 
themselves in the market. The second is the structural changes that are being introduced to 
reduce market distortions and drive efficiency improvements. Beyond domestic borders, the 
Bank also continues to pursue further liberalisation in the cross border provision of insurance 
in  certain  sectors,  such  as  the  Marine,  Aviation  and  Goods  in  International  Transit  (MAT) 
sector,  both  to  enhance  capacity  and  reduce  costs  for  businesses.  This  is  primarily  being 
advanced under regional integration plans, focusing in particular on ASEAN. 
Taken  together,  the  reforms  are  expected  to  result  in  wider  product  offerings  and  delivery 
channels,  service  quality 
transparency,  and  more 
differentiated pricing that is reflective of risk. 
improvements,  greater  market 
incentives 
insurers 
for 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  This  will  help  risk  managers  for  whom  the  decision  to  purchase  insurance  is  increasingly 
driven by wider considerations which go beyond just the intention to transfer risk. Significant 
advancements  in  risk  management  practices  and  financial  innovations  have  substantially 
broadened  the  actions  that  risk  managers  can  take  to  control  risks.  For  many  companies, 
insurance  solutions  are  no  longer  viewed  as  the  only,  or  even  the  most  important,  way  to 
reduce  risk  exposures.  The  insurance  reforms  will  allow  the  industry  to  better  respond  to 
changing  demand  drivers.  Importantly,  it  will  also  create  opportunities  to  build  stronger 
partnerships between corporate risk managers, insurance companies and insurance brokers 
in elevating risk management practices more generally. This includes a wider role envisaged 
for the industry in providing risk advice to clients, and initiatives to advance the quality and 
coverage  of  risk  information  that  is  useful  to  risk  managers  across  a  broad  spectrum  of 
areas,  such  as  information  on  hazard  exposure,  demographic  changes  and  technological 
risks. 
Conclusion 
In  conclusion,  maintaining  that  delicate  balance  between  extreme  risk  aversion  and  well-
reasoned  risk  taking,  which  is  essential  for  businesses  to  grow  and  prosper,  will  always 
involve  difficult  judgements.  We  should  be  careful  to  ensure  that  advancements  in  risk 
management practices are serving to sharpen, and not blunt, such judgements. This requires 
that  investments  in  people  and  processes  are  firmly  supported  by  good  information, 
confidence  in  a  strong  risk  culture,  and  compelling  risk  managers  who  will  ensure  that 
organisations  do  not  become  complacent,  and  remain  focused  on  doing  their  very  best  to 
prepare for any possibility. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
