  Erkki Liikanen: Monetary policy and its effectiveness 
Speech  by  Mr  Erkki  Liikanen,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Finland,  at  a  public  lecture  at  the 
Croatian National Bank, Zagreb, 10 September 2015. 
Accompanying slides can be found on the Bank of Finland’s website 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It gives me great pleasure to have this opportunity to address you today. At the moment, we 
are at a very interesting juncture in the economic and monetary developments in the EU and 
the  euro  area.  The  economic  conditions  of  all  countries  in  our  continent  –big  or  small, 
northern  or  southern  –  are  deeply  interconnected,  so  I  believe  that  we  share  many  of  our 
concerns and interests. 
It has been a long and arduous journey for the EU and not least the euro area from the crisis 
of 2008–2009 until today, when at last we see a real promise of economic recovery in the 
area as well as increasing confidence that a solid foundation for lasting financial stability has 
been  laid.  There  are  a  lot  of  uncertainties,  of  course,  in  the  global  economy,  in  regional 
geopolitics, and so on – but there are also signs that economic recovery is underway. 
So, it is an exciting time and monetary policy is once again an important part of the overall 
picture.  It  is  my  purpose  today  to  concentrate  on  monetary  policy  and  some  related 
questions. I will survey the monetary policy situation from the point of view of the euro area 
and from my perspective as a member of the ECB’s governing council. 
It is useful to start by a review of our recent monetary policy, which is very exceptional by 
historical standards, both in terms of its strength and its instruments. So, what exactly are we 
doing? How will it impact the euro area economy? What else needs to be done to ensure a 
balanced and sustainable recovery? 
[SLIDE 2] Commitment to accommodative monetary… 
Commitment to accommodative monetary policy benefits economic outlook 
The  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB  has  taken  a  series  of  monetary  policy  measures  to 
stimulate  the  euro  area  economy.  The  aim  of  these  measures  has  been  to  maintain  price 
stability over the medium term. 
The most recent monetary policy easing cycle, starting from June 2014, consists of several 
measures. In addition to interest rate policy, we have used so-called non-standard measures 
in an unprecedented scale. 
[SLIDE 3] Interest rate policy in 2014 
In  June  and  September  2014  the  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB  cut  the  monetary  policy 
lending rates and decided on a negative deposit facility rate. In consequence monetary policy 
interest rates are reduced to the zero lower bound. 
[SLIDE 4] The decisions to support provision of credit in 2014 
The Governing Council also introduced two asset purchase programmes, for asset backed 
securities (ABS) and covered bonds. It also launched a new refinancing facility to encourage 
banks to increase their lending for productive investments. 
[SLIDE 5] The decisions on large scale asset purchases and forward… 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  In January 2015, the Governing Council judged that there was additional need for easing of 
the monetary policy stance, as the inflation outlook had weakened further. 
In this situation we launched the biggest asset purchase programme in Eurosystem history. 
Through this expanded asset purchase programme, the Eurosystem extended its purchases 
to bonds issued by euro area governments, government agencies and European institutions. 
Within this programme, the Eurosystem will buy securities to a value of EUR 60 billion per 
month until September 2016, or beyond if necessary. Thus, the total purchases will be more 
than EUR 1,000 billion. Euro area government bonds will make the most of the purchases. 
The motivation behind the decision to expand purchases to euro-denominated public sector 
securities was the increasing probability of euro area falling into deflation and the adverse 
effects stemming from prolonged period with low inflation. The Governing Council of the ECB 
wanted  to  prevent  price  stability  objective  from  losing  its  role  as  a  firm  anchor  to  inflation 
expectations and price formation in the euro area. 
The  Governing  Council  has  stated  that  purchases  “are  intended  to  run  until  the  end  of 
September  2016,  or  beyond,  if  necessary,  and,  in  any  case,  until  we  see  a  sustained 
adjustment in the path of inflation that is consistent with our aim of achieving inflation rates 
below,  but  close  to,  2%  over  the  medium  term.”  And  it  has  flagged  readiness  to  carry  on 
purchasing more securities if necessary. With this forward guidance the Governing Council 
indicates  its  commitment  to  a  monetary  policy  which  will  realign  inflation  with  our  price 
stability objective. 
In January euro area headline inflation was a negative –0.6%, and has hovered around 0.2% 
over the past few months to August 2015. With nominal short-term interest rates already at 
the zero lower bound, fading inflation expectations pushed up real interest rates, effectively 
tightening monetary policy. 
[SLIDE 6] Large scale asset purchases stimulate 
Large scale asset purchases stimulate both demand and inflation 
The two  main  channels of  effect for  large-scale asset  purchases  –  often  referred  to  in  the 
literature – are the signalling effect and the portfolio balance effect. 
[SLIDE 7] Signalling and portfolio balance effects of a large-scale… 
The signalling effect contributes to stronger anchoring of inflation expectations in line with the 
medium-term objective of price stability. This effect also contributes to reducing anticipated 
real rates. Depending on the monetary policy reactions in the rest of the world, the signalling 
can also put downward pressure on exchange rates. 
The  portfolio  balance  effect  broadens  the  effects  of  the  securities  purchases  to  the  whole 
financial  system  even  if  only  a  comparatively  narrow  range  of  high-quality  securities  are 
purchased by the central bank. With this effect, investors are encouraged to shift holdings 
into other asset classes – e.g. from sovereign to corporate bonds, from debt to equity, and 
across jurisdictions. This has an indirect effect on the prices and required rates of return in 
the financial markets as a whole. 
[SLIDE 8] ECB’s accommodative monetary policy 
Overall,  the  ECB’s  accommodative  monetary  policy  lowers  real  interest  rates  and  eases 
financial conditions in the economy, boosting demand. Consumption increases and the lower 
cost  of  debt  finance,  reduced  cost  of  equity  and  weaker  exchange  rates  in  combination 
contribute  to  making  some  investment  projects  profitable  that  were  previously  deemed 
unattractive. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  This  supports  private  consumption  through  various  channels.  Also,  the  lower  cost  of  debt 
finance,  reduced  cost  of  equity  finance,  and  the  weaker  exchange  rate  all  contribute  to 
making investment projects more profitable. 
[SLIDE 9] Divergence in monetary policy cycles has weakened the euro 
The divergence in international monetary policy cycles is putting downward pressure on the 
external value of the euro. This development is partly a result of tightening monetary policy 
expectations on the other side of the Atlantic. 
[SLIDE 10] Renewed decline in oil price puts downward pressure… 
Conditions in wide spectrum of asset markets have developed broadly as intended when the 
current cycle of monetary policy easing. However, the slowdown in emerging markets and 
recent sharp fluctuations in financial and commodity markets have brought some downside 
risks to the outlook for growth and inflation. The renewed decline in oil price puts downward 
pressure on inflation in the short run. 
[SLIDE 11] Commitment to accommodative monetary policy stance… 
Commitment to the accommodative monetary policy stance supports inflation expectations, 
thereby lowering the real interest rate. More recently, renewed downside risks have emerged 
and inflation expectations have decreased. 
However,  owing  to  sharp  fluctuations  in  financial  and  commodity  markets,  the  Governing 
Council judged it premature to conclude whether these developments could have a lasting 
impact  on  the  outlook  for  prices,  or  whether  they  should  be  considered  to  be  mainly 
transitory. 
[SLIDE 12] Sharp fall in long-term bond yields… 
The ECB’s asset purchase programme has already led to lower reference interest rates over 
the  whole  maturity  spectrum  and  is  gradually  resulting  in  more  favourable  borrowing 
conditions  for  non-financial  corporations  and  households.  Despite  somewhat  higher  bond 
yields recently, borrowing conditions remain favourable and loan dynamics are expected to 
improve. 
[SLIDE 13] Stock market turbulence in August 
A policy of quantitative easing boosts property prices and stock markets. In August, however, 
equity prices fell sharply in China and also globally as the uncertainty over the state of the 
Chinese economy increased. This has sent jitters in the stock markets through the world. It 
remains to be seen whether the uncertainty is increased in a more permanent fashion. 
[SLIDE 14] Monetary policy transmission to the real economy… 
Monetary policy transmission to the real economy is improving 
The expanded asset purchases began only at the beginning of March. The full impact of our 
measures, especially if accompanied by firm actions by other policymakers, will be seen in 
the months and years ahead. 
While we have already seen a substantial effect from our measures on bond yields and asset 
prices,  what  ultimately  matters  is  when  there  is  an  equivalent  effect  on  investment, 
consumption and inflation. 
[SLIDE 15] Monetary policy measures support bank lending 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  Recovery  in  bank  lending  and  the  strengthening  of  other  sources  of finance  are  important 
factors  working  for  the  current  monetary  policy  in  the  euro  area.  Our  policies  are  also 
improving the credit channel, confirmed by the fact that credit to the private sector is at last 
gradually picking up. 
The ECB’s monetary policy measures enhance financial intermediation in a number of ways. 
They lower funding costs for banks, which should make lending cheaper and more profitable, 
thereby boosting the volume of lending. And the banks benefit from the measures via their 
positive impact on the real economy. 
An  improving  real  economy  will  eventually  be  reflected  in  expanding  balance  sheets  and 
improved  profitability  as,  for  example,  the  share  of  non-performing  loans  in  the  loan  stock 
declines.  At  the  same  time,  banks’  credit  risks  will  decline,  making  it  easier  for  them  to 
increase lending. 
[SLIDE 16] Monetary policy transmission to non-financial corporations… 
These extraordinary monetary policy measures have contributed to a broad-based easing in 
financial  conditions  and  more  favourable  borrowing  conditions  for  firms  and  households. 
They support economic activity in all of the euro area countries, especially in those having 
suffered most from stressed conditions in recent years but having at the same time executed 
substantial structural measures to improve the performance in the longer run. 
[SLIDE 17] Corporate bond yields remain low… 
The  importance  of  market  funding  for  non-financial  corporations  is  increasing  in  the  euro 
area.  The  asset  purchases  support  the  corporate  bond  markets,  as  investors  selling 
government  bonds  are  expected  to  switch  to  higher-risk  corporate  bonds,  reflecting  the 
portfolio balancing effect. 
Corporate  bond  yields  reached  a  record  low  in  the  euro  area  in  early  2015.  Although 
corporate emissions have partially compensated for the decline in bank lending in the case of 
large corporations, SMEs do not have the same access to alternative sources of funding and 
are therefore still highly dependent on bank lending. 
[SLIDE 18] Average interest rates on new housing loans… 
From  the  perspective  of  achieving  price  stability  it  is  vital  that  monetary  policy  measures 
have a positive effect not just on corporate expenditure, but also household expenditure. 
[SLIDE 19] The recovery in the euro area is expected to continue 
The recovery in the euro area is expected to continue 
[SLIDE 20] ECB staff projections in September 
As a result of the accommodative monetary policy measures, the inflation and growth outlook 
have  improved.  The  information  available  in  September  indicates  a  continued  though 
somewhat weaker economic recovery and a slower increase in inflation rates compared with 
earlier  expectations.  The  recovery  will  be  supported  by  domestic  dynamics,  while  the 
external  environment  has  become  less  favourable.  Despite  downward  revision,  ECB  staff 
projections  published  last  week  still  point  to  a  sustained  recovery  leading  to  a real  growth 
rate of 1.8%.% in 2017. 
[SLIDE 21] Inflation outlook subdued 2015–2016 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Inflation is expected to remain very low but is projected to rise over the projection horizon, 
reaching 1.7% in 2017. The projection for HICP inflation also entails a downward revision, 
largely due to lower oil prices. 
[SLIDE 22] Finland falls further behind euro area growth 
The  accommodative  monetary  policy  is  beneficial  to  both  the  euro  area  and  the  Finnish 
economy.  The  Bank  of  Finland  has  assessed  the  impact  of  the  expanded  asset  purchase 
programme  on  the  Finnish  economy.  According  to  these  calculations,  lower  interest  rates 
and a weaker exchange rate will increase the GPD growth rate in Finland by 0.3 percentage 
points in two years. 
However, Finland has fallen further behind euro area growth as exports have suffered and 
the labour market situation has deteriorated. Unfortunately, Finland is not expected to reach 
the pace of the recovery in the rest of the euro area in the near term. 
[SLIDE 23] Financial stability risks and macroprudential policy 
Financial stability risks and macroprudential policy 
While  the  current  monetary  policy  measures  are  necessary  for  the  ECB  to  achieve  its 
primary objective of maintaining price stability and to ensure that inflation does not remain 
too  low  for  too  long,  the  current  monetary  policy  stance  may  also  have  unintended  side-
effects  on  the  financial  system.  A  key  concern  is  that  a  prolonged  period  of  very 
accommodative  monetary  policy  could  result  in  a  misallocation  of  resources  that  would 
ultimately undermine financial stability. 
[SLIDE 24] The mandate of the ECB 
The  Eurosystem’s  primary  objective  is  to  maintain  price  stability,  and  monetary  policy 
decisions are based on the assessment of the risks to price stability in the euro area as a 
whole. Higher risks to financial stability should be addressed primarily through domestic so-
called macroprudential policy in the different member countries. 
In a single currency area, macroprudential policies are particularly important for dealing with 
sectoral  and  regional  risks  that  cannot  be  accounted  for  by  the  single  monetary  policy. 
Macroprudential policy therefore provides a much needed instrument for mitigating financial 
stability risks and thereby supporting the price-stability-focused monetary policy. 
[SLIDE 25] The ECB’s role in the new supervisory architecture 
From  the  perspective  of  financial  stability,  the  euro  area  is  now  in  a  substantially  better 
position than a few years ago. We are now operating in a new regulatory and supervisory 
environment. In November last year, the ECB took over responsibility for supervising banks 
in the countries belonging to the Banking Union. It is less well-known that, at the same time, 
the ECB became the ultimate macroprudential decision-maker in the Union. 
[SLIDE 26] The ECB reinforces but cannot substitute… 
More specifically, the ECB can apply higher requirements for specific macroprudential tools 
than  proposed  by  the  designated  national  macroprudential  authorities,  if  it  deems  that  the 
suggested national measures are inadequate. 
In contrast to the single monetary policy, macroprudential policy in the Banking Union is a 
joint  responsibility  between  different  authorities. The main  responsibility  in  macroprudential 
policy  lies  with  national authorities. They  are  in the  best  position  to  detect  country-specific 
systemic risks and take appropriate measures to address them. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  The role of the ECB in macroprudential policy is to enhance national policies and reduce the 
inaction bias inherent in taking potentially unpopular and intrusive national actions. The ECB 
will  help  to  identify  potential  financial  stability  risks  and  foster  a  coordinated  stance  for 
macroprudential policies among the euro area Member States. 
The European Systemic Risk Board (ESRB), in turn, monitors the development of EU-wide 
cross-border  and  cross-sectional  systemic 
risks  and  provides  guidance  and 
recommendations to the national authorities. 
[SLIDE 27] Macroprudential policy is important in a time of… 
A necessary precondition for successful macroprudential policies – both at a national level 
and  for  the  Banking  Union  as  a  whole  –  is  the  availability  of  sufficient  macroprudential 
toolkits.  Importantly,  the  Capital  Requirements  Regulation  and  Directive  (CRR/CRD  IV) 
provide the ECB and the national authorities with a common minimum set of macroprudential 
tools for the banking sector. These include countercyclical capital buffer requirements, capital 
surcharges for  systemically  important  institutions  and  minimum  risk  weights for  real  estate 
exposures, for example. 
However,  in  most  euro  area  countries,  the  national  toolkits  should  be  strengthened.  For 
example,  in  many  countries  the  tools  for  containing  excesses  in  housing  markets  and  for 
building resilience against the realization of housing-related risks are not strong enough. In 
addition, we should develop new tools to address systemic risks potentially developing in the 
shadow banking sector. 
The availability of strong national macroprudential toolkits and the courage to use these tools 
are of utmost importance in the current environment of very low interest rates. The ECB’s 
Governing  Council  is  closely  monitoring  any  potential  risks  to  euro  area  financial  stability, 
including those from excessive risk-taking. Currently, these risks are contained. Should they 
emerge, macroprudential policy would be best suited to address them. 
It is clear that much work remains to be done to make the European financial system safer. 
We need to evaluate the sufficiency of the toolkits of the national authorities and the ECB, as 
well  as  learning  how  to  use  the  new  tools  most  effectively;  this  is  a  work  in  progress  and 
should continue. But we are taking important steps in the right direction. 
[SLIDE 28] Transparency improves the accountability… 
Transparency improves the accountability and effectiveness of monetary policy 
In  January  this  year,  when  the  Governing  Council  decided  to  expand  its  asset  purchase 
programme, it also decided to publish a summary of that meeting’s deliberations before the 
next monetary policy meeting. The days of ‘never excuse, never explain’ and central banks 
acting as opaque and secretive institutions were over for good. 
[SLIDE 29] Transparency, accountability and efficiency:.. 
A high degree of transparency is an important tool for an independent central bank like the 
ECB,  as  it  facilitates  accountability.  We  are  accountable  to  achieve  our  mandate,  price 
stability.  By  explaining  the  reasoning  behind  our  monetary  policy  decisions  and  helping  a 
better understanding of monetary policy we make it easier to attain our objective, facilitating 
efficiency. 
In  mid-2013,  by  introducing  forward  guidance  and  through  2014  conveying  the  Governing 
Council’s  ‘reaction  function’  we  increased  our  influence  over  the  shape  of  the  yield  curve. 
When  we  had  decided  on  our  purchase  programme  in  January,  long-term  nominal  interest 
rates declined, as we had communicated our reaction function and the markets understood it. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Most recently, and going forward, President Mario Draghi has clarified our reaction function 
by discussing the conditions that will determine the duration and intensity of our expanded 
asset  purchase  programme,  above  and  beyond  our  expressed  intention  to  carry  out  our 
purchases until end-September 2016. 
We have emphasized that we will evaluate the likelihood for inflation not only to converge to 
levels  that  are  closer  to  2%,  but  also  to  stabilize  around  those  levels  with  sufficient 
confidence thereafter. 
The decision to publish an account of our monetary policy meetings was preceded by long 
and thorough discussions by the Governing Council. As we have been increasingly resorting 
to unconventional measures to meet our mandate, we decided that we need to be more open 
with the public about how we reached our decisions. 
At  the  same  time,  we  felt  that  even  differences  of  views  can  be  communicated  without 
compromising the credibility and singleness of our monetary policy. Such differences are quite 
normal and should exist in any committee having meaningful and analytical discussions. 
The accounts we decided to start publishing are intended to provide a richer summary and 
convey the flavour of the discussion among Governing Council members. 
This implies that in reporting on our monetary policy deliberations the independence of the 
members of the Governing Council must not be put at risk. At the same time, it is also very 
important  to  us  to  preserve  the  collegiality  of  our  deliberations.  That  is  why  we  do  not 
attribute positions to individual Council members. 
In our view, providing a fair and balanced summary of the main arguments put forward was 
the  best  way  to  achieve  this.  The  language  we  use  reflects  our  collegiate,  consensus-
oriented mode of discussion and decision-making. And not publishing a voting record allows 
members  to  support  the  decision  of  the  committee,  even  if  they  may  have  personally 
preferred a different course of action. 
[SLIDE 30] Thank you! 
Let me conclude. 
The  economic  recovery  in  the  euro  area  is  proceeding,  albeit  at  a  slower  pace  than 
expected.  ECB  policies  are  working,  as  underlying  economic  conditions  are  improving 
despite recent financial and commodity market volatility. 
Other  policymakers,  such  as  national  governments  are  responsible  for  their  own  efforts  to 
strengthen the euro area economies and their growth potential in the medium to longer term. 
This  will  be  achieved  mainly  by  implementing  structural  reforms  based  on  each  country’s 
own needs and capabilities. 
The Governing Council will closely monitor all relevant incoming information. It emphasizes 
the  willingness  and  ability  to  act,  by  using  all  the  instruments  available  within  its  mandate 
and, in particular, recalls that the asset purchase programme provides sufficient flexibility in 
terms of adjusting the size, composition and duration of the programme. 
In  the  meantime,  we  will  fully  implement  our  monthly  asset  purchases  of  €60  billion  per 
month. These purchases have already had and will continue to have a favourable impact on 
the cost and availability of credit for firms and households. As I already noted, we have taken 
a  decidedly  medium-term  approach,  as  reflected  in  our  commitment  to  continue  our  asset 
purchases until the end of September 2016, or beyond, if necessary, and, in any case, until 
we see a sustained adjustment in the path of inflation that is consistent with our definition of 
price stability. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
