  Stefan Gerlach: Making residential rental markets work for financial 
stability 
Address by  Mr Stefan Gerlach, Deputy Governor (Central Banking) of the Central Bank of 
Ireland, at the Twenty-First Dubrovnik Economic Conference, Dubrovnik, 8 June 2015. 
 Accompanying charts can be found on the Central Bank of Ireland’s website. 
I would like to thank Amelia Dennigan, Gabriel Fagan, John Flynn, Robert Kelly, Maurice McGuire, Cyril Roux, 
Rebecca Stuart and, in particular, Therese Grace for their help in preparing this speech. 
Introduction 
1. 
I am very pleased to be here in Dubrovnik at the 21st Dubrovnik Economic Conference. 
Today  I  will  talk  about  rental  markets  and  financial  stability.  While  the  rental  market  is 
currently  a  focus  of  attention  in  many  countries,  including  Ireland1,  the  link  with  financial 
stability,  a  preoccupation  of  central  banks,  is  an  issue  that  is  frequently  neglected  in  the 
important public debate about housing. Before proceeding, I note that while housing policies 
are outside the remit of central banks, any financial stability concerns they raise are not. In 
this  talk,  I therefore  hope  to  draw  attention  to  these  issues,  while  recognising  that  it  is for 
others to set specific policies in these areas. 
My talk is motivated by three observations on housing markets through the crisis: first, while 
owner-occupancy rates increased prior to the crisis, during the recent crisis we saw owner-
occupancy rates fall. Consequently, the number of renters rose in many countries affected by 
housing  market  downturns,  including  Ireland.  This  indicates  that  for  many  people  of 
household formation age, the rental market acts as a backstop, which they turn to in times of 
uncertainty and tight credit conditions. 
My second observation is that empirical evidence shows that economies in which the rental 
market  was  relatively  large  and  deep  suffered  less  during  the  financial  crisis.  Deep  rental 
markets thus appear to promote the resilience of the economy to adverse shocks and are 
therefore desirable from an economic stability perspective. To promote their development, it 
is important that renting is an attractive long-term proposition for households and landlords 
alike. 
My third and final observation arises from the fact that, as the economy recovered in Ireland, 
the  housing market took  off  rapidly,  with  property  prices  increasing  by  over  20  per  cent  in 
2014, having fallen by more than 12 per cent just two years earlier (indeed, in January 2015, 
the Central Bank of Ireland introduced loan-to-value and loan-to-income limits to increase the 
resilience of the banking and household sectors to the property market and to reduce the risk 
of bank credit and house price spirals from developing in the future).2 This pick-up is often 
attributed  to  “pent-up”  demand for  owner-occupied  housing  which  built-up  during the  crisis 
years  when  credit  was  scarce  and  there  was  uncertainty  about  the  path  of  house  prices.3 
Whatever its causes, it indicates that, while people are willing to rent on a short-term basis, 
there is a strong preference for owner-occupied housing over rented accommodation. 
                                                
1  See, in particular, the recent report by the National Economic and Social Council (NESC (2015)). 
2  See Central Bank of Ireland press release and associated documentation, 27 January 2015. 
3   The effect has also been exacerbated by the low levels of new house building during the crisis years, which 
has resulted in local supply shortages. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  The financial crisis 
2. 
To  put  the  role  of  the  housing  market  in  perspective,  it  is  useful  to  start  by  reviewing  the 
depth of the recent economic crisis. One measure of the adversity of outcomes is the loss of 
potential output, shown in Chart 1 for a sample of 24 countries.4 These losses arose from the 
crisis  reducing  the  level  and  perhaps  also  the  growth  rate  of  the  economy’s  productive 
potential.  Another  measure  is  the  increase  in  the  unemployment  rate  between  2005  and 
2014,  shown  for  a  sample  of  19  countries  in  Chart  2.  Furthermore,  Chart  3  indicates  that 
there is a high correlation between output losses and house price declines. Those countries 
that experienced the greatest losses had the largest house price decreases after the crisis. 
These charts illustrate that Croatia and Ireland both fared particularly poorly in the crisis: they 
experienced large losses of potential output, large increases in unemployment and large falls 
in  real  property  prices.  They  also  make  clear  that  there  are  great  differences  between 
countries in economic outcomes. 
While  the  travails  of  Croatia  and  Ireland  might  simply  have  been  due  to  bad  luck,  credit-
fuelled housing bubbles played a big part in both countries’ pre-crisis growth and subsequent 
decline.  It  is this  aspect  that  I  will  focus  on  and,  in  particular,  the  role that  deep  and  well-
developed  rental  markets  can  play  in  helping  to  reduce  the  effects  of  shocks  to  housing 
markets. 
What is the role of rental markets? 
3. 
So what is the role of rental markets in the downturn? As shown by Chart 4, the proportion of 
the  population  which  rents  property,  that  is  the  rental  rate,  varies  among  industrialised 
economies  from  just  over  60  per  cent  in  Switzerland  to  under  20  per  cent  in  Spain  and 
Croatia.5 The rental rate is low in all English-speaking countries, ranging from 36 per cent in 
Canada to 26 per cent in Ireland. Indeed, rental rates increased in a number of countries that 
experienced housing market turmoil during the crisis years. 
Consider a simplified scenario where all people in an economy finish school at 18, save for 
10 years and then buy a house. In this scenario, a predictable number of people enter the 
housing  market  every  year:  those  who  turn  28  years  of  age.6  When  a  shock  hits  the 
economy,  house  purchase  is  delayed,  either  because  of  uncertainty  about  the  future 
direction of house prices, or because of a lack of credit. This delay in house purchase results 
in people moving into the rental market. A deep rental market is better placed to absorb such 
an increase in demand than a thin rental market. This is because the increase in demand will 
be a smaller portion of the overall size of the market. 
Moreover, compared to a situation in which no new household formation takes place in times 
of  uncertainty,  this  switch  in  preferences  from  owner-occupancy  to  rented  accommodation 
can  have  an  important  stabilising  effect  on  housing  markets.  As  house  prices  fall  and 
demand for rental properties pushes up rents, yields on rental properties increase, making it 
attractive  to  become  a  landlord  instead  of  selling  at  a  depressed  price.  In  Ireland,  it  is 
estimated that 36 per cent of landlords are “accidental landlords” who found themselves with 
a property that they could not sell as a result of the housing market crash.7 Rent received on 
these properties has enabled landlords to meet outstanding mortgage repayments, and thus 
helped them avoid falling into mortgage arrears. Moreover, as prices fall, the rental yield on a 
                                                
4  These losses are computed by Ball (2014). 
5  Due to limited cross-country data availability, rental rate data include households in both private and publicly-
provided rental accommodation. 
6  See Miles (2011) for a discussion of such effects. 
7  RedC Survey results reported in Housing Agency (2014). 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  property is likely to rise, encouraging new landlords into the market and helping to create a 
floor to house prices. 
Overall, a deep and well-established rental market therefore seems to be a mitigant against 
the  effect  of  shocks  to  the  broader  economy  and  housing  markets.  This  is  clear  in  cross-
country  data.  Chart  5  contains  a  scatterplot  of  losses  in  potential  output  during  the  crisis 
against rental rates and Chart 6 shows the relationship between rental rates and changes in 
unemployment. In both these cases a clear negative relationship is readily apparent. Overall, 
the  evidence  suggests that  there  is  a  link  between  the  depth  of the rental  market  and  the 
severity of macroeconomic outcomes during the recent crisis. 
The role of mortgage debt in a financial crisis 
4. 
There are of course also a number of social benefits from owner-occupancy which need to 
be kept in mind. For instance, owner-occupancy represents the purchase of an asset and, 
since mortgage loans are amortised in Ireland, therefore leads to wealth accumulation. This 
can  be  particularly  helpful  in  retirement,  when  reduced  income  can  be  offset  by  the  lower 
cost of outright ownership of housing. In addition, studies have shown that homeowners are 
more  engaged  in  social  and  political  activities,  have  more  positive  assessments  of  their 
neighbourhoods, better psychological health and higher educational attainments.8 Surveys in 
the US show that homeowners believe their neighbourhoods are safer and better places to 
raise children.9  
But while the benefits of owner-occupancy are well documented, there is a much less well-
known flipside to this coin: the risks associated with financially vulnerable households taking 
on the financial burden of house purchase. Let me now discuss this issue. 
In Ireland the burden of the current crisis has fallen squarely on the young, many of whom 
bought property at the top of the market. The perception that one must get “on the property 
ladder”  as  soon  as  possible  that  was  a  particular  feature  of  the  boom  years,  but  also  a 
consequence  of  the  poorly  functioning  rental  market  in  Ireland,  has  had  implications  for 
younger  families.  Many  of  these  are  now  left  with  unsuitable  properties  for  their  housing 
needs (for example, one bedroom apartments that are not satisfactory for growing families), 
and with debts that they could no longer service when salaries declined and unemployment 
rose  during the  economic  downturn.  Moreover,  negative  equity  and  mortgage  arrears may 
make  it  difficult  for  them  to  move  in  pursuit  of  new,  or  better  paid,  employment.  While 
desirable and beneficial for many, homeownership does come together with important risks 
that many neglected before the onset of the crisis. 
A  particular  concern  in  this  regard  is  the  fact  that  the  risk  of  becoming  unemployed  or 
experiencing  income  losses  is  not  evenly  shared  across  society.  Younger  and  less 
experienced  workers,  and  those  who  work  in  industries  that  are  sensitive  to  the  business 
cycle, such as the construction sector, are particularly exposed to the risk of unemployment. 
This  is  illustrated  by  Chart  7  which  shows  that  the  crisis  has  disproportionately  affected 
unemployment rates among younger age cohorts in Ireland. Graduate salaries have declined 
significantly since 2007, which has long-term implications for the earning potential of young 
people.10  Chart  8  shows  that  employment  in  the  sectors  most  vulnerable  to  the  economic 
cycle, such as construction, has been most adversely affected by the crisis. 
Thus, the lack of a deep and well-functioning rental market forces all households, including 
those  at  a  relatively  high  risk  of  unemployment,  into  the  property  market.  While  the  great 
                                                
8  See Rohe and Lindblad (2013) for a discussion of the benefits of homeownership. 
9  See Belsky (2013). 
10  Conefrey and Smith (2014). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  increasing  capital  values 
majority  of  borrowers  are  credit  worthy  and  will  service  their  loans,  unemployment  and 
income loss, which may be caused by the unemployment of a spouse or partner, have been 
important determinants of mortgage arrears in Ireland.11 Banks in economies with very high 
house ownership rates may therefore experience high credit losses in a downturn. 
The resulting link between highly-indebted and financially more vulnerable households and 
the  banking  sector  can  create  a  cycle  which  is  both  self-reinforcing  in  good  times  with 
expectations  of 
increasing  equity  and  enabling  greater 
indebtedness, and in bad times as both banks and households suffer losses. 
What role can rental markets play? Buying a house using a mortgage is a risky leveraged 
investment that involves a household borrowing several times its annual income to buy an 
asset with an uncertain future value. Such investments should only be entered into by those 
that  understand  the  risks  and  feel  able  to  assume  them.  Moreover,  the  rental  market  can 
alleviate  the  risk  of  capital  loss  and  negative  equity,  increase  labour  mobility  and  thus 
facilitate  the  adjustment  following  adverse  economic  shocks.  From  a  financial  stability 
perspective  it  is  therefore  important  that  households  that  worry  about  the  risks  of 
homeownership have the option, if they wish, to rent a property that provides the type and 
quality  of  housing,  and security  of tenure,  that they  require.  Let me  next  turn  to  the rental 
market. 
The private rental market 
5. 
It is clear that in Ireland, in contrast to elsewhere in Europe, renting a home is not seen as a 
long-term option for households. Indeed, results from a recent survey show that over 70 per 
cent of private rental tenants would prefer to own their own property, and just 17 per cent 
wish  to  rent  long-term.12  While  this  may  reflect  a  cultural  preference,  or  the  benefits  of 
homeownership,  it  seems  more  than  likely  that  the  type,  quality,  affordability  and,  in 
particular, security of tenure of private rented accommodation also plays an important role. 
What  can  be  done 
to 
long-term  alternative 
homeownership? I believe that there are three aspects to this problem: first, the rental market 
structure, particularly in terms of security of tenure, can play a role. Second, the investment 
horizons of landlords are important. A culture whereby the market is dominated by landlords 
seeking an income stream over the long term, rather than a capital gain in the short run, can 
help  raise  the  attractiveness  of  renting  in  a  number  of  ways.  Finally,  in  many  countries, 
policies aim to specifically incentivise homeownership, to the detriment of the rental market. 
to  make  renting  a  more  attractive 
Security of tenure 
5.1 
A particular concern in Ireland is the absence of long-term rental contracts; while households 
may  wish  to  stay  for  long  periods  in  their  accommodation,  rental  contracts  in  Ireland  are 
predominantly  of  a  year’s  duration.  This  leads  to  a  wide-spread  lack  of  security  of  tenure. 
Indeed, a recent survey indicated that 23 per cent of private tenants in Ireland are afraid of 
losing their home. In addition, 32 per cent have no formal lease, even though more than half 
have been living in their current accommodation for more than two years.13 The risk and the 
associated costs of having to move may make households opt to purchase their own home 
and take on financial risks that they may feel they are not well placed to assume. Indeed, 
29 per cent of tenants say that they would be more likely to rent long term if there was the 
possibility of a longer term lease.14 Lengthening rental contracts therefore seems desirable.15 
                                                
11  McCarthy (2014). 
12  RedC survey reported Housing Agency (2014). 
13  Housing sentiment survey conducted by iREACH, reported in NABCO (2014). 
14  Housing Agency (2014). 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Interestingly,  research  has  shown  that  in  countries  with  comparatively  strong  security  of 
tenure  and  high  rental  rates,  such  as  Germany  and  the  Netherlands,  security  of  tenure  is 
seen to foster long-run demand for renting and rental investment, such that neither tenants 
nor landlords have sought to weaken security.16  
Why are rental contracts in Ireland of such short term nature? Ireland’s history of high and 
variable  inflation  and  the  lack  of  institutional  investors  in  the  rental  market  must  both  be 
important. In  economies  with  a  history  of  inflation,  banks  protect  themselves  by  lending  at 
flexible  interest  rates.  In  turn,  with  mortgage  costs  varying  over  time,  renters  protect 
themselves  with  short  term  contracts.  In  contrast,  in  economies  with  a  history  of  low  and 
stable inflation, mortgage lending tends to be for long maturities and rental contracts tend to 
be longer term. 
Of course, Ireland’s history of inflation is now over. But lending arrangements change slowly. 
Overall,  housing  markets  and  financial  stability  in  Ireland  would  benefit  from  borrowers 
having a wider choice of fixed rate loans. 
Incentives of landlords 
5.2 
The  lack  of  institutional  investors  in  the  rental  market  is  also  important.  The  Irish  rental 
market  is  dominated  by  private  households  who  let  a  single  property.17  The  fact  that  they 
may  need  the  dwelling  for  a  family  member,  or  may  wish  to  sell  it,  is  another  factor  that 
makes for short-term contracts and concerns about the security of tenure. Furthermore, buy-
to-let properties have the highest rate of mortgage arrears. The latest figures from December 
2014  show  that  over  25  per  cent  of  buy-to-let  mortgages  are  in  arrears.  Indeed,  survey 
findings suggest almost 50 per cent of all landlords18 cannot cover their loan repayments with 
rental  income.  Overall,  29  per  cent  of  landlords  intend  to  exit  the  market  as  soon  as 
possible.19  
In  contrast,  institutional  investors,  such  as  pension  funds  and  insurance  companies,  have 
very  long  investment  horizons  and  have  strong  preferences  for  tenants  who  stay  for  an 
extended period of time, since finding new tenants and refurbishing apartments for them is 
costly.20  Institutional  investors  can  bring  a  standardised,  professional  approach  to  the 
management of entire buildings of apartments, aiding the supply of suitable accommodation 
in popular areas. This suggests that attracting more institutional investors would promote a 
well-functioning rental market that is so important for financial stability.21 Furthermore, these 
investors are likely to be less leveraged and have more diversified portfolios than individuals 
owning  one  or  two  rental  properties,  and  are  thus  better  able  to  withstand  an  economic 
downturn. 
                                                                                                                                                   
15  NESC (2015) discusses security of tenure in depth. 
16  See De Boer and Bitetti (2014). 
17  See Housing Agency (2014) which suggests that over 80 per cent of landlords own one or two properties. 
18  Including those without outstanding debts. 
19  Housing Agency (2014). 
20  As  do  private  households  that  invest  in  property  for  purposes  such  as  additional  income  in  retirement.  In 
Germany, where many people rent for extended periods, a large share of landlords are individuals, however, 
they do so for retirement purposes rather than capital gains, and are therefore interested in a steady income 
stream from long-term tenants (see ECB (2009), particularly Box 3). 
21  To this end, Budget 2013 introduced Real Estate Investment Trusts (REITs) to Ireland. To date, approximately 
1,500 residential units have been acquired by REITs. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  There is a wide variety of government intervention in rental market, from the direct provision 
of social housing to the regulation of the private rented sector.22 Because moving is costly 
and  disruptive,  the  tenant-landlord  relationship  is  inherently  asymmetric.  Regulation,  if 
designed well, can therefore improve outcomes. That said, poorly thought out regulation, in 
particular rent controls, can have adverse effects by reducing the supply of rental properties 
and discouraging new construction and the maintenance of existing rental properties. Getting 
housing regulation “right” – a task outside the central bank’s remit – is important. 
Policies favouring home-ownership 
5.3 
Home-ownership  brings  many  benefits,  and  it  is  understandable  that  there  are  policies  in 
place  to  enable  house  purchase;  I  have  already  outlined  the  potential  benefits  in  terms of 
asset accumulation and social advantages associated with home-ownership. However, some 
policies  aimed  at  enabling  people  to  gain  from  the  benefits  of  home-ownership  have  the 
effect of worsening the situation of those who either choose not to be homeowners, or cannot 
afford to be so. 
One  important  issue  that  influences  households’  choices  between  buying  and  renting 
property is tax policy. In many countries it is generally favourable towards homeownership. 
Examples  of  favourable  taxation  treatment  of  housing  include  the  exemption  of  imputed 
rental income on principal homes from income tax calculations, tax relief of mortgage interest 
payments,  exemptions  of  capital  gains  from  the  sale  of  principal  homes,  and  the  use  of 
outdated housing values for property taxes. 
A  favourable  tax  treatment  of  homeownership  risks  encouraging  excessive  leverage  and 
housing 
financial 
imbalances.23  It  can  also  tempt  households  that  are  worried  about  the  risks  inherent  in 
mortgage  borrowing  into  house  ownership.  Overall,  it  seems  desirable  for  tax  policy  to  be 
neutral between homeownership and renting. To this end, it is important to note that tax relief 
on mortgage payments have been phased out since the crisis, and a recurrent property tax 
has been introduced, in Ireland. 
the  development  of  macroeconomic  and 
investment, 
leading 
to 
Conclusion 
6. 
Economies  that  experienced  boom-bust  cycles  in  housing,  such  as  Croatia  and  Ireland, 
suffered disproportionately in the financial crisis. There were numerous reasons for this large 
impact, many of which  are, by now, very familiar. However, it is less frequently noted that 
those  economies  with  deeper  rental  markets  suffered  less.  While  the  specifics  of  housing 
policy are outside the remit of central banks, it is incumbent for us to draw attention to issues 
that relate to financial stability. To reduce the risk and the amplitude of future housing cycles, 
housing  policy  needs  to  consider  also  financial  stability  issues.  In  this  regard,  it  seems 
particularly important to promote a well-developed rental market as a genuine alternative to 
ownership,  and  an  attractive  investment  proposition  for  potential  landlords.  While  many 
households  may  continue  to  buy  rather  than  rent,  we  need  to  make  sure  that  this  choice 
reflects their preferences and does not merely reflect a poorly functioning rental market. 
References 
Ball, L., (2014) “Long-Term Damage from the Great Recession in OECD Countries”, NBER 
Working Paper 20185. 
                                                
22  For  more 
information,  see:  http://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social_welfare/social_welfare_payments/ 
supplementary_welfare_schemes/rent_supplement.html. 
23  OECD (2011). 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Belsky, E. S., (2013) “The Dream Lives On: The Future of Homeownership in America”, Joint 
Center for Housing Studies, Harvard University, W13–1, January. 
Conefrey,  T.  and  Smith,  R.,  (2014)  “On  the  Slide?  Salary  Scales  for  New  Graduates  
2004–2012”, Central Bank of Ireland, Economic Letter No. 1. 
De  Boer,  R.  and  R.  Bitetti, (2014),  “A  Revival  of  the  Private  Rental  Sector  of  the  Housing 
Market?: Lessons from Germany, Finland, the Czech Republic and the Netherlands”, OECD 
Economics Department Working Papers, No. 1170. 
ECB, (2009), “Housing finance in the euro area”, Structural Issues Report, March. 
Housing  Agency,  (2014)  “Future  of  the  Private  Rented  Sector,  Final  Report”,  prepared  for 
The Housing Agency on behalf of the PRTB, October 2014. 
NABCO, (2014) “Housing Sentiment Survey”, November, 2014. 
NESC,  (2015)  “Ireland’s  Rental  Sector:  Pathways  to  Secure  Occupancy  and  Affordable 
Supply”, No. 141, May. 
OECD,  (2011)  “Housing  and  the  Economy:  Policies  for  Renovation”,  Chapter  in  Economic 
Policy Reforms 2011: Going for Growth. 
McCarthy,  Y.,  (2014)  “Disentangling  the  mortgage  arrears  crisis:  The  role  of  the  labour 
market, income volatility and housing equity”, Central Bank of Ireland, Research Technical 
Paper 02/RT/14. 
Miles, D., (2014), “Mortgages, housing and monetary policy what lies ahead?”, speech given 
to the Northern Housing Consortium, York Racecourse, 22 November. 
Rohe, W.M. and Lindblad, M., (2013) “Reexamining the Social Benefits of Homeownership 
after  the  Housing  Crisis”,  Joint  Center  for  Housing  Studies,  Harvard  University,  HBTL-04, 
August. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
