  Guy Debelle: Remarks on financial integration in the Asia Pacific 
Speech by Mr Guy Debelle, Assistant Governor (Financial Markets) of the Reserve Bank of 
Australia,  at  the  Launch  of  the  Australian  Centre  for  Financial  Studies  report  on  Financial 
Integration in the Asia Pacific, Sydney, 16 June 2015 
Thanks to Marc-Oliver Thurner and David Norman for their assistance. 
Accompanying charts can be found on the Reserve Bank of Australia’s website. 
 It is a pleasure to speak at the launch of the Australian Centre for Financial Studies (ACFS) 
work on Financial Integration in the Asia Pacific. 
I have had some first hand experience on financial integration through the Asian Bond Fund 
(ABF) initiative, working with my fellow central bankers in Asia through EMEAP. In particular, 
in launching ABF2 and the Pan-Asian Index Fund (PAIF) around a decade ago, we got direct 
exposure to some of the impediments to financial integration in the region, both regulatory 
and tax. We worked together to reduce some of those impediments, which helped to pave 
the way for an expansion in cross-border fixed income investment in the region. 
I  would  like  to  talk  about  some  issues  that  come  to  mind  when  thinking  about  financial 
integration.  In  doing  so,  my  aim  is  to  pose  questions  that  the  ACFS  work  might  consider, 
without providing any answers. 
The first issue is about developments over the past decade or so, which show that financial 
integration is not a monotonic process. It is not always onwards and upwards. There was a 
reversal  in  some  metrics  of  financial  integration  after  2008.  In  particular,  cross-border 
banking  flows  declined  steeply  in  2008  and  2009,  and  have,  in  aggregate,  continued  to 
shrink until fairly recently. 
Interestingly,  cross-border  flows  involving  Chinese  and  Japanese  banks  have  been 
increasing while those elsewhere, particularly in Europe, have been declining. We have seen 
that here in Australia, with lending by Chinese and Japanese banks into Australia growing 
quite rapidly (albeit from a low base), as lending from European banks has been declining 
(Graph  1).  Some  Chinese  banks  have  obtained  Australian  banking  licences  while  some 
European banks have given them up. 
In light of these developments, one question that is worth contemplating is whether there is 
such a thing as an optimal degree of financial integration? Can there be too much of it? The 
experience of the financial crisis shows that at least some forms of financial integration didn’t 
go too well. 
Relatedly, what is the most beneficial form of financial integration? Is it cross-border banking 
flows? And if so, should those flows be through a branch or a subsidiary, taking account of 
the  varying  regulatory  environments  that  come  with  that  choice?  Are  bank  to  bank  flows 
more problematic than direct lending by foreign banks to domestic borrowers? 
The  experience  of  cross-border  banking  is  also  replete  with  examples  of  the  last-mover 
disadvantage. The general argument mounted in support of cross-border banking is that it 
allows a bank to profitably utilise its knowledge, systems and skills in a new market. But is 
that  best  done  by  partnering  with  an  existing  bank,  or  entering  the  market  on  your  own? 
While there may be opportunities that arise with a better banking model, it can often be the 
case  that  all  the  good  credits  are  taken.  The  local  banks  already  have  well-established 
relationships with the customers with the strong balance sheets and it may be quite difficult 
to wean them away, however attractive the proposition put to them. This can lead to the new 
entrant filling its book with the fish John West rejects. That’s not necessarily a bad thing, nor 
obviously unprofitable, but the credit quality is likely to be lower. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Alternatively,  are  flows  intermediated  by  markets  more  beneficial,  whether  in  the  form  of 
bonds or equity? For many years, there has been a marked contrast in the financial structure 
of the US and most of the rest of the world. In the US, there is a considerably higher share of 
market-based intermediation, whereas in the rest of the world, including Australia and Asia, 
bank-based intermediation has the lion’s share of financing. 
One consequence of the regulatory reform program after the crisis is that it has tended to 
increase  the  cost  of  bank-intermediated  finance.  As  a  result,  market  intermediation  is 
increasing, which will have implications for the future of financial integration in Asia. 
This  is  evident  in  the  recent  strong  issuance  of  offshore  bonds  by  Asian  non-financial 
corporations. Much of this rise has been driven by Chinese issuers, which now account for 
about  40  per  cent  of  the  bond  issuance  by  Asian  non-financial  corporations  (Graph  2). 
However,  borrowing  from  banks  still  represents  the  vast  majority  of  debt  of  Asian  non-
financial corporations. 
Another  question  that  arises  is  which  of  these  forms  of  cross-border  flows  –  banking  or 
market-based – are more stable? This is an issue which gets a lot of attention in the Asian 
region  and  will  once  again  come  into  sharp  relief  when  the  Fed  raises its  policy  rate. The 
increase  in  cross-border  flows  into  emerging  markets  over  recent  years,  particularly  in  the 
Asian region, has contained a large amount of market-based finance. Asset managers have 
a much higher share of emerging Asia in their funds under management today than they did 
a decade ago. How stable are these flows likely to be in a more volatile environment? What 
is  the  behaviour  of  the  investors  who  have  allocated  a  higher  share  of  their  portfolio  to 
emerging markets? How much of that increased share is a result of a search for higher yield 
which might reverse when yields in traditional developed markets increase? How much of it 
is a structural diversification into the emerging world as it has become a much larger share of 
the global economic and financial landscape? 
A major influence on the future path of financial integration in the Asia-Pacific region will be 
developments in Chinese financial markets. China is on a path of financial deregulation and 
capital  account  liberalisation.  Almost  no  other  country  has  managed  this  process  without 
encountering significant problems. While China has endeavoured to learn the lessons from 
all  the  other  countries  that  have  gone  down  this  path,  including  Australia,  it  will  be  a 
significant achievement if they are able to pull it off without encountering some problems. 
Investing in China’s domestic markets has become easier over the past year, with a range of 
new initiatives gradually opening the capital account, at this stage, primarily by allowing more 
portfolio  flows  between  Hong  Kong  and  the  mainland.  The  new  schemes  expand  the 
avenues for investing in China’s domestic debt and equity markets from the existing RQFII 
and QFII programs, which at the end of May accounted for around US$140 billion of foreign 
investment in China. 
The Shanghai-Hong Kong Stock Connect scheme, which started in November last year, is at 
about half its northbound capacity of around US$50 billion. A Shenzhen-Hong Kong Stock 
Connect  is  expected  to  be  announced  soon.  The  mutual  recognition  of  funds  agreement, 
effective  from  July,  will  allow  fund  managers  registered  in  Hong  Kong  to  offer  investment 
fund products to mainland residents (and vice versa). 
From an Australian perspective, these avenues should provide an opportunity for Australian 
banks, asset managers and their clients to increase their exposure to the Chinese domestic 
financial market. Australian international portfolio investment has been growing strongly over 
recent  years  from  around  A$450  billion  in  2010  to  over  A$750  billion  at  the  end  of  2014 
(Graph 3). While the share of Asian bond investment has risen a little over that period, the 
share  of  investment  in  Asian  equities  has  been  largely  steady.  Both  remain  at  well  below 
10 per  cent  of  total  portfolio  investment  in  offshore  markets.  There  would  appear  to  be 
significant scope for further financial integration with the region. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  To conclude, the work by the ACFS is focussing on an area of significant importance today 
and one that will be important for a long time to come. There are many issues to discuss, a 
few of which I have highlighted here. The briefing paper is a promising start and I wish them 
well for the rest of the project.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
