  Dennis Lockhart: Considerations on the path to policy normalization 
Speech  by  Mr  Dennis  Lockhart,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve  Bank  of  Atlanta,  at  the  Southwest  Florida  Business  Leaders  Luncheon,  Naples, 
Florida, 6 February 2015. 
       Atlanta Fed President and CEO Dennis Lockhart, in a February 6, 2015, speech to 
the  Southwest  Florida  Business  Leaders,  shares  his  thoughts  on  the  monetary 
policy “liftoff” decision ahead. 
Lockhart  says  the  linchpin  in  a  decision  to  make  a  significant  policy  change  is 
confidence in the economic forecast. 
Lockhart’s baseline outlook for 2015 and 2016 assumes growth at around 3 percent 
per annum. 
In  Lockhart’s  view,  this  outlook,  combined  with  the  improvement  of  economic 
conditions to date, indicates the economy is on a path to a satisfactory and desirable 
state of health. 
Lockhart  says  that  the  weakness  of  inflation  and  wages  is  a  concern,  and  that 
firming  of  inflation  readings  will  give  him  confidence  that  the  outlook  on  which 
monetary policy decisions will swing remains realistic. 
From  a  Main  Street  perspective,  Lockhart  says,  the  important  point  for  business 
planning  is  that  monetary  policy  is  likely  to  shift  sometime  this  year,  and  that 
decision should be a signal that the FOMC is confident that the economy is on track 
to achieve its objectives. 
I  want  to  begin  by  expressing thanks to Gary  Tice  for  his  service  on  the  Federal  Reserve 
Bank of Atlanta’s Miami board. Gary follows Gay Rebel Thompson from this community, who 
earlier served as a board member and chair of the Atlanta Fed’s board for South Florida. 
This  year  –  2015  –  is  widely  expected  to  be  the  year  the  Federal  Reserve  initiates 
normalization of monetary policy. This prospect has generated a lot of interest and buzz. 
If  you  follow  the  Fed-watching  industry,  as  I  do,  you  are  well  aware  that  a  top-of-mind 
question regarding policy is: At what meeting will the Fed decide to lift off? At what meeting 
will  the  Federal  Open  Market  Committee  (FOMC)  raise  the  policy  rate  target  above  its 
current near-zero range? 
If you are an investor in fixed-income or interest-paying assets, a lot of money may ride on 
the precise answer to that question. 
In contrast, if you are a business person operating in the nonfinancial real economy, you may 
be less concerned about the precise timing of the first policy adjustment. You are likely to be 
more concerned about what a change in the interest-rate environment means for the outlook 
for overall demand conditions and the general direction of the economy. 
Today I will orient my remarks mostly to the concerns of Main Street. This keeps the focus 
where,  in  my  opinion,  it  ultimately  should  be  –  that  is,  on  the  health,  resilience,  and 
momentum of the broad economy. 
With this perspective in mind, I want to share my thought process, as one policymaker, on 
the decisions ahead and the economic context in which they may be made. 
When a Reserve Bank president speaks publicly, he or she is expressing individual views, 
not an official message of the Fed or the FOMC. That is the case today. My colleagues may 
not agree with my views. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Economic progress and outlook 
The national economy has improved greatly from the recession’s trough in 2009. Much has 
been accomplished. 
The  Great  Recession  was  a  particularly  severe  episode.  The  economy  lost  quite  a  lot  of 
ground.  We  lost  nearly  7  million  jobs  –  more  jobs  than  in  the  prior  three  recessions 
combined. During the recovery, we have regained that ground, and nonfarm payroll jobs are 
now about 2 million jobs above where they were at the onset of the recession. 
In terms of total output, the economy is now almost 14 percent larger than at its nadir at the 
bottom of the recession. 
It has taken a while – the recovery is five-and-a-half years old – and the job is not finished, in 
my opinion. But, as I said, much has been accomplished. 
I believe the economy has sufficient traction for the expansion to be extended through the 
medium term. 
My baseline outlook for 2015 and 2016 assumes growth at around 3 percent per annum. I 
expect  employment  to continue  to grow  and  both  unemployment  and  underemployment to 
continue to decline. This morning, we received the Bureau of Labor Statistics’ employment 
situation report for January. Payroll jobs grew by 257,000 on net. And  over the past three 
months, job gains have averaged 336,000. 
As a general statement, the improvement of economic conditions to date, in combination with 
the  outlook  I  just  outlined,  leads  me  to  the  view  that  the  economy  is  on  a  path  to  a 
satisfactory and desirable state of health. 
The Fed’s statutory objectives contained in the so-called dual mandate help define what is 
satisfactory  and  desirable.  Our  policy  objectives  are  maximum  employment  and  low  and 
stable  inflation.  The  Committee  has  put  a  clear  definition  on  the  inflation  objective.  The 
Committee  has  defined  it  as  a  rate  of  2  percent  annual  inflation  over  the  longer  run  as 
measured  by  a  particular  index  called  the  personal  consumption  expenditures  price  index. 
Importantly,  inflation  is  targeted  on  a  total  or  headline  basis  including  the  highly  variable 
components of food and energy prices. In practice, most Fed officials monitor a collection of 
inflation  indicators  in  an  attempt  to  discern  the  underlying  trend.  There  are  worrisome 
aspects  of  the  current  inflation  picture,  and  reading  underlying  trends  is  problematic  at 
present. Hold that thought. I’ll emphasize the centrality of inflation concerns a little later. 
Maximum, or full, employment is less explicitly defined. Most economists assume that what 
constitutes full  employment  changes over  time. Structural  shifts  in the  economy  cause  the 
natural  rate  of  unemployment  to  move  around.  For  a  good  part  of  the  recovery  period,  a 
number  of  Fed  policymakers,  me  included,  have  estimated  the  unemployment  level 
consistent with full employment as between 5 1/4 and 5 1/2 percent or a little higher. Today’s 
report has the headline unemployment rate at 5.7 percent. So, on that basis, we would seem 
to be approaching an acceptable steady-state level of employment. 
It’s  a fair question, then,  why  the  FOMC  has  not  already  started to  normalize  interest-rate 
policy. My answer is the recovery has been sluggish for much of its five-and-a-half years. To 
accomplish  what  we  have,  the  recovery  has  required  the  support  of  extraordinary  policy 
measures  –  measures  such  as  a  policy  rate  set  effectively  at  zero  and  three  rounds  of 
quantitative  easing.  Furthermore,  the  economy  has  endured  periodic  headwinds  that 
threatened to dilute or reverse progress. And although the economy is growing, its strength 
has sometimes seemed tentative and fragile. 
A moment ago, I said the job is not finished. Some gaps remain. 
Employment progress, for instance, may be less than meets the eye. Many of us have held 
that the conventional measure of unemployment probably overstates actual progress. There 
are still almost 7 million workers counted as employed who say they are working part-time 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  involuntarily.  As  a  point  of  reference,  7  million  is  about  4  1/2  percent  of  a  labor  force  of 
157 million. There are always people in this involuntary part-time category, but the number is 
still  elevated  compared  to  historical  levels.  Over  the  last  few  years,  there  has  been  a 
worrisome outflow of prime-age workers – especially men – from the labor force. I believe 
some  of  these  people  will  be  enticed  back  into  formal  work  arrangements  if  the  economy 
improves further. 
The distance between current conditions and our goals doesn’t have to be completely closed 
for the FOMC to start moving interest rates higher. Monetary policy is, of necessity, forward 
looking. If, as we look forward, it seems likely we will achieve our policy objectives, then we 
can consider beginning to adjust policy. 
From  a  Main  Street  perspective,  it  is  the  overall  direction  and  extent  of  normalization  that 
should  matter  most,  rather  than  the  exact  date  of  liftoff.  Liftoff  will  be  a  momentous  event 
when  it  happens,  but  it  is  the  evolution  of  the  interest-rate  environment  over  the  next  few 
years that will most influence real business activity. 
Confidence as linchpin 
The linchpin in a decision to make a significant policy change is confidence. By that, I mean 
confidence in a forecast – an outlook narrative, if you will – that has the economy on track to 
achieve the FOMC’s policy objectives in a reasonable timeframe. I think a reasonable time 
horizon is one to two years. 
I really want to emphasize this point. The Committee has repeatedly stressed that the first 
and  subsequent  policy  moves  will  be  data-dependent.  It  is  confidence  based  on  clear 
evidence in the data that will trigger the start of normalization. 
One hundred percent confidence is never attainable. The test is one of sufficiency – that is, 
sufficient  confidence  that,  in  a  defined  period  of  time,  the  broad  economy  will  reach 
conditions consistent with sustainable full employment and stable prices. 
At this particular moment, I don’t quite have sufficient confidence. There are factors at work 
at the moment whose effects I consider to be transient. Key among these factors is inflation. 
Inflation, by almost every measure, has been running considerably below the FOMC’s target 
of 2 percent. This was the case well before the recent drop in energy prices. Because of the 
sharp  falloff  of  energy  prices  –  especially  gasoline  prices  –  headline  or  total  inflation  has 
gone negative in the most recent readings. Core inflation – the measure that excludes the 
direct impact of energy and food prices – has recently been running below 1 percent. 
In  my  baseline  forecast,  I  have  inflation  getting  past  this  period  of  broad  disinflation  and 
resuming a gradual rise to 2 percent. It’s important, in my opinion, to be confident that this 
will occur, and certainly that the trend in overall prices is not continuing to move away from 
the FOMC’s target. 
Just as current readings of inflation give some pause, broad wage trends seem to suggest 
we are not yet on the cusp of full employment. The quite modest growth of wages across the 
economy  does  not  seem  normal  given  the  solid  growth  numbers  we’ve  seen  in  recent 
quarters. 
Inflation and wages ought to be telling indicators that the gaps are closing. Their weakness is 
a concern. 
A noisy first half 
The  first  half  of  2015  will  present  challenges  in  evaluating  the  validity  of  economic 
assumptions. 
I’ve mentioned oil prices. After seven months of decline, prices firmed in trading sessions last 
week,  then  fell  again.  Financial  market  participants  interpreted  the  firming  as  a  positive 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  development. A number of oil and gas sector analysts forecast that global petroleum supplies 
will exceed demand through the first half of the year. 
The dollar has appreciated by 13 percent on a trade-weighted basis since last June. Exports 
in the fourth quarter seem to have been negatively affected by the dollar’s rise. I will avoid 
predicting exchange rates, but suffice to say that the impact of the dollar on exports, as well 
as imported consumer goods prices, is part of the current swirl of variables making the state 
of the economy harder to assess. 
The direction of the dollar is an aspect of the larger context of slow global growth with risk of 
spillover to the U.S. economy. Some of the influence of soft economic conditions abroad is 
incorporated into my baseline outlook. In contrast, more extreme scenarios are not. 
I  should  also  comment  on 
inflation-protected  securities. 
Compensation  for  inflation  in  these  securities  (so-called  TIPS)  has  moved  sharply  lower 
since last summer. This decline may reflect transitory influences like falling energy costs. A 
less benign possibility is that investors are lowering their outlook for inflation. This could be 
either  because  their  confidence  is  waning  that  the  Fed  will  achieve  its  2  percent  inflation 
target, or because they see growing risks to the continued strength of the broad economy. 
Since mid-January, some inflation-compensation measures have shown signs of reversing. A 
firming in the inflation compensation data from their year-end lows is an example of the kind 
of encouraging development that will bolster my confidence in the medium-term outlook. 
To put an exclamation point on the proviso that the first half of 2015 may be noisy and hard 
to  read,  I’ll  just  catalog  a  few  of  the  obvious  things  that  might  confuse  true  underlying 
conditions: oil prices, the dollar, the effects of both oil prices and exchange rates on headline 
inflation, their possible impact on core inflation, slow-to-improve wages, the ups and downs 
of quarter-to-quarter growth, and mixed messages from measures of inflation expectations. 
inflation  compensation 
in 
What am I looking for? 
So, if the linchpin in a policy decision, for me, is confidence, what am I looking for? 
For  starters,  as I  said  earlier, key  indicators  of economic  conditions  should  not  be  moving 
away  from  my  basic  outlook.  Assuming  no  substantial  softening  of  GDP  and  employment 
growth, my attention will likely be on the path of inflation. 
I’d like to see some evidence that what we believe to be transient factors driving recent weak 
inflation readings are, in fact, passing. I would like to see firming of inflation readings. This 
will  give  me  confidence  that  the  outlook  on  which  important  decisions  will  swing  remains 
realistic and likely to play out. 
Inflation  is  appropriately  a  focal  point  because  its  firming  will  reduce  concerns  that  the 
economy is somehow stalling, that prophesies of long-term stagnation have any basis, and 
that chances of accomplishing the FOMC’s policy goals are receding. 
As of today, I remain comfortable with the assumption that circumstances will come together 
around mid-year, or a little later, that will deliver sufficient confidence to begin normalization 
with the liftoff decision. I won’t be more definitive than that. I think all possibilities from June 
on should remain open. I don’t at this juncture have a prediction or preference. Timing will 
depend on what the data tell us. 
From a Main Street perspective, the important point for business planning is that monetary 
policy is likely to shift sometime this year, and a higher interest-rate environment will ensue. 
The  decision  to  begin  normalization  should  be  a  signal  that  the  FOMC  is  confident  the 
economy is on track to achieve its objectives and that the economy should have sufficient 
strength  and  momentum  to  handle  higher  rates.  The  start  of  the  process  of  normalization 
should itself instill confidence on Main Street. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
