  Emmanuel Tumusiime-Mutebile: Promoting and strengthening good 
corporate governance in Uganda 
Remarks  by  Mr  Emmanuel  Tumusiime-Mutebile,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Uganda,  at  the 
Gala  Dinner  of  the  Institute  of  Corporate  Governance  of  Uganda,  Kampala,  26  February 
2015. 
 The President, Members of Council and CEO of the ICGU; 
Distinguished Guests; 
All Stakeholders in the Corporate Governance Fraternity; 
Ladies and Gentlemen; 
I would like to thank the Institute of Corporate Governance of Uganda, for inviting me to give 
the keynote address at this first corporate governance gala. It is an honour to address you all 
at this event. I would also like to commend the Institute for the work it is doing to promote 
good governance in Uganda, which is of crucial importance to the development of a modern, 
competitive market oriented economy. I hope this gala event will contribute to strengthening 
the culture of corporate governance in our society. 
Recent headlines from around the world have brought the issue of corporate governance to 
everyone’s  attention.  Numerous  scandals  have  beset  the  corporate  world,  not  least  in  the 
banking industry where large international banks have been fined heavily for various forms of 
malfeasance,  especially  in  the  United  States.  The  common  denominator  in  most  of  these 
scandals is that public and private sector officials were not acting in the best interest of their 
organizations, their shareholders, or employees, and were often acting in violation of the law. 
They were able to act in this manner because of a combination of inadequate monitoring, a 
breakdown in internal controls, and often the ignorance and incompetence of directors. 
In  Uganda,  the  problem  of  weak  corporate  governance  is  compounded  by  an  often 
haphazard  appointment  process  for  company  boards.  Unfortunately,  the  appointment  of 
board  members  is  not  necessarily  based  on  merit.  Hence  the  caliber  of  directors  is  not 
always as high as it should be. It is also common knowledge that many directors overstep 
their roles and get involved in micro-managing their company or institution. There is a failure 
to understand clearly the proper role of a board of directors in the running of a company or 
institution, and in particular what the oversight function of a board of directors actually entails. 
The  oversight  function  of  the  Board  of  Directors  is  primarily  strategic.  The  Board  must 
provide  the  vision  and  set  the  tone  at  the  top.  It  must  also  be  responsible  for  fiduciary 
standards  and  prescribe  methods  to  monitor  and  control  the  management  so  that  abuses 
can be prevented. In addition the Board must ensure compliance with legal and regulatory 
requirements. This is why there is a shift in emphasis towards appointing non-executive and 
independent  directors,  who  are  people  who  are  not  part  of  the  management  team  of  the 
company.  These  directors  are  supposed  to  act  as  an  independent  check  on  corporate 
management. 
The role of a corporate board of directors has become technical and demanding and hence 
directors  are  required  to  have  business  and  technical  expertise.  They  must  be  able  to 
understand the nature of the firm’s business, its financial performance and the risks facing 
the firm. I should add that the responsibility of directors today carries serious personal and 
collective liabilities. 
To  maintain  public  confidence,  companies  must  demonstrate  a  strong  commitment  to  the 
development  and  enforcement  of  rigorous  standards  of  corporate  governance.  These 
standards  must  encompass  the  relationship  between  a  company’s  board  of  directors,  its 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  management,  and  its  shareholders.  They  must  require  corporate  leaders  to  be  faithful  to 
shareholder interests and act with both competence and integrity. Corporate governance has 
become the sine qua non for any business which cares about its reputation. 
The various scandals I noted earlier have been a loud wake-up call, focusing attention on the 
need  to  strengthen  corporate  governance,  to  improve  accountability,  transparency  and 
control.  In  response,  a  number  of  measures  have  been  taken  or  proposed  by  various 
countries to improve corporate governance, such as the Sarbanes Oxley Act in the United 
States. 
In Uganda, the Financial Institutions Act (FIA) 2003, includes an entire chapter devoted  to 
corporate  governance.  In  addition,  the  BOU  has  issued  additional  Corporate  Governance 
Guidelines  for  the  financial  sector.  The  Companies  Act  2012  (chapter  F)  also  reinforces 
corporate governance. 
Good  intentions  do  not  always  prevent  unintended  consequences  –  which  is  why  a  forum 
such  as  this  one  can  be  very  helpful  in  illuminating  the  potential  pitfalls  of  well-intended 
corporate  governance  proposals.  Some  unintended  side-effects  might 
include  high 
compliance  costs,  ambiguous  liabilities,  or  reduced  innovation.  It  is  counterproductive  to 
make  disclosure  so  onerous  as  to  make  the  cost  of  compliance  prohibitive  or  impractical. 
Regulations  and  standards,  whether  by  regulators,  government,  trade  groups,  or  the 
companies  themselves,  should  not  impede  the  ongoing  process  of  innovation.  Rather  we 
must ensure an environment that is conducive to effective and efficient operations. 
A credible case can be made that we should focus on principles as the bedrock for rules. We 
should  establish  key  principles  against  which  corporate  decisions  should  be  evaluated, 
regardless  of  whether  or  not  a  certain  type  of  behavior  is  prohibited.  In  this  way,  when 
innovations  make  old  rules  obsolete,  corporate  leaders  would  have  to  consider  not  only 
whether some action would violate the law but whether it would violate a principle of good 
corporate  governance.  Rules  are  clearly  necessary  but  they  cannot  replace  ethics  and 
exemplary leadership. 
Timely and regular flow of information to stakeholders is the grease that engenders trust. In 
elevating the standards of corporate governance in any sector, shareholders must play an 
active  role  to  engage  boards  and  hold  them  accountable.  But  for  this  to  happen, 
shareholders, and indeed consumers, must have adequate and relevant information on the 
performance of their organizations. 
To conclude, I want to re-emphasize that good corporate governance is critical to the health 
of the business sector, our financial system, and the wider economy. Our economy will be 
stronger if corporate decisions are made with competence and integrity, and if shareholders 
and  the  public  can  appropriately  assess  the  profitability  and  riskiness  of  corporations’ 
business activities. 
I thank you for your attention. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
