  Andreas Dombret: Looking to the future – what comes next in terms of 
European financial integration? 
Speech  by  Dr  Andreas  Dombret,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Deutsche 
Bundesbank, at the South African Institute for International Affairs, Johannesburg, 10 April 
2015. 
 1.  
Introduction 
Ladies and gentlemen 
Thank you for inviting me to speak at the South African Institute for International Affairs. I 
appreciate the Institute’s objective of conducting evidence-based policy research as part of 
an international dialogue. It is therefore a great pleasure to be here today to take part in and 
to promote such an international exchange of ideas. 
A dialogue is essential in the age of globalisation, in which countries are no longer isolated 
but part of a closely interconnected community. And this community consists of a growing 
number of countries. Over the past decades, we have seen the emerging economies steadily 
being integrated into the global economy. And looking to the future, I firmly believe that the 
role  played  by  emerging  economies  will  become  greater  still.  Your  country  is  a  prime 
example:  South  Africa  plays  a  leading  role  in  Sub-Saharan  Africa  and  is  also  a  respected 
member of the G20, reflecting its role in the world economy. 
A  globalised  economy  offers  huge  potential  to  all  its  members.  Nevertheless,  while  we  all 
share the benefits in good times, we also have to share the burdens in bad times. The global 
financial crisis has highlighted how closely the world has grown together and how quickly a 
problem in one corner of the world can spread around the globe. 
This truth applies all the more to countries sharing a common currency such as the member 
states of the Common Monetary Area here in southern Africa or the euro area in Europe. 
Let us take a closer look at the euro area and the challenges it is currently facing. Back in 
1999, 11 European countries adopted the euro as their common currency. Today, the single 
currency  is  shared  by  19  countries  and  more  than  300  million  people,  which  in  my  eyes 
makes it a success story. That being said, it has not always been plain sailing. 
In the wake of the global financial crisis of 2008, the euro area slid into a financial crisis of its 
own.  This  was  compounded  in  2010  when  Greece  entered  into  a  sovereign  debt  crisis, 
leading  to  other  member  states  suffering  a  sudden  loss  in  confidence,  which  eventually 
brought  the  euro  area  to  the  brink  of  collapse.  Extensive  rescue  packages  by  the 
governments along with non-standard measures taken by the European Central Bank helped 
to calm the markets and prevented the crisis from escalating. 
To  some  commentators,  the  current  situation  might  look  similar.  Greece’s  newly  elected 
government objected to complying with the financial assistance agreements and intended to 
withdraw some of the reforms that had already been adopted. There were even brief calls for 
further  debt  relief.  However,  after  intense  negotiations  among  the  finance  ministers  of  the 
euro  area,  the  Greek  government  settled  for  requesting  an  extension  of  the  current 
programme.  After  the  Greek  government  had  also  committed  to  pushing  ahead  with 
economic and fiscal reforms, the finance ministers of the euro area approved a four-month 
extension of the programme. The details of a new financial assistance programme need to 
be worked out by summer. 
Greece certainly needs further assistance from the rest of the euro area. However, further 
assistance can only be granted if Greece continues with its efforts to restore sound public 
finances and competitive economic structures. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
  
 
Some observers see these developments as an indication that financial integration in Europe 
has failed. I see these developments as an indication that financial integration in Europe has 
to go further. Let us take a look at three areas where further integration could be the way 
forward for Europe. 
Fiscal union – beyond the horizon 
2.  
The first area is public finances. And in order to understand the core of my argument, it is 
important  to  be  familiar  with  the  particular  features  of  the  European  monetary  union.  The 
European monetary union is special in that it combines a single monetary policy with national 
fiscal policies. 
The  monetary  policy  for  the  19  countries  of  the  euro  area  is  decided  by  the  Governing 
Council  of  the  ECB  in  Frankfurt.  However,  the  fiscal  policies  of  the  19  euro-area  member 
states  are  a  matter  for  the  national  policymakers  –  each  country  decides  on  its  own 
government revenues and expenditures. 
This imbalance of responsibilities gives individual countries an incentive to borrow – a “deficit 
bias” is built into the system. This is because the negative consequences of borrowing are 
spread across all the member states of monetary union – for example, by means of a higher 
interest  rate  level  for  all  of  them.  Our  objective  should  be  to  counter  that  “deficit  bias”  to 
ensure a stable monetary union. This can only be achieved by realigning responsibilities – 
liability and control have to be in balance. 
And one way to rebalance liability and control is deeper fiscal integration. If we were to take 
this  path,  the  European  level  would  gain  certain  control  rights  over  national  budgets.  This 
would amount to what is known as a fiscal union. However, such a step would depend on the 
countries of the euro area transferring national sovereignty to the European level. 
Giving  up  sovereignty  in  this  way  would  be  a  radical  change  and  require  wide-ranging 
changes to national and European legislation. More than anything, such changes would need 
the support not only of policymakers but also of the general public. And on this point we need 
to be realistic. I cannot identify any willingness to do that at present – not in Germany or in 
any other country of the euro area. 
This means that, for the foreseeable future, control of fiscal policy in Europe will remain at 
the national level. In this area, deeper integration still lies beyond the horizon. 
Banking union – the reality of today 
3.  
At this point in time, a fiscal union remains more of a vision than of a concrete step to be 
taken  anytime  soon.  However,  in  another  area,  Europe  has  just  taken  a  significant  step 
towards deeper integration. 
On 4 November 2014, the European Central Bank assumed direct supervision of the largest 
banks in the euro area – thereby erecting the first pillar of a European banking union. As of 
today, this concerns 123 banks which together account for more than 80% of the aggregated 
balance sheet for the euro-area banking sector. The European Central Bank has therefore 
become one of the world’s largest supervisors. 
The banking union is certainly the biggest step towards financial integration in Europe since 
the launch of the euro in 1999. And to me, it is the most logical step to take. Single monetary 
policy requires integrated financial markets – which includes, without doubt, European-level 
banking supervision. 
European  banking  supervision  allows  banks  throughout  the  euro  area  to  be  supervised 
according to the same high standards. In addition, cross-border effects can be covered better 
through joint supervision than by national supervisors. And adding a European perspective to 
the  national  view  puts  more  distance  between  the  supervisory  authority  and  the  entities  it 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  
 
supervises. This minimises the danger of supervisors getting all too close to their banks and 
treating them with “kid gloves” out of national interest. 
Meanwhile,  a  comprehensive  banking  union  has  to  comprise  more  than  just  an  effective 
European  banking  supervision.  The  second  pillar  of  the  banking  union  is  a  European 
resolution mechanism to deal with future bank failures. This mechanism will be in place from 
2016  onwards.  If  push  comes  to  shove  and  a  bank  is  no  longer  viable,  shareholders  and 
creditors will be first in line to bear banks’ losses, and taxpayers’ money will only be the very 
last resort. This will realign incentives and make the entire banking system more stable. 
Capital markets union – the day after tomorrow? 
4.  
The  European  banking  union  is  definitely  a  major  step  forward  in  designing  a  better 
framework  for  the  European  monetary  union.  However,  Europe  should  broaden  its  view 
beyond the banking sector. Consequently, the EU-Commission has proposed to establish a 
European capital markets union. Following monetary union and the banking union, this will 
be the third major step of financial integration in Europe. 
In essence, the European capital markets union has two objectives. The first objective is to 
increase the share of capital markets in the funding mix of the real economy. The second 
objective is to integrate capital markets more closely across borders. 
Some  people  relate  the  first  objective  to  the  question  of  whether  a  capital  markets-based 
financial system is superior to a bank-based financial system. Well, to sum up the empirical 
evidence: it depends. It depends on a number of factors and country-specific characteristics, 
which makes it hard to provide a general answer. 
Nevertheless, the recent crisis shed light on these issues from another angle. A system in 
which  the  real  economy  relies  on  a  single  source  of  funding  will  most  certainly  run  into 
trouble when that source dries up – regardless of whether it is bank funding or capital market 
funding. 
Therefore, it is not a question of “either/or”. The objective of the European capital markets 
union is not to abandon bank-based funding but to supplement it with capital markets-based 
funding. And in Europe above all places there is ample room to do so. The European stock 
market  is  only  60%  the  size  of  the  US  stock  market  when  measured  in  relation  to  GDP. 
Likewise, the European market for venture capital is 20% the size of the US market, and for 
securitisations the percentage is even lower. 
In  the  end,  it  comes  down  to  the  uncontested  argument  of  diversification.  Increasing  the 
share of capital markets will improve and broaden access to funding particularly for small and 
medium-sized  enterprises  which  form  the  backbone  of  many  European  economies.  At  the 
same time, it will improve the matching of investors to financial risk, thereby increasing the 
efficiency  of  the  financial  system.  As  a  result,  the  financial  system  will  be  able  to  better 
support sustainable economic growth. 
The second objective of the European capital markets union is to improve the integration of 
capital markets in the entire European Union. One of the main arguments is that integrated 
capital markets can improve private risk sharing. The technical question is: to what degree 
does a shock to the economy affect consumption? 
Empirical studies for the United States show that integrated capital markets cushion around 
40%  of  the  cyclical  fluctuations  among  the  US  federal  states.  A  share  of  around  25%  is 
smoothed via the credit markets, while fiscal policy cushions 10–20% of shocks. Altogether, 
around  80%  of  a  given  economic  shock  is  absorbed  before  it  can  affect  consumption. 
Studies for Canada yield similar results. 
In Europe, the picture looks different. Here, it is mainly credit markets that cushion economic 
shocks – and they are not very effective in doing so. Altogether, only around 40% of a given 
shock is absorbed before it can affect consumption. Increasing the share of capital markets 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
  
 
and integrating them across borders would therefore help improve risk sharing in Europe and 
reduce the volatility of consumption. 
To be sure, the argument for a capital markets union is straightforward, but implementation 
will  be  much  less  so.  The  capital  markets  union  is  a  complex  undertaking  affecting  many 
different  areas.  Consequently,  the  European  Commission  has  presented  a  wide  range  of 
suggestions and steps to be taken. Nevertheless, I firmly believe that Europe should embark 
on the path towards a capital markets union in order to enhance the stability and prosperity 
of its economy. 
5.  
Conclusion 
Ladies and gentlemen 
George Washington is credited with having written, more than two centuries ago in a letter to 
a friend, that a United States of Europe would come into being. This is certainly a bold vision 
aiming  at  an  encompassing  political  integration.  In  my  speech  today,  I have  taken a  more 
modest approach and argued from an economic point of view. I have highlighted three areas 
where deeper integration might help to enhance the stability of monetary union. 
The  first  area  is  public  finances,  although  a  European  fiscal  union  is  currently  a  rather 
unrealistic vision. The second area is the banking system, and here we have taken a major 
step towards integration – in November 2014, the banking union became a reality. The third 
area  is  capital  markets.  Looking  to  the  future,  I  consider  a  capital  markets  union  another 
project that would contribute to enhancing the stability of the European economy. 
To be sure, these are all big steps, but in my view they are worth taking. A stable monetary 
union will eventually benefit all member states and also the rest of the world. 
Thank you. 
 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
