  William C Dudley: Remarks at the 2015 US Monetary Policy Forum 
Remarks  by  Mr  William  C  Dudley,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve  Bank  of  New  York,  at  the  2015  US  Monetary  Policy  Forum,  New  York  City,  27 
February 2015. 
Jonathan McCarthy, Paolo Pesenti and Joseph Tracy assisted in preparing these remarks. 
 It  is  a  great  pleasure  to  have  the  opportunity  to  comment  on  this  year’s  Monetary  Policy 
Forum paper, “The Equilibrium Real Federal Funds Rate, Past, Present and Future.” Let me 
preface my remarks with the reminder that what I have to say today reflects my own views 
and  not  necessarily  those  of  the  Federal  Open  Market  Committee  (FOMC)  or  the  Federal 
Reserve System.  
I think this is a timely topic because it is relevant to several questions that are particularly 
important in the current environment. First, if one were to use a Taylor-type rule as a guide to 
assess  the  stance  of  monetary  policy,  what  equilibrium  real  federal  funds  rate  would  one 
currently use in the formula? Given the performance of the economy in recent years, I think it 
would be very hard to justify the typical assumption of a 2 percent rate. 
Second, what will this equilibrium real rate be in the future? This is particularly germane right 
now given that short-term forward interest rates derived from the Treasury yield curve have 
come down sharply since late 2013. For example, the 1-year forward rate, 9 years ahead has 
declined sharply over the past year, falling from around 5 percent in December 2013 to just 
under 3 percent currently. What can explain such a large shift in forward rates at such a long 
time horizon? 
Third, when U.S. monetary policy is normalized, how fast should we raise short-term interest 
rates?  In  other  words,  what  is  the  appropriate  path  back  to  the  long-run  equilibrium  real 
federal funds rate, shallow or steep? 
In my view, the paper reaches five major conclusions – conclusions that I find myself broadly 
in agreement with: 
• 
There  are  many  factors  that  influence  the  level  of  the  equilibrium  real  short-term 
interest rate. Real potential GDP growth may be one factor, but the real equilibrium 
rate is also affected by financial conditions, uncertainty and risk aversion, financial 
market performance (e.g., bubbles and busts) and the degree of restraint exerted by 
the stringency of banking and financial market regulation. 
There  is  little  evidence  supporting  the  so-called  “secular  stagnation”  view  that  the 
equilibrium real short-term rate will persistently remain near or below zero. 
The  equilibrium  real  short-term  rate  is  non-stationary.  Thus,  it  will  not  necessarily 
revert back to some long-run average value. 
U.S.  and  global  markets  are  integrated  to  a  significant  degree.  As  a  result,  the 
equilibrium real short-term rates both here and abroad will tend to move together. 
This seems especially germane in the current environment in which very low long-
term  government  bond  yields  in  Europe  and  Japan  appear  to  have  been  an 
important factor in pulling U.S. long-term yields lower over the past year or so. 
Given  the  uncertainties  about  the  current  and  future  levels  of  the  equilibrium  real 
short-term  rate,  an  inertial  policy  rule  may  lead  to  better  outcomes.  As  a 
consequence,  the  process  of  normalization  of  monetary  policy  should  proceed 
cautiously, with short-term interest rates more likely to rise only gradually toward the 
equilibrium real short-term rate. 
    BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  That said, I think the paper leaves some open questions worthy of further exploration. First, 
although the equilibrium real short-term interest rate, which I will refer to as r*, is only loosely 
related  to  real  potential  GDP  growth,  could  we  do  better  if  we  were  to  decompose  real 
potential GDP into its components – such as the growth rates of labor input and productivity 
–  and  examine  the  relationship  between  r*  and  each  component  separately?  Second, 
accepting  the  principle  that  an  inertial  monetary  policy  rule  performs  better  as  uncertainty 
about  the  level  of  the  equilibrium  real  short-term  rate  increases,  what  does  this  imply  for 
monetary policy under current circumstances? Third, in light of the evidence on the volatility 
of  the  equilibrium  real  short-term  rate,  what  are  the  implications  of  adopting  a  Taylor-type 
rule as a benchmark for monetary policy evaluation? I will argue that in the U.S. context, a 
Taylor-type rule – even an inertial one – is an incomplete guide for policy because it does not 
explicitly include financial variables that are important factors in the transmission of monetary 
policy to the real economy. Finally, I will briefly comment on the issue of secular stagnation 
and my views on the long-term equilibrium real federal funds rate. 
Turning  to  the  first  issue  of  the  relationship  between  real  potential  GDP  growth  and  the 
equilibrium  real  short-term  interest  rate,  the  authors  find,  at  best,  only  a  very  loose 
relationship. I would have welcomed some further work here, more closely focused on the 
components of real potential GDP growth – such as labor input and productivity – and their 
potential links to the level and dynamics of the equilibrium real short-term rate. First, I would 
look more closely at the demographic factors that influence the amount of labor input. In my 
view,  it  seems  plausible  that  when  the  labor  force  is  rising  rapidly,  this  might  put  upward 
pressure  on  r*  by  increasing  the  demand  for  capital  needed  to  equip  the  new  army  of 
workers.  This  might  have  been  particularly  relevant  during  the  late  1970s  when  the  labor 
supply in the U.S. was rising rapidly due to the influx of the baby boom generation into the 
workforce and the climb in female participation rates. Second, the equilibrium real short-term 
rate might be influenced by the productivity growth rate. If productivity growth were high, one 
might expect that the return on capital might also be elevated, putting upward pressure on 
real rates. The late 1990s surge in productivity growth during the internet technology boom 
seems to be a good example of this type of phenomenon. 
If the growth in labor input and productivity were positively related with the equilibrium real 
short-term rate, then in the current environment this would be consistent with a relatively low 
r*. The  potential  labor  force  has  grown  very  slowly  in  recent  years  (less  than  a  ½ percent 
annual rate over the past five years), and productivity growth has been subdued – running at 
only 1 to 1½ percent annual rate on average over the past few years. In sum, by focusing on 
the  components  rather  than  on  the  overall  real  potential  GDP  growth  rate,  one  might  find 
stronger and more persistent relationships with the equilibrium real short-term interest rate. 
The second issue that I want to briefly explore concerns the degree of uncertainty about the 
equilibrium  real  short-term  rate  and  its  implications  for  monetary  policy.  The  paper  argues 
quite convincingly, I think, that when this uncertainty is high, then an inertial policy rule may 
be preferable – that is, would lead to higher expected welfare. 
While I think this is true, I also think it is important not to overstate the implications of this 
conclusion in today’s environment. Currently, short-term rates in the U.S. are low relative to 
the  standard  formulation  of  the  1999  Taylor  Rule.  This  implies  either  that  U.S.  monetary 
policymakers  think  that  the  equilibrium  real  short-term  rate  is  currently  depressed,  or  that 
they judge that a monetary policy stance more inertial than the Taylor 1999 standard is more 
appropriate for the FOMC to achieve its mandated employment and inflation objectives. My 
own view is that it is a bit of both. Lingering headwinds related to the financial crisis suggest 
that r* is temporarily depressed. In addition, there are some reasons to be cautious in how 
early and fast one should raise short-term interest rates. In particular, inflation is projected to 
stay for some time below the Fed’s objective of 2 percent for the PCE deflator and market-
based  measures  of  inflation  compensation  are  depressed  currently.  Also,  as  I  have  noted 
elsewhere, I believe that the risks of lifting the federal funds rate off of the zero lower bound a 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  bit  early  are  higher  than  the  risks  of  lifting  off  a  bit  late.  This  argues  for  a  more  inertial 
approach to policy. 
That said, it is important not to overemphasize uncertainty to justify a policy of persistently 
low  short-term  interest  rates.  There  are  also  risks  from  too  much  policy  inertia.  An  inertial 
approach works well as long as inflation expectations stay well-anchored. But, if a delay in 
monetary policy normalization or a very shallow trajectory in normalizing short-term interest 
rates were to cause inflation expectations to move meaningfully above our 2 percent inflation 
objective,  then  an  inertial  policy  would  likely  become  detrimental  in  achieving  the  FOMC’s 
objectives. 
The third,  and related,  issue  I  want to  address is  the  care  needed  in  using rules,  such  as 
Taylor  1999,  as  a  guide  to  policy.  As  the  paper  convincingly  shows,  over  time,  financial 
market conditions have become a much more important factor in evaluating the appropriate 
setting  of  monetary  policy  and  the  level  of  short-term  interest  rates.  This  reflects  several 
factors.  First,  over  the  past few  decades  the  U.S.  capital  markets  have  grown  in  size  and 
scope, and our financial system has become much less bank-centric. This has loosened the 
linkage  between  the  federal  funds  rate  and  financial  market  conditions.  Second,  the  U.S. 
economy and financial markets have become more interconnected globally. Thus, the impact 
of  U.S.  monetary  policy  has  become  more  diffused,  and  financial  market  conditions  have 
come to depend increasingly not only on developments at home, but also on developments 
abroad. As an example, the current low level of U.S. Treasury bond yields reflects, at least in 
part, the fact that long-term interest rates in Europe and Japan are much lower. 
While simple policy rules provide useful benchmarks for policymakers, their very virtue – their 
simplicity – is also a significant shortcoming. Policy rules, especially those with fixed values 
for  r*,  cannot  capture  all  of  the  information  that  is  relevant  for  policymaking.  In  particular, 
such rules do not capture the fact that the linkage between the federal funds rate and both 
financial markets and global conditions can be very loose and shift over time. This is a critical 
shortcoming  because  this  looseness  affects  the  stability  of  the  relationship  between 
monetary policy and economic outcomes. 
If the relationship between monetary policy, financial conditions and the real economy were 
tight and stable over time, then following a relatively simple and unchanging policy rule would 
likely generate acceptable results. However, if the transmission of monetary policy to the real 
economy is more variable and uncertain, as I believe it is, then monetary policy cannot be 
put on autopilot guided only by a fixed policy rule. 
As an example, one significant conundrum in financial markets currently is the recent decline 
of forward short-term rates at long time horizons to extremely low levels – for example, the 
1-year  nominal  rate,  9  years  forward  is  about  3  percent  currently.  My  staff’s  analysis 
attributes this decline almost entirely to lower term premia. In this case, the fact that market 
participants have set forward rates so low has presumably led to a more accommodative set 
of  financial  market  conditions,  such  as  the  level  of  bond  yields  and  the  equity  market’s 
valuation,  that  are  more  supportive  to  economic  growth.  If  such  compression  in  expected 
forward  short-term  rates  were  to  persist  even  after  the  FOMC  begins  to  raise  short-term 
interest rates, then, all else equal, it would be appropriate to choose a more aggressive path 
of  monetary  policy  normalization  as  compared  to  a  scenario  in  which  forward  short-term 
rates rose significantly, pushing bond yields significantly higher. 
In closing, I agree with the authors that it is very much premature to accept the hypothesis 
that we have entered a sustained period of secular stagnation. That said, however, I do think 
that the real potential GDP growth rate will be  lower over the medium term, held down by 
much slower growth of labor input and an anticipated continuation of lackluster productivity 
growth performance. If I am correct, this does have implications for the longer-run value of r*. 
My point estimate is that the longer-run value of the federal funds rate is 3½ percent, well 
below  its  long-run  historical  level  of  4¼ percent.  At  the  same  time,  I  also  have  little 
confidence about the accuracy of this specific estimate. So you see that I come out in a very 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  similar place as the authors of this year’s Monetary Policy Forum paper. They suggest that 
the long-run equilibrium real federal funds rate might be in the range of 1 to 2 percent. Add 
on 2 percent inflation, you end up in just about the same place as my current long-term 3½ 
percent nominal federal funds rate point estimate. 
Thank you for your kind attention. 
2015 U.S. Monetary Policy Forum 
The Equilibrium Real Funds Rate: Past, Present and Future 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
