  Manuel Sánchez: Mexico and Texas – Ties and mutual benefits 
Remarks by Mr Manuel Sánchez, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Mexico, at The Centennial 
Lecture Series, The University of Texas, El Paso, Texas, 10 September 2015. 
 I would like to thank you for the opportunity to participate in the Centennial Lecture Series of 
the University of Texas at El Paso. It is a great honor to speak in this distinguished academic 
center,  which  has  contributed  considerably  to  closer  relations  between  Mexico  and  the 
United States. I congratulate those of you who have been an essential part of the success 
story of this institution. 
The University of Texas at El Paso has grown at an impressive pace during its first century. 
After starting out as a small school specialized in mining and metallurgy in 1914, today it is a 
full-fledged branch of the University of Texas, offering a wide range of degrees. El Paso now 
leads  in  programs  on  border  issues  and  the  relationship  between  the  United  States  and 
Mexico.  Enrollment  has  increased  notably  over  the  years,  with  the  Hispanic  community 
accounting for a large majority of the student body. 
Today, I would like to focus on Mexico and Texas as two increasingly integrated economies. 
I  will  begin  with  a  review  of  how  their  links  have  expanded  over  time,  yielding  significant 
mutual benefits. I will then briefly describe recent developments in and the outlook for the 
Mexican economy, in a context in which the United States and Texas play important roles. 
Finally, I will discuss monetary policy and inflation in Mexico. 
As usual, my remarks are entirely my own and  do not necessarily reflect the views of the 
Bank of Mexico or its Governing Board. 
Mexico and Texas 
Mexico and Texas have a deeply interconnected history of growth. The state of Texas can be 
rightly viewed as one of the largest economies in the world, and its geographic proximity to 
Mexico  makes  it  all  the  more  logical  for  the  two  to  exploit  mutually  advantageous 
opportunities. Their symbiosis is a natural consequence of a common cultural heritage, and, 
in economic terms, includes trade, investment, human capital, and many other areas. 
In particular, Texas is Mexico’s main trading partner within the United States, and Mexico is 
the state’s main partner as well. In fact, Texas accounts for more than twice as much of total 
Mexican trade volume as China. As with the United States as a whole, commercial linkages 
were deepened by the North American Free Trade Agreement, perhaps the most profound 
structural change ever undertaken by Mexico.1 
Mexico purchases many goods from Texas, with computers and electronics, petroleum and 
coal products, and transportation equipment making up the largest share. Gains for Mexico 
have been seen in terms of competition and pressure for efficiency on domestic production 
lines, as well as greater variety and lower prices for consumers.2 
 Between  the  United  States  and  Mexico:  NAFTA  and  the  Border  Region,”  Journal  of  Urban  Resources, 
1  For an examination of the benefits of NAFTA for Texas, see Aguilar Barajas, I. et al. (2014). “Trade Flows 
10/2014. 
the United States and Mexico, Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars, p.45. 
2  For details on Texas exports to Mexico, see Wilson, C.E. (2011). Working Together: Economic Ties between 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
The role of Texas in U.S. and Mexican trade supersedes Texan borders, as it is the state 
with  the  largest  terrestrial  ports  of  entry  between  the  two  countries.  This  is  especially 
important given the fact that roughly four-fifths of U.S. trade with Mexico is by land.3 
Direct investment from Texas has greatly helped Mexico, which is on the receiving end of 
knowhow and advanced production technology. Many Mexican companies, for their part, do 
business in Texas. 
Furthermore, a great many trade-related jobs have emerged on both sides of the border. In 
fact, the Lone-Star State is that with the greatest number of exports-related jobs in the United 
States.4 
Additionally,  Texas  is  the  second  most  important  state  in  terms  of  labor  migration  from 
Mexico. For a long time, as we all know, our migrants have found opportunities to contribute 
to  this  vibrant  economy  with  great  dedication  and  efficiency.  Remittances,  in  turn,  have 
allowed families in Mexico to increase schooling and build better housing. 
During  the  last  few  years,  net  Mexican  migration  to  the  United  States  has  decreased 
significantly,  to  levels  that  recently  became  negative.  This  trend  seems  to  reflect  the  slow 
rebound since 2009 of U.S. economic sectors such as construction, which have traditionally 
absorbed Mexican labor. Lower fertility rates in Mexico since the 1980s might also be a part 
of the explanation.5 
Finally, Texas provides  a rich supply of schools and universities such as your own,  which 
many Mexicans have chosen for all levels of education. 
Mexican economic developments and outlook 
Like  other  emerging  economies  during  the  last  couple  of  years,  Mexico  has  been  hit  by 
turbulence  in  international  financial  markets.  Two  sources  of  fear  dominate  on  the  world 
stage. 
The  first  is  uncertainty  surrounding  the  beginning  of  U.S.  monetary  normalization. 
Speculation regarding the possible date of the Federal Reserve’s first hike is great in spite of 
efforts to confirm intentions to make the process gradual. 
The  second  stems  from  the  recent  slowdown  of  China’s  economy,  with  leading  indicators 
suggesting  that  this  trend  may  continue.  Potentially  unsustainable  financial  imbalances  in 
that country have also raised concerns. 
As a result, since the middle of 2014, net capital flows to emerging markets have declined, 
commodity  prices  have  fallen  sharply,  and  most  currencies  have  depreciated  against  the 
U.S.  dollar.  In  this  scenario,  the  Mexican  peso  has  weakened  significantly,  stressed  in 
particular by faltering oil prices and production, while the yield curve has seen a moderate 
upward shift, probably in anticipation of the start of U.S. monetary normalization. The share 
of nonresident holdings of peso-denominated government securities in the total outstanding 
                                                
3  See Texas Department of Transportation (2013). North American Free Trade Agreement: Is it Important for 
4  For an estimation of jobs supported by exports from individual U.S. states, see Hall, J. and C. Rasmussen 
(2015). Jobs Supported by State Exports 2014, Office of Trade and Economic Analysis, International Trade 
5  Estimation of net Mexican migration to the United States based on the Current Population Survey by the U.S. 
Texas? Austin TX, Texas Department of Transportation. 
Administration, the U.S. Department of Commerce. 
Census Bureau and the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
has dipped only slightly. However, a potential portfolio adjustment with significant pressures 
on domestic financial markets cannot be ruled out.6 
To cope with possibly rising uncertainty and risk, Mexico should distinguish itself from other 
emerging  economies  by  strengthening  its  growth  prospects  and  macroeconomic  policy 
framework. Steps to favor greater growth include deep structural changes and improvements 
to the rule of law and public security. Especially important to financial stability are actions to 
ensure the sustainability of the path of the public-debt-to-GDP ratio, and timely adjustment of 
monetary  policy,  with  the  relative  stance  vis-à-vis  the  United  States  taken  into  account, 
among other factors.7 
Since 2014, Mexico’s economy has been recovering, growing in the first half of 2015 at an 
annual rate of 2.4 percent. This pace is slightly below the yearly average of the previous two 
decades,  and  is  held  back  by  at  least  three  drags.  The  first  is  a  slowdown  in  industrial 
production,  which  has  resulted  mainly  from  persistent  contraction  in  mining,  dominated  by 
falling oil output. 
Second,  the  manufacturing  sector  has  been  deterred  largely  by  a  deceleration  in  U.S. 
industry in 2015, affected by another severe winter and declining energy investment in the 
face of significantly lower energy prices. Modest Mexican manufacturing activity is in line with 
less vigorous exports to the United States in spite of substantial real peso depreciation. We 
expect  these  factors  to  be  transitory  and  momentum  for  Mexican  exports  to  pick  up  once 
again. 
Third, domestic spending has remained tepid, as indicated by damp investment growth and a 
measured pace for recovering private consumption. The main weight on domestic spending 
does not seem to come from the labor market, where unemployment continues to drop and 
labor force participation remains stable. Nor does it seem to stem from a lack of domestic 
financing, the growth of which has been gaining steam. 
More likely causes are disappointing trends in consumer confidence, which has not seen a 
previously hoped-for rebound, and in producer confidence, which keeps on declining. 
Analysts’ consensus is for a moderate and gradual Mexican economic upturn in tandem with 
that  of  the  United  States.  The  Bank  of  Mexico  forecasts  growth  of  1.7  to  2.5  percent  this 
year, and 2.5 to 3.5 percent in 2016.8 
Downside  risks  to  growth  likely  predominate.  These  include  further  reductions  in  oil 
extraction,  less  robust-than-expected  U.S.  industrial  production,  and  continued  fragile 
consumer and producer sentiment. 
Structural  reforms  currently  underway  in  Mexico  could  enhance  long-term  productivity 
growth. However, eventual benefits will take time to show-up, and success crucially depends 
on careful and deep implementation. Changes in the energy sector may prove particularly 
attractive to Texan investors. New possibilities  in oil extraction, as well  as opportunities in 
natural  gas  transportation  and  electricity  generation,  among  others,  provide  for  tantalizing 
potential investments. 
                                                
6  For  an  analysis  of  net  capital  flows  to  emerging  economies,  see  Institute  of  International  Finance  (2015). 
7  For  a  brief  overview  of  ongoing  Mexican  structural  reforms,  see  Sánchez,  M.  (2015).  “Mexico’s  Reforms 
Progress  and  Economic  Outlook,”  speech  given  at  the  2015  IIF  Latin  America  Economic  Forum,  Busan, 
“Don’t Panic! EM Capital Flows Have Weakened, but NOT Collapsed,” IIF Report, August. 
Republic of Korea, March. 
Abril – Junio 2015, August. 
8  See  Blue  Chip  Economic  Indicators,  September  2015,  and  Banco  de  México  (2015),  Informe  Trimestral,  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  Inflation and monetary policy 
Monetary  policy  in  Mexico  has  been  guided  by  the  priority  aim  of  attaining  price  stability, 
which,  within  an  inflation-targeting  approach,  means  a  permanent  objective  of  3  percent 
annual inflation. The conduct of monetary policy has taken into account the cyclical phase of 
the economy. In the last two and a half years, the policy interest rate was cut by 150 basis 
points to accommodate sluggish economic activity. 
After some price pressures in 2014 coming mainly from tax hikes, annual inflation in 2015 
has  remained  on  target,  even  reaching  historically  low  levels  below  the  objective.  This 
achievement is noteworthy, given the fact that until only a few years ago, Mexico had a long 
history  of  high  and  unstable  inflation. Therefore,  it  is  imperative  to  consolidate  the  record, 
recognizing  that  price  stability  demands  continuous  attention  to  prevent  a  reversal  of  the 
trend. 
Some factors call for vigilance. Recent performance has been aided by positive shocks such 
as favorable base effects related to last year’s tax hikes, the elimination of domestic long-
distance telephone charges, and slower increases in energy prices. These phenomena may 
prove ephemeral. 
Peso  depreciation  has  not  affected  inflation  much  so  far,  and  the  impact  has  been 
concentrated  in  durable  goods.  This  may  not  be  the  case  going  forward,  especially  if  the 
weakening of the currency becomes amplified. 
Additionally, in spite of current unprecedented declines in inflation, survey expectations for 
the medium term are stable but above the target. This may reflect a perception that work still 
needs to be done to solidify the good results. Price stability will not be secure until medium-
term inflation expectations are firmly anchored on the objective. 
The  Bank  of  Mexico  expects  inflation  to  remain  around  the  target  in  2015  and  2016.9 
Nevertheless, upside risks should be monitored, especially given the possibility of second-
round effects. Continued significant peso depreciation, negative supply shocks, and eventual 
aggregate demand pressures are among these risks. 
Concluding remarks 
Let me conclude by saying how much I value the contributions of the University of Texas at 
El  Paso  to  the  understanding  and  collaboration  between  our  societies. We have  exploited 
opportunities in better ways due to the assiduous efforts of academics from this university, 
and I have no doubt that further progress is yet to come. 
Texas and Mexico continue to find new avenues to profit mutually from trade, investment, 
and  human  capital  resources.  Mexico  currently  faces  challenges  both  on  the  international 
and  domestic fronts. The  best  way  to  deal  with  them  is  by  cultivating  long-term  economic 
growth prospects, notably through well-implemented structural reforms, and buttressing the 
macroeconomic framework, including monetary policy. 
On that note, inflation this year has reached historically low levels. This achievement requires 
consolidation for Mexico to reap the full benefits of permanent price stability. 
 9  See Banco de México (2015), idem. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
