   Prasarn Trairatvorakul: Journey towards a more competitive, inclusive, 
connected and sustainable Thai banking system 
Speech by Dr Prasarn Trairatvorakul, Governor of the Bank of Thailand, at the Association of 
International Banks (AIB) Dinner Talk, Bangkok, 21 May 2015. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
It is a great pleasure for me to be here on this special occasion. 
The  topics  I  addressed  in  previous  occasions  focused  on  economic  situations  and 
developments. So much has been said and discussed on those issues, so today I would like to 
talk  about  the  future  development  of  the  banking  system  in  Thailand  which  is  equally 
important. As many of you here are already aware, we are drafting the third Financial Sector 
Master Plan which will cover the next five years time span. The process is quite challenging 
because it involves many stakeholders, both in the public and private sectors, including foreign 
banks like yourselves. We thank you for your suggestions and feedback provided individually 
and  also  as  a  group  through  the  AIB.  Today  I  will  share  with  you  briefly  the  concept  and 
aspiration behind the development plan for the banking system in Thailand. 
Thailand  is  currently  at  a  crossroad  in  need  of  structural  reforms  to  cross  over  the  middle 
income  trap.  This  requires  commitment  from  all  stakeholders.  The  public  sector  is  already 
taking  the  lead  on  infrastructure  development  to  promote  urbanization  and  more  equitable 
income  distribution.  For  the  private  sector,  they  will  need  to  make  a  transition  toward 
production with innovation and higher value-added. Realization of these commitments requires 
long-term funding at reasonable cost from the financial sector. 
Therefore, the roles of the financial sector should be highlighted. 
The ambition can be likened to the destination of our journey. What is our destination? It is to 
have a banking system that is responsive to changes in the real economy and able to 
meet its ever-changing needs. With this destination in mind, milestones are set at different 
stages  with  signposts  to  prevent  us  from  getting  lost  or  sidetracked  along  the  way.  For  the 
banking  system,  these milestones  and  signposts  are  laid  out  in  the  Financial  Sector  Master 
Plans. 
We have come a long way since the 1997 financial crisis and have put in place foundations 
which  shaped  the  country’s  core  financial  system.  In  our  first  milestone  of  structural 
improvements, the number of financial institutions was consolidated from above 100 to about 
30 today. International standards and best practices on risk management were adopted, built 
upon  necessary  infrastructures  including  the  core  payment  system,  the  Deposit  Insurance 
Scheme and National Credit Bureau. 
With  our  second  milestone  to  enhance  efficiency,  new  qualified  foreign  entries  with 
sufficient  capitals  and  well-designed  business  model  brought  meaningful  competition.  With 
these reforms, the banking system has become more robust and competitive  with good risk 
management and governance, sufficiently capitalized according to Basel III and show notable 
growth. 
Nonetheless,  I  believe  that  efficiency  can  be  further  enhanced  through  improvement  in  IT 
systems, data development, and utility sharing. The recent global financial crisis serves as a 
reminder that status quo is never good enough. 
Financial  development  is  therefore  a  journey  that  should  never  end,  with  milestones 
along the way. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   
As we move on to the next stage of our journey, it bodes well with a saying that “Yesterday 
was a walk in the park. But tomorrow is a step in the dark.” While I would not exactly call our 
past events a walk in the park, there are approaching challenges that depict dark clouds above 
our path. 
The  contextual  trends  and  challenges  that  I  am  going  to  highlight  tonight  derive  from 
technological developments, the ageing society, urbanization, and regionalization. 
Firstly,  with  technological  developments,  traditional  barriers  to  entry  were  brought  down, 
allowing  non-banks  such  as  fintech  companies  and  cross-border  players  to  the  market,  and 
helped reduce operating costs. At the same time, consumers expect better and more timely 
services. Banking is something that customers want to do “anytime and anywhere”, and they 
want to do it cheaply as well. While technology may help us reach our destination faster, it also 
dictates that we be more adaptive and responsive to changes. Banks that get stuck in the past 
will lose out quickly. 
A second challenge that put banks’ adaptability to the test is the shifting demographic 
structure  of  Thai  population.  It  is  expected  that  by  2025,  the  number  of  older  people  in 
Thailand  will  account  for  20%  of  the  population  and  exceed  the  number  of  children  under 
15 years old. In an ageing society, banks that are able to cater to the needs of older population 
and tailor their products to accommodate changing demands would be successful. 
The next trend, urbanization, happening in many East Asian countries, brings both challenges 
and opportunities. According to the World Bank Research that just came out early this year, 
almost  twelve  million  people  in  Thailand  now  live  in  urban  areas;  about  ten  million  live  in 
Bangkok  alone.  The  number  seems  low  for  the  area  outside  Bangkok  because  of  the  strict 
definition  of  urban  areas  employed  by  the  World  Bank.  The  same  research  also  says  that, 
cities outside Bangkok are growing at a much faster rate, and some cities such as Surat Thani 
have  more  than  doubled  its  population  in  ten  years.  Urbanization  results  in  increased 
purchasing  power  and  fuels  domestic  demand.  More  infrastructure  investments  such  as 
housing, electricity and transportation will be required. This is where the financial sector can 
contribute and benefit from the development. 
The trend towards regionalization poses a fourth challenge as well as an opportunity for the 
banking  sector.  With  the  commencement  of  the  AEC  in  2015,  competition  will  intensify, 
benefiting  those  prepared  to  pursue  opportunities  across  borders.  ASEAN  as  a  group  has 
already  agreed  on  its  Financial  Integration  Post-2015  Vision  for  2025,  and  now  is  in  the 
process of operationalizing it with the milestones and targets to be set in all areas including 
banking, capital market and, insurance. But this is another topic that I don’t think we will have 
time to cover today. 
The message that I want to stress is that banks need to plan ahead and invest more to meet 
these challenges. Banks can no longer afford to focus on maximizing short-term returns at the 
expense of future growth and competitiveness. 
Against this backdrop, you may wonder what’s the next milestone of our journey? 
Bearing in mind these challenges, the third Financial Sector  Master Plan  will guide financial 
developments  up  to  2020.  The  milestone  for  the  next  stage  of  our  journey,  as  the  title 
says, is a more competitive, inclusive, connected and sustainable Thai banking system. 
Competitiveness,  what  do  we  mean  when  we  say  we  want  a  more  competitive  banking 
system? How can we be more competitive and innovative? 
If our peers are driving the newest computerized hybrid cars, while we are driving a 10-year-
old car, we will be slower, less safe, and consume more fuel. Thus, a possible alternative to 
keep up with our peers and ensure that traffic flows smoothly is to upgrade our vehicles to the 
latest reliable technology. 
Likewise, for our banking system to be competitive, each bank should aim to increase 
its own efficiency. By promoting digitization, both for banks’ own internal operations and for 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   
customers’ experience, the cost for both parties would be lowered. Additionally, we may set up 
and promote more usage of common utilities such as banknote handling centers or common 
Point  of  Sales  (POS).  From  the  policy  perspective,  standards  and  ecosystem  should  be 
developed  to  ensure  compatibility,  interoperability,  security  and  confidence.  Moreover, 
competition  in  market  segments  with  low  competition,  particularly  payment  services,  will  be 
promoted in the third Financial Sector Master Plan. 
On  inclusiveness,  merely  upgrading  the  technology  would  not  be  sufficient.  Following  our 
earlier analogy of driving a car on a journey, we must take into account the needs of all the 
passengers.  In  this  case,  our  next  milestone  is  to  achieve  a  more  inclusive  banking 
system that serves all groups of customers, particularly household and SMEs, many of 
whom have been left on the side of the road while others are driving by on the journey. 
For  individuals  and  households,  they  should  be  able  to  more  easily  access  financial 
services and at a more reasonable cost. I am not merely talking about loans, but also basic 
services such as deposits and fund transfers. The latest financial access survey indicates that 
lack of access is partly because of the distance to nearest service providers is too far and the 
cost  is  too  high.  This  is  where  technology  and  collaboration  such  as  the  use  of  agents  can 
help. Moreover, as our population is ageing fast, we should all start to save for retirement now, 
and I strongly encourage banks to develop and promote more products to satisfy this growing 
customer segment. There is also a growing class of older people who have too little knowledge 
or  weaker  capabilities  to  manage their  own  financial  wealth  after retirement. This  is  another 
area that banks can help. 
For SMEs, which contribute significantly to employment in Thailand, we need to work together 
to  promote  their  access  to  funding.  This  calls  for  a  joint  effort  between  the  government, 
banking  sector,  and  SMEs  to  improve  available  information  and  its  flow.  In  this  regard,  as 
bankers, such as guests here today, are close to the SMEs, see their account movements, and 
provide  financial  advice  you  will  play  a  key  role  here.  I  believe  there  are  a  lot  of  rooms  for 
banks  to  provide  funding  for  SMEs,  both  directly  and  indirectly,  perhaps  through  more 
innovative  products  that  can  benefit  from  banks’  own  information  and  more  collaboration 
between banks. Equity financing, including venture capital, for SMEs will also be promoted in 
our plan. In my opinion, innovation and entrepreneurship of SME, which need supports from 
banks, is one of the most important drivers for Thailand to overcome the middle-income trap. 
As for large corporates, Thai conglomerates now operate in multiple countries, and as their 
businesses grow, they would require more cross-border services to meet their needs. A bank 
intending to serve such conglomerates should have an integrated system across countries and 
advisory services for alternative funding such as from the capital market. These require more 
investment in IT and people. 
On connectedness, financial integration has a key role in supporting business opportunities in 
ASEAN. If you compare the pace of financial integration to economic integration, there is still a 
lot of catching up. For example in Thailand, foreign assets in the banking system account for 
about  10  percent  of  total  assets,  still  well  below  intra-ASEAN  trade  at  24  percent  and 
investment  at  17  percent.  Currently,  financial  institutions  are  already  on  the  journey  toward 
financial integration through outward presence, as well as strategic partnerships and alliances. 
This  will  be  further  enhanced  with  Qualified  ASEAN  Banks  (QABs)  and  greater 
cohesiveness and transparency of regulation in ASEAN. 
To  underpin  ASEAN’s  promising  future  and  growth  potential,  infrastructures  necessary  to 
facilitate financial integration is also important. Further linkages of financial infrastructures 
should be encouraged and promote usage of already integrated systems, such as the 
regional payment systems. 
I must admit that the regulatory landscape for banking in ASEAN countries are quite diverse 
and  include  many  legacy  regulations  which  impede  integration.  This  makes  financial 
integration more difficult to achieve. This is one area that ASEAN as a group has recognized 
and  will  tackle  under  its  financial  integration  plan  Post-2015  to  accommodate  AEC  2025 
agenda. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   
Finally,  on  sustainability,  a  banking  system  that  is  competitive,  inclusive,  and  connected 
needs to also be sustainable. Just as when we travel on a journey, we need not only reliable 
vehicles, but also skilled drivers and passengers that are cautious explorers, and enforceable 
driving  laws  to  ensure  that  we  arrive  at  our  next  destination  safely.  The  fact  that  the  Thai 
banking  system  has  been  able  to  withstand  many  incidents  in  the  past  years,  including  the 
great flood, the subprime crisis, and the economic slowdown, testifies to the fact that we have 
been on the right path on sustainability. But again, complacency must be avoided. 
In  this  context,  our  banking  system  needs  experienced  bankers  with  good  governance, 
excellent risk management practices and banking regulations to ensure safety and soundness, 
as well as financially literate customers. 
In my opinion, banks, as the first touchpoint to the customers, play a central role in promoting 
financial literacy and usage of new channels such as digital banking. More convenience does 
not  mean  a  compromise  on  security  and  reliability  of  financial  services,  critical  for 
customer’s confidence in the usage of digital channels. 
As  QABs  are  increasingly  interlinked  with  more  cross-border  transactions,  it  also  calls  for 
closer cooperation on the part of home and host supervisors in line with the global regulatory 
reforms to ensure stability of the financial system, similar to enforceable international driving 
laws. 
Last  but  not  least,  human  resources  are  another  key  aspect  that  needs  to  be  continually 
improved as without sufficient talent pool, the above milestones may not be achieved. 
This  comes to the  end  of  key milestones  of our  journey,  but  the  actual  action is just 
about to begin. 
Although  I  end  my  address  today,  our  journey  towards  a  more  competitive,  inclusive, 
connected  and  sustainable  banking  system  is  not  yet  concluded.  Our  journey  will  be  a 
continuous one as it’s imperative for banks to constantly adapt to dynamic financial needs of 
the  real  economy.  Policymakers  and  regulators  alike  must  also  be  proactively  involved  and 
adapt to the changing ecosystem. Although much has been achieved domestically, regionally 
there  is  still  much  to  be  done.  As  such,  reaching  the  destination  will  require  dedication  and 
cooperation from all travelers to arrive safely. The key message that I would like to leave 
with  you  today  is  that  do  not  get  stuck  with  maximizing  short-term  returns  or  past 
successes, but we must invest more for the future. 
I wish you all a safe journey. Thank you. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
