  Graeme Wheeler: Some thoughts on the inflation outlook and monetary 
policy 
Speech  by  Mr  Graeme  Wheeler,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  New  Zealand,  to 
ExportNZ, Tauranga, 29 July 2015. 
 Introduction 
I would like to discuss New Zealand’s recent inflation outcomes, the main factors accounting 
for them, and the outlook for monetary policy in ensuring that future average inflation over 
the medium term is near the 2 percent midpoint of the target band. Since the former issues 
have  been  covered  extensively  in  our  recent  Monetary  Policy  Statements,  speeches  and 
analytical papers, the main focus will be on our current policy thinking.1  
New Zealand is far from alone in experiencing low inflation. Across the 30 or so economies 
(mainly advanced economies) whose central banks pursue inflation targeting, headline and 
underlying inflation have commonly been below specified goals. There are several reasons 
for  this:  the  level  of  excess  capacity  in  product  and  factor  markets  in  several  economies 
remains  high;  wage  outcomes  have  been  subdued,  even 
low 
unemployment;  measures  of  inflation  expectations  have  declined;  and  many  commodity 
prices are appreciably lower than a year ago. In most advanced economies, policy interest 
rates are at historic lows. In four advanced economies, they are negative2. 
in  countries  with 
Recent inflation performance 
Over the past two years annual CPI inflation in New Zealand has been in the lower half of the 
1 to 3 percent target band, except for the period since the December quarter 2014, when the 
fall  in  oil  prices  brought  CPI  inflation  to  very  low  levels.  Low  headline  inflation  during  this 
period has been primarily due to negative inflation in the tradables sector (figure 1), which 
accounts for around half of the CPI regime. 
Figure 1: Contribution to headline CPI inflation 
(annual, deviation from 1992q1 to 2015q2 average) 
Source: Statistics New Zealand, RBNZ estimates 
                                                 
1  See,  for  example,  McDermott  (2015),  ‘The  dragon  slain?  Near-zero  inflation  in  New  Zealand’,  speech  on 
23 April 2015, and Richardson (2015), ‘Can global economic conditions explain low New Zealand inflation?’, 
Analytical Note 2015/3. 
2  This treats the euro area as one economy. If each economy were treated individually, 22 economies would 
have negative policy rates. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Annual CPI inflation is currently 1.7 percentage points below the mid-point of the target range 
and 2.1 percentage points below its long-term average. Of the latter, 1.6 percentage points 
are  accounted for  by  below-average  tradables  inflation,  with  the  remaining  0.5  percentage 
points due to weaker non-tradables inflation. 
Tradables inflation has been low for several reasons. The global oversupply of commodities 
and manufactured goods, and the high level of excess capacity in the advanced economies, 
have  kept  cost  and  price  pressures  among  our  trading  partners  contained.3  The  steady 
appreciation  in  New  Zealand’s  real  effective  exchange  rate  since  2011  (until  recently)  has 
been a major factor behind periods of negative tradables inflation over the past three years. 
And, more recently, the 52 percent decline in oil prices since June 2014 (figure 2) resulted in 
negative quarterly inflation in the December 2014 and March 2015 quarters. 
Figure 2: Oil and the domestic petrol price 
Source: Reuters, Ministry of Business, Innovation, and Employment 
 Non-tradables  inflation  has  been  relatively  low  and  stable,  averaging  around  2.5  percent 
since the beginning of 2012. Low non-tradables inflation largely reflects the impact of strong 
factor accumulation that has expanded capacity, and enabled strong demand growth to be 
met without increased inflation pressures. This is particularly the case in the labour market, 
where record levels of net immigration and historically high labour force participation, along 
with natural increase, have expanded the labour supply by around 3 percent over the past 
year (figure 3), and enabled a strong rate of employment growth to be absorbed without any 
acceleration in wage inflation. 
                                                
3  The  continuous  commodity  index  is  currently  about  40  percent  below  its  2011  peak,  and  represents  the 
second  largest  commodity  bear  market  in  50  years  (only  in  the  immediate  aftermath  of  the  global  financial 
crisis was there a larger decline). 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 Figure 3: Annual labour force growth 
  Source: Statistics New Zealand 
Non-tradables inflation has been about ½ of a percentage point weaker on an annual basis 
than the Bank’s modelling estimates would suggest is normal for this phase of the economic 
cycle,  even  allowing  for  the  stronger  growth  in  economic  capacity.4  This  underestimate  of 
inflation  has  also  occurred  in  other  countries  and  could  be  due  to  several  factors.  For 
example,  inflation  expectations  may  be  weaker  than  survey  data  suggests,  the  tradables 
component of non-tradable products and services may be higher than previously thought, or 
online  commerce  may  be  increasing  competition  and  squeezing  margins  in  non-traded 
sectors, such as retail. 
Under the Bank’s flexible inflation targeting framework, the Policy Targets Agreement (PTA) 
specifically recognises that annual CPI inflation will fluctuate around the medium-term trend 
due to factors such as exceptional movements in commodity prices – like those experienced 
since mid-2014. Measures of core inflation have recently been higher than headline inflation. 
One of our preferred measures, from the sectoral factor model, was 1.3 percent in 2015 Q2 – 
within the Bank’s target range – and has averaged 1.4 percent on an annual basis since the 
beginning of 2012.5  
Outlook for inflation 
The Bank expects annual CPI inflation to be close to the midpoint of the 1 to 3 percent target 
range  by  the  first  half  of  2016.  The  rise  in  headline  inflation  is  expected  to  mainly  come 
through  higher  tradables  inflation,  due  to  the  14  percent  decline  in  the  trade-weighted 
exchange rate since mid-April and as the decline in oil prices drops out of the annual figure. 
There  are,  however,  several  risks  and  uncertainties  around  the  inflation  outlook.  These 
include the future path of the exchange rate, which will be influenced by future commodity 
                                                
4  The core measure of non tradables inflation is about 0.5 percent weaker in annual terms than suggested by its 
past relationship with the output gap and inflation expectations. The average absolute error of the model is 
0.3 percentage points. 
5  The  Bank  uses  several  measures  to  estimate  core  inflation  but  puts  greatest  weight  on  a  sectoral  factor 
model.  This  model  weights  those components  of  the  CPI  that most  closely  reflect  the  general  trend  in  CPI 
inflation  and  down-weights  those  that  do  not.  The  weightings  evolve  over  time  as  the  volatility  of  each 
component changes. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  prices,  and the  speed  with  which  the  recent  depreciation feeds through  to  higher  inflation. 
Our  modelling  suggests  that  a  1  percent  exchange  rate  depreciation  boosts  annual  CPI 
inflation,  albeit  with  a  considerable  lag,  by  around  0.1  percentage  points.  The  speed  and 
magnitude of this adjustment over the coming quarters, and its impact on competitiveness, 
will  depend  on  the  currency  hedging  practices  of  exporters  and  the  pricing  power  of 
businesses  to  pass  on  higher  import  costs.  Net  migration  continues  to  be  strong  and, 
although this exacerbates housing pressures in some regions, it also acts to moderate wage 
outcomes. The size of the output gap will also influence the path of non-tradables inflation, 
as will the extent to which subdued price setting behaviour has some structural elements to 
it, and continues to persist. 
Economic and policy backdrop 
Central  bankers  have  found  the  post  Global  Financial  Crisis  (GFC)  years  to  be  a  very 
challenging time for conducting monetary policy. High expectations have been placed upon 
central banks at a time when the economic, financial and political interlinkages in the global 
economy seem more complex, and where monetary policy has become the fall-back policy to 
promote a strong global recovery. 
Globally,  the  corporate  and  household  deleveraging  process  has  been  more  difficult  and 
prolonged than expected – especially in the euro area. In many economies, deleveraging (or 
simply reluctance to extend already high debt levels) has been reflected in slow growth in 
household  demand,  weaker-than-forecast  business  investment,  and  persistent  levels  of 
excess capacity. 
Our  economy  has  generated  better  growth  and  employment  outcomes  than  many  other 
advanced  economies  in  the  post-GFC  period.  There  are  several  reasons  for  this.  Our 
banking sector was far less adversely affected by the GFC than those in the United States 
and  Europe,  Canterbury  reconstruction  generated  strong 
investment  and  boosted 
manufacturing production, and, only 18 months ago, New Zealand’s terms of trade were at a 
40-year  high.  Like  other  forecasters,  we  have  been  surprised  by  the  strength  of  net 
immigration and its positive impact on productive capacity. 
There  have  also  been  question  marks  over  the  robustness  of  past  empirical  relationships, 
and  the  effectiveness  of  traditional  monetary  policy  instruments,  in  an  environment  of 
unprecedented  monetary  accommodation  in  the  global  economy.  Central  bankers  have 
learned  how  hard  it  is  to  increase  inflation  expectations  when  inflation  expectations  are 
embedded at low levels and household debt levels are high. They have seen the short-term 
relationship  between  inflation  and  aggregate  demand  become  more  uncertain,  and  their 
ability to influence long-term interest rates, which has always been limited, has weakened. In 
addition, in a world of extraordinary global liquidity and asset price inflation, it is more difficult 
to assess the size of output gaps and the level of the neutral interest rate. One aspect that 
appears  not  to  have  changed  much  is  that  monetary  policy  affects  inflation  and  inflation 
expectations  with  a  variable  and  potentially  long  lag.  Monetary  policy  can  take  around  
12–18 months to have its peak effect on inflation. 
Policy outlook 
Recent policy developments 
1. 
In  June  2014,  the  Bank  started  to  scale  back  the  extent  of  its  expected  OCR  increases 
(figure 4), and by early February 2015 our expectation was that the OCR was likely to be on 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  hold  for  some  time.  Also,  by  this  time  the  Bank  was  discussing  circumstances  where  the 
OCR might be reduced.6  
Figure 4: The Bank’s 90-day interest rate projections 
Source: RBNZ estimates. 
 This  perspective  was  reinforced  as  dairy  prices  began  to  fall  sharply  in  March  while  the 
exchange  rate  remained  close  to  its  peak.  Furthermore,  the  negative  income  effects  from 
falling export prices were accentuated by a bounce in landed oil prices and an increase in 
refinery  margins.  The  latter  meant  that  the  expected  income  gain  of  around  $400  per 
household from the initial oil price decline had halved. 
Several considerations underlay the Bank’s decision to cut the OCR in June 2015. Statistical 
data revisions and the recent slowing in demand suggested that the output gap was likely to 
be  smaller  than  forecast,  non-tradables  inflation  looked  to  be  low  and  stable,  and  the 
exchange rate had not adjusted sufficiently to the decline in the terms of trade. The decision 
to reduce interest rates was aimed at buffering the decline in the terms of trade associated 
with  falling  dairy  and  other  commodity  prices,  and  ensuring  that  the  exchange  rate 
contributed to moving inflation back towards the target mid-point. 
The exchange rate 
2. 
The exchange rate has declined by 14 percent on a TWI basis and 15 percent against the 
US  dollar  since  mid-April  2015.  Other  factors,  in  addition  to  policy  signalling  by  the  Bank, 
have  put  downward  pressure  on  the  currency.  These  include  falling  dairy  prices,  various 
domestic  economic  indicators  suggesting  some  moderation  in  demand  growth,  and  the 
strengthening in the US dollar and sterling. 
We  signalled  for  some  time  that  we  believed  the  high  exchange  rate  was  unjustified  and 
unsustainable.  In  the  June  MPS  we  described  it  as  overvalued  and  suggested  that  a 
significant  downward  adjustment  was  justified  and  necessary  to  put  New  Zealand’s  net 
external position on a more sustainable path. Since the June MPS, the exchange rate has 
                                                
6  Wheeler (2015), ‘The outlook for the New Zealand economy’, speech on 4 February 2015. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  declined  by  5  percent  on  a  TWI  basis  and  global  dairy  prices  have  fallen  by  16  percent 
(figure 5). 
In the July OCR review we noted that the exchange rate had declined significantly since April 
2015 and, along with lower interest rates, had led to an easing in monetary conditions. We 
indicated  that  further  depreciation  is  necessary  given  the  weakness  in  export  commodity 
prices. 
Our  models  suggest  that  the  real  exchange  rate  is  currently  in  the  vicinity  of  its  long-run 
equilibrium value – if growth, inflation, and the terms of trade were at their long-run trends. 
However,  the  exchange  rate  remains  above  the  level  consistent  with  current  economic 
conditions  and,  in  particular,  the  current  low  level  of  export  prices.  Reflecting  this,  our 
economic forecasts, based on recent levels of the exchange rate and terms of trade, show 
the  current  account  deficit  becoming  larger  over  the  next  two  years.  At  current  levels  of 
export prices, a more substantial exchange rate depreciation is therefore required to stabilise 
the net external liabilities position relative to GDP. 
Figure 5: NZD exchange rate and export prices 
Source GDT, Reuters 
 In this context, we believe that the exchange rate needs to weaken further. In addition, the 
high  stockpiles  of  whole  milk  powder  in  China,  the  increase  in global milk  supply,  and the 
trade diversion issues involving Russia make for a very uncertain future, with the potential for 
further downward pressure on global dairy prices. Also, over coming months, we are likely to 
see  the  Federal  Reserve  and  the  Bank  of  England  begin  the  process  of  normalising  their 
interest rates, and this may assist the currency lower. 
Interest rates 
3. 
Turning to the interest rate outlook, our conditional projections in the June MPS built in a 50 
basis point cut in interest rates over the forecast period. We cut the OCR by 25 basis points 
in June and indicated that, while further easing may be appropriate, our future policy course 
would depend on the flow of emerging data. In the July OCR review we reduced the OCR by 
a further 25 basis points, and indicated that, at this point, some further easing seems likely. 
The  current  level  of  interest  rates  remains  below  New  Zealand’s  neutral  rate,  as  was  the 
case  when  we  raised  rates  during  the  period  March  to  July  2014.  We  view  the  neutral 
interest  rate  as  the  policy  rate  consistent  with  the  economy  growing  at  its  potential  in  the 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  medium  term  and  having  inflation  expectations  matching  the  price  stability  objective.  The 
Bank’s  analysis  suggests  that  the  neutral  90-day  rate  currently  sits  in  the  4  to  5  percent 
range. The Bank is continuing to reflect on this issue as the very low level of global rates 
could mean that the effective neutral rate may be at the bottom end of, or below, this range. 
We view the current monetary policy settings as providing stimulus to the economy at a time 
when  output  looks  to  be  growing  around  2.5  percent,  slightly  below  potential7,  and  core 
inflation remains a bit below the mid-point. At the same time, the moderation in wage and 
pricing  behaviour  and  survey  data  suggests  that  inflation  expectations  have  fallen  and 
appear  to  be  closer  to  the  mid-point  of  the  PTA  target  range  than  has  been  the  case  for 
several years (figure 6). 
Figure 6: Inflation expectations 
(annual, years ahead) 
Source: ANZ Bank, Aon Consulting, Consensus Economics, RBNZ 
 The future path of the OCR will be driven by the flow of incoming data, our assessment of the 
economic outlook, and judgements as to what level of interest rates is needed to achieve the 
Bank’s  price  stability  goal.  Several  factors  will  continue  to  be  important  in  this  regard 
including:  whether  wage  and  price-setting  outcomes  are  consistent  with  the  price  stability 
objective;  whether  the  range  of  inflation  expectations  data  suggests  expectations  have 
stabilised at an appropriate level; future movements in commodity prices –especially global 
dairy  prices;  and  the  degree  of  exchange  rate  adjustment  that  occurs  and  how  quickly  it 
passes through into inflation. 
Some  local  commentators  have  predicted  large  declines  in  interest  rates  over  coming 
months that could only be consistent with the economy moving into recession. We will review 
our growth forecasts in the September MPSbut, at this point, we believe that while demand 
and  output  growth  may  be  a  little  below  trend,  several  factors  are  supporting  economic 
growth. These include the easing in monetary conditions, continued high levels of migration 
                                                
7  The growth rate of potential output is considered to be around 2.6 percent. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  and labour force participation, ongoing growth in construction and continued strength in the 
services sector. 
A relevant issue is how rapidly the Bank should seek to return inflation to the mid-point of the 
target  band.  There  are  important  trade-offs  here  that  can  come  at  the  expense  of 
unnecessary volatility in output, interest rates, and the exchange rate – outcomes that, under 
the PTA, the Bank is required to seek to avoid. 
Attempting to return inflation to the midpoint quickly could create the risk of overshooting the 
inflation  goal,  un-anchoring  inflation  expectations,  and  increasing  the  volatility  of  interest 
rates  and  the  exchange  rate,  as  monetary  policy  is  significantly  eased  and  subsequently 
tightened.  On  the  other  hand,  while  moving  interest  rates  only  gradually  might  have  the 
benefit of inducing less volatility in output and key relative prices, it would increase the risk 
that the Bank consistently undershoots its inflation target, and that inflation expectations get 
anchored at too low a level. 
Our  judgement  in  the  current  circumstances  is  that  aiming  to  return  inflation  to  around  its 
medium-term  target  level  in  about  nine  to  12  months’  time  is  an  appropriate  speed  of 
adjustment. This may not always be the appropriate speed of adjustment. Nor does it mean 
that  the  Bank  will  necessarily  deliver  a  precise  outcome  as  the  economy  is  constantly 
experiencing  shocks  and  disturbances  that  policy  may  need  to  counter  or  accommodate. 
Having the scope to amend policy settings, however, is a key strength of the monetary policy 
regime. In response to these developments, the Bank will review and, if necessary, revise its 
policy settings to meet its price stability objectives. The time path of inflation may change as 
monetary policy is recalibrated, but the overall goal of meeting the specifications of the PTA 
will remain the central focus of policy. 
The housing market 
4. 
We are conscious of the impact that low interest rates can have on housing demand and its 
potential to feed into higher house price inflation. Lower interest rates risk exacerbating the 
already extensive housing pressures in Auckland by stimulating housing demand, although, 
outside of Auckland, nationwide house price inflation is currently running at an annual rate of 
around 2 percent. 
Raising  interest  rates  can  be  a  useful  policy  response  in  leaning  against  asset  price 
pressures when they are widely based and wealth effects are spilling over into demand and 
triggering broader inflationary pressures. There is currently little evidence of this and, in the 
present  situation,  raising  interest  rates  would  be  inappropriate  as  it  would  put  upward 
pressure on the exchange rate and further dampen inflation. 
Monetary policy and macro-prudential policy can each affect the housing market. While they 
have different primary objectives of price stability and financial system stability respectively, 
there  can  be  important  spillover  effects  between  the  two  policies.  In  the  Policy  Targets 
Agreementfinancial stability is a secondary objective; in the macro-prudentialMemorandum of 
Understanding, macro-prudential initiatives need to have regard to their potential impact on 
monetary policy. 
We  continue  to  be  concerned  about  the  financial  stability  risks  and  risks  to  the  broader 
economy that would be associated with a major correction in Auckland house prices. In the 
current  circumstances,  macro  prudential  policy  can  be  helpful  in  reducing  some  of  the 
pressures arising from the Auckland housing market. The proposed LVR measures and the 
Government’s policy  initiatives that it announced in the 2015 Budget should begin to ease 
the impact of investor activity. 
While a strong supply response over several years is needed to address Auckland’s housing 
imbalance, macro-prudential policy can help to lower the financial and economic risks while 
important  regulatory  and  infrastructure  issues  are  addressed  and  additional  investment  in 
new housing takes place. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Conclusion 
In  mid-2014,  New  Zealand’s  terms  of  trade  were  at  a  40-year  high,  but  over  the  past  15 
months the economy has experienced several shocks. Export prices for whole milk powder 
have  fallen  63  percent  since  February  2014,  and  oil  prices  are  currently  more  than  50 
percent  below  their  June  2014  level.  Net  immigration  and  labour  force  participation  are  at 
historic highs and the real exchange rate has declined steadily since April 2015. 
We  think  the  economy  is  currently  growing  at  an  annual  rate  of  around  2½  percent.  To 
maintain  growth  around  potential  and  return  CPI  inflation  to  its  medium-term  target  level, 
some  further  monetary  policy  easing  is  likely  to  be  required.  We  also  believe  that  further 
exchange rate depreciation is necessary given the weakness in export commodity prices and 
the projected deterioration in the country’s net external liabilities over the next two years. The 
Bank will review and, if needed, revise its policy settings in response to emerging economic 
developments in order to meet the price stability objectives specified in the PTA. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
