  Amando M Tetangco, Jr: We are all wealth watchers 
Speech by Mr Amando M Tetangco, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the 
central bank of the Philippines), at the Wealth Watch Book Launch, Manila, 3 July 2015. 
 This  is  the  second  time  this  week  that  we  are  launching  a  document  related  to  financial 
empowerment. Just two days ago, we launched the National Strategy for Financial Inclusion, 
the  document  signed  by  13  government  agencies  (including  the  BSP)  which  sets  the 
strategic map for a unified national financial inclusion landscape. It is a living document that 
is  meant  to  be  populated  by  tactical  plans  of  each  of  the  agencies  involved.  And  it  is 
envisioned that following the launch, significant partnerships among government agencies as 
well as with the private sector would ensue. 
As  you  know,  we  had  the  Queen  of  the  Netherlands,  the  UN  Secretary  General’s  Special 
Advocate for Financial Inclusion for Development, Queen Maxima, witness that occasion as 
our special guest. While we do not have a queen with us today, we are most privileged to 
have you our most significant partners in this journey of financial literacy and education and 
consumer protection to share this occasion with us. 
Today, we launch a different document. A book. In fact, a “wealth book”. Unlike the NSFI, 
this  Wealth  Watch  Book  is  not  authored  by  13  government  agencies,  but  the  book  is 
authored by those “closer to home” – by our very own BSPers from the Financial Consumer 
Protection Department (FCPD). 
The book is not for those who have no access to financial products and services but, it is for 
those  who  have  a  little  bit  more than  others  well,  perhaps  significantly  more  but  who  may 
need to be just as “watchful” 
In many respects, however, this book and the NSFI are about the same. Because like the 
NSFI,  our  Wealth  Watch  Book  deals  with  information,  and  how  you  can  make  that 
information “work” for you. It is about stewardship of what you have. It is about preparing for 
unexpected events. It is about growth and growing what you have so you can have more. 
Our launch today brings to mind the NBA Draft. At each draft, media would focus on how 
those towering “boys” who’ve been drafted would now move from “living within tight college 
budgets” to becoming and I quote from Yahoo Sports “money making machines”. 
Sadly,  however,  we  so  often  hear  of  stories  of  athletes  with  successful  careers  but  who 
experience financial ruin when their careers end. 
Fortunately, among all these sad stories, there is one about an NBA superstar who retired a 
few  years  back.  His  spending  habits  were  legendary  –  he  is  rumored  to  have  spent  one 
million dollars, in less than half an hour! His wise banker supposedly warned him to “get it 
together” or else he end up broke like many other former successful athletes. 
As the story would have it, the NBA superstar decided to become educated in money and 
finance.  He  went  back  to  school,  got  his  bachelor’s  degree,  a  Master  of  Business 
Administration and eventually went on to earn his Doctor of Education in Human Resource 
Development. 
This  is  the  story  of  Dr.  Shaquille  O’Neal.  As  we  know  of  him  today,  he  has  several 
restaurants,  car  washes,  fitness  centers,  a  shopping  center,  a  movie  theater  while  he 
continues  to  be  a  product  endorser  and  NBA  TV  analyst.  By  all  accounts  then,  he  is 
financially  secure  and  if  the  popular  story  is  accurate,  it  all  goes  back  to  his  early  “turn-
around” and eventual commitment to manage his finances. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  I share this story not to say that the value of financial literacy is for those fortunate enough to 
become  millionaires.  Instead,  I  use  it  to  highlight  that  even  for  those  who  have  much, 
financial literacy matters also. 
But  financial  literacy  is  not  just for  them.  Financial  literacy  is  also  for  the  Juan  and  Juana 
Dela  Cruzes  who,  even  if  they  do  not  have  million-dollar  paying  jobs  are  conscious  of 
preparing for a future that offers no guarantees. 
If we accept that tomorrow always holds some uncertainty, we have to accept as well that 
there is no switch that we can turn “on” or “off” to rectify an unexpected development. The 
issue before us is  whether or not we are sufficiently aware and adequately empowered to 
manage our personal finances today. 
While the BSP already has several financial education outreaches, we know that much more 
can be done towards empowering our financial consumers. 
And  we  are  committed  towards  this  goal.  This  afternoon’s  book  launching  is  a  concrete 
manifestation of this commitment. 
For this endeavor, let me thank the authors of the articles. The readers of our Wealth Watch 
Book  will  certainly  benefit from  your “wealth”  of experiences  as  practitioners  in  the field  of 
finance. 
Let me also thank our Financial Consumer Protection Department that always tries to think 
outside  of  the  box  in  designing  new  and  innovative  means  of  delivering  our  key  financial 
literacy messages. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen.  I  hope  you  will  find  answers  to  your  many  questions  on  wealth 
management in this book. I hope also that you will find new insights and practical tips on how 
you can make money work for you. 
The Wealth Watch book is not just a compilation of individual writings. It is a collective output 
that is far larger than its parts. 
Thank you all for joining us today. Happy Anniversary. Thank you and good afternoon. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
