  Benoît Cœuré: Interview in EBRA newspaper group 
Interview  with  Mr  Benoît  Cœuré,  Member  of the  Executive  Board  of the  European  Central 
Bank,  in  EBRA  newspaper  group,  (L’Alsace,  Les  Dernières  Nouvelles  d’Alsace,  Le 
Républicain Lorrain, L’Est Républicain, Vosges Matin, Le Bien Public, Le Journal de Saône-
et-Loire,  Le  Progrès,  Le  Dauphiné  Libéré  and  Vaucluse  Matin),  conducted  by  Mr  Francis 
Brochet and published on 11 September 2015. 
 Can we have confidence in the growth in the euro area? 
Yes. Growth has returned and the unemployment rate is falling in the euro area. We can trust 
in the euro to protect us in an international environment where major emerging economies 
are experiencing a slowdown and financial markets are very volatile. The European Central 
Bank is protecting growth by clearly stating that its policy of very low interest rates and its 
asset purchases will continue for as long as necessary. But growth is still not strong enough 
to create a sufficient number of jobs. 
Many people see the euro area as more of a straitjacket than a form of protection… 
Sharing a currency is like living under the same roof – there must be common rules. These 
rules, for example regarding deficit and debt reduction, do act as constraints, but they also 
establish collective trust, making it possible to have very low interest rates and stable prices. 
If a country were to free itself from these rules, it would be completely unprotected and find 
itself alone in the face of the volatility of global markets. 
But  Joseph  Stiglitz,  winner  of  the  Nobel  Prize  for  economics,  recently  said  in  this 
publication that the rules are too strict and that austerity kills growth… 
In economics, as in politics, it’s all a matter of degree. Today, the euro area as a whole has a 
balanced approach to fiscal policy, and fiscal adjustment, which was necessary, is no longer 
hampering growth. As for France, there is still some way to go. 
Greece is still in the process of adjusting. Are you concerned about the result of the 
elections on 20 September? 
There  is  a  fairly  broad  consensus  among  the  governing  parties  and,  I  believe,  the  Greek 
people that it is in the country’s interests to remain in the euro area, and that this requires 
adjustment efforts. That is the rationale of the programme adopted in August. 
Wasn’t the agreement forced on the Greek people? Did they have a choice? 
It is a political agreement between the 19 Heads of State or Government of the euro area 
that strikes a balance between two  legitimate concerns – the mandate of Mr Tsipras, who 
was elected on a certain programme, and the fact that this programme is partially financed 
by the other euro area countries and their taxpayers, who also have the right to express their 
point of view. The important thing is that Greece and its partners trust each other again. On 
this basis, there will be room for manoeuvre when it comes to adapting the programme after 
the elections, for example in terms of labour market reforms and tackling vested interests, 
provided that the objectives of the programme are met. 
You  talk  about  unemployment,  but  the  ECB  is  supposedly  only  worried  about 
inflation… 
When inflation is weak, the best way to bring it up to the 2% objective is to support economic 
activity. Today, therefore, growth and employment are prerequisites for price stability. There 
is no contradiction. 
Are the days of foolish finance over? 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Not entirely. The ECB is strongly committed to financial stability. European citizens should 
not be subjected to the ups and downs of the financial markets. This also requires financial 
actors to behave in a reasonable manner and respect the rules. A lot of work has been done 
since  the  crisis  to  make  these  rules  stricter  and  banks  stronger.  However,  I  think  it  is  still 
necessary to increase the personal responsibility of financial actors. Banks’ senior managers 
must be accountable for the operations carried out by their teams. This is the only  way to 
avoid certain abuses, such as the manipulation of indices for speculative purposes. 
You  want  a  more  integrated  euro  area.  This  implies  more  sovereignty  being 
transferred from member countries to Europe. Are people ready for this? 
More integration will make Europe more effective. In a globalised world, France cannot stand 
alone; it is too small, regardless of its great history and many talents. But we cannot force 
people into this. Europe will first have to demonstrate its usefulness by creating more growth 
and more jobs. 
But when you see the “every man for himself” approach to the migrant crisis, do you 
not despair of Europe? 
It is true that each country’s initial reaction followed national instincts. However, coordinated 
efforts are now gradually being made, and they will continue to evolve. I think that this crisis, 
which  deeply  moves  us  all,  will  actually  be  a  wake-up  call  that  makes  us  realise  how 
essential Europe really is. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
