  Ravi Menon: Whither Asian banking? 
Opening  address  by  Mr  Ravi  Menon,  Managing  Director  of  the  Monetary  Authority  of 
Singapore, at the Symposium on Asian Banking and Finance, jointly organised by the MAS 
and the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, Singapore, 28 May 2015. 
 Dr John Williams, President and CEO, the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, 
Distinguished guests, colleagues, ladies and gentlemen, 
Good  afternoon.  And  a  warm  welcome  to  Singapore  and  to  the  Symposium  on  Asian 
Banking and Finance, jointly organised by the MAS and the Federal Reserve Bank of San 
Francisco. 
Banking systems have returned to a more stable footing since the Global Financial Crisis. 
• 
• 
Banks are holding larger capital and liquidity buffers than before. 
Their return on equity (ROE) continues to recover. According to a McKinsey survey 
of the 500 largest banks in the world, their ROE averaged 9.9 percent in the first half 
of 2014, within a whisker of the long-term average of 10 percent. 
But  these  overall  numbers  mask  wide  variances  in  performance  across  banks  and 
geographies. 
• 
• 
Banks in Emerging Asia report average ROE of about 15%. 
Among advanced economies, US and Canadian banks lead the pack with ROE of 
over 9%, compared to about 2% for their Western European peers. 
Asian  banks  have  strengthened  their  position  since  the  Global  Financial  Crisis. When  the 
crisis struck Asia in 2008, there were fears of a drying up of trade finance as European banks 
started deleveraging and cutting back from the region. As it turned out, Asian banks stepped 
in decisively and trade finance volumes recovered strongly. 
• 
Between 2008 and 2013, trade finance volumes at Chinese and Hong Kong banks 
have more than doubled while those at Indian banks rose more than half over the 
same period. 
Eurozone  banks  have  since  recovered  some  of their  market  share,  but  the  Asian 
banks remain significant players. 
 This afternoon I would like to discuss three key forces that will shape the course of banking 
and finance in Emerging Asia over the medium term: 
• 
• 
• 
economic growth; 
financial regulation; and 
technological innovation. 
Economic growth 
Let me begin with growth. 
The  near  term  economic  outlook  for  Emerging  Asia  will  be  shaped  by  two  themes:  the 
ongoing recovery in the G3 economies and the slowdown in the Chinese economy. 
• 
The underlying growth momentum in the US appears intact despite a disappointing 
start to the year. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
      The Eurozone is recovering from a double dip recession and financial stresses have 
abated. 
In Japan, domestic demand is strengthening, following the negative consumption tax 
shock of last April. 
However,  China,  which  had  been  supporting  global  demand  in  recent  years,  is 
experiencing a deceleration in growth amid a property downturn and softer exports. 
Even so, targeted fiscal and monetary stimulus measures should support growth at 
close to 7% this year. 
Against this backdrop, overall growth in Emerging Asia will remain firm, at 6% this 
year.  Banks  in  Emerging  Asia  will  therefore  not  do  badly.  There  are,  however, 
downside risks that they need to watch. 
First, the divergence in monetary policy settings among the G3 economies could pose risks 
to financial stability that could also potentially hurt growth. The anticipated normalisation of 
interest rates in the US against continuing quantitative easing in the Eurozone and Japan will 
be reflected in sharp movements in exchange rates and bond yields. This is not a prediction, 
it is already happening. 
The scenario of a “double whammy” posed by a rise in US interest rates and a strong US 
Dollar could expose vulnerabilities among some Asian borrowers. 
• 
Rising interest rates will increase the debt servicing burden of Asian households and 
corporates, especially those who have taken on high levels of debt at low rates. 
Asian corporates with large unhedged dollar borrowings could face increasing stress 
as a strengthening dollar undermines their ability to repay loans. 
 Banks  in  Emerging  Asia  could  face  higher  non-performing  loans.  They  could  also  face 
reduced US Dollar funding if there are large capital outflows from Asia. But their liquidity and 
capital positions are generally sound and they should be able to weather this. 
What matters is the medium to long term, and here the outlook for Asia remains sanguine. 
To be sure, as populations age and productivity growth slows, potential growth rates around 
the world are projected to moderate. But Asia is poised to remain the fastest growing and 
most dynamic region in the world. 
China and India will grow by 6–7% on average over the next ten years. This may not seem 
much compared to the 10% that China used to average in recent decades. But what matters 
for the rest of Asia is the incremental demand from China in absolute terms. 
• 
China is the second largest economy in the world. It is two and a half times larger 
today than it was 10 years ago. 
China  growing  at  7%  today  adds  close  to  USD  300  billion  of  GDP  every  year 
compared  to  the  USD  180  billion  of  GDP  that  a  smaller  China  growing  by  10% 
added 10 years ago. 
 The ASEAN-4 – Indonesia, Malaysia, Thailand and the Philippines – are projected to grow by 
at  least  4%  per  annum  on  average.  It  could  be  as  high  as  6%  if  ASEAN  becomes  more 
integrated and these countries successfully implement structural reforms to raise productivity 
and competitiveness. 
The Asian Development Bank projects that by 2030, the sum of the GDP of China, India and 
ASEAN  in  purchasing  power  parity  terms  could  even  exceed  that  of  the  US  and  Europe 
combined. 
For  banks,  it  is  not  just  the  size  and  growth  of  the  Asian  economies  that  matter.  It  is  the 
composition of that growth and demand. Two trends are noteworthy for Asian banks: the rise 
of the Asian middle class and the regionalisation of Asian corporates. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
Rising  incomes  and  the  agglomeration  effects  of  urbanisation  will  significantly  expand  the 
ranks of the Asian middle class. 
• 
In ASEAN, the middle class is projected to make up two-thirds of the population by 
2030, compared to less than a quarter in 2010. 
This rapid expansion of the middle class will spur demand for a wide range of goods and 
services.  Modern  services,  such  as  telecommunication,  banking  and  finance,  have  higher 
income elasticities of demand compared to traditional services. This means that as income 
rises  and  wealth  accumulates,  the  demand  for  financial  services  –  be  it  consumer  credit, 
wealth management, or insurance – will rise more than proportionately. 
As  Asian  economies  develop  and  integrate  further,  Asian  corporates  will  expand  and 
internationalise. They will need more funding – not just traditional bank credit but debt and 
equity  financing.  They  will  need  more  cash  management  and  transaction  services.  Asian 
banks  who  have  been  serving  these  corporates  in  their  home markets will  follow  them  as 
they regionalise their businesses. 
Financial regulation 
The second driving force that will shape banking in Asia is financial regulation. 
The Global Financial Crisis has spurred far-reaching financial regulatory reforms. The ones 
impacting banks most will be the new Basel III rules. 
• 
Basel III calls for an increase in both the quantity and quality of capital that banks 
must keep as a buffer against unexpected loss. 
Basel III will also put in place a new global liquidity standard. Banks will be required 
to hold enough liquid assets to survive a 30-day period of cash outflows. 
 There are also efforts underway in advanced jurisdictions to reform banking structures. The 
details  vary  but  the  overall  thrust  is  to  separate  retail  banking  from  riskier  activities  like 
proprietary trading and investment banking. The objective is to simplify business models and 
facilitate the resolvability of large and complex banking groups. 
On the whole, the reforms will help to make banks safer and financial systems stronger. But 
they are not without some negative consequences, and their distributional impact is uneven. 
For  many  global  banks,  the  new  regulatory  standards  and  reforms  to  national  banking 
structures  will  mean  a  fundamental  review  of  their  organisation  and  activities.  In  fact,  the 
international operations of global banks are already being affected. 
• 
According to the IMF, direct cross border lending as a share of total banking assets 
has declined, mostly due to the retrenchment of Eurozone banks. 
For many Asian banks, the transition to the new regulatory standards will probably be less 
demanding. 
First, many of them had already bitten the bullet after the Asian Financial Crisis and built up 
their capital and liquidity buffers. They are thus starting from a stronger position to meet the 
new standards. 
• 
Several Asian regulators, such as China, India, Philippines and Singapore, have set 
capital requirements that exceed the Basel III standards. 
And  banks  in  China,  India,  Thailand,  Hong  Kong  and  Singapore  were  already 
subject to liquidity requirements prior to Basel III. 
 Second, Asia’s financial systems emerged from the last crisis less affected than their global 
peers, with much of their financial resources and businesses intact. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   A  focus  on  traditional  banking  helped  Asian  banks  avoid  the  fall-outs  from  the 
collapse of complex, structured products and risks from outsized trading desks. 
This, together with their strong deposit funding, means that Asian banks do not need 
to deleverage or withdraw from markets in order to meet the more stringent capital 
ratios or new liquidity requirements. 
 Asian  banks  have  been  able  to  fill  the  financing  gaps  that  opened  up  as  global  banks 
concentrated on repairing their balance sheets back home. 
• 
According  to  BIS  data,  between  2008  and  2014,  the  share  of  Eurozone  banks  in 
international claims on Emerging Asia more than halved to just 15% whereas the 
share of Asian banks almost doubled to 60%. 
If Asian banks continue to maintain strong buffers and manage their risks well, they are well-
placed to thrive and grow in the new regulatory environment. 
Technological innovation 
A  third  major  force  shaping  Asia’s  banking  landscape  is  technology,  specifically  digital 
technology. This could prove both transformative and disruptive in a region where banking 
penetration remains low. 
The  broad  adoption  of  financial  technology  or  fintech  could  dramatically  lower  the  cost  of 
banking services. Not only will this enhance financial inclusion, it could potentially also help 
mobilise  untapped  savings,  enable  more  efficient  financial  transactions,  and  make  credit 
more readily available and affordable to small businesses. 
Emerging Asia fares poorly in financial inclusion even among emerging markets. 
• 
Less  than  15%  of  Asian  SMEs  have  bank  credit  lines,  compared to  24%  in  Latin 
America and 28% in Eastern Europe. 
In Indonesia, for example, only about one out of every three persons aged 15 and 
above has an account with a financial institution. 
 Ironically,  Emerging  Asia’s  relative  under-development  could  turn  out  to  be  an  advantage. 
The  innovative  adoption  of  digital  technology  by  the  financial  industry  is  enabling  these 
economies to leapfrog into more advanced channels for providing banking services. 
• 
transfers,  even  before  customers 
A growing number of Asian customers, especially in countries like China and India 
with rapidly developing technology infrastructure, are using mobile banking apps for 
payments  and 
in  more  advanced 
economies. 
In India, bank accounts can be linked to biometric identity cards issued under the 
national  Aadhaar  initiative,  enabling  millions  who  otherwise  lack  the  formal 
documents  required  to  open  a  bank  account  to  have  access  to  basic  banking 
services. 
funds 
 Of course, technological innovations pose threats as well as opportunities to Asian banks. As 
in the US, a number of fintech entities in Asia are making inroads as lower-cost alternatives 
to  banks.  Among  the  fintech  services  that  have  enjoyed  the  greatest  success  are  mobile 
money and online payments. 
• 
In  the  Philippines,  GCash  has  become  a  popular  mobile  remittance  services 
provider that leverages on the network of its telecommunications parent. 
In China, transaction volume through third-party payments providers has surpassed 
RMB 4 billion. Alipay, which dominates the market, has over 700 million registered 
accounts. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 4 
   
 
The competitive challenge posed by fintech players to Asia’s banks should not be overstated 
though.  The  banks  are  fighting  back  –  developing  online  platforms  to  complement  their 
physical branches. We can expect the Asian banking landscape to continue to transform as 
banks adapt innovations enabled by fintech to stay relevant and competitive. 
Conclusion 
Let me sum up. The three driving forces present both challenge and opportunity for banks in 
Asia. 
• 
Economic growth will be slower in the next decade compared to the last two. But the 
composition of that growth in an increasingly middle class Asia will benefit modern 
services like banking. 
Financial regulation will be tighter and will constrain all banks. But Asian banks will 
be affected less in relative terms given their stronger capital positions and funding 
structures. 
Technological  innovation  will  threaten  to  disintermediate  banks.  But  to  the  extent 
that  Asian  banks  themselves  adopt  the  new  technology  platforms,  they  will 
strengthen their ability to penetrate unbanked markets and expand their footprint. 
  Of course, it goes without saying that Asian banks should guard against complacency and 
continue  to  meet  high  prudential  standards  and  strengthen  their  risk  management 
capabilities. 
Many  of  you  will  be  presenting  your  thoughts  over  the  next  two  days  on  these  and  other 
issues on the future of Asia’s banking and finance. I look forward to hearing your insights. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
