  Philip Lowe: International and domestic adjustment 
Speech  by  Mr  Philip  Lowe,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Australia,  to  the 
Committee for Economic Development of Australia (CEDA), Melbourne, 9 September 2015. 
 Accompanying charts can be found at the end of the speech. 
I would like to thank Tim Atkin and Kevin Lane for assistance in the preparation of this talk. 
I  would  like  to  begin  by  thanking  the  Committee  for  Economic  Development  of  Australia 
(CEDA) for the invitation to address this lunch. It is a pleasure to be able to speak at another 
CEDA function, particularly one here in Melbourne. 
A central theme of the Reserve Bank of Australia’s (RBA) communication over the past few 
years has been that the Australian economy is in a period of transition: a transition from the 
biggest resources boom in over a century to something a bit more normal. The sheer scale of 
the resources boom means that this transition has its challenges. And these challenges are 
being compounded by what is happening beyond our shores. 
A  second  theme  of  our  communication,  however,  has  been  that  a  reasonably  successful 
transition  is  possible,  and  indeed,  probable.  This  assessment  reflects  the  positive 
fundamentals  of  our  economy,  as  well  as  its  underlying flexibility.  This  flexibility  helped  us 
deal with the upswing of the resources boom and is now helping us deal with the downswing. 
And  a  third  theme  of  our  communication  has  been  that  monetary  policy  is  helping  this 
adjustment,  but  that  the  likelihood  of  a  successful  transition  would  be  boosted  by  a  lift  in 
underlying productivity growth and an increase in the expected risk-adjusted return on capital 
formation – both physical capital and human capital. 
Today, I would like to take this opportunity to touch on each of these three themes. I think it 
is useful to start with recent developments in the global economy, particularly in China, as 
they  form  an  important  backdrop  to  the  adjustment  that  we  are  going  through.  And  then  I 
would like to focus on the ongoing adjustment in our own economy. 
Global developments 
So, first to the global backdrop. 
Perhaps  the  main  news  over  the  past  month  or  so  is  that  from  China.  In  particular,  two 
developments in Chinese financial markets have caught people’s attention. The first is the 
very  sharp  decline  in  the  Chinese  equity  market  and  the  second  is  the  decision  by  the 
Chinese authorities to allow the renminbi to depreciate against the US dollar. 
In  the  Chinese  equity  market,  prices  have  fallen  by  almost  40  per  cent  since  mid  June 
(Graph  1).  This  fall  has  reversed  around  two-thirds  of  the  increase  that  occurred  over  the 
previous year. The reasons for this earlier increase are not entirely clear. One possible factor 
was  an  easing  of  some  restrictions  on  margin  financing.  Another  was  an  expectation  by 
Chinese  citizens  of  future  capital  gains,  perhaps  as  the  equity  market  opened  up  to 
increased  investment  from  overseas.  A  third  was  the  weakness  in  residential  property 
markets.  Whatever  the  reason,  as  so  often  happens,  things  went  too  far.  Many  investors 
thought the increase in equity prices would keep going and many borrowed money to get a 
bigger stake in what was a rising market. A bubble developed. And then it burst. While this 
attracted much attention, these movements in the Chinese equity market are likely to have 
only limited implications for the overall Chinese economy. 
In  terms  of  the  exchange  rate,  for  much  of  the  past  few  years,  the  renminbi  has  moved 
closely with the US dollar (Graph 2). This meant that as the US dollar appreciated, so too did 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  the Chinese currency; on a trade-weighted basis, the renminbi had appreciated by around 
15 per cent between mid 2014 and the end of July this year. 
With  the  US  and  Chinese  economies  being  in  different  phases  of  the business  cycle,  it  is 
unsurprising  that  the  Chinese  authorities  might  have  come  to  the  conclusion  that  greater 
flexibility  of  the  renminbi  against  the  US  dollar  was  warranted.  Notably,  a  move  in  this 
direction is also consistent with the authorities’ long-standing goal of transitioning to a more 
market-determined  exchange  rate.  While  the  change  in  the  Chinese  exchange  rate  also 
attracted  much  attention,  the  magnitude  of  the  change  does  need  to  be  kept  in  some 
perspective. At around 3 per cent, the recent depreciation is hardly out of line with the short-
term movements that are sometimes seen among the major freely floating currencies of the 
world. 
These  developments  in  the  Chinese  financial  markets  have  coincided  with  signs  of  some 
further slowing in the Chinese economy. Many of the recent indicators – including those for 
industrial production, fixed asset investment and retail trade – have been somewhat softer 
than  earlier  in  the  year  (Graph  3).  The  same  is  true  for  various  business  surveys  and 
Chinese  exports.  In  contrast,  one  area  that  has  looked  a  little  more  positive  of  late  is  the 
residential property market. In some of the larger cities, property prices have been increasing 
again, although construction activity has yet to pick up noticeably. 
Over the past month, the news out of China has had significant ripple effects on global equity 
markets.  Volatility  has  picked  up  and  many  of  the  major  equity  markets  are  down  around 
10 per cent from their levels a few months ago. Volatility has also picked up in commodity 
markets and most commodity prices are also lower than a few months ago. It is noteworthy 
though  that  this  increased  volatility  in  equity  and  commodity  markets  has  not  led  to 
dislocation  in  other  financial  markets.  In  particular,  there  has  not  been  a  deterioration  in 
funding markets and credit spreads have mostly moved in a relatively narrow range. 
This recent focus on developments in China has, understandably, thrown the spotlight on the 
outlook  for  the  Chinese  economy.  Assessing  this  outlook  is  complicated  by  the  fact  that 
China  is  simultaneously  adjusting  to  slower  growth  in  potential  output  and  dealing  with  a 
relatively soft phase of its own business cycle. 
The slowing in potential output growth – after an extraordinary period of sustained double-
digit  growth  –  was  inevitable  and,  indeed,  widely  expected.  It  has,  however,  brought  into 
sharper focus some of the structural challenges facing the Chinese economy. These include: 
• 
• 
the challenge of shifting from investment-led to consumption-led growth 
the  challenge  of  liberalising  the  markets  for  important  factors  of  production  – 
including labour, land, capital and energy 
the challenge of demographic change, with the Chinese working-age population now 
declining and the overall population ageing 
the challenge of dealing with various strains and distortions in the financial system 
and the property market. 
  At various times the Chinese authorities have acknowledged each of these challenges and a 
range of plans has been developed to deal with them. However, how successful these plans 
ultimately turn out to be is yet to be seen. There is no doubt that the economic outcomes in 
China over the past few decades have been remarkable, with hundreds of millions of people 
being  lifted  out  of  poverty.  The  challenges,  however,  are  not  getting  any  easier,  and  the 
authorities’ recent handling of the stock market crash has led some to ponder the general 
direction of Chinese policy, including the likely pace of reform across the economy. This is an 
issue that will bear close watching over the months ahead. 
From a cyclical perspective, the Chinese authorities have taken a number of steps recently to 
support  growth.  Increased  spending  on  infrastructure  is  one  of  these.  Nominal  benchmark 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  interest rates have been reduced, although with inflation declining, real rates have tended to 
rise  over  the  past  year (Graph  4).  Reserve  requirements  in  the  banking  system  have  also 
been lowered, although this was designed to offset the withdrawal of liquidity that has taken 
place as the Chinese authorities have sold foreign exchange reserves in response to private 
capital outflow from China. The depreciation of the renminbi against the US dollar can also 
be expected to provide some support, at the margin, to the Chinese economy. 
So, overall, it is a complicated picture at present in Australia’s largest single trading partner. 
We  became  used  to  extraordinarily  strong  growth  in  China  and  now  we  are  having  to  get 
used to something a little less extraordinary, and we are also being reminded that China too 
has  a  business  cycle.  Nevertheless,  it  remains  the  case  that  there  are  still  significant 
mutually  beneficial  opportunities  from  deeper  economic  relations  between  Australia  and 
China. As a nation, we need to keep an eye on these opportunities, while, at the same time, 
understanding and managing the associated risks as best we can. 
Elsewhere, the recent economic data have mostly had a slightly more positive tone. The US 
economy  is  recording  above-average  growth  and  the  unemployment  rate  is  around  most 
estimates of full employment. In Europe, the economic news has recently tended to be a bit 
better than it had been earlier in the year and a recovery, of sorts, is taking place there. In 
India, too, the growth momentum looks to have improved, although in a number of countries 
in east Asia, both domestic demand and export growth have slowed. 
For the globe as a whole, economic conditions continue to be supported by the decline in oil 
prices.  In  addition,  the  drag  from  fiscal  consolidation  has  lessened  in  several  countries. 
Monetary  conditions  also  remain  very  accommodative.  At  some  point  before  too  long,  we 
should hope that the US economy is sufficiently strong for the Federal Reserve to begin the 
process of normalising interest rates there. A stronger US economy should be good for the 
rest of the world, although financial market developments will need to be watched carefully 
given  that  the  policy  interest  rate  in  the  United  States  has  been  at  zero  for  almost  seven 
years now. 
Putting all this together, when the RBA published its latest forecasts a bit over a month ago, 
we were expecting GDP growth in our trading partners to be around average over the next 
couple of years (Graph 5). While recent news on global industrial production has been softer, 
on balance, the recent data have not changed this general outlook materially. We still expect 
GDP  growth  in  our  trading  partners  to  average  around  4  per  cent  over  2015  and  2016, 
although given recent developments in east Asia the risks around this central forecast are 
tilted a little to the downside. 
The domestic transition 
I would now like to turn to the adjustment in the domestic economy. 
The  broad  story  here  is  well  known.  Over  the  past  decade,  Australia  has  experienced  an 
extremely large external shock in the form of a resources boom (Graph 6). This shock has 
had three phases. 
The first phase was a very large increase in commodity prices. 
The second was a very large increase in resources sector investment. 
And the third phase is a very large increase in resources sector production and exports. 
While these various phases have overlapped at times, we are now  very  much in this third 
phase, in which higher production is generating increased exports, but commodity prices are 
much lower than they were a few years ago and resources sector investment is returning to 
more normal levels. 
During  the  first  two  stages  there  was  a  significant  reallocation  of  resources  within  the 
Australian economy. This was important in avoiding the overheating that had characterised 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  previous resources booms. But an adjustment back the other way is now taking place, and 
has been for some time. 
Indeed,  the  terms  of  trade  have  been  declining  for  almost  four  years  now,  after  having 
peaked in the second half of 2011. Over this period, the global supply of commodities has 
increased substantially as new investment projects have come on stream over the past four 
years.  Largely  as  a  result,  the  prices  of  our  exports  relative  to  our  imports  have  fallen  by 
around 30 per cent. This decline brings the terms of trade back to around their level in the 
mid 2000s, which was considerably higher than their average of the 1990s. 
The peak in mining investment occurred around a year after the peak in the terms of trade. In 
mid 2012, mining investment reached a record high of around $30 billion per quarter. Since 
that  time,  it  has  fallen  significantly  to  be  around  $20  billion  in  the  June  quarter  this  year. 
Further  declines  still  lie  ahead  as  more  projects  are  completed,  although  the  end  of these 
large  declines  now  looks  to  be  coming  into  sight;  our  current  forecasts  have  mining 
investment declining to around $10 billion per quarter by the end of 2017. If this does turn out 
to  be  the  case  then  we  are  currently  roughly  halfway  through  the  decline  in  mining 
investment. 
In  contrast,  the  ramp-up  in  resources  sector  output  is  still  under  way.  Over  the  past  three 
years, resource exports are up by 20 per cent and annual increases of around 9 per cent are 
expected  over  the  next  couple  of  years  as  LNG  production  increases.  While  there  is 
inevitably a degree of imprecision in the estimates, this increase in LNG exports is expected 
to boost GDP growth by an average of around ¾ percentage point in each of 2016 and 2017. 
Through this third phase of the mining boom, the economy overall has been growing at an 
annual  rate  of  between  2  and  2½  per  cent  (Graph  7).  The  quarterly  readings  for  GDP 
continue to be affected by fluctuations in mining production due to the weather. But looking 
through this volatility, the data for the June quarter suggest that the economy is continuing to 
grow at a similar rate to that of the past few years. 
Most other recent indicators are also consistent with a moderate expansion in the Australian 
economy.  Measures  of  business  conditions  have  improved  and  most  are  now  above 
average. The unemployment rate has been little changed over the past year and the demand 
for labour has increased, with a rise in employment relative to the working-age population. 
The housing cycle remains in an upswing and household consumption is growing moderately 
(Graph 8). 
For  many  in  the  community,  the  fact  that  growth  is  occurring  at  only  a  moderate  pace  is 
disappointing.  Growth  has  been  slower  than  we  had  become  used  to,  and  slower,  I  think, 
than  we  are  capable  of.  And,  in  terms  of  our  incomes,  this  has  been  compounded  by  the 
decline in prices of resource exports. As a result, there has been very little growth in our real 
income per capita for some years now, after a decade and a half of very strong growth. 
While  this  disappointment  is  understandable,  we  should  not  lose  sight  of  the  fact  that  our 
economy has shown considerable ability to adjust, and to do so in a way that has preserved 
both  overall  economic  and  financial  stability.  We  have  adjusted  to  the  upside  of  a  huge 
positive  international  demand  shock  without  overheating  and  we  are  now  adjusting  to  the 
downside while still managing to grow at a moderate rate. This is a significant achievement 
and is a testimony to the underlying flexibility of our economy. This flexibility should give us 
come confidence about the future. 
An  important  element  of  this  flexibility  is  the  exchange  rate  (Graph  9).  When  the  terms  of 
trade  initially  started  to  fall  and  the  decline  in  mining  investment  was  clearly  in  sight,  the 
exchange  rate  was  relatively  slow  to  adjust.  On  a  number  of  occasions,  the  RBA  drew 
attention to this. But the exchange rate has now adjusted considerably and this adjustment 
has continued over recent weeks. Just as the appreciation helped stabilise the economy in 
the  upswing  of  the  boom  in  commodity  prices  and  mining  investment,  the  depreciation  is 
helping in the downswing. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  One  example  of this  is  in  the  tourism  industry. As  the  relative  cost  of  overseas  travel  has 
increased,  more  Australians  are  holidaying  domestically  and  more  people  are  visiting  our 
shores. Encouragingly, we are now seeing some signs that this change in travel patterns is 
prompting  a  pick-up  in  investment  in  the  tourism  industry.  In  particular,  there  has  been  a 
noticeable increase in the stock of work to be done in the construction of hotel and related 
accommodation (Graph 10). The RBA’s liaison with tourism-related businesses suggests that 
further increases in investment in this area are likely in coming years. Conditions have also 
improved in a number of other sectors that are sensitive to the exchange rate. 
Another element of the flexibility has been the labour market, both in terms of labour supply 
and wages (Graph 11). During the upswing, population growth picked up noticeably, partly 
due to a rise in immigration. This helped alleviate some of the pressures in the labour market 
that would have otherwise occurred, especially in areas where skills were in short supply. In 
the  downward  phase,  population  growth  has  slowed,  again  partly  due  to  immigration. 
Aggregate  wage  growth  has  also  moderated  significantly.  This  has  played  some  role  in 
generating sufficient employment growth over recent times to keep the unemployment rate 
steady despite the below-average growth of the overall economy. 
A third element of this flexibility has been monetary policy. As the RBA has frequently noted, 
it  is  entirely  appropriate  that,  during  a  period  in  which  both  the  terms  of  trade  and  mining 
investment  are  declining,  monetary  policy  is  accommodative.  Monetary  policy  is  helping 
support growth in the overall economy even if it is not working in quite the same way as it 
once did. This support is most clearly evident in the interest-sensitive housing construction 
sector,  where  investment  has  increased  by  7  per  cent  over  the  past  year.  The  stronger 
housing market is also having some positive ripple effects on parts of the retail sector. 
So, together, the flexibility of the exchange rate, the labour market and monetary policy  is 
helping with the cyclical adjustment in our economy. The missing ingredient continues to be 
a lift in non-mining business investment, where we are still waiting for convincing signs of a 
pick-up. The latest reading from the Australian Bureau of Statistics on firms’ capital spending 
plans outside the resources sector did show a slight improvement from earlier readings, but a 
material lift in non-mining business investment still seems to be some way away. 
In  time,  though,  we  should  expect  that  the  adjustments  that  we  have  seen  in  the  cyclical 
variables  –  the  exchange  rate,  the  labour  market  and  interest  rates  –  will  help  create  the 
environment  that  leads  to  increased  investment.  But  there  are  clearly  limits  here.  A  low 
exchange rate, low growth in  wages and low  interest rates are not the basis for sustained 
increases in investment and output. They can certainly help during the adjustment phase, but 
ultimately  we  will  be  better  off  if  increased  investment  is  driven  by  high  expected  returns 
rather than by the low cost of finance or low wages. This is why the focus on improving the 
climate for business investment is so important. There is no magic bullet here, but surely the 
investment  climate  would  be  improved  through  a  strong  focus  by  both  business  and 
government  on  innovation,  productivity,  human  capital  and  entrepreneurship,  topics  that  I 
have spoken about on previous occasions. 
Thank you and I would be happy to answer any questions that you might have. 
 
 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
 Graph 1 
 Graph 2 
 6 
     BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Graph 3 
 Graph 4 
    BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
 Graph 5 
 Graph 6 
 8 
     BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 Graph 7 
 Graph 8 
     BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
 Graph 9 
 Graph 10 
 10 
     BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 Graph 11 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
