  G Padmanabhan: Is India ready for full capital account convertibility? 
Address  by  Mr  G  Padmanabhan,  Executive  Director  of  the  Bank  of  India,  at  the  MSNM 
Besant Institute of PG Management Studies, Mangalore, 16 May 2015. 
 Inputs by my colleagues S/Shri H S Mohanty and Anand Prakash and review by a number other colleagues is 
gratefully acknowledged. Residual errors, if any, are speaker’s own. 
Esteemed  members  of  the  Governing  council  of  the  MSNM  Besant  Institute  of  PG 
Management  Studies,  banker  friends,  faculty  and  students  of  the  institute,  ladies  and 
gentlemen, 
1.  
Thank  you  for  inviting  me  to  speak  this  evening.  I  am  truly  impressed  by  the  rich 
tradition of this institution and congratulate all those associated with it for rendering yeomen 
service  to  the  society.  This  part  of  the  country  has  always  boasted  about  the  educational 
institutions and is home to some great bankers who have shaped the financial sector history 
of this country. I feel humbled standing before this august audience. 
2.  
The topic I have chosen for discussion today is capital account convertibility. There 
is a buzz around this concept in recent weeks. Some section of media has reported on the 
subject in recent weeks as this being next on the wish list of RBI Governor; whereas all he 
was doing was to answer a question posed by a student in an educational institution! Today, 
I  shall  pose  and  endeavour  to  answer  the  question:  Is  India  ready  for  full  capital  account 
convertibility?  As  you  are  aware,  the  question  of  capital  account  convertibility  has  been  a 
recurrent theme in the discourse on public policy both in the Indian and the global arena for 
close to two decades with periodic spurts in the zeal and vigour in the debate followed by a 
lull or even regression on the credo. We, as I stated earlier, stand at a juncture when the 
debate  has  gathered  some  momentum  again  and  the  issue  has  been  brought  to  the  front 
burner with some apparent imminence in attaining the goal. Standing as I do at the end of my 
long  association  with  the  external  sector  management,  I  shall  try  to  take  an  objective  and 
dispassionate  view  on  the  issue.  I  must  make  it  clear  upfront  that  what  I  say  does  not 
necessarily represent the views of the Reserve Bank of India. 
Current account convertibility vs capital account convertibility 
3. 
International  trade  by  which  we  shall  mean  trade  amongst  nations  in  goods, 
services,  and  assets  (or  in  popular  parlance,  capital)  has  perhaps  been  as  old  as  human 
civilisation itself, as would be evident from archaeological finds of Indus valley coins in the 
Middle  East.  This  trade  and  interaction  down  the  centuries  till  industrial  revolution  was 
dictated by the compulsions of geography and geology: certain commodities-coveted items 
of consumption everywhere-were available only in some parts of the world. The idea of trade 
in  goods  (and  services)  across  borders  even  when  the  commodities  concerned  could  be 
produced  in  the  economies  of  both  the  trading  partners  as  an  efficiency  and  welfare 
increasing  engagement  for  both,  dates  back  to  Adam  Smith  (the  principle  of  absolute 
advantage, 1776) and to David Ricardo (the theory of comparative advantage, 1821). There 
has  been  extensive  research  on  the  theory  of  international  trade  during  most  of  the  last 
century  and  there  is  now  a  general  consensus  among  economist  that  free  trade  amongst 
nations improves global welfare. As Gregory Mankiw observes, “Economists are famous for 
disagreeing with one another, and indeed, seminars in economics departments are known 
for their vociferous debate. But economists reach near unanimity on some topics, including 
international trade.” Promoting free trade has been a stated global policy priority during the 
post second world war period. Article VIII; sub-section 2 of the Articles of Agreement of the 
IMF states that “......no member shall, without the approval of the Fund, impose restrictions 
on the making of payments and transfers for current international transaction.” Similarly, the 
objectives of WTO include, “to provide a forum for negotiating and monitoring further trade 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
  
 
liberalisation.”  Though,  every  now  and  then,  we  come  across  modern  mercantilism  in 
objections  to  imports,  these  are  often  driven  by  political  considerations  and  not  based  on 
economic  logic.  Be  that  as  it  may,  India  accepted  the  Article  VIII  obligation  as  early  as  in 
1994 and has been an active member of the WTO. So the public policy view on free trade in 
goods and services or current account convertibility is settled. 
4.  
What  about  capital  account  convertibility?  Capital  account  of  the  balance  of 
payments, as you know, comprises a summary of cross border transactions in assets. Assets 
in the context of international transactions mean investment assets: equity, debt, immovable 
property  or  any  combination  or  hybrid  of  these.  Thus  capital  account  convertibility  would 
mean  that  there  is  no  restriction  on  conversion  of  the  domestic  currency  into  a  foreign 
currency  to  enable  a  resident  to  acquire  any  foreign  asset  or  on  conversion  of  a  foreign 
currency  to  the  domestic  currency  to  enable  a  non-resident  to  acquire  a  domestic  asset. 
Assets are diverse. If a foreign company sets up an Indian subsidiary, say, to manufacture 
automobiles or aircrafts that is also capital account transaction and so is if a hedge fund buys 
treasury  bills  to  book  a  profit  out  of  expected  movement  in  interest  rates.  Similarly  capital 
flows may finance a metro project or fuel a real estate boom. Therefore, capital flows cannot 
be viewed as a homogeneous phenomenon with identical economic consequences. Capital 
flows can be conceptually classified into two broad categories. Those that imply long term 
engagement without any incentive to exit at every provocation – and those that are motivated 
by disinterested profit – those that buy at every low and sell at every high, as it were. A full 
capital  account  convertibility  will  open  the  door  to  both  without  any  discrimination.  In  this 
backdrop, is capital account convertibility as much a public policy priority as current account 
convertibility? 
Capital convertibility and Internationalisation of the currency 
5.  
Before I elaborate my views, it is useful to understand the distinction between capital 
account  convertibility  and  internationalisation  of  the  currency.  The  relationship  between 
capital  account  convertibility  and  currency  internationalisation  is  quite  intrinsic  but  it  is 
important  to  distinguish  between  the  two.  According  to  Kennen  (2009),  an  international 
currency is one that is used and held beyond the borders of the issuing country, not merely 
for  transactions  with  that  country’s  residents,  but  also,  and  importantly,  for  transactions 
between non-residents. In other words, an international currency is one that is used instead 
of  the  national  currencies  of  the  parties  directly  involved  in  an  international  transaction, 
whether  the  transaction  in  question  involves  a  purchase  of  goods,  services  or  financial 
assets. An international currency has to be capable of playing roles of store of value, medium 
of  exchange  and  unit of  account  for  both  residents  and  non-residents.  More  specifically,  it 
can be used for trade and financial transaction invoicing and denomination, official reserves, 
vehicle  currency  for  foreign  exchange  intervention  and  anchor  currency  for  pegging.  An 
international  currency  has  to  be  essentially  a  freely  convertible  currency  with  the  ability  to 
attract  significant  volumes  of  international  trades  across  regions  by  way  of  invoicing.  In 
addition,  the  currency  has  to  possess  a  greater  degree  of  stability  in  its  exchange  rate 
determined by the market forces and a deep and liquid market with availability of wide range 
of hedging products with easy accessibility to both residents and non-residents. Needless to 
add,  it  would  also  require  to  be  supported  by  an  efficient banking  system  and  world  class 
market infrastructure. Full capital account convertibility and development of offshore centres 
are other enabling conditions for internationalisation. According to the IMF (2011), economic 
fundamentals such as the economy‘s size and trade network, depth and liquidity of capital 
markets, as well as the stability and convertibility of the currency are important determinants 
that support currency internationalisation. 
Why capital convertibility? 
6.  
Let me now return to the question that I had raised regarding the need for capital 
account  convertibility.  While  trade  liberalisation  and  current  account  convertibility  were  the 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  
 
central themes of IMF’s mandate in 1945, liberalisation of capital account transactions as a 
policy  objective  entered  public  discourse  only  in  the  1990’s.  There  is  a  reason  for  it. 
Throughout the Breton-Woods regime, which was essentially a fixed exchange rate regime, 
full  capital  account  convertibility  was  the  left  out  part  of  the  “impossible  trinity”.  It  is 
noteworthy  that  in  his  classic  paper,  Robert  Mundell  qualifies  the  assumption  of  ‘extreme 
degree  of  mobility  of  capital’  an  ‘overstatement’.  It  is  also  to  be  noted  that  most  of  the 
western countries, baring a few exceptions, had some form of capital controls which would 
be  wound  down  only  in  the  early  1970s.  It  is  then  that  the  mainstream  economics  started 
discussing the counter-productivity of capital controls. The 1990’s saw significant increase in 
global capital flows, presumably following the triumph of market capitalism, and advocacy of 
capital account convertibility as a policy goal, particularly for the developing countries, started 
gaining momentum. In fact, the Interim Committee of the IMF in its meeting in Hong Kong in 
September  1997,  adopted  a  statement  on  liberalisation  of capital  accounts  that  essentially 
sought to incorporate unrestricted capital account transactions into the Articles of the IMF. 
This  was  after  the  outbreak  of  the  Asian  Crisis;  such  was  the  force  of  the  idea  of  capital 
account convertibility. 
7.  
Let me list some of the benefits envisaged. 
a. 
Why capital account convertibility was advocated so forcefully? 
The  most  obvious  argument  is  that  all  developed  countries  are  capital  account 
convertible; hence this is an inevitable destiny of the developing countries in their 
path to development. 
Free global capital flows bring about better and more efficient allocation of the global 
pool  of  savings  to  the  more  productive  uses.  From  the  developing  country’s 
viewpoint,  free  access  to  global  capital  markets  increases  available  investible 
resources  which  augments  domestic  savings,  reduces  marginal  cost  of  capital, 
accelerates investment and growth. 
According  to  Stanley  Fischer,  ‘....open  capital  accounts  support  the  multilateral 
trading  systems  by  broadening  the  channels  through  which  countries  can  finance 
trade and investment.” 
Open capital accounts facilitate portfolio diversification by investors in developed as 
well as developing countries. 
Because 
rests  on  sound 
macroeconomic policy, it creates a sort of commitment for the country concerned to 
ensure better macroeconomic management, lest it is punished by the investors. As 
Rudiger  Dornbusch  puts  it,  “The  capital  market  fulfils  an  important  supervisory 
function over economic policy” 
feasibility  of  capital  account  convertibility 
the 
b. 
c. 
d. 
e. 
Downsides of capital convertibility 
8.  
Unlike  current  account  convertibility,  capital  account  convertibility  does  not  come 
without a downside. But before we discuss the downside it will be in order to point out that 
reservations have been expressed about the most important contribution of capital account 
convertibility, that is, its role in better allocation of global savings. It has been pointed out that 
often capital movement is guided by considerations such as tax savings which improve the 
returns  to  the  investor  but  does  not  contribute  to  increased  productivity.  Secondly,  neither 
open capital account constitute sufficient conditions to ensure capital flows into a country nor 
do capital flows, in absence of appropriate institutional framework in the receiving country, 
contribute  to  growth  and  welfare.  On  the  other  hand,  it  has  been  argued  that  free  capital 
accounts  were  not  necessary  for  the  phenomenal  growth  recorded  by  countries  in  the 
diverse  parts  of  the  world.  As  Jagdish  Bhagwati  observes  in  his  celebrated  1998  paper, 
“After all, China and Japan, different in politics and sociology as well as historical experience, 
have  registered  remarkable  growth  rates.  Western  Europe’s  return  to  prosperity  was  also 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
  
 
achieved  without  capital  account  convertibility.”  Elsewhere  in  the  same  paper  he  remarks, 
“Substantial  gains 
(from  capital  account  convertibility)  have  been  asserted,  not 
demonstrated,  and  most  of  the  payoff  can  be  obtained  by  direct  equity  investment.” 
(emphasis added), a theme to which I shall return shortly. 
9.  
a. 
Let us now look at the specific downsides of full convertibility in the capital account: 
It  is  recognised  that  capital  flows  are  sensitive  to  macroeconomic  conditions.  Any 
deterioration in fiscal conditions, inflation management, balance of payments, or any 
other macroeconomic shock may cause a cessation or reversal of capital flows 
Capital flows, inasmuch as they result essentially from trade in financial assets, are 
prone  to  volatilities  derived  from  information  asymmetries,  herd  behaviour,  panics 
etc., which may be far divested from the fundamental macroeconomic strengths. I 
resist  the  temptation  to  tangentially  sail  into  a  discussion  on  the  vagaries  of  the 
financial  markets.  Suffice 
famous  words:  “when  capital 
development of a country becomes a by-product of the activities of a casino, the job 
is likely to be ill done.” 
As  a  consequence  of  impossible  trinity,  an  open  capital  account  demands  a 
complete  ‘let  go’  of  the exchange  rate  management  and  volatile capital  flows  and 
can  therefore  lead  to  extreme  volatility  in  the  exchange  rate  and  large departures 
from its equilibrium value. 
to  quote  Keynes’s 
b. 
c. 
Views of Bretton woods institutions 
It  is  also  important  to  note  the  significant  shift  in  the  view  of  Bretton  Woods 
10.  
institutions  on  capital  account  liberalisation.  IMF,  which  was  a  strong  votary  of  capital 
account liberalisation in the pre global financial crisis period, adopted a new institutional view 
in December 2012 on capital account liberalisation and the management of capital flows. The 
institutional view recognises that full capital account liberalisation may not be an appropriate 
goal  for  all  countries  at  all  times,  and  that  under  certain  circumstances  capital  flow 
management measures can have a place in the macroeconomic policy toolkit. It has done 
much  to  change  the  public  image  of  the  Fund  as  a  doctrinaire  proponent  of  free  capital 
mobility.  The  Fund  thus  now  endorses,  though  in  a  limited  way,  the  perspective  of  many 
emerging and developing countries. The IMF now recognises that capital flows carry risks, 
and that the liberalisation of capital flows before nations reach a certain threshold of financial 
and  institutional  development  can  accentuate  those  risks.  It  also  acknowledges  that  under 
certain  circumstances,  cross-border  capital  flows  should  be  regulated  to  avoid  the  worst 
effects  of  capital  flow  surges  and  sudden  stops.  It  further  says  that  nations  that  are  the 
source  of  excessive  capital  flows  should  pay  more  attention  to  the  potentially  negative 
spillover effects of their macroeconomic policies. Finally, the IMF notes that its new view on 
capital flow management may be at odds with other international commitments, such as in 
trade  and  investment  treaties  that  restrict  the  ability  to  regulate  cross-border  finance.  The 
World Bank has also advocated the use of capital control measures as a last resort to help 
mitigate a financial crisis and stabilise macroeconomic developments. 
11.  
It may be contextual to recall that when the Asian crisis broke out, some economists 
advocated  imposition  of  temporary  capital  controls  as  a  policy  tool  to  steer  the  affected 
economies  out  of  the  crisis.  In  fact  Malaysia  did  precisely  this  to  check  deepening  of  the 
crisis with success. However at that time it was considered an unorthodox and anti-market 
policy  prescription.  But  in  September  2008,  when  Iceland  faced  a  similar  crisis,  capital 
controls implemented through stringent exchange control regulations were a key component 
of the policy package. As pointed out, the use of capital controls in times of currency and 
banking crisis is now part of the accepted wisdom. It may also be noted that India has been 
using capital controls to effectively manage the flows. While on the subject, let me point out 
that imposition of capital controls by one country can have significant negative externality; it 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  
 
can  generate  a  flight  of  capital  from  other  similarly  situated  countries  for  fear  of  capital 
controls there too. 
12.  
Though the debate on capital account convertibility has moderated and its advocacy 
qualified, it is generally accepted that sooner or later all countries have to be there and the 
question is when, how and at what pace. Are there preconditions to be created so that the 
benefits  of  capital  account  convertibility  outweigh  the  costs,  as  Tarapore  Committee 
advocated  or  should  we  rush  to  it  in  anticipation  of  the  promised  land  and  leave  it  to  the 
financial  markets  to  discipline  economic  management  into  good  behaviour?  Is  the  slow 
progress  to  capital  account  convertibility  “a  case  of  undesirable  procrastination  or  wisely 
heeding  the  precautionary  principle”  as  Arvind  Subramanian  puts  it?  This  leads  me  to 
examine the Indian situation. 
India and liberalisation – the approach thus far 
13.  
As you are aware, during the two-and-half decades of the FERA regime, there were 
severe restrictions on all cross-border transactions. Leave aside capital account, the current 
account transactions were also subject to stringent exchange control regulations. Following 
the economic liberalisation process that started in the early nineties, several measured steps 
were  taken  to  unshackle  India’s  external  sector.  The  first  and  most  important  step  was  to 
move  to  a  flexible  exchange  rate  regime  and  allow  the  hugely  overvalued  Rupee  to  float, 
though  somewhat  managed  down  the  years  –  sometimes  actively  and  sometimes 
passively. The next important step was to declare compliance with Article VIII obligations 
of  the  IMF  –  that  there  will  not  be  any  unreasonable  restriction  on  current  account 
transactions – good half century after the Articles was penned. And the last milestone was 
putting  in  place  a  new  statute  –  the  Foreign  Exchange  Management  Act,  1999  that 
recognised and discriminated between current and capital account transactions, the former 
unrestricted and the latter subject to regulations. While the overarching framework has not 
changed  during  the  last  15  years,  there  have  been  significant  changes  in  the  operating 
procedure. The process has been mostly in one direction; the capital account transactions 
have been progressively liberalised without any significant pause or regression. 
14.  
broad-brush picture, I shall follow the familiar taxonomy. 
a. 
What does the regime for capital account transactions look like today? In drawing a 
There  is  virtually  no  restriction  on  Foreign  Direct  Investment  (FDI).  Any  foreign 
individual  or  firm  or  any  other  association  of  people  can  invest  in  any  Indian 
company  or  set  up  an Indian  company  through  FDI  which essentially  means  long 
term  engagement  with  influence  on  management.  There  are  some  restrictions  on 
the  extent  of  entry  into  select  sectors,  but  that  is  motivated  by  social,  stability  or 
strategic  interests.  For  instance,  restriction  on  entry  into  socially  sensitive  print 
media  sector,  strategically  important  defence  sector  or  bubble  prone  real  estate 
sector cannot really be faulted on economic logic. 
There  are  some  operational  restrictions  on  FDI  in  so  far  as  the  universe  of 
instruments of investment is rather narrow comprising mostly equity instruments and 
that these instruments have to be sold and bought at fair value. The logic is fairly 
simple. An instrument of FDI should not be a camouflage for debt. In normal times 
and  for  traditional  industries,  these  provisions  are  fine.  But  of  late,  we  are 
increasingly being made aware that richer instruments with more structure may be 
needed  for  investment  in,  say,  infrastructure  sector  where  cash  flows  are  typical. 
Similarly, there may be need for some flexibility in valuation in, for example, start-up 
technology firms. We are seized of the problems and working towards a solution to 
remove the irritants. 
In  this  context  I  return  to  Bhagwati’s  comment  I  mentioned  earlier.  If  growth  and 
welfare are the ultimate objectives, as they indeed are, FDI is the best instrument to 
achieve  this.  The  advantages  of  FDI  –  better  access  to  technology,  management 
b. 
c. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
 d. 
e. 
f. 
g. 
h. 
6 
  
 
practice, and so on – have been chronicled in detail. The ‘Make in India’ program is 
indeed based on this principle. It is true that making in India for the world may not be 
easy,  for  that  would  mean  outcompeting  the  existing  incumbents.  But  making  in 
India for the large and latent domestic demand is surely a possibility – just look at 
the  automobile  sector  –  though  it  would  pose  difficult,  but  manageable  problems 
relating to demand management. 
It  is  true  that  FDI  flows  have  not  been  as  robust  as  buoyant  as  we  would  have 
wished it to be. But surely, the capital account regulations are not the cause. As you 
are  aware  FDI  has  a  nexus  with  a  whole  lot  of  other  issues  including  taxation, 
domestic investment climate, infrastructural support, ease of business and so on. It 
can perhaps be said that the productivity gain from addressing these issues will be 
far more that any liberalisation of capital flows into Indian financial markets. 
The regime for Foreign Portfolio Investment (FPI) has also been fairly liberal. The 
two  principal  areas  of  FPI  are  equity  and  debt.  As  far  as  equity  is  concerned, 
portfolio investment has virtually unrestricted access. The access to both sovereign 
and corporate debt is wide enough. There are aggregate limits on FPI in sovereign 
as well as corporate debt but these limits are progressively increased over time in 
keeping with the volume of capital flows and macroeconomic conditions. In recent 
times,  we  have  been  adopting  a  policy  of  nudging  FPI  into  debt  instruments  of  a 
certain minimum maturity so that the investment assumes credit risk and does not 
involve mere interest rate arbitrage. 
Usually, portfolio investment is viewed as hot money which exhibits volatility. It has 
been  argued  that  fear  of  sudden  cessations  and  reversals  on  account  of  portfolio 
flows  are  highly  exaggerated.  I  am  inclined  to  agree  with  this  observation  on  two 
grounds. First, experience shows that though the aggregate portfolio investment at 
any  point  of  time  may  have  a  volatile  periphery,  it  does  have  a  significant  stable 
kernel. Secondly, since the instruments are rupee denominated, any sell-off involves 
a  loss  on  account  of  fall  in  both  the  price  of  the  instrument  as  well  as  the  rupee 
which can be expected to have an equilibrating effect. 
Now  I  come  to  the  most  critical  component  of  capital  flows,  viz.,  foreign  currency 
denominated  debt.  It  is  a  matter  of  great  comfort  that  there  has  not  been  any 
sovereign  market  borrowing  in  a  currency  other  than  rupee.  The  foreign  currency 
borrowing  is  mostly  by  the  corporate  sector.  The  inclination  to  resort  to  foreign 
currency borrowing is seductive. Usually, debt is cheaper than equity. Secondly, it is 
tempting to borrow in a low-interest rate currency and leave the liability un-hedged. 
The currency crisis in Latin America as well as in the Far East had, in addition to 
other  problems,  implosive  and  indiscriminate  foreign  currency  borrowing  at  the 
heart. In the interest of financial stability, it is necessary to monitor and regulate the 
foreign  currency  loan  liability.  The  regulatory  regime  so  far  has  had  the  following 
broad components: 
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
Restriction on short term (less than three years) borrowing 
a loosely monitored overall aggregate limit on foreign currency liability, 
a  discriminatory  regime  channelling  flow  into  the  priority  sectors  and 
disallowing flow into sensitive sectors such as real estate and 
a  cap  on  the  overall  cost  of  borrowing,  as  a  tool  to  address  the  adverse 
selection problem, 
iv. 
It is true that the ECB regime has evolved in response to the investment needs of 
the  economy  as  well  as  that  of  specific  priority  sectors  and  in  the  process  has 
perhaps become more discretionary than necessary. There is a need to consolidate 
the regime. The guiding principle ought to be that no socially useful venture goes 
BIS central bankers’ speeches
 i. 
j. 
k. 
l. 
 
 
unfinanced  and  at  the  same  time  ensuring  that  burgeoning  foreign  currency  debt 
does not pose stability problems. This is easier said than done. 
Globally,  presumably  because  of  the  prolonged  soft  interest  rate  conditions  in  the 
west,  there  has  been  a  significant  increase  in  the  debt  component  of  the  capital 
structure of the corporate balance sheet. The foreign exchange risk inherent in cross 
border  borrowing  raises  stability  concerns.  In  India,  we  have  for  some  time  been 
concerned  about  the  unhedged  exposures  relating  to  the  external  commercial 
borrowing.  There  are  several  disincentives  for  hedging;  cost  of  hedging,  comfort 
drawn  from  accounting  accommodation,  etc.  Active  volatility  management  by  the 
Reserve  Bank  also  may  contribute  to  the  process.  An  orthodox  solution  is  to 
mandate compulsory hedging by all foreign currency borrowers. There are several 
practical  difficulties, 
though.  First,  a  central  authority  mandating  how  an 
entrepreneur should manage the risk smacks of a regression to the command and 
control  economy.  Second,  do  we  have  a  market  that  can  support  hedging  by  all 
foreign  currency  borrowers?  Third,  hedging  is  essentially  transfer  or  parcelling  of 
risk. Where are we transferring the risk in this case? To the banks’ books? Faulty 
mechanism design can create perverse incentives and lead to inefficient outcomes. 
A  saner  approach  would  perhaps  be  to  create  an  atmosphere  and  incentives  for 
recognition of risk and to make available a wide range of hedging instruments. 
While  on  the  subject  of  borrowing,  let  me  mention  an  important  and  encouraging 
development. In economics, the term ‘original sin’, coined by Barry Eichengreen and 
others, has been used to describe the inability of countries to borrow abroad in their 
own  currency  which  lies  at  the  heart  of  currency  crisis  and  financial  fragility.  As 
Krugman points out, :....Beyond that, however, even if a sudden loss of confidence 
does  take  place,  countries  that  have  their  own  currencies  and  borrow  in  those 
currencies  are  simply  not  vulnerable  to  the  kind  of  crisis  so  widely  envisaged. 
Remarkably,  nobody  seems  to  have  laid  out  exactly  how  a  Greek-style  crisis  is 
supposed  to  happen  in  a  country  like  Britain,  the  United  States,  or  Japan  (that 
borrow  in  their  own  currency)  –  and  I  don’t  believe  that  there  is  any  plausible 
mechanism  for  such  a  crisis.”  It  is  heartening  therefore  that  there  has  been 
considerable global interest in recent times in Rupee denominated Indian sovereign 
and more important, corporate debt. A few multilateral agencies have successfully 
issued  Rupee  debt  in  international  financial  centres  last  year.  There  is  a  need  to 
expand and encourage this development and we are in the process of putting the 
necessary framework in place. In this connection, it is also important to put in place 
stable policy for sovereign debt with necessary checks and balances rather than a 
complete ban or total openness. 
What  I  have  dealt  with  so  far  relate  mostly  to  the  corporate  sector.  As  far  as 
Individuals  are  concerned,  I  must  add  the  caveat  that  any  liberalisation  for 
individuals  has  to  be  guided  and  circumscribed  by  the  spectre  of  ‘black  money’. 
Even  with  those  limitations,  we  have  progressively  increased  the  limit  for  capital 
account transactions for Individuals on a per annum basis and are in consultation 
with  the  Government  to  increase  it  to  USD  250,000  per  year  per  individual.  The 
experience so far has been that most of this is used for permissible current account 
transactions, presumably because of the ease. 
The  last  issue  that  remains  to  be  discussed  is  derivatives.  Before  I  discuss  the 
existing regime and its philosophy, it would be necessary to appreciate the nature 
and  dynamics  of  the  currency  market.  I  have  dealt  with  this  issue  in  detail 
elsewhere. As the literature and experience attest, the downside of capital account 
convertibility  can  be  summed  up  in  two  words:  currency  crisis.  Not  only  does  the 
currency market ultimately capture the dynamics of cross border asset transactions, 
it also is treated as an asset with its own dynamics. FEMA mandates the Reserve 
Bank  to  maintain  orderliness  in  the  currency  markets,  the  society  disapproves  of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
  
 
heightened  volatility  and  economists  warn  of  its  adverse  consequences.  In  this 
backdrop,  our  approach  has  been  guided  by  two-if  I  can  use  the  word-  axioms: 
Anyone  anywhere  in  the  world  with  an  exposure  to  the  Rupee  should  be  able  to 
enter  into  a  derivative  transaction  to  hedge  the  currency  risk,  and  the  transaction 
should  be  in  the  on-shore  market.  Beyond  that,  we  have  been  endeavouring  to 
expand the set of derivative transactions. We are not ready yet to allow unfettered 
trading of the rupee for pure speculation. 
Are we ready? 
15.  
Now let me come back to the question I posed at the beginning of my discussion. 
Are  we  ready  for  capital  account  convertibility?  Sometimes  I  ask  myself  rhetorically,  if  a 
similar question had been asked in 1991 “Are we ready for flexible exchange rate?” what the 
considered answer would have been? These questions are difficult to answer. In 1991 our 
hands were forced by many developments. A currency crisis, global acceptance of the free 
market  philosophy  and  so  on.  Is  capital  account  convertibility  predicated  by  any  such 
developments or events? 
16.  
As  I  mentioned  earlier,  capital  flows,  first  and  foremost,  are  sensitive  to 
macroeconomic  policy.  Therefore,  a  freely  convertible  country  must  have  sound,  credible, 
and time consistent macroeconomic policy. What does that translate to, operationally? Fiscal 
prudence and low inflation. Where do we stand in respect of these parameters? I wouldn’t 
think  we  are  very  comfortable  here.  Both  fiscal  management  and  inflation  have  their  own 
logic and dynamics in a large, diverse, developing country like India. How optimal will it be to 
throttle  social  expenditure  and  blow  up  interest  rates  just  to  attain  capital  account 
convertibility? The second threat emanating from capital account convertibility is contagion of 
disturbance in the global financial markets. The brunt of this has to be borne by the domestic 
financial  system.  Though  tightly  regulated,  the  financial  sector,  particularly  the  banking 
industry is surely not in the pink of heath. 
17.  
Therefore  the  question  of  readiness  for  full  convertibility  has  to  be  expanded  to 
several related questions: Is capital control retarding investment and growth of the economy? 
Is  any  socially  useful  project  unable  to  proceed  beyond  the  drawing  board  because  the 
entrepreneur is unable to raise resources either domestically or in offshore markets? What 
will be the incremental benefit of full convertibility that we are denying ourselves? What are 
the  institutional  and  infrastructural  developments  we  must  have  to  reap  the  full  benefits  of 
further  liberalisation  of  capital  account?  There  is  an  enormous  literature  and  a  wealth  of 
experience to provide the answer. The answer should be based on economic logic and on 
evidence and not derived from evangelism or what Bhagwati calls “banner-waving”. 
Concluding thoughts 
18.  
To conclude, there is no denying the fact that sound capital controls have hitherto 
worked well in the Indian case and helped in protecting the economy from the vagaries of 
international capital flows and in insulating the economy from the contagion effect of various 
currency crises but the time has probably come to revisit the issue of greater capital account 
liberalisation. So what should India do or how should it proceed further on this path? The first 
obvious question has to be why does India need capital account convertibility when empirical 
evidence regarding its impact on growth is mostly negative? The indirect effect, as argued by 
some  researchers,  is  also  not  well  established.  The  answer,  to  my  mind,  lies  in  fact  that 
greater opening of capital account is inescapable as the Indian economy grows further and 
becomes global in dimension. A truly globalised economy, which the Indian economy is likely 
to  become  in  the  not  too  distant  a  future,  cannot  afford  to  remain  isolated  for  a  very  long 
period  of  time.  Sooner  than  later,  it  will  need  to  get  closely  integrated  with  the  rest  of  the 
world.  While  there  are  risks  associated  with  full  capital  account  convertibility,  resisting 
liberalisation  over  an  extended  period  may  prove  futile  and  counterproductive.  As  the 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  
 
economy  gets  more  globalised,  it  will  become  harder  to  maintain  closed  capital  accounts. 
Increasing  openness  to  international  trade  may  create  opportunities  for  circumvention  of 
capital  account  restrictions  through  under-and  over  invoicing  of  trade  transactions  and  the 
increasing sophistication of investors and global financial markets makes it much easier to do 
so.  Transfer  pricing  is  one  of  the  methods  which  corporates  may  employ  to  get  around 
capital account restrictions. In any case, keeping any restriction for too long is self defeating 
as  people  end  up  finding  new  methods  of  bypassing  that  restriction.  So,  India  needs  to 
continue moving towards full capital account convertibility. There is simply no escape from it. 
It is a moot question as to how fast the movement should be. That will depend on how fast 
we can meet the most important preconditions like fiscal consolidation, inflation control, low 
level of NPAs, low and sustainable current account deficit, strengthening of financial markets, 
prudential supervision of financial institutions, etc. India has already made visible progress 
on  these  fronts.  There  are  of  course  risks,  but  we  need  to  accept  these  risks  and  move 
forward boldly while controlling the risks as far as practicable. If the experience of developed 
countries is any pointer, sound policies, robust regulatory framework promoting a strong and 
efficient financial sector, and effective systems  and procedures for controlling capital flows 
greatly enhance the chances of ensuring that such flows foster sustainable growth and do 
not  lead  to  disruption  and  crisis.  India  has  all  these  in  place  and  we  need  to  keep  on 
strengthening them. As I step aside, I wish all the actors in this story the best of luck. 
19.  
 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
