  Barry Whiteside: Developing microfinance in Fiji 
Opening address by Mr Barry Whiteside, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Fiji, during the 
media launch of the 2015 Microfinance Awards, Reserve Bank of Fiji, Suva, 12 June 2015. 
 Salutations 
Our valued sponsors of the Microfinance Awards 
All our Stakeholders in Financial Inclusion 
Members of the Media 
Invited Guests 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
Welcome and introduction 
A very good morning to you all 
It  is  with  great  pleasure  that  I  welcome  you  all  to  the  media  launch  of  our  3rd  National 
Microfinance Awards. 
The  Awards  are  indeed  very  special  as  they  enable  us  to  honour  and  recognize  the 
outstanding  achievements  and  contributions  of  some  of  the  best  micro-entrepreneurs  and 
microfinance service providers in Fiji. Small businesses in our country must be nurtured, for 
given time and support they will grow and lend their combined weight to the Fijian economy. 
The theme for our Awards continues to be focussed on “Bringing out the Best” in the area of 
microfinance.  With  this  theme  in  mind  I  am  extremely  pleased  to  announce  that  we  have 
added  a  new  Award  category  this  year  to  honour  and  recognize  the  efforts  of  our  Young 
Microfinance entrepreneurs. This now takes our total number of categories to four: 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
Similar to our past occasions, the Microfinance Service Providers will be nominating several 
of  their  best  microfinance  entrepreneurs  to  the  Individual,  Partnership  and  Young 
Entrepreneur categories and will also qualify as entrants to the Institution category. 
Nominations for all entries are now open and will close on the 31st August 2015, to allow for 
a thorough assessment of all applications received. We hope to receive a wide cross section 
of entries from around the country. 
A  panel  of  judges  will  assess  all  the  nominations  based  on  specific  criteria  set  out  by  the 
Awards Committee. All this will culminate in an Awards night in early November, to which the 
finalists  will  be  invited  and  where  we  will  announce  the  winners  and  celebrate  their 
achievements. 
Best Microfinance Entrepreneur – Individual; 
Best Microfinance Entrepreneur – Partnership; 
Best Microfinance Young Entrepreneur; and 
Best Microfinance Service Provider – Institution. 
Microfinance – inclusive finance 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  earlier  this  month  the  Minister  of  Employment,  Productivity  and 
Industrial Relations highlighted that there are 46,277 job seekers currently registered on their 
database, of which around 4,400 are tertiary graduates 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  To those looking for a job and who cannot find one, I encourage you to look at setting up 
your own little businesses. Bring out your entrepreneurial spirit and nurture it. I believe that 
with  passion,  positivity  and  determination,  many  of  you  can  succeed  and  make  a  decent 
living. 
Microfinance continues to show compelling evidence in lifting the standard of living for the 
under privileged. This has been noted in submissions for these very Awards over the past 
two years. It has been inspiring to see how these micro entrepreneurs started with virtually 
nothing,  but  with  a  little  support  through  microfinance,  have  been  able  to  provide  for  their 
families, build assets, as well as mitigate risks in their lives. I am so pleased to learn from last 
year’s  winners,  that  participating  in  the  Awards  has  inspired  their  respective  communities, 
friends and families to start their own businesses. 
National demand side survey 
Late  last  year,  the  Reserve  Bank  in  partnership  with  the  Pacific  Financial  Inclusion 
Programme and the Fiji Bureau of Statistics conducted a National Demand-Side Survey of 
financial services and products in our country. As can be deduced from its title, the survey 
targeted the users and potential users of financial services across the whole of Fiji. The final 
Report for this survey noted that there is room for expansion and product innovation to meet 
the needs of our microfinance sector. 
When we talk about microfinance we should not only focus on the credit or lending side but 
realise  that  it  is  important  that  our  micro-entrepreneurs  have  access  to  a  whole  range  of 
financial  services  that  are  accessible  and  affordable.  These  financial  services  play  an 
important role in helping poor families manage their lives as well as protecting them against 
unexpected financial shocks. 
Microfinance  Service  Providers  should  ask  themselves,  are  our  current  products  properly 
designed  to  suit  the  needs  of  our  micro-entrepreneurs?  Are  our  current  products  adding 
value to benefit them? Apart from providing credit, are there suitable savings mechanisms in 
place? What  about  insurance:  life  insurance,  health  and  general  insurance?  Do  they  have 
easy access to these services? Are they aware of the types of services available to them? 
Financial literacy 
With  the  availability  of  various  financial  products,  changing  technology  and  delivery 
mechanisms of financial services, financial literacy is an essential everyday life skill. Being 
able to understand our financial landscape and manage money and financial risks effectively 
does  make  a  world  of  difference  in  our  lives.  For  example,  using  your  mobile  wallet  to 
conduct business transactions can save you time and money. 
Regulatory stance 
Ladies and gentlemen, to support our micro-entrepreneurs, the Reserve Bank issued clear 
guidelines  in  2010  for  the  commercial  banks  to  set  up  microfinance  windows  to  provide 
products and services to meet the needs of low income earners and our rural populace who 
had  long  been  excluded  from  banking  services.  This,  followed  by  our  branchless  banking 
guideline,  has  seen  positive  responses  from  our  banks  supporting  our  unserved  and 
underserved communities through innovative banking and delivery channels. 
Microfinance expositions 
The  feedback  received  from  our  demand  survey  also  tells  us  that  lack  of  awareness  is  a 
major  reason  why  people  do  not  use  the  formal  financial  system.  The  Reserve  Bank,  in 
partnership with our financial stakeholders, has been raising awareness and promoting the 
microfinance sector through 19 financial inclusion expositions around Fiji since 2010. Eight 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  expositions alone were held in the maritime area. These expositions provide a one-stop shop 
for financial services to areas where there is little to no access. 
Progress out of poverty Index (PPI) 
I am also pleased to report that an important focus of the Reserve Bank and the National 
Financial Inclusion Taskforce is to empower individuals, especially the poor, to contribute to 
economic  development  and  poverty  alleviation.  I  thank  our  Microfinance  Institutions  (and 
especially  Elrico  Munoz  and  his  SPBD  team)  for  taking  the  initiative  in  introducing  the 
Progress  out  of  Poverty  Indicator  tool  which  will  enable  us  to  assess  the  poverty  level  of 
clients  and  track  progress  out  of  poverty  over  time.  Currently  two  Microfinance  Service 
Providers have fully adopted this tracking system while others, including commercial banks 
and Government, have shown interest in adopting it. With this tracking tool, we hope to see 
more people graduate out of poverty over time. 
Media 
With these few words ladies and gentlemen, let us not forget the important role that you, our 
media,  can  play  in  the  whole  area  of  financial  inclusion  and  microfinance–  you  can  raise 
awareness  on  issues  relating  to  microfinance,  you  can  prompt  discussions  about  its 
promises and opportunities and the developments that are out there. We invite you to join us 
in  disseminating  useful  information  to  strengthen  this  extremely  important  and  growing 
sector. 
Concluding statement 
At the Reserve Bank we are proud of the model for financial inclusion that we have helped 
develop for Fiji. It is a model built around all our stakeholders. It is a model of team work, 
where one institution is not necessarily trying to go one up on its competitors. And it is all for 
the good of giving our people the necessary hand-up that they may need to lift themselves 
and their families out of poverty. 
Let us keep in mind that if we all work together, we can help improve the lives of hundreds, if 
not thousands, of Fijians. Through our collaborative efforts, we can help inspire more micro-
entrepreneurs generate more success stories and achieve a more balanced and sustained 
growth, a growth that is inclusive. 
Finally,  we  must  not  forget  that  these  Awards  would  not  be  possible  if  it  wasn’t  for  our 
sponsors. Once again let me say how grateful we are for your generous support and to have 
you on board for 2015. This year our sponsors include: 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
Thank you once again for your kind support. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  I  now  have  much  pleasure  in  launching  the  2015  National 
Microfinance Awards and thank you all so much for joining us today. 
Vinaka 
Pacific Financial Inclusion Programme ( Gold Sponsor) 
ANZ Bank (Gold) 
Life Insurance Corporation of India (Silver) 
Westpac Banking Corporation (Silver) 
Bank South Pacific (Silver) 
Bank of Baroda (Bronze) 
HFC Bank (Bronze) 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
