  Yves Mersch: Advancing Monetary Union 
Speech by Mr Yves Mersch, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
at the Euro Exhibition, Osnabrück, 25 January 2015. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
Euro banknotes and coins are not just a means of payment. The bridges and arches on our 
banknotes are a symbol of European integration. They stand for the fact that there is a lot 
which  connects  us  within  the  Monetary  Union,  and  that  our  once  so  divided  continent  has 
succeeded in overcoming these deep divisions, as the crisis has recently shown. 
Our  common  currency  also  therefore  stands  for  shared  values.  “Stability  of  institutions 
guaranteeing  democracy,  the  rule  of  law,  human  rights  and  respect  for  and  protection  of 
minorities”  have  been  some  of  the  accession  criteria  for  membership  of  the  EU  since  the 
European Council in Copenhagen in June 1993; “Membership presupposes the candidate’s 
ability to take on the obligations of membership including adherence to the aims of political, 
economic and monetary union.”1 
The  recently  published  legal  opinion  of  the  Advocate  General  of  the  European  Court  of 
Justice  in  the  case  of  Peter  Gauweiler  and  the  Die  Linke  party  against  the  ECB  on  the 
Outright  Monetary  Transactions  (OMT)  programme  also  refers  to  these  constitution-like 
shared  legal  values.  This  “constitutional  compact”  underlies  European  integration  and 
includes  the  German  constitutional  principle  of  constitutional  identity  review  –  it  does  not 
exclude it.2 
Recent expressions of solidarity from all over Europe following the barbaric terrorist attacks 
on staff at the satirical magazine “Charlie Hebdo” in Paris show what a central role the rights 
to freedom of speech and freedom of expression occupy in our system of values. 
These  values  of  freedom  are  central  among  those  accorded  great  importance  in  newer 
Member States from the former Eastern bloc. With the awareness that the common currency 
within  the  EU  is  evidence  of  closer  integration,  the  introduction  of  the  euro  –  especially  in 
countries  such  as  Lithuania  most recently  –  is  also  perceived  as  a  demarcation from,  and 
protection against, purportedly aggressive hegemonic powers. 
This shows that the European Union and the euro area are far more than an amalgamation 
of independent nation states. 
Shared values are all the more important when the cement that typically holds together the 
parts of a full political union is missing. Alongside a shared identity – a loose concept which 
has  sometimes  been  maliciously  abused  in  the  past,  yet  one  which  cannot  merely  be 
reduced  to  a  successful  football  team  –  or  language,  this  is  often  long-term  transfer 
payments  to  even  out  differences  in  living  conditions.  Germany  has  this  in  the  form  of 
horizontal financial equalisation among the federal states [Länderfinanzausgleich], as well as 
transfer payments to the states of former East Germany, which are financed by the solidarity 
surcharge [Solidaritätszuschlag]. 
It may well be that one day the political will considers fiscal transfers between the Member 
States of the euro area necessary and desirable. However, that would then require a change 
                                                
1  Conclusions  of 
in  Copenhagen, 
http://www.consilium.europa.eu/ueDocs/cms_Data/docs/pressData/en/ec/72921.pdf. 
the  Presidency,  European  Council 
21–22 
June 
1993, 
2  See the Opinion of Advocate General Cruz Villalón on Case C-62/14, Peter Gauweiler, et al. and Fraktion DIE 
LINKE  im  Deutschen  Bundestag  v  Deutscher  Bundestag  (Request  for  a  preliminary  ruling  from  the 
Bundesverfassungsgericht (Germany)) delivered on 14 January 2015, paragraph 38 ff. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  is 
that  Member  States,  with 
to the European treaties. There is no provision for a transfer union in the current Treaty. And 
whether you like it or not, that applies to the front door as well as the back door. 
This  is  something  which  those  who  call  for  more  (financial)  solidarity  must  realise.  More 
solidarity within Europe in this sense would also require more European control. But we don’t 
yet have a “euro area parliament” with the democratic legitimation for this, or a supranational 
budget worthy of this name. 
At the moment I see correspondingly little willingness from national parliaments to relinquish 
their budgetary powers in order to centralise them at the European level. The flipside of this 
coin,  however, 
their  own  national  budgets,  have 
disproportionately more individual responsibility. 
Even without financial transfers, there must be reasons why it is more attractive for Member 
States  to  be  part  of  the  Monetary  Union  than  to  stay  outside  it.  In  addition,  they  must  be 
better off in the euro area than out. In concrete terms, membership of the euro should bring 
more stability and prosperity. 
In  this  respect,  the  Monetary  Union  has  already  taken  considerable  steps  towards 
integration. But a common internal market and a single monetary policy alone is not enough 
to achieve this in the long run. 
With  stricter  budgetary  rules  for  euro  area  countries,  a  stability  mechanism  and  banking 
union, the Monetary Union is in a considerably better position today that it was at the start of 
the  crisis.  But  despite  these  steps  towards  integration  we  still  can’t  speak  of  a  completed 
Monetary Union. 
To sit back now, given what has been achieved, would therefore be wrong. Developing the 
Monetary Union further is a permanent undertaking. 
As a matter of principle, the prosperity of each individual country in a monetary union always 
depends on the financial and economic policies of the other Member States. Member States 
find  themselves,  as  it  were,  in  a  community  with  a  shared  destiny.  All  governments  are 
therefore well advised if they take the other Member States into account and coordinate their 
policies where appropriate. Member States thus not only need a common monetary policy, 
they also profit when they share more sovereignty in other policy areas. 
When I talk about “sharing sovereignty”, this in no way means that Member States lose their 
independent decision-making authority, let alone their national identity. On the contrary, the 
more  sovereignty  Member  States  share, the  more  influence  they  can  sometimes  gain.  Let 
me illustrate this with an example. 
Last year Lithuania’s finance minister, Rimantas Šadžius, reportedly said, “we already have 
the  euro,  it  just  has  a  different  name”.  What  he  wanted  to  express  by  that  was  that 
Lithuania’s monetary policy  was significantly shaped by the ECB. From 2002 the litas was 
pegged to the exchange rate of the euro, and before that to the US dollar. On Thursday Vitas 
Vasiliauskas, Chairman of the Board of Lietuvos bankas, was allowed to have a say for the 
first time in the monetary policy of the second-largest economy in the world. 
In  times  of  highly  interdependent  national  economies,  sharing  sovereignty  means  gaining 
influence. And precisely this common decision-making for the benefit of all is a prerequisite 
for Monetary Union being able to bring its members more stability and prosperity. 
This is particularly true when it comes to creating a single European financial market. It is this 
aspect  which  I  would  like  to  go  into  in  more  detail  today.  At  the  moment,  as  a  logical 
consequence  of  the  banking  union  created  last  year,  a  capital  markets  union  is  under 
discussion. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Why Europe needs a capital markets union 
Europe’s  economy  is  characterised  by  small  and  medium-sized  enterprises  (SMEs).  They 
account for two out of three jobs and generate around 60% of value added. And precisely 
these enterprises finance themselves almost exclusively via the domestic banking sector. In 
most  countries,  however,  the  majority  of  loans  to  enterprises  are  granted  by  only  a  few 
banks. That makes the economy vulnerable towards, and dependent on, this sector. 
In  the  United  States,  on  the  other  hand,  it  is  quite  usual  for  enterprises  to  obtain  money 
directly  from  the  capital  market.  And  not  necessarily  in  the  state  in  which  they  have  their 
headquarters.  This  form  of  corporate  financing  makes  the  economy  much  less  vulnerable 
towards any problems in the banking sector. It is, however, significantly underdeveloped in 
Europe. 
In  a  monetary  union  one  should  also  expect  a  fully  integrated  capital  market.  That  would 
mean,  for  example,  that  a  creditworthy  entrepreneur  from  Osnabrück  could  issue  a  bond 
without any problems in the Netherlands. Or an entrepreneur from Lisbon could do the same 
in  France.  After  all,  France,  Portugal,  the  Netherlands,  Germany  and  15  other  countries 
share the same currency. 
A  truly  integrated  capital  market  would  not  only  benefit  the  European  economy  because  it 
would ensure an efficient and location-independent allocation of financial resources. It would 
also bring with it a greater distribution of risk. 
First, spreading risk means striving for a balanced financing mix. If Europe’s enterprises do 
not  principally  finance  themselves  with  bank  loans  but  also  with,  for  example,  corporate 
bonds,  the  economy  can  still  prosper  when  banks  are  rather  hesitant  in  their  lending. 
Currently in Europe, however, only around 20–50% of debt financing takes place in capital 
markets. By comparison, in the United States it is around 80%. 
Now, we cannot expect to have a completely new financing mix in Europe from one day to 
the next. That is why a healthy banking sector remains a prerequisite for SMEs to be able to 
access loans. Over the medium to long term, however, the desire is not to have to rely on 
this sector alone, but to foster alternative methods of financing, for example by appropriately 
regulating the securitisation market. 
Second, spreading risk means that financial markets within a monetary union should actually 
function  independently  of  national  borders.  Economic  shocks  can  then  be  better  absorbed 
because  countries  receive  a  certain  amount  of  protection  from  the  private  sector.  If,  for 
example,  part  of  a country’s  assets  are  held  by foreign  investors, these  investors  will  also 
bear a share of the consequences of an economic shock. Such shocks thus have a reduced 
impact on the domestic economy. A country can also reduce its  vulnerability to shocks by 
holding  a  geographically  diversified  portfolio  itself.  Ultimately,  integrated  financial  markets 
help  to  cushion  national  shocks  because companies  and  consumers  can  also fall  back  on 
foreign capital markets and banks in times of crisis. 
Such risk-sharing with the private sector works very well In the United States. According to 
scientific  estimates,  around  two-thirds  of  an  economic  shock  are  smoothed  by  capital  and 
credit markets.3 The European financial markets are much less effective at absorbing such 
shocks and their ability to do so deteriorated even further during the course of the crisis.4 
                                                
3  Sørensen,  B.  E.  and  Yosha,  O.,”Channels  of  interstate  risk  sharing:  United  States  1963–1990”,  Quarterly 
Journal of Economics, 111(4), 1996. 
4   Van  Beers,  N.,  Bijlsma,  M.  and  Zwart,  G.,  “Cross-country  insurance  mechanisms  in  currency  unions:  an 
empirical  assessment”,  Bruegel  Working  Papers,  2014/04,  2014;  International  Monetary  Fund,  “Towards  a 
fiscal  union 
technical  background  notes”,  September  2013,  available  at 
http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/sdn/2013/sdn1309tn.pdf. 
the  euro  area: 
for 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  The design of a capital markets union – regulatory harmonisation and institutional 
efficiency 
The Commission will soon present a first proposal on what a capital markets union could look 
like in practice. This proposal will then be submitted for public consultation. The details are 
not yet known, but I would like to share with you some of my ideas about an effective capital 
markets union. 
For  me,  the  term  “capital  markets  union”  means  more  than  simply  tinkering  with  existing 
regulation. It means addressing areas that are politically sensitive as well, such as disclosure 
requirements  for  companies,  supervision  of  the  financial  infrastructure,  insolvency  law  and 
EU-wide  harmonisation  of  capital  gains  tax  regulation.  We  have  already  achieved  a  great 
deal in the field of payment systems, having broken down barriers and significantly reduced 
costs for citizens since we introduced the Single Euro Payments Area (SEPA), although the 
existing legislation now needs to be implemented with full force. We want to do the same in 
the medium term for the cross-border use of credit cards: in a monetary union, there should 
be no “roaming” fees when it comes to making payments. 
The basic principle of the free movement of capital goes back to the Treaty of Rome5 and 
has enjoyed the same status as the other fundamental freedoms since the Maastricht Treaty. 
I think it is time that we consider what regulatory and institutional adjustments have become 
necessary since then so that we can take full advantage of the single capital market. 
Turning first to the regulatory dimension, let’s stick with our example of the entrepreneur in 
Osnabrück. If his company wishes to issue a bond in the Netherlands, it will agree with the 
investor whether the transaction is to be carried out under German or Dutch law. This initially 
sounds  like  a  relatively  simple  way  to  conduct  cross-border  financial  transactions  despite 
divergent national legislation. 
However,  financial  transactions  are  often  far  more  complex  than  that.  There  might  be  an 
entire chain of financial intermediaries, meaning that it is not clear for the final buyer what 
his/her  legal  claims  and  property  rights  are.  The  account  holder’s  legal  position  from  the 
moment a security is posted to his/her account varies substantially. In some countries, the 
account holder has full and undivided ownership. In other countries, he/she has an “inferior” 
legal position, i.e. he/she holds an indirect interest in a property or just a claim against the 
account provider. 
At  the  turn  of  this  century,  a  group  of  financial  market  experts,  led  by  Alberto  Giovannini, 
developed  a  number  of  suggestions  as  to  how  greater  harmonisation  in  the  EU  financial 
markets  could  be  achieved.  In  two  reports6,  representatives  of  the  private  sector,  the 
European  Commission  and 
the  European  Central  Bank  presented  concrete 
recommendations on how, for example, regulatory barriers could be broken down. 
Almost 12 years have now passed since the second report was published and some of these 
proposals and recommendations have still not been implemented. For example, we still do 
not have an EU-wide framework for the treatment of interests in securities. 
Drawing  once  more  on  the  comparison  with  the  United  States,  a  cross-border  securities 
transaction costs at least ten times as much in Europe as it does in the United States. 
I  think  that  makes  it  clear  that  Europe’s  economy  has  a  lot  to  gain  from  dismantling  the 
relevant regulatory barriers as part of a capital markets union. 
                                                
5  At that time with the caveat: “to the extent necessary for the proper functioning of the Common Market”. 
6  http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/financial-markets/docs/clearing/first_giovannini_report_en.pdf. 
http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/financial-markets/docs/clearing/second_giovannini_report_en.pdf. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  In  addition  to  harmonised  regulation  for  securities,  we  should  also  seek  to  implement  a 
harmonised legal framework for crisis management. The Council Regulation on cross-border 
insolvency  proceedings  has  provided  a  common  regulatory  framework  governing,  for 
example,  jurisdictions  and  the  recognition  of  court  judgements.  But  within  this  framework, 
there  are  substantial  national  differences,  such  as  regarding  the  extent  to  which  various 
stakeholders are protected in the event of an insolvency. 
In my view, a single resolution framework for non-banks, i.e. central counterparties (CCPs; in 
line  with  the  Bank  Recovery  and  Resolution  Directive  (BRRD)),  is  also  part  of  a  capital 
markets union. We should also have a comprehensive resolution regime for central securities 
depositories (CSDs) in order to level the playing field for banks and non-banks. 
Those are just a couple of examples. In general, what is important is that financial market 
regulation be harmonised so that a single European capital market can function smoothly. It 
is very important to keep in mind that harmonisation and standardisation are not the same 
thing  as  seeing  everything  at  par  or  interfering  with  cultural  identities.  You  can  use  a 
computer in any of the Member States and the connections are configured in such a way that 
I  can  exchange  keyboards  with  different  language  layouts  without  any  problems.  This 
technical standardisation does not therefore stand in the way of language diversity. 
But harmonised regulation alone is not enough. We also need institutional adjustments. 
If – as in the case of the capital markets union – regulation is to be implemented and applied 
so that the same conditions prevail throughout the whole EU, then there are, in my view, two 
main approaches. 
The first is where the legislator creates strict rules that leave no room for interpretation. They 
can then be implemented and applied in a decentralised manner, i.e. at national level, with 
the  result  that  institutional  adjustments  are  not  essential.  Alternatively,  the  legislator  may 
wish  to  draw  up  more  flexible  regulation.  In  this  case,  a  supranational  authority  would  be 
needed to ensure that this regulation is interpreted and applied in the same way across all 
Member States. 
Finding this balance between discretionary powers and centralisation comes to the fore, for 
example,  in  the  context  of  supervision  of  securities  markets,  instruments  and  market 
infrastructures.  Day-to-day  supervision  is  currently  largely  done  at  the  national  level.  We 
should  consider  whether  this  is  still  appropriate  and  what  role  the  European  supervisory 
authorities will play in the future. Their tasks and responsibilities are currently being reviewed 
in Brussels. 
Closing remarks 
As  you  see,  the  capital  markets  union  is  a  bigger  project  that  cannot  be  implemented 
overnight,  not  to  mention  the  progress  that  is  still  needed  in  terms  of  integration  in  other 
political areas. 
But this should not discourage us from getting started on it. Political scientists would tell you 
that it is completely normal that we didn’t have a fully accomplished currency union from day 
one  and  that  we  still  don’t  have  it  today.  Hardly  any  international  agreement  was  as 
ambitious  at  the  first  attempt  as  some  of  the  negotiators  would  have  perhaps  liked.  The 
United  States  also  needed  many  decades  and  went  through  several  crises  before  its 
currency union achieved its current form. 
The  “Four  Presidents’  Report”  (European  Commission,  European  Council,  Eurogroup  and 
ECB)  presented  to  the  Heads  of  State  or  Government  in  2012  discusses  the  need  to 
complete  the  Economic  and  Monetary  Union.  This  includes  considering  a  fiscal  union  and 
even a political union, which are difficult topics and ones that I have not touched upon today. 
Let’s  remind  ourselves  that  Europe’s  Heads  of  State  or  Government  already  “laid  the 
foundation  for  completion  of  the  European  Union”  with  the  Maastricht  Treaty.  This  Treaty, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  according  to former German  Chancellor  Helmut Kohl,  marked “a  new,  decisive  step  in  the 
process  of  European  integration  that  in  a  few  years  will  lead  to  the  creation  of  what  the 
founding fathers of modern Europe dreamt of after the last war: a United States of Europe.”7  
It is time that this affirmation resulted in action. 
A  completed  Union  would  not  mean  that  Member  States  give  up  their  national  identities. 
Quite the contrary: they bring their national identities with them into the euro area. That is 
why we speak of “unity in diversity”. The Euro Exhibition illustrates this: while one side of our 
coins all share the same design, each Member has its own country-specific design for the 
reverse  side.  These  designs  often  bear  symbols  of  national  identity,  such  as  Milda,  the 
symbol  of  freedom,  who  features  on  the  Latvian  euro  coins.  But  go  and  take  a  look  for 
yourself! I hope you will enjoy the exhibition. My thanks go to the Deutsche Bundesbank and 
the City of Osnabrück for inviting me to today’s opening event. 
 
                                                
7  Kohl, H. “Zielvorstellungen und Chancen für die Zukunft Europas”, speech given on 3 April 1992. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
