  Lawrence Schembri: The long-term evolution of house prices – an 
international perspective 
Remarks  by  Mr  Lawrence  Schembri,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  to  the 
Canadian Association for Business Economics, Kingston, Ontario, 25 August 2015. 
 I  would  like  to  thank  Don  Coletti,  Jason  Allen,  Brian  Peterson,  Greg  Bauer  and  Denis  Gorea  for  their  help 
preparing this speech. 
Accompanying charts can be found at the end of the speech or on the Bank of Canada’s website. 
Introduction 
Thank  you  for  the  invitation  to  speak  here  today.  Every  August  since  1961,  when  John 
Diefenbaker  was  prime  minister  and  you  could  buy  a  house  for  $15,000,  business  and 
government economists have gathered here in Kingston to discuss issues of the day. CABE 
has carried on this tradition of convincing economists to attend a conference while everyone 
else is on vacation. The promise of a good chart is probably all the convincing most of us 
need. I’ve got plenty of those for you today. 
I want to talk to you about the evolution of house prices and the underlying determinants of 
their  long-term  movements.  As  you  know,  developments  in  the  housing  sector  and  the 
related  mortgage  market  are  important,  for  both  the  Canadian  economy  and  its  financial 
system.  My  presentation,  then,  is  part  of  our  ongoing  effort  at  the  Bank  to  promote  an 
informed discussion of housing and house prices. 
In  our  quarterly  Monetary  Policy  Report  and  our  biannual  Financial  System  Review  we 
usually  take  a  “here  and  now”  perspective.  But  today  I  want  to  provide  more  context  by 
stepping back and looking at house prices in two dimensions: 
• 
• 
across time, over the past 40 years; and 
across  countries  –  in  particular,  across  a  group  of  countries  that  share  economic 
circumstances and policy frameworks similar to Canada’s. 
I’ll begin with a quick look at some stylized facts about the evolution of house prices. Then, 
I’ll examine their long-run determinants from both the demand and supply sides. Finally, I’ll 
comment on the implications of house prices for financial stability and the recent experience 
with macroprudential housing-related policies, including their complementary interaction with 
monetary policy. 
House price trends 
Let’s  start  with  trends  in  house  prices.  Chart  1  shows  indexes  of  real  house  prices  since 
1975 for two sets of advanced economies. Chart 1a shows Canada and a set of comparable 
small,  open  economies  (Australia,  New  Zealand,  Norway  and  Sweden)  with  similar  macro 
policy  frameworks  and  similar  experiences  during  and  after  the  global  financial  crisis.1  In 
particular, they did not have sizable post-crisis corrections in house prices. 
                                                
1  Although  these  economies  were  not  at  the  centre  of  the  crisis,  they  were  severely  affected  by  it  and  the 
subsequent recession. They did not experience significant bank failures so the normal channels of mortgage 
finance continued to operate. Banks in these jurisdictions typically draw on external sources for some of their 
funding. During the peak of the crisis, these sources largely dried up and banks received temporary liquidity 
support  from  public  sources.  In  Canada,  for  example,  the  federal  government  implemented  the  Insured 
Mortgage Purchase Program in 2009. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
For  comparison  purposes, Chart 1b shows  a  second  set  of  advanced  economies  that  did 
experience significant and persistent post-crisis declines in house prices.2  
Three points about these charts. 
First, there are notable variations across countries. While there is some common movement, 
local circumstances clearly matter. 
Second, broadly speaking, real house prices across both sets of countries experienced no 
material upward trend from 1975 to 1995. 
Third,  a  generalized  upward  movement  in  house  prices  began  in  the  second  half  of  the 
1990s  and  is  continuing  today,  even  after  post-crisis  corrections.  Real  prices  remain  well 
above 1995 levels for almost all countries. 
These trends suggest that there are common factors at the global level or simultaneously in 
each country that have arisen over the past 20 years and have pushed up real house prices. 
Understanding these common and idiosyncratic determinants of house prices is important for 
both macroeconomic outcomes and financial stability and thus the conduct of monetary and 
macroprudential policies. 
A framework for analyzing house price trends 
To  analyze  these  trends,  let’s  start  with  some  basics.  A  house  is  simultaneously  both  a 
consumption good and an asset. It delivers a stream of non-financial housing services and, 
at the same time, is also a store of wealth. For most of us, it is the largest asset we own. 
A household’s decision to purchase a house depends on the utility of the services it provides, 
its price, and its ongoing user cost. The user cost includes depreciation, maintenance and 
interest costs, less the expected price growth. In the housing market, the price is determined 
by  the  total  demand  for  housing  services  and  the  stock  of  houses.  The  equilibrium  house 
price  thus  depends  on  the  user  cost,  which  includes  the  expected  price  appreciation,  and 
this, in turn, depends on the expected evolution of demand and supply factors. 
To complicate matters, a number of other dimensions influence the choice of the data being 
analyzed: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
For  my  purposes  today,  I’ll  focus  primarily  on  owner-occupied  houses,  the  total  of  singles 
and multiples and the composite price for existing houses measured at the national level.3  
Housing can be owner-occupied or rented. 
Housing units can be single-family houses or multiple-unit dwellings. 
Housing is a composite good consisting of both a structure and land. 
Housing prices can be for existing or new houses, or both. 
                                                
2  These  house  price  measures  are  indexes,  not  levels,  rebased  from  the  real  house  price  database  of  the 
Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Dallas,  with  the  average  of  each  country’s  index  for  2005  representing  100.  The 
charts  show  house  price  movements  for  individual  countries  relative  to  their  average  over  the  period  from 
1975 to the first quarter of 2015. 
3  Because  of  these  multiple  dimensions,  as  well  as  regional  influences  within  a  country,  housing  and  house 
prices  are  intrinsically  heterogeneous.  Therefore,  price  measures  are  necessarily  indexes.  The  SP/Case-
Shiller  city-level  indexes  of  repeated  sales  control  for  quality,  but  their  availability  is  limited  to  a  few 
jurisdictions.  In  Canada,  the  equivalent  to  the  Case-Shiller  is  the  Teranet/National  Bank  Composite  House 
Price Index. The Bank of Canada uses this index and the Canadian Real Estate Association MLS Home Price 
Index,  as  well  as  the  MLS  average  for  monitoring  purposes.  These  three  price  indexes  have  exhibited  the 
same upward trend. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Demand factors 
Four broad sets of demand factors have likely contributed to rising real house prices across 
advanced economies since 1995: 
• 
• 
macroeconomic – rising disposable incomes and lower long-term interest rates; 
demographic  –  population  growth,  driven  in  part  by  migration,  and  shifts  in  age 
structure and family size; 
credit conditions – broader access to and more efficient funding of mortgage credit 
due to financial liberalization and innovation; and 
other 
investment, preference shifts and regulatory and tax changes. 
the  macro-policy 
improvements 
international 
framework, 
factors  – 
  to 
House prices and income 
First, let’s look at house prices and income. Since 1995, house prices in Canada and the set 
of  comparable  countries  have  increased  faster  than  nominal  personal  disposable  income 
(Chart 2a).4 During this period, all of these countries experienced solid income growth, with 
the strongest growth in Norway and Sweden (Chart 2b). 
During the global financial crisis, these countries also experienced house price corrections. 
This  caused  the  ratios  of  house  prices  to  income  to  decline  temporarily,  after  which  they 
continued climbing. 
So why did house prices rise faster than income? 
Demographics 
There are a number of possible explanations. Consider population growth. Chart 3a shows 
population growth rates in our set of comparable countries over two periods, 1975 to 1994 
and 1995 to 2015. Population growth rates were the highest in Australia, Canada and New 
Zealand  over  the  entire  sample.  Moreover,  growth  rates  increased  in  all  countries,  except 
Canada,  in  the  post-1995  period  relative  to  the  pre-1995  period.  Therefore,  population 
growth could help explain the rise in house prices relative to income for most countries over 
the latter part of the sample.5  
One of the factors that has affected population growth rates is migration. Net migration was 
highest in Australia and Canada over the entire sample. In addition, net migration increased 
importantly in all five countries in the second half of the sample period (Chart 3b).6  
In  Australia,  Canada  and  New  Zealand,  the  rate  of  population  growth  of  the  approximate 
house-owning  cohort  of  those  aged  25  to  75  declined  in  the  second  part  of  the  sample 
period.  This  likely  reflects  the  aging  of  their  populations  as  the  postwar  baby  boom 
generation moved from youth into middle age (Chart 4). 
Nonetheless, the growth rate of this cohort still remains well above 1 per cent for these three 
countries. 
                                                
4  Nominal  personal  disposable  income  was  rebased  to  be  consistent  with  the  rebased  house  prices  in  each 
country, as described in footnote 2. 
5  Sweden had the lowest rate of population growth among these countries, but it also experienced the largest 
increase in real house prices between 1995 and 2015. 
6  The home-ownership rate of immigrants is slightly less than that of native-born residents in all five countries. 
“Indicators of Immigrant Integration: Settling In,” OECD Publishing, 2 July 2015, p. 179. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  In Canada, it is noteworthy that the average family size decreased from about 3.5 in 1976 to 
below 3.0 in 2011, a decline of approximately 20 per cent.7 Partial evidence suggests that 
this  pattern  is  similar  in  the  other  advanced  economies  in  our  sample.  This  decline  in  the 
average family size has supported the rate of household formation, and thus, has partially 
offset  the  impact  of  the  lower  growth  rate  of  the  house-owning  cohort  on  the  demand  for 
houses in Australia, Canada and New Zealand.8  
It is also important to consider where population growth is occurring. Chart 5 shows that over 
our  sample  period,  the  pace  of  urbanization,  measured  by  the  change  in  the  urbanization 
ratio, has increased since 1995 in all of the countries in the comparable group, except New 
Zealand.9  Australia  and  Canada  are  notable  for  the  size  of  the  shift,  which  could  be 
explained by a number of factors. These include the well-known agglomeration economies of 
scale  provided  by  urban  areas  and  the  location  preferences  of  home-owners,  especially 
younger-age cohorts and recent immigrants.10  
The urbanization of the population in Norway also stands out. This could potentially explain 
why  house  prices  have  grown  faster  in  Norway  than  in  Canada,  even  though  population 
growth in Canada has been higher than in Norway. 
To sum up, population growth and the shift in demand for housing toward urban areas have 
exerted strong upward pressure on house prices. 
Credit conditions 
A  third  demand  factor  affecting  house  prices  is  the  improvement  in  mortgage  credit 
conditions.  Lower  long-term  interest  rates  and  financial  liberalization  and  innovation  have 
improved  housing  affordability  in  advanced  economies,  especially  since  the  mid-1990s.  I’ll 
say a few words about each of these changes that have influenced the availability of credit. 
Since  2000,  real  10-year  government  bond  yields  have  trended  downward  across  all 
advanced countries, including those in our comparison group, with a slight increase during 
the recent financial crisis (Chart 6). 
The decline in yields has been attributed to higher global savings and stronger monetary and 
fiscal  policy  frameworks,  which  have  credibly  reduced  inflation  and  risk  premiums  by 
increasing  macroeconomic  stability  in  the  roughly  15-year  period  (known  as  the  Great 
Moderation)  that  preceded  the  global  financial  crisis.11  Since  the  crisis,  persistently  weak 
global demand – especially real investment – coupled with sustained low central bank policy 
rates  and  large  asset  purchases  has  helped  to  lower  long-term  interest  rates  and,  in  turn, 
reduce  financing  costs  for  financial  intermediaries  and  mortgage  rates  for  households.12 
Other  things  being  equal,  this  decline  has  helped  improve  the  affordability  of  home 
ownership and support demand for houses. 
                                                
7 
8 
“Fifty years of families in Canada: 1961 to 2011,” Statistics Canada. 
In Canada, the evidence indicates that much of the increase in home ownership is among the older cohort of 
the  population,  which  suggests  that  longer  and  healthier  life  spans  may  have  supported  house  demand  in 
recent years. 
9  For example, the urbanization ratio in Canada increased from 75.61 per cent in 1975 to 77.68 per cent in 1995 
and 81.65 per cent in 2014. New Zealand is the most urbanized country in the sample; its ratio was already 
above 80 per cent in 1975. 
10  See,  for  example,  Agglomeration  Economics,  edited  by  Edward  L.  Glaeser,  National  Bureau  of  Economic 
Research Conference Report (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2010). 
11  For  more  on  the  decline  in  real  long-term  interest  rates,  see  C.  Wilkins,  “Monetary  Policy  and  the 
Underwhelming Recovery” (speech to the CFA Society, Toronto, 22 September 2014). 
12  For  example,  in  Canada  discounted  5-year  mortgage  rates  have  declined  by  about  470  basis  points  since 
2000, from just above 7.25 per cent to 2.55 per cent. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Credit  conditions  have  been  positively  affected  by  financial  liberalization  and  innovation. 
Recent work by the International Monetary Fund has catalogued the related effects of these 
two factors on access to housing market finance and mortgage market development across 
countries.13  
The trend in advanced economies from the mid-1990s until the crisis has been toward higher 
maximum  loan-to-value  ratios,  longer  amortizations  for  mortgage  borrowers  and  more 
flexible funding arrangements for mortgage lenders in terms of covered bonds and mortgage 
securitization.  The  assessment  and  diversification  of  mortgage  credit  risk  have  also 
improved. As a consequence, a broader set of borrowers and lenders has become involved 
in obtaining and providing mortgage finance. 
Chart  7a  shows  a  positive  relationship  between  a  summary  index  of  mortgage  finance 
conditions,  constructed  by  the  IMF,  which  captures  both  financial  liberalization  and 
innovation, and the depth of the mortgage markets across several advanced economies.14 
Although  data  for  New  Zealand  are  not  available,  the  chart  indicates  that  the  other  four 
countries in our comparison group have mortgage finance conditions in place that generate 
deep  mortgage  markets  and  foster  broad  and  often  less  procyclical  access  to  mortgage 
finance.  Again,  other  things  equal,  this  supports  demand  for  owner-occupied  housing  and 
higher house prices. 
Chart 7b shows that home-ownership rates in Canada and Sweden (over a shorter sample 
period) have risen, suggesting that these changes to mortgage finance have had a positive 
impact on housing affordability. In Australia, the rate of home ownership has declined. This 
may  be  due  to  a  more  modest  change  in  mortgage  credit  conditions.  Or,  more  likely, 
affordability has been eroded by rapidly rising house prices, which have increased the most 
in Australia among the comparison group. For Norway, there has been no material change in 
the home-ownership rate over this limited time period.15  
As I noted earlier, important innovations have fostered deeper, more efficient and diversified 
mortgage  financing.  I’ll  comment  on  the  two  most  significant:  covered  bonds  and 
securitization. 
Covered bonds have been popular in Denmark for a long time. They were introduced and 
have become more widely used in Sweden and Norway and, to a lesser extent, in Canada, 
Australia and New Zealand (Chart 8a). 
These  bonds  have  played  a  growing  role  in  mortgage  finance  in  the  post-crisis  period 
because  they  are  generally  viewed  as  safer  than  private-label  securitization.  They  give 
investors access to dual collateral: the mortgages securing the bonds as well as other assets 
on the issuer’s balance sheet should the mortgages prove insufficient.16  
Securitization  of  mortgages  also  increased  significantly  in  the  pre-crisis  period  in  some 
countries, especially private-label securitization in the United States (Chart 8b). While these 
vehicles were successful in raising large amounts of mortgage funding before the crisis, they 
were an important source of financial vulnerability during the crisis because the incentives to 
originate  and  securitize  subprime  mortgages  were  misaligned  and  the  related  risks  were 
opaque and not well priced. 
                                                
13  See International Monetary Fund “Housing and the Business Cycle” in World Economic Outlook, April 2008; 
and  E.  Cerutti,  J.  Dagher  and  G.  Dell’Ariccia  “Housing  Finance  and  Real-Estate  Booms:  A  Cross-Country 
Perspective,” IMF Staff Discussion Note, June 2015. 
14  See International Monetary Fund “Housing and the Business Cycle” in World Economic Outlook, April 2008. 
15  Comparable time-series data for New Zealand are not available. 
16  Since  covered  bonds  are  relatively  senior  in  the  creditor  hierarchy  in  the  event  of  insolvency,  they  have  a 
preferential claim over depositors and other debt-holders. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  Since the crisis, we have seen a dramatic decline in private-label securitizations of residential 
mortgages, which has not recovered, despite global financial reform efforts led by the G-20 
to address the serious weaknesses in their design. 
Publicly  supported  securitization  has  continued  to  play  an  important  role  in  funding 
residential mortgages over this period, however, especially in the United States and Canada. 
Other factors supporting demand 
A  number  of  other  related  factors  have  likely  supported  the  demand  for  houses  in  our 
comparison group and in advanced economies more generally. 
All  of  the  countries  in  our  comparison  group  had  solid  macro  and  financial  policies 
characterized by 
• 
monetary  policy  frameworks  comprising  explicit  and  credible  inflation  targets  and 
flexible exchange rates; 
sustainable fiscal positions; and 
effective financial regulatory and supervisory frameworks.17  
• 
• 
As a result, these countries achieved a high degree of macro and financial stability over the 
post-1995  period;  in  particular,  they  kept  inflation  low.  This  stability  had  a  number  of 
important consequences. It reduced uncertainty for households and firms. As noted, it also 
lowered risk premiums and long-term interest rates.18 And it fostered financial and mortgage 
market development. 
These  countries  all  coped  with  the  crisis  and  its  aftermath  relatively  well.  Economic  and 
financial stability strengthened the demand for houses because it enhanced the perception 
that  they  are  safe,  high-quality  assets.19  Consequently,  households  may  have  decided  to 
shift more of their wealth into housing and consume more housing services as their income 
increased by buying more owner-occupied dwellings over time. This trend was supported by 
government  policies  (although  not  widespread  in  our  comparison  group)  to  promote  home 
ownership, especially for younger and lower income households.20  
Supply factors 
Now let’s look at the supply factors that have influenced the prices of houses, in particular, 
regulation and geography. Such supply constraints tend to be most binding in urban areas. 
Coupled  with  the  observed  shift  in  demand  related  to  population  growth  in  urban  areas, 
supply constraints may have put significant upward pressure on house prices in urban areas 
in advanced economies. 
                                                
17  All of the countries, except Sweden, are significant commodity exporters. From 2002 until 2014 they benefited 
from rising commodity prices. 
18  Credibly reducing expected inflation also contributes to lower nominal mortgage rates. The effect of this is to 
spread the real burden of servicing a mortgage more evenly over its term. 
19  Foreign investors also perceived these countries as attractive locations to invest in real estate, although the 
impact of their investment on house demand and prices in the countries is unlikely to be widespread. A recent 
survey of international real estate investors found that Australia, Canada, Sweden and several other countries 
represent  the  “most  stable  and  secure”  environments  for  real  estate  investment.  (See  Foreign  Investment 
Survey,  Association  of Foreign  Investors in  Real  Estate, January  2013.)  The  IMF,  in  a review  of  existing  – 
albeit scarce – evidence, concluded that the impact of foreign investors on real estate prices is not pervasive, 
but is limited to certain urban markets and at higher price ranges. (See H. Ahir, H. Kang and P. Loungani, 
Seven Questions on the Global Housing Markets, IMF Research Bulletin, September 2014. 
20  Examples  of  such  policies  include  favourable  tax  treatment  (mortgage  interest  deductibility,  reduced capital 
gains, tax deferred home-ownership savings programs) and public mortgage guarantees. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  The  regulatory  factors  include  land-use  or  zoning  restrictions  that  specify,  for  example, 
minimum lot sizes or maximum development density; the establishment of greenbelts around 
urban areas, which represent a more sweeping land-use restriction; and development fees. 
In terms of geographical constraints, the most common are bodies of water and landscape 
features  such  as  mountains,  wetlands  and  other  terrain  not  suitable  for  residential 
development. 
To what extent are these sorts of constraints affecting house prices in urban areas? Chart 9 
provides some suggestive evidence on the impact of land-use regulations on median price-
to-income  ratios.  Many  of  the  cities  with  higher  ratios  also  have  obvious  geographical 
constraints – Hong Kong and Vancouver are good examples – so the two sources of supply 
restrictions likely interact to put upward pressure on prices. 
To examine the implications of these supply constraints, it is useful to consider the impact of 
urban population density on house prices. 
Chart  10  indicates  that,  over  the  period  from  1995  to  2014,  there  was  a  strong  positive 
relationship  between  increases  in  population  density  and  house  prices  in  Canadian  urban 
centres.21, 22 
Greater population density, combined with regulatory and geographical constraints, creates 
price incentives that cause shifts in the available housing mix.23 In particular, as the prices of 
single-family homes rise, condos become a more affordable alternative. 
In Vancouver, bounded on three sides by water with coastal mountains as a backdrop, condo 
development  has  dominated  housing  starts  since  the  early  1990s.  We  are  now  seeing  a 
similar  shift to  condos  in  Montréal  and  Toronto  (Chart 11).24  In  recent  years, Toronto  and 
Vancouver have seen price growth in single-family houses outpace multiples (mainly condos) 
by  a  factor  of  two  to  three.  About  a  third  of  the  Canadian  housing  stock  is  in  Toronto, 
Montréal and Vancouver so this change is significant. Outside of Canada’s big three cities, 
condos are only now becoming as important as single-family homes. 
Given these supply constraints, the increasing urbanization of Canada’s population is putting 
upward pressure on Canadian house prices. 
Policy implications 
In view of these demand and supply factors, which have tended to work together to cause 
house prices to rise faster than income since 1995 in advanced countries, especially in urban 
areas,  what  are  the  implications  for  monetary  policy  and,  perhaps  more  importantly,  for 
financial stability policy? 
                                                
21  Given  recent  rises  in  house  price,  the  increase  for  Vancouver  shown  in  Chart  10  is  lower  than  might  be 
expected  because  the  starting  point  of  the  sample  (1995)  was  a  significant  peak  for  prices  in  Vancouver. 
House prices shot up 34 per cent from 1990 to1995 while other Canadian cities had either negative or minimal 
growth of less than 10 per cent. From 1995–2005, house prices in Vancouver rose by 48 per cent, but that 
was  outpaced  by  price  increases  in  other  Canadian  cities  that  ranged  from  65  to  almost  140  per  cent. 
Winnipeg’s decline in population density is, in part, due to a 30 per cent increase in its municipal boundaries 
over this period. 
22  This relationship is also true for U.S. cities. See “Urbanization & Canadian REITs,” CIBC Institutional Equity 
Research Industry Update, April 2012. 
23  As  cities  grow,  the  price  of  housing  in  the  urban  core  typically  rises  faster  than  in  the  periphery.  This 
steepening of the “rent curve” reflects the agglomeration economies as well as the higher opportunity cost of 
commuting. See D. Capozza and L. Helsey, “The Fundamentals of Land Prices and Urban Growth,” Journal of 
Urban Economics, 26, no. 3 (1989): 295–306. 
24  City  authorities  have  also encouraged  condo development  to  achieve  higher  densities  in certain  areas  and 
control infrastructure costs. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  The advanced economies in our comparison group had similar experiences during and after 
the  global  financial  crisis.  They  suffered  sizable  declines  in  exports  to  their  major  trading 
partners that were more severely affected by the crisis. Their domestic financial institutions 
and  markets  were  adversely  affected  by  spillovers  from  global  financial  stresses.  Liquidity 
and credit conditions tightened severely. 
In response, they loosened monetary policy, with sharp declines in policy interest rates. Their 
credible  inflation-targeting  frameworks,  flexible  exchange  rates  and  resilient  financial 
systems meant that such countercyclical monetary policy easing was effectively transmitted 
into  lower  real  interest  rates  along  the  maturity  spectrum.  This  easing  supported  the 
economic  recovery  by  boosting  domestic  demand,  notably  in  sectors  sensitive  to  interest 
rates,  such  as  housing,  and  caused  house  prices  to  recover  from  declines  experienced 
during the crisis. 
But, to date, the global recovery has been weak, so global and domestic interest rates have 
remained at historically low levels. This has underpinned the demand for, and the prices of, 
houses in the post-crisis period. 
Since  elevated  house  prices  have  important  implications  for  financial  stability,  the  Bank  of 
Canada is closely monitoring the housing market. In particular, as we noted in recent issues 
of our Financial System Review, rising house prices contribute to two material vulnerabilities 
that can affect financial stability: 
1. 
Higher  house  prices  are  generally  associated  with  higher  levels  of  household 
indebtedness and leverage.25  
Higher  house  prices  represent  a  potential  source  of  asset-price  misalignment  if 
influenced  by  expectations  of  price  appreciation  not  consistent  with  evolving 
fundamentals.26  Such  misalignment  could  suddenly  correct  and  create  financial 
stress.27  
2. 
The  likely  trigger  for  both  vulnerabilities  would  be  a  major  global  shock  that  generated  a 
sharp increase in unemployment and possibly in interest rates as well. If these vulnerabilities 
were  triggered,  the  adverse  impact  on  the  financial  system  and  the  economy  would  be 
amplified by the exposure of banks and other intermediaries to them. 
Now, when we look at the post-crisis experiences of the countries in our comparison group, 
they have similar levels  of household leverage, measured by household debt as a ratio of 
GDP  (Chart  12).28  Household  leverage  has  risen  along  with  house  prices,  as  households 
have taken advantage of low post-crisis interest rates. The one exception is New Zealand, 
where  a  modest  degree  of  household  deleveraging  seems  to  have  occurred.  For  Canada, 
the ratio of household debt to GDP has risen since 1975, although the growth of this ratio 
has notably declined since 2010. For Sweden and Norway, the ratio also grew at a modest 
pace in the post-crisis period.29  
                                                
25  See, for example, A. Crawford and H. Faruqui “What Explains Trends in Household Debt in Canada?” Bank of 
Canada Review (Winter 2011–12): 3–15. 
26  Extrapolative house price expectations may arise during periods of strong house price growth driven by shifts 
in demand and supply factors. See E. Cerutti, J. Dagher and G. Dell’Ariccia “Housing Finance and Real-Estate 
Booms: A Cross-Country Perspective,” IMF Staff Discussion Note, June 2015. 
27  The December 2014 and June 2015 issues of the Financial System Review examine various estimates of the 
degree of overvaluation of Canadian houses. 
28  The household debt-to-GDP ratio is more consistently measured across countries than the household debt-to-
disposable income ratio and is thus more useful for comparison purposes. 
29  While the significant reductions in interest rates in the immediate aftermath of the financial crisis increased 
house affordability in these countries, this gain has been offset by the ongoing increases in house prices. For 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  reduce the procyclicality of household credit and bank leverage; 
moderate credit growth; 
improve the creditworthiness of borrowers; and 
lower the rate of house price growth. 
The inflections in the rate of leverage growth that we see in the chart after the crisis may be 
due  to  the  macroprudential  measures  these  countries  implemented.  Such  measures  have 
allowed  stimulative  monetary  policy  to  flow  through  to  households  with  the  capacity  to 
borrow.30  
Chart 13a and b draw on recent work by the IMF, which shows that macroprudential policies 
in  the  form  of  maximum  loan-to-value  (LTV)  or  debt-to-income  (DTI)  ratios  have  tightened 
across a broad range of countries over the past 10 years.31 The IMF’s research, as well as 
that of other economists, has found evidence suggesting that the tightening has helped to: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
The most effective macroprudential policies to date appear to have been the imposition of 
maximum  LTV  and  DTI  constraints.32  Increased  capital  weights  on  bank  holdings  of 
mortgages have also had an impact.33 While long-term evidence on these instruments is not 
yet available, permanent measures that address structural regulatory weaknesses and that 
are relatively straightforward to implement and supervise will likely be the most effective over 
time. 
In Canada, we have had four successive rounds of macroprudential tightening, primarily in 
terms of the rules for insured mortgages (Figure 1). I’ll mention just a few of the highlights. 
The  maximum  amortization  period  for  insured  loans  has  been  shortened  from  40  years  to 
25.34 LTV ratios have been lowered to 95 per cent for new mortgages, and 80 per cent for 
refinancing  and  investor  properties.  These  latter  two  changes  effectively  eliminate  new 
insurance for refinancing and investor properties. Qualification criteria such as limits on the 
total debt-service ratio and the gross debt-service ratio, as well as requirements for qualifying 
interest rates, have also been tightened.35  
Recent  evidence  suggests  that  these  measures  have  resulted  in  higher  average  credit 
scores, which have improved the quality of mortgage borrowing (Chart 14a). With respect to 
household credit growth, Chart 14b, shows that the trend growth of mortgage credit declined 
                                                                                                                                                   
example, Chart 6 in the December 2014 Financial System Review shows that the affordability of houses in 
Canada has been relatively unchanged since 2008. 
30  Evidence  in  “Debt  and  (Not Much)  Deleveraging”  (McKinsey  Global  Institute,  February 2015) suggests  that 
much of the debt in countries in the comparison group is held by relatively high-income households. 
31  E.  Cerutti,  S.  Claessens,  and  L.  Laeven,  “The  Use  and  Effectiveness  of  Macroprudential  Policies:  New 
Evidence,” IMF Working Paper WP/15/61, March 2015. 
32  Ibid. 
33  Mortgage  underwriting  standards  have  also  been  tightened  recently  in  many  countries,  as  they  have 
implemented the Financial Stability Board’s Principles for Sound Residential Mortgage Underwriting Practices, 
April 2012. 
34  Uninsured mortgages are still available with longer amortizations; the normal maximum is 30 years. 
35  The  total  debt-service  ratio  is  the  percentage  of  gross  annual  income  required  to  cover  annual  payments 
associated  with  housing  and  all  other  debt  obligations.  The  gross  debt-service  ratio  includes  only  housing-
related  payments.  Other  changes  to  insured  mortgages  include  a  minimum  credit  score,  with  limited 
exceptions; stronger loan documentation standards to ensure the reasonableness of the property value and of 
the borrower’s sources and level of income; mortgage insurance eliminated for non-amortizing home-equity 
lines of credit; and mortgage insurance now limited to homes with a purchase price of less than $1 million. In 
addition,  mortgage  and  mortgage  insurance  underwriting  principles  have  been  made  consistent  with 
international standards. See Guidelines B-20 and B-21issued by the Office of the Superintendent of Financial 
Institution.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
  from  14  per  cent  in  2007–08  (3-month  growth,  annualized)  to  around  5  per  cent  in  
2013–15.36  
Conclusion 
Let me conclude with a few key points from the mountain of facts, graphs and analysis that I 
have reviewed with you today. As I mentioned at the outset, the purpose of my presentation 
is to help provide more context for an informed discussion about housing and house prices 
given their importance to the Canadian economy and the financial system. 
First, real house prices have been rising relative to income in Canada and other comparable 
countries for about 20 years. There are many possible explanations, mostly from the demand 
side, but also from the supply side. 
Second, in terms of demand, demographic forces, notably migration and urbanization, have 
played a role in the evolution of house prices, as have improving credit conditions through 
lower  global  real  long-term  interest  rates  and  financial  liberalization  and  innovation.  There 
are,  of  course,  other  demand  factors  that  warrant  more  data  and  analysis,  including  the 
impacts of foreign investment and possible preference shifts. 
Third,  in  terms  of  supply,  the  constraints  imposed  by  geography  and  regulation  have 
decreased housing supply elasticity, especially in urban areas. This reduced supply elasticity 
has interacted with demand shifts toward more urbanization to push up house prices in major 
cities. 
Fourth, the credible and effective macro and financial policy frameworks in place in Canada 
and 
to  a  high  degree  of 
macroeconomic  and  financial  stability.  Consequently,  in  the  face  of  a  protracted  global 
recovery,  their  countercyclical  policies  successfully  underpinned  domestic  demand  in  the 
post-crisis  period.  The  resulting  strength  in  the  housing  market  has  increased  household 
imbalances, but the risks stemming from these vulnerabilities have been well managed by 
complementary macroprudential policies. 
The  experience  in  these  countries  therefore  suggests  that  macroprudential  policies  that 
address  structural  weaknesses  in  the  regulatory  framework  are  best  suited  for  mitigating 
such  financial  vulnerabilities.  They  reduce  tail  risks  to  financial  stability  and  enhance  the 
overall resilience of the financial system. 
Thank you. Enjoy these last few days of summer. 
 
the  other  countries  considered  here  have  contributed 
                                                 
36  Other  factors  also  influenced  the  growth  of  mortgage  credit  over  this  period.  In  particular,  note  that  in  late 
2008–09 the Canadian economy was in a recession. The decline in that period should not be interpreted as a 
result  of  the  first  wave  of  tightening  of  the  mortgage  rules.  Similar  evidence  on  the  impact  of  these 
macroprudential policies is found by I. Krznar and J. Morsink, “With Great Power Comes Great Responsibility: 
Macroprudential Tools at Work in Canada,” IMF Working Paper WP/14/83, May 2014. 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
       BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
       12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
       BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13 
   14 
     BIS central bankers’ speeches 
       BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 15 
   16 
     BIS central bankers’ speeches 
       BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 17 
   18 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
