  Ravi Menon: Asia – short-term bumps along long-term growth path 
Remarks by Mr Ravi Menon, Managing Director of the Monetary Authority of Singapore, at 
the opening of Korea’s National Pension Service Office, Singapore, 17 September 2015. 
 Dr Choi Kwang, Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, National Pension Service 
Ladies and gentlemen, good afternoon 
I am delighted to join you to celebrate the opening of the Singapore office of Korea’s National 
Pension Service (NPS). This is an exciting development for Singapore’s asset management 
industry. 
• 
NPS manages one of the largest pension funds in the world, with KRW 500 trillion of 
assets under management. 
The decision by NPS to set up an office here is significant. 
• 
This will be NPS’s first overseas office in Asia and its third in the world after New 
York and London. 
In setting up an overseas office in Asia, NPS is affirming the long-term growth prospects for 
the  region.  NPS  is  clearly  taking  a  strategic  view  of  Asia  against  the  backdrop  of  recent 
market volatility and moderation in growth. 
Asia’s recent tantrum: what does it mean? 
Financial  markets,  including  those  in  Asia,  have  experienced  a  surge  in  volatility  over  the 
past several weeks. 
• 
Equity markets have taken a beating. The stock indices in Emerging Asia are down 
by  an  average  of  18%  since  their  highs  in  Q2  this  year,  with  the  Chinese  stock 
market correcting the most, by about 40%.1 
Currency markets saw sharp movements. The depreciation of the RMB, alongside a 
pullback  of  foreign  funds  from  the  region,  triggered  downward  pressures  on  the 
region’s currencies. Since the RMB move on 11 August, Emerging Asia currencies 
have depreciated by an average of 3.2% against the US Dollar, with some falling by 
as much as 7%.2 
 While markets seem to have calmed somewhat, a sense of uncertainty prevails and the risk 
of renewed volatility remains. What is happening? 
Financial markets are essentially coming to terms with four significant “re-pricings”. 
• 
First, the stock markets in China are adjusting downwards from unsustainably high 
levels. 
Second,  the  RMB  has  become  de-coupled  from  the  US  Dollar  and  is  moving 
towards a more market-determined exchange rate. 
Third, oil and commodity prices have eased considerably this year, marking the end 
of what some have called a “super-cycle”. 
                                                  
1   Emerging Asia economies refer to China, India, Korea, Hong Kong, Taiwan, Singapore, Thailand, Malaysia, 
Indonesia and the Philippines. 
2   Excluding the Hong Kong Dollar. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Fourth, the effects of an impending interest rate hike in the US – the first after seven 
years of extremely easy monetary policy – are being priced in across Asian markets. 
 These are not necessarily unwelcome developments. 
The correction in China’s stock market is not surprising given the stretched valuations that 
had developed over the preceding year. And it serves to deflate some of the excesses that 
have built up in the system, such as the rapid rise in margin financing. 
The 2.5% depreciation of the RMB against the US Dollar since August is consistent with the 
divergence  in  growth  momentum  between  China  and  the  US.  It  must  also  be  seen  in  the 
context of the 15% appreciation of the RMB in real effective terms during the year to July. 
The  move  towards  a  more  market-determined  exchange  rate  is  in  line  with  the  broader 
liberalisation and internationalisation of the currency. 
The gradual tightening of financial conditions in Emerging Asia as interest rates normalise in 
the  US  will  serve  to  rein  in  the  excessive  credit  expansion  seen  in  some  of  the  regional 
economies in recent years. It is not a bad thing to break the psychology of monetary over-
dependence on the part of markets and even some policymakers. 
Talk  of  currency  wars  is  over-blown  and  comparisons  with  the  Asian  Financial  Crisis  are 
over-done. 
To  be  sure,  some  of  the  gyrations  in  financial  markets  have  reflected  concerns  among 
investors about the moderation of growth in Asia. 
• 
The sluggish recovery in the G3 economies has taken the wind from many trade-
oriented Asian economies. 
At the same time, the transition to domestic-led growth has been bumpy. Structural 
reforms to raise human capital, spur new investments and reduce impediments to 
growth have not proceeded quickly enough in many countries. 
 So, downside risks remain, and there may be further bumps along Asia’s growth trajectory. 
But Asia is still expected to grow faster than other emerging economies. 
• 
In China, debt overhang and excess capacity will be a drag. But sustained monetary 
and fiscal stimulus measures should help to pre-empt a sharp slippage in economic 
activity. 
In the ASEAN countries, a slowdown in export growth will have a negative impact. 
But  public  infrastructure  spending  and  private  consumption  on  the  back  of  higher 
real incomes due to the decline in oil prices should help to shore up growth. 
Overall,  growth  in  Emerging  Asia  is  likely  to  stay  above  6%  in  2015,  not  too  far 
below last year’s 6.6%. 
  Looking  beyond  this  adjustment  period,  the  medium-  to  longer-term  outlook  for  Asia 
continues to be bright. Ultimately, economic fundamentals matter the most, and the longer-
term drivers of growth in the region remain positive. 
• 
First,  demographics  across  much  of  the  region  remain  favourable,  with  the 
proportion of the working age population continuing to rise in most Asian economies. 
Second,  the  emergence  of  a  sizeable  middle  class  and  ongoing  urbanisation  will 
underpin a continued expansion in domestic consumption and investment. 
 And  Asia  has  the  potential  to  do  even  better,  if  it  continues  to  press  ahead  with  deeper 
regional integration and domestic structural reforms. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Diversification for enhanced returns 
The significance of Asia’s growth and its implications for long-term investment returns are not 
lost to global asset managers. The increasing interest in the region is also motivated by the 
need  at  many  pension  funds  and  sovereign  funds  to  achieve  more  diversified  investment 
portfolios. 
• 
These 
geographies and reducing the home bias towards investment in domestic markets. 
They are also diversifying across assets to include more non-traditional assets such 
as  real  estate,  private  equity  and  infrastructure,  which  promise  sustained  and 
attractive risk-adjusted returns. 
their  portfolio  allocations  across 
increasingly  diversifying 
funds  are 
 Emerging Asia offers both asset and geographical diversification. 
• 
Emerging Asia will remain one of the fastest growing regions in the world offering 
prospects  of  higher  long-term  returns,  while  the  depth  and  liquidity  of  its  asset 
markets should continue to improve. 
The growth dynamics of Emerging Asian economies is not only different from that of 
developed Europe and America but also differentiated from one another. 
Emerging Asia offers great potential for the development of alternative investment 
assets such as infrastructure, for which the region has enormous need. 
  I congratulate NPS on the opening of its Singapore office and wish you continued success in 
your regional strategy. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
