  Glenn Stevens: Overview of recent economic developments in Australia 
Opening statement by Mr Glenn Stevens, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, to the 
House  of  Representatives  Standing  Committee  on  Economics,  Canberra,  18  September 
2015. 
 Chair 
Members of the Committee 
Thank you for the opportunity to meet with you today. 
The Australian economy continues to progress through a major adjustment, in the midst of 
testing international circumstances. The terms of trade have been falling for four years and 
have declined by a third since their peak – though that was a very, very high peak. They are 
now  back  to  about  the  same  level  as  in  2006  –  still  about  30  per  cent  above  their 
20th century average level. 
Resources sector capital spending has been following the terms of trade with a lag. From an 
extraordinarily high peak – at about 8 per cent of GDP, nearly three times the peaks seen in 
most previous upswings – this investment has been falling for about two and a half years. By 
the time it is finished, this decline will probably total something like 5 per cent of GDP. We 
are  probably  now  about  halfway  through  the  decline.  It  is  having  a  predictable  impact  on 
those industries and regions that had earlier experienced the effects of the boom. 
Resources sector exports have risen strongly as the greater capacity resulting from all the 
investment has been put to use. Australia now exports around three times the volume of iron 
ore that it did a decade ago, and around twice as much coal. A very large rise in exports of 
natural gas is in prospect over the next few years. 
Outside the mining sector and parts of the economy most directly exposed to it, there are 
signs  that  conditions  have  been  very  gradually  improving.  Survey-based  measures  of 
business  conditions  have  been  a  bit  above  their  longer-run  average  levels  for  some  time 
now, and the most recent readings are about where they were in 2010. A few of the non-
mining sectors have shown quite marked improvements over the past twelve months. 
To  this  we  can  add  that  the  overall  number  of  job  vacancies  in  the  economy  has  been 
increasing, even as employment opportunities in mining and some other areas diminish. The 
increase has not been rapid, but nonetheless the trend has clearly been upward for about 
two  years.  Since  this  time  last  year,  moreover,  we  have  seen  a  rise  of  about  200  000,  or 
about  2  per  cent,  in  employment.  The  labour  force  participation  rate  and  the  ratio  of 
employment to population have both started to increase. The rate of unemployment, though 
variable from month to month, seems to have stopped rising, and it is at a level a bit lower 
than we had thought, six months ago, it might reach. 
Of  course,  this  performance  is  not  uniform  geographically  or  by  industry.  The  two  large 
south-eastern states show the largest increases in demand and employment, and dwelling 
prices,  while  conditions  elsewhere  are  more  subdued.  By  industry,  the  rise  in  employment 
has been strongest in services, especially those types of services delivered to households, 
though business services activities have also added to employment over the past year. 
Monetary policy is seeking to support this transition, something it can do because inflation 
remains low. Very low interest rates, coupled with financial institutions wanting to lend, have 
played a part in the improvement in conditions in some sectors. Residential construction is 
running at very high levels, households are adding a little less of their incomes to savings 
and savers have been searching for higher returns. These are all indications of easy money 
at work. Cognisant of the risk that very low interest rates may foster a worrying debt build-up, 
regulatory initiatives are in place to maintain sound lending standards and capital adequacy. I 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  hasten to add that the objective of such tools is not to control dwelling prices, but to contain 
leverage. The evidence is emerging that they are doing their job. 
More  recently,  the  significant  decline  in  the  exchange  rate  is  starting  to  have  more 
discernible effects on the pattern of spending and production. The decline over the past two 
years amounts to about 25 per cent against a rising US dollar and 18 per cent against the 
trade-weighted basket. We are hearing about the effects of this in our liaison and also seeing 
it in the data on such things as tourism flows as well as exports of business services. This is 
to be expected as the exchange rate adjusts to the change in the terms of trade. 
Over the year to June, real GDP grew by 2 per cent. This was in line  with our forecast of 
three months ago and at the lower end of our forecast range from a year ago. The effect of 
unusual weather conditions on exports meant that GDP as measured exaggerates both the 
strength in the March quarter and the weakness in the June quarter. 
There are still some puzzles in reconciling what has happened to real GDP with what has 
happened  to  employment  and  indications from business  surveys.  Hopefully,  those  puzzles 
will be resolved over time. 
Nonetheless,  what  is  pretty  clear  is  that  the  economy  is  growing,  albeit  not  as  fast  as  we 
would  like,  the  adjustment  to  the  decline  in  the  terms  of trade  is  well  advanced,  and  non-
mining activity is improving rather than deteriorating. If the latter trend continues, it is credible 
to think that we can achieve better output growth, particularly as we reach the later phases of 
the decline in mining investment. This is what is needed to bring down the unemployment 
rate. 
As  always,  global  factors  will  be  important  and  the  international  setting  continues  to  be  a 
rather complex one. Since the last hearing, growth in the Chinese economy has continued to 
moderate.  Growth  in  other  parts  of  Asia  was  also  weaker  around  the  middle  of  the  year. 
Reflecting  these  outcomes,  forecasts  for  global  growth  over  the  period  ahead  are  a  little 
lower than they were six months ago. 
That was the backdrop for a period of volatility in some financial markets. The unwinding of 
an  equity  market  bubble  in  China  appears  to  have  served  as  the  proximate  trigger  for  a 
revision of equity valuations around the world. Risk appetite diminished somewhat and the 
currencies of many emerging market economies came under downward pressure. 
Whether  that  financial  volatility  itself  will  serve  further  to  dampen  global  growth  prospects 
remains to be seen. Sometimes such events portend a wider set of economic events, but just 
as often, they don’t. 
In the present instance, it is important to stress that long-term debt markets and core funding 
markets for financial institutions have not been impaired. These markets remain open and it 
is  still  the  case  that  highly  rated  private  borrowers  and  most  sovereigns  can  borrow  at 
remarkably  low  cost.  Things  could  change,  but  at  present  we  do  not  see  anything 
approaching the dislocation of funding channels seen in serious crises. 
To  be sure,  emerging  market countries  are  under  some  pressure  and some  of  them  have 
specific  problems  that  are  being  recognised  by  markets.  At  the  same  time,  though,  many 
emerging market countries have done quite a bit to improve their resilience over the years. 
It’s also worth noting that performance in the Unites States continues to improve. Everyone 
knows  that,  eventually,  this  will  have  to  be  reflected  in  less  accommodative  US  monetary 
policy.  Some  fretting  about  the  first  increase  in  US  interest  rates  for  nine  years  is  to  be 
expected, no matter how  well telegraphed it has been. The more important factor, though, 
will  be  the  pace  of  subsequent  increases.  The  Federal  Reserve  has  indicated  this  is 
expected to be very gradual, but of course that will depend on  what happens with the US 
economy.  There  is  a  degree  of  irreducible  uncertainty  here  and  hence  the  possibility  of 
further financial market volatility at some point. Overall though, it seems very likely that global 
interest rates will still be quite low for quite some time yet. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  For Australia, we cannot, of course, determine our terms of trade or other forces in the global 
economy. We can only adjust to them. The record of adjustment in recent years is good. We 
negotiated the financial crisis without a major financial crisis of our own or a big downturn in 
economic activity. We negotiated the first two phases of the resources boom without major 
inflationary problems, and are part way through our adjustment to the third phase – so far 
without a major slump in overall economic activity. There is still a pretty good chance that we 
will  come  out  of  this  episode  fairly  well,  and  much  better  than  we  came  out  of  previous 
episodes of this type. 
I now turn briefly to another area of the Bank’s responsibilities, namely the payments system. 
The New Payments Platform (NPP) will enable real-time, data-rich payments on a 24/7 basis 
for households, businesses and government agencies. The Payments System Board, having 
worked  to  facilitate  the  process  of  the  private  sector  coming  together  to  drive  this  project, 
supports the industry’s efforts. The Reserve Bank itself is making good progress in its own 
part in this project. 
In the card payments area, the Bank has announced a review and we released an Issues 
Paper in early March. Among other things, the review contemplates the potential for changes 
to  the  regulation  of  card  surcharges  and  interchange  fees.  It  provides  an  opportunity  to 
consider some of the issues raised in the Financial System Inquiry. As usual, the Bank has 
been consulting widely, including via a roundtable in June that included representatives from 
over 30 interested organisations. 
The Payments System Board has asked the staff to liaise with industry participants on the 
possible “designation” of certain card systems. A decision to designate a system is the first of 
a number of steps the Bank must take to exercise any of its regulatory powers in respect of a 
payment  system,  but  does  not  commit  it  to  a  regulatory  course  of  action.  The  Payments 
System  Board  will  have  further  discussions  on  the  case  for  changes  to  the  regulatory 
framework at future meetings. In the event that the Board were to propose changes to the 
regulatory framework, the Bank would, as usual, undertake a thorough consultation process 
on any draft standards. 
In  our  financial  stability  role,  a  focus  has  been  on  central  counterparties,  which  facilitate 
efficient  and  safe  clearing  of  some  types  of  financial  transactions.  These  entities  are 
increasingly  important  given  the  way  global  regulatory  standards  have  been  moving.  The 
Bank has focused on ensuring their risk management meets the highest standards and that 
they have the capacity to recover from financial shocks. We have also done a lot of work to 
ensure  that  our  regulatory  framework  is  appropriately  recognised  by  regulators  in  other 
jurisdictions, which is important if we are to keep the Australian financial system connected 
with the global system. 
With those remarks, Chair, my colleagues and I await your questions. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
