  Gent Sejko: Overview of Albania’s latest monetary and economic 
developments and outlook 
Speech by Mr Gent Sejko, Governor of the Bank of Albania, on the Monetary Policy Decision 
of the Bank of Albania’s Supervisory Council, Tirana, 4 March 2015. 
 Today, on the 4 of March 2015, the Supervisory Council of the Bank of Albania reviewed and 
approved  the  Interim  Monetary  Policy  Report.  After  scrutinising  the  current  and  expected 
performance of inflation and other economic indicators, the Supervisory Council of the Bank 
of Albania decided to keep the key interest rate unchanged at 2.0%. 
 The  domestic  and  external  economic  environment  has  generated  low  inflationary 
pressures. 
According to INSTAT data, annual inflation was 1.3% in January, up from the rate registered 
in December. Inflation fluctuations in the last two months have been determined mainly by 
the volatility in food prices. The fall in food inflation in December and its rise in January were 
driven  by  developments  in  international  markets  and  the  performance  of  domestic 
production.  In  parallel,  the  decline  in  oil  prices  has  generated  downward  pressure  on 
inflation. Prices of other consumer goods’ categories did not display any significant change. 
The rise in inflation in January was in line with our projections; however, the rate of inflation 
remains below Bank of Albania’s target. 
The Bank of Albania evaluates that inflationary pressures will increase gradually and 
inflation  will  return  to  target  within  the  medium  term.  However,  Bank  of  Albania 
evaluates  that  inflation  will  remain  below  the  target  for  the  most  of  this  period.  Its 
performance  will  continue  to  be  determined  by  the  degree  of  recovery  in  economic 
growth,  supply-side  domestic  and  external  shocks,  and  economic  and  financial 
agents’ inflation expectations. 
The Albanian economy is assessed to have improved in 2014. According to INSTAT data, 
the economic activity grew by 1.4% during the first nine months of the year. We expect the 
growth  rate  to  accelerate  in  the  fourth  quarter,  driven  by  the  strong  fiscal  stimulus  in  this 
period. 
Due  to  damages  caused  by  floods  in  the  south  of  the  country,  our  projections  on  the 
performance  of  the  economy  during  2015  are  revised  slightly  downwards.  However,  their 
effect  is  expected  to  be  temporary  and  the  economy  is  projected  to  remain  in  an  upward 
trend in the medium term. Economic growth for 2015 is projected to be higher than that in the 
previous  year.  The  expansion  of  economic  activity  will  continue  to  be  driven,  to  a  large 
extent,  by  private  sector  growth.  Foreign  demand  is  expected  to  play  a  small  positive  role 
and the speed of fiscal consolidation is expected to be reduced. 
While upward, our projections suggest that the economic activity at home will remain below 
its  potential  in  2015,  generating  incomplete  utilisation  of  production  capacities.  Incomplete 
capacity utilisation is underpinned by a relatively high unemployment rate and is reflected in 
low  pressures  on  wage  increases  and  production  costs.  In  parallel,  the  weak  aggregate 
demand does not allow for the increase in businesses profit margins. In the medium term, 
the  expected  improvement  in  economic  growth  will  bring  the  economy  back  to  equilibrium 
and will increase demand-side inflationary pressures. 
From the supply side, the decline in food and commodity prices in global markets and the 
increase of domestic agricultural production are expected to exercise downward pressures 
on inflation during 2015. However, their negative impact on inflation is expected to phase out 
in the coming years. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Inflation expectations will have a similar direction of their impact. In the short term, economic 
agents  expect  low  inflation  rates.  This  projection  does  not  encourage  the  growth  of 
consumption and of investments. Moreover, it tends to be factorised in low prices in future 
contracts  between  economic  agents.  Inflation  expectations  will  shift  upward,  as  inflation 
rises. 
Considering the above arguments, the Bank of Albania estimates that – with a high 
probability of occurrence – inflation will range 1.8–4.4% four quarters ahead. 
The balance of risks to the inflation projections remains on the down side. Downward 
risk factors to the inflation projections are slower economic growth, stronger decline of global 
prices  and  materialisation  of  second-round  effects  from  lower  oil  prices  at  home.  On  the 
other hand, a factor that may contribute to a faster increase in inflation in the future is the 
increase  in  prices  of  agricultural  products  as  a  result  of  damages  to  agricultural  land  from 
recent floods. 
In line with these assessments, the monetary policy should remain stimulating in the 
period ahead. The monetary stimulus will support the recovery of domestic demand 
and ensure the return of inflation to target. 
In  January,  the  Bank  of  Albania  lowered  its  key  interest  rate  to  2.0%  and  signalled  the 
continuation of this monetary policy trend for some quarters ahead. The monetary stimulus 
increased  progressively  through  the  lowering  of  the  key  interest  rate,  through  the 
continuation  of  eased  conditions  of  liquidity  injecting  operations,  and  through  forward 
guidance to the public. This policy is aimed at cutting the costs of lending to the economy 
with the ultimate goal supporting demand growth and return of the economy to equilibrium. It 
has also signalled the commitment of the Bank of Albania to comply with its inflation target. 
Taking into consideration the time lag, the structural problems and the various shocks 
on financial markets and economic activity, the transmission of the monetary policy 
has been adequate, but not yet complete. 
The monetary stimulus has been transmitted to the financial markets, but the response of the 
economy to better lending terms continues to remain weak. The accommodative monetary 
policy  is  reflected  in  lower  interest  rates  for  lek  loans  and  has  contributed  to  the  constant 
growth  of  this  loan’s  portfolio.  Credit  expansion,  however,  remains  low  as  a  result  of  the 
sluggish  demand  for  credit  and  banks’  conservative  lending  policies.  The  Bank  of  Albania 
asserts that the financial markets and agents have sound and liquid balance sheets, but they 
continue to be risk averse into undertaking long-term investments. 
In conclusion, the Supervisory Council decided that the actual monetary policy stance 
is appropriate and decided to keep the key interest rate unchanged at 2.0%. The new 
information analysed at the meeting does not change our evaluations for the current situation 
of  the  economy  and  financial  markets,  and  expectations  for  their  outlook.  The  current 
monetary conditions are adequate for ensuring the return of inflation to our 3.0 % target in 
the  medium  term.  Judging  from  the  expected  developments  and  the  balance  of  risks 
surrounding them, the  Supervisory  Council  deems that  the  monetary  policy  of the  Bank of 
Albania will continue to maintain its stimulating nature, for some quarters ahead. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
