  Benoît Cœuré: Addressing global data availability challenges 
Panel  remarks  by  Mr  Benoît  Cœuré,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  European 
Central Bank, at the Eurofi Financial Forum 2015, Luxembourg, 10 September 2015. 
 It is a great pleasure for me to participate in this panel alongside such distinguished fellow 
speakers. I will share with you my views on remaining data gaps. The closing of those gaps 
is essential for the ECB’s conduct of monetary policy and the effective implementation of the 
ECB’s micro-prudential, macro-prudential and financial market oversight functions. I will also 
briefly touch on the important subjects of data sharing and data transparency. 
However,  let  me  first  point  out  that  there  are  a  number  of  ongoing  international  initiatives 
aimed  at  improving  the  information  frameworks  on  which  key  policy  decisions  are  based. 
These  have  largely  been  driven  by  the  Data  Gaps  Initiative  (DGI)  launched  in  April  2009, 
which  supports  several  G20  projects,  such  as  bilateral  and  multilateral  surveillance,  and 
initiatives focusing on global systemically important financial institutions.1 
As a member of the Inter-Agency Group on Economic and Financial Statistics, the ECB has 
been deeply involved in the development and implementation of these recommendations and 
strongly supports the second phase of this initiative (DGI-2). 
In  this  context,  I  would  like  to  mention  three  important  achievements.  First,  the  ECB  has 
introduced new statistics on securities holdings. These provide very detailed insight into who 
holds which securities in the euro area.2 Second, earlier this year, the ECB, together with the 
BIS and the IMF, published a “Handbook on Securities Statistics”. This enables the collection 
of  better  securities  data  by  clarifying  concepts  and  providing  guidance  on  the  harmonised 
presentation  of  securities  data.  Third,  the  recent  ECB  regulation  on  supervisory  financial 
information, which will gradually extend reporting requirements to entities that have not yet 
been reporting on the basis of FINREP, is one example of where we have closed a data gap 
and increased the consistency of data at the same time. 
Despite this encouraging progress, serious data gaps, inconsistencies and inefficiencies still 
exist  in  several  major  policy  and  supervisory  fields.  Allow me  to  briefly  mention  a  few  key 
examples. 
In the field of credit, significant data gaps still exist. The availability of complete and granular 
credit register information and corresponding risk parameters is critical in order to assess the 
concentration of exposure throughout each banking group across relevant dimensions. The 
absence of this information makes it difficult for supervisors to perform stress tests without 
collecting additional ad hoc data (as in the case of the European Banking Authority’s stress 
                                                 
1   As early as April 2009, the finance ministers and central bank governors of the G20 called on the International 
Monetary  Fund  (IMF)  and  the  Financial  Stability  Board  (FSB)  to  identify  major  financial  and  economic 
information gaps that needed to be filled. As a result, a few months later, in September 2009, the IMF and the 
FSB presented the report that would launch the Data Gaps Initiative. G20 leaders have pledged to close data 
gaps to support financial stability, with those gaps including: data measuring the build-up of risk in the financial 
sector  (e.g.  financial  soundness  indicators  and  coverage  of  risk  transfer  instruments,  including  data  on  the 
credit  default  swap  markets);  data  measuring  financial  network  connections  (particularly  for  systemically 
important  global  financial  institutions)  and  identifying  the  activities  of  non-bank  financial  institutions.  It  is 
important to note that these gaps do not relate solely to banks and insurance companies. Data gaps are also 
prevalent in the non-regulated sector. 
2   The  ESCB’s  Centralised  Securities  Database  contains  reference  data  on  millions  of  individual  securities. 
These reference data are linked to a granular database on securities holdings, which allow policy-makers to 
assess “who holds what” when it comes to securities. The main euro area sectors and the 26 largest banking 
groups  holding  individual  securities  are  covered.  A  legislative  process  aimed  at  extending  the  collection  to 
cover all groups under the ECB’s direct supervision is under way. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
  test).  Such  additional  data  requests  place  a  large  burden  on  banks,  but  also  on  the 
supervisors tasked with handling and ensuring the quality of these ad hoc data. Furthermore, 
those ad hoc requests have long lead times and limit supervisors’ ability to react quickly to 
changes  in  the  financial  environment.  Thus,  credit  register  information  improves  overall 
monitoring and the ability to react in a changing environment. 
There are also large remaining gaps in the field of derivatives, where the ability to monitor 
the  size  of  derivatives  markets  and  the  interconnections  between  financial  market 
infrastructure (FMI) participants is key if we are to successfully assess the risks across them, 
especially considering the global nature of these markets and the fragmentation of the FMI 
landscape worldwide. Data are widely available, but they are fragmented and reported in a 
non-harmonised way. 
In the area of bank funding, we are still missing a timely and comprehensive overview of a 
bank’s access to different funding sources in the money markets and the conditions under 
which a bank is able to finance its activity. 
We  definitely  need  to  gain  more  insight  into  the  shadow  banking  sector.  This  sector  is 
continuing to expand and increase its share of financial intermediation, including as regards 
lending  to  the  real  economy.  More  comprehensive  reporting  and  reliable  data  on  shadow 
banking  entities  and  activities  will  be  required  in  order  to  extend  the  macro-prudential 
framework to cover the shadow banking sector. The forthcoming EU regulation on securities 
financing transactions will be very helpful in this respect. 
From a policy perspective, there is also a need to have sufficiently long time series for macro 
variables, such as credit growth, but also for micro data (including bank-specific information), 
in order to be able to identify the build-up of financial imbalances. 
In addition to critical data gaps in terms of scope, there are also plenty of data inefficiencies 
and  inconsistencies  caused  by  a  lack  of  harmonisation  and  standardisation.  Where 
harmonised identifiers do exist, they have not been globally implemented, as in the case of 
the Legal Entity Identifier (LEI). This contributes to the current inability to properly integrate 
and  aggregate  existing  data  in  a  comprehensive  manner  and  the  lack  of  a  consistent 
overview of inter linkages and concentration risks in the banking sector and other parts of the 
financial system. To this end, standardisation and harmonisation efforts need to be stepped 
up,  as  demonstrated  by  the  ongoing  work  of  the  Committee  on  Payments  and  Market 
Infrastructures  (CPMI)  and  the  International  Organization  of  Securities  Commissions 
(IOSCO).3  When  developing  globally  harmonised  identifiers,  such  as  Unique  Transaction 
Identifiers (UTIs) and Unique Product Identifiers (UPIs), we should rely, wherever possible, 
on data standards that already exist (e.g. ISO standards). These efforts are critical to ensure 
national, regional and global aggregation where needed (for example, in the case of globally 
systemic banks and data on derivatives). In addition, the compulsory use of these standards 
for  reporting  and  wide  access  to  a  minimum  set  of  standardised  identifiers  for  all 
stakeholders is key. 
The  issues  that  I  have  mentioned  clearly  show  that  there  are  serious  data  gaps  in  some 
areas. Meanwhile, in other areas, data are available, but we have the issue of data sharing 
and  data  transparency.  A  wide  variety  of  authorities  are  involved  in  collecting  data,  and 
efforts are needed at the level of authorities requesting data. Stronger coordination will, over 
time, facilitate the integration of data, which are often requested on the basis of a stovepipe 
approach  and  governed  by  separate  legal  frameworks.  As  a  result,  underlying  concepts, 
definitions and standards can all vary from dataset to dataset, making the combining of data 
very  labour-intensive  and  subject  to  all  kinds  of  misinterpretation  and  overlaps.  This 
                                                 
3   See  Financial  Stability  Board,  „Feasibility  study  on  approaches  to  aggregate  OTC  derivatives  data“, 
September 2014, and the consultative report by the CPMI and the Board of IOSCO on „Harmonisation of key 
OTC derivatives data elements (other than UTI and UPI) – first batch“, September 2015. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  endeavour  requires  political  commitment  from  all  stakeholders.  It  also  requires  that 
authorities collecting data share relevant information with other authorities. 
I  fully  acknowledge  the  existing  constraints  and  barriers  that  may  currently  hamper  data 
sharing  between  authorities,  such  as  data  confidentiality  and  the  different  mandates  of 
market supervisors, regulators and central banks. However, I think that sharing data among 
policy-makers and supervisory authorities is essential. Understanding interconnectedness in 
the global financial system and identifying sources of systemic risk were key motivations for 
establishing the Financial Stability Forum in 1999.4 Sixteen year after the Tietmeyer Report, 
and  one  crisis  later,  we’re  still  not  there.  We  need  to  establish  a  “circle  of  trust”  bringing 
together  certain  authorities  among  which  data  should  be  shared  more  easily.5  Authorities 
have a duty to overcome the obstacles that are currently preventing the sharing of data and 
endeavour to use harmonised data wherever possible. 
I am sure the panel will explore these issues in more detail during our discussions. 
                                                 
4   „While  the  national  authorities,  the  IFIs,  the  international  regulatory  bodies  and  the  central  bank  groupings 
each gather and assess data on segments or the  whole  of the international financial  system, and regularly 
monitor aspects of financial system stability, none has the breadth of information or the capacity to formulate a 
complete assessment of evolving risks. In view of the many sources from which systemic risk can arise, better 
procedures  are  needed  for  systematically  pooling  and  efficiently  using  the  information  available  to  these 
bodies in their assessment of domestic financial vulnerabilities and global conditions.“ in Tietmeyer, H. “Report 
on  international  cooperation  and  coordination  in  the  area  of  financial  market  supervision  and  surveillance”, 
Bank for International Settlements, 11 February 1999. 
5   The recommendations for the second phase of the G20 Data Gaps Initiative include Recommendation II.20 on 
the promotion of data sharing by G20 economies, which includes an increase in “the sharing and accessibility 
of granular data, if needed by revisiting existing confidentiality constraints”. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
