  
 
Maja Kadievska-Vojnovik: Prospects of the Macedonian economy in 2015 
Address  by  Ms  Maja  Kadievska-Vojnovik,  Vice-Governor  of  the  National  Bank  of  the 
Republic  of  Macedonia,  at  the  panel  discussion  on  the  “Prospects  of  the  Macedonian 
economy in 2015”, organized by “Finance Think”, Skopje, 22 December 2014. 
 Many thanks to Ana Mitreska, Manager of the Monetary Policy and Research Department, who participated in the 
preparation for the panel discussion on the “Prospects of the Macedonian economy in 2015”. 
Macedonian economy is small and open, as evident from the high and growing share 
of exports and imports in GDP (in the last four years the openness increased by almost 
20 percentage  points,  reaching  high  105%  of  GDP  in  2013).  Given  this  feature,  it  is 
undoubtedly exposed to global developments, especially developments in Europe, which is 
our  key  trading  partner  to  which  we  export  over  70%  of  the  Macedonian  products. 
Economies  of this kind, by  definition,  are  economies  that  absorb the  shocks from  external 
environment,  with  relatively  limited  opportunities  for  influence.  In  fact,  the  decrease  of 
economic activity in 2009 and in 2012 (about 0.5% in both years) showed that the real sector 
of the economy cannot remain immune to the adverse demand shocks arising from Europe. 
Also,  an  important  structural  feature  of  our  economy  is  its  high  import  dependence  of  the 
export sector and its high energy dependence. 
However, the adverse second-round effects felt in the Macedonian economy were far 
weaker  than  those  registered  in  the  other  countries  in  the  region,  although  the 
Macedonian economy is more open than the other economies in South East Europe (with the 
exception of Bulgaria). The average decrease in GDP in SEE countries was nearly 2%. At 
the  same  time,  the  pace  of  economic  recovery  in  the  post-crisis  period  is  faster  than  the 
average  for  the  region.  Thus,  in  the  period  2010  –  2013,  the  cumulative  increase  in  the 
economic activity is close to 8 percentage points, which is nearly 3 percentage points more 
compared to the average cumulative growth for the region. In fact, Macedonia is one of the 
few  countries  in  the  SEE  region,  which  has  already  exceeded  the  pre-crisis  maximum 
economic activity. 
Therefore, quite logical is the question: what are the factors that provided a relatively 
good response to the crisis and a relatively solid economic recovery of the domestic 
economy, amid an anemic global setting? And more importantly, whether these factors will 
continue to be the engine of growth in the medium term, determining the future prospects of 
the economy? Domestic factors are also very important. Sound macroeconomic policies in 
the  pre-crisis  period  prevented  major  imbalances  in  the  economy  and  left  room  for 
conducting countercyclical policies in the wake of the crisis relieving its effects (which was 
not  the  case  with  the  other  countries  in  the  region).  More  intensive  implementation  of 
structural  reforms,  in  particular,  improving  the  business  climate,  also  played  a  very 
important role, whose positive effects have become especially prominent in recent years. 
Thus, despite the weak growth in foreign demand, our economy has grown by solid 
rates. The external environment is still not sufficiently stimulating. Foreign effective demand 
has not yet offset the sharp decline of nearly 5%, registered in 2009, although it shows signs 
of recovery, which gradually reduces its importance as a limiting factor for the growth of the 
domestic economy. It is estimated that it will continue to gradually recover, moving around 
2%  in  2016.  However,  the  key  factors  that  ensure  solid  economic  performance,  with 
economic growth of 2.7% in 2013 and 3.9% in the first three quarters of 2014, are factors 
that are specific to Macedonia, i.e. they are of inner character. 
One  of  the  key  factors  that  cause  “decoupling”  of  the  speed  and  intensity  of  the 
recovery of the Macedonian economy and foreign effective demand, and increase the 
resilience  of  the  economy  to  external  shocks  is  the  presence  of  new  companies  – 
foreign investments (mainly in the tradables sector), which gradually and steadily increase 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  It 
for 
is  expected 
the  economy. 
the  capacity  utilization  and  diversify  the  production  and  export  structure  of  the  economy. 
Since 2010, their activity has grown steadily, with the current exports of these facilities 
accounting for around 35% of total exports. However, more importantly, their net value 
added is constantly increasing and thus relieves the trade deficit of the economy. Since 
2010, the cumulative positive effect of these companies on the trade balance is about Euro 
200 million, or 2.6% of GDP. This reduces the external vulnerability and improves the risk 
profile  of  the  country  and  its  foundations.  The  raised  technological  level,  the  increase  in 
manpower,  the  improved  access  to  capital,  the  spillover  effects  on  domestic  companies 
(which is already visible in our country), the absorption of the workforce, are also significant 
favorable effects. In the medium term more positive effects should be expected. 
The  second  key  factor  that  significantly  contributes  to  achieving  solid  rates  of 
economic growth is the fiscal stimulus, through the increased number of investments 
in infrastructure projects. Large investments in road, rail and energy infrastructure are, on 
the  one  hand,  an  important  impetus  for  growth  in  the  short  run,  while  on  the  other,  they 
improve the competitiveness of the economy and contribute to the increase in the potential 
growth. The public sector share in the investments during the crisis has increased (from 20% 
in  2007  to  34%  in  2010),  offsetting  the  smaller  investments  from  the  private  sector  and 
providing  positive  stimulus 
that  Government’s 
announcements of infrastructure projects will continue to provide significant support for the 
growth in the medium term. 
What is also important is that the growth in recent years has created preconditions for 
improving  the  conditions  in  the  labor  market.  The  number  of  employees  has  grown 
steadily  since  the  beginning  of  2012,  with  the  growth  being  especially  pronounced  during 
2013  (over  4%)  on  an  annual  basis,  as  a  combination  of  the  labor  demand  by  new 
companies  (the  number  of  companies  with  a  large  number  of  employees  began  to  grow 
faster  exactly  in  2013),  the  active  measures  on  the  labor  market,  and  the  gradual 
intensification of the activity of the rest of the economy. The unemployment rate, though still 
high, is constantly declining and according to the latest data it is 27.9%. What is important is 
that its reduction is a combination of the decline in the number of unemployed persons, and 
the  larger  number  of  active  population.  The  participation  rate  reached  57.3%,  which  is  an 
upward  adjustment  of  about  1  percentage  point  compared  to  2008  and  is  a  sign  of  the 
positive  perceptions  of  the  conditions  on  the  labor  market.  As  expected,  the  indicators  of 
productivity  and  unit  labor  costs  also  register  positive  movements  starting  from  this  year 
(increase  in  productivity  and  decline  in  costs  by  about  2%  on  average  in  2014).  Although 
these indicators are still less favorable compared with the pre-crisis performances, given the 
growth  of  the  economy,  this  gap  is  gradually  decreasing.  In  the  medium  term  we  expect 
further narrowing of the gap. 
The  banking  system  provides  additional  credit  flows  in  the  economy,  whereby  it 
actively supports the economic growth. Unlike other countries, where credits extended to 
the private sector reduced in certain periods after the crisis, in Macedonia credit flows were 
constantly  growing  and  currently  credits  are  1.5  times  higher  than  before  the  crisis.  The 
average credit growth from 2008 to 2014 was almost 6% which is well above the average for 
the region of about 1.8%, and certainly above the average for the Euro-zone, where lending 
decreases. Credit growth accelerated particularly in 2014, and in November this year it was 
close to 10% on an annual basis. The fact that the banking system is in excellent condition, 
with a capitalization rate of over 16%, with high liquidity and low reliance on external funding 
sources, explains the current room for lending. We expect the solid credit support to continue 
in the medium term, supporting growth. 
What  are  our  expectations  for  the  economic  growth  in  the  period  ahead?  Although 
foreign demand suffers downward adjustments, our estimates for the growth of the domestic 
economy  in  the  next  period  point  to  solid  performances.  Considering  the  solid  economic 
growth that is already certain to take place in 2014, and the assessments for further support 
of  the  growth  through  foreign  and  public  investment,  our  estimates  point  to  an  economic 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
growth of 4.1% in 2015 and its acceleration to 4.5% in 2016. As before, these solid growth 
rates are a consequence of the growth of the activity of the foreign facilities, the announced 
new foreign investments, with some of them expected to employ a larger number of people, 
but  also  the  expected  additional  fiscal  impetus  in  infrastructure.  Their  positive  second-
round  effects  are  expected  to  continue  to  be  felt  in  the  labor  market  by  increasing  the 
demand  and  price  of  labor.  Current  projections  show  room  for  growth  in  the  number  of 
employees  and  the  nominal  wages  of  around  3%.  Partial  effect  on  the  wage  growth  is 
expected  from  both  the  realized  and  the  announced  increase  in  the  wages  of  the  public 
administration.  Under  such  assumptions,  our  projections show  that domestic demand  will 
be a source of economic growth, while net exports would have a negative contribution. By 
the end of the time horizon of the projections, there are assessments for gradual balancing of 
the growth structure, with a gradual reduction of the negative contribution of net exports. 
Consumption  and  investment  decisions  of  the  entities  are  still  expected  to  be 
financially supported by domestic banks. The performances of the credit market in 2014 
are better than our initial expectations, and lending surveys show that these performances 
are  a  combined  effect  of  the  growth  of  both  the  supply  and  the  demand  for  loans.  These 
performances and the assumptions about the movement of the sources of funding for banks 
indicate credit growth in 2014, which is assessed at 8.7%, and its acceleration to 9% in 2015 
and 10% in 2016. These projections continue to be contingent on meeting the assumptions 
for  the  recovery  of  the  economy  as  the  main  prerequisite  for  the  growth  of  the  deposit 
potential, for forming positive expectations of banks and for greater propensity of the private 
sector to borrow. In this context, the dynamics  of “bad loans” is of particular importance. 
Comparatively speaking, although their share in the total portfolio is moderate, there is room 
for improvement in this area, especially in the corporate sector segment. Given the fact that 
until recently, the granting of loans was concentrated with households, the new credit flows 
need  to  be  more  balanced  between  the  sectors,  which  implies  gradual  resolution  of  the 
problems  with  non-performing  loans  to  the  corporate  sector.  The  application  of  the  new 
regulations  –  the  new  Basel  standards,  may  also  be  a  medium-term  challenge  for  the 
banking system. 
Although the main growth projection for the Macedonian economy suggests relatively 
dynamic growth during 2015 and 2016, there are risks related to this scenario, mainly 
arising from the external environment. They are mostly in a downward direction, and it 
was assessed that they further increased this year. It is assessed that the increase in the 
short-term risks is a consequence of the growth of geopolitical tensions in the countries 
of  the  Middle  East  and  the  tensions  between  Russia  on  the  one  hand,  and  Ukraine  and 
West-European countries on the other. Although the initial effects of the Ukrainian crisis are 
perceived  as  limited  to  the  affected  countries  and  countries  in  their  region,  further 
deterioration  of  the  situation  could  lead  to  expansion  of  the  second-round  adverse  effects 
globally,  particularly  in  the  case  of  disrupted  production/transport  of  gas  and  oil  and 
escalation  of  the  sanctioning  and  counter-sanctioning  measures,  which  would  especially 
violate  global  trade  and  financial  flows.  On  the  other  hand,  a  more  severe  turmoil  in  the 
Middle  East  could  lead  to  significant  disruptions  in  oil  production  and  consequently,  to  a 
sharp rise in oil prices. The probability of lower growth of the Chinese economy in the short 
run,  as  a  result  of  significant  adjustments  on  the  real  estate  market  also  poses  a  risk  to 
global growth. From the perspective of emerging economies, major risk factor is the time 
and  the  pace  of  increase  of  the  Fed’s  policy  rate.  Namely,  if  for  some  reason  (such  as  a 
revision of the assessment of capacity utilization in the US economy) the Fed’s policy rate 
increases  faster  than  the  expectations  of  market  participants,  it  would  increase  the 
volatility  of  the  financial  markets  and  would  trigger  capital  outflows,  especially  from  the 
vulnerable  emerging  economies.  Such  outflows  and  pressures  on  the  exchange  rates  of 
emerging countries could also be caused in the event of adverse economic and geopolitical 
developments in global terms, which would lead toward increased global risk aversion and 
resorting to “safe” assets. From the perspective of developed countries, the main risk arises 
from the possibility the prolonged very low inflation, or the occurrence of deflation, to produce 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  is 
significant negative effects on the economic activity and public debt sustainability. This risk is 
particularly pronounced in the euro zone, where the longer underperformance of inflation in 
comparison with the target would cause a decline in longer-term inflation expectations, which 
in the absence of room for loosening the monetary policy would lead to higher real interest 
rates and consequently, to lower economic activity. In the medium run, the risks to the global 
economy  arise  from  the  possibility  of  lower  potential  growth  of  developed  economies  and 
developing  countries,  as  well  as  the  possibility  of  prolonged  economic  stagnation  of  the 
developed  countries  (the  so-called  secular  stagnation).  The  risk  of  secular  stagnation  is 
particularly pronounced for the countries of the euro zone, where the constantly low domestic 
demand due to lower investment and higher private savings would have negative effects on 
economic growth and productivity in the long run. 
Yet, the challenges for growth in the forthcoming period are not related only to the external 
environment.  Namely,  this  is  a  period  in  which  it  appears  that  the room provided by the 
macroeconomic  policies  for  supporting  further  growth 
largely  exhausted. 
Macroeconomic  policies  have  played  a  key  role  in  the  post-crisis  economic  recovery,  but 
they  require gradual  consolidation  in  order  to  prevent  the  emergence of  imbalances  in  the 
economy.  Monetary  policy  has  taken  a  number  of  standard  and  non-standard  measures 
which have resulted in historically low interest rates. Hence the assessment for the limited 
room  for  further  adjustment  measures.  Given  the  expected  low  inflationary  pressures,  the 
monetary policy stance, in general, will depend on the developments in the external sector. 
Hence, the main point that needs to be highlighted, and which is aimed at supporting 
long-term growth, are the structural reforms. In the recent period, Macedonia has been 
making  great  efforts  to  improve  the  business  climate,  which  is  being  confirmed  by  the 
business  indicators  (Doing  Business).  In  this  regard,  Macedonia  is  ranked  30th  place  for 
2015,  which  is  an  improvement  of  six  positions  relative  to  2013.  Improved  ranking  is 
observed  in  all  categories,  with  the  exception  of  the  segments  “obtaining  credit”  and 
“procedures  for  obtaining  building  permits”.  However,  there  are  segments  where  there  is 
room  for  further  improvement  –  procedure  for  obtaining  building  permits,  access  to 
electricity,  registration  of  property,  implementation  of  contracts.  The  latest  Transition 
Report of the EBRD also refers to the areas where greater efforts are required. In fact, there 
are  few  segments  where  there  is  complete  convergence  to  the  setup  in  the  developed 
market economies. The energy sector, infrastructure and financial sector (particularly in 
the  part  of  providing  additional  funding  through  the  capital  market)  are  highlighted  areas 
where further reforms are needed. The last aspect, i.e. the deepening of the capital market is 
a  very  important  element  in  the  growth  pattern.  Currently,  the  main  source  of  funding  are 
either companies’ own funds or bank loans. Alternative financing by providing funds through 
the capital market is limited, as confirmed by the low share of the stock exchange turnover in 
GDP, which on average in the period 2010 – 2013 totaled 1.5% of GDP. In this context, a 
significant support could be provided by international financial institutions. 
All in all, in our views, solid economic growth higher than 4% is expected also in the next 
two years. The main growth factors are the present and the announced foreign investments, 
as well as the fiscal impetus in the infrastructure, which are key determinants of the growth of 
investments  and  exports.  Credit  support  and  growth  in  demand  and  price  of  labor  are 
considered  factors  that  will  support  also  the  private  consumption.  The  risks  around  the 
baseline scenario are mainly downward and depend on the external environment. However, 
what  is  crucial  is  to  increase  the  development  potential  and  productivity  of  the 
economy  in  the  long  run,  wherefore  it  is  especially  important  to  continue  the  plan  for 
structural reforms, particularly in the already established vulnerable areas. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
