  Timothy Lane: Drilling down – understanding oil prices and their 
economic impact 
Remarks by Mr Timothy Lane, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Canada, to the International 
Trade Association (MITA), Madison, Wisconsin, 13 January 2015. 
The charts can be found at the Bank of Canada’s website. 
 Introduction 
Good afternoon. I want to thank the Madison International Trade Association for inviting me 
to this annual outlook event. I’m happy to be back in America’s Midwest, a region that has 
many  important  ties  to  Canada.  Your  economy  has  a  lot  in  common  with  ours,  and  it  is 
affected by many of the same global forces. 
The dramatic drop in oil prices over the past few months is certainly a major new force in the 
world  economy  today  (Chart  1).  Oil  prices  affect  almost  everyone,  for  better  or  for  worse. 
Petroleum products are a big slice of families’ budgets and a significant cost of production for 
a myriad of industries. 
Oil is especially important to both of our countries. In Canada, oil extraction now accounts for 
about  3  per  cent  of  our  GDP  and  crude  oil  about  14  per  cent  of  our  exports.  The  United 
States  is  still  the  world’s  largest  consumer  of  oil  and,  with  the  emergence  of  shale-oil 
production, has become the biggest producer too. 
Oil is also at the heart of Canada-U.S. economic relations. The United States is the market 
for close to 100 per cent of Canada’s oil exports. Our oil exports to the United States have 
been growing strongly, even as the United States has been reducing its overall reliance on 
imported oil. As a result, Canadian oil makes up about 40 per cent of U.S. crude oil imports, 
and that share is expected to grow over the years ahead (Chart 2). This trade is evident here 
in Wisconsin; one example is the terminal of the Alberta Clipper pipeline in Superior and the 
cluster of industries surrounding it. 
As I will discuss, the rapid expansion of oil production in both of our countries has been a 
real game-changer in the global oil industry. 
World oil markets have been turbulent over the past several months. In the next few minutes, 
I  will  describe  the  fundamental  economic  forces  that  are  at  play.  I  will  also  highlight  the 
uncertainties  surrounding  both  those forces  and  the  other factors  affecting  oil  prices.  I  will 
then  discuss  how  lower  oil  prices  affect  the  global,  U.S.  and  Canadian  economies  –  who 
wins and who loses? 
The commodities super-cycle 
Over  the  past  decade  and  a  half,  world  oil  prices,  and  commodity  prices  in  general, 
experienced a sustained upward movement, often called the “super-cycle” (Chart 3). By far 
the most important reason for this long-term trend is the rising demand for these products 
stemming from rapid economic growth in China and other emerging-market economies.1  
                                                
1   Researchers Kilian and Lee estimate that demand shocks accounted for about 60 per cent of the increase in 
oil prices during the run-up from US$30 a barrel to US$140 a barrel. See L. Kilian and T.K. Lee, “Quantifying 
the speculative component in the real price of oil: The role of global oil inventories,” Journal of International 
Money and Finance, 42 (April 2014): 71‒87. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  It would be hard to exaggerate the importance of the integration of China, India and other 
emerging economies into the world economy. The economy of China alone doubled in size 
between 2007 and 2013, an expansion built on the production of goods requiring energy to 
manufacture. With rising living standards, Chinese households have been able to afford cars 
and  other  products  that  consume  energy.  China’s  oil  consumption  followed  suit,  doubling 
over the past decade to about 10 million barrels a day and making the country the world’s 
second-largest consumer of crude oil. 
This growing demand for energy put continued upward pressure on oil prices. Over time, the 
industry responded by stepping up exploration, developing higher-cost sources, and making 
some major technological breakthroughs. 
With the recent drop in oil prices, some commentators have been quick to declare that the 
super-cycle is finished, but these underlying forces still have a long way to run (Chart 4). The 
urbanization  and  industrialization  of  emerging  economies  and  the  growth  of  their  middle 
classes  is  far  from  complete.  China’s  urban  population  has  grown  by  about  300  million 
people  since  2000  but,  even  now,  only  55  per  cent  of  its  people  live  in  urban  areas, 
compared  with  more  than  80  per  cent  for  North  America  and  advanced  Asian  economies 
such as Japan and Korea. According to some estimates, another half-billion people in China 
and India alone will move to cities and likely join a growing middle class over the next two 
decades. As long as these trends continue, they will add to world demand for oil. 
The disappointing global cconomy 
Although the forces underlying the commodities super-cycle are still at work, demand for oil 
is  likely  to  expand  on  a  slower  track  than  in  the  past.2  Global  economic  growth  has 
repeatedly  fallen  short  of  expectations  in  the  aftermath  of  the  financial  crisis  of  2007–08 
(Chart 5). 
That disappointing pattern, in turn, reflects two sets of factors. 
First, the fallout from the global financial crisis turned out to be much more prolonged and 
severe than most economists expected. Even now – seven years later – there are important 
headwinds to global economic growth. Public and private indebtedness at a global level is at 
a historic high, and there is also the lingering uncertainty resulting from the bitter experience 
of the past few years (Chart 6). 
Still, global economic growth is picking up as progress is being made on deleveraging and as 
confidence improves. The most recent Bank of Canada projections show a global growth rate 
of  3  1/2  per  cent  this  year  and  next,  compared  with  3  per  cent  last  year.  The  recovery  is 
particularly robust in the United States, where the policy response to the financial crisis was 
more timely, aggressive and sustained than in other major advanced economies. 
Second,  certain  important  structural  factors  suggest  that,  over  the  longer  term,  world 
economic  growth  will  be  slower  than  in  the  past.  One  important  reason  is  demographics: 
aging  populations  in  advanced  and  some  emerging  economies.  Another  is  the  maturing 
growth of emerging economies such as China: it is probably impossible for China to sustain 
economic  growth  at  the  double-digit  rates  of  the  2000s  –  although  its  growth  rate  is  still 
expected to stabilize at an enviable annual pace of 7 per cent for the foreseeable future. 
Both sets of factors suggest lower global economic growth than before the crisis. 
Disappointing  global  growth,  and  the  resulting  slower  growth  of  energy  demand,  are  a 
significant  part  of  the  background  to  the  recent  movement  in  oil  prices.  But,  in  our  view, 
increased supply probably played an even greater role. 
                                                
2   For example, since July 2014, the International Energy Agency has revised down its estimates for 2014 global 
oil demand by 0.3 million barrels a day and 2015 demand by 0.8 million barrels a day. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  The Hog cycle 
It’s  only  a  slight  exaggeration  to  say  that,  when  oil  is  worth  $100  per  barrel,  there  is  oil 
everywhere. 
The U.S. oil industry is a case in point (Chart 7). The so-called “shale revolution” that started 
six years ago has been nothing short of astounding. In 2008, the production of shale oil was 
almost non-existent. Today, the sector produces about 4 million barrels a day and, before the 
recent drop in prices, was on track to increase its output to almost 4.8 million barrels a day in 
2020. 
We’ve also seen a powerful supply response to high prices in Canada. Oil sands production 
rose fivefold between 1993 and 2014, to 2.3 million barrels per day, and now accounts for 
more than 60 per cent of Canada’s crude production. Between 2006 and 2013, investment in 
the oil sands more than doubled to over $30 billion (Chart 8). 
Two distinguishing features of unconventional oil affect the dynamics of the market. First, the 
extraction cost of most of the new oil is relatively high. A barrel of shale oil costs between 
$40 and $80 to extract, depending on the project; oil from Canada’s oil sands costs closer to 
$60 to $100 a barrel (Chart 9). In many cases, this is mainly a reflection of the upfront cost of 
investment  and  exploration,  rather  than  the  continuing  cost  of  keeping  oil  flowing  from 
existing  installations.  Of  course,  these  costs  may  also  vary  over  time  with  changing 
technology and competitive forces. 
Second, it takes time and, in some cases, major investments, to bring a new supply of oil on 
stream. When demand increased over the past several years, supply could not be expanded 
right  away.  Instead,  prices  shot  up,  creating  incentives  to  explore,  innovate  with  extractive 
technology and invest in new facilities. Over time, these activities have delivered an outsized 
supply response, which has been driving prices down. 
So  what  happens  next?  When  the  price  drops  below  the  all-in  cost  of  production,  and  is 
expected to stay there, that discourages further exploration and investment. Indeed, in recent 
weeks, a number of oil companies have announced that they are scaling back investment. 
This  is  important,  since  new  investment  is  needed  to  offset  naturally  occurring  declines  in 
production in existing fields. 
But before existing production is actually taken off stream, the price would have to drop a lot 
further  –  below  the  short-run  marginal  cost  (sometimes  referred  to  as  the  “cash  cost”) 
(Chart 10).  Except  for  some  smaller  companies  that  may  cut  output  more  quickly  as  their 
access to financing is restricted, producers are likely to take time to adjust, especially if they 
have hedged against price movements. In all, it may take quite some time before supply and 
demand are brought back into balance – although technological change may enable some 
suppliers to adjust their production more quickly than in the past. 
It  should  not  be  surprising,  then,  if  oil  prices  overshoot  their  trend  in  one  direction  or  the 
other. Cycles like this are typical of markets where both supply and demand are inelastic in 
the short run, and where it takes time for the long-run supply response to materialize. 
Indeed, the basic forces at work are the same as in the hog cycle – a cycle that economists 
learned  to  analyze  about  80  years  ago.3  When  hog  prices  are  high,  producers  rush  to 
increase their herds. As the pigs reach maturity, producers bring their increased supply to the 
market  all  at  the  same  time,  causing  a  glut.  Prices  fall,  and  producers  cut  back  their 
production. This leads to a shortage. Prices start rising, and the cycle starts anew. 
What does this tell us about where oil prices are likely to end up and how low they can go in 
the meantime? 
                                                
3   N. Kaldor, “A Classificatory Note on the Determinateness of Equilibrium,” The Review of Economic Studies 1, 
no. 2 (February 1934): 122‒36.   
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  First, with current expectations for global economic growth, the demand for oil will continue to 
rise – and the world is likely to require some higher-cost oil to satisfy that demand. Barring 
major  changes  to  technology  or  a  large  shock  to  the  global  outlook,  today’s  oil  prices  are 
unlikely to be high enough to balance supply and demand. This is consistent with what both 
the futures curve and our own model of oil prices are telling us.4  
Of course, there is considerable uncertainty around the equilibrium level – both because all 
the risks to global growth translate into risk to oil demand and because new technology is 
bringing costs down all the time (Chart 11). 
Second, prices can be subject to large overshoots in the short run, in either direction. The 
only  true  floor  to  prices  in  the  short  term  is  the  short-run  marginal  cost,  at  which  point 
producers would lose more money by continuing to pump oil from existing installations than 
by shutting it in. 
OPEC, geopolitics and financialization 
So far, I’ve been focusing on the fundamentals of supply and demand, which, in my view, go 
a long way toward explaining the recent plunge in prices. But in the short run, there are a 
number of other important influences that are more difficult to predict. I would like to say a 
few words about three other pieces of the story. 
First,  geopolitical  developments  often  have  a  major  impact  on  oil  prices  –  since  they  can 
affect oil supply directly and since the threat of future supply disruptions can also build a risk 
premium into oil prices. As a notable example, in the early part of 2014, conflicts in Libya and 
Iraq  led  to  temporary  outages  in  their  oil  production,  keeping  world  prices  high,  even  as 
supply  elsewhere  in  the  world  continued  to  ramp  up.  When  production  from  those  two 
countries came back on stream, that was an important trigger for the plunge in oil prices later 
in the year. Of course, such conflict situations and other geopolitical events can change very 
quickly in one direction or the other, and continue to pose an important source of risk. 
Second,  the  Organization  of  the  Petroleum  Exporting  Countries  (OPEC)  has  had  an 
important influence on the dynamics of world oil markets, and this influence may be changing 
over time. The drop in oil prices was accelerated in early December by OPEC’s decision to 
leave its production target unchanged, even as prices were falling. In effect, OPEC members 
were allowing the price to fluctuate so that more supply adjustment would come from other 
producers, rather than acting as the “swing producers” as they had in some other episodes. 
This changing role may  reflect, in part, the decline in OPEC’s share of world production – 
which, at about 40 per cent, is 10 percentage points lower than in its heyday (Chart 12). It is 
too  early  to  tell  whether  and  how  OPEC’s  behaviour  will  change  as  its  market  share 
continues to decline. 
Third,  financial  linkages.  With  the  run-up  in  commodity  prices  during  the  past  couple  of 
decades,  much  attention  was  paid  to  the  “financialization”  of  commodities  –  including 
investor  flows  into  commodity-based  mutual  funds  and  exchange-traded  funds,  increased 
involvement  by  global  investment  banks  in  commodity-backed  lending  and  physical 
large  commodity-trading  houses.5 
commodity 
Financialization has gone into reverse in recent years, owing to a combination of moderating 
trends in commodity prices and regulatory changes. The research we have done at the Bank 
the  prominent 
trading,  and 
role  of 
                                                
4   C. Baumeister, “The Art and Science of Forecasting the Real Price of Oil,” Bank of Canada Review (Spring 
2014): 21–31. 
5   T.  Lane,  “Financing  Commodities  Markets,”  (speech  to  the  CFA  Society  of  Calgary,  Calgary,  Alberta, 
25 September 2012). 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  of Canada on the role of investment flows in commodities markets shows that these flows 
may amplify or accelerate price movements, but do not create trends on their own.6  
There is still a question of whether financial flows may have accelerated some of the price 
movements  that  we  have  seen  –  for  instance,  if  investors  who  had  been  drawn  to  the  oil 
market by rising prices faced margin calls and decided to pull out after suffering losses. At 
this  point,  data  on  speculative  positioning  in  oil  markets  do  not  suggest  that  such  effects 
were  driving  recent  market  movements,  but  we  cannot  rule  out  that  they  may  have  been 
either a contributing or a mitigating factor. Moreover, we remain alert to the possibility that 
financial linkages could transmit stress from oil markets to the financial system. 
Putting all the pieces together, we conclude that there are two-sided risks around current oil 
prices:  sizable  short-run  movements  in  either  direction  are  quite  possible.  Despite  some 
promising research at the Bank of Canada on forecasting oil prices, the range of uncertainty 
around even the best forecasts is very wide.7 In view of this uncertainty, the Bank’s baseline 
economic projections are constructed on the assumption that oil prices remain constant over 
the projection period.8 We use information from our models and other sources to understand 
and highlight the risks around that baseline. 
Global economic impact 
What  will  the  drop  in  oil  prices  mean  for  the  world  economy?  We  are  still  finalizing  our 
complete  forecast  of  the  global  and  Canadian  economies,  which  the  Bank  of  Canada  will 
release next week in our Monetary Policy Report, but here is how we approach the question. 
For the world as a whole, the decline in oil prices is beneficial. If it is caused by new sources 
of supply, the price drop spreads the benefits of a favourable shock; if it is partly the result of 
slower demand growth, it mitigates the effects of an unfavourable shock. 
It is no surprise that lower oil prices benefit consumers and hurt producers. For the users of 
oil, a lower price is like a tax cut. The positive effect will work its way through the economy 
via two channels: first, it will give consumers more disposable income, which they can spend 
on  goods  and  services;  second,  it  will  reduce  input  costs  and  encourage  production  in 
sectors other than oil, especially energy-intensive sectors. 
The  United  States,  as  a  net  importer,  will  benefit  from  the  drop  in  oil  prices.  Our  October 
forecasts were for U.S. growth to average around 3 per cent over the next couple of years, 
and the positive oil shock adds an upside risk to our projection. 
Other economies that are large net importers of oil, such as China, Japan and Europe, will 
also get a boost to their economic growth. 
The  decline  in  oil  prices  has  clear  adverse  effects,  however,  on  oil-exporting  emerging 
economies.  Some  of  these  countries,  which  have  relied  on  high  oil  prices  to  balance their 
budgets, could face financial stress (Chart 13). 
While lower oil prices will undoubtedly depress headline inflation, this is a temporary effect 
that central banks will look through in setting monetary policy. Provided that consumers and 
businesses understand that the drop in oil prices is a one-time change, it should not slow the 
pace of underlying inflation. 
                                                
6   R.  Alquist  and  O.  Gervais,  “The  Role  of  Financial  Speculation  in  Driving  the  Price  of  Crude  Oil,”  Bank  of 
Canada Discussion Paper No. 2011–6, 2011. 
7   C. Baumeister, “The Art and Science of Forecasting the Real Price of Oil,” Bank of Canada Review (Spring 
2014): 21–31. This work also shows that a no-change assumption is more accurate than one based on the 
futures curve. 
8   Bank of Canada, Monetary Policy Report, April 2014. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  In  Europe  and  Japan,  which  have  been  grappling  with  slow  economic  growth  and  low 
underlying  rates  of  inflation,  the  situation  could  be  more  problematic.  There  is  a  risk  that 
lower oil prices could add to deflationary pressures or even trigger a generalized downward 
price spiral, but that is not our base case. 
Implications for Canada 
Canada, like other countries, has been trying to regain its economic footing since the global 
financial  crisis.  From  the  outset  of  the  Great  Recession,  the  Bank  of  Canada  has  been 
providing significant monetary stimulus. But we have yet to reach the point where growth is 
self-sustaining.  For  that  to  happen,  the  sources  of  growth  will  have  to  rotate  away  from 
consumption and toward increased exports, which are our traditional economic engine. 
Signs  of  a  broadening  recovery  have  been  emerging  during  the  past  year.  Stronger  U.S. 
growth  and  a  weaker  Canadian  dollar  have  boosted  non-energy  exports.  Investment 
spending and job creation have also begun to pick up, although significant slack remains in 
the labour market. 
In  that  context,  we  see  important  risks  to  Canada’s  economic  outlook  stemming  from  the 
recent decline in the price of oil and other commodities. As a net oil exporter, Canada will be 
affected by the lower prices, operating through several channels. 
The most immediate impact will be positive: a boost to consumers’ disposable incomes and 
spending. Lower oil prices will also benefit many sectors, such as manufacturing, by reducing 
production  costs.  Our  latest  Business  Outlook  Survey,  which  was  published  yesterday, 
showed that more firms than in previous surveys are anticipating declines in their input costs, 
thanks in good part to cheaper oil and cheaper commodities in general. 
The positive effect on the world economy and the resulting stronger growth  would also be 
positive  for  Canada.  A  buoyant  global  economy  would  increase  Canada’s  non-energy 
exports, boost confidence and lead to improved business investment. 
However, these gains will be more than reversed over time as lower incomes in the oil patch 
and along the supply chain spill over to the rest of the economy. The decline in Canada’s 
terms of trade will also reduce the country’s wealth. 
The lower prices, if they are expected to persist, will significantly discourage investment and 
exploration in the oil sector. As I mentioned earlier, we are already seeing signs of this. 
Lower oil prices are also typically accompanied by a weaker Canadian dollar, and this time is 
no exception. The dollar’s depreciation by over 10 per cent against the U.S. dollar in the past 
six months will help cushion the economy from the impact of lower oil prices. 
Despite the mitigating factors I enumerated, lower oil prices are likely, on the whole, to be 
bad for Canada. Estimating the magnitude of that overall impact requires carefully analyzing 
the interplay between the various effects as they work through the economy. That is what we 
are doing as we prepare next week’s forecast. 
For the Bank of Canada, there are two main takeaways from the drop in oil prices. First, we 
will  look  through  its  immediate  and  temporary  negative  effect  on  total  consumer  price 
inflation. Second, we will closely monitor its broader impacts on growth and the delay it may 
cause to the economy’s return to its production potential. We will also watch for any impacts 
on the rotation of demand that we have begun to witness. 
Conclusion 
Allow me to conclude. 
The recent movements in oil prices have been dramatic, but they are not random. Once we 
sort through the different economic forces at play, we see that underlying the recent drop in 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  oil prices is a surge in unconventional oil supply against the backdrop of slower growth of 
global demand. Over time, higher-cost oil is still likely to be needed to satisfy growing global 
demand,  but  prices  could  go  lower,  or  remain  low,  for  a  significant  period  before  those 
medium-term forces do their work. 
These  developments  are  among  the  most  important  that  the  Bank  of  Canada  takes  into 
account in making monetary policy. We will continue to work to bring the Canadian economy 
back to its potential and return inflation sustainably to our 2 per cent target. However things 
play out, we have the tools to respond. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
