  Boštjan Jazbec: Financial crises and the current situation in Slovenia 
Address by Mr Boštjan Jazbec, Governor of Bank of Slovenia, at the Annual Conference of 
the Bank Association of Slovenia, Ljubljana, 18 November 2014. 
 My  congratulations  to  the  Bank  Association  of  Slovenia  for  choosing  a  most  appropriate 
theme for this year’s annual conference, and for putting together in the November edition of 
Bančni  vestnik  some  high-quality  papers  on  critical  issues  that  occupy  the  minds  of 
policymakers in Slovenia. 
This year is the tenth anniversary of Slovenia’s accession to the European Union. Who would 
have  dared  to  predict  ten  years  ago  that  Slovenia  would  find  itself  in  the  midst  of  a  most 
severe and protracted economic and financial crisis? 
Can we take comfort by claiming, like in the famous hit song by Billy Joel, “We didn’t start the 
fire”? In my opinion, much of the problem that we face today is of our own making. We have 
to figure out ourselves the best strategies to put the economy back on track and make sure 
that we get there. 
*** 
Let  me  start  with  what  we  all  know  about  financial  crises  and  the  current  situation  in 
Slovenia. 
A common cause of the vast number of financial crises experienced in various countries at 
different times is excessive debt accumulation without enough awareness of the consequent 
risks.  Most  debt-fuelled  booms  end  badly.  Financial  crises  generally  tend  to  be  protracted 
affairs.Sometimes, inertia and denial on the part of the policy makers add to the duration of 
the crisis period. 
The situation in Slovenia conforms to this pattern. 
The  rapid  economic  growth  that  followed  European  Union  accession  in  2004  was  fed  by 
excessive  borrowing  and  risk  taking  by  banks  and  enterprises.  Banks  relied  heavily  on 
external  wholesale  funding  and  the  rapid  credit  expansion  took  place  against  very  limited 
equity capital in the corporate sector. 
These balance sheet vulnerabilities got exposed when the external financing began to drain 
away with the onset of the global financial crisis in 2008. Slovenia was caught in a vicious 
cycle  of  reduced  credit  availability,  deleveraging,  a  cutback  in  corporate  investment  and 
output,  and  rising  non-performing  loans.  The  deterioration  in  the  balance  sheet  of  banks 
became a problem for the state, given that the state owns the majority of the banking sector. 
The recession put the public finances under severe strain and, as early as in 2009, Slovenia 
was  placed  under  the  Excessive  Deficit  Procedure  of  the  European  Commission  requiring 
substantial  fiscal  consolidation  efforts  in  the  near  and  medium  term.  The  burden  of 
restructuring the state-owned banks further added to the strain on the public finances. 
Concerns  about  the  health  of  the  banking  sector  and  sustainability  of  public  debt  fuelled 
speculation for a while around mid-2013 that Slovenia would need a bailout and submit itself 
to  a  program  with  the  Troika.  But,  we  managed  to  avoid  this  by  taking  some  resolute 
measures and announcing a policy agenda aimed at fixing the fundamental problems with 
the  economy.  However,  since  then,  we  have  lost  valuable  time  in  policy  formulation  and 
implementation because of not having an effective government for a significant part of this 
year.  Much  remains  to  be  done.  We  have  miles  to  go  before  we  can  declare  “mission 
accomplished”. 
*** 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  What are the challenges that we currently face? 
There are visible signs that an economic recovery is underway, but in an environment where 
net bank credit to the non-financial sector is still contracting. The structure of output growth 
reveals an underlying fragility. Growth has been primarily export led. The dynamics of private 
business investment and private consumption remains weak. 
What holds back the revival of credit growth and the empowerment of domestic demand? 
One  reason  is  that  the  monetary  policy  transmission  channel  is  impaired  by  the  weak 
balance  sheets  of  banks  and  the  corporate  sector.  As  long  as  asset  quality  is  poor  and 
capital is inadequate, banks will tend to restrict overall credit supply and apply a large risk 
premium  to  lending  rates.  Liquidity  may  not  be  a  binding  constraint  in  such  a  situation. 
Indeed,  there  is  considerable  liquidity  currently  in  the  Slovene  banking  system,  and  this 
accounts  for  the  unexpectedly  low  take  up  in  the  recent  first  auction  of  liquidity  under  the 
ECB’s TLTRO programme. 
A second reason is weak credit demand. Credit demand has decreased since the onset of 
the global crisis. This is because highly indebted companies are focused on deleveraging. 
The process still has some way to unwind. Slovene enterprises remain overleveraged, both 
relative to their euro area peers and historical trends. As long as the deleveraging process 
continues, the easing of monetary conditions will not necessarily induce higher borrowing. 
A  note  of  caution  is  in  order  regarding  boosting  credit  growth.  The  financial  crisis  has 
demonstrated  and  recent  empirical  research  shows 
that  credit  growth  should  not 
compromise  financial  stability.  If  we  boost  credit  demand  willy  nilly  without  addressing  the 
large sectoral and aggregate imbalances in the economy that had built up during the credit 
boom years, we may end up sowing the seeds of another financial crisis. Matters are likely to 
become worse if additional credit availability enables enterprises to postpone balance sheet 
adjustment. So, the focus should be on the proper allocation of credit instead of its aggregate 
amount.  It  is  important  that  good  borrowers  rather  than  the  bad  ones  are  the  main 
beneficiaries of credit growth. 
I am not downplaying the importance of credit in fostering economic activity. Far from it. Bank 
credit  and  other  debt  instruments  are  crucial  to  all  economies,  but  balancing  the  risk  and 
opportunities is always  a challenge, a challenge that we must never forget. The crisis has 
demonstrated  very  clearly  the  importance  of  limiting  the  reliance  on  debt-financing  and 
having adequate safeguards in place to prevent credit bubbles. A shift toward more equity 
financing is urgently necessary, for which, an appropriate environment has to be in place for 
attracting new non-debt capital flows. 
*** 
So, what should be the way ahead? 
Putting the economy back on track requires a coherent, integrated national policy strategy to 
restore the health of the financial sector, restructure the corporate sector, and reinforce the 
sustainability  of  the  public  finances.  The  economic  recovery  must  be  based  on  equity-
financed investment and not on debt-financed investment. Given the need to ensure fiscal 
sustainability, recourse to more state funding for restructuring the economy and increasing 
investment is not a feasible option. 
Some  of  the  required  policy  measures,  notably  in  the  financial  sector,  have  been  and  are 
being implemented. Without a determined follow through with supporting measures on other 
fronts, the fragile economic recovery will stall and problems will intensify. 
*** 
Priority has been given to repairing the balance sheet of banks. Based on the findings of a 
comprehensive  asset  quality  review  and  stress  tests  in  late  2013,  balance  sheets  of  four 
banks have been repaired through recapitalization and transferring non-performing loans to 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  findings  of 
the  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism 
the  Bank  Asset  Management  Company.  The 
the  recently  concluded 
Comprehensive  Assessment  indicate  that,  notwithstanding  these  efforts,  the  health  of  the 
banking sector remains fragile. 
This is not surprising. The banking system is the nerve center of the entire economy. Non-
performing  loans  remain  high  even  after  the  transfers  to  the  Bank  Asset  Management 
Company and their volume has increased in the course of 2014. This is a result of the still 
weak  economic  growth, slow  deleveraging  in  the  corporate  sector  and  too  slow  enterprise 
restructuring. 
The  rehabilitation  strategy  also  involves  bank  resolution  through  liquidation,  consolidation 
and  privatization.  Two  small  domestic  banks  are  currently  in  the  process  of  being  wound 
down, and the privatization of one state-owned bank (NKBM) has already been initiated. The 
new European resolution mechanism is scheduled to take effect in 2016. Banka Slovenije is 
seeking to speed up the process. It intends to create in 2015 a deposit insurance fund and a 
resolution fund to facilitate the consolidation of weak banks. 
The banking sector is undergoing a necessary process of structural reforms, and the world of 
banks is changing. Regulation and supervision is being strengthened to make the future of 
the  banking  system  more  stable  and  less  crisis-prone.  On  4  November,  the  European 
Central  Bank  assumed  responsibility  under 
for 
supervising 8 banks in Slovenia accounting for more than two-thirds of the market share. The 
supervisory  culture  will  change  under  the  new  regime.  Supervision  will  become  more 
quantitative and the ECB will also inspect the business models of banks. For the 10 credit 
institutions not covered under the SSM, Banka Slovenia will align its supervisory approach 
with  that  of  the  SSM.  The  Central  Credit  Registry  is  being  upgraded  to  support  banking 
supervision. 
Banka  Slovenije  has  established,  like  other  European  central  banks,  an  institutional 
framework  for  macroprudential  oversight  of  the  financial  system  that  is  in  line  with  the 
recommendations of the European Systemic Risk Board. The basic aim is to safeguard the 
stability  of  the  financial  system  by  identifying  the  emergence  of  systemic  risks  at  an  early 
stage and taking preventive measures to mitigate these risks. 
**** 
Bank rehabilitation is only a necessary condition for unlocking credit growth to the Slovene 
economy.  Successful  corporate  restructuring,  which  entails  both  financial  and  business 
restructuring,  is  also  essential  to  lay  the  foundation  for  productive  investment  and  strong 
employment  creation.  Unless  enterprise  restructuring  is  undertaken  decisively  in  a  timely 
fashion,  the  capital  buffer  of  banks  created  by  their  recent  recapitalization  will  erode  and 
further injections will be needed once again. 
The  enabling  legislative  framework  for  enterprise  restructuring  is  in  place,  but  systematic 
restructuring is yet to begin. This should be given priority by the government. A decision must 
be made with regard to the most urgent restructuring cases 
A critical constraint that Slovenia faces is the availability of funding for corporate restructuring 
and  increasing  investment  activities.  Given  that  the  feasibility  of  using  state  resources  for 
these  purposes  is  limited,  privatization  and  entry  of  private  investors  should  be  the  key 
vehicles for the required non-debt capital infusion foreign direct investment is a key source of 
potential  equity.  The  business  and  political  culture  will  need  to  adapt  and  embrace  the 
realities of globalization and Slovenia’s integration in the world economy. A communication 
strategy  must  be  developed  and  implemented  to  promote  and  market  Slovenia  as  an 
attractive  FDI  destination.  In  parallel,  steps  should  be  taken  to  ease  regulatory  and  other 
barriers that currently inhibit investment. 
**** 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  Small  and  medium-size  enterprises  (SMEs)  play  a  very  important  role  in  the  Slovene 
economy  and  their  financing  must  not  be  ignored.  It  would  be  necessary  to  increase  the 
absorption  of  foreign  resources  for  supporting  SMEs.  The  Slovene  financial  institutions 
responsible for final credit delivery should develop new financial instruments for start-ups and 
young fast-growing enterprises, and explore methods for attracting higher volume of venture 
capital investments from foreign sources. 
**** 
I would like to conclude by asking “What have we learnt from the financial crisis”? Maybe you 
know  the  famous  quote:“There  is  nothing  new  except  what  is  forgotten.”  The  cover  of  the 
Special  Issue  of  Bančni  vestnik  has  reminded  us  the  lesson  from  history:  “No  more  credit 
excesses”. Let us not forget this any time soon. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
