  Jens Weidmann: Challenges for the euro area: what progress has been 
made – what still needs to be done? 
Speech by Dr Jens Weidmann, President of the Deutsche Bundesbank, at the Swiss Institute 
of International Studies, Zurich, 9 March 2015. 
 Introduction 
1. 
Dr Meyer, Thomas, Ladies and Gentlemen 
Thank you for inviting me to this event. It gives me great pleasure to be here with you today 
in this beautiful city on the River Limmat. 
Being a monetary policymaker is rather like trying to swim at a constant speed. If you dive 
into the water at the Upper Letten, you will simply be swept along by the current without any 
effort – in fact, you may actually have to actively slow yourself down. 
If you take a swim in Lake Zurich, on the other hand, you can usually progress at your own 
pace  in  a  leisurely  breaststroke.  But,  of  course,  even  there  you  may  encounter  more 
turbulent waters – waves churned up by a passing boat, for example. 
I’m sure you’ll agree, Thomas, that we central bankers are currently faced with a fairly strong 
countercurrent.  Euro-area  inflation has  been  below  the  target  of  just  under  2%  for  months 
now, with another negative rate of –0.3% recorded in February. And the consensus is that 
the inflation outlook will remain subdued for some time to come. 
The  ECB  Governing  Council  has  therefore  decided  to  make  extensive  government  bond 
purchases, thus progressing to an even more expansionary monetary policy stance. In terms 
of monetary policy, the Eurosystem is undoubtedly facing a difficult situation at the moment. 
Failing  to  meet  its  inflation  target  for  too  long  could  have  negative  repercussions,  as  the 
various players in the economy have adapted to this pace of inflation. 
As  a  case  in  point,  both  private  and  public  borrowers  have  based  their  contracts  on  the 
benchmark of inflation of below, but close to, 2% over the medium term. If inflation remains 
below this level for a long time, it will become more difficult for them to service their debt. And 
that  could  have  implications  for  price  developments  and  the  credibility  of  monetary  policy. 
The dangers associated with inflation staying too low for too long therefore have to be taken 
seriously. 
But is that really cause for us to loosen our monetary policy? I have my doubts. Despite the 
horror scenarios evoked in some quarters, the risk of a self-reinforcing spiral of falling wages 
and prices – of deflation, in other words – is very low, a view shared by the vast majority of 
the Governing Council members. 
There are, at least, no visible signs of especially low wage settlements, either in Germany or 
the  other  large  euro-area  countries.  Negotiated  wages  are  likely  to  rise  by  around  3%  in 
Germany this year; the increase just agreed for Germany’s metal-working industry is around 
that size. And even in Spain, where inflation rates are negative, the Commission is expecting 
wages to rise by 0.7% in 2015. 
As for the spectre of debt deflation, there are currently no signs in any of the crisis countries 
other  than  Greece  that  low  inflation  is  hampering  deleveraging  in  the  non-financial  sector. 
The  primary  reason  why  debt  ratios  in  these  countries  are  rising  is  that  increased  public 
borrowing  is  overshadowing  the  partial  deleveraging  that  has  occurred  in  the  non-financial 
private sector. 
When assessing the monetary policy situation, of course, it is also important to look at the 
cause of the low inflation rates. Plummeting energy prices are one of the main factors. But 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
  this  slump  is  likely  to  be  fairly  short-lived.  And  although  falling  energy  prices  are  slowing 
down inflation, they are also boosting consumers’ purchasing power and cutting enterprises’ 
costs. Falling oil prices are therefore having the effect of a small stimulus package. 
This assessment is also reflected in the ECB staff macroeconomic projections published last 
Thursday. While the ECB staff lowered the projection for this year’s inflation rate, they made 
perceptible  upward  revisions  to  the  growth  outlook  for  this  year  and  next.  Inflation  is  now 
expected to return to the desired range of “below, but close to, 2%” in 2017. 
Another  point  to  consider  is  that  purchases  of  euro-area  government  bonds  are  not  “just 
another”  instrument.  As  the  founding  fathers  of  our  monetary  union  were  well  aware,  in  a 
monetary union with a single monetary policy but continuing national sovereignty over fiscal 
policy, the easier it is to pass on the fallout of unsound budgetary policy to other member 
states or to the Eurosystem, the stronger the inherent incentive for countries to run up debt. 
That  is  why  the  EU  treaties  forbid  the  Eurosystem  from  purchasing  bonds  directly  from 
member states or giving them loans. Now the Eurosystem is buying government bonds not 
on  the  primary  market  but  on  the  secondary  market.  That  is  not  prohibited.  Still,  these 
purchases will make the Eurosystem the member states’ largest creditor, thus further blurring 
the boundaries between monetary and fiscal policy to a significant extent. 
Ultimately,  the  government  bond  purchase  programme  also  means  that  all  governments  
– regardless of their credit quality – can, in effect, fund a substantial portion of their debt very 
cheaply.  As  the  central  banks  are  only  purchasing  the  government  bonds  of  their  home 
countries, the member states will recoup much of the interest payable on these instruments 
at a later date via central bank profits. 
That  can,  of  course,  ingrain  certain  habits  and  ultimately  encourage  countries  to  put  the 
necessary consolidation of their public finances on the back burner. And that, in turn, could 
increase  pressure  on  monetary  policymakers  to  keep  interest  rates  low  for  longer  than 
necessary – even if monetary policy considerations would call for a rise in key interest rates. 
The  mere  impression  that  monetary  policy  is  no  longer  centred  around  the  goal  of  price 
stability  could  erode  its  credibility,  and  central  banks  would  have  to  make  great  efforts  to 
combat this. 
Ultimately, deciding whether to make bond purchases is about weighing up which risks are 
more pressing. On the one hand, we have the risk associated with blurring the boundaries 
between monetary and fiscal policy, combined with possible financial stability risks caused by 
very loose monetary policy. On the other, we have the risks to credibility caused by a phase 
of low inflation, which could engender the risk of a self-reinforcing deflationary spiral. 
Given that the oil price slump – the main cause of the low inflation rates – is temporary and is 
also acting as a stimulus for the economy as a whole, I consider the former risks to be more 
pressing than the latter at present. 
Ladies and gentlemen, the world would be a far simpler place for the Eurosystem’s monetary 
policymakers if economic growth in the member states were stronger. When potential growth 
is low, a central bank will soon start to run out of options – interest rates cannot simply be 
lowered ad infinitum into negative territory. 
One  important  reason  why  monetary  policymakers  have  been  forced  to  take  ever  riskier 
action is the weak growth outlook for the euro area. According to estimates by the European 
Commission,1 the euro area’s potential growth over the medium term – in other words, over 
the  next  ten  years  –  is  a  mere  1%.  And  weak  growth  prospects  mean  not  only  a 
                                                 
1   European Commission (2013), “The euro area’s growth prospects over the coming decade”, Quarterly Report 
on the Euro Area 12(4). 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  comparatively  small  increase  in  living  standards  but  also  tighter  budget  constraints  in  the 
future. 
What we need is a lasting increase in growth. Yet that can only be achieved if we decisively 
tackle our structural barriers. 
What progress has been made? 
2. 
It could be argued here that major progress has already been accomplished, especially in the 
countries hit hardest by the crisis. I share this view. Indeed, much has been done to correct 
the macroeconomic imbalances that were a root cause of the euro-area crisis. 
Historian Harold James once likened the behaviour of member states before and after the 
start of monetary union to that of couples before and after getting married: “It was like what 
happens  to  couples  who,  once  married,  abandon  some  of  their  romantic  and  utopian 
intentions in day-to-day married life. At the most trivial level, men now leave unwashed socks 
lying around and women drop towels on the floor. In many cases, the situation then spirals 
from there …”2  
Before  the  crisis,  prices  and  productivity  in  some  parts  of  the  euro  area  had  become 
increasingly  divorced  from  one  another.  When  the  financial  crisis  hit  and  investors’  risk-
awareness grew, they refused to continue to bridge the resulting gap. 
But a lot has happened since then. For example, wage bargaining has been decentralised in 
many countries and wage indexation abolished or, at the very least, reduced. Consequently, 
wages can better reflect the specific circumstances of individual enterprises. This and other 
measures have brought prices and wages closer into line with productivity. Member states’ 
price competitiveness increased significantly, to the point where current account deficits were 
completely eliminated in all crisis countries except for Cyprus back in 2013. Cyprus, too, is 
expecting to record a current account surplus in 2014. 
In  addition,  progress  has  been  made  in  the  consolidation  of  government  budgets.  The 
sustainability of public finances in countries such as Italy, Greece, Spain and Portugal has 
also been improved by adjusting pensions for demographic factors, with measures including 
an  increase  in  the  statutory  retirement  age.  As  a  result,  the  pension  system  will  be 
strengthened  financially,  much  needed  expertise  will  remain  in  enterprises  and  the 
demographically induced decline in the labour supply will be slowed down to a certain extent. 
Germany took this path at an earlier point in time, which makes it all the more regrettable that 
it is now back-pedaling a little on these reforms. 
What remains to be done? 
3. 
The measures that have been introduced have helped improve the public finance situation 
and increase competitiveness. However, competitiveness should not just be the product of 
cost cuts. Prosperity ultimately hinges on productivity – and this is where efforts should be 
focused in the euro area. 
What  is  now  required  are  structural  reforms  that  unleash  innovative  power  and  enhance 
productivity. We need these reforms right now not least because they play a part in raising 
income expectations. What is more, areas in which higher income is expected in future are 
receiving investment today. Supply-side reforms can therefore support demand, too. 
Responsibility  for  some  areas  in  which  there  is  a  need  for  reform  lies  primarily  with  the 
European Commission and the European Council rather than at the national level. 
                                                 
2   H James (2014), Finanzmarkt macht Geschichte. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
  The digital single market 
3.1 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  economic  textbooks  are  in  complete  agreement  on  what  drives 
productivity: technological progress. 
In recent years, technological progress has been heavily influenced by IT. As is so often the 
case,  economists  cannot  quite  agree  on  the  scale  of  the  contribution  made  by  digital 
technologies. But what they do agree on is that it is considerable.3, 4 
However,  the  European  markets  for  digital  applications  remain  heavily  fragmented, 
especially with respect to legal issues such as protection of privacy, contents and copyright. 
The  liability  of  online  intermediaries,  electronic payments  and  electronic  contracts are  also 
regulated  differently.  There  is  still  no  digital  single  market  in  the  EU;  instead,  there  are 
28 individual digital markets. 
If the single market were to enter the digital age with no holds barred, this could significantly 
strengthen the forces of growth. 
Studies5  show  that  creating  a  harmonised  and well  regulated  digital  single  market  has  the 
same  potential  as  implementing  the  single  market  in  its  original  form,  which  is  to  say  an 
upturn in growth of as much as 4%. In Germany alone, as many as 420,000 new jobs could 
be created between 2015 and 2020. 
Common market for services 
3.2  
The  market  for  digital  applications  is  not  the  only  one  in  which  integration  remains 
incomplete. 
The single market has proven extremely successful at simplifying trade in goods. As a result, 
competition here is intense. Enterprises’ market power does not enable them to charge large 
mark-ups on top of their costs; levels are similar to those in the USA, for example. 
Creating a transatlantic market – the TTIP is a keyword here – could thus provide even more 
stimulus  in  this  regard.  The  USA  is  the  EU’s  largest  export  market  and  its  third  most 
important import partner for trade in goods. As far as trade in services is concerned, the two 
regions share even closer connections. 
And it is precisely in the area of services that the EU still has some catching up to do in terms 
of intensifying competition. Mark-ups on the cost of services are, on average, higher than in 
the USA. One could say that the European Commission’s Services Directive has failed to live 
up to expectations. Thus, achieving a single market for services and ensuring the unhindered 
cross-border provision of services promise significant economic benefits. 
Barriers to market entry 
3.3  
Obstacles  to  growth  exist  across  individual  member  states  in  the  form  of  red  tape  for 
business  start-ups,  to  cite  one  example.  Frequent  administrative  formalities,  long  approval 
periods  and  high  fees  make  starting  a  business  more  complicated  and  expensive  than 
necessary. 
In the World Bank’s Doing Business table, for instance, Germany ranks 114th in the “ease of 
starting a business” category. Speaking of which, Switzerland did not fare spectacularly well 
in  this  category  either,  coming  in  at  69th  place.  Other  European  countries  also  found 
                                                 
3   D T Jorgenson (2001), Information technology and the U.S. economy, American Economic Review, Vol 91, 
No 1, pp 1–32. 
4   B  Van  Ark,  M  O’Mahoney  and  M  P  Timmer  (2008),  The  Productivity  Gap  between  Europe  and  the  United 
States: Trends and Causes, Journal of Economic Perspectives, Vol 22, No 1, pp 25–44. 
5   Copenhagen Economics (2010), The Economic Impact of a European Digital Single Market, Final Report. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  themselves  in  mid-table  positions  at  best.  In  other  words,  there  is  plenty  of  room  for 
improvement. 
Even though an enterprise’s direct costs may appear to be manageable at first glance, the 
economic cost of difficulties entering the market and, as a result, weaker competition should 
not be underestimated. For example, studies6 indicate that the differences between the costs 
of entering the market in the USA and in the EU, while relatively small, could still account for 
10%  to  20%  of  the  EU’s  productivity  shortfall.  The  costs  of  removing  red  tape  are 
comparatively low and could help strengthen growth. 
Labour markets 
3.4  
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  market  entry  barriers  can  severely  hamper  productivity.  But 
productivity  is  not  only  subdued  by  regulations  in  the  product  market.  In  order  for  the 
economy to flourish, resources must be utilised wherever they promise the highest return. Of 
course, this is especially true of the most important resource of all – the labour provided by 
each individual. 
Studies7  show  that  innovative  European  firms  are  having  a  considerably  tougher  time 
recruiting the staff they need than their US counterparts. 
As a result, allocative efficiency and, ultimately, productivity are reduced. It would appear that 
the  reason  for  this  is  the  “lock-in”  effect  produced  by  overly  strict  employment  protection, 
meaning that it is not so easy for employees to change employers. 
That which creates security also creates inertia. But can you have one without wanting the 
other?  I  think  so.  However,  the  answer  cannot  simply  be  to  drastically  cut  employment 
protection. The advice of labour market economist and Nobel Prize winner Chris Pissarides 
could serve as a guideline here: “protect workers, not jobs”. 
In other words, the implementation of less stringent employment protection legislation linked 
to  adequate  financial  support  in  the  event  of  job  loss  would  likely  reduce  the  overall 
unemployment rate. But employees would be protected against the vagaries of the market. 
The overwhelmingly high unemployment rate in many euro-area countries is reason enough 
alone to improve the functioning of the labour markets. Especially dramatic is the high level 
of youth unemployment, above all in Spain and Greece. The notion of a “lost generation” is 
devastating not only from an economic perspective. 
Spain and Greece have already initiated reforms to surmount the divide between protected 
and  precarious  employment.  Most  recently,  Italy  has  likewise  passed  reforms  that  head  in 
this direction. These steps are encouraging. But it is also clear that reducing unemployment 
will not happen overnight – it will take time. 
However,  in  countries  where  reform  has  been  systematically  pursued,  such  as  Spain  and 
Ireland, the results are already visible. Spain’s unemployment rate has fallen by almost three 
percentage points from its peak during the financial crisis, while Ireland’s unemployment rate 
is already down by five percentage points. It is therefore crucial that they not stop halfway. 
Flexible labour markets also remain important in the euro area for another reason. Last but 
not least, the optimal currency area theory suggests that, in the absence of an exchange rate 
as an adjustment variable, the free movement of workers in the labour market is required to 
absorb  economic  shocks.  Rendering  the  European  labour  markets  more  flexible  would 
therefore have a threefold positive effect. 
                                                 
6   Markus  Poschke  (2010),  “The  Regulation  of  Entry  and  Aggregate  Productivity”,  Economic  Journal,  Royal 
Economic Society, Vol 120, No 549, pp 1175–1200. 
7   D  Andrews,  C  Criscuolo  (2013),  “Knowledge-based  capital,  innovation  and  resource  allocation”,  OECD 
Economics Department Working Papers, No 146. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
  Capital markets union 
3.5  
Differences in language and culture would suggest, however, that mobility in the European 
labour market will not be as high in the foreseeable future as in other currency areas. This 
makes it all the more important for other buffers to function effectively. 
Even in federal currency areas such as the United States, Canada or Switzerland, this buffer 
function  is  performed  primarily  by  the  capital  markets.  In  the  USA,  for  example,  the 
integrated markets for capital cushion around 40% of total cyclical fluctuations between the 
US federal states. If a negative shock hits an industry or a specific region, then this loss is 
spread  widely  beyond  the  state.  But  in  return,  shareholders  throughout  the  country  also 
receive a share of the profits during the good times. 
When compared with the equity capital markets, the significance of the credit markets as a 
buffer is lower: around 25% of cyclical fluctuations are evened out via the credit markets. 
Fiscal cushioning mechanisms, however, are by far the least significant: only 10% to 15% of 
economic shocks are absorbed through public finances.8 This last figure is similar in other 
federal  systems.  Only  in  Canada  is  the  contribution  considerably  higher,  at  approximately 
30%. 
In terms of their performance, fiscal buffers thus correspond more closely to the traditional 
leaf spring; only integrated capital markets are capable of providing the cushioning comfort of 
modern  air  suspension  systems.  Here,  the  equity  capital  markets,  in  particular,  are  an 
essential component. 
The fiscal framework 
4. 
Although  the  role  fiscal  adjustment  mechanisms  play  in  absorbing  asymmetric  shocks 
appears  to be  limited,  fiscal  policy  remains  at  the  centre  of  the  debate  on  the  euro  area’s 
future development. 
This  is  related  to  the  incentives  for  running  up  debt  mentioned  earlier,  created  by  the 
combination of a single monetary policy and national fiscal policies. As long as fiscal policies 
remain in national responsibility, the member states also need to bear the consequences of 
their  policies  themselves.  Otherwise,  incentives  will  be  created  to  engage  in  unsound 
practices. 
The rescue measures taken during the crisis prevented any further escalation of the crisis 
and stabilised the euro area in the short term. However, elements of joint liability have also 
increasingly been introduced as part of these measures, while fiscal policy has remained a 
matter  for  national  policymakers.  Hence,  there  is  a  growing  divide  between  liability  and 
control, which can lead to growth in incentives for government borrowing. 
A frequently suggested solution to these euro-area stability problems is the introduction of a 
fiscal union with centralised intervention rights at the European level and joint liability. This is 
not a fundamentally new idea. Addressing the Bundestag in November 1991, for example, 
the  then-Chancellor  Helmut  Kohl  remarked  that  “the  idea  of  sustaining  economic  and 
monetary union over time without political union is a fallacy”. 
But  we  ought  to  remain  realistic:  there  is  currently  no  sign  of  any  willingness  –  either  in 
Germany or in our partner countries – to transfer fiscal policy sovereignty to the European 
level.  Therefore,  we  will  have  to  make  do  with  the  regulatory  framework  agreed  on  at  the 
time by all parties – which places liability and control at the national level. 
                                                 
8   P  Asdrubali,  B  E  Sørensen  and  O  Yosha  (1996),  “Channels  of  Interstate  Risk  Sharing:  US  1963–1990”, 
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 111(4), pp 1081–1110. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  But the principle of individual national responsibility requires a double safeguard. First, strict 
fiscal rules that prevent the development of unsound public finances. Second, a reliable ban 
that prohibits countries from providing each other with aid in times of financial distress. Only 
a credible no bail-out clause results in risk-appropriate pricing of a country’s government debt 
by financial markets. The more debt a government takes on, the more expensive it becomes. 
The example of Switzerland shows that a combination of fiscal rules and individual financial 
responsibility  can  ensure  sound  public  finances.  A  crucial  element  in  Switzerland’s  fiscal 
framework is the no bail-out regime for local governments. 
But up until ten years ago, no one was quite sure whether a canton really was exempt from 
the  obligation  to  bail  out  a  bankrupt  municipality  within  its  jurisdiction.  The  answer  to  this 
question was provided by the Leukerbad case: a court ruled that the canton of Valais was 
under no obligation to bail out the highly indebted municipality of Leukerbad. Ever since, the 
financial  markets  have  also  acknowledged  the  no  bail-out  regime  as  a  credible  policy,  as 
indicated, amongst other things, by the fact that yields on bonds issued by cantons which are 
home to municipalities facing financial problems have dropped since the court ruling.9 
Yet how can the principle of individual fiscal responsibility be reinforced among the member 
states  of  the  euro  area?  A  key  starting  point  is  to  strengthen  the  financial  markets’ 
disciplinary  function.  This  would  require,  in  particular,  an  end  to  the  preferential  regulatory 
treatment of government bonds, which includes banks not needing to hold capital reserves 
against investments in government bonds. 
This preferential treatment of sovereign debtors is based on the assumption that government 
bonds are free of risk, an assumption that contradicts the no bail-out clause and therefore 
reduces  its  credibility.  When  banks  are  not  required  to  hold  any  capital  reserves  against 
government  bonds,  their  solvency  is  directly  threatened  by  a  sovereign  default,  and  a 
financial  crisis  cannot  be  ruled  out.  Hence,  government  bonds  should  be  backed  by 
adequate capital. 
There is also another special treatment that should be ended. To avoid concentration risks, 
bank  loans  to  a  single  private-sector  borrower  may  not  exceed  25%  of  the  bank’s  liable 
capital. In future, large exposure limits should also apply to sovereign debtors. 
From a financial stability perspective, particular problems are posed by the fact that banks 
often only have government bonds issued by a single country in their portfolio – those of their 
home country. Not only do the euro-area banks hold more government bonds on their books 
than ever before (€1.9 trillion), the home bias has actually become even stronger in the crisis 
countries  in  recent  years.  In  Italy’s  case,  for  instance,  97%  of  the  euro-denominated 
government bonds held by the country’s banks were issued by the Italian government. 
So,  the  banks  not  only  have  no  capital  backing  for  these  government  bonds  but  are  also 
tying their own fate to that of their country. This will need to change to give credence to the 
no bail-out regime. 
But  even  a  credible  no-bailout  regime  can  only  have  the  intended  disciplining  effect  once 
doubts begin to emerge over a country’s fiscal soundness. That is why it is also important to 
combat the particular incentives inherent in a monetary union to run up debt, so that things 
do not get out of hand in the first place. 
Hence the need for effective fiscal rules. Switzerland has a wealth of experience in applying 
fiscal rules. Its national debt brake has been in force since 2003, since which time debt has 
levelled off, and the debt ratio has been on the decline. The debt brake was introduced by 
                                                 
9   Lars  P  Feld,  A  Kalb,  M-D  Moessinger  and  S  Osterloh  (2013),  Sovereign  Bond  Market  Reactions  to  Fiscal 
Rules and No-Bailout Clauses: The Swiss Experience. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
  way of referendum, which increases its binding force, as violations explicitly run counter to 
the will of the people. 
Incidentally, we can gain even more detailed insights from the cantonal fiscal rules, which are 
now  in  place  in  nearly  all  the  country’s  cantons.  Available  research  reveals  that  stricter 
cantonal debt brakes also prove to be more effective.10 
By  revising  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  and  the  fiscal  compact,  the  euro-area  member 
states have also changed the rules. This served as a counterweight to the introduction of the 
substantial rescue packages. 
However,  it  appears  that  little  remains  of  the  original  intention  to  tighten  the  fiscal  rules. 
Although it is now much more difficult for finance ministers to turn down the Commission’s 
recommendations, the Commission’s influence has also significantly increased. And that is 
not always a positive thing either. The rules, on the whole, have hardly any logic to them, and 
the Commission does not always seem to want to apply a narrow interpretation. 
But we are learning from the Swiss example that the rules need to be strict. I believe that 
flexibility in interpretation should only be applied, if at all, in well-founded exceptional cases. 
For this ultimately weakens the structural consolidation requirements and defers them to the 
future. 
Conclusion 
5. 
Ladies and gentlemen, this brings me to the end of my speech. 
With its decision in favour of substantial government bond purchases, the Eurosystem has 
once again provided ex ante assistance. Governments and the European Commission must 
now use the time to strengthen the long-term conditions for growth in the euro area. Friedrich 
Dürrenmatt  once  said,  “The  quickest  way  to  clear  up  a  matter  is  through  dialogue”. 
Therefore, I now look forward to our discussion. 
 
                                                 
10   See Feld et al (2013). 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
