  Thomas C Baxter: Compliance – some thoughts about reaching the next 
level 
Remarks  by  Mr  Thomas  C  Baxter,  Executive  Vice  President  and  General  Counsel  of  the 
Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York,  at  the  Fordham  Journal  of  Corporate  Counsel  & 
Financial Law Symposium, Fordham Law School, New York City, 9 February 2015. 
 These  remarks  are  personal  and  do  not  necessarily  represent  the  views  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of 
New York, or any component of the Federal Reserve System. 
Introduction 
Let me begin by thanking Professor Sean Griffith, the director of the Corporate Law Center, 
and Robert Lyons, editor of the Fordham Journal of Corporate & Financial Law, for inviting 
me to participate in this symposium about corporate compliance and corporate governance. 
Let  me  also  thank  Fordham  Law  School  for  hosting  the  symposium.  I  would  also  like  to 
recognize a colleague who is with us today. He is Martin Grant, who is the New York Fed’s 
chief ethics and compliance officer. I have had the privilege of working with Martin for the last 
25 years, and much of what I have learned about compliance I have learned from him. 
In the space sometimes labeled compliance, we have come a very long way in a relatively 
short time. In about 20 years, compliance has transformed from a nice idea to an important 
component  of  most  major  corporations.  This  is  especially  true  in  the  highly  regulated 
industries, including the industry where I have made my career, financial services. We could 
spend much time discussing how this transformation happened. From my vantage point, it 
happened  because  of  the  combined  effects  of  the  Federal  sentencing  guidelines,  the 
Delaware  Chancery  Court’s  Caremark  decision,1  and  the  post-Enron  legislation  known  as 
Sarbanes Oxley. Of course, other events also fueled the transformation, and in the financial 
services industry, the worst financial crisis our country has seen since the Great Depression 
became a burning platform. 
While it is always important to look back at the road traveled, I am not going to spend any 
more  time  on  that  particular  topic.  Instead,  today  I  intend  to  look  forward  at  where 
compliance is going, and to forecast for our future some things we should pay attention to 
now.  I  will  discuss  five  different  items,  and  I  predict  that  some  of  the  greatest 
accomplishments for compliance are not in the recent past but in the not-too-distant future. If 
we plan ahead, and if we can successfully adapt to changing circumstances in our respective 
industries and in the national and global economies, then 20 years from now you will listen to 
another  keynote  speaker  remarking  on  further  amazing  progress  for  the  compliance 
profession. In short, we are on our way to another level. 
Important steps toward the next level 
Most of my remarks today will be devoted to the things that I believe will get us to the next 
level. Let me turn to them now. 
Ethics and compliance/values and rules 
1. 
The nomenclature that is used in compliance to describe the company officer responsible for 
compliance has changed, and the change in nomenclature is a clue to revealing a material, 
substantive change. Twenty years ago, we called this officer the “compliance officer”, and I 
emphasize  the  singular.  Over  several  years  the  title  morphed,  as  compliance  programs 
                                                
1  
In re Caremark International Inc. Derivative Litigation, 698 A.2d 959 (Del.Ch. 1996). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  developed and compliance jobs multiplied, both with respect to subject matter expertise and 
the  types  of  skill  sets  needed  to  make  compliance  programs  “take”.  Consequently, 
companies  found  that  the  compliance  officer  turned  into  the  chief  compliance  officer, 
because in major companies, it took a village to get compliance done. Compliance, you see, 
turned from singular to plural. 
More recently the title has again changed. In many companies today, the title is chief ethics 
and compliance officer, or CECO, reflecting a salutary trend on the part of many companies 
to  integrate  ethics  and  compliance. Why  is  this  happening?  In  my  view,  it  is  happening  in 
recognition of the fact that it is easier to have an effective compliance program in a company 
that nurtures a strong ethical culture. In a recent speech, Daniel Tarullo, a governor of the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, accurately observed that “culture” is a 
“somewhat contested academic concept”. Yet, the evidence is growing that an ethical culture 
produces tangible benefits, including making compliance more effective. 
Recent  studies  attempting  to  assess  the  effectiveness  of  compliance  programs  have 
developed a measure called the “PEI”, or Program Effectiveness Index. Early work with the 
PEI  shows  that  companies  combining  their  ethics  and  compliance  programs  tend  to  have 
better PEI scores. The reason for the higher effectiveness measure seems to be something 
that  I  find  perfectly  rational.  Ethics  programs,  consisting  of  measures  taken  to  inculcate 
organizational  values,  help  to  create  a  culture that  is  not  only  conducive  to following  rules 
that  are  embedded  in  law  and  regulation,  but  also  conducive  to  compliance  with  company 
mores. A strong ethical culture breeds a more compliant culture. 
The  symbiotic  relationship  between  ethics  and  compliance  arises  because  of  the  close 
connection between values and rules. Ethics is about values and compliance is about rules. 
You obtain the beneficial symbiotic effect when the values and the rules live in harmony. A 
different result is obtained when you have organizational values that conflict with the rules. 
One of the very exciting areas in compliance today relates to how a company’s strong ethical 
culture can impact corporate behavior. One aspect of this behavioral change relates to the 
greater tendency of corporate constituents to follow the applicable rules when the culture is 
right. Looking to the future, I envision we will see much more empirical research that shows 
the benefits of merging ethics with compliance, and placing both in the hands of a trusted 
corporate officer with a catchy new name – the chief ethics and compliance officer. As we 
move  to  the  next  level,  ethics  and  compliance  will  increasingly  become  a  part  of  a  single 
program. 
Ethics and compliance as a tool for on-boarding risk 
2. 
The last 20 years have demonstrated the benefit of ethics and compliance in identifying legal 
risk  and  taking  operational  measures  to  keep  that  identified  legal  risk  within  the 
organization’s accepted risk appetite. In most applications, though, compliance has been the 
vehicle that prompts the organization to reduce risk by constraining activity. In the financial 
services industry, correspondent banking provides an illustrative case. 
Correspondent  banking  is  the  business  of  effecting  funds  transfers  for  other  financial 
institutions.  Because  the  U.S.  dollar  is  the  international  medium  of  exchange,  financial 
institutions throughout the world have a need to effect dollar-denominated transfers of funds. 
Ethics  and  compliance  professionals  in  U.S.  banks  have  pointed  out  that  this  type  of 
business  presents  several  different  legal  risks:  money  laundering,  terrorist  financing,  and 
sanctions evasion are the most obvious and the most notorious. There is no doubt that these 
compliance professionals are correct. One consequence of their being right, however, is that 
U.S. correspondent banks decided to “de-risk”. To execute on the de-risking mandate, many 
U.S. correspondents stopped providing correspondent banking services to those perceived 
to present such risk. 
As a result, certain elements of the global financial services industry now find it increasingly 
difficult  to  transact  business  in  dollars.  There  is  a  concern  by  the  U.S.  correspondents 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  transferring funds for Middle Eastern customers that the correspondents might unwittingly be 
providing services to a terrorist organization, or be enabling a person or affected sovereign to 
evade economic sanctions. So, the correspondents close accounts for all banks in the Middle 
East.  Similarly,  there  is  a  concern  by  the  U.S.  correspondents  transferring  funds  for  Latin 
American  customers  that  they  might  unwittingly  be  providing  financial  services  to  drug 
traffickers, a money laundering risk. So, they close accounts for all banks located in Mexico, 
Venezuela and Colombia. The de-risking exercise succeeds in its risk-reducing objective, but 
it succeeds in an overly broad manner by cutting services indiscriminately to so many. 
The  adverse  and  unintended  consequences  for  certain  regions  of  the  world  are  clear  and 
present. There are also implications for U.S. policy with respect to the role of the dollar as the 
international  medium  of  exchange.  These  issues,  while  highly  consequential,  are  not  the 
object of my remarks today; rather, they are a symptom of what compliance can lead to – 
namely, a reason to restrict business activity. Given the size of penalties for violations, and 
the potential reputational damage associated with this business, it is very difficult to quarrel 
with the business judgment. 
The success of compliance over the last 20 years has conditioned business leaders to think 
about  compliance  as  a  pathway  to  terminate  or  constrain  a  risky  business  relationship. 
However, it is possible to look at compliance in a very different way, as a two-way street and 
not  a  “one-way”  street.  Let  me  explain  what  I  mean.  A  sound  and  effective  compliance 
program can be used, appropriately in my view, as a tool that would permit on-boarding of 
what is seen as risky business. 
To continue with the example of correspondent banking, if a U.S. correspondent had a sound 
and effective compliance program that was  well tailored to identify and control the risks of 
money  laundering,  terrorist  financing,  and  sanctions  evasion,  this  correspondent  might 
become sufficiently confident to on-board risk. This means that instead of closing accounts 
for everyone in a specific geographic area, it would continue with some of these accounts, or 
even  open  new  accounts.  Now,  I  do  not  want  anyone  to  think  I  am  saying  that  all 
correspondents  can  reasonably  have  such  confidence  now.  At  this  point  in  our  journey,  I 
concede the need to develop greater confidence that the identified risks can be controlled at 
a  reasonable  cost.  With  that  said,  I  believe  that  we  will  reach  a  place  where  ethics  and 
compliance  programs  are  sufficiently  developed  so  organizations  can  make  considered 
decisions  to  on-board  risk  and  keep  it  within  the  accepted  risk  appetite  by  using  effective 
controls. I look forward to that time as we move to the next level. 
Developing the methodology to assess effectiveness 
3. 
I mentioned earlier one of the promising new tools to assess the effectiveness of ethics and 
compliance programs, and that is the PEI, the Program Effectiveness Index. The excellent 
report by the Ethics Resource Center, The Federal Sentencing Guidelines For Organizations 
at Twenty Years, has drawn attention to standards for assessing program effectiveness. The 
report states: “Altogether, the lack of assessment standards and guidance on how the quality 
of  a  compliance/ethics  program  should  influence  the  outcome  of  a  matter  create  the 
impression, validated by the [Ethics Resource Center] and Conference Board studies...that 
too many judgments are being made inside a black box.”2 
While we seem to be on the cusp of a number of promising indicators, like the PEI, the truth 
is that we are not there yet. We simply do not have a tool that will give us an accurate and 
reliable  measure  of  program  effectiveness.  Instead,  we  have  a  situation  where  enforcers 
(including  those  agencies  with  civil  enforcement  authority,  such  as  the  banking  agencies) 
tend  to  be  result  oriented.  When  we  see  that  a  particular  organization  has  experienced  a 
major compliance failure, we tend to view the failure as evidence of the ineffectiveness of the 
                                                
2   Ethics Resource Center, The Federal Sentencing Guidelines for Organizations at Twenty Years at 51 (2012). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  ethics  and  compliance  program. We  reason  backward,  “if  the  program  were  effective,  this 
would  not  have  happened.”  I  think  this  is  natural  and  understandable  for  the  enforcement 
community, but it is not necessarily good policy. To borrow an observation from Senator Ted 
Kennedy concerning the Federal sentencing guidelines, this creates “a risk that companies 
without substantial compliance programs will get a free ride, and those with strong programs 
will not receive the credit that they deserve.”3 
Alternatively, if there were a reliable and acceptable measure of program effectiveness, this 
kind  of  backward  reasoning  would  be  replaced  by  reliance  on  the  effective  measure. 
Institutions  could  use  the  measure  when  making  arguments  for  leniency,  again  assuming 
that the measure demonstrated that their programs were effective. It might, of course, show 
just the opposite. And there are other, perhaps even more important, benefits. If an industry 
and its regulators came to have great confidence in a particular effectiveness measure, this 
might provide a foundation for building a program that could be used to on-board risk. Put 
differently,  a  particular  organization  could  have  confidence  that  its  ethics  and  compliance 
program  would  be  protective  because  the  program  had  been  validated  by  a  well-accepted 
measure of effectiveness. 
Some of the skeptics will say “you are dreaming”. When I hear them, I am reminded of the 
words  of  George  Bernard  Shaw,  and  specifically  the  reminder  to  dream  things  that  never 
were and ask “why not”.4 
Adaptive compliance – adding speed and agility to process and procedure 
4. 
Over the past 20 years, as ethics and compliance has moved through infancy and into early 
childhood, we have become committed to the process and procedure that is emblematic of a 
program.  There  is  much  about  this  progression  that  is  good.  The  building  of  compliance 
programs  has  produced  real  benefits,5  and  these  benefits  have  created  the  compliance 
profession.  There  is  a  risk  too.  The  risk  is  that  the  process  and  procedure  that  is  the 
substance of the compliance program will become a kind of iron cage, restraining innovation 
so that the organization cannot adapt to changing circumstances. In short, the process and 
procedure can stifle speed and agility. 
One  place  where  this  has  occurred  recently  is  in  financial  services.  Some  institutions 
witnessed some malefactors violating the law and engaging in anti-competitive practices with 
respect  to  the  setting  of  the  Libor  rate.  Those  institutions  responded  to  very  specific  rate 
fixing abuses, but they did not envision that the abuses with respect to Libor could also be 
occurring in other businesses, like foreign exchange. Compliance, in this particular instance, 
was not adaptive. Compliance professionals, in this instance, did not show the needed speed 
and agility. They did not reason along the lines that “if it is happening concerning Libor then it 
might be happening concerning foreign exchange.” 
As compliance becomes increasingly routinized  and subject to what the consultants would 
call the “repeatable process”, the process can have a tendency to drive out creative thought. 
As  creativity  dissipates,  so  does  the  ability  to  connect  related  occurrences.  In  the  next 
20 years,  we  will  need  simultaneously  to  perform  repeatable  processes  and  to  think 
innovatively. We will need to continue to build the routines and repeatable processes. Yet, 
we will also need to be sufficiently flexible to see around corners, to where new problems are 
                                                
3   Remarks  of  the  Honorable  Edward  M.  Kennedy,  U.S.  Sentencing  Commission,  Symposium  Proceedings: 
“Corporate Crime in America: Strengthening the ‘Good Citizen’ Corporation,” at 120 (1995). 
4   George Bernard Shaw, Back to Methuselah: In the Beginning, act 1, Selected Plays with Prefaces, vol. 2, at 7 
(1949). 
5   A  survey  sponsored  by  the  Ethics  Resource  Center  from  2011  “shows  that  employees  in  companies  with 
effective,  meaningful  codes  of  conduct  and  programs...  witness  fewer  incidents  of  misconduct,  and  are  far 
more likely to report misconduct when observed.” Ethics Resource Center, supra note 2, at 2. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  emerging,  and  new  risks  to  our  franchises  are  developing.  This  is  what  it  will  take  to  be 
successful at the next level. 
Attention at the top – developing protocols for escalation 
5. 
I commend Fordham for focusing this symposium on compliance and governance. They are 
related  and  intertwined.  The  four  items  discussed  all  relate  to  compliance.  My  last  item 
touches on governance. 
As I speak with chief ethics and compliance officers, a regular topic of conversation is conflict 
with the business leaders who own the risk. This is a little unsettling, because during the last 
20  years  we  have  been  successful  in  establishing  as  a  better  practice  the  approval  of the 
compliance program by the board of directors. One might think that, if the board of directors 
approves  the  compliance  program,  then  it  should  not  be  difficult  for  the  chief  ethics  and 
compliance officer to get the business owners to pay close attention. 
The devil here, as in so many other places, lies in the details. It is usually the implementation 
of  the  compliance  program  that  causes  the  conflict.  It  is  usually  related  to  the  cost  of 
compliance, because the cost ordinarily affects how the business owner measures success, 
which is the size of the business’ profit. The chief ethics and compliance officer will not be 
able to resolve the conflict easily, because compliance is a cost to the business which can 
make  compliance  the  adversary  of  the  business  owner.  The  chief  ethics  and  compliance 
officer will not want to bring a specific conflict issue to the attention of the board of directors. 
While this might be very effective in resolving the specific conflict, it could absolutely destroy 
her ability to function effectively thereafter. In a recent survey of chief ethics and compliance 
officers conducted by Price Waterhouse, the survey respondents identified as a problem their 
“struggle to gain the attention of the board of directors.”6 Two specific issues were identified. 
One related to fear on the part of the chief ethics and compliance officer to engage in action 
to resolve a conflict with a key business person – a fear of losing one’s job or her place in the 
corporate hierarchy. The other problem concerned access to the board of directors. It is one 
thing to go before the board of directors annually to have the compliance program approved. 
It is quite another to go before the board of directors to do battle with a senior executive who 
is probably before the board of directors on a regular basis. 
One possible solution as we move to the next level is to embed ethics and compliance issues 
in the disciplines that are more typical of governance issues involving the board of directors. 
These  would  be  issues  like  strategy,  business  goals,  and  risk  management,  all  of  which 
touch ethics and compliance. Another solution would be to create escalation pathways to the 
board of directors for resolving conflicts between the chief ethics and compliance officer and 
a senior business leader. 
Conclusion 
As I said at the outset, ethics and compliance have come a long way in a very short time. We 
have learned a great deal during the journey. As I look out over the road ahead, I believe we 
will continue to make significant progress in business organizations that deliver on their value 
proposition, not only to shareholders, but to the other constituents that these organizations 
serve,  their  customers,  employees,  and  communities.  Ethics  and  compliance  will  be  an 
important part of that progress, provided that ethics and compliance is nurtured by a strong 
ethical culture, in a company following sound corporate governance, and employing the best 
and the brightest personnel. I am excited about the road ahead. 
Thank you for listening. 
                                                
6   Price  Waterhouse  Coopers,  “What  It  Means  to  be  a  ‘Chief’  Compliance  Officer:  Today’s  Challenges, 
Tomorrow’s Opportunities” at 12 (2014). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
