  Ignazio Visco: Recent economic and financial developments in Italy 
Address by  Mr Ignazio  Visco, Governor of the Bank of Italy, at the Annual  Meeting of the 
Italian Banking Association, Rome, 8 July 2015. 
 The breakdown of the negotiations between Greece and its international creditors and last 
Sunday’s referendum results have had a relatively modest impact, so far, on the euro area’s 
financial  markets.  Certainly,  the  availability  of  viable,  credible  European  instruments  for 
intervention has helped. The significant progress made in recent years by the other countries 
struck  by  the  sovereign  debt  crisis  has  been  important.  However,  future  developments 
remain fraught with uncertainty: what is at issue in Greece is not just the public debt that has 
been accumulated but how to put the public finances back on a sustainable path and above 
all how to make the economy competitive and capable of growth. On a different scale, these 
are the same challenges that face the euro area as a whole. 
The day before yesterday the Governing Council of the ECB decided to keep the emergency 
liquidity assistance that the Bank of Greece can provide to the country’s banks at its current 
level.  The  Greek  authorities  extended  the  closure  of  the  banks  and  the  limits  on  cash 
withdrawals  for  two  days,  until  this  evening.  Consultations  between  Greece  and  the 
European  authorities  are  ongoing.  The  Governing  Council  is  closely  monitoring  financial 
market developments and the implications for monetary conditions and price stability in the 
area; it stands prepared to deploy all the instruments available. 
Even in a worst-case scenario, the immediate impact of the Greek crisis through trade and 
financial channels would be modest for Italy and for the euro area. But the crisis may have 
more serious repercussions if it revives international investors’ fears that the euro may not be 
irreversible.  In  that  case,  coordinated  countermeasures  by  both  national  and  European 
authorities will be indispensable. 
To  date  the  tensions  have  not  significantly  undercut  the  effects  of  the  Eurosystem’s 
expanded asset purchase programme. The rise in long-term interest rates since the middle 
of April is largely the consequence of the improved prospects for inflation and growth, due in 
turn  to  the  purchase  programme  itself,  and  possibly  also  of  a  correction  of  the  initial 
overreaction. The Governing Council is determined to carry out the programme in full in order 
to bring inflation back into line with the medium-term objective. Any undesirable tightening of 
monetary conditions will be forcefully countered. 
Credit conditions and credit quality 
The  monetary  expansion  is  gradually  being  transmitted  to  credit  conditions.  In  Italy  the 
interest  rates  on  new  business  loans  and  home  mortgage  loans  were  down  to  2.2  and 
2.7 per cent in May, from 3.1 and 3.3 per cent in mid-2014. For firms, the spread with respect 
to  the  corresponding  German  and  French  rates  has  narrowed  by  about  half  a  percentage 
point. And since the middle of last year the improvement in credit cost conditions is no longer 
limited to the largest and financially soundest corporations. 
The  contraction  in  lending  to  non-financial  corporations  has  nearly  ceased.  In  the  three 
months  ending  in  May  the  annualized  decline  came  to  half  a  percentage  point,  compared 
with a much faster decrease of around 3 per cent in the middle months of 2014. Lending to 
households has begun to grow again, if only modestly. The timing and strength of the upturn 
vary by sector and by individual firm. Lending to manufacturing and non-real-estate service 
firms that have no debt payment arrears has expanded, but credit to firms in construction and 
real-estate services, sectors where the overall risk remains high, is still diminishing. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
In the first quarter of the year the flow of new bad debts eased to 2.4 per cent of outstanding 
loans, from an average of 2.6 per cent in 2014 and 2.9 per cent in 2013. The improvement 
was due to loans to firms, for which the new bad debt rate fell by 0.6 points to 3.9 per cent. 
The  decrease  involved  all  sectors  of  economic  activity.  Credit  quality  remains  poorer  for 
construction firms and firms located in the South. 
At the end of March banking groups’ bad debts amounted to 10.2 per cent of outstanding 
loans  and  total  non-performing  exposures  to  17.9  per  cent.  The  large  volume  of  non-
performing  loans  continues  to  restrain  the  supply  of  credit  and  puts  Italian  banks  at  a 
disadvantage with respect to their European counterparts. Apart from the long recession, it 
reflects constraints and rigidities that oblige Italian banks to keep impaired assets on their 
books much longer than banks in the other main countries. 
Measures  taken  by  the  Government  last  month  will  increase  the  speed  and  efficiency  of 
bankruptcy  procedures and  property foreclosures. They  make  loan  losses  immediately  tax 
deductible. In this way they act directly on some of the causes of Italian banks’ large stock of 
non-performing loans. 
Accurate assessment of the measures’ impact is hindered by the lack of official statistics on 
the length of the procedures involved. For bankruptcy procedures, market sources indicate 
an  average  duration  of  about  six  years.  Preliminary  estimates,  which  are  subject  to 
considerable uncertainty, suggest that in a favourable scenario this time could be halved, but 
a series of organizational and operational factors could reduce the effect. For foreclosures, 
the duration might be shortened, on average, from four to three years. 
Speeding up these procedures will have a positive effect on banks’ balance sheets. First of 
all,  it  should  raise  the  market  price  of  impaired  assets.  Some  simulations  show  that  a 
reduction of two years in credit recovery times could increase the value of collateralized non-
performing  loans  by  as  much  as  10  per  cent,  and  market  estimates  appear  to  be  largely 
aligned with this valuation. Moreover, the stock of non-performing loans should shrink, by as 
much as half in the longer run. 
The  measures  taken  by  the  Government  include  the  immediate,  rather  than  deferred, 
deductibility of write-downs and loan losses, so as to freeze the creation of new deferred tax 
assets  in  connection  with  loan  loss  provisions.  The  changeover  to  immediate  deductibility 
eliminates  a  significant  competitive  disadvantage  for  Italian  banks  in  the  Banking  Union, 
making  it  less  onerous  to  write  down  loans  when  necessary,  and  it  attenuates  the  pro-
cyclicality  of  their  tax  treatment.  Deferred  tax  assets  stemming  from  loan  losses  already 
entered in banks’ balance sheets, equal to around €25 billion, will be gradually reduced and 
will completely disappear over the next few years. The set of measures entails no cost to the 
State. 
All  in  all,  these  measures  can,  in  time,  lead  to  a  significant  reduction  in  the  risk-weighted 
assets of Italian banks and make way for new loans capable of largely offsetting the lending 
reduction  of  recent  years.  But  relieving  banks’  balance  sheets  of  the  large  stock  of  non-
performing loans will require action on a series of fronts, since the reasons for their existence 
are multiple. The value appreciation of non-performing loans brought about by the reform will 
spur the creation of a secondary market for these assets, but may not be enough to ensure 
this market is sufficiently large. 
This is the proper framework in which to view the planned creation of an asset management 
company  specializing  in  the  purchase  of  non-performing  loans.  On  this  front  the  dialogue 
between  the  Italian  authorities  and  the  European  Commission  is  producing  useful  and 
necessary  analyses.  As  I  have  clarified  on  other  occasions,  the  project  is  designed  to 
reactivate market mechanisms, not to remedy the difficulties of individual banks at taxpayers’ 
expense. It can also help restore an adequate flow of credit and thus support the economic 
recovery. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
The dialogue must be brought to a conclusion rapidly; protracted uncertainty over this matter 
can  discourage  the  completion  of  market  transactions.  Banks  must  also  take  steps  to 
improve the data on non-performing loans. The analyses on this subject have brought to light 
informational  gaps  that could  dissuade  potential  buyers.  Data  are  also needed  in  order  to 
improve the banks’ own management of these assets. 
Banks’ corporate governance 
The reform of the cooperative banks is now in the implementation phase. The supervisory 
instructions issued by the Bank of Italy that complete the reform and enable the launch of the 
operations needed to ensure that cooperative banks with assets of above €8 billion comply 
with the new legislation came into effect on 27 June. Once it is ascertained that this threshold 
has been exceeded, the bank’s executive bodies must, within a given deadline, draw up and 
transmit a plan to the Bank of Italy listing the initiatives to be undertaken within the 18-month 
time limit envisaged by the law. In exercising its powers of authorization, the Bank of Italy will 
verify  that  the  corporate  operations  proposed  by  the  banks  do  not  have  the  effect  of 
perpetuating, under a new guise, the ownership and management arrangements that the law 
is meant to abrogate. 
Another  important  step  that  must  be  taken  is  the  reform  of  the  mutual  banks.  While  the 
cooperative bank reform takes account of the emergence of large, often listed, banks whose 
original links to their local communities had been severed, in the case of mutual banks the 
issue instead is to create the conditions for them to continue to fulfill their specific function, 
even in the current context, maintaining their mutualistic connotations and local community 
links. Integration in banking groups is needed to favour access to capital markets in view of 
high credit risks, as well as to improve the quality of management, increase efficiency and 
keep  costs  down.  This  would  not  constitute  a  diversion  from  the  mutual  banks’  original 
purposes but on the contrary would strengthen their ability to serve their members and their 
communities, among other things by providing a broader range of services adapted to their 
customers’ needs. 
The completion of the reform will necessitate legislative interventions that promote forms of 
integration  based  on  membership  of  banking  groups,  based  on  models  that  have  been 
adopted in other European countries. The Bank of Italy is monitoring the discussion on these 
issues and is engaged in dialogue with the competent institutions. Our hope is that shared 
solutions can be arrived at, capable of guaranteeing these banks’ continued presence on the 
market. 
Supervision and crisis management 
In this phase the Single Supervisory Mechanism, in operation since November, is acting to 
ensure  that  the  playing  field  in  which  the  supervised  banks  do  business  is  as  level  as 
possible. Initiatives to review the ways in which banks that adopt internal models measure 
their  risk-weighted  assets  can  contribute  to  the  attainment  of  this  objective.  The  analyses 
conducted  by  the  supervisory  authorities  at  international  level  demonstrate,  in  fact,  that 
differences in the riskiness of bank portfolios do not fully account for the differences found in 
the way the various banks’ capital requirements are quantified. 
Significant  changes  are  being  made  to  the  legal  framework  for  managing  bank  crises.  At 
European level plans are being prepared for the resolution of possible banking crises. Last 
week  the  Italian  Parliament  approved  the  enabling  law  for  the  transposition  of  the  Bank 
Recovery  and  Resolution  Directive  (BRRD),  to  be  completed  by  the  promulgation  of  the 
mandated legislative decrees. The Bank of Italy has been designated as the Italian resolution 
authority, and we will shortly make the organizational changes required for the most effective 
performance of these functions. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  
 
Under the new European rules, if supervisory interventions cannot prevent the failure of a 
bank,  the  resolution  authority  must  consider  whether  to  follow  the  ordinary  insolvency 
procedure – under Italian law this means compulsory administrative liquidation – or whether 
instead it would serve the public interest to initiate the special resolution procedure in order 
to  maintain  systemic  stability,  while  holding  public  support  to  a  minimum  and  protecting 
depositors and customers in general. 
The  European  Commission’s  2013  Communication  on  the  application  of  the  state  aid 
guidelines  already  foresees  the  involvement  of  a  bank’s  shareholders  and  subordinated 
creditors  before  any  public  support  is  provided.  With  the  transposition  of  the  BRRD, 
regardless  of  possible  public  intervention,  shareholders  and  holders  of  capital  instruments 
will be called on to contribute to resolution. Starting next year, what is more, a bank’s senior 
creditors can also be “bailed-in”. Deposits up to €100,000 will continue to be fully protected 
by  the  national  guarantee  schemes,  which  have  been  reviewed  at  European  level  to 
harmonize levels of coverage and to ensure that they have adequate and readily available 
funds. In any case deposits beyond €100,000 held by individuals and by small and medium-
sized enterprises will receive preferential treatment in respect of other instruments. 
In placing their securities, the banks must be especially careful to comply with the investor 
protection  rules,  since  subscribers  may  be  called  on  to  contribute  to  the  resolution  costs. 
Customers  must  be  given  exhaustive  information  on  the  characteristics  of  the  different 
instruments, the riskiest of which should be expressly reserved to institutional investors only. 
Today  the  Bank  of  Italy,  as  part  of  its  financial  education  programme,  has  posted  on  its 
website an account of the rules that will soon enter into force in our country. 
With the implementation of the BRRD, under the Single Resolution Mechanism for banking 
crises,  a  Single  Resolution  Fund  will  be  established,  to  which  euro-area  banks  will 
progressively 
In  particular 
circumstances,  such  as  when  the  bail-in  might  entail  risks  for  financial  stability  or 
compromise the continuity of critical functions, the authorities may, at their own discretion, 
exempt  some  categories  of  creditors from  their  obligation  to  contribute  to  the  costs  of the 
resolution. 
A backstop at European level still has to be designed, using public money to supplement the 
resources of the Single Resolution Fund in order to deal promptly with any crises involving 
the  largest  banks.  The  recent  report  by  the  “five  presidents”  on  Completing  Europe’s 
Economic  and  Monetary  Union  indicates,  opportunely,  that  such  a  backstop  is  a  priority, 
along  with  a  comprehensive  single  deposit  guarantee  scheme  that  goes  beyond  the mere 
harmonization of national schemes. 
resolution  procedures. 
resources 
transfer 
finance 
to 
The capital market and finance to the economy 
The  capability  of  the  banks  to  take  on  risks  has  diminished  and  they  have  become  more 
selective as regards borrowers. We need a more diversified financial system if we want to 
support investment and economic growth. 
Some signs of change have emerged. New stock market listings are increasing, there is a 
growing volume of bond issues, including by medium-sized firms, the number of mini-bond 
issuers is rising, and the average volume of issues is declining. This last year has seen the 
introduction  of  various  funds  geared  to  investment  in  the  debt  instruments  of  small  and 
medium-sized enterprises: at the end of June there were 23 such funds under the aegis of 
Italian  asset  management  companies,  15  of  them  already  operational.  Other  funds  have 
been instituted by foreign managers. However, the capital raised by the Italian funds is still 
scanty – under €2 billion. 
These  changes,  which  stem  partly  from  firms’  difficulty  in  obtaining  bank  credit,  were 
encouraged by public interventions, such as tax incentives for capital increases and the new 
rules on bond issues by unlisted companies. Direct funding to the private sector, in the form 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
of shares, bonds and loans, is still relatively small: these instruments account for just 16 per 
cent  of  the  financial  assets  of  insurance  companies  and  pension  funds  in  Italy,  compared 
with 23 per cent in the euro area as a whole. 
Nevertheless, even a more favourable regulatory environment may not be enough to induce 
investors  to  diversify  their  assets,  although  the  decline  in  the  returns  on  traditional 
instruments has encouraged the search for higher yields. Investment in securities issued by 
firms,  typically  riskier  and  relatively  illiquid,  calls  for  specific  professional  skills.  Many 
investors lack these skills and thus need services and infrastructures to acquire and analyse 
the information necessary for risk assessment; they also need specialized funds to which to 
entrust their assets, and financial instruments for the efficient diversification of risks and profit 
opportunities. 
Closer financial market integration at the European level is essential for the development of 
new  financial  instruments.  This  is  the  aim  of  the  proposal  of  the  European  Commission, 
which in February presented a green paper on building a capital markets union in the EU by 
the end of 2019. The suggested reforms are intended to overcome the obstacles to raising 
risk capital and debt capital, particularly for small and medium-sized enterprises; they may 
also help to support asset diversification by institutional investors. The finance ministers have 
asked the Commission to submit a detailed plan of action by the end of September of this 
year. 
In the short term, the priorities are to simplify the prospectus directive, making it easier for 
firms, especially small and medium-sized ones, to obtain listing; to standardize information 
on  credit  quality;  to  develop  a  market  for  simple  and  transparent  securitizations,  possibly 
subject  to  favourable  prudential  treatment;  and  to  create  a  European  private  placement 
market,  a  form  of  financing  that  allows  firms  to  place  their  bonds  with  one  or  more 
institutional investors at a lower cost than that of issuing securities to the public. 
Over  a  longer  period,  for  full  capital  markets  union  the  various  countries’  company  and 
bankruptcy  legislation  needs  to  be  harmonized  and  the  differences  between  the  tax 
treatment  of  capital  gains  reduced,  notably  as  regards  the  method  of  calculating  the  tax 
base. Legislative harmonization will be a gradual process; it will therefore be best to follow a 
modular approach, starting with the easiest reforms and then gauging where there is room to 
tackle more ambitious challenges. 
The project is of major importance for Italy. The creation of broad and efficient markets would 
offer firms, even the smallest of them, new opportunities for borrowing and for growth and 
investors a wider array of options. The issues of establishing credit ratings and standardizing 
corporate information are especially important. The availability of private placement in Italy 
would be extremely useful, particularly for small and medium-sized firms, which have  very 
limited access to the bond market at present. Its development in Italy too will be furthered by 
standardizing the rules and practices at European level. 
 The  lengthy,  and  still  unresolved,  Greek  crisis  has  cast  new  light  on  the  limits  still 
encumbering  the  governance  of  the  Economic  and  Monetary  Union  despite  the  efforts  of 
recent years. The stability of the Union cannot be undermined by one country’s difficulties. If 
a member state finds itself in a financially untenable position, then there must be the means 
to arrive at a rapid and orderly solution. 
In strengthening European integration, not only in the economic sphere, effective methods of 
handling emergencies must be identified and adopted. Ultimately, in order to absorb cyclical 
and  structural  shocks  the  euro  area  must  have  a  common  budget,  based  on  autonomous 
taxation  capabilities  and  direct  recourse  to  financial  markets.  The  resilience  of  member 
states’ economies can be improved by introducing institutions that facilitate labour mobility 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  
 
and  by  making  more  rapid  progress  towards  unifying  the  capital  markets.  The  ability  of 
national budgets to counter adverse cyclical phases must also be safeguarded. 
Individual  countries  must  continue  their  efforts  to  enhance  the  soundness  and  the  growth 
potential of their economies. Italy has taken several important steps that are now beginning 
to bear fruit. Had we not done so, the Greek crisis would have had serious repercussions. 
But our task is not complete; reform must continue in all sectors of the economy and in the 
public  administration.  Our  financial  system  must  become  more  competitive  and  regain  its 
capacity to fully support economic activity. The measures bearing on the quality of credit and 
the governance of banks constitute a major advance in this direction. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
