  Thomas Jordan: The Swiss economy in a weakened world 
Summary of a speech by Mr Thomas Jordan, Chairman of the Governing Board of the Swiss 
National  Bank,  at  the  General  Meeting  of  the  Federation  of  the  Swiss  Watch  Industry, 
Lausanne, 25 June 2015. 
The complete speech can be found in French and German on the Swiss National Bank’s website (www.snb.ch).  
 Since summer 2007, the global economy has been in a state of near-permanent crisis. What 
began  as  a  subprime  crisis  triggered  the  banking  and  financial  crisis,  leading  to  a  deep 
recession.  This  culminated  in  the  European  debt  crisis.  The  current  strength  of  the  Swiss 
franc  is  a  reflection  of  this  global  crisis,  and  highlights  the  franc's  status  as  a  safe  haven, 
which is especially pronounced in times of high global uncertainty. 
The  Swiss  National  Bank  (SNB)  has  responded  to  the  appreciation  pressure  by  taking 
exceptional  measures.  In  terms  of  Switzerland's  economic  activity  and  the  SNB's  balance 
sheet,  no  other  country  has  seen  its  monetary  policy  so  highly  exposed.  The  decision  to 
discontinue the minimum exchange rate was prompted by renewed changes in international 
conditions, particularly the growing divergence between the monetary policy stances of the 
world's main currency blocks. Had the SNB delayed its decision, it would have lost control of 
monetary policy and would have had to discontinue the minimum exchange rate at a later 
date under much less favourable conditions. 
The end of the minimum exchange rate has major repercussions for the Swiss economy, and 
it was by no means an easy decision for the SNB. Yet this is not the first time that the Swiss 
economy has had to react to shocks and changes in the international environment, and the 
experience was often painful. The example of the watch industry shows that even a severe 
crisis can be overcome. Unfortunately, this example is not readily transferable to other export 
industries. Many companies currently find themselves compelled to seek cost reductions and 
efficiency gains. 
The  economic  outlook  depends  to  a  great  extent  on  global  economic  developments.  In  its 
latest  monetary  policy  assessment,  the  SNB  is  projecting  that  momentum  in  the  global 
economy  will  pick  up  again.  This  should  cushion  the  impact  of  the  exchange  rate  shock 
somewhat, and allow Switzerland to return to positive growth in the second half of the year. 
While inflation has dropped well into negative territory, as things currently stand, a sustained 
price decline - or, indeed, a deflationary spiral - is not to be expected. 
Overall,  the  Swiss  franc  is  currently  significantly  overvalued.  Monetary  policy  is  geared 
towards this challenging set of circumstances, and is guided by the SNB's willingness to take 
an  active  role  in  the  foreign  exchange  market  and  apply  negative  interest  rates.  This  two-
pronged approach is designed to ease the upward pressure on the Swiss franc. However, in 
the  current  climate  there  is,  regrettably,  no  easy  solution  that  would  absorb  all  external 
disruptions. We must accept these challenging economic conditions for the time being. 
The SNB is aware that many companies find themselves in a difficult situation. And it has 
great respect for the challenges facing Switzerland's businesses and their staff. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
