  Amando M Tetangco, Jr: The BSP and the banking industry – weaving a 
story of growth and development 
Speech by Mr Amando M Tetangco, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the 
central bank of the Philippines), at the Annual Reception for the Banking Community, Malate, 
23 January 2015. 
 On  behalf  of  the  members  of  the  Monetary  Board,  your  other  hosts  for  tonight:  Finance 
Secretary  Cesar  Purisima  (who  is  currently  on  official  mission  abroad),  Freddie  Antonio, 
Phillip  Medalla,  Andy  Suratos,  Juan  de  Zuniga  and  Val  Araneta,  I  thank  all  of  you  for 
accepting our invitation. 
This  marks  the  10th  year  that  I  am  welcoming  you  to  the  Fort  San  Antonio  Abad  for  the 
BSP’s Annual Reception for the Banking Community. This is the only time in a year that the 
BSP  hosts  in  one  event,  the  leadership  of  the  Philippine  banking  industry  –  from  the 
universal and commercial banks to the thrift banks and the rural banks – in a multi-sectoral 
gathering.  After  all,  the  banking  industry  serves  the  cross  section  of  our  society.  In  other 
words,  all  of  us  here  have  a  stake  in  the  banking  sector,  a  very  important  pillar  of  our 
economy. 
As in the past, I will briefly review how we fared last year, discuss how we see the operating 
environment  for  this  year,  and  share  how  we  can  move  forward  together  to  achieve  even 
better results. 
Review of 2014 
Well, 2014 certainly turned out to be a good year for the Philippine economy in general and 
for the banking sector in particular, although it did not start this way. 
About this time last year, we were faced with significant capital outflows and as a result, the 
peso came under strong depreciation pressures. In May to August, inflation spiked to levels 
that threatened the attainment of the government’s inflation target. In addition, losses from a 
series of natural disasters slowed our economy. GDP grew 5.8% in the first three quarters 
last  year,  slower  than  in  the  comparable  period  in  2013.  Even  so,  the  Philippines  still 
emerged as one of the fastest growing economies in the region. 
Indeed, our country’s underlying story of resilience remained intact through the challenges of 
2014 with continuing economic and governance reforms keeping us on the growth track. 
On  our  part,  the  Bangko  Sentral  implemented  preemptive  and  sequential  monetary  and 
macroprudential  policies  that  helped  keep  inflation  expectations  in  check  and  financial 
market exuberance at bay. 
As a result, average inflation settled at 4.1 percent – this is the sixth year in a row that we 
kept inflation within the government’s target range. 
The peso remained relatively stable. And  while  our Balance of Payments showed a deficit 
due  to  capital  outflows  influenced  by  the  Fed’s  decision  to  end  quantitative  easing,  our 
current account remained in surplus from strong remittances and receipts from exports and 
BPOs. This brought our foreign exchange reserves to nearly $80 billion, sufficient to cover 
over 10 months’ worth of imports of goods and payment for services. This provides a critical 
buffer against potential external shocks. 
Underpinning the sustained growth of the Philippine economy is the strong performance of 
our  banking  system.  Double-digit  growth  rates  in  lending  continued  to  support  economic 
activities, as public confidence in banks sustained the rise in deposits to record high levels. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  The  confidence  is  well  deserved.  For  instance,  even  as  lending  continued  to  grow, 
commercial  and  universal  banks  maintained  the  quality  of  their  loans,  with  NPLs  as  of 
September  at  2.04%  –  the  lowest  since  December  2009.  Certainly,  we  are  seeing  better 
governance, better management and more investments in technology and capacity building 
from Philippine banks. 
Equally important, our stress tests indicate that our banks have enough capital to withstand 
extreme  shocks  in  credit  and  market  risks.  Indeed,  the  accelerated  adoption  of  Basel 3 
capital requirements beginning January last year is a measure not only of the strength of our 
banks  –  it  is  a  measure  of  the  commitment  and  the  readiness  of  our  banks to  help  foster 
overall financial stability. 
Philippine  banks  are  also  becoming  more  financially  inclusive.  We  are  witness  to  their 
increasing involvement in financial education, the growing number of new deposit accounts 
starting  with  children,  the  greater  use  of  electronic  money,  the  expanding  size  of  the 
country’s microfinance portfolio and the wider coverage of our automatic teller machines or 
ATMs.1 
I  am  happy  to  share  the  good  news  that  next  week,  the  Bankers  Association  of  the 
Philippines, Bancnet and Megalink will formalize the consolidation of the two ATM networks. 
This  is  a  milestone  we  have  been  looking  forward  to  on  the  way  to  the  greater  goal  of 
establishing  a  National  Retail  Payment  System  (NRPS)  that  will  achieve  inter-operability, 
efficiency, security and inclusiveness in the way we settle financial transactions. 
Indeed,  the  Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas  is  pleased  that  the  banking  community  is  fully 
engaged with us in the implementation of prudent and systematic banking reforms. 
I can say that today, our banking system is sound, profitable and stable; it is responsive to 
the needs of the economy; it is responsible in managing the funds entrusted to them by their 
customers; and it is increasingly inclusive. Ladies and gentlemen of the Philippine banking 
sector, well done! Congratulations! 
Our  banks  are  also  highly  rated  by  independent  analysts.  In  2014  for  instance,  Philippine 
banks  received  awards  and  recognition  for  various  categories  that  are  just  too  many  to 
mention here. In the interest of fairness therefore, I will desist from naming any such awards. 
Suffice it to say, that people take note of these awards which should help define your bank 
as we prepare for the opportunities and challenges that come with ASEAN Integration. 
In addition, it is a source of pride for us that when Moody’s assessed 69 jurisdictions in 2014, 
it concluded that only the Philippine banking system deserved a positive outlook – only one 
out of 69. 
Outlook 
Given all these, what is in store for us in 2015? 
As policymakers of the National Government see it, our economy will grow by 7–8 percent in 
2015  while  the  inflation  target  is  at  2  to  4  percent.2  Other  institutions  and  analysts  project 
lower numbers for growth. But there is one thing they have in common – the view that the 
Philippines will continue to be comparatively buoyant. 
However, there are risks that cloud the future. 
The  continuing  uncertainty  in  the  global  financial  markets  is  a  concern  as  geopolitical 
tensions go on and economic performance among major economies remains divergent. 
                                                
1   June 2014 Data for Financial Inclusion. 
2   DBCC Macroeconomic Assumptions (2013–2017), as of 20 June 2014. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  For  instance,  US  economic  growth  continues  to  gain  traction.  With  this,  the  market 
anticipates the Fed will raise the Fed Funds target rate this year. As a result, the US dollar 
has been strengthening against other currencies. 
Apart  from  the  US,  however,  other  major  economies  are  slowing  down  weighed  by  debt, 
unemployment,  weak  demand  and/or  geopolitical  concerns.  These  economies  are  moving 
toward  stimulus  programs  or  quantitative  easing.  This  divergence  in  monetary  policy 
between strong and weak economies could unsettle markets. 
While  all  of  this  was  happening,  the  balance  of  supply  and  demand  in  the  oil  market  has 
triggered a precipitous decline in oil prices. 
I have been asked how a stronger dollar and cheaper oil will affect us. Well, a stronger dollar 
would make our foreign exchange obligations more expensive but, this will be countered by a 
smaller oil (import) bill from lower oil prices. The drop in oil prices will also ease inflation and 
benefit consumers. Nevertheless, we need to be mindful of the risk of a sudden reversal in 
the trend. If low oil prices persist, the economies of oil-producing countries may eventually 
weaken and adversely affect the global economy. 
For certain, there will be pluses and minuses. We could see sporadic market volatility in the 
interim.  Nevertheless,  from  our  experience  and  track  record,  it  can  be  said  that  we  are 
equipped to deal and handle these issues. 
Let  us  also  remember  that  we  start  2015  with  a  credit  rating  that  is  two  notches  into 
investment grade territory. Higher state spending on infrastructure and the implementation of 
projects under the public-private partnership program should also provide stimulus for growth 
moving forward. 
I believe, therefore, that even as episodes of stormy weather develop, the Philippine banking 
community can face 2015 with confidence given its strong balance sheet, solid capital base 
that  exceeds  global  standards,  product  innovations,  and  adherence  to  international 
standards for governance and risk management. 
Of  course,  we  still  need  to  continue  working  together  on  our  reform  agenda  to  achieve  a 
more  inclusive  financial  system  that  promotes  inclusive  growth,  strengthen  consumer 
protection,  forestall  emerging  risks,  and  ensure  financial  stability  at  all  times.  This  is  the 
philosophy that underpins our reform program. 
Together, let us craft the way forward to an even better, stronger and more inclusive banking 
system. Only by doing so can we preserve the gains we have achieved so far. And we do 
have a long way to go, given that 25% of Filipinos still live in poverty. Of course, there is so 
much more that our banks have empowered and continue to support – from the cities to the 
countryside. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen.  I  have  learned  in  my  almost  10  years  as  governor  of  the  Bangko 
Sentral  that  each  year  is  different.  While  our  mandate  remains  the  same,  our  operating 
environment is constantly shifting and changing. Sometimes, it turns on its head. 
So, how do we navigate in uncharted waters? Well, with extreme care: we have to make sure 
that we are in shipshape condition, that we are properly equipped for the journey ahead, and 
that we remain watchful of possible risks. Ladies and gentlemen, I believe we are ready to 
take on the challenges and opportunities that lie ahead. 
Let us now offer a toast: May I request the members of the Monetary Board to please join me 
on stage… To our continuing partnership in making our banking industry a dynamic story of 
growth and development that benefits our people and our country. Cheers!... Mabuhay ang 
Pilipinas! Mabuhay po tayong lahat! 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
