  Christian Noyer: Spheres of influence in the international monetary 
system 
Speech by Mr Christian Noyer, Governor of the Bank of France and Chairman of the Board 
of Directors of the Bank for International Settlements, at the Round-table 1 “Fragmentation 
Risk  in  Financial  Services:  A  Retreat  From  Globalization?”,  21st  Conference  of  Montreal, 
Montreal, 8 June 2015. 
 For many casual observers, there is a close link between money and geopolitics. Historically, 
money  is  an  attribute  of  the  Sovereign.  It  can  easily  be  seen  as  an  instrument  to  project 
power  and  influence.  There  are  numerous  instances  over  the  last  two  millennia  where 
monetary power has been used to finance military expansion or, more simply, to assert and 
exercise government authority. I would not go as far as Michael Bordo and Angela Redish 
who state, in a recent paper, that “the chronology of monetary history is driven by warfare”; 
but there is some historical truth in their assertion. 
Today, however, we live in a regime of fiat money with independent Central Banks in most 
advanced and emerging economies. Money is not supposed to serve any other purpose than 
help the economy to function and stabilize through its three main – technical – attributes: as 
a  medium  of  exchange,  a  unit  of  account  and  a  store  of  value.  Yet,  the  language  of 
geopolitics  still  permeates  the  discussion  on  the  international  monetary  system.  Eminent 
authorities, for  instance,  casually  talk  about  “currency  wars”.  Similarly,  many  euro-sceptics 
characterize the euro as a pure “political” or geopolitical, project – clearly implying that it has 
no  economic  rationale.  It  will  come  as  no  surprise  to  you  that  I  do  not  share  this  view. 
Obviously,  the  creation  of  the  euro  has  been  underpinned  by  a  broad  political  vision  and 
ambition. But there was – and still is – a strong economic rationale in solidifying economic 
and  financial  integration  in  Western  Europe  by  the  creation  of  a  single  currency.  This 
economic rationale is clearly perceived by investors and market participants who have made 
the  euro  the  second  world  currency  for  investing  in  financial  assets  and  holding  foreign 
exchange reserves. 
This  being  said,  history  has  also  shown  that  the  geography  of  the  international  monetary 
system may undergo fast and abrupt changes. Over decades and centuries, new currencies 
emerge and existing ones disappear as major vehicles for international trade and investment. 
Geopolitical changes may trigger such evolutions. But some endogenous dynamics are also 
at work. Past some stages, or “tipping points”, the use of a currency may expand or shrink 
quickly due to network and scale effects: the more people use a currency, the more attractive 
it becomes.  
This  begs  the  question  of  possible  “spheres  of  influence”  appearing  in  the  future  with 
significant evolutions in the respective role and weight of existing currencies. In my remarks, 
I will simply define such “spheres of influence” as parts of the world economic system where 
the use of a specific currency might dominate. With this strict definition in mind, I will make 
four main observations. 
An asymmetric world 
First, the current world is highly asymmetric. Two major currencies – the US dollar and the 
Euro – account for most of the foreign exchange reserves. One of them, the dollar, clearly 
dominates in financial markets and payment systems. This asymmetry has many well-known 
and self-reinforcing consequences. 
US  monetary  policy  has  significant  effects  well  beyond  the  US  economy.  Those  monetary 
spillovers  may  be  especially  important  when  unconventional  monetary  policies  are 
implemented. They cast new doubts on the insulating properties of floating exchange rates. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  They create new incentives, for many emerging economies, to manage their exchange rate 
and,  for  that  purpose,  accumulate  dollar-denominated  foreign  exchange  reserves.  As  a 
consequence,  most,  but  not  all,  of  the  official  liquidity  provided  through  multilateral 
mechanisms is denominated in dollars. 
The rise of the euro 
The  major  innovation  of  the  last  decade  has  been  the  rise  of  the  euro.  It  offers  some 
interesting insights and lessons. Most economic models and historical examples suggest that 
the appearance of new world currencies would trigger huge portfolio adjustments and create 
major  turbulences.  Economists  also  hypothesized  that,  in  a  multicurrency  world,  portfolio 
shifts would create permanent exchange rate instability. None of this has happened. In fact, 
the  euro  has  neither stabilized  nor  disrupted  the  international  monetary system.  Exchange 
rates have moved significantly but, most of the time, in an orderly fashion and have followed 
low  periodicity  cycles.  This  may  be,  for  the  future,  an  interesting  precedent:  a  new  global 
currency can emerge without destabilizing the system. 
It is also worth noticing that the euro crisis had no major effect on its international role. In 
particular, the share of foreign reserves invested in Euro securities has barely moved. And, 
when the Swiss authorities decided to peg their currency, they chose the euro as an anchor. 
Does  the  euro  have  a  “sphere  of  influence”?  As  you  know,  we  have  taken  a  very  neutral 
stance on this issue and neither encouraged or discouraged the use of the euro as a reserve 
currency. In fact, the euro is increasingly used in international transactions and accepted for 
payments  (including  retail  ones)  in  many  countries  –  as  European  tourists  can  experience 
every day. Recently, the Eurozone seems to exert a stronger influence on global monetary 
conditions. For the first time in many decades, long-term rates in Europe have significantly  
decoupled  from  those  of  the  US.  Also,  there  is  some  evidence  of  “reverse  causality”  with 
Euro long term rates increasingly impacting US rates, creating new channels for monetary 
spillovers and feedbacks. However, the euro is not yet widely used as a unit of account: most 
global  transactions  –  especially  in  commodities  –  are  denominated  in  dollar.  A  majority  of 
new securities issuances are also denominated in dollars. 
New global currencies? 
As  the  geography  of  the  world  economy  changes,  so  will  the  shape  of  the  international 
monetary system. Over the last two decades, China has grown into one of the two largest 
economies in the world. At the same time, authorities are constantly announcing new steps 
to  increase  the  renminbi  (RMB)  convertibility  and  develop  its  use  in  international 
transactions.  It  is  therefore  natural  to  wonder  whether  the  RMB  will  emerge  as  a  major 
international  currency  in  the  foreseeable future. In  line  with  my  introductory  remarks,  I  will 
refrain from any geopolitical speculation on this question and present a few technical – and 
personal – remarks on the nature of a global currency. 
What  does  it  take  to  become  a  reserve  currency?  It  is  generally  assumed  that  this  status 
brings important privileges, some of them “exorbitant”. It is also forgotten that it comes with 
significant obligations. 
First,  being  a  reserve  asset  means  that  the  currency  enjoys  full  and  unconditional  capital 
account  convertibility  towards  both  residents  and  non-residents.  The  economy  is  therefore 
fully  integrated  with  global  capital  markets  and  fully  exposed  to  external  financial  shocks. 
This creates a very demanding environment. Convertibility essentially means that you accept 
the  judgment  of  “foreigners”  as  to  the  true  value  and  purchasing  power  of  your  domestic 
currency.  Although  it  is  not  often  perceived  as  such,  it  entails  some  abandonment  of 
sovereignty, through the loss of some independence in monetary policy. This is the famous 
“Mundell  trilemma”:  no  country  can  simultaneously  have  a  fixed  exchange  rate, full  capital 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  convertibility and monetary policy independence. Indeed, all reserve currencies today have 
fully flexible exchange rates. 
The  second  condition  may  be  even  more  stringent.  Ultimately,  what  makes  a  reserve 
currency is the ability to serve unconditionally as a store of value. The country must therefore 
develop  deep,  liquid  and  unfettered  financial  markets.  It  also  entails  an  ability  to  offer 
“benchmark”  safe  assets  that  keep  their  value  in  all  circumstances,  and  may  serve  as 
vehicles for reserve accumulation. Typically, only government debt will be used as a reserve 
asset.  So,  being  a  reserve  currency  also  means  that  “foreigners”  will  permanently  hold  a 
large  part  of  Government  debt  and  their  judgment  will  ultimately  prevail  as  to  the  true 
solvency of the Government.  
Being  a  reserve  currency  therefore  implies  constraints  as  much  as  it  brings  benefits. That 
may  be  the  reason  why  countries,  including  China,  would  proceed  cautiously  on  the  road 
towards full reserve currency status. 
There  is  a  distinction  between  being  a  reserve  currency,  on  the  one  hand,  and  a  global 
currency,  on  the  other.  The  first  concept  refers  to  the  currency  as  a  store  of  value;  the 
second  may  concern  only  its  role  as  a  medium  of  exchange.  These  are  two  different 
attributes.  A  currency  may  be  widely  used  in  transactions  without  being  considered  for 
reserve accumulation. 
This distinction maybe relevant when looking at the composition of the special drawing rights 
(SDR). As you know, this is the “basket currency” that serves as a unit of account for the IMF 
and,  to  a  limited  extent,  as  medium  of  exchange  between  its  member  countries.  The 
composition of the SDR is due for review at the next annual meeting of the Fund and experts 
are currently working on its preparation. This is a highly technical work. And so should be the 
decision. While the symbolism may be strong for some observers, the decision – whatever it 
is – should not be seen as politically inspired or motivated. 
Conclusion: a longer-term perspective 
Looking  further  into  the  future,  will  there  be  monetary  “spheres  of  influence”?  A  lot  will 
depend on whether the world will – or not – stay financially integrated. 
Financial  and  regional  fragmentation  may  lead  to  monetary  fragmentation  and  some 
currencies being dominant in some parts of the world. 
Another possibility is that financial integration will progress and the capital market becomes 
truly global. In that case, several major currencies could coexist with none having a dominant 
position in any part of the world or any segment of the financial system. 
There are limits to the power of money to shape the international system. What matters is the 
depth,  openness  and  interconnectedness  of  product  and  financial  markets.  Ultimately,  the 
geopolitics of trade and finance will determine the future. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
