  Peter Praet: Interview in Il Sole 24 Ore 
Interview with Mr Peter Praet, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
in Il Sole 24 Ore, conducted by Mr Alessandro Merli on 17 March and published on 25 March 
2015. 
 In the ECB latest projections, as in those of other forecasters, besides the upward 
revision of figures, there is a clear change of tone from “fairly gloomy” to more 
“upbeat”. What is happening in the euro area economy? 
After  two  recessions,  the  first  in  2009  and  another  in  2010–2011  as  well  as  an  aborted 
recovery,  we  had  a  stabilisation  of  economic  conditions  in  the  course  of  2013  and  an 
improvement in early 2014, but by the late spring we were seeing a slowdown in an already 
weak  recovery.  That’s  why  we  decided  on  a  number  of  measures  between  June  and 
September/October, the so-called credit easing package. Then, in November, we saw that 
inflation  was  remaining  weak  and,  in  spite  of  the  measures  we  had  taken,  that  inflation 
expectations had become seriously destabilised. We flagged the risk of being trapped in a 
1%/1% economy: 1% inflation, 1% growth. This would create a vicious  circle: if everybody 
revised  their  inflation  and  growth  expectations  downwards  then  there  would  be  less 
investment  and  a  debt  overhang.  That  is  why  we  decided  to  take  further  measures  in 
January. In spite of favourable conditions created by the oil price, there was a high risk that 
some of the benefits would be saved and so the full effect of the positive supply shock would 
be  in  doubt.  We  have  always  said  that  low  oil  prices  have  an  ambiguous  effect:  positive, 
because  energy  is  cheaper,  but  negative  if  they  reinforce  the  deflationary  behaviour  of 
economic agents. In January we also thought that taking further measures when there are 
signs of a turning point would give a boost to the economy. We believed that doing it at that 
moment would put us back onto a growth trajectory, reducing the risk of the de-anchoring of 
inflationary  expectations.  It’s  a  combination  of  circumstances  that  we  hope  will  help  to 
support the economic recovery: the low price of oil, better financial conditions including the 
currency,  a  more  neutral  fiscal  policy,  and  also  the  benefit  of  structural  reforms  in  some 
countries. These effects are visible in Ireland, Spain and Portugal, where – although painful – 
reforms have created the basis for a solid recovery. 
You have a fairly big jump in projections on growth, 0.5% or thereabouts for both 2015 
and 2016, but what surprised some people in the markets was that you also expect 
inflation to pick up substantially between 2015 and 2016, going from 0% to 1.5%, and 
then to 1.8% in 2017. Some regard this as too optimistic. 
The pickup in headline inflation is largely due to a base effect, namely the fact that the impact 
on annual inflation of the drop in the price of fuel and other goods influenced by the price of 
oil will disappear later this year. The gradual increase in the price of oil that markets expect 
to  see  over  the  projection  horizon  and  which  forms  part  of  our  assumptions  will  also  give 
support to our headline inflation projections. The more relevant question is on core inflation 
when you take the price of food and energy out: this is now at 0.7%. It gets close to 2% in 
2017, converging with headline inflation. The first element in the increase of core inflation is 
the  pass-through  of  the  exchange  rate,  which  is  the  most  important  impact.  The  second 
source is the indirect effect of oil prices, for instance through transportation costs. Then we 
have the closing of the output gap, which might lead to firms regaining some pricing power. 
Most analysts have been discussing our assumption of the closing of the output gap by end 
of  2017.  Some  people  argue  that  the  output  gap  cannot  be  closed  with  such  high 
unemployment.  But  the  labour  market  can  be  tight  in  spite  of  massive  unemployment  if 
observed unemployment is all structural in nature. It’s difficult to say today, but we think there 
will be somewhat higher wage increases in 2017, in spite of a still high jobless rate, because 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  we expect the structural component of unemployment to remain large in 2017. But the key 
assumption giving support to the projected inflation is not a vigorous pickup in wage costs – 
which in fact are going to remain moderate – but rather firms regaining pricing power. In the 
last year producer prices have been negative. Profits of firms have been under pressure not 
only because of volumes but also because of prices. 
Central banks normally tend to look through oil prices. Why did you have to act? 
As  I  said,  there  was  uneasiness  about  the  serious  risks  of  de-anchoring  in  inflation 
expectations. Maintaining price stability is the core mandate of the ECB. In 2003 the ECB 
announced  that,  in  order  to  avoid  risks  of  deflation,  inflation  should  be  below  but  close 
enough to 2% in the medium term. If the ECB does not deliver on this pledge, at some point, 
this creates a problem of credibility. If the risk is increasing, we have to give a signal that we 
are ready to do what is necessary to counter it, given our mandate. In January we concluded 
that we were confronted with the risk of falling into deflation. The price of protection against 
deflation  jumped.  These  dynamics  were  reversed  after  we  took  very  forceful  action.  The 
switch in the projections reflects this: we were in negative dynamics, with people being very 
pessimistic about the long run. We tried to invert those dynamics by very strong signalling at 
a time when we had favourable conditions. 
Now, a number of people, including quite a few members of the Governing Council, 
argue that with conditions improving anyway, and the oil price being a temporary 
phenomenon, that quantitative easing (QE) wasn’t really justified. 
Let me clarify two points. First, there was a large majority in the Governing Council. We tried 
not  to  be  overly  conditioned  by  the  question  of  risk-sharing. We  made  a  purely  monetary 
policy decision, separate from the question of doing fiscal policy through the back door. What 
is important is that the central bank has signalled its willingness and ability to act, to use the 
instruments  available.  The  discussion  on  “wait  and  see”  is  a  fair  one,  but  the  collective 
judgement of the Governing Council was that it was time to act. Second, what you see in our 
projections  –  which  indeed  give  us  some  grounds  for  comfort  –  is  that  a  more  robust 
recovery  is  under  way  –  but  that  this  is  conditional  on  a  full  implementation  of  what  we 
announced in January. 
Where do you see the risks, now that QE has started and seems to be having a strong 
impact, especially on markets. 
The  major  risk  is  the  risk  of  complacency.  Take  Italy,  for  example:  the  yields  on  10-year 
government debt are at post-war lows, credit conditions are improving very fast, at the fastest 
pace  in  the  euro  area.  It  is  clear  that  this  additional,  substantial  amount  of  monetary 
accommodation  will  bring  a  lot  of  relief  to  the  economy.  But  productivity  in  Italy  stopped 
growing back in the mid-1990s, it was the worst performer among the large OECD countries, 
and in this long crisis, Italy has already had three recessions. 
It’s still a very challenging situation. The Italian economy, already debilitated by long-standing 
structural  weaknesses,  has  gone  through  an  accelerated  downward  trend  and  has 
underperformed other stressed economies, such as Ireland and Spain. This is now starting to 
be understood and we are seeing some structural reforms. But the implementation remains 
quite  difficult.  You  have  to  communicate  to  people  a  sense  of  urgency  and  of  ambition: 
reforms have to be done quickly and on a large scale. Implementation is key now. There is a 
long  way  to  go.  Monetary  policy  accommodation  will  help  but  will  not  make  Italy  a  more 
productive economy. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  So QE may remove the urgency to undertake the reforms? 
On the contrary. It’s a window of opportunity. Monetary policy accommodation facilitates the 
implementation of reforms. It’s a risk if governments look at the electoral cycle and think they 
can  just  benefit  from  some  growth  and  stop  the  reforms.  Will  structural  reforms  depress 
demand again? That is totally wrong. One has to be careful in selecting the right structural 
interventions, in prioritising the measures to take. There is a very limited window in which to 
carry out the reforms. 
Is a weaker exchange rate the main channel through which QE will help the Italian 
economy? 
I  would  say  it’s  more  the  financial  conditions,  a  factor  which  is  broader  than  just  the 
exchange  rate.  The  Italian  banking  system  was  not  exposed  to  sub-prime,  but  it  is  very 
exposed  to  the  Italian  economy  and  government  debt.  So  there’s  a  local  exposure  to  an 
economy that wasn’t growing even before the crisis. The financial sector entered the crisis 
already weak, with low profitability and high costs. It withstood the 2009 crisis, but when the 
sovereign debt crisis hit in mid-2011, and interest rates on government debt went to 7%, the 
sector’s large portfolios of Italian sovereign securities depreciated rapidly. At that point, as 
was  to  be  expected,  banks  retrenched,  tightening  credit  conditions  for  their  customers. 
Financial conditions became very harsh for the real economy. It took a long time to improve. 
Even one year ago, rates were very high for an economy that had not been growing for years 
and was expected to stagnate in the future. Market discipline can move from too soft to too 
harsh. It was perhaps not enough in the past but then it became excessive. Governments 
should take measures to avoid a pro-cyclical financial loop that creates instability. 
In Italy a lot of people are starting to think we would be better off outside the euro. 
Italy joined the euro because the previous regime, i.e. fixing the exchange rate and devaluing 
occasionally,  was  a  source  of  uncertainty  and  instability.  Markets  learned  how  that  regime 
worked, and therefore interest rates were constantly high, creating that snowball effect that 
brought  Italy  the  very  high  public  debt  burden  it  has  now.  The  country’s  problem  is  that  it 
entered  monetary  union  with  that  high  public  debt  and  governments  did  not  seize  the 
opportunity offered by lower interest rates to reform the economy. Now the low interest rate 
environment and easier financial conditions are again facilitating the necessary reforms. It’s a 
window. I think this is understood: some reforms are in the pipeline. But as I said it’s always 
a matter of implementation. 
What is your early assessment of the reforms, including the labour market reform, in 
Italy? 
The so-called Jobs Act can be a very important building block in a bold reform agenda. In 
Spain a similar step was taken three years ago, and it was a key factor pushing the Spanish 
economy  to  generally  outperform  the  rest  of  the  euro  area  in  2014.  As  we  have  seen  in 
Spain, the Jobs Act reform can make Italy a more attractive location for doing business. It 
can create new employment opportunities, reabsorb the unemployed and give more stable 
and better-paid jobs to those who seek work certainty. But, again, this should be the starting 
point of an ambitious agenda for economic reforms. It should not be the end of the efforts. 
The fall of the euro has been the most visible consequence of QE. There is a 
disconnect between the state of the economy and monetary policy, especially in 
respect of the dollar. Will the Fed be “patient” about a further rise of the dollar? 
Currencies  will  reflect  fundamentals  and  that  is  basically  what  we  have  seen.  I  cannot 
comment  further  on  the  exchange  rate  movements.  From  the  European  point  of  view,  the 
decline of the effective exchange rate has been relatively modest. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  But can you be accused of having started a currency war, given what other central 
banks have had to do to respond to your QE? 
We  have  received  a  lot  of  international  support  for  our  recent  measures.  We  do  it  for 
domestic reasons. The IMF told us we should have done it faster, so it was no surprise for 
anybody. We did the credit easing first, which gave renewed incentives for banks to create 
credit  for  the  real  economy,  but  in  terms  of  the  quantity  it  was  not  sufficient.  Inflation 
expectations were not rebounding, so we took a new set of measures. 
Have the TLTROs been obscured by QE? 
As I said, we have been positively surprised by the impact of our summer 2014 measures on 
the pricing of credit even before QE. What we now see is that those banks which participated 
in the first two operations in September and December last year have cut the price of their 
loans  to  households  and  companies  by  more  than  non-participating  banks.  They  have  a 
strong  incentive  to  generate  more  loans  because  the  advantageous  borrowing  conditions 
under the TLTROs are conditional on their actual loan flows. Also, the third tender last week 
went quite well in terms of volumes. So, the TLTROs are also playing an important role. 
Banks claim that while you tried to promote credit easing with your monetary policy, 
your supervisory arm, the Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM), and the constant 
change in the rules makes this more difficult. 
The  flood  of  changes  in  regulation  has  had  a  certain  cyclical  effect,  which  has  been 
compensated by monetary accommodation. But there is no contradiction. You need to make 
banks  safer,  less  leveraged,  and  reduce  liquidity  risk.  It  is  a  caricature  to  say  that  we 
squeeze the banks and then provide more liquidity. We want more resilient banks. 
Negative interest rates have now become so widespread that they must be posing 
some risks and interfering with your macro scenario. You could reach your target 
sooner than expected. 
I would be very cautious here about the implications of the early days of QE. You need to 
give the markets some time to settle and get used to our purchases of €60 billion per month. 
When we designed the policy we wanted to have a sustained path of inflation towards where 
it should be. It will take time to assess its impact. 
The people who said we may be in a deflationary spiral may be the same people who now 
say it’s too much. We’ll have a steady hand in implementation and we stick to the fact that a 
steady  improvement  in  the  outlook  for  price  stability  is  conditional  on  us  carrying  out 
purchases at least until September 2016. 
Are you encouraging excessive risk-taking and therefore instability? 
We are coming from a situation in which the risk of financial instability came from inflation 
being  permanently  too  low,  possibly  a  deflation  risk.  A  third  recession  would  create  huge 
financial  stability  problems.  A  shift  in  investment  patterns  by  banks  and  other  financial 
entities  to  longer-dated  and  riskier  exposures  is  part  of  the  policy  of  QE.  Furthermore,  in 
some countries some banks may have an excessive exposure to the sovereign. That creates 
a  big  correlation  between  the  sovereign  risk  and  the  bank  risk.  Therefore,  banks  of  the 
countries concerned could decide to reduce their exposure to the sovereign. Having said all 
this, we are monitoring financial markets constantly and with extreme care to detect pockets 
of exuberance. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
