  Guy Debelle: Bond market liquidity, long-term rates and China 
Speech by Mr Guy Debelle, Assistant Governor (Financial Markets) of the Reserve Bank of 
Australia,  at  the  Actuaries  Institute  “Banking  on  Change”  Seminar,  Sydney,  16  September 
2015. 
 I am going to talk about three key current issues in financial markets, namely bond market 
liquidity, long-term interest rates and China’s exchange rate regime. All three are having an 
important bearing on financial market prices round the world, including here in Australia, both 
now and probably for quite some time to come. They may not sound that interrelated but I 
will tie them together at the end. 
Bond market liquidity 
I will start with bond market liquidity. 
If you have read any financial market media over the past year, you would have been hard-
pressed to avoid reading an article on bond market liquidity. Indeed, one of the best financial 
market commentators, Matt Levine, devotes a section of his column to “people are worried 
about bond market liquidity”.1 Notwithstanding the fact that his column is published daily, he 
has little problem in finding material to write about on this issue. 
So today, I would like to provide Matt Levine with some more material and throw my hat into 
this crowded ring. Though not for the first time, as about a year ago I talked about this very 
issue.2 So why revisit this issue again today? Here are a few reasons: 
First, one year on, there have been a few noteworthy liquidity “events” in the bond market, 
including the awkwardly named “Flash Rally” in US Treasuries on 15 October 2014, the day 
after  I  gave  the  speech  last  year.  Second,  the  much  anticipated  first  increase  in  the  Fed 
funds  rate  has  been  designated  as  a  critical  test  case  of  the  state  of  liquidity  in  the  bond 
market. Third,  while  equity  markets  experienced  a  volatile  month  in  August,  bond markets 
were,  somewhat  surprisingly,  relatively  stable  (as  for  that  matter,  were  major  foreign 
exchange rates). That serves to highlight the fact that liquidity and volatility are related but 
are not the same thing. 
So what exactly do I mean by bond market liquidity? Generally I would take it to mean the 
ability  to  transact  in the  bond  market  without  having  a  material  influence  on  the  price.  For 
example,  if  I  want  to  sell  some  of  my  holdings  of  Australian  Government  securities,  how 
much will I be able to sell, and over what time period, without having a significant impact on 
market pricing? 
This question highlights two points: there is both a quantity dimension and a time dimension 
to liquidity. If I try to sell all my securities at once, my impact on the market is likely to be 
larger  than  if  I  break  my  order  up  into  smaller  pieces  and  sell  it  over  a  period  of  time. 
However,  if  I  do  the  latter  and  sell  gradually,  there  is  a  risk  that  the  market  price  moves 
against me over that period of time, because of news or other people’s transactions and I 
don’t get as good an overall price. 
                                                
1   See 
for  example,  <http://www.bloombergview.com/articles/2015–06–03/people-are-worried-about-bond-
market-liquidity>. Of late, there has also been the occasional column on people who are not worried about 
bond market liquidity. 
2   “Volatility  and  Market  Pricing”,  speech  to  Citi’s  6th  Annual  Australian  and  New  Zealand  Investment 
Conference, Sydney, 14 October 2014. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  The quantity and time element of liquidity is often conflated in the discussion of bond market 
liquidity.  Hence  you  can  hear  that  it  is  currently  simultaneously  the  best  of  times  and  the 
worst of times for liquidity in the bond market. Bond market liquidity at the “top of book” is, on 
a number of metrics,3 as good as it has ever been. That is, my ability to sell a small parcel of 
bonds very close to the current market price is very good. But the “depth of book”, my ability 
to sell a large parcel of bonds, is nowhere near as good, and worse than its been for quite 
some time. 
How  can  it  be  that  we  have  both  of  these  two  developments?  This  outcome  reflects  the 
evolution of the market over recent years in response to technological changes, regulatory 
changes as well as institutional appetite for this activity. 
In terms of technology, there has been a significant increase in the share of electronic trading 
in bond markets. In the Australian market, we estimate that electronic trading accounts for 
around  one-third  of  trading  in  the  Australian  government  securities  market  (though  it  is 
considerably less in other domestic bond markets). In the US, the share of electronic trading 
is much higher, more than half of turnover. With the increased electronification of the market 
has come high-frequency trading firms. These firms are providing increased liquidity at the 
top  of  the  book,  but  are  not  necessarily  contributing  to  the  depth  of  the  book,  given  their 
preference to  trade  in  small  size,  as  well  as  in  many  cases,  inability  to trade  in  large  size 
because of balance sheet constraints. They have contributed to lower transaction costs (in 
terms  of  the  bid-ask  spread)  for  small  orders.  But  there  are  question  marks  around  their 
resilience in times of market stress. The key structural change is the shift in market share 
from those who provide immediate and continuous liquidity and have the ability to warehouse 
risk to those who do the same but don’t have the capacity to warehouse risk. 
In this regard, the bond market has followed the well-trodden path of the equity market and 
later the foreign exchange market of increased electronic trading and increased participation 
by high-frequency traders (HFT). Not all would regard the “equitisation” of the bond market 
(or foreign exchange market for that matter) as a good thing.4  
The  report  recently  released  by  the  US  authorities  examining  the  “Flash  Rally”  in  the  US 
bond market on 15 October 2014 highlights some of the issues.5 To remind you briefly what 
happened on that day. About an hour after a slightly weaker than expected US data release, 
10-year  US  Treasury  bond  yields  fell  rapidly  by  16  basis  points  in  six  minutes  (that  is  the 
price went up, hence a flash rally) before reversing course and almost retracing that move 
over the next six minutes. If you had taken a well-timed coffee break over that 12 minutes, 
you would have been none the wiser that anything much had happened. 
The report was not able to come to any conclusions about what caused this to occur, though 
investigations are ongoing. But it does provide information about the structure of US treasury 
market through that time, including the share of high-frequency firms, or proprietary trading 
firms (PTFs) as the report calls them, in the market. One interesting fact is that one firm had 
a relatively high share of both sides of the market, in part because a sizeable share of trades 
was being done with itself. That is, it was buying and selling US treasuries with itself. Another 
noteworthy fact is that the price adjustment was smooth throughout, there was no gapping in 
                                                
3   See  “Market-making  and  proprietary  trading:  industry  trends,  drivers  and  policy  implications”,  CGFS  report 
liquidity  metrics.  Available  at 
for  a  discussion  and  analysis  of  various 
no. 52,  November  2014, 
<http://www.bis.org/publ/cgfs52.htm>. 
4   Michael Lewis’s ‘Flash Boys’ brought high-frequency trading in equities into popular discourse. For the role of 
HFTs in the foreign exchange market, see ‘High-frequency trading in the foreign exchange market’, Markets 
Committee Publications No 5, September 2011. Available at <http://www.bis.org/publ/mktc05.htm>. 
5   See  Joint  Staff  Report:  The  U.S.  Treasury  Market  on  October  15,  2014.  Available  at 
<http://www.treasury.gov/press-center/press-releases/Documents/Joint_Staff_Report_Treasury_10–15–
2015.pdf>. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  prices. So this event does not fit neatly into the category of a liquidity event. There was no 
prolonged dislocation where the price gapped rapidly and stayed there, which is often what 
people have in mind when thinking about the consequences of lower liquidity. Nevertheless, 
the fact that such events can occur in arguably the most deep and liquid market in the world 
does mean that we need to understand what is going on here. 
As well as the impact of technology, regulation has also had a significant effect. Regulatory 
changes have increased the cost to banks of intermediation, and hence liquidity provision, in 
many  markets,  and  particularly  the  bond  market.  This  has  seen  a  number  of  participants 
withdraw  completely  and  others  scale  back their  activities.  Bond  desks  at  banks  hold  less 
inventory  than  they  have  done  historically,  given  the  increased  cost  of  doing  so.  This 
contributes to less “depth of book” liquidity, though not necessarily less “top of book” liquidity. 
The  regulatory  changes  were  intended  to  have  this  effect.  Liquidity  provision  was  under-
priced  previously  and  was  over-supplied.  Regulation  has  increased  the  cost  of  providing 
liquidity and hence decreased the quantity supplied. So the direction of change should not be 
the issue, rather the extent of the change should be the focus of debates about bond market 
liquidity. That is, has regulation increased the cost of liquidity provision too far with the result 
that liquidity in the bond market is now too low? 
That is certainly a discussion worth having. But in the meantime, liquidity in the bond market 
today is what it is. It continues to evolve but it is not going back to what it was any time soon. 
So participants in the bond market need to adjust to the current situation rather than simply 
complain about it. 
If transaction costs are higher, particularly for transacting in large size, then asset managers 
and other bond holders need to take account of that in the way they execute their transaction 
in the market. For example, as discussed above, one solution may be to execute more slowly 
in smaller parcel sizes. Execution certainly needs to be more nimble and considered than in 
the past. 
But  perhaps  more  importantly,  the  increased  transaction  costs  in  terms  of  liquidity  and 
execution  should  also  be  taken  into  account  in  the  way  an  asset  manager  constructs  its 
portfolio. The differences in transaction costs across various classes need to be taken into 
account. If transaction costs are higher, then perhaps I should be transacting less. Do I really 
need  to  be  selling?  In  some  cases,  I  might  not  have  much  choice,  because  the  need  to 
transact  may  be  driven  by  the  mandate  I  have  been  given.  But  in  that  case,  a  discussion 
should at least be had with the provider of the mandate highlighting the higher transaction 
costs and the implications that has for the portfolio. Or maybe I need to transact because of 
redemption flows out of my fund. In that situation, I may need to think about holding a higher 
liquidity buffer than I did in the past. 
If the cost of obtaining liquidity in the market from my bond portfolio is higher than it used to 
be, then I need to think about weighing that up against the cost of holding more liquidity on 
my own balance sheet to accomodate potential redemption flows. 
Let  me  now  turn  to  another  concern  that  is  often  expressed  around  bond  market  liquidity, 
namely  that,  with  the  decline  in  intermediation  by  the  banks,  the  likelihood  of  market 
dislocation  is  higher.  This  often  comes  up  in  discussions  around  the  consequences  of  the 
Fed  tightening  monetary  policy  resulting  in  a  large  sell-off  in  bond  markets.  The  “taper 
tantrum” of 2013 is often invoked as an example. This saw a rapid rise in bond yields in a 
number of emerging markets following indications that the Fed was going to wind down its 
quantitive easing program. 
As I said last year, I think the issue is not so much one of a decline in liquidity as much as a 
decline in the capacity to warehouse risk. In the past, when there was a large sell-off in bond 
markets, liquidity was never that great. A bank has no more desire than any other investor to 
catch a falling knife. Bid-ask spreads widen considerably and the depth of book deteriorates. 
That has always been the case. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  However, in addition to a decline in liquidity provision, banks now have less risk-warehousing 
capacity than they did in the past. They are less able to be nimble buyers of assets whose 
prices they believe have overshot. In the past, while the banks may have pulled back for a 
while as prices fell, they were generally among the first to step in and buy when they felt that 
the  price  had  overshot.  This  is  one  important  aspect  of  what  I  mean  by  warehousing  or 
absorbing risk. As a result of regulatory changes as well as their own risk tolerances, they 
are less willing and able to do this today. 
Many  real  money  investors  are  not  able  to  move  so  quickly  to  take  advantage  of 
overshooting  prices.  The  degree  of  discretion  is  generally  not  as  large.  Mandates  often 
impose  the  constraint  of  not straying  too far from  benchmarks,  and  it  takes  a  long time  to 
change  mandates  to  respond  to  changes  in  market  circumstances.  Are  there  other 
participants in the market who are able to move so rapidly and agilely to perform that function 
today? I’m sure they exist but I’m not so sure that there are enough of them. I suspect we will 
soon find out. 
If there is less capacity to do this, then prices will move by larger amounts and remain away 
from equilibrium values for longer. Volatility will be higher. In itself, this is not necessarily a 
bad  thing.  It  is  what  it  is.  But  with  higher  volatility,  the  distribution  of  price  movements  will 
have fatter tails. Overshooting will be more likely and that can have long-lasting and more 
deleterious consequences. 
Given that, some have recommended that central banks step in and play the role of market-
maker of last resort. Without debating the merits of that proposal today, it is worth pointing 
out that the term “market-maker of last resort” is misrepresenting the role being played here. 
A market-maker makes two-way prices, both buying and selling. In a dislocated market, with 
most of the trading one-way, the central bank would only be buying, it wouldn’t be selling the 
asset to anyone else anytime soon. A more appropriate description is buyer of last resort, 
with the risk to the central bank’s balance sheet that comes from performing that role. 
Long-term yields 
I will now talk a bit about an issue that is of direct relevance to actuaries. Is the government 
bond rate still the appropriate risk-free yield? Is it lower now than it used to be and will it stay 
there? 
On  the  first  question,  in  my  opinion,  the  answer  is  still  yes.  Ultimately  the  risk-free  yield 
should be something that approximates the growth rate of the economy. On that basis, the 
government  bond  yield  is  still  doing  a  pretty  good  job.  Yes,  policy  actions  in  some  of  the 
major economies might have pushed the yield lower than it might otherwise have been. But 
those policy actions reflect the growth circumstance in which we find ourselves. In Australia, 
partly  as  a  result  of  those  policy  actions,  we  have  seen  foreign  holdings  of  Australian 
government securities increase to over 75 per cent at its peak, though it’s a bit lower than 
that now. Again, I don’t see these purchases as distorting the Australian government bond 
yield, but rather reflecting the reality of the world we live in. 
So  with  government  bond  yields  around  historical  lows  in  recent  years,  should  that  be 
reflected in the discount rates used in actuarial calculations? How long is this period of low 
rates going to last? I’m not going to answer the question directly. But again it’s useful to think 
of it in terms of economic growth rates. Secular stagnation is often put forward as a reason 
why growth rates will be lower than they used to be. There are various theories of secular 
stagnation  around,  but  a  number  of  them  boil  down  to  the  proposition  that  the  rate  of 
innovation and technological progress will be lower now and in the future than it has been in 
the  past.  Personally  I  find  that  very  defeatist,  and  ultimately  speculative.  We  simply  don’t 
know what the future will bring. There have been quite a number of times in the past where 
such a claim has been made which has subsequently been proven wrong. Maybe it’s right 
this time, but I don’t see any reason to give up yet. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  In Australia, one factor which does have a significant influence on real growth rates is the 
rate of population growth. That has slowed in Australia of late, which means there are some 
grounds to believe that the medium-term growth rate of the economy has slowed, in which 
case  discount rates  should  probably  be  lower.  But  the  orders  of  magnitude  we  are  talking 
about are pretty small, of the order of a quarter of a per cent. That is well within the range of 
error  around  our  knowledge  of  the  longer  term  growth  rate  of  the  economy.  That  said,  I 
realise a quarter of a percentage point can matter a lot actuarially when compounded over a 
number of years. 
So to sum up, I continue to believe the government bond yield is the best measure of the 
risk-free  yield  in  the  economy.  There  are  some  reasons  to  believe  that  is  now  structurally 
lower  than  it  used  to  be,  but  I  find  the  proposition  that  the  future  rate  of  technological 
progress will be lower too pessimistic. 
China’s exchange rate 
I will just say a few words about the recent developments in China’s exchange rate, picking 
up on some of the points highlighted in the RBA Board minutes released yesterday, as well 
as my colleague Phil Lowe’s speech last week.6 
As  you  probably  know,  the  Chinese  authorities  made  a  notable  change  to  their  foreign 
exchange  rate  regime  on  11th  August.  On  that  day,  the  Chinese  authorities  moved  the 
exchange  rate  regime  further  along  the  path  to  a  more  market-determined  rate,  a 
development  which  should  be  welcomed.  The  initial  effect  was  for  the  Chinese  exchange 
rate to depreciate by around 4½ per cent. This is not all that big in the general scheme of 
exchange rate moves (though it generated a very large amount of commentary). Moreover it 
comes in the context of a more than 15 per cent appreciation of China’s exchange rate in 
trade-weighted  terms  over  the  past  year  as  the  RMB  moved  up  in  lock-step  with  the  US 
dollar. I want to focus here on one aspect of the change in the regime. 
As  part  of  their  efforts  to  limit  the  appreciation  of  the  RMB  over  more  than  a  decade,  the 
Chinese  authorities  had  accumulated  US$  4  trillion  in  foreign  exchange  reserves.  This 
occurred in an environment of a sizeable current account surplus combined with significant 
flows of capital into China as well as stringent restrictions on the ability of Chinese citizens to 
invest  abroad.  However,  that  environment  has  changed,  China  still  runs  a  current  account 
surplus, though  it  is smaller  than  it  was  a few years  back.  Most  importantly,  China  is  now 
experiencing  sizeable  capital  outflows  as  the  easing  of  restrictions  on  capital  flows  has 
allowed Chinese citizens to invest abroad. 
As a result, the Chinese authorities have of late, in the face of these capital outflows, been 
intervening to hold up their exchange rate, rather than hold it down. Consequently, China’s 
foreign exchange reserves have declined by around half a trillion US dollars. We don’t know 
what  the  Chinese  are  selling  because  we  don’t  know  the  composition  of  their  reserve 
holdings. But it probably involves some US treasuries and other sovereign bonds. Nor do we 
know what assets the private capital outflow from China is buying. But they are both huge 
orders of magnitude are most certainly having a first order influence on financial markets. 
One can regard the Chinese reserve accumulation as reflecting the accumulation of foreign 
assets  by  the  state  on  behalf  of  the  private  sector  who  couldn’t  invest  abroad.  Now  the 
private sector can invest, there will be a switch as they accumulate assets while the public 
sector sells down its holdings. That is, a fair part of what is going at the moment is a shift in 
who is holding foreign assets in China, not necessarily a large change in the total quantity of 
                                                
6   “International and Domestic Adjustment”, speech by Philip Lowe at a Committee for Economic Development of 
Australia (CEDA) event, Melbourne, 9 September 2015. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  foreign  assets  being  held  by  China.  What  matters  for  global  financial  markets  is  the 
difference in portfolio allocation between the public and private sector in China. 
Conclusion 
I  have  talked  about  three  topical  issues  in  financial  markets  today:  bond  market  liquidity, 
long-term  yields  and  China’s  exchange  rate.  All  three  issues  are  important  to  financial 
markets  in  Australia.  They  are  currently  quite  interrelated,  with  the  rundown  in  China’s 
foreign  exchange  reserves  probably  in  part  comprising  sales  of  US  treasuries  and  other 
sovereign bonds, because of their greater liquidity, thereby affecting global long-term yields. 
We are seeing an unusual situation where a risk-off environment is associated with sales of 
the risk-free assets by a large market participant, rather than purchases. 
On bond market liquidity, the decline in liquidity is, in part, a desired outcome of regulation. 
Whether it has fallen too far can be debated. But the situation isn’t going to change any time 
soon.  Market  participants  have  to  adjust  their  behaviour  to  deal  with  the  current  state  of 
affairs.  They  have  to  consider  carefully  how  their  execution  strategies  will  function  in  an 
environment  of  lower  liquidity  and  they  may  also  need  to  adjust  the  construction  of  their 
portfolios accordingly. 
Whether the changed market environment is more conducive to temporary flash crashes or 
permanent dislocations remains to be seen. The latter is of significantly greater concern than 
the former, which can be avoided by a well-timed coffee break. 
All three of these issues are going to be with us for a while to come. So it is important we 
adjust to the current environment rather than wish it was something else. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
