  Ronald Waas: Digitization in a growing economy 
Keynote speech by Mr Ronald Waas, Deputy Governor of Bank Indonesia, at the Visa Card 
Managers Annual Meeting, Bali, 27 February 2015. 
 President Director of Visa and his team for organizing this event, 
People of Payment System Industry, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Distinguished, 
• 
• 
• 
Good Morning and May God Bless Us All, Om Swastiastu, 
1. 
To begin this speech, please allow me to invite all of us to praise God the Almighty 
for  his  blessings  so  that  we  meet  in  a  healthy  and  favorable  condition  in  Sofitel 
Hotel, Nusa Dua – Bali, in the Visa Card Managers Annual Meeting. 
I welcome the theme “Digitization in a Growing Economy”, particularly because 
digital technology has been a consistently  increasing part of our daily lives at the 
local, Asian, and international levels. 
On this great occasion, I would also like to extend my appreciation to Visa and all 
System  Payment  people  who  are  present  here  and  constantly  show  their 
commitment to promote a better Payment System in Indonesia in the future. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, distinguished guests, 
Regulatory function 
4. 
On  several  occasions  of  interacting  with  industries  and  the  wider  community,  I 
always quote a famous American writer in the beginning of the 19th century, James 
F. Cooper: “the very existence of government at all, infers inequality”. The most 
fundamental  essence  of  the  existence  of  authorities  is  to  guarantee  that  any 
unbalanced social and economic establishments in the community may be managed 
for the welfare of the wider community. 
This adagio is important, primarily related to the massive potentials of Indonesian 
domestic  market  with  a  consistently  increasing  economic  capacity.  Without 
acceptable management, our nation will never be “the host” in its own country. 
Therefore,  in  line  with  the  complex  social  plurality  and  highly  dynamic  digital 
technology  development,  the  authority’s  function  as  a  control  tool  to  organize 
people’s  life  to  become  more  strategic,  especially  to  achieve  a  completely  safe, 
smooth, and efficient payment system. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, distinguished guests, 
Indonesia’s economic development 
7. 
Millennium  21  is  a  new  horizon  which  opens  many  opportunities  for  Indonesia  to 
become a country providing better welfare. With such determination, Bank Indonesia 
will keep strengthening its contribution to the national economy. 
In  the  last  few  years,  the  magnitude  of  global  environmental  change  keeps 
happening to the domestic economy. Amidst such unfriendly strategic environment, 
our economic foundation needs improvement and strengthening in some parts. 
History shows that although Indonesia’s economy keeps experiencing turbulence, it 
always manages to survive by creating stabilization and even to rise by recording 
high growth. The year 2011 marks the end of Indonesia’s recovery transition period 
2. 
3. 
5. 
6. 
8. 
9. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
 10. 
 
 
by successfully entering into the category of middle income country with per capita 
income of over USD 3,000. The World Bank has ranked Indonesia’s economy 10th 
in the world through Purchasing Power Parity (PPP). 
It  is  certainly  the  pride  of  Indonesia  as  a  big  nation.  However,  it  also  leaves  a 
challenge and work for all of us to allow the wider community to enjoy the benefits of 
the nation’s huge economic capacity. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, distinguished guests, 
Domestic market potential 
11. 
We  realize  that  the  huge  potential  of  Indonesia’s  market  has  not  been  optimally 
explored. In spite of the increasing use of payment system, a survey by McKinsey & 
Company (2013) shows that the volume of use of cash for retail transactions is 
still dominant, i.e. 99.4%, which is one of the highest compared to ASEAN peer 
countries. 
In such condition and in line with the digitization trend development of Indonesian 
people  and  the  international  world,  we  are  confident  that  the  future  potentials  of 
electronification  increase  will  become  higher.  Some  factors  may  boost  such 
payment system potentials. 
First, payment system development in Indonesia keeps increasing. Statistics show 
that non-cash transactions grow by 22% in average annually (in terms of volume) 
and 21% (in terms of transaction value). Out of all non-cash instruments, the most 
rapid development is shown by electronic money by around 30% in 2014. 
Second,  digitization  trend  through  the  use  of  telecommunication  device  by  the 
community, including in remote areas, consistently indicates an increase, which now 
has  reached  270  million1  users.  Penetration  of  internet  users  in  Indonesia  is  also 
very high, reaching 74.6 million in 20142. 
Third, Indonesia has very high population of around 250 million people or half of the 
total population of ASEAN countries. With the increasing number of middle class 
growth reaching 150 million people in 2014, more than 50% of Indonesian people 
may potentially become payment system users. 
Fourth,  we  record  that  payment  infrastructure  development  also  shows 
significant growth every year, such as ATM, EDC, and use of electronic channels, 
e.g. mobile  banking,  internet  banking,  and  phone  banking.  Payment  infrastructure 
growth of ATM and EDC in the last two years reaches 14% and 50% respectively. 
Fifth, Non-Cash National Movement (GNNT) launched in 14 August 2014 gains 
strong supports from various Government institutions. Bank Indonesia consistently 
makes extensification and intensification programs for effective GNNT program. 
12. 
13. 
14. 
15. 
16. 
17. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, distinguished guests, 
Mandates of Bank Indonesia 
18. 
As  a  payment  system  authority, the mission  of Bank  Indonesia  is  to  manage  and 
maintain  safe,  efficient,  and  smooth  Payment  System  and  Money  Management 
through access expansion and by considering the national interest. The mission will 
be achieved through two important aspects: first, Payment System strengthening 
and second, proactive in initiating cooperation and collaboration. 
                                                
1   Data of MOCIT, 2014. 
2   Mark Plus Insight Netizen Survey, 2014. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 19. 
20. 
21. 
 
 
Payment system strengthening is specified in four pillars: first, effective and efficient 
money management system; second, payment electronification expansion; third, 
reliable and safe Payment Infrastructure; fourth, strong and rigorous supervision and 
oversight. On this occasion, we will focus more on exploration of the second pillar, 
i.e. Payment Electronification Expansion. 
In relation to the Payment Electronification Expansion, one of the visions of Bank 
Indonesia  in  non-cash  sector  is  to  realize  a  society  with  strong  preference  to 
using  non-cash  payment  instruments  and  facilities  in  making  financial 
transactions, also known as Less Cash Society. 
The realization of Less Cash Society is important to boost more efficient economy, 
in  addition  to  promoting  better  governance  in  financial  management  by  the 
community, businesses, and government institutions. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, distinguished guests, 
Electronification 
22. 
23. 
24. 
In the beginning, we frequently use the term Digital Payment Services; however, in 
line  with  the  focus  and  efforts  to  achieve  the  mission  in  non-cash  sector,  we 
consider Electronification as a more appropriate term. 
Electronification  is  an  incorporated  and  integrated  effort  to  change  cash 
payment into non-cash payment. Expanded use of electronification is defined as 
an  effort  to  change  most  payment  mechanism  from  physical  into  digital  or  from 
manual into electronic and to increase limited financial access to wider (inclusive) 
financial access. 
Expanded  payment  electronification  strategy  is  made  through  an  integrated 
campaign  effort  involving  all  stakeholders.  We  will  seek  facilitation  with  the 
Government and the relevant institutions which may potentially serve as the catalyst 
of use of payment system electronification. 
Expanded  payment  electronification  is  also  an  integral  part  of  financial  inclusion 
policy to increase the access of unbanked people to financial institutions. Through 
the  use  of  information  technology,  we  expect  that  the  launched  electronification 
program may serve as a drive to answer this challenge by providing services to such 
people in a safe and efficient manner. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, distinguished guests, 
Bank Indonesia’ policy to promote less cash society 
26. 
25. 
Bank Indonesia’s authority in payment system is embodied in the following 4 roles: 
(1)  establishment  of  policy,  (2)  authority  in  the  entry  and  exit  policy  of  payment 
system  industry,  (3)  payment  system  operators,  and  (4)  oversight.  Through  such 
4 roles, we may determine the future direction of payment system development. 
The established policy is directed to achieve targets of non-cash transactions of 
up to 2.4 times of GDP by 2015 and 3 times of GDP by 2016. The entry and exit 
policy aims to make the payment system industry healthier and ready to compete 
with the global industry. As an operator, Bank Indonesia consistently builds a safe 
and  reliable  payment  system  following  the  requirements  of  the  community  and 
payment  industry.  Lastly,  Bank  Indonesia  continuously  strengthens  payment 
system  oversight  to  ensure  any  payment  system  development  innovation  is 
followed by good risk mitigation aspect which in turn will increase public trust in 
non-cash payment system. 
To  boost  non-cash  expansion,  Bank  Indonesia  has  launched  less  cash  society 
achievement  strategy  in  4  focus  activities,  namely  (1)  change  of  public  culture 
27. 
28. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
 29. 
30. 
31. 
32. 
33. 
34. 
35. 
36. 
the 
that 
information 
the  use  of 
technology,  we  expect 
Indonesia  has  presently  expanded  payment  electronification 
 
 
towards  non-cash  transactions,  (2)  expanded  services  of  non-cash  payment, 
(3) development of supporting infrastructure, and (4) alignment of regulations. 
First,  culture  change  strategy  will  be  realized  through  an  integrated  campaign 
involving  all  stakeholders.  We  will  seek  facilitation  with  the  Government  and  the 
relevant institutions which may potentially serve as the catalyst of use of payment 
system electronification. The efforts made jointly by Bank Indonesia and the industry 
among  others  are  e-ticketing  cooperation  in  public  transportation  sector  and 
development of Government’s assistance distribution (government to people). 
On the other hand, we are also seeking to increase public awareness on non-cash 
transactions through a sustainable education program, like integration of non-cash 
study into the education curriculum. 
Second, expanded payment electronification is also an integral part of financial 
inclusion policy to increase the access of unbanked people to financial institutions. 
Through 
launched 
electronification program may serve as a drive to answer this challenge by providing 
services to such people in a safe and efficient manner. 
Bank 
development of Electronic Bill Presentment and Payment to integrate bill payment. 
Third,  to  realize  reliable,  efficient,  and  safe  payment  infrastructure  through 
National  Payment  Gateway  (NPG)  and  National  Scheme.  NPG  infrastructure 
development eventually aims to increase PS service efficiency, including in terms of 
cost,  to  add  PS  service  coverage  through  interconnection  and  interoperability 
among  operators,  and to  build  independency  of  national  retailers  PS  by  domestic 
processing. 
PS  independency  closely  relates  to  the  national  standard  implementation.  Bank 
Indonesia will ensure that the set standard is in line with the national interest and 
implemented according to the determined time target. We all have started it and it is 
our obligation to complete it. I am aware that something we originally start may have 
downsides, but it is our task to cover those downsides. 
Fourth, strong and transparent regulations and oversight must be applied to all 
payment  system  operators.  In  the  aspect  of  oversight  of  payment  system 
instruments, BI will surely strengthen the capability of payment system oversight. 
In addition, we will strengthen coordination and consolidation between policy 
authorities and payment system businesses. The step is realized through a plan 
to  establish  a  high  level  coordination  medium  consisting  of  payment  system 
authority  and  businesses.  Intensive  coordination  and  consolidation  is  expected  to 
synergize  various  interests  and  direct  industries  for  their  efficient  movements,  to 
promote favorable climate, and to strengthen customer protection by upholding the 
national interest. 
through 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
Closing 
37. 
38. 
4 
 To conclude my speech this morning, I wish to remind us all that payment system 
development must be built under the principle of a sound competition to minimize 
any negative impacts potentially resulting in public confusion, to open access 
reachable  by  domestic  actors  and  the  wide  community,  and  to  eliminate 
economic rent. 
Particularly  in  connection  with  Expanded  Electronification,  I  also  wish  to  re-
emphasize that the realization of the expected less cash society basically aims to a 
cultural/behavioral  change  instead  of  system  change.  Therefore,  improvement  of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 39. 
40. 
 
 
education  quality  for  the  public  is  the  most  strategic  phase.  The  reason  is  only 
through  improvement  of  education  quality  we  can  open  comparative  excellence 
window  and  build  the  foundation  to  reach  excellent  and  prosperous  Indonesian 
society. 
In this regard, Bank Indonesia as the Payment System Authority will seek to direct 
the  industry  for  their  efficient  movements,  promote  favorable  climate  for  payment 
system and settlement of financial transactions, and strengthen customer protection 
by upholding the national interest. 
I conclude this speech with the confidence that God will always be with us to support 
and smooth our moves towards a better future. 
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
