  Mugur Isărescu: Issue of CHF-denominated loans 
Presentation by Mr Mugur Isărescu, Governor of the National Bank of Romania, in front of 
the Budget and Finance Parliamentary Commission, Bucharest, 10 February 2015. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, Members of Parliament,  
First  of  all,  I  would  like  to  thank  you  for  the  invitation  to  present,  together  with  my  central 
bank colleagues, the stance and action steps adopted by the National Bank of Romania in 
relation to the issue of CHF-denominated loans in Romania.  
I  assure  you  that  we  deem  this  debate  to  be  very  useful  at  the  current  juncture.  The 
members of the central bank’s top management have come before you in line with the legal 
obligation stipulated in the NBR Statute (Law 312/2004) of providing the Parliament and the 
general  public  with  quality  information  for  a  clear  image  of  the  policies  and  the  measures 
adopted by the National Bank of Romania in fulfilling its tasks.  
The Swiss National Bank’s decision 
I.  
The public debate on CHF-denominated loans started on 15 January 2015, when the Swiss 
National Bank removed the 1.2 EUR/CHF floor, which led to the immediate and significant 
appreciation  of  the  Swiss  franc  against  the  euro,  the  US  dollar  and  other  currencies.  The 
decision adopted by the monetary authority of Switzerland took into account the fact that the 
floor – implemented in September 2011, when the Swiss franc was substantially overvalued 
against the euro – had become increasingly difficult to keep in place given the quantitative 
easing  initiated  by  the  European  Central  Bank  and  the  significant  capital  inflows  into 
Switzerland.  The  CHF  appreciation  against  the  leu  was  inevitable,  even  if  the  domestic 
currency had a relatively stable evolution against the reference currency (euro).  
The literature refers to the Swiss franc as a safe haven currency. Owing to the small size of 
the local financial market, against the background of foreign capital inflows, the Swiss franc 
tends to strengthen significantly versus other currencies in times of turmoil on international 
markets.  
The measures the  National  Bank  of  Romania  can  take  in  order to  influence  the  exchange 
rate of the domestic currency against the Swiss franc are limited. The CHF/RON exchange 
rate is set indirectly. The euro is Romania’s reference currency on the FX market, given the 
intensity  of  the  country’s  trade  with  euro  area  states,  the  EU  membership  and  Romania’s 
intention  to  adopt the  euro  in the future. The  EUR/RON  exchange  rate  is  the  result  of the 
foreign  currency  demand  and  supply  generated  by  trade  and  financial  flows,  while  the 
CHF/RON  exchange  rate  is  determined  indirectly  depending  on  the  EUR/RON  and 
EUR/CHF exchange rates. The developments in the EUR/CHF exchange rate depend on the 
foreign  currency  demand  and  supply  between  the  euro  area  and  Switzerland,  Romania 
having no influence on its quotation. The EUR/RON exchange rate is relatively stable and it 
reflects  the  favourable  performance  of  fundamentals.  The  recent  depreciation  of  the  RON 
against the  
CHF is therefore entirely attributable to the appreciation of the CHF versus the EUR, USD 
and other currencies, as a result of the Swiss National Bank removing the 1.2 floor, following 
the European Central Bank’s quantitative easing decision.  
The NBR’s intervention to bring the CHF/RON exchange rate back to the 14 January 2015 
level  is  not  possible,  as  the  international  arbitrage  does  not  allow  that  only  the  CHF/RON 
exchange rate be influenced, while keeping unchanged the exchange rates of the leu versus 
the other currencies.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  In order to reverse the impact on the CHF/RON exchange rate following the Swiss National 
Bank’s decision, the leu would have to appreciate versus the euro to approximately RON 3.7 
per  euro.  This  EUR/RON  exchange  rate  level  could  be  maintained  only  temporarily,  as 
pushing the EUR/RON exchange rate down to a level much lower than that perceived by the 
market to be correct would require considerable foreign currency sales (amounting to EUR 
billions)  not  only  for  achieving  this  objective,  but  also  for  enabling  the  systematic 
interventions necessary for subsequently maintaining this exchange rate.  
This  intervention  by  the  NBR  would  have  short-term  effects  and  significant  economic 
consequences.  The  sizeable  contraction  in  foreign  currency  reserves  would  trigger  the 
worsening  of  investor  perception,  as  mirrored  by  the  rise  in  risk  premia.  The  external 
borrowings  would  become  costlier  for  the  state  and  the  private  sector,  while  the  risk  of 
speculative attacks on the domestic currency would increase.  
The  massive  appreciation  of  the  leu  versus  the  euro  would  lead  to  the  strong  erosion  of 
Romania’s external competitiveness, having therefore a negative impact on the performance 
of  Romanian  exports.  Under  the  circumstances,  the  economic  activity  would  post  a 
contraction, also reflected in an unfavourable evolution of the number of jobs. Furthermore, 
the decrease in exports, accompanied by the simultaneous spur in imports, would generate a 
worsening  of  the  trade  balance.  In  such  a  context,  additional  corrective  pressures  would 
emerge on the EUR/RON exchange rate towards the pre-intervention level. Mention should 
be made that the NBR’s foreign currency sales would imply the absorption of liquidity in lei 
from the money market, leading to a substantial increase in domestic currency interest rates. 
This would not only deter leu-denominated lending and foster foreign currency lending (which 
would become cheaper), but it would also imply considerably higher costs for borrowers with 
outstanding leu-denominated loans. In other words, a low currency risk would come at the 
expense of a higher interest rate risk.  
Moreover,  the  strengthening  of  the  domestic  currency  would  induce  a  deflationary  shock 
across the Romanian economy, with the potential of creating a loop of mutually-reinforcing 
falling prices and broad-based delay in consumption, conducive to economic downturn and 
consequently to layoffs.  
Apart  from  the  adverse  economic  effects,  the  NBR’s  intervention  to  help  the  domestic 
currency  appreciate  against  the  CHF  to  a  level  similar  to  that  recorded  prior  to  the  Swiss 
National  Bank  removing  the  1.2  EUR/CHF  floor  would  also  impact  public  policy.  Such  an 
intervention  would  result  in  changing  the  benchmark  currency  on  the  foreign  exchange 
market  from  EUR  to  CHF,  contradicting  not  only  the  economic  reality,  but  also  the  EU 
membership legally binding Romania to adopt the single currency at a certain point in time.  
As for the possibility of the NBR imposing a ban on CHF-denominated loans, such a decision 
would have entailed the restriction of CHF-denominated capital flows, thus violating one of 
the  fundamental  prerequisites  of  Romania’s  accession  to  the  EU:  full  capital  account 
liberalisation, completed in 2006.  
Besides,  even  assuming  such  a  measure  had  been  possible,  it  would  have  affected  trade 
with  and  investment  from  Switzerland,  as  well  as  the  financing  of  CHF  hedged  borrowers 
(exporters,  as  well  as  employees  of  companies  with  Swiss  capital,  whose  incomes  are 
expressed in CHF).  
The relevant presence of Swiss capital in Romania is pointed out by the direct investment 
from Switzerland, which totals around EUR 2 billion, as well as by the number of companies 
with  Swiss  capital  (over  2,000).  These  companies’  annual  turnover  is  worth  about 
EUR 7 billion,  while  the  number  of  employees  has  ranged  between  50,000  and  60,000 
(nearing the number of CHF borrowers). The main Swiss investors in Romania are present in 
significant  economic  sectors:  building  materials,  energy,  petrochemicals,  pharmaceuticals, 
food industry, tobacco, agriculture and stockbreeding. Over the last years, trade flows with 
Switzerland  exceeded  the  EUR  250  million  threshold  for  exports  and  the  EUR  400  million 
threshold for imports.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  The  situation  generated  by  the  CHF  appreciation  should  be  approached  rationally,  rather 
than emotionally. First and foremost, before coming up with a solution, we should make sure 
that  the  situation  has  stabilised.  Frequently,  FX  markets  tend  to  overreact  at  the  incipient 
stage of such events. From this standpoint, mention should be made that about 40% of the 
rise  in  the  CHF/RON  exchange  rate  was  already  corrected:  it  started  off  at  1  CHF  = 
3.74 RON  on  14  January  2015,  peaked  at  4.58  on  23  January  and  stood  at  4.21  on 
9 February 2015.  
Moreover,  given  the  considerable  financial  impact,  time  is  necessary  for  solutions  to  be 
formulated so that the additional burden generated by the stronger CHF might be rationally 
and realistically shared among the parties involved.  
To  sum  up,  we  believe  that,  before  adopting  any  measures,  the  following  should  be 
analysed: the actual situation of CHF-denominated loans in Romania, the current economic 
environment, the approach to the effects generated by the stronger CHF in other countries in 
the region, as well as the viability of the solutions recommended.  
to 
is  also  attributable 
the  notable  decline 
Information on CHF-denominated loans 
II.  
CHF-denominated  loans  do  not  pose  a  systemic  risk  because  they  hold  a  small  share  in 
GDP and also in total loans.  
CHF  lending  to  the  private  sector  stands  for  1.4%  of  Romania’s  GDP,  while  Poland  and 
Hungary report levels five and seven times higher respectively. The proportions are the same 
as  regards  the  share  of  CHF-denominated  loans  in  total  private  sector  loans:  in  Romania 
they account for 4.7%, while Poland and Hungary report levels three and five times higher 
respectively.  The  weight  of  CHF  lending  in  total  loans  to  non-financial  corporations  and 
households in Romania has followed a downward path since 2012, to 4.7% of total loans to 
these  sectors.  The  development 
in 
CHF-denominated loans granted since 2009.  
CHF-denominated loans were almost exclusively taken by individual borrowers. These loans 
account for around 10% of total loans to households, and individuals with CHF-denominated 
loans (75,412) account for 2.1% of the total number of individual borrowers. For comparison, 
in Poland, the number of CHF borrowers exceeds 500,000.  
The rationale behind the boom in CHF lending during 2007-2008 is in close connection with 
the social factors. The CHF borrowing costs were lower at the credit agreement date, which 
ensured  easier  access  to  lending  for  lower  income  borrowers,  as  well  as  larger  loans  for 
larger income borrowers. On the other hand, the unfavourable developments in the CHF may 
have  a  major  adverse  impact  on  debtors’  capacity  to  repay  the  loans.  A  simulation  of  the 
instalments of a standard loan in CHF, RON and EUR respectively, extended in December 
2008,  shows 
instalments  on 
CHF-denominated  loans  were  lower  compared  with  similar  monthly  instalments  on  loans 
granted in RON or EUR, and (ii) the impact of the change in the exchange rate and/or the 
interest rate was stronger on CHF loans than on those in the other currencies.  
The number of CHF borrowers is on the decline (by 31.8% in November 2014 compared with 
December 2008, i.e. by around 35,200). The drop is due to loan repayment, loan conversion 
into  another  currency,  their  removal  from  the  balance  sheets  or  their  sale.  The  number  of 
CHF borrowers fell at a faster rate compared with the household loan dynamics at aggregate 
level,  the  number  of  debtors  moving  down  15%  between  December  2008  and  November 
2014. The number of CHF loans witnessed a similar development.  
Credit risk associated with CHF-denominated loans is relatively higher compared with other 
currencies.  In  November  2014, the  NPL  ratio  on  household  loans  in  CHF  stood  at  around 
12%  versus  9.4%  for  all  foreign  currency-denominated  loans  to  households,  yet  the 
dynamics were similar to those of foreign currency-denominated loans overall.  
the  credit  agreement  date, 
the  monthly 
that:  (i)  at 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  Recent studies also identify heightened risks and correspondingly high costs associated with 
CHF  loans  to  unhedged  borrowers  at  an  international  level,  particularly  in  non-euro  area 
countries.  
Individuals with CHF-denominated loans are not a homogeneous group. The distribution of 
such loans shows a large variety in terms of: loan destination, loan value, borrowers’ income 
level, borrowers’ indebtedness level, and loan maturity.  
CHF-denominated  loans  to  households  have  had  different  purposes.  About  35%  of  CHF-
denominated  loans  are  housing  loans  and  58%  of  them  are  mortgage-backed  consumer 
loans.  Real  estate  lending  to  households  is  mostly  denominated  in  EUR,  with  CHF-
denominated loans accounting for merely 7.7% of the said loans versus 37% in Poland.  
CHF-denominated  loans  are  not  homogenous  in  terms  of  value.  Large  value  loans 
(exceeding  CHF  47,000)  are  concentrated:  25%  of  borrowers  hold  two  thirds  of  the  loan 
stock. At the other end, another 25% of borrowers have taken small value loans (lower than 
CHF 4,000), accounting for only 1% of the loan stock.  
The  breakdown  of  CHF  borrowers  by  income  group  points  to  the  existence  of  vulnerable 
social  groups  among  them.  About  half  of  the  CHF  borrowers  have  a  net  monthly  income 
lower than lei 1,500 and up to 75% of them have a net monthly income lower than lei 2,500.  
The average DTI ratio of CHF borrowers currently stands at 92%, higher than in December 
2008, i.e. 64%. Indebtedness distribution is strongly uneven, as borrowers with a net monthly 
income below  lei 2,500  are currently over-indebted, as a result of both income contraction 
during the crisis and CHF appreciation. Borrowers whose income is below the average wage 
economy-wide were the hardest hit by CHF appreciation. Debt-servicing costs of borrowers 
whose net monthly wage is lower than lei 500 rose by 32.2% of the said income, whereas 
those of borrowers with an income higher than lei 3,000 increased by less than 7% of their 
net monthly wage.  
Designing similar solutions for both borrowers with income lower than lei 700 and an average 
DTI ratio of 184% and borrowers with income higher than lei 7,000 and an average DTI ratio 
of 26% is not warranted.  
CHF-denominated  loans  are  usually  long-term  loans,  with  an  average  residual  maturity  of 
13.2 years. However, about 40% of CHF-denominated loans have a residual maturity shorter 
than five years and other 40% of them have a residual maturity longer than 15 years. In fact, 
the  average  value  of  CHF-denominated  loans  is  significantly  higher  than  that  of  leu-
denominated loans, but it also varies a lot depending on borrowers’ income level.  
Such  disparities  argue  against  applying  a  similar  approach  to  borrowers’  debt-servicing 
difficulties: there are various individual specific situations, therefore one size does not fit all, 
which calls for the adoption of several differentiated solutions.  
CHF-denominated loans are concentrated among a handful of banks (three banks account 
for 77% of CHF borrowers and for 69% of the CHF-denominated loan volume; these banks 
jointly held 14% of total bank assets in November 2014). Moreover, the net currency position 
in CHF was not a source of speculation for banks, given its very low share in total own funds 
and  its  extremely  low  volatility  when  compared  with  other  currencies.  Mention  should  be 
made that banks showed caution in managing CHF-denominated assets and liabilities.  
The current economic environment  
III.  
The analysis of the current economic environment reveals two significant characteristics.  
First,  Romania  has  maintained  sustainable  macroeconomic  balances  over  the  last  years, 
also as a result of the counter-cyclical monetary and prudential policies implemented by the 
National Bank of Romania. Romania further enjoys robust economic growth and solid growth 
prospects, of 2.7% in 2015 and 2.9% in 2016. The annual inflation rate has remained on a 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  downward  path,  while  the  general  government  balance  and  the  current  account  balance 
stand  at  sustainable  levels.  These  arguments  show  that  the  movements  in  the  CHF/RON 
exchange  rate  should  not  be  seen  as  a  depreciation  of  the  domestic  currency  (which  is 
supported by strong economic fundamentals), but as CHF appreciation following the Swiss 
National Bank’s decision.  
Second,  the  downtrend  in  interest  rates  on  leu-denominated  loans,  also  as  a  result  of  the 
NBR’s decisions to gradually cut the monetary policy rate and to pursue adequate liquidity 
management, is supportive of the solution of converting foreign currency-denominated loans 
into the domestic currency in the case of currently unhedged borrowers.  
The analysis of the latest statistical data points to a further decline in the annual inflation rate, 
which followed a lower-than-forecasted path and ran below the lower bound of the variation 
band of the flat target, due to the steeper drop in volatile prices and to the increasingly weak 
inflation on external markets, overlapping the lingering negative output gap and the ongoing 
downward adjustment in inflation expectations. In December 2014, the year-on-year inflation 
rate  stood  at  0.8%,  while  the  average  annual  inflation  rate  stuck  to  1.1%  and  the  annual 
average  inflation  rate  based  on  the  Harmonised  Index  of  Consumer  Prices  –  which  is 
relevant for assessing convergence with the European Union – came in at 1.4%, the same 
as in the previous month.  
The  fall  in  the  inflation  rate  allowed  for  successive  policy  rate  cuts  (to  an  all-time  low  of 
2.25% in February 2015) and for interbank rates to decline markedly to record lows, amid 
favourable liquidity conditions in the money market. In August 2014, the NBR resumed the 
rate  cutting  cycle  so  that  in  February  2015  the  monetary  policy  rate  ran  at  2.25%  versus 
5.25%  in  June  2013.  Moreover,  January  through  November  2014,  the  NBR  gradually 
lowered  the  minimum  reserve  requirement  ratios.  Thus,  at  present  the  minimum  reserve 
requirement ratio on leu-denominated liabilities of credit institutions is 10% (from 15% at end-
2013)  and  that  on foreign  currency-denominated  liabilities  is  14%  (from  20%  in  December 
2013).  The  aforementioned  movements  in  the  policy  rate  and  reserve  ratios  led  to  a 
significant  reduction  in  the  debt  service  of  borrowers  with  loans  in  domestic  currency,  an 
increase in leu-denominated loans and a contraction in foreign currency-denominated loans, 
confirming  the  stronger  preference  for  loans  in  domestic  currency.  Consequently,  the 
currency risk has receded.  
Prudential indicators show that the banking sector is stable and sound. The loan-to-deposit 
ratio (LTD), a relevant financial stability indicator, has fallen below 100%, coming in at 91.3% 
in December 2014. The solvency ratio stood at 17.1% in September 2014 against 15.5% in 
December 2013, significantly above the international prudential requirements, and liquidity is 
at an adequate level.  
The removal of non-performing loans from the balance sheets has led to negative profitability 
of the banking system, with credit institutions incurring net losses worth around EUR 1 billion 
in 2014.  
Out of the total stock of loans to households amounting to lei 101 billion, foreign currency-
denominated  loans  account  for  the  equivalent  of  lei  62  billion  (or  61%  of  total).  Mention 
should  be  made  that  out  of  foreign  currency-denominated  loans  worth  62  billion  when 
expressed  in  domestic  currency,  EUR-denominated  loans  held  83.8%,  CHF-denominated 
loans accounted for 15.7%, and USD-denominated loans took 0.5%, as of November 2014.  
Individuals’  substantial  foreign  currency  indebtedness  and  the  adverse  movements  in  the 
exchange rates of several currencies of late (the strong appreciation of the CHF and of the 
US  dollar,  as  well  as  the  uncertainties  surrounding  the  euro  exchange  rate)  make  it  even 
more difficult for a number of borrowers to repay their debt.  
Other  countries  reported  similar  repayment  difficulties  on  loans  to  households  as  well  and 
applied  various  government-backed  schemes  to  support  individuals  improve  their  debt 
service (the United Kingdom, Ireland, the US, Latvia, Croatia, Iceland).  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  regulation, 
NBR measures vis-à-vis foreign currency lending 
IV.  
The NBR has implemented at an early stage a mix of measures to deter the unsustainable 
increase  in  foreign  currency  lending.  The  measures  envisaged:  (A)  monetary  policy, 
(B) prudential 
(D)  public  warnings,  and 
(E) implementing  the  recommendations  of  the  European  Systemic  Risk  Board  (ESRB)  on 
lending in foreign currencies. Romania ranks among the countries that had to come up with 
unorthodox measures in order to deal with the challenges arising from the full capital account 
liberalisation, euroisation of the economy, massive foreign capital inflows, etc. Some of these 
measures,  previously  seen  as  administrative  measures  at 
their 
implementation,  are  currently  deemed  macroprudential  instruments  (e.g.,  debt  service  to 
disposable income ratio and loan-to-value ratio).  
(C)  prudential  supervision, 
the  moment  of 
Monetary policy  
A. 
In  order  to  deter  foreign  currency  lending  and,  implicitly,  to  strengthen  the  traditional 
channels  of  monetary  policy  transmission,  the  NBR  actively  used  as  an  instrument  the 
minimum reserve requirements ratio on foreign currency liabilities. This ratio continued to be 
raised  during  2004-2006,  its  level  increasing  by  5  percentage  points  each  time  in  August 
2004, January 2006 and March 2006 to 40%. Additionally, the NBR extended the scope of 
minimum  reserve  requirements  to  foreign  currency-denominated  liabilities  with  residual 
maturity of over two years, as follows: (i) starting February 2005, on the liabilities incurred 
subsequent to  this  date;  (ii)  starting  July,  on the  liabilities  incurred  prior to  February  2005. 
The high restrictiveness thus imposed on the minimum reserve requirements ratio on foreign 
currency-denominated liabilities of credit institutions was kept in place until 2009, when the 
knock-on effects of the economic crisis on Romania prompted the central bank to implement 
a countercyclical monetary policy.  
B.  Prudential regulation  
• 
In  2003,  prior  to  Romania’s  joining  the  European  Union,  the  central  bank  issued 
norms setting forth certain conditions for granting loans to households, such as:  
– 
– 
– 
capping the indebtedness level at 35% of the net income for mortgage loans;  
requiring from borrowers a down-payment of 25%;  
providing  real  and/or  personal  collateral  equal  to  at  least  the  amount  of  the 
loan requested for consumer loans that are not intended for goods purchasing;  
capping the LTV ratio at 75%.  
– 
In July-September 2005, additional lending requirements were imposed, as follows:  
– 
capping  the  overall  household  debt  service  ratio  at  40%  of  net  income  on 
condition  that  the  borrowers’  commitment  arising  from  mortgage  loans  does 
not exceed 35% of their net income;  
capping  aggregate  exposure  from  foreign  currency-denominated  loans  at 
300% of the credit institution’s own funds, or endowment capital in the case of 
branches  of  foreign  credit  institutions,  for  loans  granted  to  households  and 
companies earning incomes in currencies other than the loan currency.  
 In the context of Romania’s accession to the EU (in 2007), the prudential regulatory 
framework for lending activity was adjusted in line with the provisions of the acquis 
communautaire, including the provision on full capital account liberalisation.  
Thus, 
to  capital  account 
liberalisation,  it  was  necessary  to  firstly  remove  the  cap  on  credit  institutions’ 
aggregate exposure from foreign currency-denominated loans as of 1 January 2007. 
Keeping the cap in place would have been tantamount to a capital restriction, i.e. a 
to  comply  with  Romania’s  commitment 
in  order 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   6 
       breach of Romania’s commitment to full capital account liberalisation at the time of 
EU accession.  
Additionally, in March 2007, the central bank’s regulations on lending were aligned 
to the relevant EU practices, which did not comprise any administrative restrictions, 
by promoting the bank self-regulation model.  
In  line  with  new  framework,  banks  establish  maximum  indebtedness  levels  by 
category of customers based on internal lending norms, by observing the risk profile 
and strategy assumed by banks in relation to borrowers’ financial capacity. These 
caps are subject to prior validation by the central bank.  
In February 2008, stricter requirements were applied for the provisioning of foreign 
currency-denominated  loans  granted  to  borrowers  earning  incomes  in  currencies 
other than the loan currency.  
In  August  2008,  the  regulation  on  lending  to  households  was  amended  so  that 
banks were required to determine borrowers’ indebtedness levels in such a way that 
the  debt  service  might  accommodate  the  materialisation  of  currency  and  interest 
rate risks, as well as higher fees and commissions, over the entire life of the loan.  
On the same date, the legal provisions were supplemented by imposing the use of 
the  borrower’s  annual  tax  record  instead  of  the  monthly  income  certificate 
throughout the income validation process.  
In  October  2011,  the  NBR  introduced  additional  restrictions  on  foreign  currency-
denominated loans to households, consisting in stricter requirements on establishing 
the maximum indebtedness level allowed for consumer loans, loan collateralisation, 
etc.  
Prudential supervision 
C. 
Prudential supervision of credit institutions is one of the NBR’s main tasks, according to the 
law. To this end, the NBR is empowered to check, based on reports and on-site inspections, 
the  compliance  with  legal  provisions  and  with  the  NBR  regulations  in  order  to  limit  and 
prevent risks specific to the banking activity. Based on the examinations and assessments it 
undertakes, the NBR ascertains to what extent the management framework, the strategies, 
processes  and  mechanisms  implemented  by  a  credit  institution  ensure  the  proper 
management  of  risks  given  the  particular  risk  profile  of  the  credit  institution.  Thus,  the 
supervision  carried  out  follows  the  risk-based  approach  rather  than  the  compliance-based 
one.  
In exercising its supervisory task, the NBR issues recommendations, adopts measures and 
imposes sanctions on the credit institutions themselves or on their executive and governing 
bodies  in  order  to  ensure  that the  proper remedial  measures  are  adopted  and  compliance 
with the regulations in force is restored.  
D. 
Implementation of recommendations of the European Systemic Risk Board 
(ESRB) on lending in foreign currencies  
At EU level, the first recommendations on lending in foreign currencies were issued by the 
ESRB  in  2011  (with  implementation  deadline  in  December  2012).  The  recommendations 
were  not  aimed  at  banning  foreign  currency-denominated  loans  by  way  of  administrative 
measures, but at setting forth measures that would ensure borrowers have the capacity to 
service  their  debt  even  in  the  context  of  adverse  developments.  With  some  of  these 
recommendations already regulated, the NBR supplemented the national legislation with the 
required provisions.  
Following up on the action steps of the Romanian authorities, the ESRB concluded that the 
aforementioned recommendation had been fully implemented by Romania.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  Public warnings  
E. 
In  the  past  decade,  the  NBR  has  constantly  issued  public  warnings  regarding  the  risks 
related  to  foreign  currency  loans,  including  CHF-denominated  loans,  taken  by  individuals 
earning incomes in currencies other than the loan currency. These recurrent warnings were 
disseminated  via  several  communication  channels:  studies,  conferences  and  seminars  on 
financial  stability  and  supervision  issues,  legal  colloquia  (available  on  the  NBR’s  website), 
statements  made  by  central  bank  representatives  during  the  quarterly  press  conferences, 
monthly meetings with the representatives of the Romanian Banking Association and other 
specialised  associations  (Association  of  Financial-Banking  Analysts  in  Romania,  National 
Association  of  Romanian  Exporters  and  Importers,  etc.).  Most  warnings  were  issued 
concomitantly  with  the  release  of  prudential  norms  and/or  restrictions  by  the  NBR.  We 
hereby  underline  that  these  activities  are  current  and  permanent,  and  are  reported  in  the 
Annual Reports and the Financial Stability Reports published on the NBR’s website.  
V.  
Other countries in the region – approaches to the situation caused by CHF 
appreciation 
The  measures  taken  by  other  EU  Member  States  to  deal  with  the  challenges  posed  by 
CHF-denominated  loans  show  that  the  solutions  were  different  relative  to  the  particular 
features  of  such  loans  in  each  country.  Therefore,  Romania  must  identify  solutions  that 
would fit its own situation. To cherry-pick the favourable components of the measures taken 
by  other  countries  without  revealing  the  context  and  the  associated  costs  would  be 
counterproductive.  
The significant CHF appreciation in early January 2015 has entailed measures tailored to the 
particular  features  of  each  country.  Specifically,  Polish  authorities  recommended  banks  to 
come up with individual solutions to cut down on debtors’ debt service. Croatia introduced a 
fixed  exchange  rate  of  the  kuna  against  the  Swiss  franc  for  a  one-year  period.  The 
Hungarian  authorities  took  over  much  of  the  effort  of  managing  the  consequences  of  the 
developments in the CHF/HUF rate; it should be mentioned, though, that CHF-denominated 
loans accounted for approximately 50% of local government borrowings and would have had 
a significant impact on the budget assuming inaction on the part of the authorities.  
Pseudo-remedies vs. realistic and balanced solutions  
VI.  
There may be various ways of action to solve the issue of CHF-denominated loans, but any 
negotiated solution should be based on the following principles:  
• 
• 
• 
target those individuals in real need of support;  
reasonable burden-sharing;  
not generate moral hazard, i.e. not lead to unreasonable expectations in the future 
(related  to  not  paying  the  debt  service)  and  not  discriminate  debtors  in  other 
currencies (RON, EUR, USD);  
not  impair  financial  and  banking  system  stability.  Financial  system  stability  is 
essential for: (i) ensuring financial intermediation and hence the funding of economic 
growth, (ii) job creation, (iii) higher household income, (iv) paving the way for credit 
repayment, (v) preserving depositors’ confidence in the banking sector;  
comply with the EU Treaty and Romania’s accession conditions, i.e. not restrict free 
capital movement.  
  VI.1.   Unrealistic solutions 
We deem the following solutions as unrealistic given their cost-benefit ratio:  
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 A. 
B. 
   C. 
    NBR  intervention  to  bring  the  CHF/RON  at  the  level  of  14  January  2015,  which 
would involve an appreciation of the EUR/RON from around 4.4 (where it currently 
stands) to 3.7; such an operation would keep the desired level in place only in the 
short run, because the level would be unsustainable and would entail arbitrage. The 
associated  costs  would  translate  into  substantial  FX  reserve  losses,  seriously 
detrimental impact on exports and larger disequilibrium on the FX market  
Conversion  of  CHF-denominated  loans  into  lei  at  exchange  rates  other  than  the 
market exchange rate applicable on the conversion date.  
Assuming  credit  conversion  at  the  historical  rate  in  the  month  of  extending  the 
credit, banks would incur losses (calculated as the difference between the exchange 
rate on 23 January 2015, i.e. 4.58, and the historical CHF/RON rate) estimated at lei 
5.66 billion (around 0.85% of GDP). Four credit institutions would see their solvency 
ratio  fall  below  the  minimum  regulated  threshold.  The  solvency  ratio  across  the 
banking sector would diminish from 17.1% to 14%.  
Credit conversion at the historical rate + 20% would generate losses worth around 
lei 4.5 billion for the entire banking sector, while three credit institutions would see 
their solvency ratio fall below the minimum regulated threshold. The solvency ratio 
across the banking sector would diminish from 17.1% to 14.6%.  
Credit  conversion  at  a  monthly  average  rate  (from  the  credit  agreement  date  to 
present)  would  generate  losses  worth  around  lei  3.2  billion  for  the  entire  banking 
sector,  while  two  credit  institutions  would  see  their  solvency  ratio  fall  below  the 
minimum regulated threshold. The solvency ratio across the banking sector would 
diminish from 17.1% to 15.3%. 
Conversion  of  CHF-  and  EUR-denominated  loans  into  lei  at  exchange rates  other 
than the market exchange rate applicable on the conversion date.  
Assuming  the  cumulated  conversion  of  CHF-  and  EUR-denominated  loans  at  the 
historical  rates  in  the  month  of  extending  the  credit,  banks  would  incur  losses 
(calculated  as  the  difference  between  historical  rates  and  the  exchange  rates  on 
23 January  2015,  when  the  CHF/RON  was  4.58  and  the  EUR/RON  was  4.49) 
estimated  at  lei  9.8  billion.  The  solvency  ratio  across  the  banking  sector  would 
diminish from 17.1% to 11.7%. Four credit institutions would see their solvency ratio 
fall below the minimum regulated threshold and would require recapitalisation.  
Cumulated  credit  conversion  at  the  historical  rates  +  20%  would  generate  losses 
worth around lei 5.5 billion for the entire banking sector. The solvency ratio across 
the  banking  sector  would  diminish  from  17.1%  to  14.1%.  Four  credit  institutions 
would see their solvency ratio fall below the minimum regulated threshold and would 
require additional capital injections.  
Cumulated credit conversion at monthly average rates would generate losses worth 
around  lei  4.5  billion  for  the  entire  banking  sector.  The  solvency  ratio  across  the 
banking sector would diminish from 17.1% to 14.6%.  
VI.2.   Realistic solutions  
The  NBR  advocates  the  implementation  of  customised  solutions,  negotiated  between  the 
parties directly involved in the credit agreement (i.e. the credit institution and the borrower). 
The solutions take into account the specifics of CHF-denominated loans, in particular, and 
FX  loans  in  general  on  the  Romanian  market  and  combine:  (i)  free  market  principles, 
(ii) state support for vulnerable household groups, and (iii) the carrying out by the NBR of its 
legal tasks on safeguarding financial stability.  
The  realistic  solutions  are  complementary  and  each  bank  may  apply  an  adequate  mix 
tailored to each individual case. They are equally valid for loans in other currencies as well 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
B. 
 C. 
   and may be optimised on a case-by-case basis. The solutions which may be deemed as both 
realistic  and  balanced  include  those  whose  outcome  is  keeping  the  domestic  currency 
equivalent of monthly instalments of CHF-denominated loans close to the December 2014 
level, with several options available to the parties to credit agreements:  
A. 
Converting  CHF-denominated  loans  into  lei  at  the  market  exchange  rate  and/or 
granting  a  discount  on  the  debt  service  amount  –  which  may  be  tantamount  to  a 
conversion at an exchange rate below the market rate  
Temporary cut in the interest rate on CHF-denominated loans in order to offset the 
impact of the stronger CHF 
May  be  a  valid  option,  given  that  both  the  benchmark  rate  of  the  Swiss  National 
Bank and the CHF market rate have reached negative values.  
Implementing a debt rescheduling scheme, with the award of a compensation by the 
State  
Such  a  solution  would  be  efficient  in  light  of  at  least  four  arguments.  First  and 
foremost, it would contribute to a higher disposable income of the beneficiaries of 
this  scheme  (performing  borrowers),  with  favourable  effects  on  consumption  and 
economic  growth.  Secondly,  it  represents  a  burden-sharing  approach  among 
creditors,  borrowers  and  the  State.  Thirdly,  enforcing  the  relevant  law  implies 
favourable  effects  also  in  terms  of  managing  the  structural  liquidity  surplus  in  the 
banking sector. Fourthly, the measure targets the segment of vulnerable borrowers, 
with  gross  monthly  incomes  of  up  to  lei  3,000,  given  households’  high  degree  of 
indebtedness  and  its  uneven  distribution  across  various  income  groups.  The 
measure  proposed  by 
in  amending  Government 
Emergency  Ordinance  46/2014  by  extending  its  scope  of  applicability  and 
introducing  simpler  and  more  flexible  loan  rescheduling  procedures,  and  may  be 
applied to CHF-denominated loans as well.  
the  Government  consists 
The  legislative  enhancements  are  aimed  at  providing  some relief  to  low-income  borrowers 
facing temporary difficulties in repaying their loans, while also improving the mechanism so 
as to be promoted by banks and requested by eligible debtors. The main proposals by the 
Ministry of Public Finance to enhance Government Emergency Ordinance 46/2014 refer to: 
(i) rendering the rescheduling mechanism and the maturity more flexible vis-à-vis borrowers’ 
financial  capacity,  (ii)  extending  the  scope  of  eligible  debtors,  (iii)  simplifying  the 
administrative  procedures  for  loan  rescheduling,  (iv)  strengthening  borrower  protection  in 
relation  to  banks,  which  remain  bound,  during  the  rescheduling  process,  not  to  tighten 
contractual terms regarding the interest rate, the level of commissions, or fresh collateral.  
With a view to tailoring banking prudential regulations to the new financial market conditions, 
the  NBR  has  initiated  several  legislative  changes  to  facilitate  the  conversion  of  foreign 
currency-denominated loans into lei and to ensure the effective enforcement of Government 
Emergency  Ordinance  46/2014  with  the  amendments  proposed  by  the  Ministry  of  Public 
Finance.  
Summing up, we at the National Bank of Romania remain open to dialogue for clarifying the 
issue of CHF lending, finding solutions and getting involved in accordance with the legislation 
in force.  
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
