  Stephen S Poloz: Release of the Monetary Policy Report 
Opening statement by Mr Stephen S Poloz, Governor of the Bank of Canada, at the press 
conference  following  the  release  of  the  Monetary  Policy  Report,  Ottawa,  Ontario,  15  July 
2015. 
 Good morning. Senior Deputy Governor Wilkins and I are happy to be here with you again to 
answer  your  questions about  today’s  interest  rate  announcement,  and our  latest  Monetary 
Policy  Report  (MPR).  Let  me  begin  with  a  few  remarks  around  the  issues  that  were  most 
important to the Governing Council’s deliberations. 
Since our last MPR in April, global economic developments have been quite disappointing, 
and these have led to a significant downgrade of our estimate of Canadian economic growth 
for 2015. There were three factors behind this downgrade: 
First, Canadian oil producers have lowered their long-term outlook for global oil prices, and 
have cut their plans for investment spending significantly more than previously announced. 
Second,  China’s  economy  is  undergoing  a  structural  transition  to  slower,  domestic-driven 
growth, which is reducing Canadian exports of a range of other commodities. 
Third,  Canada’s  non-resource  exports  have  also  faltered  in  recent  months.  While  this  is 
partly due to the first-quarter setback in the U.S. economy, it’s still a puzzle that merits further 
study. 
Given the collapse in oil prices, and declines in some other key non-energy commodities, the 
economy  is  now  operating  on  two  distinct  growth  tracks:  the  resource  track  and  the  non-
resource track. These tracks are not independent – the cancellation of an investment in the 
oil patch will often lead to a hit in the manufacturing sector, for example. But we can do some 
rough decompositions to illustrate the situation. I draw your attention to Chart 18, on page 
19 of the MPR. There we can see the sharp drop in oil and gas output, which constitutes 10 
per  cent  of  our  economy,  and  the  slowdown  in  non-energy  commodity  production,  which 
represents a further 8 per cent. The remaining 82 per cent is seeing steady growth, although 
it has moderated slightly so far this year, due to the setback in the U.S and spillovers from 
the resource sector. 
As the non-resource track regains momentum, it is expected to become the dominant trend 
at  the  aggregate  level.  We  expected  this  to  begin  in  the  second  quarter.  But  it  did  not, 
because of the three factors I listed above. 
A major shift in a country’s terms-of-trade is one of the most complex situations an economic 
forecaster  can  face.  We  have  said  from  the  beginning  that  while  there  would  be  both 
negative  and  positive  effects  from  lower  oil  prices  on  Canada,  the  negative  effects  would 
dominate, and they would come first. The positives would be more gradual, taking the form of 
stronger consumer spending, both here and in the U.S., and increased non-resource exports, 
because of stronger U.S. spending and a lower Canadian dollar. 
These  positives  have  been  slow  to  emerge,  but  we  can  see  them  working.  Export  sub-
sectors  that  are  usually  sensitive  to  exchange  rate  movements  have  been  outperforming. 
The setback in the U.S. economy appears to have been mainly temporary, as U.S. labour 
market performance has been strong. In Canada’s non-resource sector, the labour market 
has  been  performing  well,  and  our  conversations  with  companies  indicate  rising  capacity 
constraints. This implies that increased investment and more employment gains are likely in 
the  months  ahead.  In  short,  we  expect  these  positive  trends  to  begin  to  outweigh  the 
negatives coming from the resource sector during the next few months. 
These considerations figured prominently in the Governing Council’s deliberations, because 
the state of total demand in the economy relative to our production capacity is what drives 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  our  inflation  outlook.  The  economy  has  been  operating  below  full  capacity  for  some  time, 
which is why we estimate that the underlying trend in inflation is running at around 1.5 per 
cent to 1.7 per cent. Core inflation is higher than the underlying trend, because a decline in 
the  dollar  is  raising  the  prices  of  imports.  Total  inflation  is  much  lower,  because  of  past 
declines in fuel prices. As the temporary effects dissipate, all these measures of inflation will 
converge on the underlying trend. 
The weak economic performance in the first half of this year means that Canada has more 
excess  capacity,  which  is  increasing  the  downward  pressure  on  the  underlying  trend  in 
inflation.  To  put  it  in  the  language  of  our  risk  management  framework,  the  three  factors  I 
mentioned earlier moved us out of the neutral zone, to a place where the downside risk to 
future  inflation  is  material.  This  would  imply  a  slower  return  to  full  economic  capacity  and 
sustainable 2 per cent inflation. 
At  the  same  time,  financial  stability  risks  remain  elevated.  Of  particular  note  are  the 
vulnerabilities  associated  with  household  debt  and  rising  housing  prices.  And  we  must 
acknowledge  that  today’s  action  could  exacerbate  these  vulnerabilities.  However,  as  we 
noted  in  our  Financial  System  Review,  financial  vulnerabilities  would  usually  translate  into 
full-blown risks – with attendant consequences for the economy – only if there was a trigger, 
such as a widespread and sharp decline in economic activity and employment. The terms-of-
trade  shock  we  are  experiencing,  which  has  already  translated  into  an  increase  in  excess 
capacity and downward pressure on inflation, has the potential to act as such a trigger, if left 
unaddressed. 
Accordingly, the Governing Council agreed that acting at this time was consistent both with 
the Bank’s primary mission – the pursuit of its inflation target – as well as helping to manage 
financial stability risks, even if there could be some increase in financial vulnerabilities in the 
process. 
Let  me  remind  you  that  monetary  policy  operates  with  a  long  lag  and  there  are  many 
transmission  channels  through  which  interest  rate  changes  affect  the  economy,  including 
longer-term bond yields and the exchange rate. This needs to be taken into account when 
predicting how the economy will respond to our actions, and when. It also makes it difficult to 
pin down the precise timing when Canada will reach full capacity with inflation sustainably at 
target – it could just as easily be sooner as later than projected. 
Let  me  also  remind  you  that  there  are  many  uncertain  elements  and  risks  to  our  outlook, 
which are discussed in the MPR. One additional element I could mention is the prospect of 
interest-rate liftoff in the U.S. Although we have no special insight into when this might occur, 
we have said many times that it would be welcome, for it would be consistent with a more 
positive  outlook  for  the  U.S.  economy.  Nevertheless,  because  the  Canadian  economy  is 
dealing with a large terms-of-trade shock, it is likely to be less synchronized  with the U.S. 
economy than in the past. Furthermore, we would expect any rises in global bond yields to 
be at least partly imported into Canada – with possible implications for the Canadian dollar – 
and with an uncertain net effect on our economy. 
To  conclude,  the  Canadian  economy  is  undergoing  a  significant  and  complex  adjustment, 
even while it is still trying to overcome persistent global headwinds. In the judgment of the 
Governing Council, today’s action is required to help facilitate the adjustment of the economy 
to this unusual situation. 
With that, Carolyn and I would now be happy to take your questions. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
