  Sukhdave Singh: Global financial markets and their impact on Malaysia 
Keynote address by Dr Sukhdave Singh, Deputy Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia 
(Bank  Negara  Malaysia),  at  the  Financial  Markets  Price  Outlook  Conference  2015  “Global 
Financial Markets and their Impact on Malaysia”, Kuala Lumpur, 16 June 2015. 
 As the Financial Times newspaper likes to put it: “These are financial times.” 
If anyone had doubts about that, the financial crisis in the advanced economies (AEs) was a 
reminder of how very much we do live in financial times, how large finance has become, how 
the tentacles of global finance have encircled the globe. A crisis that started in the mortgage 
market  of  a  large  nation  reverberated  around  the  world  spread  through  the  globalised 
financial and economic system. 
To understand why, imagine a landscape – a flat plain dotted with many ponds and lakes of 
water. None of them connected to each other. If anything happens in one body of water, it 
does not affect the others. That is the global financial system before globalisation. 
However, if we now dig channels between the different bodies of water so that we have a 
system of interconnected ponds and lakes, the nature of that system has changed. Now, if 
water rises in one lake, it will also flow through the channels to the other lakes and ponds. 
That  is  the  global  financial  system.  A  system  of  connected  national  financial  systems  and 
markets,  large  and  small.  Financial  liberalisation  and  advancements  in  information  and 
communications  technologies  have  connected  the  different  national  financial  systems  to 
create a global financial network through which financial resources flow around the world. In 
such a system, when there are disturbances in the small financial systems, it would merely 
be  a  ripple  in  the  global  financial  system.  But,  if  something  happens  in  a  large  financial 
system,  its  impact  would  send  shockwaves  across  the  entire  network.  If  policymakers, 
especially in the large economies, do not understand this, or underestimate its implications, it 
could lead to an overestimation of the effectiveness of national macroeconomic policies and 
underestimation of the global impact of those policies. 
The global financial system is in a state of constant evolution with key impetus coming from 
technological  advancements,  financial  innovation,  regulatory  changes,  financial  incentives 
and regulatory arbitrage. 
The globalised financial system and what it means to be a part of it 
So, let me first turn to the implications for Malaysia of being a part of the globalised financial 
system for there is no doubt that Malaysia has become more financially integrated globally. 
Malaysia’s financial integration with the world 
Based  on  data  on  Malaysia’s  International  Investment  Position,  which  is  compiled  by 
Malaysia’s  Department  of  Statistics,  outstanding  non-resident  investments  in  Malaysia 
increased by almost 4½ times between 2001 and 2014 to reach US$429 billion. That is the 
amount that non-residents have invested in Malaysia as of 2014 in the form of FDI, portfolio 
investments and other investments such as deposits, loans and trade credits by banks and 
corporates. 
But  over  the  same  period,  Malaysians  have  also  been  investing  abroad.  The  stock  of 
resident  private  sector  investments  abroad  increased  almost  nine-fold  to  US$299  billion. 
About  half  of  this  was  in  the  form  of  direct  investments  and  another  half  in  the  form  of 
portfolio and other investments. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  About 67% of the stock of foreign investments in Malaysia is in the form of portfolio and other 
investments. This reflects the high openness of Malaysia’s capital account and the significant 
deepening  of  its  financial  markets.  As  a  consequence,  foreign  interest  in  our  markets  has 
increased. Even as our equity market has grown, so has non-resident participation, keeping 
non-resident’s share fairly steady at around 24%. In the bond market, non-resident holdings 
of Malaysian Government Securities has increased steadily since 2009, and now accounts 
for a relatively stable share of about 47% of total outstanding MGS. 
Given  the  more  significant  foreign  presence  in  our  financial  markets,  the  definition  of 
Malaysia’s external debt was expanded to include foreign holding of ringgit financial assets. 
About  40%  of  Malaysia’s  redefined  external  debt  is ringgit  denominated debt  held  by  non-
residents. 
In  the  years  before  the  crisis,  there  was  also  a  relatively  strong  correlation  between  the 
performance  of  the  Malaysian  bond  and  equity  markets  and  the  international  markets, 
particularly those in the US. Since the crisis, that relationship has diminished significantly as 
the  large  amounts  of  liquidity  has  flowed  back  and  forth  between  the  emerging  market 
economies (EMEs) and the AEs. 
The benefits of global financial integration 
Financial  integration  brings  benefits  to  the  Malaysian  economy.  Being  a  part  of  the  global 
financial system facilitates trade and investment flows between Malaysia and the rest of the 
world.  It  has  allowed  foreign  investors  to  invest  in  Malaysia  with  full  confidence  that  the 
profits  from  such  investments  can  be  easily  repatriated  back  to  their  home  countries. 
Malaysian exporters and importers can freely trade with the world in full confidence that they 
could  conveniently  receive  and  make  payments  in  any  currency  they  wish  in  a  quick  and 
efficient manner. At one time, the lack of banking relationships made it necessary for BNM to 
established  bilateral  payments  arrangements  with  central  banks  in  many  other  developing 
economies  to  facilitate  payments  for  trade  between  Malaysia  and  those  economies.  The 
expansion of correspondent banking has now made such arrangements largely redundant. 
The globalisation of finance has allowed Malaysian corporates to tap global sources of funds 
to  support  their  investments  and  operations  in  other  parts  of  the  world,  hence  broadening 
their  economic  opportunities.  It  has  allowed  Malaysian  fund  managers  to  invest  in  other 
markets  to  diversify  their  investments  and  increase  the  yields  to  their  unit  holders.  It  has 
allowed foreign funds to invest in our financial markets, adding depth and liquidity to these 
markets.  It  has  allowed  foreign  financial  institutions  to  operate  in  our  markets  and  our 
financial institutions to operate in foreign markets. 
Therefore,  our  engagement  with  the  global  financial  system  brings  real  benefits  to  the 
economy. 
The risks in global financial integration 
However, along with the benefits, there are also risks from the growing financial integration. 
A  more  integrated  global  financial  system  has  a  tendency  to  amplify  financial  shocks  and 
transmit them throughout the system. 
As Alan Greenspan, the former Chairman of the US FED, once put it, “These global financial 
markets, engendered by the rapid proliferation of cross-border financial flows and products, 
have  developed  a  capability  of  transmitting  mistakes  at  a  far  faster  pace  throughout  the 
financial system in ways that were unknown a generation ago.” 1 
                                                
1  Alan  Greenspan,  Understanding  today’s  international  financial  system,  34th  Annual  Conference  on  Bank 
Structure and Competition, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, 7 May 1998. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  This  could  not  have  been  better  illustrated  then  how  the  financial  crisis  in  the  major 
economies spread to the rest of the world through the network of financial relationships. The 
consequent conflagration in the global financial markets had a significant negative impact on 
economies around the world. For EMEs, the subsequent actions of the policymakers in the 
crisis-affected  economies  have  created  additional  significant  policy  challenges  in  trying  to 
manage the cross-border contagion in the form volatility of their exchange rates and financial 
markets. 
Malaysia was not spared from this volatility. We have experienced the contagion from what 
was happening in the major economies. For example, in the aftermath of the crisis in Europe, 
when the European banks were shrinking their balance sheets and pulling back from their 
overseas lending, concerns were raised about the fact that the European banks in Malaysia 
had claims of $64 billion on Malaysians, which was equivalent to about 23% of Malaysia’s 
GDP  then.  These  concerns  focused  on  the  impact  of  a  pullback  by  European  Banks  on 
capital flows and the availability of financing to Malaysian companies. What ultimately helped 
us  to  alleviate  those  concerns  was  the  fact  that  two-thirds  of  these  claims  were  held  by 
locally  incorporated  subsidiaries  of  European  banks.  Incidences  like  this  not  only  highlight 
the fact  that  being  part  of  the  global financial  system  brings  risks  of  contagion,  but  it  also 
points  to  the fact  that  having  prudent  policies  –  in  this case,  requiring foreign  banks  to  be 
locally incorporated – can help to mitigate some of these risks. I will have more to say on risk 
mitigation a little later.  
The second way that the financial contagion can spread to the domestic economy is through 
capital flows into domestic asset markets. These create asset bubbles and if the central bank 
doesn’t intervene, the twin attraction of rising asset prices and an appreciating exchange rate 
can be an irresistible draw for foreign portfolio funds. If not well-managed, such inflows can 
create  imbalances  in  the  economy  and  financial  system,  which  will  eventually  manifest 
themselves, usually when the flows reverse. Since the start of the crisis in 2008, Malaysia 
has  experienced  three  episodes  of  large  foreign  capital  outflows.  Thankfully,  our  policy 
framework, a healthy level of foreign exchange reserves, and the robustness of our financial 
system, have enabled us to withstand such flows without significant disruption of domestic 
economic and financial activity. 
The third form of risk is through interest differentials. Very low interest rate in the AEs do not 
just attract yield-searching foreign funds to the higher yields in the emerging markets (EMs), 
they also create a very strong temptation for residents in EMs to borrow from abroad. We 
saw this type of vulnerability in this region in the period before the Asian financial crisis and 
more  recently,  in  the  Eastern  European  economies.  The  build-up  of  unhedged  foreign 
currency  debt  by  residents  can  be  a  significant  source  of  vulnerability  during  times  of 
economic and financial upheaval. 
Then there are global liquidity spillovers into domestic liquidity that put downward pressure 
on domestic interest rates. We see this most evidently with the negative interest rates of the 
ECB, which has resulted in capital flows to the neighbouring countries and pressure on their 
exchange  rates.  As  a  consequence,  interest  rates  in  neighbouring  Denmark,  Sweden  and 
Switzerland have all also become negative. Such contagious fall in interest rates can lead to 
excessive  borrowing,  a  decline  in  savings,  increases  in  asset  prices,  and  increases  in 
leverage,  which  in  turn  increase  the  risks  of  financial  imbalances  developing  and 
undermining financial stability. 
Among the EMEs, this period of low global interest rates has seen strong growth of credit in 
many economies, and while this has supported consumption and domestic demand, it has 
also led to increased household, corporate, and government indebtedness. The world today 
is even more indebted then it was before the crisis. I am sure that some of that debt went into 
productive uses, but it also the case that when something is cheap, it is used wastefully. It 
should also be obvious after the crisis, that economic growth fuelled by high credit growth is 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  essentially growth borrowed from the future; higher growth today will be at the cost of lower 
growth tomorrow. 
Lastly,  risks  can  also  emerge  from  the  current  account  of  the  balance  of  payments.  It  is 
important to understand that changes in the current account can be both the source, as well 
as an outcome, of changes in capital account. The traditional interpretation is that a country 
has a saving-investment gap that is reflected in its current account deficit, which then drives 
it to rely on foreign savings to fund that deficit. But, it is equally possible that countries can 
have large capital inflows resulting in excess domestic liquidity and low interest rates. Add to 
that  an  appreciating  exchange  rate,  and  you  have  the  key  ingredients  for  domestic 
consumption  and  investment  booms,  leading  to  higher  imports  and  driving  the  current 
account  into  a  deficit  or  a  lower  surplus.  Hence,  the  adverse  developments  in  the  current 
account can be the outcome of capital inflows. 
Before I move on, let me sum up the risks of global financial integration as I see them, for 
this is really where the challenge lies. 
As a policy maker in an EM economy, living in a globalised financial system characterised by 
a huge pool of surplus liquidity is like living next to the sea. On a day-to-day basis, the tide 
comes in, the tide goes out. You learn to live with it. Sometimes, the waves are high and you 
need to take appropriate precautions. 
The sea is bountiful and to some borrowers it may appear to offer the opportunity of a cool 
escape  from  the  searing  heat  of  higher  domestic  interest  rates.  Like  the  call  of  sirens  to 
ancient  mariners,  it  lures  residents  and  regulators  with  its  enchanting  promise  of  easy 
liquidity and growing domestic equity and bond markets. However, this vast sea also holds 
many dangers. It is affected by fierce forces that can create violent and destructive waves. 
Even  when  it  is  calm,  beneath  that  calm  surface  there  are  dangerous  currents.  To  the 
unwary,  who  wade  in  too  far,  it  can  drag  them  to  financial  ruin,  be  they  businesses, 
individuals,  or  governments.  Beneath  its  surface  are  hidden  rocks  that  can  drive  even 
successful  economies  to  the  bottom  of  the  sea.  The  challenge  for  EM  policy  makers  in  a 
globalised financial system is not that different from the one faced by a fisherman who lives 
by the sea, and that is, how to benefit from the riches offered by the sea while avoiding the 
dangers. So let me now turn to how I believe we can do that. 
Reaping the benefits and mitigating the risks 
The  question  I  would  like  to  pose  and  attempt  to  answer  is:  “What  can  EMEs  do  to 
strengthen their buffers and increase their resilience against the risks arising from integration 
with the global financial system?” 
I  am  going  to  frame  my  answers  within  three  broad  categories:  one,  in  terms  of  reducing 
external vulnerabilities, two, in terms of improving policy frameworks; and three, in terms of 
strengthening domestic economic fundamentals. 
First,  in  terms  of  external  vulnerabilities,  I  think  storms  in  the  global  sea  of  liquidity  are  a 
source  of  concern,  but  for  policy  makers  in  EMEs,  the  consequential  concern  is  how 
seaworthy is our own boat? Can it withstand a stormy sea? In my observation, capital flows 
often  tend  to  accentuate  domestic  vulnerabilities  and  that  can  create  the  greatest  risk  of 
financial instability. 
For  those  who  choose  to  borrow  from  the  international  financial  markets,  it  is  good  to 
remember that even in a world of abundance, restraint is a virtue. Like the sirens of Greek 
mythology, the international banks may go around EMEs telling them how easy it is to get 
funding. However, like the ancient mariners, governments and corporates in EMEs would do 
well not to heed those sweet-sounding siren calls. A period of low global interest rates may 
be a good time to re-finance old debt but it is never a good time to accumulate excessive 
debt. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  The  temptation  is  strong,  especially  when  the  domestic  interest  rates  are  higher.  Central 
banks and regulators need to monitor the use of external financing by their residents to avoid 
an  excessive  build-up  of  short-term  external  debt.  This  was  something  we  did  before  the 
Asian Financial Crisis and it proved to be prudent policy. At the same time, policy makers 
need  to  focus  on  reducing  domestic  economic  vulnerabilities  that  make  the  economy 
dependent on external savings. In this respect, the high savings rate in Malaysia has been a 
key factor in ensuring that we did not rely excessively on external funding. The high savings 
rate is not an accident, but rather the outcome of policies that have nurtured and protected 
such savings. 
A  related  point  is  the  need  to  be  careful  about  the  pace  of  capital  account  opening. 
Premature  liberalisation can  create  instability  in  the  domestic financial  system. It  may  also 
that financial liberalisation may not work out as anticipated, or it may create vulnerabilities 
that were not foreseen. In this case, countries must have the policy space to step back. 
So,  that  is  about  addressing  external  vulnerabilities.  Now  what  about  having  sound  and 
robust domestic policy frameworks. This is a particularly important source of resilience when 
confronted  with  a  volatile  global  environment.  The  prudent  conduct  of  monetary  policy  to 
ensure price stability and provide a supportive environment for sustainable growth is a key 
contribution of central banks. Ensuring that credit growth is not excessive and that it is not 
channelled  into  unproductive  uses  is  important  to  guard  against  future  problems  with 
excessive leverage and bad bank assets. A financial system that is burdened by a legacy of 
bad  lending  is  obviously  not  going  to  be  able  to  efficiently  perform  its  function  when  the 
economy is hit by an external shock. It is for this reason that over the past several years, 
BNM has strengthened the credit culture at our banks and non-banks, undertaken rigorous 
stress-testing  of  banks, and  introduced  various  measures to  address  vulnerabilities  arising 
from the household indebtedness. 
Fiscal policy, the other tool in the macro-policy toolkit, also needs to be conducted prudently 
and  this  is  to  ensure  that  there  is  fiscal  policy  space  to  respond  to  shocks.  Prudent  fiscal 
policy can be a significant force is supporting growth in the face of adversity. 
Another key determinant of policy effectiveness is whether policy makers have enough policy 
instruments to address the challenges that they are facing. With respect to risks related to 
financial globalisation, I will just mention three points. 
• 
Foreign  exchange  reserves.  Reserves  are  an  important  policy  buffer  for 
economies that are becoming globally financially integrated. Ideally, such reserves 
should  be  accumulated  from  more  permanent  inflows  such  as  current  account 
surpluses, FDI and remittances by residents working abroad create. Reserves built 
from short-term portfolio flows and external borrowings may be less resilient. 
Exchange rate. For EMEs, a floating exchange rate is probably optimal. Combined 
with  adequate  foreign  exchange  reserves,  a  floating  exchange  rate  broadens  the 
policy  options  when  confronted  with  capital  flows.  The  current  volatility  in  the 
exchange rates of EMEs is in many cases unwarranted, but a fixed exchange rate 
under such circumstances would not be sustainable. 
Capital  flow  management  measures  (CFMs).  My  view  is  that  CFMs  are  like 
quantitative easing (QE). They are not your standard policy instruments like QE is 
not  conventional  monetary  policy,  but  it  is  good  to  have  both  of  these  policy 
instruments  in  your  policy  toolkit  should  you  have  need  for  them  in  a  difficult 
situation.  While  the  IMF  has  hesitantly  moved  its  institutional  stance  towards 
supporting CFMs, many others in the AEs have not. For instance, it is often the case 
that trade agreements with the AEs still insist on significantly limiting the amount of 
policy  space  available  to  EMEs  to  undertake  measures  to  manage  capital  flows. 
This is even after the post-crisis experience of significant spillovers to EMEs from 
the  policies  pursued  by  the  AEs.  However,  within  this  region,  there  has  been  a 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  convergence  of  views.  Following  the  joint  meeting  of  the  ASEAN+3  Finance 
Ministers  and  Central  Bank  Governors  in  May  this  year,  a  press  statement  was 
released on their common position with respect to both macroprudential measures 
and  capital  flow  management  measures.  I  quote:  “…deepening  global  financial 
integration  …require  MPPs  and  CFMs  that  counter  increases  in  financial  stability 
risks from changes in macroeconomic policies in countries with major currencies.” 
Beyond  the  resilience  of  policy  frameworks,  my  third  and  final  point  has  to  do  with  the 
resilience  of  domestic  fundamentals.  Firstly,  having  a  diversified,  flexible  and  competitive 
economy is a key strength in dealing with instability from the external sector, whether it is in 
the real economy or in the financial system. 
Secondly, having a strong and resilient financial system is an important source of strength 
against vulnerabilities rising from living in an integrated world. In the period after the onset of 
the  financial  crisis  in  the  AEs,  many  Asian  economies  have  been  able  to  sustain  growth 
because their financial systems were healthy and were able to finance and support domestic 
economic activity even as growth in the AEs disappeared. 
A deeper and more diversified financial system can also help to intermediate capital inflows 
in a less distortionary manner. In the post-crisis period, we have been pleased that the depth 
of  the  financial  markets  in  Malaysia  and  the  presence  of  large  institutional  players  have 
contributed  to  stability  in  the  domestic  financial  markets,  even  in  the  face  of  significant 
volatility in foreign portfolio flows. 
However, when it comes to the size of financial markets, there are a couple of caveats that I 
wish to add. 
First,  a  larger  and  deeper  financial  system  may  attract  increased  capital  flows,  and 
consequently,  lead  to  increased  volatility  of  the  exchange  rate.  Such  volatility  can  be 
mitigated if the foreign exchange markets are also deep enough to absorb the variations in 
the  demand  and  supply  of  foreign  exchange.  Exchange  rate  flexibility  is  necessary  and 
having a healthy level of foreign exchange rate reserves is also helpful in times when there is 
significant volatility of capital flows. During the Asian Financial Crisis of 1997–98, net portfolio 
outflows were RM31 billion. During the 2008–09 financial crisis in the AEs, we experienced 
almost three times that much outflows without any significant disruption of domestic financial 
intermediation. 
The second caveat has to do with the question of whether a financial system can become too 
big whereby it becomes a drag on the economy. Based on research at the BIS and the IMF, 
this may indeed be the case. In July 2012, Stephen Cecchetti and Enisse Kharroubi of the 
BIS published a paper, where based on a study of 50 advanced and emerging countries from 
1980–2009, they found that beyond a certain point, further growth of the financial system can 
actually  reduce  real  growth  by  reducing  productivity  growth.  Furthermore,  a  fast  growing 
financial  sector  can  also  drag  down  productivity  growth  by  pulling  away  scarce  resources 
from the rest of the economy. 
In  the  words  of  the  authors:  “This  evidence,  together  with  recent  experience  during  the 
financial  crisis,  leads  us  to  conclude  that  there  is  a  pressing  need  to  reassess  the 
relationship  of  finance  and  real  growth  in  modern  economic  systems.  More  finance  is 
definitely not always better.” 
Last  month,  the  IMF  released  a  paper  that  essentially  reaches  the  same  conclusions.  It 
identifies Ireland, Japan and the US as countries that have “too much finance” for their own 
good. 
In Malaysia, the Financial Sector Blueprint clearly recognises the role of the financial system 
in serving the real economy. The economy is not subservient to the needs of the financial 
sector. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  that 
the  regional  economies  could  be  affected  by  global 
Regional cooperation 
The final thing I wish to mention with respect to reaping the benefits and mitigating the risks 
of financial globalisation is regional cooperation. 
During  the  Asian  Financial  Crisis,  we  found  out  that  contagion  can  occur  when  our 
neighbours experience difficulties, even if our financial systems are not closely linked. More 
recently,  the  European  countries,  even  those  that  are  not  in  the  euro  area,  have  found 
themselves  in  a  similar  position.  The  key  factor  is  whether  a  country’s  financial  system  is 
linked  to  the  global  financial  system.  Herding  behaviour  and  generalisation  among 
international investors and lenders will make the crisis in one country transcend borders and 
also affect neighbouring countries. 
The  possibility 
financial 
developments,  as  well  as  financial  developments  in  countries  within  the  region,  creates  a 
strong  inventive  for  cooperation  to  create  mechanisms  that  would  pre-empt  such  adverse 
developments, and if they do occur, to limit their impact on the regional economies. 
You would have heard about the resource pooling under the CMIM as well as the regional 
swap  arrangements. These  arrangements  exist.  They  have  existed for a  number  of  years. 
But too be truly effective, we need to be looking deeply at global developments and how they 
can potentially impact the region, and more importantly, vulnerabilities within the region that 
could  have  cross-border  effects.  This  requires  having  a  regional  surveillance  mechanism, 
and the ASEAN+3 policymakers have set up the ASEAN+3 Macroeconomic Research Office 
(AMRO) in Singapore to do exactly that. 
Would the regional mechanisms be better than the international mechanisms? It remains to 
be seen. We are still building these mechanisms, which provide us the opportunity to ensure 
that the bricks we put in place today will contribute to strong structures that would be able to 
withstand the demands placed on them in the future. In this respect, I wish to mention two 
points. 
First,  we  have  to  ensure  that  whatever  regional  institutions  we  set  up  must  have  strong 
governance. It would be unfortunate if after criticising the governance of existing international 
organisations we then end up replicating similar governance structures in the institutions that 
we set up in Asia. 
Second, regional policymakers are still trying to trying to make the cultural change whereby 
we  are  comfortable  with  both  hearing  about  potential  vulnerabilities  in  our  economies  and 
being comfortable in expressing concerns about vulnerabilities that may exist in our regional 
neighbours. That is a cultural change but it is a necessary change if regional surveillance and 
defence mechanisms are to be truly effective. 
Of course, it is must be remembered that, regional or international, such mechanisms are a 
supplement and not a replacement for national resilience. 
What the future holds? 
The state of the global economic and financial system 
It is indeed the case that after almost seven years of ups and downs, there continues to be 
plenty of uncertainty. Therefore, let me just say that we have been going through very stormy 
weather for the last seven years, and now we see some of the dark clouds parting and the 
sun shining through. Does it mean the storm is over? I cannot say. It is still the case that 
reading a financial newspaper on Friday can sometimes give a different picture of the global 
economy from what was reported on Monday. Many macroeconomic statistics continue to be 
volatile or show weak trends. On the other hand, many financial statistics, while also being 
volatile, have shown very strong trends. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  After seven years of very aggressive monetary policy, we continue to face a world of weak 
growth. There has been much discussion of the new normal. Policymakers have expressed 
concern about the low level of productivity. There are questions about whether these are new 
trends or trends that existed even before the crisis but were glossed over by policies aimed 
at  sustaining  consumption  and  growth.  Structural  weaknesses  in  economies  are  regularly 
discussed, but less regularly addressed. 
But  despite  this  uncertainty,  I  will  briefly  mention  two  trends  with  respect  to  the  global 
economy and financial markets that are relevant in terms of their impact on Malaysia. 
First, there is better growth in the AEs but the growth remains weak and uneven. The U.S. 
economy  is  showing  the  strongest  signs  of  sustained  economic  growth,  The  EMEs  are 
continuing to experience growth but that growth is now slower. 
Second,  the  monetary  policies  of  the  AEs  remain  very  easy  and  are  not  likely  to  change 
significantly in the near term. This condition of sustained low interest rate continues to spur 
investors to frantically search for a few extra basis points in yields, undertaking larger and 
larger  risks. This  has fuelled  the  upward  momentum  of global financial  markets  and  asset 
prices,  which  have  risen  to  historical  levels.  Many  market  participants  know  that  they  are 
indulging in very risky behaviour, but feel that “As long as the music is playing, you’ve got to 
get  up  and  dance”  as  one  financier  famously  put  it.  But  they  are  nervous  and  this 
nervousness  is  causing them  to  react to  short-term  developments  and  any  sign  that could 
signal  that  the  music  is  about  to  stop.  Note  for  example,  the  obsession  of  the  financial 
markets  with  when  the  Fed  is  going  to  increase  its  interest  rate  by  a  quarter  percentage 
point! Frankly, I do not think any one of the QE central banks is thinking of putting down its 
fiddle  just  yet.  But  the  anticipation  is  certainly  creating  instability  and  over-reaction  in  the 
global financial markets, with EM currencies experiencing a high level of volatility. It is also 
not inconceivable that having run out of profitable opportunities in other parts of the markets, 
portfolio funds are now making currencies the next game in town. 
Implications for Malaysian economy and financial system 
These  global  developments  obviously  have  implications  for  Malaysia.  First,  the  volatility  in 
the global financial markets will continue to wash on to our shores and create a challenging 
environment for both policymakers and participants in our financial markets. Such volatility 
does have an economic cost. Second, the fact that for the first time all the major economies 
are  showing  positive  growth  will  provide  support  to  growth  of  the  Malaysian  economy. 
However,  until  global  growth  can  become  self-reinforcing,  the  weak  nature  of  external 
demand will remain a challenge. 
The significant contribution of domestic demand to growth in the face of the adverse external 
environment  over  the  past  several  years  is  a  tribute  to  the  resilience  of  our  economy  and 
financial system. It is an outcome of not only the policies that were implemented during these 
years but also in the years before. 
The  adverse  global  environment  since  the  onset  of  the  crisis  in  the  AEs  has  reduced  the 
contribution of the external sector to growth. Since 2007, the contribution of net exports to 
real GDP growth has been negative with the sole exception of 2014. This is in large part the 
outcome  of  the  weak  global  growth  which  has  reduced  global  demand  for  our  exports, 
combined  with  strong  domestic  demand that  has  increased  imports. Over  the  longer term, 
the  contribution  of  the  external  sector  will  need  to  expand  to  support  a  healthy  and 
sustainable economy. 
With  respect  to  this,  we  need  to  continue  focusing  on  strengthening  our  economic 
relationships with other countries. The ASEAN Economic Community is one opportunity for 
us  to  do  so.  The  Trans-Pacific  Partnership  Agreement  that  is  current  being  negotiated  by 
12 countries, including Malaysia, is another. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Conclusion 
In conclusion, it seems to me that Malaysia will over time become even more integrated with 
the  global  economy  and  financial  system.  This  is  necessary  if  Malaysia  is  to  grow  and 
prosper. We need global markets and we need foreign investment. So far, we have done a 
credible  job  of  ensuring  that  the  Malaysian  economy  and  financial  system  evolves  in 
response to domestic, regional and global developments. But, as I have sought to highlight in 
my  speech,  globalisation,  particularly  financial  globalisation,  also  brings  difficult  challenges 
and risks. And those challenges are not likely to go away. Therefore, maintaining our focus 
on  ensuring  the  resilience  and  competitiveness  of  our  economy  and  financial  system  will 
serve us well as we sail the stormy global seas. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
