  Emmanuel Tumusiime-Mutebile: The effect of regulation on financial 
inclusion 
Remarks  by  Mr  Emmanuel  Tumusiime-Mutebile,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Uganda,  at  the 
National Microfinance Conference 2015 “Financial Inclusion in a Regulated Environment in 
the East African Community”, Kampala, 29 January 2015. 
 Good morning, ladies and gentlemen, 
My  intention  this  morning  is  to  outline  the  regulatory  approach  which  we  have  adopted  in 
Uganda with regard to the promotion of financial inclusion and then to discuss the results of 
that approach. I will start by expounding the principles which guide the regulatory approach. 
The  key  principle  which  guides  our  regulatory  approach  to  the  promotion  of  financial 
inclusion is that financial regulations cannot force financial institutions to provide customers 
with  financial  services  when  this  is  not  profitable  for  them  to  do  so.  The  main  cause  of 
financial exclusion is the difficulty in serving the financially excluded in a commercially viable 
manner.  These  difficulties  arise  because  the  costs  of  serving  the  financially  excluded  are 
high, especially in rural areas, whereas the income which can be generated from the poor is 
low.  Consequently  financial  exclusion  can  only  be  reduced  through  innovations  which  can 
lower  the  cost  of  providing  financial  services  or  which  can  create  new  financial  services 
which are both wanted by and affordable to the poor. 
In a market economy, the institutions best placed to generate these innovations are in the 
private sector; institutions which have the incentives and expertise to do so. The rapid growth 
of mobile banking in East Africa is a phenomenon which has been driven by private sector 
initiatives.  Private  sector  banks  and  telecommunications  companies,  driven  by  the  profit 
motive,  have  utilised  new  technologies  to  create  new  markets  and  have  thus  brought 
financial services to millions of people who previously had no access to these services. 
In  these  circumstances,  what  is  the  appropriate  role  of  financial  regulation?  The  primary 
objective of financial regulation is prudential; it is to protect the savings of ordinary citizens 
from reckless or abusive management of financial institutions, and to preserve the stability of 
the  financial  system.  To  the  extent  that  ordinary  citizens  have  greater  confidence  in  the 
safety  of  their  deposits  in  financial  institutions,  prudential  regulation  can  contribute  to  the 
deepening of the financial system. 
Inevitably,  however,  there  are  often  tradeoffs  to  be  considered  when  innovations  are 
proposed by the private sector which have the potential to promote financial inclusion. The 
approach  which  we  have  adopted  in  Uganda  is  to  avoid  placing  regulatory  restrictions  on 
innovations  in  the  financial  sector  provided  that  these  innovations  do  not  conflict  with  the 
primary objectives of prudential regulation. In some cases, this has meant that innovations 
have had to be designed to incorporate safeguards to protect the public’s savings, as is the 
case  with  mobile  banking,  which  I  will  discuss  later.  In  other  cases,  such  as  with  small 
informal  financial  institutions,  we  have  to  recognise  that  it  is  not  practically  possible  to 
provide effective prudential regulation. 
I  would  like  now  to  highlight  four  innovations  in  the  Ugandan  financial  markets  which  are 
relevant for financial inclusion and explain the regulatory approach that we have adopted to 
them. 
Deposit taking microfinance institutions 
The first innovation I want to discuss is the establishment of microfinance institutions (MFIs), 
which  began  in  Uganda  in  the  1990s.  Initially  these  were  not-for-profit  institutions  which 
relied  mainly  on  donor  funding  and  did  not  take  deposits.  At  around  the  turn  of  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  millennium, Uganda, along with many other countries, took the view that at least some of the 
MFIs should be allowed to accept deposits, both because their customers would benefit from 
access  to  deposit  facilities  and  because  MFIs  could  grow  more  rapidly  and  be  more 
sustainable if they could mobilise deposits. Therefore, specific legislation was introduced in 
2003 to allow MFIs to take deposits. To provide safeguards for the deposits, the legislation 
imposed  prudential  regulations  on  Microfinance  Deposit  Taking  Institutions  (MDIs)  and 
brought  them  under  the  regulatory  aegis  of  the  Bank  of  Uganda.  However  the  prudential 
regulations  were  specifically  designed  to  take  account  of  the  fact  that  MDIs  are  generally 
much smaller than commercial banks and have a very different business model. For example 
the minimum start up capital requirement for a deposit taking microfinance institution is much 
lower than that of a bank. For an MDI the minimum capital is Shs 500 million, whereas for a 
commercial bank it is Shs 25 billion. In 2010, the coverage of the Deposit Protection Fund 
was extended to include the deposits of MDIs. 
 It  is  fair  to  say  that  the  growth  of  the  MDIs  has  not  been  as  rapid  as  originally  hoped. 
Although the number of deposit accounts with MDIs has increased five fold since 2006, as 
shown in table 1, it is still small in comparison with the number of deposits accounts held in 
commercial banks; commercial banks held more than five times as many deposit accounts 
as MDIs in 2014. As such MDIs have only made a relatively modest contribution to reducing 
financial exclusion over the past decade. It appears that the business model of MDIs, which 
involves  a  high  volume  of  small  loans  and  deposits,  has  not  always  been  successful  in 
Uganda,  possibly  because  the  operating  costs  have  been  too  high.  Several  of  the  MDIs 
which were licensed in the 2000s have since been converted into commercial banks. 
Mobile banking 
Mobile  banking  was  first  introduced  in  Uganda  in  2009.  The  business  model  involves  a 
partnership between a mobile phone operator and a commercial bank. The services offered 
have so far been restricted to basic retail payments and money storage services; money can 
be transferred from one customer to another and it can also be stored in a customer’s virtual 
account. 
The main regulatory  concern  of the  BOU  has  been  to safeguard  customers’  virtual money 
which  they  purchase,  with  cash,  from  mobile  money  agents.  The  BOU  has  only  allowed 
mobile  money  operations  when  this  is  done  in  partnership  with  a  supervised  commercial 
bank.  Mobile  money  operators  have  to  hold,  in  an  escrow  account  in  their  partner 
commercial bank, the equivalent in value of all the mobile money that they have sold to their 
customers.  This  means  that  the  mobile  phone  operators,  which  are  not  licensed  financial 
institutions, cannot themselves intermediate the funds that they have mobilised through the 
sale  of  mobile  money.  Customers  who  purchase  mobile  money  have  a  similar  level  of 
protection as that which is afforded to depositors in a commercial bank. The BOU has also 
issued mobile money guidelines in 2013. The guidelines stipulate an approval process for all 
agents  who  wish  to  engage  in  the  provision  of  mobile  money  services  and  the  roles  and 
responsibilities  of  all  parties  involved.  They  also  stipulate  the  safeguards  to  protect 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  customers,  such  as  the  requirement  that  customers’  PIN  numbers  must  be  used  to 
authenticate all transactions. 
As can be seen in table 2, the growth in mobile banking has been phenomenal. The number 
of  registered  mobile  money  customers  exceeds  half  of  the  total  population  of  Uganda, 
although  this  number  may  include  some  people  who  are  registered  with  more  than  one 
operator.  In  terms  of  extending  access  to  financial  services,  mobile  banking  has  made  a 
much larger contribution than any other recent innovation. The regular FINSCOPE surveys 
reveal that the share of the population with access to formal financial services increased from 
28  percent  in  2009  to  54  percent  in  2014  and  that  almost  all  of  this  increase  was  due  to 
access  to  mobile  banking.  However,  although  the  growth  of  mobile  banking  amongst  the 
previously  financially  excluded  has  been  impressive,  we  should  also  bear  in  mind  that  the 
range of financial services available through mobile banking is very narrow; as I have already 
noted it is restricted to basic payment transactions and storage of money.  
 Agent banking 
Although the  number  of  deposit  accounts  held  in  commercial  banks  in Uganda  has grown 
rapidly, tripling since 2005, commercial banks only serve 20 percent of the adult population, 
according  the  2013  FINSCOPE  survey.  The  provision  of  banking  services  involves 
substantial  fixed  costs,  which  is  an  obstacle  to  expanding  services  to  the  unbanked, 
especially in rural areas. As such, an expansion of banking services requires new business 
models which can deliver services at much lower costs. 
One such model is agent banking. Agents are normally people with small businesses, who 
are  contracted  by  the  banks  to  undertake  transactions  on  their  behalf,  such  as  collecting 
deposits, facilitating customer withdrawals and making payments, for a fee. The advantage 
for the bank is that it can avoid the heavy expenses involved in setting up a bank branch. 
Agent banking is restricted under the existing banking laws, hence  we  are currently in the 
process of amending the Financial Institutions Act to permit the use of authorised agents by 
banks, with safeguards for bank customers. 
Savings and Credit Cooperatives 
There are currently approximately 2,000 savings and credit cooperatives in Uganda. These 
are mutual associations whose members make deposits in, and can access loans from, their 
SACCO.  Although  there  are  a  handful  of  quite  large  SACCOs,  whose  members  comprise 
employees  of  large  organisations,  the  vast  majority  are  very  small.  SACCOs  undoubtedly 
play an important role in extending financial services to the unbanked. The 2013 FINSCOPE 
survey  revealed  that  622,000  adults,  about  four  percent  of  the  adult  population,  held 
accounts  in  SACCOs  in  2013,  a  fivefold  increase  since  2009.  Although  SACCOs  are 
registered with a public agency – the Registrar of Cooperatives – they are not subject to any 
prudential regulation, and hence there are no safeguards for members’ savings. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  The  dilemma  for  regulatory  policy  is  that  effective  prudential  regulation  of  a  very  large 
number of small, informal financial institutions, such as the SACCOs, is not feasible. It is far 
too  costly  for  any  regulator  to  supervise  effectively  any  more  than  a  tiny  fraction  of  the 
existing  SACCOs.  Consequently  the  approach  we  have  adopted  at  the  BOU  is  to  try  and 
encourage  some  of  the  larger  SACCOs,  which  have  hundreds  or  even  thousands  of 
members, to graduate to the status of Microfinance Deposit Taking Institutions (MDIs), and 
thus become subject to the MDI Act. To facilitate this, the MDI Act is being amended to make 
it  more  compatible  with  the  organisational  structure  of  SACCOs,  for  example,  by  allowing 
institutions which are not limited liability companies to be licensed as MDIs. The remaining 
SACCOs may eventually be brought under the umbrella of an apex body, but it will clearly 
not  be  possible  for  this  body  to  provide  the  same  degree  of  regulatory  safeguards  to  the 
savings held in SACCOs as that afforded to deposits in banks and MDIs. 
Conclusion 
Uganda has made some progress towards greater financial inclusion over the last 10 years. 
The  most  important  contribution  has  been  made  by  the  rapid  spread  of  mobile  banking, 
although  the  range  of  services  offered  is  still  quite  narrow.  However,  commercial  banks 
should be able to harness new technologies, especially through the use of smart phones, to 
provide a wider range of services through mobile banking in the future. We also hope that the 
graduation of some of the larger SACCOs into Microfinance Deposit Taking Institutions and 
the  adoption  of  agent  banking  by  the  commercial  banks  will  also  boost  financial  inclusion. 
The  priority  objective  of  financial  regulation  will  continue  to  be  ensuring  the  safety  of 
customers’ deposits. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
