  R Gandhi: Differentiated banks – design challenges 
Text  of  the  Sri  V  Narayanan  Memorial  Lecture  by  Mr  R  Gandhi,  Deputy  Governor  of  the 
Reserve Bank of India, at Sastra University, Kumbakonam, 18 April 2015. 
 Assistance provided by Ms Sara Rajendra Kumar is gratefully acknowledged. 
1. 
In a dynamic growth-oriented economy, the financial sector needs to keep pace with 
the  demands  of  the  real  sector.  It  is  crucial  that  the  financial  system  is  flexible  and 
competitive to cope with multiple objectives and demands made on it by various constituents 
of the economy. The financial sector comes of age when it has diverse institutions, catering 
to  different  segments,  ranging  from  retail  to  wholesale,  micro-finance  to  project  finance, 
nurturing specific sectors and offering specialised services and tailor-made products to niche 
segments. 
2. 
In  India,  banking  industry  is  the  most  important  channel  which  provides  financial 
services. One of the key objectives of bank nationalization in 1969 and 1980 was to spread 
the  banking  habit  through  opening  branches  in  hitherto  un-banked  areas.  The  post 
nationalisation  decades  witnessed  rapid  spread  of  bank  branches  in  hitherto  un-banked 
areas and banking has since increased in scale and complexity. 
3. 
Over the years Reserve Bank has completely liberalised and has put it at the banks’ 
end the decision about their geographical expansion and coverage; banks are effectively free 
to decide how many branches and other channel outlets they should open, when and where 
these touch points should be located, etc. Consequently, as on 31st March 2014, there were 
1,16,415  branches  of  scheduled  commercial  banks,  19,082  branches  of  the  RRBs,  and 
9,526  branches  of  UCBs.  As  on  31st  March  2013,  there  were  also  93,488  PACS  in  the 
country. Further, there were 3,98,408 Banking Correspondent touch-points as on 31st March 
2014. 
Financial inclusion 
4. 
Though the reach and scope of banking has thus increased, the huge demand for 
financial services remains unsatiated. It is a matter of concern that even with 150 domestic 
commercial banks [comprising 26 Public Sector Banks, 20 Private Sector Banks, 44 Foreign 
Banks,  4  Local  Area  Banks  (LABs),  56  RRBs]  and  over  2,700  co-operative  sector  banks 
operating  in  the  country,  just  about  40  per  cent  of  the  adults  have  formal  bank  accounts. 
Reserve Bank is aware of this aspect and is committed to financial inclusion and is exploring 
various  possibilities  to  foster  inclusion  of  the  unserved  and  under-served  population  and 
areas  and  facilitate  provision  of  affordable  financial  services  by  increasing  competition 
among  the  banks  and  encourage  innovative  approaches  (including  channels,  products, 
interface, etc.). 
The Government of India and the Reserve Bank are clear that financial inclusion is a 
5. 
massive  requirement  and  therefore  all  financial  sector  participants  will  have  to  put  in 
consistent  efforts  in  that  direction.  The  Reserve  Bank  created  a  conducive  and  enabling 
environment for access to financial services to extend door step banking facilities in all the 
unbanked villages in a phase-wise manner. During Phase I, 74,414 unbanked villages with 
population more than 2,000 were identified and allotted to various banks through SLBCs for 
coverage through various modes, that is, branches, BCs or other modes such as ATMs and 
satellite branches, etc. All these unbanked villages have been covered by opening banking 
outlets comprising 2,493 branches, 69,589 BCs and 2,332 through other modes. 
6. 
In Phase II, under the roadmap for provision of banking outlets in unbanked villages 
with population less than 2,000, about 4,90,000 unbanked villages have been identified and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  allotted  to  banks  for  coverage  in  a  time  bound  manner  by  March  31,  2016.  As  per  the 
progress  reports  received  from  SLBCs,  banks  had  opened  banking  outlets  in  1,83,993 
unbanked  villages  by  March  2014,  comprising  7,761  branches,  163,187  BCs  and  13,045 
through  other  modes.  The  Reserve  Bank  is  closely  monitoring  the  progress  made  by  the 
banks under the roadmap. 
7. 
The  Reserve  Bank  has  encouraged  banks  to  adopt  a  structured  and  planned 
approach to financial inclusion (FI) with commitment at the highest levels through preparation 
of board approved financial inclusion plans (FIPs). The first phase of FIPs was implemented 
over 2010–13. The Reserve Bank has used FIPs to gauge the performance of banks under 
their FI initiatives. With the completion of the first phase, a large banking network has been 
created and a large number of bank accounts have also been opened. However, it has been 
observed  that  the  accounts  opened  and  the  banking  infrastructure  created  has  not  seen 
substantial  operations  in  terms  of  transactions.  In  order  to  continue  with  the  process  of 
ensuring  meaningful  access  to  banking  services  to  the  excluded,  banks  were  advised  to 
draw up fresh three-year FIPs for 2013–16. Banks were also advised that the FIPs prepared 
by  them  are  disaggregated  and  percolate  down  to  the  branch  level  so  as  to  ensure  the 
involvement of all the stakeholders in FI efforts and also to ensure uniformity in the reporting 
structure  under  FIPs.  The  focus  under  the  new  plan  is  now  more  on  the  volume  of 
transactions in the large number of accounts opened. A brief of the performance of banks 
under FIP up to March 31, 2014 is: 
i) 
The  number  of  banking  outlets  has  gone  up  to  nearly  3,84,000.  Out  of  these, 
1,15,350 banking outlets were opened during 2013–14. 
Nearly  5,300  rural  branches  were  opened  during  2013–14.  Out  of  these,  nearly 
4,600 branches were opened in unbanked rural centres (Tier V and Tier VI centres). 
Nearly 33,500 BC outlets were opened in urban locations during 2013–14 taking the 
total number of BC outlets in urban locations to 60,730 as at the end of March 2014. 
More  than  60  million  basic  savings  bank  deposit  accounts  (BSBDAs)  were  added 
during the 2013–14 taking the total number of BSBDAs to 243 million. 
With the addition of 6.2 million small farm sector credits during 2013–14, there are 
40 million such accounts as on March 31, 2014. 
With the addition of 3.8 million small non-farm sector credits during 2013–14, there 
are 7.4 million such accounts as on March 31, 2014. 
Nearly 328 million transactions were carried out in BC-ICT accounts during 2013–14 
as compared to 250 million transactions during 2012–13. 
8. 
As  you  all  know,  greater  impetus  to  the  Financial  Inclusion  plans  has  since  been 
received through the Prime Minister’s Jan Dhan Yojana. Under this programme, in a short 
span  of  seven  and  a  half  months,  a  world  record  breaking  achievement  in  the  form  of 
opening  JDY  Accounts  for  14.71  crore  persons  as  at  end  March  2015  has  been 
accomplished. 
vii) 
iv) 
vi) 
iii) 
v) 
ii) 
Need for more banks & differentiated banks 
9. 
While  thus  the  Financial  Inclusion  efforts  through  the  existing  set  of  banks  have 
been  continued,  the  Reserve  Bank  is  conscious  of  the  position  that  these  may  not  be 
adequate to speed up the process and achieve the goals early. A Govt of India’s High Level 
Committee on Financial Sector Reforms headed by Dr Raghuram Rajan submitted in 2008 
its  Report  titled  “A  Hundred  Small  Steps”.  Among  its  various  recommendations,  the 
Committee recommended that there is a need for paradigm shift in the strategy for financial 
inclusion.  It  said  the  emphasis  should  be  shifted  from  large-bank-led,  public-sector-
dominated,  mandate-ridden,  branch-expansion-focussed  strategy.  It  said  the  poor  need 
efficiency, innovation, and value for money which can come from motivated financiers who 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  have low cost structure and thus see poor as profitable, but who also have the capacity to 
make decisions quickly, and with minimum paperwork. It therefore recommended that entry 
to private, well-governed, deposit-taking small finance banks be allowed. 
10. 
The available options for the Reserve Bank to facilitate expansion of banking in the 
country are through private sector banks and foreign banks. The policy for approving foreign 
bank  applications  to  open  maiden  branch  and  further  expand  their  branch  presence  has 
been  liberalized  in  2005.  However,  for  well  documented  reasons,  we  have  been  very 
cautious of allowing unrestricted and unbridled growth of foreign banks in India through their 
branch  banking  mode.  Hence,  after  a  long  process  of  consultation  since  2005,  finally  in 
November 2013, we came out with our policy for allowing the foreign banks through Wholly 
Owned Subsidiary (WOS) model. The scheme is yet to take off, though two foreign banks 
have since approached us formally in this regard. 
11. 
The licensing policy for the private sector banks has been to grant universal bank 
licences  as  a  “stop  and  go”  licensing  system.  In  the  above  background,  in  2010,  Reserve 
Bank brought out a Discussion Paper for licensing of new banks in the private sector, which 
was  followed  by  draft  guidelines  and  the  issue  of  final  guidelines  in  February  2013  and 
culminated in issuing of banking licences to two applicants. It may be recalled that the last 
two rounds of licensing took place way back in 1993 and 2004. We have since granted in 
principle approval for two new private sector universal banks. We have also expressed our 
intention to make the universal bank licences available “on tap”. 
12. 
The concept of differentiated banks was first discussed in 2007 when it was felt that 
the  time  was  not  yet  opportune  for  such  banks.  Thereafter,  the  concept  was  once  again 
discussed in a Paper “Banking Structure in India – The Way Forward”, brought out by the 
Reserve  Bank  in  August  2013.  The  Paper  looked  into  various  aspects  of  the  banking 
structure,  licensing  of  banks,  banking  models  and  suggested  a  transition  path  for  some 
banks. 
13. 
Another initiative taken by the Reserve Bank was setting up of a Committee headed 
by Shri Nachiket Mor, on Comprehensive Financial Services for Small Businesses and Low-
Income  Households  to  look  into  the  issues  relating  to  financial  inclusion.  The  committee 
came  up  with  two  broad  designs  for  the  banking  system  in  the  country  –  the  Horizontally 
Differentiated  Banking  System  (HDBS)  and  the  Vertically  Differentiated  Banking  System 
(VDBS) based on the functional building blocks of payments, deposits and credit. 
14. 
In  a  HDBS  design,  the  basic  design  element  remains  a  full-service  bank  that 
combines  all  three  building  blocks  of  payments,  deposits,  and  credit  but  is  differentiated 
primarily on the dimension of size or geography or sectoral focus. In a VDBS design, the full-
service  bank  is replaced  by  banks that  specialise  in  one  or  more  of  the  building  blocks of 
payments,  deposits,  and  credit.  Among  others,  the  Committee  suggested  licensing  of 
Payments Bank and wholesale banks as differentiated banks. 
15. 
The Nachiket Mor committee opined that in the Indian context it would be important 
to  have  the  regulatory  flexibility  to  approach  payments,  savings,  and  credit  independently 
(the Vertically Differentiated Banking Design) and to bring them together when the efficiency 
gains  are  high  and  the  other  costs  are  low.  Some  of  the  examples  of  such  niche  and 
specialised institutions are the South Korean Post Office Bank (only payments and deposits), 
GE Capital (credit and payments), MasterCard and Visa (only payments). 
What are differentiated banks 
16. 
Differentiated  banks  are  distinct  from  universal  banks  as  they  function  in  a  niche 
segment. The differentiation could be on account of capital requirement, scope of activities or 
area  of  operations.  As  such,  they  offer  a  limited  range  of  services  /  products  or  function 
under a different regulatory dispensation. The concept is not entirely new. In fact, and in a 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  sense,  the  UCBs,  the  PACS,  the  RRBs  and  LABs  could  be  considered  as  differentiated 
banks as they operate in localized areas. 
17. 
Some  countries,  for  example,  USA,  Australia,  Singapore,  Hong  Kong,  Brazil,  and 
Indonesia,  have  a  differentiated  bank  licensing  regime  where  differentiated  licenses  are 
issued specifically outlining the activities that the licensed entity can undertake. It is observed 
that the criterion for differentiation for the purposes of issuing differentiated licenses could be 
anchored either to capital conditions, as is practiced in Indonesia or to the activity as is the 
case in Australia, Singapore and Hong Kong. 
18. 
In our country too, diverse opportunities in the banking sector reflecting significant 
macro-economic  growth  potential  could  be  utilized  by  niche  banking  by  facilitating 
specialization  thereby  enhancing  optimal  use  of  resources.  Each  of  the  niches  has  the 
potential to be individually large to sustain significant balance sheets and specialized entities 
can play a major role in all of them. Currently, while the banking sector is evolving depending 
on  the  needs  of  the  economy,  it  is  felt  that  given  a  choice,  some  banks  and  non-bank 
financial  companies  may  choose  to  operate  as  a  specialized  niche  bank  to  derive  the 
obvious  advantages  of  lower  absolute  capital  requirements,  lower  cost  of  funds  and 
specialization. As a regulator, the Reserve Bank felt that an enabling environment should be 
provided  for  niche  banks  also  to  operate  and  leverage  upon  them  to  contribute  to  the 
objective of financial inclusion. 
The advantages of differentiated banks 
19. There are several advantages of having differentiated banks. They are as follows: 
• 
There  are  diverse  opportunities  in  the  banking  and  financial  landscape  reflecting 
significant  macro-economic  growth  potential  in  India  and  differentiated  licensing 
could  enable  unlocking  potential  of  these  opportunities  as  it  encourages  niche 
banking  by  facilitating  specialisation  thereby  reducing  potential  non-optimal  use of 
resources. 
Very  large  ticket,  long  term  infrastructure  lending  requires  risk  management 
expertise that goes beyond traditional credit appraisals at banks. There is significant 
space  for  specialized  entities  in  risk  assessment  and  structuring  of  infrastructure 
finance. 
Very  low  ticket  unsecured  credit requires risk management methodology  and  cost 
control that is not easy in the business model of conventional banks. 
Increase in competition among banks could lower costs of transactions. 
Gaps in SME finance can be filled with asset and cash flow based lending, operating 
leases, and factoring. 
Issues  of  conflict  of  interest  when  a  bank  performs  multiple  functions  would  not 
arise, where differentiated licenses are issued. 
Risk  management  systems  and  structure  for  regulatory  compliance  could  be 
customized according to the banking type. 
Customized  application  of  supervisory  resources  according  to  the  banking  type 
could result in greater optimization of such scarce resources. 
Core  competency  could  be  better  harnessed  leading  to  enhanced  productivity  in 
terms of reduced intermediation cost, better price discovery and improved allocative 
efficiency. 
       4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  The policy on differentiated banks 
20. 
After  a  careful  analysis  of  the  advantages  of  and  the  challenges  from  licensing 
differentiated banks, we came to the conclusion that in balance, the advantages outweigh the 
challenges,  and  the  challenges  can  be  effectively  met  with  appropriate  arrangements.  As 
mentioned  by  the  HLCFSR,  the  environment  is  conducive  for  experimentation  with  small 
banks.  The  Reserve  Bank  has,  accordingly,  decided  to  licence  differentiated  banks  and 
guidelines on licensing of small banks and payments banks have been issued in November 
2014. 
Objectives 
21. 
The objectives of licensing small finance banks are furthering financial inclusion by 
(a) provision of savings vehicles, and (b) supply of credit to small business units; small and 
marginal farmers; micro and small industries; and other unorganised sector entities, through 
high technology-low cost operations. We hope to achieve the stated objectives by stipulating 
target segments where the credit should be directed and by indicating the ticket size of the 
advances to ensure that the target segment is serviced. 
22. 
The objectives of setting up of payments banks are to further financial inclusion by 
providing (i) small savings accounts and (ii) payments / remittance services to migrant labour 
workforce, low income households, small businesses, other unorganised sector entities and 
other  users. We  hope  to  achieve  the  stated  objectives  by  specifying  the  services  that  the 
payments bank could undertake and by indicating the manner in which the funds need to be 
deployed. 
Promoters 
23. 
The  Small  Finance  Banks  can  be  promoted  by  individuals  who  have  at  least  10 
years of experience / expertise in financial or banking field or by private sector companies or 
societies with good track record. Existing MFIs, NBFCs or LABs can opt for conversion. The 
promoters will have to be resident Indians or owned and controlled by resident Indians. They 
will  have  to  conform  to  stringent  ‘fit  and  proper’  criteria.  The  promoter’s  minimum  initial 
contribution to the paid-up equity capital of such small finance bank shall at least be 40 per 
cent  and  gradually  brought  down  to  26  per  cent  within  12  years  from  the  date  of 
commencement of business of the bank. 
24. 
The promoters of Payments Banks can be individuals who have at least 10 years of 
experience  /  expertise  in  financial  or  banking  field  or  by  telecom  companies,  PPI  issuers, 
private sector companies or societies, super-market chains with good track record. Existing 
PPIs can opt for conversion. The promoters will have to be resident Indians or owned and 
controlled by resident Indians. They will have to conform to stringent ‘fit and proper’ criteria. 
There  can  be  strategic  partnership  with  other  banks.  The  promoters  can  retain  100% 
ownership. 
Responsibilities and permissible activities 
25. 
The Small Finance Banks will be small sized universal banks. They have to finance 
priority  sector  to  the  extent  of  75%  of  their  NDTL;  while  40%  should  be  as  per  standard 
priority sector norms, the other 35% can be in any of the priority sector. 50% of their credit 
portfolio will have to be of ticket size of less than ₹25 lakh. 
26. 
The Payments Banks can undertake payment and deposit services only. They can 
accept deposits from a customer up to ₹1 lakh only. They will have no credit portfolio. They 
should invest 75% of their NDTL only in Government securities. They will not be subject to 
priority sector norms. They can perform Banking Correspondent functions to other banks. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  Area of operation 
27. 
Both the Small Finance Banks and the Payments Banks can operate all over India. 
Challenges of designing the differentiated banking structure 
28. 
Given  our  objective  of  furthering  financial  inclusion,  it  was  relatively  easy  to 
determine  what  type  of differentiated  banks that  can  subserve  this  objective.  It  was  amply 
clear  that  the  Small  Finance  Banks  and  Payments  Banks  are  such  entities.  However, 
designing  their  structures  was  not  that  easy.  We  encountered  several  competing  options, 
dilemmas  and  confusion.  We  resolved  these  through  internal  deliberations  and  external 
consultations. The feedback to our draft guidelines were also valuable in resolving some of 
these issues. Let me explain certain key challenges and how did we resolve them. 
Safety of the banking system 
29. 
The real challenge before the regulator would be maintaining systemic stability and 
protecting  the  interests  of  the  depositors.  Many  niche-banking  models  typically  depend  on 
inter-bank  liquidity,  and  wholesale  funding  which  is  a  potential  source  of  risk  and 
vulnerability. Therefore, we decided that at least to begin with, the niche-banking should not 
be exposed to such liquidity risk. That is why we decided to design Small Finance Bank and 
Payments Bank which will not have such liquidity risk. 
30. 
While  encouraging  the  presence  of  different  kinds  of  banks,  the  regulator  has  to 
ensure  that  risk  management  is  robust  as  niche  banks  are  susceptible  to  risks  such  as 
concentration risk which needs to be mitigated through adequate capital requirements and 
other  suitable  regulatory  measures  such  as  appropriate  exposure  norms  and  limits  on 
leverage.  This  approach  guided  us  in  letting  Small  Finance  Banks  operate  across  the 
country,  rather than  limited  to  a  narrow  geography;  in  prescribing  ₹100  crore  as  capital  to 
ensure a decent size of balance sheet; in limiting exposures to single and group borrowers of 
Small  Finance  Banks  to  10%  and  15%  of  their  net  worth  respectively;  and  in  prescribing 
CRAR at 15% for the Small Finance Banks. Likewise, these risk management considerations 
determined in prescribing that Payments Banks cannot extend loans and advances and not 
less than 75% of their assets to be in Government securities only. 
Managing public perception 
31. 
Another challenge is to build trust in the minds of depositors and public in general. 
Considering that in India we have been only licensing universal banks which engage in all 
types  of  financial  activities,  it  may  be  a  challenge  to  manage  the  public  perception  and 
provide  enough  confidence  to  the  public  to  enable  them to  place  deposits  in  differentiated 
banks.  There  will  be  a  need  for  creation  of  awareness  through  proper  communication 
strategy and depositor education. We are conscious of this need. 
Legal provisions for licensing of differentiated banks 
Section 22 of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 provides that a company intending 
32. 
to carry on banking business must obtain a licence from RBI except such of the banks (public 
sector  banks  and  RRBs),  which  are  established  under  specific  enactments.  Every  bank  in 
India, i.e., domestic and foreign, apart from banking business, can carry out all the activities 
permitted under Section 6 of the Banking Regulation Act. However, the Act also provides for 
Reserve  Bank  specifying  the  terms  and  conditions  and  other  requirements,  along  with  the 
licences. We have to employ these provisions for licensing of differentiated banks. 
Viability of the models 
33. 
and a downturn in a particular sector or region can jeopardize the operations of a bank. 
Concentration  risk:  The  differentiated  banks  will  be  fraught  with  concentration  risk 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  34. 
Asset  Liability  mismatches:  Sector-specific  banks  run  the  risk  of  asset-liability 
mismatches. Asset liability mismatches will be posing a challenge to liquidity management by 
differentiated  banks.  It  is  therefore,  imperative  to  have  specific  asset-liability  management 
(ALM) tools for such banks. 
35. 
Absence  of  cross  subsidization:  Universal  banks  function  by  engaging  in  cross-
subsidizing loss making business in one segment with earnings from another which will not 
be possible for specialized banks thereby, impacting their revenues. The localized operations 
or restriction on the banks to engage in a particular activity could lead to non-availability of 
cross-subsidization impacting the viability of such models. 
36. 
Avenues  for  income  generation:  Providing  avenues  for  income  generation  for  the 
differentiated banks is a challenge. To begin with, other fee-based business like distribution 
of  insurance  and  mutual  fund  products,  credit  card  business,  remittances,  payment  and 
settlement business, etc. could be permitted to augment the revenue streams. 
37. 
These  model  related  issues  we  have  addressed  through  prescribing  single  and 
group borrower limits and higher CRAR for Small Finance Banks, high quality liquid assets 
for the  Payments  Banks,  cost  minimization  through technology  and  letting them  undertake 
agency functions to augment revenue. 
Ownership of differentiated banks and corporate governance issues 
38. 
The question of what kind of promoters should be allowed access to banking system 
is also relevant in the context of the high standards of corporate governance needed for the 
banking industry. There are existing non-bank financial sector entities, micro finance entities, 
Local Area Banks and Urban Cooperative Banks who would like to convert themselves into 
Small Finance Banks; telecom companies who would like to set up and Pre-Paid Instrument 
Issuers  (PPI)  who  would  like  to  convert  themselves  into  Payments  Banks.  Real  sector 
companies, societies, partnership firms, industrial and business houses, and even individuals 
would be interested in obtaining a banking license. Thus the choice is innumerous. 
39. 
Critical factors to the selection are the promoters’ credentials, experience and track 
record. We  recognized  that the  aspirations  of  NBFCs,  MFIs,  LABs  and UCBs  are genuine 
and  hence  provided  for  their  conversion,  except  that  of  UCBs.  UCBs  we  are  awaiting 
enabling  statutory  amendments.  As  regards  individuals,  we  prescribed  10  years  of 
experience in banking and finance as a precondition. In the case of real sector companies 
and societies, we prescribed track record of five years. 
40. 
Since there are separate guidelines for foreign ownership of banks, we prescribed 
that  the  promoters  of  these  Small  Finance  Banks  and  Payments  Banks  will  have  to  be 
resident individuals or resident owned and controlled entities. 
Further, in India we have pursued a policy of diversified ownership in private sector 
41. 
banks to prevent self-dealing by promoters and to enable the management to run the banks 
professionally.  However,  for  a  new  bank  to  take  sound  roots,  a  determined  and  well-
endowed promoter is an absolute requirement. We balanced these two conflicting ideas, in 
the case of Small Finance Banks by prescribing higher minimum locked in promoter’s stake 
in the initial five years and a gradual divestment thereof over a period of 12 years. Since in 
the Payments Banks case there is no conflict of interest as they are prohibited from lending 
activities, there are no such limitations on higher promoter’s holdings. 
Challenges to regulation and supervision 
42. 
Providing a level playing field in development obligations: Introducing differentiated 
banks would take away the level playing field which is now available to all banks uniformly 
where the banks are required to contribute to the priority sector obligations and other welfare 
measures of the Government. Implementing such obligations would become difficult through 
differentiated banks. Therefore, to ensure participation of these banks in the developmental 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  needs  of  the  economy,  appropriate  modifications  may  have  to  be  set  keeping  in  view  the 
nature of the business model. 
43. 
Accordingly, for Small Finance Banks we prescribed a higher level of Priority Sector 
Lending requirement at 75%, as the very purpose is financial inclusion. For Payments Banks, 
as they will not have lending activities, we have ensured their participation in development by 
prescribing 75% investment in Government securities. 
Elimination of regulatory arbitrage 
44. 
As  universal  banks  are  permitted  to  do  all  or  any  of  the  activities  mentioned  in 
Section 6 of Banking Regulation Act, 1949, regulating the universal banks is easier for the 
regulator as the regulations could be principle based and common to these banks. However, 
once  the  differentiated  banks  are  licenced,  there  would  be  a  need  for  having  a  different 
regulatory and supervisory approach specific for such banks depending on the specialization. 
It also needs to be ensured that there is no scope for regulatory arbitrage across different 
types of banks. 
Multiple regulations and complexity in regulations 
45. 
Also,  there  may  be  a  need  for  more  types  of  regulations  for  differentiated  banks 
because  of  the  different  products  lines,  service  offerings,  clientele,  areas  and  modus 
operandi of doing business. Multiple regulations need to work in tandem to ensure effective 
regulation. Further, there would be increase in complexity due to various types of banks and 
the  different  regulations  applicable  to  each  type  of  specialized  category  of  banks.  The 
regulatory  and  supervisory  resources  would  have  to  be  reoriented  to  ensure  that  effective 
regulatory and supervisory oversight is put in place. 
Resolution regime for banks 
46. 
More  number  of  banks  may  mean  more  number  of  failures.  It  is  a  big  risk  in 
licensing of differentiated banks. However, as noted by the HLCFSR, failure of a few small 
banks  may  not  have  systemic  consequence.  Further,  the  Resolution  regime  is  being 
strengthened. 
Conclusion 
47. 
There  is  enormous  unmet  potential  demand  lying  in  the  rural  areas  and  other 
unbanked  centres  which  needs  to  be  tapped.  To  tap  this  unmet  demand  for  financial 
services,  it  is  felt  that  it  is  worth  experimenting  on  new  types  of  institutions  for  financial 
inclusion.  However,  in  a  country  like  India  where  there  exists  differentiated  markets  and 
consumer groups, the concept may have to be contextualized according to the needs of the 
customers. As regards the health of the differentiated banks, there is a need for creating a 
balance between long term sustainability and the financial inclusion goals. We in the Reserve 
Bank believe we have carefully crafted suitable policy guidelines for the Small Finance Banks 
and Payments Banks keeping this balance in perspective. We have received 72 applications 
for the Small Finance Banks and 41 applications for the Payments Banks. We are processing 
them and hope to issue licences to the fit and proper applicants in a few months’ time. We 
hope that these new entities will speed up our financial inclusion efforts in a big way. 
48. 
Thank you. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
