  
 
Vítor Constâncio: Understanding inflation dynamics and monetary policy 
Panel remarks by Mr Vítor Constâncio, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, at the 
Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Kansas  City  Economic  Symposium,  Jackson  Hole,  Wyoming, 
29 August 2015. 
 The accompanying charts (plus slides) can also be found on the European Central Bank’s website. 
I  would  like  to  thank  the  ECB  staff  members  that  have  done  the  econometric  work  for  this  intervention,  in 
particular, Matteo Ciccarelli, Chiara Osbat, Elena Bobeica, Carlos Montes-Galdon and Marco Groß. 
Summary 
At  the  2015  Jackson  Hole  Economic  Policy  Symposium,  ECB  Vice-President  Vítor 
Constâncio  discusses  main  challenges  in  understanding  inflation  dynamics.  He  reviews 
recent developments in euro area inflation and related implications for monetary policy. 
Understanding inflation dynamics has become particularly important in present times, in view 
of  the  prolonged  low  inflation  phase.  The  traditional  relationship  between  slack  in  the 
economy  and  inflation  seems  to  have  weakened  significantly  in  some  countries.  This 
requires a careful examination since that relationship – the Phillips curve – is the traditional 
cornerstone of the transmission mechanism giving central banks control of inflation. Inflation 
dynamics  since  the  Great  Recession  have  shown  signs  of  instability  that  have  led  to  a 
sequence of systematic forecast errors. The two puzzles of “missing disinflation” in 2009–11 
followed by “excessive disinflation” after 2012 triggered a surge of new research around the 
Phillips curve and its possible demise. 
After reviewing a number of unsettled issues pertaining to the Phillips curve in the economic 
literature,  such  as  those  related  to  the  measurement  of  economic  slack  and  inflation 
expectations, the discussion note argues that the two puzzles can be explained, and that the 
Philips curve for the euro area is alive and well. This is comforting since the opposite result 
would raise serious questions about the central bank’s capacity to control inflation. 
The current phase of low inflation is significantly driven by negative demand shocks at the 
global and domestic level, besides commodity price developments. This is certainly the case 
for  the  euro  area  where  the  low  inflation  can  largely  be  explained  by  domestic  demand 
weakness, possibly leading to a larger degree of economic slack than indicated by the usual 
methods.  The  link  between  inflation  and  real  economic  activity  appears  however  to  have 
strengthened in the euro area as of late (steepening of the Phillips curve). We should thus be 
able to bring the inflation rate closer to target in the medium term, provided that our policies 
are successful in significantly reducing the economic slack. 
Outline 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
Introduction 
Prolonged low inflation: puzzles and forecasting errors 
Drivers of low inflation in the euro area: domestic or external? 
The Phillips curve as a vehicle to discuss inflation dynamics: 
Measuring the economic slack, the slope and its stability; 
Are  hybrid  New  Keynesian  Phillips  curves  useful  in  understanding  inflation 
dynamics? 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
 7. 
8. 
inflation 
the  coefficients  of 
Stability  of 
inflation 
expectations and external prices. Limitations of the Phillips curve and the need to 
use several different models. 
Lessons  for  monetary  policy:  the  use  of  models  and  judgement  to  understand, 
forecast  and  design  policies  to  influence  medium-term  inflation.  Achieving  the 
inflation target in the euro area. 
inertia,  economic  activity, 
 Introduction 
It  is  a  great  pleasure  to  participate  in  this  policy  panel  with  such  distinguished  fellow 
participants. In my remarks today I will discuss the general difficulties in dealing with inflation 
dynamics,  but  I  will  concentrate  on  the  recent  developments  in  euro  area  inflation  and 
discuss their implications for monetary policy. 
Understanding  inflation  dynamics  has  become  particularly  important  in  view  of  the 
low inflation regime now prevailing and because the traditional relationship between slack in 
the economy and inflation seems to have weakened significantly in some countries. 
Figure 1 
  
If confirmed, the flattening of the Phillips curve would be relevant for monetary policy 
because that relationship was the traditional linchpin of the transmission mechanism 
that  gave  central  banks  control  of  inflation.  The  subsequent  focus  on  the  role  of 
expectations  and  their  management  in  the  toolkit  of  monetary  policy  reduced  but  did  not 
eliminate  the  relevance  of  that  traditional  mechanism.  In  2006  both  the  International 
Monetary Fund (IMF) and the Federal Reserve started to highlight a decade-long decline in 
the  slope  of  the  Phillips  curve,  i.e.  the  coefficient  of  economic  slack  (IMF  (2006),  Iakova 
(2007) and Roberts (2006)). This decline has been challenged by Gordon (2007 and 2013) 
as being too dependent on the Phillips curve specification, being particularly associated with 
variants  of  the  New  Keynesian  Phillips  curve  (NKPC),  but  not  verified  by  Gordon’s  own 
“triangle model”. Coibion and Gorodnichenko (2015) show that evidence of slope decline is 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  mixed for the United States. Stock and Watson (2010) say that “there are some hints that the 
slope parameter might be smaller at low levels  of inflation but these hints are not robustly 
confirmed by statistical tests”. Stella and Stock (2012) even find signs of a steepening of the 
Phillips curve for the United States. 
More  important,  however,  was  the  emergence,  after  the  Great  Recession,  of  a  twin 
puzzle: first, missing disinflation in 2009–11, and second, excessive disinflation after 
2012, particularly in Europe. During the Great Recession (the recession that followed the 
financial crisis), inflation in advanced countries did not fall as much as a traditional Phillips 
curve  and  past  experiences  would  have  predicted,  given  the  severity  and  length  of  the 
recession (Williams (2010) and Ball and  Mazumder (2011)). Just as puzzling, more recent 
global developments point in the opposite direction, since, in spite of the ongoing recovery, 
headline inflation rates in advanced (and a few emerging market) economies remain below 
target. Clearly, one reason for the low inflation rates is the recent large decline in oil prices. 
But core or underlying rates of inflation have also been below average almost everywhere. 
The seemingly weakened relationship between inflation and economic slack in the cases of 
the two puzzles seemed to have disposed of the Phillips curve. We will see why that is not 
true after all. 
Ex-post, we are not in the dark: If we exploit all available information we can recover 
the dynamics of inflation after the fact fairly well, and rationalise inflation developments 
after the financial crisis. For the euro area we can identify two distinct periods of disinflation 
in the case of HICP excluding energy and food: the first from 2008 to 2010 and the second 
starting in 2012. The analysis is based on a Bayesian VAR1 which includes HICP excluding 
energy  and  food,  real  activity  indicators  (real  GDP,  the  unemployment  rate  and  real 
investment), external variables (NEER, non-energy commodity prices, oil price in US dollars 
and foreign demand) and financial variables (short-term interest rates lending rates and real 
loans to non-financial corporations). 
Figure 2 
                                                
1  The methodology is similar to Jarociński and Smets (2008), “House prices and the Stance of Monetary Policy”, 
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review, July/August, 90(4), pp. 339–65. 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  Each  inflation  dip  had  different  origins:  the  first  was  mainly  due  to  external  factors  (falling 
energy  and  food  prices),  while  the  second  was  driven  more  by  domestic  sources  in  an 
environment of weak demand. 
There is a vast body of literature on the first puzzle of the “missing disinflation”, which 
offers  a  variety  of  explanations:  the  increased  anchoring  of  expectations  by  a  credible 
monetary  policy  (Bernanke  (2010)  and  IMF  (2013));  the  continued  decline  of  the 
responsiveness to economic slack (IMF (2013)); the increased downward wage rigidities in a 
recession  that  bend  the  wage  Phillips  curve  (Daly  and  Hobijn  (2014));  the  higher  forward-
looking expectations of marginal costs in a dynamic stochastic general equilibrium (DSGE) 
model  (Del  Negro, Giannoni  and  Schorfheide  (2015));  a  fall  in  total factor  productivity  and 
increased costs of working capital (Christiano, Eichenbaum and Trabandt (2014)); a regime 
switch in the slope explained by sticky prices and sticky information (Murphy (2014)); or the 
role of higher mark-ups of liquidity-constrained firms (Gilchrist, Schoenle, Sim, and Zakrajsek 
(2015)).  Others  pointed  to  important  measurement  issues  and  suggested  e.g.  using  short-
term  unemployment  to  measure  slack  (Gordon  (2013),  Krueger  et  al.  (2014)  and  Ball  and 
Mazumder  (2014))  or  household  expectations  from  surveys  to  relevantly  measure  inflation 
expectations (Coibion and Gorodnichenko (2015)). 
Most of these approaches, besides solving the puzzle a posteriori, also provide new methods 
that  promise  to  improve  future  inflation  forecasting,  even  in  the  context  of  reduced-form 
Phillips  curves.  The  use  of  short-term  unemployment2  or  household  inflation  expectations 
that are closer to those of economic agents, are two examples of promising developments. It 
is  also  helpful  to  introduce  time-varying  coefficients  or  regime-switching  estimates,  to 
account for many possible sources of non-linearity in the Phillips curve. 
For headline inflation, external supply shocks, for example in commodity prices, have played 
a significant role but the two highlighted puzzles also apply to core inflation. Very importantly, 
the trend for a weaker relationship with economic slack applies also to core inflation. Most of 
the papers I have cited use the consumer price index (CPI) without energy and food or the 
GDP  deflator  as  inflation  variables.  Only  a  few  also  use  headline  inflation.  Core  inflation 
reflects  mostly  domestic  factors,  as  indirect  effects from  external  developments  are muted 
and  take  time  to  operate.  That  is  why  I  consider  it  more  useful  to  focus  on  core  inflation 
dynamics for the purpose of discussing their consequences for monetary policy. 
Despite a few dissenters, the majority view in these papers is favourable to the idea 
that the slope of economic slack has declined. There are several possible explanations: 
The increased anchoring of inflation expectations makes inflation less sensitive to economic 
activity. 
Higher  import  volumes  as  a  result  of  increased  globalization  have  also  increased  the 
importance of international prices relative to domestic prices, forcing domestic mark-ups to 
be less sensitive to the state of the domestic economy. 
Also  as  a  result  of  globalization,  inflation  across  countries  displays  an  important  common 
factor that explains a substantial part of the national inflation variation. Ciccarelli and Mojon 
(2010)  and  Ferroni  and  Mojon  (2014)  show  that  the  commonality  of  inflation  goes  beyond 
what can be captured by commodity prices. They also report that the global inflation factor 
would improve forecasts of domestic inflation in different specifications, from augmenting an 
AR  (1)  model  to  using  it  in  Phillips  curves  or  BVARs.  Further,  they  demonstrate  that  the 
importance of the common factor does not depend on spillovers among countries but is more 
                                                
2  See in particular Ball and Mazumder (2014), who use a parsimonious Phillips curve for core US inflation, with 
only long-term inflation expectations (reduced in practice to a constant) and short-term unemployment. They 
get a good fit for 2000-14 and even for a long period that starts as early as 1985 (the beginning of the Great 
Moderation). 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  the  result  of common  shocks  and  convergence  of monetary  policy  frameworks  around  the 
world. Confirming these results, Medel, Pedersen and Pincheira (2014), using a sample of 31 
OECD countries, report that the global inflation factor improves the inflation forecast for 50% 
of  the  countries  in  the  case  of  headline  inflation  and  for  40%  in  that  of  core  inflation. 
Nevertheless, the improvements in the forecasts mentioned in these papers are contained, 
producing a 5% to 6% reduction in the root mean squared errors. 
The fourth type of explanation relates to possible non-linearities in the relationship between 
inflation  and  real  activity.  More  precisely,  the  coefficient  of  the  real  activity  measure  in  a 
Phillips  curve  may  depend  on  the  size  and  duration  of  economic  slack,  on  the  level  and 
volatility of inflation, and on the degree of anchoring of inflation expectations. Specifically: 
Clark, Laxton and Rose (1996) and Macklem (1997) point to the role of capacity constraints: 
during  recessions,  when  firms  operate  below  their  full  capacity,  if  demand  is  successfully 
stimulated, firms will be able to produce more without incentives to raise prices. During boom 
times, when firms operate closer to full capacity, additional demand translates into stronger 
price  increases.  Thus,  the  slope  of  the  Phillips  curve  is  an  increasing  function  of  excess 
demand. 
Ball, Mankiw and Romer (1988) and Ball and Mankiw (1994) discuss convexity of the Phillips 
curve in the context of adjustment/menu costs. Ball, Mankiw and Romer (1988) show that in 
a  new-Keynesian  framework  the  frequency  of  price  changes  increases  when  the  average 
rate of inflation increases, because firms must adjust their prices more frequently to keep up 
with the general rise in prices. As a consequence, the slope of the Phillips curve increases 
with the level of inflation. 
Stiglitz (1986), Fisher (1989) and Akerlof, Dickens and Perry (1996) developed models with 
downward  wage  and  price  rigidities.  These  models  embed  the  fact  that  workers  are  more 
reluctant to accept a decrease in their wages than an increase. At times of excess supply, 
the slope of the Phillips curve becomes an increasing function of the level of inflation. 
The theories that imply convexity rationalise relatively stronger expansionary monetary policy 
action  during  times  of  recession  (as  price  pressures  induced  by  expansionary  policy  are 
expected to be smaller during recessions). 
The consequences for monetary policy of the weakening of the link between the level 
of  economic  activity  and  inflation,  if  this  weakening  indeed  happened,  would  be 
significant. First, it has consequences on the sacrifice ratio: if inflation increases as a result 
of shocks not related to domestic slack, then the cost of bringing inflation down in terms of 
output loss would increase sharply. Second, if instead inflation becomes very low, monetary 
policy  would  have  to  stimulate  economic  activity  more  strongly  and  could  lack  effective 
instruments to do so. In sum, a flatter slope of the Phillips curve makes controlling inflation 
either  more  costly  or  more  difficult.  Naturally,  when  that flattening  is  associated  with  more 
strongly anchored expectations, the difficulties are mitigated. 
What  this  underlines  is  the  need  to  carefully  monitor  the  relative  importance  of  different 
drivers  of  domestic  inflation:  inertia,  expectations,  economic  slack,  supply  shocks  and 
external variables. Several methods and models are necessary for the task, as policy makers 
cannot rely on the perspective provided by a single tool. 
Nevertheless,  the  fact  remains  that  forecasters  were  not  able  to  anticipate  the 
disinflation for the euro area as a whole from 2012, or for the larger member countries. 
This is particularly surprising because forecasters did take into account the fall in economic 
activity  in  most  euro  area  countries  after  2011,  which  generated  significant  gaps  between 
actual  and  potential  output.  The  ECB  has  not  been  alone  in  over-predicting  euro  area 
inflation. The IMF, ECB Survey of Professional Forecasters (SPF), Consensus Economics, 
Euro  Zone  Barometer,  OECD  and  European  Commission  have  also  systematically  over-
predicted both headline and core inflation at all horizons, especially since the second quarter 
of 2012. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
 Figure 3 
  However, as policy makers we need more than just good inflation forecasts: we also 
need to understand the inflation process in order to better assess the role of monetary 
policy. We also need to be able to explain our reasoning to the public, as the management 
of expectations has become such an important monetary policy instrument. This is one more 
reason for continuing to use the Phillips curve as a tool to discuss inflation dynamics. 
The current attention to the relationship between inflation and economic slack has led 
to an intense debate on the stability of the Phillips curve and its power to explain the 
twin puzzle. Empirical research, especially in the United States, shows that the slope of the 
Phillips curve has varied over time, with a clear tendency to flatten over the years. 
For the euro area, the evidence from several recent papers points to a steepening in 
recent years (see e.g. Oinonen and Paloviita (2014), Riggi and Venditti (2015) and Foroni 
and  Porqueddu  (2015)).  This  development  is  especially  marked  in  those  countries  which 
experienced deeper and longer recessions and made greater efforts to reform their product 
and  labour  markets,  with  an  impact  on  nominal  rigidities  (see,  for  Italy,  Riggi  and  Santoro 
(2015)  and,  to  a  lesser  extent,  for  Spain,  Banco  de  España  (2013  and  2015).  When 
analysing the excessive disinflation in the euro area since 2012, natural questions arise as to 
whether we are facing a new regime of low inflation (e.g. due to demographics, integration of 
low-cost  countries  in  global  trade,  less  powerful  trade  unions,  dominance  of  a  service 
economy), and whether the Phillips curve (and “which” Phillips curve) is still an appropriate 
framework of analysis. 
A number of technical issues pertaining to the Phillips curve have not yet been settled 
in the literature. 
A  key  problem  in  this  debate  is  that  single-equation  estimates  of  the  Phillips  curve 
might  not  correctly  identify  its  slope,  as  inflation  and  economic  slack  are  determined 
simultaneously. 
Moreover,  economic  slack  is  a  multidimensional  concept  that  is  not  directly 
observable and choices must be made on how to estimate or measure it. 
An  additional  problem  is  that  inflation  is  also  influenced  by  foreign  shocks,  either 
directly  via  imported  inflation  or  indirectly  via  global  economic  slack,  as  a  consequence  of 
international integration of production. How do we account for such external shocks? 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
Further, the standard hybrid New Keynesian Phillips curve includes agents’ inflation 
expectations,  which  are  also  difficult  to  measure.  Recent  work  by  Coibion  and 
Gorodnichenko  (2015)  uses  expectations  from  surveys,  with  some  practical  success.  It 
highlights that the choice of the measure of inflation expectations is crucial in understanding 
inflation dynamics in the United States, advocating the use of surveys of household inflation 
expectations  rather  than  those  of  professional  forecasters.  Naturally,  expectations  from 
surveys  or  professional  forecasters  are  not  microfounded.  More  generally,  NKPC  has  had 
many  problems  to  predict  inflation  even  when  embedded  in  a  DSGE  model.  As  King  and 
Watson (2012) highlight when using the labour income share or unit labour costs the models 
do  not  capture  that  the  last  15  years  do  not  show  a  co-movement  of  inflation  with  the 
significant decline of those ULCs. Gürkaynak, Kisacikoglu and Rossi (2013) also illustrate the 
subpar  performance  of  DSGE  models  to  forecast  inflation.  In  their  encompassing  survey 
Mavroeidis,  Plagborg-Møller,  and  J.  Stock  (2014),  also  conclude  that  without  rejecting  the 
NKPC, “we are unable to pin down the role of expectations in the inflation process sufficiently 
accurately for the results to be useful for policy analysis”. 
Finally  there  is  the  question  of  stability  of  Phillips  curve  parameters,  in  the  form  of 
non-linearities  or  structural  changes.  As  sudden  decreases  in  forecasting  ability  are 
frequently associated with instability, a plausible explanation for the recent inflation surprises 
is  a  change  in  the  slope  of  the  Phillips  curve.  In  what  follows  I  am  going  to  show  some 
robustness analysis of the Phillips curve. Let us focus on slack. 
Economic slack is the great unknown: it is unobservable and is highly sensitive to the 
assumptions  used  for  the  decomposition  of  economic  activity  into  trend  and  cycle. 
Usual  measures  of  slack  can  vary  substantially  across  methods  and  variable  inclusion, 
although they tend to agree on the timing of peaks and troughs. 
The  fact  that  economic  activity  is  multidimensional  suggests  that  there  might  be 
advantages in using large dynamic models to estimate it. For instance, ECB staff used a 
dynamic factor model that performs a trend/cycle decomposition of real activity variables and 
core inflation3 The model uses a single factor to capture common cyclical fluctuations and 
estimates  the  output  gap  as  the  deviation  of  output  from  its  trend.  Different  modelling 
assumptions, such as different sets of real activity indicators and different specifications of 
the trend components of the variables, lead to different estimates of the output gap. These 
differences are economically very relevant, with some models estimating an output gap that 
was  close  to  zero  in  2014  on  average,  and  others  estimating  remaining  slack  of  as  
much as –6%. 
One way to discriminate among different estimates of the output gap is to check their 
ability to forecast inflation. It turns out that the variants associated with a continuation of a 
positive growth trend, implying a wider output gap, are the ones that produce better inflation 
forecasts. The best variant from this perspective implies that the output gap was as large as 
–6% in 2014 (see the left-hand chart of Figure 4). Assuming the opposite, namely a break in 
the  output  trend,  which  we  could  call  a  secular-stagnation  hypothesis,  leads  to  a  much 
poorer  forecast  ability  of  recent  inflation.  The  output  gap  estimated  by  the  IMF  and  the 
European  Commission  are  halfway  between  the  extremes  arising  from  the  dynamic  factor 
model I have described (see right-hand chart of Figure 4). 
                                                
3  Jarocinski M. and Lenza, M., “Inflation forecasts in a Bayesian dynamic factor model of the euro area”, ECB 
Working Paper forthcoming. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
 Figure 4 
 Taking into account uncertainty over how to measure slack and inflation expectations, 
the Phillips curve is alive and well in the euro area (in some form). The dynamic factor 
model just discussed is not the only one that can explain the recent excessive disinflation. 
ECB  staff  have  conducted  a  specification  search  with  a  hybrid  NKPC  using  different 
measures  of  slack  and  of  inflation  expectations,  and  also  including  import  prices  as  a 
measure of external shocks. 
 Figure 5 
Several specifications are indeed able to track the recent disinflation. The results are 
shown  in  Figure  5,  where  each  grey  line  is  the  conditional  out-of-sample  projection  of 
inflation excluding energy and food, based on its own lag, lagged import prices, a measure of 
slack  (lagged)  and  a  measure  of  inflation  expectations.  The  projection  is  based  on  the 
realized values of the explanatory variables except for lagged inflation, which is determined 
 8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  dynamically.  While  indeed  many  models  pointed  to  inflation  increasing  faster  than  it  did, 
some are able to track the disinflation quite well. These models tend to be those that use the 
unemployment rate (or gap) and a short to medium-term measure of inflation expectations. 
The result holds also for conditional forecasts that start earlier, through the financial 
crisis and since the first recovery. In fact, the best specifications of the same hybrid NKPC 
were evaluated by looking at out-of-sample dynamic projections of inflation over the period 
up to end-2014 based on two different estimation samples, one ending in 2007 and the other 
in 2009. Figure 6 shows that the results are satisfactory for both exercises. 
Figure 6 
 However,  as I  have  already  hinted, the  coefficients  of the  Phillips  curve  may  not  be 
stable. As I mentioned above, the slope of the Phillips curve might have increased over the 
period  when  we  were  over-predicting  inflation.  Running  the  same  specifications  just 
described  over  two  samples,  one  stopping  at  2012  Q1  (when  we  started  to  systematically 
over-predict  inflation  excluding  food  and  energy)  and  the  other  covering  the  full  sample 
ending  in  2014  Q4,  there  is  some  evidence  of  an  increase  in  the  slope  estimate.  This 
suggests the specific possibility of non-linearities that could be due to state-dependency of 
the Phillips curve or to structural change of some form. Indeed, regime-switching estimates, 
accounting  for  parameter  change  due  to  state-dependency  on  various  measures  of  the 
business  cycle  can  help  to  explain  the  “excessive”  disinflation  since  2012. The  results  are 
shown in Figure 7 below. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
 Figure 7 
  How  much  time  variation  is  there  in  the  slope  of  the  Phillips  curve,  and  in  which 
direction? The discussion on the steepening or flattening of the Phillips curve brings me to 
recent discussions that pointed to a flattening, particularly for the United States, but also for 
various other advanced economies. Let us take an agnostic view on the origins of the time-
variation  (that  is,  without  necessarily  making  it  conditional  upon  regimes  identified  by  a 
specific variable) and estimate a hybrid NKPC with time-varying parameters, similar to that in 
Blanchard et al. (2015). Over the sample period running from 1999 Q1 to 2015 Q2, the slope 
of headline inflation had a general tendency to decrease until 2011, after which it rebounded 
(see the left-hand chart in Figure 8). For core inflation the upward shift started earlier (see 
the  right-hand  chart  in  Figure  8). This  is  true for  the  euro  area  as  a  whole  but  particularly 
valid  for  some  countries  that  experienced  longer  recessions  and  made  greater  efforts  to 
reform their product and labour markets with an impact on nominal rigidities. 
Figure 8 
10 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Some variation is also visible in the estimates of the other parameters, with the weight on 
expectations increasing over most of the 2000s relative to the level of persistence, and the 
effect of the exchange rate, but not relative to the level of import prices in US dollars, which 
slightly increased over time. 
Figure 9 
 The  impact  of  the  change  in  the  central  parameter  estimates  on  conditional 
predictions  is  not  negligible.  Indeed,  estimating  this  model  with  constant  and  with  time-
varying parameters and feeding it with technical assumptions based on the June ECB staff 
macroeconomic projections for import prices, exchange rates and the measure of slack (i.e. 
the unemployment rate, as the gap is estimated endogenously within the model), as well as 
for projected inflation expectations, yields a significantly steeper profile for inflation excluding 
food  and  energy  over  the  next  two-and-a-half  years  (Figure  10).  The  steepening  of  the 
Phillips curve also helps improve its ability to fit the low inflation episode, together with the 
use  of  measures  that  indicate  wider  negative  slack  and  short-  to  medium-term  survey 
inflation expectations. 
Figure 10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
  Conclusions 
Inflation dynamics since the Great Recession have shown signs of instability that have led to 
a  sequence  of  systematic  forecast  errors.  The  two  puzzles  of  “missing  disinflation”  and 
successive  “excessive  disinflation”  triggered  a  surge  of  new  research  around  the  Phillips 
curve and its possible demise, which seems to have been prematurely foretold. 
There  is  an  important  common  factor  in  inflation  in  the  advanced  economies  that  helps 
explain national inflation dynamics. The current phase of low inflation, aside from commodity 
price developments, is significantly influenced by negative demand shocks both at the global 
and national level. 
In  particular,  the  recent  low  inflation  in  the  euro  area  was  largely  triggered  by  domestic 
demand  weakness,  which  probably  led  to  a  larger  degree  of  economic  slack  than  was 
predicted by the usual methods. 
The  Phillips  curve  seems  to  survive  the  recent  reassessment  and  is  still  a  valid  tool  of 
analysis in the euro area, meaning that a sustained recovery in inflation is conditional upon 
real activity and inflation expectations. 
The  link  between  inflation  and  real  activity  appears  to  have  strengthened  in  the  euro  area 
recently. Provided our policies are able to significantly reduce the output gap, we can rely on 
a material effect to help bring the inflation rate closer to target. 
References 
Akerlof, G.A., Dickens, W.T. and Perry, G.L. (1996), “The Macroeconomics of Low Inflation”, 
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity Vol. 27(1), 1–76. 
Ball,  L.  and  Mankiw,  N.G.  (1994),  “Asymmetric  Price  Adjustment  and  Economic 
Fluctuations”, Economic Journal, Vol. 104(423), 247–261. 
Ball,  L.,  Mankiw,  N.G.  and  Romer,  D.  (1988),  “The  New  Keynesian  Economics  and  the 
Output-Inflation Trade-off”, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity Vol. 19(1), 1–82. 
Ball, L. and Mazumder, S. (2011), “Inflation Dynamics and the Great Recession”, Brookings 
Papers on Economic Activity, Vol. 42, 337–405. 
Ball, L. and Mazumder, S. (2014), “A Phillips Curve with Anchored Expectations And Short-
Term Unemployment”, NBER WP 20715. 
Banco de España (2015) “Variation in the Cyclical Sensitivity of Spanish Inflation: an Initial 
Approximation”, Economic Bulletin July-August 2013. 
Banco de España (2015), Annual Report. 
Bernanke, B. (2010), “The Economic Outlook and Monetary Policy”, Speech at the Federal 
Reserve Bank of Kansas City Economic Symposium, Jackson Hole, Wyoming. 
Blanchard, O., Cerutti E. and Summers, L. (2015), “Inflation and Activity: Two Explorations, 
and  Their  Monetary  Policy  Implications”,  presented  at  the  2015  ECB  Forum  on  Central 
Banking. 
Christiano,  L.J.,  Eichenbaum,  M.S.  and  Trabandt,  M.  (2014),  “Understanding  the  Great 
Recession”, NBER WP 20040. 
Ciccarelli,  M.  and  Mojon,  B.  (2010),  “Global  Inflation”,  The  Review  of  Economics  and 
Statistics, Vol. 92(3), 524–535. 
Clark, P., Laxton, D. and Rose, D. (1996), “Asymmetry in the U.S. Output-Inflation Nexus: 
Issues and Evidence”, IMF Staff Studies, Vol. 46. 
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Coibion,  O.  and  Gorodnichenko,  Y.  (2015),  “Is  the  Phillips  Curve  Alive  and Well  after  All? 
Inflation  Expectations  and 
the  Missing  Disinflation”,  American  Economic  Journal: 
Macroeconomics, Vol. 7(1): 197–232. 
Conti, A., Neri, S. and Nobili, A. (2015), “Why is Inflation So Low in the Euro Area?”, Temi di 
discussione  (Economic  Working  Papers)  1019,  Bank  of  Italy,  Economic  Research  and 
International Relations Area. 
Daly,  M.  C.,  &  Hobijn,  B.  (2014),  “Downward  Nominal  Wage  Rigidities  Bend  the  Phillips 
Curve”, Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, Vol. 46(S2), 51–93. 
Del Negro, M., Giannoni, M.P. and Schorfheide, F. (2015), “Inflation in the Great Recession 
and New Keynesian Models”, American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 2015, Vol. 7(1): 
168–196. 
Eisner, R. (1997), “A New View of the NAIRU”, in: Improving the Global Economy: Keynesian 
and  the  Growth  in  Output  and  Employment,  edited  by  P.  Davidson  and  Jan  A.  Kregel; 
Cheltenham, UK; Lyme, NH, US: E. Elgar. 
Ferroni, F. and Mojon, B. (2014), “Domestic and Global Inflation”, mimeo. 
Fisher,  T.C.G.  (1989),  “Efficiency  Wages:  A  Literature  Survey”,  Bank  of  Canada  
WP No. 89–5. 
Foroni,  C.  and  Porqueddu,  M.  (2015),  “Inflation  Dynamics  in  the  Euro  Area:  the  Role  of 
Inflation Expectations and Nonlinearities in the Phillips Curve”, mimeo. 
Gilchrist, S., Schoenle, R., Sim, J. and Zakrajsek, E. (2015), “Inflation Dynamics During the 
Financial Crisis,” Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2015–012, Washington: Board 
of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. 
Gürkaynak,  R.S.,  Kisacikoglu,  B.  and  Rossi,  B.  (2013),  “Do  DSGE  Models  Forecast  More 
Accurately Out-of-Sample than VAR Models?”, CEPR Discussion Paper July 2013.  
Gordon,  R.J.  (2007),  “Phillips  Curve  Specification  and  the  Decline  in  U.S.  Output  and 
Inflation Volatility”, presented at Symposium on The Phillips Curve and the Natural Rate of 
Unemployment, Institut für Welwirtschaft Kiel, Germany. 
Gordon, R.J. (2013), “The Phillips Curve is Alive and Well: Inflation and the NAIRU During 
the Slow Recovery”, WP 19390, National Bureau of Economic Research. 
Iakova,  D.  (2007),  “Flattening  of  the  Phillips  Curve:  Implications  for  Monetary  Policy”,  IMF 
WP No 07/76. 
IMF  (2006),  “How  Has  Globalization  Changed  Inflation?”,  World  Economic  Outlook, 
Washington, D.C.: IMF, April, 97–134. 
IMF  (2013),  “The  Dog  That  Didn’t  Bark:  Has  Inflation  Been  Muzzled  or  Was  It  Just 
Sleeping?”, World Economic Outlook Chapter 3, International Monetary Fund. 
Jarocinski,  M.  and  Lenza,  M.  (2015),  “Output  gap  and  Inflation  Forecast  in  a  Bayesian 
Dynamic Factor Model of the Euro Area”, forthcoming ECB Working Paper.  
King, R. and Watson, M.W. (2012), “Inflation and unit labour costs”, Journal of Money, Credit 
and Banking, 44(s2), 11–149. 
Krueger, A., Cramer, J. and Cho, D. (2014), “Are the Long-Term Unemployed on the Margins 
of the Labor Market?”, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Vol. 48(1), 229–280. 
Macklem, T. (1997), “Capacity Constraints, Price Adjustment, and Monetary Policy”, Bank of 
Canada Review (Spring): 39–56. 
Mavroeidis,  S.,  Plagborg-Møller,  M.  and  Stock,  J.  (2014),  “Empirical  Evidence  on  Inflation 
Expectations  in  the  New  Keynesian  Phillips  Curve”,  Journal  of  Economic  Literature,  
March 2014, 52(1), 124–188. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13 
  Medel, C., Pedersen, M. and Pincheira, P. (2014), “The Elusive Predictive Ability of Global 
Inflation”, Banco Central de Chile WP 725. 
Murphy, R. (2014), “Explaining Inflation in the Aftermath of the Great Recession”, Journal of 
Macroeconomics, Vol. 40, 228–244. 
Oinonen, S. and Paloviita, M. (2014), “Updating the Euro Area Phillips curve: the Slope has 
Increased”, Bank of Finland Research Discussion Papers.Riggi, M. and Santoro S. (2015), 
“On the Slope and Persistence of the Italian Phillips Curve”, International Journal of Central 
Banking, Vol. 11(2), 157–197. 
Riggi,  M.  and  Venditti  F.  (2015),  “Failing  to  Forecast  Low  Inflation  and  Phillips  Curve 
Instability: a Euro-area Perspective”, Journal of International Finance, Vol. 18(1), 47–68. 
Roberts,  J.M.  (2006),  “Monetary  Policy  and  Inflation  Dynamics”,  International  Journal  of 
Central Banking, Vol. 2(3), 193–230. 
Stella, A. and Stock, J.H. (2012), “A State-Dependent Model for Inflation Forecasting”, Board 
of  Governors  of  the  Federal  Reserve  System  International  Finance  Discussion  Papers 
No 1062, November. 
Stiglitz, J. (1986), “Theories of Wage Rigidity, In Keynes’ Economic Legacy: Contemporary 
Economic Theories”, edited by J. L. Butkiewicz, K. J. Koford, and J. B. Miller, 153–222. New 
York: Praeger. 
Stock, J.H. and Watson,  M.W. (2010), “Modeling Inflation After the Crisis”, NBER Working 
Papers 16488. 
Williams, J.C. (2010), “Sailing into Headwinds: theUncertain Outlook for the U.S. Economy”, 
Speech 85, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco. 
 14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
