  Pentti Hakkarainen: International competition will change mortgage 
lending 
Speech by  Mr Pentti Hakkarainen, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Finland, to the Nordic 
Mortgage Council, Helsinki, 28 August 2015. 
Accompanying slides can be found on the Bank of Finland’s website: Slides (PDF). 
 A level playing field for competition 
The  time  is  ripe  for  turning  national  mortgage  credit  markets  into  more  integrated  and 
competitive pan-European markets. So far, mortgage lending markets have been surprisingly 
local  in  nature,  at  the  same  time  as  many  other  segments  of  banking  have  become 
increasingly international. 
Despite  the  current  cross-country  differences,  the  provision  of  housing  loans  is  likely  to 
become more  similar  across  countries. The  conditions for  this  development  are  already  in 
place in the integrated financial markets. 
First  and foremost, more  harmonised  regulation  and  supervision,  enhanced  particularly  by 
the Banking Union, has put banks on an equal footing across Europe. Secondly, the ongoing 
digitalisation  and  development  of  modern  scoring  techniques  will  give  a  strong  boost  for 
increasingly common provision of housing loans through online banking services, also cross-
border. Finally, today’s customers are well-prepared for comparing competing loan offers. 
Housing markets and financial stability 
Overall, stability in the European credit institutions sector has strengthened as economic and 
financial developments have gradually improved since the crisis. Regulatory and institutional 
reforms have also made the financial system more resilient against shocks. 
However,  financial  stability  reports  published  by  many  central  banks  and  international 
organisations  point  to  risks  and  vulnerabilities  on  a  number  of  European  housing  markets 
and in housing finance (slide 2). Household indebtedness continues to be high by historical 
standards  and  house  prices  remain  elevated  and  on  the  rise  in  some  countries  and 
metropolitan areas, in particular. In the four Nordic countries the high level of household debt 
is a common and growing concern, albeit to differing degrees. 
Why are housing markets and housing finance so crucial to the stability of the economy as a 
whole  (slide  3)?  Housing  booms  and  busts  have  been  associated  with  many  of  the  most 
serious financial and economic crises in developed countries. Rapid real estate credit growth 
has  often  been  accompanied  by  current  account  deficits  that  have  turned  out  to  be 
unsustainable. The bursting of a housing bubble may have a devastating effect on the real 
economy,  as  it  suppresses  private  consumption  and  investment.  Therefore,  in  terms  of 
output losses, the total costs of housing busts for society are much higher than the direct 
credit losses borne by mortgage lenders. 
Housing markets are regional, still today 
Euro area housing markets and housing finance are still structurally heterogeneous. There is 
considerable heterogeneity, for example, in loan characteristics, such as typical interest rate 
fixation periods, maturities, amortisation requirements and loan-to-value ratios (slide 4). 
The housing market cycles are also quite country-specific. However, the latest financial crisis 
hit all markets by and large at the same time, albeit with differing force. Now the recovery 
from the crisis has continued and is becoming more broadly based across countries (slide 5). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
The rebound in house prices has been strong in several countries (slide 6). The European 
Central Bank’s estimates of potential over/undervaluation of house prices suggest that while 
euro area house prices are, on average, broadly in line with fundamentals, some pockets of 
vulnerability do exist (slide 7). 
The  recovery  in  house  prices  and  lending  has  been  supported  by  an  improving  economic 
outlook  and  more  favourable  financing  and  lending  conditions  (slides  8–11).  However, 
developments continue to diverge both at country and regional level. 
Housing  markets  and  finance  are  heterogeneous  across  the  Nordic  countries,  too,  albeit 
these  economies  are  in  many  other  respects  quite  similar  to  each  other.  Structural 
differences  exist  between  countries  with  respect  to  lenders’  business  models,  typical  loan 
products and the level of household indebtedness (slides 12–13). The four countries are also 
in different phases of their housing cycles, with real house prices rising fastest in Sweden 
and Norway (slide 14). 
Some specificities in Finland 
In Finland, housing lending is one of the key business segments of universal banks, and the 
loan market is dominated by the three largest banks. Average maturities of housing loans are 
short  in  Nordic  comparison,  and  non-amortising  loans  are  almost  non-existent  (slide  15). 
Loans are predominantly tied to variable interest rates and funded mainly by deposits and, 
increasingly, by covered bonds (slides 16–18). 
Over the past 5 years there has been a soft, if lengthy landing in the Finnish housing market, 
reflecting  the  protracted  economic  downturn.  The  housing  loan  cycle  in  Finland  is  now 
passing  its  second  trough  after  the  burst  of  the  global  financial  crisis  (slides  19–22).  The 
average interest rate on new housing loans has reached a record low, being the lowest in the 
euro area (slides 23–25). Yet, growth in housing lending is only slowly picking up and house 
prices are slightly decreasing relative to household income (slide 26). 
Risks related to growing indebtedness 
The mutually reinforcing cycles in housing and credit markets may, at times, turn out to be 
detrimental  to  financial  and  economic  developments.  In  Finland,  the  growth  in  household 
indebtedness  has  continued  without  interruption  since  the  end  of  the  1990s,  albeit  more 
slowly in recent years (slide 27). This debt accumulation includes features that increase risks 
and vulnerabilities for Finnish households and the economy as a whole. 
Firstly,  household  debt  and  the  related  risks  are  very  unevenly  distributed  among 
households. A large amount of housing debt is borne by a small proportion of households 
with the highest debt-to-income ratios. For example, about half of the total amount of housing 
debt is with the most indebted tenth of all households in Finland (slide 28). 
Secondly,  owing  to  variable  rate  loans,  there  may  be  considerable  annual  variation  in 
household interest expenses. Lower interest rates and longer repayment periods since the 
turn  of  the  millennium  have  kept  households’  annual  debt-servicing  burden  in  check, 
although the amount of debt has at the same time substantially increased (slide 29). 
Regional differences within a country 
There  can  be  a  strong  regional  divergence  in  house  prices  and  household  indebtedness 
within countries, too. These regional differences are driven by both demand and supply-side 
factors.  Growth  areas  are  typically  characterised  by  increasing  population,  younger 
residents,  a  better  employment  situation  and  higher  household  income  than  the  national 
average. This is also reflected in brisker housing markets and higher house prices in these 
areas. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
For example, in Finland the market conditions in the metropolitan areas are diverging from 
the conditions prevailing in areas where the population is diminishing. The largest housing 
loans are concentrated in the biggest cities and growth centres (slide 30). In these centres, 
house prices are also highest (slides 31). 
Is there a need for public intervention? 
There  is  a  strong  public  interest  in  preventing  excessive  credit  growth  and  leverage. 
Macroprudential  policy  plays  a  key  role  in  pursuing  that  objective.  Housing  market-related 
tools, such as maximum loan-to-value ratios, minimum risk weights for mortgage loans and 
countercyclical  capital  buffers,  have  recently  been  introduced  in  the  toolkits  of  designated 
macroprudential  authorities,  including  the  Financial  Supervisory  Authority  in  Finland 
(slides 32–33). 
Owing to the lack of experience, some question marks remain. Many of the macroprudential 
tools  are  yet  to  be  tested  in  practice.  Therefore,  the  consequences  and  effectiveness  of 
these instruments are still largely uncertain. It is, however, clear that we are moving in the 
right  direction.  The  authorities  responsible  for  financial  stability  have  stronger  mandates, 
more  analytical  tools  and  better-targeted  policy  instruments  to  mitigate  housing-related 
systemic risks than ever before. 
Mortgage lending in the future 
In  the  areas  of  retail  payments,  large  corporate  finance  and  consumer  credit,  European 
integration is already advanced and cross-border activities are day-to-day business. In some 
of  the remaining  areas of finance,  SME  lending  in  particular,  corresponding  developments 
require more time owing to the more complicated and work-intensive credit risk assessment. 
The  regulatory  and  supervisory  framework  is  becoming  more  harmonised  across  Europe, 
creating a level playing field for banks. In addition, there are specific trends and factors that 
are  likely  to  touch  housing  finance,  in  particular  (slides  34–35).  Examples  of  such 
developments  include  common  standards  in  collateral  valuation,  innovations  in  financial 
technology, advanced data mining and credit risk scoring, and the already widespread use of 
online  banking  services.  Furthermore,  mortgage  brokers,  special  firms  that  arrange  loans, 
may gain a stronger foothold in housing finance, as has happened increasingly in Germany. 
To  sum  up,  the  conditions  for  increasing  international  competition  and  integration  in 
mortgage lending are improving. While the mortgage credit markets are still very national and 
regional in nature, it is likely that a considerable change is already underway. This will have a 
substantial impact on banking, especially in the euro area, where there is no currency risk in 
cross-border lending. We have to make sure that this welcome development is managed in a 
way that ensures the stability of the housing markets and housing finance. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
