  Stephen S Poloz: Release of the Monetary Policy Report 
Opening statement by Mr Stephen S Poloz, Governor of the Bank of Canada, at the press 
conference  following  the  release  of  the  Monetary  Policy  Report,  Ottawa,  Ontario,  15  April 
2015. 
 Good morning. Carolyn and I are happy to be here to answer your questions about today’s 
interest rate announcement and our latest Monetary Policy Report (MPR). Let me begin with 
a  few  remarks  around  the  issues  that  were  most  important  to  the  Governing  Council’s 
deliberations. 
I’ll  start  with  the  global  context.  The  plunge  in  oil  prices  was  due  mostly  to  strong  supply 
growth, but a softening in demand growth also contributed. A wide range of other commodity 
prices  have  declined  further  this  year,  also  suggesting  a  softer  world  economy.  In  this 
context, we have seen many central banks ease policy this year, ourselves included. 
This  widespread  easing,  coupled  with  the  positive  implications  of  lower  energy  prices  for 
world  growth,  leads  us  to  the  conclusion  that  the  global  economy  will  pick  up  through  the 
year. Increased economic divergence is prompting divergent monetary policies as well, and 
is delivering more exchange-rate volatility and, on net, more strength in the U.S. dollar. 
Turning to Canada, as we stated in the January MPR, although lower oil prices would have 
both  upside  and  downside  effects  on  Canada,  the  net  impact  would  be  negative.  The 
negative effects would be immediate and seemed quite certain, whereas the positive effects 
would  be  more  gradual  and  less  certain.  Therefore,  we  faced  a  risk  that  our  return  to  full 
capacity  and  stable  2  per  cent  inflation  would  be  delayed  significantly.  Accordingly,  in 
January  we  took  out  some  insurance  against  that  risk,  in  the  form  of  a  25-basis-point 
reduction in the policy interest rate. 
Our  cut  led  to  lower  rates  across  our  entire  yield  curve  and  a  lower  Canadian  dollar. 
Meanwhile,  oil  prices  stabilized  and  recovered  to  levels  around  our  January  forecast 
assumptions. And, as we monitored the data, we saw that some of the effects of lower oil 
prices were already being felt during the fourth quarter of 2014. 
The updated forecast in today’s MPR suggests that the economy saw no growth in the first 
quarter. I want to emphasize that policy does not hinge on decimal points – we always know 
we  are  dealing  with  a  range  of  possible  outcomes.  Interpretation  of  the  recent  data  is 
complicated by the slowdown in the U.S. in the same quarter, which no doubt was partly due 
to  severe  weather  and  a  port  strike  in  Los  Angeles.  We  had  some  unusual  weather 
ourselves.  However,  our  best  judgement  is  that  the  data  we  have  received  so  far  remain 
consistent  with  the  view  that  the  impact  of  the  oil  price  shock  is  proving  to  be  faster  than 
initially expected, not larger. 
Outside  of  the  energy  sector,  other  areas  of  the  economy  appear  to  be  doing  well.  In 
particular,  the  segments  of  non-energy  exports  that  we  have  been  expecting  to  lead  the 
recovery  have  been  doing  so,  and  we  expect  this  trend  to  be  buttressed  by  stronger  U.S. 
growth and the lower Canadian dollar. Our Business Outlook Survey indicates that capacity 
constraints  are  beginning  to  emerge  for  exporters,  which  is  promising  for  new  investment. 
And, although we still have material slack in our labour market, the market’s fundamentals 
have  begun  to  improve.  Even  so,  companies  remain  cautious  about  new  investment  and 
hiring intentions. 
Weighing  these  various  forces  acting  on  the  economy,  we  are  anticipating  a  rebound  in 
growth  in  the  second  quarter,  and  a  move  to  above-trend  growth  thereafter,  for  annual 
growth of 1.9 per cent this year. This projected growth profile gets us back on track to use up 
our excess capacity around the end of 2016, at which time inflation will settle sustainably on 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  2  per  cent.  We  see  the  risks  around  this  projection  as  roughly  balanced,  but  they  will  be 
reassessed continuously as new data become available. 
The  main  risk  is  the  size  and  duration  of  the  negative  impact  of  the  oil  shock,  weighed 
against the positive forces that are building in the non-energy export sector. Our outlook is 
for  the  positives  to  begin  to  reassert  themselves  during  the  second  quarter,  and  to  do  so 
clearly  in  the  second  half  of  the  year.  The  interest  rate  cut  of  January  and  the  lower 
Canadian dollar are working to speed up the transition. To give just one example, exporting 
companies  with  existing  contracts  denominated  in  U.S.  dollars  are  seeing  an  immediate  8 
per  cent  increase  in  Canadian-dollar  cash  flow,  and  will  be  able  to  compete  more 
aggressively for future sales. 
Inflation as measured by total CPI today is running at about 1 per cent, well below our 2 per 
cent target. This is largely due to the drop in gasoline prices, a temporary effect. But total CPI 
inflation  would  be  even  lower  than  1  per  cent,  in  fact  quite  close  to  zero,  were  it  not  for 
exchange-rate effects, which are boosting total inflation by 0.6 to 0.7 percentage points, and 
some additional one-time factors. Core inflation is running at about 2 per cent, but it is also 
being boosted by exchange-rate effects and a couple of other one-time factors. 
Because monetary policy takes up to two years to have its full effect on inflation, responding 
to  every  fluctuation  in  prices  would  be  counter-productive.  Therefore,  we  generally  look 
through inflation variations that, in our judgement, will prove temporary. These judgements 
constitute a very important part of our deliberations. Presently, we are looking through the 
effects of the drop in oil prices, the effects of the recent depreciation of the Canadian dollar, 
and the one-time effects of fluctuations in meat and telecommunications prices. This is why 
we  refer  to  “underlying  inflation”,  which  estimates  and  excludes  what  we  judge  to  be 
temporary factors, and is driven mainly by the changes in the degree of excess capacity in 
the  economy.  In  our  projection,  total  inflation,  core  inflation  and  underlying  inflation  all 
converge on the same level once temporary factors have dissipated. 
Meanwhile, the issue of financial stability risks remains front-and-centre in our deliberations. 
These  risks  are  evolving  in  line  with  our  expectations.  The  level  of  indebtedness,  as 
measured by the debt-to-disposable income ratio, continues to rise. It is likely to rise further 
as the decline in gross national income, due to the halving of oil prices, works its way through 
the  system.  On  the  surface,  lower  interest  rates  would  be  expected  to  promote  more 
borrowing,  which  would  increase  this  vulnerability.  However,  in  the  near  term,  lower 
borrowing  rates  will  actually  mitigate  this  risk,  by  reducing  payments  for  mortgage  holders 
and  giving  us  more  economic  growth  and  employment  gains.  We  believe  that  the  best 
contribution the Bank can make to easing financial stability risks through time is to help the 
economy return to full capacity and stable inflation sooner, rather than later. 
With that, Carolyn and I would be happy to take your questions. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
