  Simon M Potter: Trends in foreign exchange markets and the challenges 
ahead 
Remarks  by  Mr  Simon  M  Potter,  Executive  Vice  President  of  the  Markets  Group  of  the 
Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York,  at  the  2015  FX  Week  Conference,  New  York  City, 
14 July 2015. 
 I would like to thank Robert Lerman and Jamie Pfeifer for their excellent assistance in the preparation of these 
remarks and colleagues in the global central bank community for numerous insightful comments and suggestions. 
Good  morning.  It’s  a  pleasure  to  be  here.  Let  me  extend  my  thanks  to  FX  Week  for  the 
invitation to speak at this conference. Before I begin, I would like to note that my comments 
today reflect my own views and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Bank of New 
York. 
The  ability  of  households,  corporations,  and  sovereigns  across  the  world  to  safely  and 
efficiently exchange assets denominated in one currency for assets denominated in another 
is essential to a healthy and robust global economy. These transactions can occur for myriad 
reasons – to support the flow of goods, services, and investment across national boundaries, 
to  diversify  the  savings  of  retirees,  or  to  hedge  risks  associated  with  manufacturing  a 
particular  type  of  product.  These  transactions  all  rely  on  a  foreign  exchange  market  that 
functions  with  integrity  –  that  is,  one  that  allows  a  diverse  set  of  buyers  and  sellers, 
supported by robust infrastructure, to confidently and effectively transact at prices that reflect 
available  market  information  and  in  a  manner  that  conforms  to  acceptable  standards  of 
behavior. 
In my remarks today, I would like to expand on the essential role that the foreign exchange 
market plays and examine some of the ways the market’s structure has changed in recent 
years. Then, amid the backdrop of a number of recent negative developments – specifically, 
evidence of unethical and illegal behavior by some market participants – I will discuss the 
critical  role  that  implementation  of  and  adherence  to  strong  global  industry  standards, 
including  best  practices,  can  play  in  restoring  and  maintaining  the  integrity  of  the  foreign 
exchange market. In doing so, I will highlight recent and ongoing efforts to help strengthen 
these  standards  through  the  Financial  Stability  Board  and  collaborative  efforts  by  major 
central banks and market participants working within and across jurisdictions, often through 
local foreign exchange committees. I will conclude by setting an expectation for all market 
participants in foreign exchange to help support this work in order to reinforce the integrity of, 
and the public’s trust in, this important market. 
The importance of the foreign exchange market 
The  foreign  exchange  market  is  perhaps  the  largest,  most  globally  integrated,  and  most 
active financial market in the world. The transactions that take place there are the lifeblood of 
a global economy that comprises many different national currencies. By enabling the transfer 
of funds and purchasing power from one currency to another, the foreign exchange market 
offers  an  important  means  for  price  discovery  that  facilitates  international  trade  and 
investment activity. 
The relative value of a currency, expressed in exchange rates, both drives and is driven by 
the costs of goods, services, and investment opportunities in each economy. Understanding 
relative  prices  helps  businesses  make  decisions  about  the  competitiveness  of  their  goods 
and services, which is important for consumption and production choices. For example, the 
current and future value of an exchange rate can be an important factor for a corporation 
when deciding where to locate a new factory or where to source parts, or even where they 
want to sell their finished products. These decisions ground the composition of activity within 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
an economy, and have a bearing on the distribution of jobs, investment, and growth across 
the  global  economy.  This  is  a  particularly  important  function  given  trade’s  increasing 
contribution to global growth. Indeed, between 2003 and 2013, the share of trade in global 
GDP increased by about 11 percentage points, to just over 59 percent.1 
The FX market is a large and growing market. According to the latest Triennial Central Bank 
Survey  of  foreign  exchange  and  derivatives  market  activity  conducted  by  the  Bank  for 
International Settlements (BIS) in April 2013, total global average daily turnover across over-
the-counter  foreign  exchange  instruments  –  including  spot,  forward,  swap,  and  option 
transactions – was estimated to be more than $5 trillion, an increase of nearly 60 percent 
since 2007.2 This trading volume dwarfs the U.S. fixed income market, where average daily 
turnover at the end of 2013 was about $815 billion.3 
Within this large market, a broad range of foreign exchange products is traded each day by a 
diverse set of market participants for a wide variety of reasons. Derivatives are the largest 
component of global trading in the FX market, accounting for about 60 percent of turnover in 
2013. They play an important role in helping transfer a wide variety of risks from entities that 
cannot or do not want to bear it to those that can and do – including risks associated with 
hedging cross-border exposures or positions in other markets, such as fixed income – or to 
provide a source of funding to help meet liquidity needs. The most actively traded derivative 
product, foreign-exchange swaps, accounted for about 40 percent of all trading activity in the 
global FX market in 2013, serving as a critically important cross-currency funding tool for a 
wide  variety  of  market  participants.  For  example,  banks  may  have  domestic  currency 
liabilities  but  foreign  currency  assets,  and  thus  may  use  the  FX  swap  market  to  source 
foreign exchange. The spot market, which accounted for about 40 percent of trading activity 
in 2013, is used by private nonfinancial entities to trade goods and services or to invest in 
foreign  businesses,  while  banks  may  use  it  to  engage  in  cross-border  lending  and  asset 
managers may use it to purchase financial assets or take positions based on their economic 
and financial market outlook. 
The foreign exchange market is a truly global market and one of the few markets that trades 
around  the  clock.  This  gives  it  the  unique  ability  to  provide  signals  as  to  how  market 
participants are interpreting or responding to developments taking place in other markets or 
in the real economy. During the global financial crisis, the foreign exchange market often was 
the first to reveal how market sentiment was evolving in response to significant events that 
occurred  outside  of  trading  hours  in  other  markets.  Such  signals  can  be  very  useful  to 
policymakers and market participants, particularly during periods of market stress. 
Of course, the foreign exchange market’s ability to support price discovery and to enable the 
international flow of goods and capital requires a marketplace that is founded on integrity and 
capable of ensuring smooth and efficient interaction among market participants. This remains 
especially important as the structure of the market continues to evolve and adapts to new 
technologies and financial flows. 
                                                
1   World Bank Development Indicators; http://data.worldbank.org/data-catalog/world-development-indicators. 
2   BIS 2013 Triennial Central Bank Survey. The Triennial Survey is coordinated by the BIS under the auspices of 
the Markets Committee (for the foreign exchange part) and the Committee on the Global Financial System (for 
the interest rate derivatives part). The latest survey of turnover took place in April 2013. Central banks and 
other  authorities  in  fifty-three  jurisdictions  participated  in  the  2013  survey.  They  collected  data  from  about 
1,300 banks and other dealers in their jurisdictions and reported national aggregates to the BIS, which then 
calculated  global  aggregates.  The  survey,  among  other  things,  provides  data  on  turnover,  instruments, 
counterparties, and currencies, which are referenced in this speech; http://www.bis.org/publ/rpfx13fx.pdf. 
3   SIFMA US Bond Market Trading Volume; http://www.sifma.org/research/statistics.aspx. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Changes to market structure 
The  foreign  exchange  market  is  a  dynamic  market  with  a  long  history  of  change  and 
innovation. Today, I would like to focus on two of the more significant recent changes in the 
market’s structure: first, the broadening of participation, and second, how execution is taking 
place within the market. 
Participation in the FX market 
The broadening of participation in the foreign exchange market is one reason why growth in 
FX trading  volumes  has far  outpaced  growth  in global  trade. The  BIS Triennial  Survey  on 
foreign  exchange  market  activity  provides  evidence  of  the  degree  to  which  this  expanded 
participation  is  taking  place.4  Traditionally,  volumes  in  the  foreign  exchange  market  were 
dominated by what is known as the inter-dealer market – trading between dealers. However, 
in  the  2010  survey,  the  largest  share  of  volume  reported  by  dealer  respondents  was  for 
transactions with “other financial institutions” – a category that includes nonreporting banks;5 
other financial institutions such as institutional investors, hedge funds, and proprietary trading 
firms;  and  official  sector  institutions.  This  shift  continued  through  the  2013  survey,  when 
“other  financial  institutions”  accounted  for  just  over  half  of  reported  volume,  reinforcing 
evidence of a broadening in foreign exchange trading, with nondealers playing a greater role 
in the market. 
The 2013 survey broke out the “other financial institutions” category for the first time. The 
data  showed  that  nonreporting  banks  accounted  for  about  45  percent  of  the  category’s 
trading  volume  while  institutional  investors  and  hedge  funds/proprietary  trading  firms  each 
accounted for about 20 percent. In a market where daily trading volume exceeds $5 trillion, 
this  represents  significant  activity  and  is  consistent  with  a  general  theme  of  increased 
participation by nondealers in the FX market. 
Execution in the FX market 
One  factor  contributing  to  the  expansion  in  participation  by  nondealers  in  the  foreign 
exchange market has been the increased ease of entry into the market, attributable to an 
expansion  in  the  number  of  execution  platforms  and  services.  In  part,  this  has  been 
supported  by  technological  advancements,  which,  in  some  cases,  have  reduced  trading 
costs, increased the speed with which transactions take place, and improved transparency. 
Electronic  trading  activity  in  foreign  exchange  markets,  as  well  as  in  other  markets,  has 
played a growing role, and some reports suggest it may represent as much as 70 percent of 
daily turnover in the foreign exchange market, up from roughly 30 percent a decade ago.6 
In addition to expanding entry to the market, technology is also changing how participants 
engage the market, through both single- and multi-dealer platforms. In the past, institutional 
customers could engage the market only by calling their dealing bank, but the marriage of 
technology and prime brokerage – the bundling of investor services, such as trade execution, 
settlement, financing, and custody – has enabled direct access to the interdealer market in 
ways not seen previously. Prime brokerage services have enabled an expansion in potential 
trading partners, allowing customers to trade in the name, and on the credit, of their prime 
broker.  Altogether,  this  has  served  to  transform  what  was  once  a  two-tiered  market  – 
                                                
4   BIS 2013 Triennial Central Bank Survey; http://www.bis.org/publ/rpfx13fx.pdf. 
5   The anatomy of the Global FX Market through the lens of the 2013 Triennial Survey. A significant fraction of 
dealers’ transactions with nondealer financial customers is with lower-tier banks. While these “nonreporting 
banks”  tend  to  trade  smaller  amounts  and/or  only  sporadically,  in  aggregate  they  account  for  roughly  one 
quarter of global FX volumes. http://www.bis.org/publ/qtrpdf/r_qt1312e.pdf. 
6   Euromoney,  December  2013,  Rise  of  electronic  FX 
trading  won’t  silence  voice  brokers. 
http://www.euromoney.com/Article/3286064/Rise-of-electronic-FX-trading-wont-silence-voice-brokers.html. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  
 
interdealer and dealer-to-client – into a market with much broader access. Moreover, as new 
trading platforms have come online, the profile of FX market participants, and thus the way 
FX is traded, has changed. New participants, such as retail and smaller institutions – that are 
often  engaged  in  high-frequency  or  high-speed  trading  –  could  begin  executing  on  their 
home or office computers, or could connect their trading algorithms directly to the platforms. 
The expansion of both the universe of market participants and the infrastructure to support 
execution  has  brought  many  positive  benefits  to  the  market  and  global  economy,  but  we 
should  also  be  mindful  of  potential  costs  that  might  arise.  In  particular,  it  is  important  to 
consider  the  implications  for  the  overall  integrity  of  the  market,  which,  as  I  noted  earlier, 
relies on the ability of market participants to confidently and effectively transact at prices that 
reflect available market information. 
Technology has helped ease entry to the market, but the capital investments needed to keep 
up  have  also  increased.  Indeed,  operating  in  fractions  of  milliseconds  has  become  an 
important component toward achieving faster execution. Will this hinder the entrance of new 
participants  in  the  future,  particularly  those  who  may  not  have  the  extensive  resources 
required to keep up? 
In  addition,  while  many  market  participants  note  the  positive  influence  that  technological 
changes have had on market functioning, including narrower bid-ask spreads.7 it is unclear 
how  these  changes  may  affect the  broader price  discovery  process  or  liquidity  of  markets 
overall.  Technology  allows  market  participants 
to  better  connect  across  potentially 
fragmented  execution  options,  but  has  the  central  price  discovery  mechanism  emerged 
stronger, and is liquidity as resilient? 
Further, dealers increasingly are internalizing customer flows―that is, matching their clients’ 
buy and sell orders in-house rather than executing them through the open market. But what 
does  this  do  to  the  quality  of  pricing  in  the  open  market?  And  does  reduction  in  potential 
open market trading have negative consequences for market functioning? 
Moving toward more robust practices in the FX market 
These changes in market structure and their potential implications for the functioning of the 
market  are  important  to  monitor,  but  market  integrity  does  not  rest  solely  on  the  ability  to 
transact. It also requires that parties in the market behave in accordance  with appropriate 
standards of behavior – standards that help to ensure that parties treat each other fairly. This 
is an area where further work is clearly required to support, and in fact to rebuild, the integrity 
of the market. As this audience is well aware, the foreign exchange market has recently been 
rocked  by  broad,  unethical  misconduct,  which  is  unacceptable,  and  this  has  shaken  the 
public’s trust and faith in the market. 
A  recent  series  of  investigations  in  the  United  States  and  abroad  established  that  serious 
misconduct  and  collusion  had  occurred  in  the  spot  foreign  exchange  market.  The 
investigations led to a string of regulatory actions and fines against some of the largest banks 
active in this market, and criminal pleas across multiple jurisdictions. These developments 
                                                
7   Not only is liquidity both challenging to define and measure, but the impact of technological change on liquidity 
is difficult to isolate. On a number of dimensions, technological change appears to have improved both the 
efficiency of price formation and the ability to transact in size without significantly affecting market prices. But 
recent “flash” events in various markets – including rapid round-trips in prices on March 18, 2015, in the euro-
dollar  currency  pair  and  on  October  15,  2014,  in  the  U.S.  Treasury  cash  and  futures  markets  –  have 
suggested the possibility that advancements in automated trading and changes in market structure may have 
improved liquidity in normal times but left markets prone to more frequent bouts of illiquidity during which price 
formation appears disconnected from fundamental information. Structural developments and the connection to 
liquidity  and  price  discovery  across  markets  warrant  further  study.  See  also  recent  comments  by  Lael 
Brainard, member of the Federal Reserve Board of Governors. Recent Changes in the Resilience of Market 
Liquidity. http://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/brainard20150701a.htm. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
have resulted in damage to the integrity of the global FX market – damage that will not easily 
be undone. The behaviors that triggered these criminal and regulatory actions illustrate that, 
for many, self-interest and the lure of near-term gains were put above the preservation of the 
market’s  integrity  and  long-term  sustainability.8  The  resulting  loss  of  the  public’s  faith  and 
trust in this critical market comes with a cost: Let’s recall that it is ultimately the public that 
stands to lose from an FX market unable to play its vital role in the global economy. 
The FX market is considered by many to be relatively lightly regulated, particularly in the FX 
spot market. Regulatory treatment across jurisdictions varies.9 Regardless of who regulates 
in a given region, in the absence of a single centralized and comprehensive global regulator 
of this highly global market, collaborative efforts between the private and official sectors play 
an important role. These efforts help us to better understand the roots of the misconduct and 
the  misalignment  of  incentives  that  contributed  to  weaknesses  in  trading  structures  and 
encouraged  unethical  and  illegal  activities.  And  they  can  also  play  an  important  role  in 
elevating best practices in order to promote a sound, effective FX market going forward. In 
the  remainder  of  my  remarks,  I’ll  discuss  three  examples  of  such  work.  First,  the 
recommendations of the Financial Stability Board’s Foreign Exchange Benchmarks Group. 
Second, the work of the various foreign exchange committees, including the New York Fed-
sponsored  Foreign  Exchange  Committee  (FXC),  to  provide  more  detailed,  globally 
harmonized guidance through an expanded Global Preamble to the existing regional codes 
of  conduct.  And  third,  the  expansion  of  that  work  into  the  current  international  effort  to 
develop and implement a single global code of conduct for the foreign exchange market and 
to enhance adherence to that code among all market participants. 
Work of the Financial Stability Board’s Foreign Exchange Benchmarks Group (FXBG) 
Given  the  global  nature  of  the  FX  market,  as  well  as  the  number  of  jurisdictions  in  which 
wrongdoing has been uncovered, efforts to strengthen the market must be global in nature 
as  well.  Recognizing  this  imperative,  the  Financial  Stability  Board  (FSB),  an  international 
body  that  monitors  and  makes  recommendations  about  the  global  financial  system, 
established the Foreign Exchange Benchmarks Group (FXBG) in early 2014. The purpose of 
the FXBG was to review FX benchmarks and associated market practices, including potential 
misaligned incentives, and make recommendations for change. The FXBG, which consisted 
of  representatives  from  more  than  twenty  countries,  engaged  with  a  range  of  market 
participants to analyze the market structures and incentives as they related to trading around 
benchmark  fixings.  The  group  produced  a  series  of  recommendations  to  enhance  the 
structures  and  behaviors  around  FX  benchmark  trading.  I  would  like  to  focus  on  two 
particular  aspects  of 
the  WM/Reuters 
to 
calculation10 and second, changes aimed at strengthening market conduct. 
The FXBG report highlighted the dominant use of the WM/Reuters (WMR) 4 p.m. London 
fixings by many different sets of market participants, including some not otherwise active in 
the  foreign  exchange  market.  The  fixings,  provided  across  many  different  currency  pairs, 
were used in many different ways – including for multicurrency portfolio valuation and for the 
valuation of key financial market indexes. In regard to the WMR 4 p.m. London fixings, the 
group identified important changes to strengthen the construction methodology and reduce 
the scope of potential manipulation. Specifically, it recommended that the length of time over 
these  recommendations  – 
first,  changes 
currency 
                                                
8   See  the  U.K.’s  Fair  and  Effective  Markets  Review  Final  Report  for  related  insightful  discussion  on  fixed 
at: 
commodities 
income, 
(FICC) 
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/markets/Documents/femrjun15.pdf. 
In the United States, the CFTC has regulatory responsibility for most FX products. 
9  
10   The WMR London fixing is now subject to regulatory oversight by the Financial Conduct Authority (FCA) in the 
U.K.,  in  addition  to  the  FSB  initiatives.  See  the  FCA’s  report  Bringing  additional  benchmarks  into  the 
regulatory and supervisory regime, https://www.fca.org.uk/news/ps15–06-additional-benchmarks. 
Available 
markets. 
and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  
 
which  the  fixing  was  calculated  be  extended.  In  addition,  it  recommended  that  this  fixing 
incorporate  price  feeds  and  transaction  data  from  a  broader  range  of  sources.  These 
recommendations  resulted  in  changes  to  the  WMR  calculation  methodology,  which  were 
implemented in mid-February of this year. 
The  FXBG  also  identified  a  series  of  recommendations  to  strengthen  market  conduct  and 
reduce the scope for manipulation and mistreatment of customer flow and information. For 
example, the recommendations encouraged greater clarity around fixing transactions through 
transparent  pricing for  such  transactions  and  by  establishing  a  clearer  separation  of fixing 
transactions from other types of activity. Further, the recommendations sought to strengthen 
the  framework  for  the  protection  of  information  by  providing  greater  detail  around  certain 
types  of  information  that  are  not  to  be  shared.  Finally,  the  recommendations  encouraged 
more  detailed  guidance  within  the  various  codes  of  conduct  in  the  FX  market  as  well  as 
demonstration of greater compliance with such codes. 
In  February  of  this  year,  the  co-chair  of  the  FXBG,  Guy  Debelle,  spoke  at  the  FX  Week 
Australia  Conference  about  this  work  and  addressed  the  status  of  implementation  of  the 
recommendations. He noted that while there had been some areas of progress, questions 
remained  about  the  implementation  in  other  areas  –  for  example,  with  regard  to  the 
recommendations  related  to  more  transparent  and  risk-appropriate  pricing  of  fixing 
transactions.11  The  FSB  has  since  requested  an  update  this  summer  on  the  status  of 
implementation  of 
foreign  exchange 
the  various 
committees are working together, and with others, to assist in this effort. 
the  FXBG  recommendations,  and 
Foreign Exchange Committee 
Additional work to support the implementation of the FXBG recommendations has been an 
area  of  focus  for  the  FXC.  The  FXC  is  a  private  sector  group,  made  up  of  market 
professionals  and  sponsored  by  the  New  York  Fed  since  1978,  that  is  intended  to  help 
provide guidance and leadership to the global FX market. In its earlier years, the Committee 
worked  closely  with  comparable  committees  sponsored  by  central  banks  in  other  major 
jurisdictions, as well as with the Financial Markets Lawyers Group here in the United States, 
to  improve  standardization  in  the  market,  including  through  developing  standardized 
documentation  in  the  FX  market,  such  as  master  agreements.  Over  the  years,  the 
Committee has evolved as the market has changed. For example, as entry to the FX market 
has expanded and as nondealer firms have come to play important roles in the market, the 
FXC expanded to include buy-side representatives. I believe that this has strengthened the 
FXC’s  ability  to  contribute  on  FX  market  issues,  including  the  work  now  required  to  help 
strengthen  the  best  practices  landscape  on  a  global  basis.  Before  turning  to  these  global 
efforts, I would like to briefly highlight a couple of recent changes to the Committee’s Charter, 
which I believe will further support the FXC’s ability to contribute in particular to this global 
work.12 
First, the revised Charter language places a more direct emphasis on the role of Committee 
members to help promote the efficiency and integrity of the market through, for example, the 
development  and  implementation  of  best  practices.  Second,  the  revised  Charter  better 
highlights the importance of incorporating an even broader set of perspectives and expertise 
directly on the FXC. Engaging a broader set of perspectives across operations, legal, and 
compliance  professionals  –  as  well  as  individuals  across  buy-side,  sell-side,  and  various 
market  infrastructure  firms  –  will  help  the  Committee  to  apply  this  more  comprehensive 
perspective to its work on best practices. It will take some time for these changes to be fully 
                                                
11   See http://www.bis.org/review/r150213c.htm. 
12   See http://www.newyorkfed.org/fxc/FXC_Charter_2015.pdf. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
implemented, but it is expected that the various steps that move us in this direction will also 
help us to engage even more effectively in the important work ahead. 
Global best practices efforts 
The FXC has been engaged in two global efforts with its counterparts abroad: development 
of  the  Global  Preamble  and  work,  now  under  way,  to  extend  the  Global  Preamble  into  a 
single global code of best practices in the FX market. 
The Global Preamble (“Preamble”) is a document that was developed collaboratively by the 
eight central-bank-sponsored foreign exchange committees to provide a common basis from 
which our individual codes of conduct for the FX market follow. The Preamble lays out key, 
shared  principles  that  underpin  our  respective  codes.  The  publication  of  a  revised  Global 
Preamble  earlier  this  year  was  an  important  development  that  built  upon  a  tradition  of 
increasing engagement across the committees. The initial Global Preamble was published in 
2013 and marked the first time the committees had come together to provide a single voice 
around  best  practices.  For  example,  the  document  noted  that  market  participants  are 
expected to have systems and controls in place to: 
• 
• 
develop and promote a strong culture of ethical behavior and standards of conduct; 
promote  awareness  and  use  of  general  dealing  practices,  procedures,  and 
conventions; 
ensure accurate and timely pre‐trade preparation and trade capture; 
support  robust  and  efficient  back  office  operations  including  confirmation,  netting, 
payment, and settlement; and 
mitigate  risk  in  FX  transactions  from  the  point  of  initial  discussion  regarding  a 
potential transaction to settlement. 
  The revised and expanded Global Preamble, published this past March, features even more 
substantive  and  detailed  guidance  on  topics  such  as  personal  conduct, confidentiality  and 
market  conduct,  and  policies  for  execution  practices.13  The  Global  Preamble  provided  an 
important opportunity to integrate the recommendations from the FSB FXBG report into best 
practices  at  a  global  level.  For  example,  it  includes  language  related  to  protection  of 
information and confidentiality, as well as the enforcement of internal systems and controls 
involving both certain types of transactions and information. 
The  publication  of the Global  Preamble  was  a  very  important  step  in helping  to  provide  a 
more  globally  harmonized  and  consistent  framework  for  national  codes  of  conduct  and  in 
integrating the FXBG recommendations, but it is not the final step. It is clear that further work 
is  required  both  to  strengthen  best  practices  at  a  global  level  and  to  promote  greater 
adherence to those practices. Recent developments indicate that market participants have 
either  not  been  aware  of  existing  best  practices  guidance  or  have  made  the  conscious 
decision to violate such guidance in the hopes of making a short-term gain. The cost of these 
short-term gains has come at all of our expense and we must all be engaged to ensure that 
this  does  not  happen  again.  Moving  toward  more  globally  harmonized  guidance  –  and 
consistent  adherence  to  such  guidance  –  is  an  important  step  forward  in  maintaining  the 
integrity of the market. 
In  recognition  of  the  importance  of  this  work,  a  new  working  group  of  the  BIS  Markets 
Committee has been formed to facilitate the establishment of a single global code of conduct 
and  principles  and  to  promote  greater  adherence  to  such  guidance.14  This  newly  formed 
                                                
13   See http://www.ny.frb.org/fxc/2015/Global%20Preamble%20March30.pdf. 
14   See: http://www.bis.org/press/p150511.htm. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  
 
structure  will  deepen  and  broaden  the  already  initiated  public-private  partnership  and  will 
engage an even wider set of financial centers in order to effectively move this work on best 
practices forward. The work will occur on a global scale and will engage a wide variety of 
market infrastructures and participants, including both the buy side and sell side. It will likely 
draw upon a variety of efforts, including the important work done in the U.K. under the Fair 
and Effective Markets Review. The FXC will be actively engaged in this effort along with its 
counterparts abroad, at the direction of the BIS Markets Committee FX Working Group. 
The  development  of  a  single  global  code  for  the  FX  market  is  a  significant  effort,  but 
developing a code is not enough. Codes of conduct and associated best practices are an 
important  complement  to  regulation.  They  can  support  the  integrity  and  function  of  the 
market  by  underpinning  the  smooth  operation  of  the  market  and  instill  confidence  that 
participants will treat each other fairly. But this is not possible, or sufficient, if best practices 
do not evolve as the market evolves, if they are not implemented effectively, or if they are not 
adhered to by market participants actively engaged in the market. Development of dynamic 
best practices is critical, as is the market’s adherence. 
Recent headlines and events paint a picture of an FX market that does not always serve the 
public well. But you all have an opportunity to change this picture – to support the work to 
strengthen  the  market.  I  encourage  you  all  to  make  the  most  of  this  opportunity.  As  Guy 
Debelle noted in his speech in February, the failure to act on the FXBG recommendations 
may prompt authorities to conclude that further regulation is the only way to strengthen the 
integrity  of  the  market.15  Similarly,  the  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  England,  Mark  Carney, 
emphasized in his recent Mansion House speech that a failure to establish effective common 
standards that are adhered to would likely result in more restrictive regulation.16 Consider this 
message  reiterated  here  today  as  well.  I  encourage  you  all  to  be  engaged  both  at  the 
individual and the firm level – to share your perspective and contribute to the process to help 
strengthen  best  practices,  and  to  support  adherence  to  such  standards  in  this  critically 
important market. 
Conclusion 
To  sum  up,  the  foreign  exchange  market  is  one  of  the  most  vital  markets  in  the  world. 
Individuals,  institutions,  and  the  global  financial  system  as  a  whole  rely  upon  the  ongoing 
effective  functioning  of  this  market.  The  market  is  constantly  evolving,  and  it  remains 
imperative  that  the  industry  work  to  strengthen  the  foundation  of  the  market,  and  help  to 
ensure that its integrity is upheld. Particularly in the wake of recent scandals, there is a role 
for  industry  participants  to  restore  and  maintain  market  integrity  through  support  and 
development of best practices. 
You all have a shared stake in this. As you move forward, always bear in mind the critical 
role that the FX market plays and think about whether your choices enhance or weaken the 
integrity of the market. 
I appreciate the work of those around the room to do so, as well as publications such as FX 
Week and others, for sharing their perspectives and providing continued coverage of these 
and other issues relevant to the market. Thank you. 
                                                
15   See http://www.bis.org/review/r150213c.htm. 
16   See http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/speeches/2015/speech821.pdf. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
