  Philip Lowe: Low inflation in a world of monetary stimulus 
Speech  by  Mr  Philip  Lowe,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Australia,  to  the 
Goldman Sachs Annual Global Macro Economic Conference, Sydney, 5 March 2015. 
 I would like to thank Marion Kohler for excellent assistance in the preparation of these remarks. 
Accompanying charts can be found at the end of the speech. 
I would like to thank Goldman Sachs for the invitation to speak today. It is a pleasure to be 
here and be part of your annual Macro Economic Conference. 
It  is  perhaps  stating  the  obvious  to  say  that  an  important  part  of  the  macroeconomic 
environment  is  monetary  policy.  The  actions  of  central  banks  have  material  effects  on 
financial markets and can shape macroeconomic outcomes. Indeed, over recent decades it 
became widely accepted that monetary policy was the primary macroeconomic stabilisation 
tool and that monetary policy could effectively manage the business cycle. 
From today’s perspective, the picture looks a little different. In many ways, the current global 
monetary environment is quite extraordinary. There has been unprecedented money creation 
by the world’s major central banks. Policy interest rates are negative across much of Europe. 
Long-term government bonds yields in most advanced economies are the lowest in recorded 
history.  Lending  rates  for  many  private  sector  borrowers  are  the  lowest  ever.  And  some 
banks in Europe are now charging customers to accept deposits. 
In  earlier  eras,  one  could  have  predicted  with  some  confidence  that  this  type  of  monetary 
stimulus would have created a boom in economic activity and subsequently a substantial lift 
in inflation. Yet, today, many parts of the world continue to operate with considerable spare 
capacity, inflation rates are low almost everywhere and inflation expectations have generally 
declined, not increased. 
So this afternoon, I would like to talk a little about these very unusual times. I will begin by 
showing a few graphs that summarise the current global monetary environment. I would then 
like  to  explore  some  of  the  possible  reasons  why  we  are  in  this  environment  before 
addressing some of the implications of all this for Australia. 
The current global monetary environment 
So first, to the facts. 
Since the global financial crisis, we have seen an extraordinary increase in the size of central 
bank balance sheets. This first graph shows the size of the combined balance sheet of the 
US  Federal  Reserve,  the  Bank  of  Japan  and  the  European  Central  Bank  (Graph  1).  This 
combined balance sheet has increased from the equivalent of US$3½ trillion in early 2007 to 
almost  US$10  trillion  today,  and  a  further  substantial  rise  is  in  prospect.  Once  this  further 
increase has occurred, the combined balance sheet will be equivalent to around 35 per cent 
of  the  relevant  countries’  collective  GDP,  up  from  just  10  per  cent  prior  to  the  crisis.  This 
increase has taken place primarily by the central banks creating money to purchase assets 
outright from the private sector. 
The next graph shows a long time-series of nominal 10-year government bond yields for a 
number of advanced economies (Graph 2). The striking thing is how low these rates are now. 
The  German  and  Japanese  Governments  can  borrow  for  10  years  at  less  than  0.4  of  a 
percentage  point,  while  the  US  and  UK  Governments  pay  2  per  cent  or  less.  At  shorter 
maturities, investors are prepared to actually pay governments to look after their money. And 
it is not just governments that can borrow at negative rates, with yields on the bonds issued 
by some highly rated corporations also turning negative recently. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
  With nominal rates so low, real long-term government bond yields in much of the world are 
negative.  One  way  of  calculating  these  real  rates  is  to subtract  the central  bank’s  inflation 
target  from  the  nominal  10-year  yield.  The  results  of  this  are  shown  in  this  next  graph 
(Graph 3). If the central banks do achieve their inflation targets (and there is some doubt that 
this will be the case), the current yields imply very large real losses for the holders of some 
sovereign bonds. For example, if the Bank of Japan was to achieve its inflation target over 
the  next  decade,  then  current  holders  of  10-year  Japanese  government  bonds  would  lose 
around 15 per cent of their investment in real terms. The same is broadly true in Germany. 
And in the United States, the real return over the next 10 years would be zero. 
The next graph shows current headline inflation rates for a number of countries as well as 
the  midpoint  of  the  relevant  inflation  target  or  objective  (Graph  4).  In  all  advanced 
economies, inflation  is  currently  below  target  and  this  is also  true  in  quite  a  few  emerging 
market  economies.  Of  course,  one  reason  for  the  low  inflation  rates  is  the  recent  large 
decline in oil prices. But even so, as is evident from the following graph (Graph 5), core or 
underlying rates of inflation are also below target almost everywhere. 
So to summarise briefly, the current environment is one in which there has been a very large 
monetary stimulus, interest rates are very low  and inflation is subdued. This is not exactly 
what the traditional textbooks would have predicted. 
Why do we find ourselves here? 
The obvious questions that arise here are why do we find ourselves in this situation and what 
does it say about the effectiveness of global monetary policy? 
One answer is that the current environment simply reflects the extreme nature of the financial 
crisis  and  that  monetary  policy  is  working  pretty  much  as  it  always  has.  In  a  number  of 
dimensions  the  crisis  was  the  biggest  financial  shock  since  the  Great  Depression  in  the 
1930s.  It  led  to  major  stresses  in  bank  and  government  balance  sheets  and  badly  dented 
confidence. Monetary policy responded to this, with the size of the response commensurate 
with  the  size  of  the  shock.  According  to  this  line  of  argument,  what  is  unusual  about  the 
current environment is not the magnitude or the effectiveness of the monetary response, but 
rather the magnitude of the underlying problem to which monetary policy is responding. 
An  alternative  answer  is  that  the  effects  of  monetary  policy  have  been  somewhat  less,  or 
slower to materialise, than in earlier times. Partly as a result of this, the monetary response 
has needed to be larger. This line of argument recognises the considerable damage caused 
by the financial crisis, but sees economic activity and inflation responding in only a relatively 
muted way to the monetary stimulus, with central banks having to do more to achieve their 
mandated goals. 
There is probably an element of truth in both of these answers. The shock caused by the 
financial  crisis  was  indeed  a  very  large  one  and  a  very  large  monetary  response  was 
appropriate and helpful. At the same time, though, the transmission of the monetary stimulus 
does  look  to  have  been  a  little  different  through  this  episode.  Economic  activity  does  not 
appear to have responded to the stimulatory monetary conditions in the way that occurred in 
the past and inflation rates have been very low. 
Perhaps the single most important factor explaining this is the very high levels of debt that 
exist in many advanced economies. 
One of the channels through which monetary policy works is by encouraging people to bring 
forward  future  spending  to  today.  This  requires  them  to  borrow  or  to  reduce  their  rate  of 
savings. In the years leading up to the crisis, a reduction in interest rates could be reliably 
predicted to encourage such a response. Credit was easily accessible, economic volatility in 
many economies was low and people were prepared to borrow. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  In today’s world, things look quite different. After a steady increase in debt levels over the 
previous two decades, many people do not want more debt (Graph 6). They do not want to – 
or they do not have the confidence to – bring forward future spending to today. As a result, 
household indebtedness in many countries has declined even though interest rates are the 
lowest on record. 
One area where low interest rates do appear to be having the broadly expected effect is on 
asset  prices:  global  equity  markets  have  been  strong;  property  prices  are  again  recording 
solid  gains  in  some  countries;  and  bond  prices  have  increased  substantially.  However,  for 
these  increases  in  asset  prices  to  boost  the  global  economy,  households  and  businesses 
need to respond by increasing their spending. While in the United States there are now some 
signs that this is happening, on the whole the response of private spending to higher asset 
prices has been muted. 
Overall, looking at this experience, I find it difficult to escape the conclusion that changes in 
interest rates are not affecting decisions about spending and saving in the way they might 
once  have  done.  Undoubtedly,  low  interest  rates  are  helping  to  repair  balance  sheets  by 
lowering debt-servicing costs and by pushing up asset prices. In so doing, they are helping 
lay the foundations for future growth in consumption and investment. But, while this repair 
process is taking place, consumption is weaker than it otherwise would be. In turn, subdued 
consumption  growth  is  feeding  through  to  a  more  subdued  business  climate  and  weaker 
investment. 
Arguably,  a  similar  dynamic  has  been  playing  out  in  government  finances  in  a  number  of 
countries. After the financial crisis, many governments found themselves with debt levels that 
were very high (Graph 7). Like many households, they have responded by tightening their 
belts. Given the high levels of debt and ongoing imbalances between recurrent revenue and 
expenditure,  few  governments  have  seen  the  very  low  interest  rates  as  an  opportunity  to 
support long-term infrastructure investment at low cost. Rather, much as households have 
done, governments have taken advantage of the lower debt-servicing costs to help shore up 
their finances. 
A second part of the monetary transmission mechanism that looks a little different is the flow-
on  from  economic  activity  to  inflation.  While  the  evidence  here  is  less  clear  cut,  looking 
around the world it seems probable that both workers and firms perceive that their pricing 
power  has  declined.  To  the  extent  that  this  has  occurred,  it  is  likely  to  have  come  from  a 
combination  of  the  scarring  experience  of  the  financial  crisis  and  of  the  increasing 
globalisation of many markets. 
Over recent years, wage outcomes have been very subdued in many countries. This is true 
not  just  in  those  countries  with  high  unemployment  rates,  but  also  in  those  with  low 
unemployment  rates.  In  Germany,  the  unemployment  rate  is  the  lowest  in  more  than 
30 years and in Japan it is the lowest in around two decades. Yet, in both countries, wage 
outcomes  are  subdued.  More  broadly,  across  a  range  of  countries,  wage  increases  have 
recently  been  slower  than  suggested  by  standard  Phillips  Curve  relationships. This  comes 
after  a  period  in  which  the  wage  adjustments  to  very  high  unemployment  rates  were 
relatively small in a number of countries. 
Time will tell if this simply reflects a change in the normal lags. But I suspect that there is 
something  deeper  going  on.  The  experience  of  the  financial  crisis  has  left  deep  scars  in 
many economies, including a heightened sense of job insecurity. This insecurity has been 
compounded  by  the  increased  competition  that  globalisation  has  brought  as  well  as  by 
changes  in  technology.  It  has  led  to  many  workers  in  advanced  economies  feeling  less 
inclined to seek the wage increases that they might once have sought – they feel that they 
have less market power and that keeping a job is more important than seeking a large pay 
increase. 
A  similar  dynamic  is  probably  playing  out  in  the  pricing  decisions  of  many  businesses. 
Globalisation has brought new competition in many markets for goods and services and the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
  financial  crisis  increased  business  uncertainty.  In  this  environment,  putting  up  prices  can 
seem to be a more risky proposition than it did previously. 
It is difficult to tell how persistent any of these perceived changes in market power are likely 
to  be.  It  still  seems  highly  probable  that  a  period  of  strong  growth  in  the  global  economy 
would eventually see a generalised increase in pricing power. In the meantime, though, the 
inflation pressures in the global economy are quite muted. The recent fall in oil prices has 
reinforced  this  and  has  contributed  to  a  decline  in  inflation  expectations  in  a  number  of 
countries. 
In  this  environment,  the  limits  of  monetary  policy  are  becoming  more  visible  than  perhaps 
they  were  in  earlier  years.  High  levels  of  debt  and  increased  uncertainty  look  to  have 
changed  or,  at  least  temporarily,  altered  the  transmission  mechanism.  This  is  one  of  the 
reasons why the G20 and others have focused on the importance of structural reform and 
improving the climate for investment. At the global level, stronger and more effective policies 
in  these  areas  would  be  helpful  in  encouraging  both  households  and  businesses  to  take 
advantage  of  the  opportunities  that  low  interest  rates  have  provided.  Monetary  policy  can 
help  support  the  global  economy,  but  ultimately  it  cannot  be  the  fundamental  driver  of 
economic growth. 
Implications for Australia 
So what does all this mean for Australia? 
There are three general points that I would like to make. 
The  first  is  that  global  monetary  developments  are  having  a  significant  effect  on  the 
configuration of Australian exchange rates and interest rates, and thus on our asset prices. 
The  monetary  stimulus  abroad  has  tended  to  put  downward  pressure  on  the  value  of  the 
currencies  concerned.  Conversely,  it  has  put  upward  pressure  on  the  value  of  other 
currencies  where  the  need  for  monetary  stimulus  has  been  less,  including  the  Australian 
dollar.  While  movements  in  the  value  of  our  own  currency  remain  heavily  influenced  by 
changes  in  commodity  prices,  the  upward  pressure  on  the  Australian  dollar  from 
developments  abroad  has  complicated  the  transition  of  the  economy  following  the  mining 
investment boom. 
With  our  exchange  rate  higher  than  it  otherwise  would  have  been,  domestic  demand  has 
been a bit weaker. The Reserve Bank Board has responded to a softer economic outlook by 
having  interest  rates  lower  than  otherwise.  The  easier  monetary  policy  in  Australia  has 
supported the domestic economy. It has done this partly by offsetting some of the upward 
pressure on our currency from developments abroad, although the scale of global monetary 
stimulus means that our exchange rate remains relatively high given the state of our overall 
economy.  The  end  result  here  is  that  global  developments  have  left  us  with  a  higher 
exchange rate and lower interest rates than would otherwise have been the case. We may 
not like this configuration, but developments abroad give us little choice. 
The lower interest rates have boosted domestic asset prices, with both property and equity 
prices recording strong gains recently (Graph 8). The low interest rates globally have also 
worked to push up Australian asset prices. Overseas investors, faced with very low returns, 
have  looked  elsewhere  around  the  world  for  higher-yielding  assets.  Some  of  these  assets 
are in Australia and so we have seen significant inflows into some types of investment. One 
example of this is commercial property, where foreign investors have been attracted by the 
historically high yields. The higher asset prices are helping to support the economy, although 
they  need  to  be  watched  carefully,  particularly  where  they  are  accompanied  by  higher 
borrowing. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  The second general point that I would like to make is that the same factors that are affecting 
the transmission of monetary policy globally are also evident in Australia, although to a lesser 
extent. 
In common with households in a number of other countries, Australian households increased 
their borrowing over the decade or so to the mid 2000s as they adjusted to lower nominal 
interest  rates  and  greater  access  to  finance.  During  this  period,  the  saving  rate  fell  and 
indebtedness increased (Graph 9). But this adjustment is now complete. Over recent years 
many  more  households  have  focused  on  paying  down  their  debts,  rather  than  borrowing 
more, and the saving rate has increased. In the earlier period, the level of interest rates that 
we have today would have caused a large boom in borrowing, but this has not occurred. 
One area where this change in behaviour is apparent is in the household sector’s injection of 
equity  into  the  housing  stock  (Graph  10).  In  the  early  2000s  when  property  prices  were 
increasing  strongly,  many  households  used  their  newfound  wealth  to  withdraw  equity  and 
enjoy higher levels of consumption. Again, this is not occurring on this occasion and this is 
changing the way that monetary policy affects the economy. 
A related part of the transmission mechanism that may be changing is the so-called cash-
flow channel. One of the ways that lower interest rates help boost spending is by improving 
the  overall  cash  flow  of  the  household  sector.  Since  household  borrowing  exceeds 
household  deposits,  a  cut  in  interest  rates  puts  more  money  in  the  aggregate  household 
budget.  However,  there  are  large  differences  across  households.  When  interest  rates  go 
down  borrowers  pay  less  interest  and  so  are  better  off.  But  savers  receive  less  interest 
income  and  so  are  worse  off.  How  these  two  different  groups  respond  determines  how 
powerful this cash-flow channel is. 
While  it  is  not  possible  to  be  definitive,  there  are  reasonable  grounds  to  believe  that  the 
behaviour of both borrowers and savers might have changed a little. Many borrowers have 
responded to the lower interest rates of recent years by paying off their loan a little faster, 
rather  than  increasing  their  spending.  This  is  evident  in  the  data  on  total  mortgage 
repayments  and  scheduled  repayments  (Graph  11).  Conversely,  it  seems  likely  that  those 
relying on interest income have reduced their spending by more than would previously have 
been  the  case.  Certainly,  the  many  letters  we  have  been  receiving  at  the  Bank  recently 
would suggest this. Unfortunately, one of the consequences of a world in which many more 
people want to save than to invest is that the return to saving falls, particularly on savings 
held in low-risk assets such as bank deposits. 
One  other  change  to  the  global  monetary  transmission  mechanism  that  has  echoes  in 
Australia  is the  behaviour  of  wages.  As  in  many  other  countries,  wage  growth  in Australia 
has  been  quite  subdued  and  lower  than  would  be  suggested  by  most  of  our  standard 
models. The latest reading of the wage price index shows an annual increase of 2½ per cent 
and the earnings per hour measure from the national accounts is lower still (Graph 12). This 
low level of wage growth is contributing to quite low rates of inflation in a range of service 
industries.  Increased  job  uncertainty  is  likely  to  be  one  of  the  factors  here,  with  consumer 
surveys showing high levels of concern about future unemployment. 
The  third  general  point  is  that  despite  the  transmission  mechanism  looking  somewhat 
different, monetary policy in Australia is still working and it is helping to support the Australian 
economy. 
The  area  where  this  is  most  obvious  is  in  housing  construction,  where  there  has  been  a 
substantial lift. This part of the transmission mechanism appears to be operating pretty much 
as normal, with the increase in activity over the past 1½ years being in line with our internal 
forecasts made in the second half of 2013 when the cash rate was first set at 2½ per cent. 
This increased activity is boosting employment in the sector and having flow-through effects 
to spending on homewares and related items. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
  The exchange rate channel of monetary policy is also working. There are some signs that the 
depreciation of the Australian dollar is boosting domestic activity, with net exports of services 
increasing strongly. Also, in our liaison program a number of businesses have reported that 
they see the lower exchange rate as opening up new opportunities. In time, we should see 
the effect of this on domestic production and spending. 
Monetary  policy  is,  of  course,  also  working  through  the  other  channels  that  I  discussed 
earlier, even if the effects are somewhat different from those in the past. 
So, overall, monetary policy is continuing to play an important role in supporting demand in 
the  Australian  economy.  At  its  February  meeting,  the  Reserve  Bank  Board  decided  that  it 
was appropriate to provide some additional support. This was not because things had turned 
for the worse, but rather because of the lack of compelling signs that economic growth was 
picking up as was earlier expected. No doubt, the factors that I have talked about today go 
some way to explaining why this has turned out to be the case. At its meeting on Tuesday 
this week, the Board maintained the cash rate at 2¼ per cent, but noted that further easing 
may be appropriate over the period ahead. 
Finally, stepping back from the short term, the low interest rates we are seeing globally and 
in Australia are a direct consequence of an elevated appetite for saving and a muted appetite 
for real investment in many economies. Monetary policy globally has responded to this reality 
in a way that a decade or so ago would have hardly seemed imaginable. In doing so it has 
helped  the  global  economy  through  a  very  difficult  period.  But,  at  the  end  of  the  day,  the 
solution to the problems caused by the disconnect between the desire to save and the desire 
to  invest  cannot  lie  with  monetary  policy.  Instead,  it  lies  in  measures  to  improve  the 
investment environment so that once again there is strong productive demand for the use of 
our societies’ savings. 
Thank you and I would be happy to answer any questions you might have. 
 
 6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  Graph 1 
    Graph 2 
     BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
 Graph 3 
    Graph 4 
   8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 Graph 5 
     Graph 6 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
  10 
 Graph 7 
   Graph 8 
     BIS central bankers’ speeches
 Graph 9 
    Graph 10 
     BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11
 Graph 11 
    Graph 12 
   12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
