  Jean-Pierre Danthine: Presentation of the Swiss National Bank’s 
Financial Stability Report 
Introductory remarks by Mr Jean-Pierre Danthine, Vice Chairman of the Governing Board of 
the Swiss National Bank, at the Media News Conference of the Swiss National Bank, Berne, 
18 June 2015. 
 As my colleague Thomas Jordan has explained, global economic growth in the first quarter 
of  2015  was  below  expectations.  However,  over  the  last  12  months,  we  have  seen  an 
improvement  in  international  economic  and  financial  conditions,  although  substantial  risks 
remain.  The  domestic  environment  has  become  more  challenging  due  to  the  strong 
appreciation of the Swiss franc that followed the discontinuation of the minimum exchange 
rate in January 2015. Against this background, I would like to examine the situation at Swiss 
banks from a financial stability perspective, looking first at the big banks and then moving on 
to a discussion of domestically focused banks. A more detailed assessment of the situation 
can be found in the latest Financial Stability Report published today. 
Big banks 
Further improving resilience 
Over  the  past  year, the Swiss  big  banks  have  continued  to  improve  their  capital  situation, 
albeit at a slower pace than the year before. They already meet most of the requirements 
which will apply from 2019. While acknowledging the progress made, the SNB recommends 
that the big banks do not lose momentum in their efforts to improve their resilience. This is 
particularly warranted with regard to the leverage ratio. 
Resilience needs to be further improved for three reasons: First, the big banks’ loss potential 
relative to their capitalisation continues to be substantial. Second, while the Swiss big banks’ 
risk-weighted capital ratios are above the average for large globally active banks, the same 
cannot  yet  be  said  for  their  leverage  ratios.  Third,  it  can  be  expected  that  regulatory 
developments  at  both  international  and  national  level  will  result  in  increased  capital 
requirements.1 The Swiss big banks should prepare for these developments. 
RWA problem identified, but not yet resolved 
In the capital regulation of banks, risk-weighted assets (RWA) play a key role. As mentioned 
in  previous  Financial  Stability  Reports,  both  markets’  and  authorities’  confidence  in  RWA 
calculated  using  banks’  internal  models  has  steadily  declined.  A  number  of  studies  have 
shown that, in some instances, model-based RWA do not properly reflect a bank’s economic 
risks.2 As a consequence, capital ratios calculated using model-based RWA may overstate 
the true level of resilience. 
                                                
1  Based  on  the  review  of  the  Swiss  “too  big  to  fail”  regulations  by  the  group  of  experts  on  the  further 
development of the financial market strategy (Brunetti group of experts), the Federal Council has instructed 
the  Federal  Department  of  Finance  to  prepare  legal  adjustments,  which  primarily  concern  more  stringent 
capital requirements. Cf. media release of the Federal Council, 18 February 2015. 
2  For  instance,  international  studies  have  revealed  significant  differences  in  RWA  between  banks  using  the 
model-based approach. These can only be partially explained by differences in the level of risk taken by the 
banks.  Cf.,  for  example,  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision,  Regulatory  consistency  assessment 
programme (RCAP) – Analysis of risk-weighted assets for market risks, January 2013; cf. also EBA, Interim 
results of the EBA review of the consistency of risk-weighted assets, 26 February 2013; Barclays, The dog 
that dug, 21 September 2012. Studies at national level have also shown that model-based RWA are too low in 
some cases. Cf. FINMA Annual Media Conference, “Models and their limitations”, 31 March 2015. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  To  address  this  problem,  regulatory  initiatives  have  been  launched  at  international  and 
national  level.  At  international  level,  the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision  is 
fundamentally  revising  the  standardised  approach.  The  Committee  is  also  examining  the 
introduction  of  a  floor  for  internally  modelled  RWA  based  on  this  revised  standardised 
approach. One important objective of the floor would be to ensure that capital requirements 
based on banks’ internal models do not fall below a prudent level. 
At national level, FINMA – together with the big banks and with the support of the SNB – has 
conducted a comparison between RWA calculated using the model-based and standardised 
approaches.  The  results  of  this  comparison,  in  addition  to  the  measures  already  taken  by 
FINMA and those expected at the international level, will be taken into account by a working 
group led by the Federal Department of Finance. This working group will draw up proposals 
and the associated legal adjustments for implementing the recommendations in the Federal 
Council’s ‘too big to fail’ evaluation report. 
Alongside these regulatory initiatives, the SNB still considers it necessary that the big banks 
increase  transparency  with  regard  to  RWA.  FINMA  has  now  called  on  these  banks  to 
disclose  the  differences  between  calculations  using  the  model-based  and  standardised 
approaches.  Such  enhanced  transparency  is  necessary  to  restore  the  credibility  of  model-
based RWA and to strengthen market discipline. 
The  SNB  continues  to  hold  the  view  that  risk-weighted  capital  requirements  –  including  a 
floor  for  model-based  RWA  –  and  leverage  ratio  requirements  should  complement  each 
other. Risk-weighted requirements should guide economic decisions at the margin, while the 
leverage  ratio  should  serve  as  a  backstop.  Yet,  until  the  measures  to  resolve  the  RWA 
problem  take  effect,  it  is  prudent  to  give  a  greater  weighting  to  the  leverage  ratio  when 
assessing  the  big  banks’  resilience.  Indeed,  analysts  increasingly  pay  attention  to  the 
leverage ratio when assessing and comparing banks. 
Domestically focused commercial banks 
Increased mortgage exposure, capital situation stable 
I would now like to turn to the domestically focused commercial banks. In 2014, these banks 
further increased their exposure to the Swiss mortgage and residential real estate markets. 
While the share of new loans with high loan-to-income ratios – a measure of affordability risk 
– remained persistently high, mortgage lending growth and the share of new mortgage loans 
with a high loan-to-value ratio decreased. Hence, the increase in exposure was lower than in 
previous years. 
With respect to bank capitalisation, the situation remained largely unchanged in 2014. First, 
the domestically focused commercial banks’ leverage ratios remained stable at high levels by 
historical standards. Second, these banks’ risk-weighted capital ratios increased slightly and 
are  significantly  above  regulatory  minimum  requirements  overall.  Furthermore,  stress  test 
results  suggest  that  most  domestically  focused  banks  should  be  able  to  absorb  estimated 
losses  without  seeing  their  capitalisation  fall  below  the  regulatory  minimum.  Nevertheless, 
under the most relevant adverse scenarios for these banks, the losses would deplete a large 
proportion of their surplus capital. 
Experience in Switzerland in the 1990s, as in other countries, suggests that this would lead 
to  a general  weakening of  the  banking  sector  and  significantly  affect  banks’  ability  to  lend, 
with negative and lasting repercussions for the real economy. 
The stress test results highlight the importance of banks holding significant capital surpluses 
relative to the regulatory minimum requirements. The activation of the countercyclical capital 
buffer in 2013 and its increase in 2014 has made a significant contribution in this respect. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Risk of renewed increase in imbalances on mortgage and real estate markets 
Overall,  imbalances  on  the  mortgage  and  residential  real  estate  markets  have  remained 
broadly  unchanged  since  the  last  Financial  Stability  Report.  From  a financial  stability 
perspective, this is a positive development. 
However, it is still too early to give the all-clear. On the one hand, imbalances remain at a 
high  level  and  have  not  yet  started  to  decline.  On  the  other  hand,  the  further  decline  of 
capital and money market interest rates observed since January 2015 carries the risk of a 
renewed increase in imbalances on the Swiss mortgage and residential real estate markets 
over the medium term. 
First,  compared  to  alternative  assets,  investments  in  real  estate  appear  to  have  become 
more  attractive  for  banks,  commercial  investors  and  households.  In  the  residential 
investment  property  segment  in  particular,  additional  demand  from  investors  searching  for 
yield might push prices up further. 
Second, the unprecedented interest rate environment creates additional incentives for banks 
to incur higher interest rate and credit risks. They might be tempted to increase both maturity 
transformation  and  lending  to  compensate  for  the  additional  pressure  on  margins  and  to 
stabilise  short-term  profitability.  Such  strategies  would  further  increase  banks’  exposure  to 
large interest rate shocks and to a correction on the mortgage and real estate markets. Given 
these risks to financial stability, banks and authorities should remain alert and, if necessary, 
take measures to contain such risks. 
In particular, should momentum on the mortgage and residential real estate markets pick up 
again,  additional  measures  might  become  necessary.  In  this  regard,  particular  attention 
should  be  paid  to  the  investment  property  segment.  This  segment  is  more  likely  to  be 
materially affected by the additional demand from investors searching for yield in the current 
environment.  Furthermore,  the  measures  taken  so  far  have  predominantly  addressed  the 
segment of owner-occupied residential real estate. 
For its part, the SNB will continue to monitor developments on the mortgage and real estate 
markets closely, and will reassess the need for an adjustment to the countercyclical capital 
buffer on a regular basis. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
