Jens Weidmann: Heading for stability and prosperity – bringing the 
euro area back on track 
Keynote speech by Dr Jens Weidmann, President of the Deutsche Bundesbank, at the 
City of London Corporation, London, 12 February 2015. 
 Introduction 
1. 
Lord Mayor 
Ladies and gentlemen 
I am very pleased and honoured to speak here at the Guildhall today, so thank you for 
the invitation. 
I do not always agree with the Financial Times’ chief economics commentator Martin 
Wolf,  but  he  was  absolutely  right  when  he  wrote  in  one  of  his  recent  commentaries: 
“These  are  exciting  times  in  European  central  banking.”  Indeed,  they  are.  The 
excitement  is  due,  not  least,  to  the  controversial  decisions  that  have  been  taken 
recently. 
I  would  like  to  seize  this  opportunity  to  explain  to  you  my  view  on  current  monetary 
policy issues, although I also wish to talk about the future of European monetary union 
(EMU). 
“Masters of the Universe” 
2. 
Ladies and gentlemen 
The first time I heard the expression “Masters of the Universe” was in the early 1980s 
when the action toy figures of the same name conquered toy markets worldwide. By 
1986, sales had ballooned to USD 400 million before plunging to a mere USD 7 million 
just one year later: the strong and virtuous He-Man and his sidekicks took a fall and 
never recovered. 
In the same year as those figures vanished from the toy shops, a bestselling novel by 
Tom  Wolfe  took  the  book  stores  by  storm:  The  Bonfire  of  the  Vanities.  The  slightly 
unsavoury hero of the story, a fixed-income broker on Wall Street, and his colleagues 
in  the  bond  department  considered  themselves  to  be  the  very  “Masters  of  the 
Universe”. 
Since then, the members of the toughest and most sophisticated business areas of the 
financial sector have frequently been referred to as “Masters of the Universe”. 
Since  the  global financial  crisis,  however,  the reputation  of the financial  industry  has 
been  seriously  tarnished,  above  all  in  the  public  eye.  While  many  were  certainly  to 
blame for the crisis, it became obvious that insufficient financial market regulation and 
wrong  incentives  in  the  financial  system,  for  example  in  remuneration,  contributed 
significantly to the crisis. 
When  the  financial  system  was  on  the  brink,  governments  and  central  banks  had  to 
step in to maintain financial stability and protect the real economy from negative spill-
overs. 
In normal times, central banks do their business without attracting very much attention 
from the public, and rightly so – you may remember Mervyn King’s characterisation of a 
good central banker: “Boring is best”. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
But in times of crisis, central banks move into the focus of attention. Over the past few 
years,  however,  expectations  as  to  what  central  banks  can  do  and  should  do  have 
reached excessive levels. No wonder central bankers are today considered to be the 
new or the real “Masters of the Universe”. 
As you can probably imagine, I refuse to accept this label. The higher the expectations 
placed on central banks’ abilities, the greater the risk of overburdening them. 
This problem is particularly relevant in the euro area, where the ECB is considered by 
some to be the only workable institution. However, I agree with my French colleague 
Christian Noyer who recently said: “It’s not good to be seen as ‘the only game in town’ 
(…). We cannot substitute governments just because their response is believed to be 
too slow.” 
Current monetary policy in the euro area 
3. 
The main firewall against overburdening is the central bank’s mandate: which is why 
central banks should stick to it. In the case of the Eurosystem, the mandate enshrined 
in the EU Treaties is to maintain price stability in the euro area. The Governing Council 
aims to maintain inflation rates “below, but close to, 2% over the medium term”. 
At the current end, inflation rates in the euro area are significantly below 2%; in fact, 
the most recent inflation figures were negative. Without doubt, this puts the Governing 
Council  in  quite  an  uncomfortable  situation.  It  is  clear  that  an  excessively  prolonged 
period of low inflation – or “lowflation”, to use the IMF’s expression – is not harmless: It 
could put a strain on the sustainability of private and public debt in some countries and 
make  the  economic  adjustment  process  in  countries  with  losses  in  competitiveness 
more difficult. However, it is worth underscoring that this is an admissible argument in 
monetary policy discussions only insofar as it impacts on price development over the 
policy-relevant horizon. 
And I am quite sure that for most of you, it was quite clear that the Governing Council 
had to react – and that the Governing Council decision three weeks ago to launch a 
sovereign bond purchase programme, or QE, was the only logical response. 
The question  you  have  presumably  been  asking  yourselves  is  this:  why  the  ongoing 
discussion in the Council about a monetary policy instrument that other central banks 
have  used  successfully  in  the  past?  The  answer  is,  because  government  bond 
purchases in a monetary union with a single monetary policy and 19 independent fiscal 
policies  are  not  an  instrument  like  any  other.  They  have  risks  and  unintended  side-
effects which could – and indeed do, in my view – outweigh their expected impact. 
As  you  know,  I  am  sceptical  about  the  decision  on  the  government  bond  purchase 
programme. But take it from me, this scepticism is not founded on what some see as 
chronic  Bundesbank  naysaying  to  a  loosening  of  monetary  policy;  rather,  it  is  the 
outcome of a difficult process of weighing the pros and cons of QE. 
While  I  acknowledge  the  difficult  situation  facing  the  Governing  Council,  and  while  I 
have  backed  many  of 
to  enhance  monetary 
accommodation  in  the  euro  area,  in  my  view  there  was  no  immediate  need  for  this 
particular  measure.  What  we  are  currently  seeing  is  a  disinflationary  process,  not  a 
deflationary spiral of decreasing prices and wages. The risk of self-reinforcing deflation 
is still considered to be very low. And this is not only my assessment, but that of most 
other Governing Council members, too. 
One of the main drivers of disinflation is the sharp fall in energy prices, a factor that is 
expected  to  be  transitory  in  nature.  Hence,  all  the  economic  forecasts  predict  that 
inflation rates will rise over the medium term, albeit at a rather sluggish pace. 
the  previous  measures 
taken 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
The decline in oil prices works more like an economic stimulus for the euro area than a 
harbinger of imminent deflation, as the lower oil price reduces the energy bills of both 
households and businesses. It therefore frees up financial resources which can then be 
put to use elsewhere – for consumption, investment or for reducing debt. All of this is 
good for the economies of the euro-area countries. 
Without any signs of second-round effects – and I do not see any – monetary policy 
need not take any steps to counter the potentially short-lived effect of lower oil prices 
on  consumer  prices. With  regard  to  per  capita  employee  compensation  in  2015,  the 
European Commission forecasts a euro-area increase of 1.3% – and even in a country 
like  Spain,  with  its  protracted  negative  inflation  rate,  the  increase  is  expected  to  be 
0.7%.  And  in Germany, with  its growth  above  potential  and  its  high  level  of  capacity 
utilisation, an increase in per capita employee compensation of 2.9% is expected. 
But it was not primarily my assessment of the need for action which made me sceptical 
about  QE,  but  more  the  combination  of  the  need  and  the  instrument  at  hand  – 
government bond purchases. 
I do not expect QE to have no impact on inflation. But the effects are difficult to gauge, 
and it can be assumed that they will be weaker than in the US, for example, because 
interest rates in the euro area today are already much lower than in the US, especially 
when the first QE programme was launched. Moreover, the funding of US companies is 
much more capital market-based than that of European businesses, and wealth effects 
are generally smaller, too. 
And government bond purchases involve the fundamental risk of mutualising sovereign 
liability risks via the central bank’s balance sheet. While this risk can be more or less 
ignored for countries with their own currency, it can be a major problem for a monetary 
union – especially so for one which, like the European monetary union, is not a fiscal 
union. 
At the end of the day, it could introduce common liability through the back door. And in 
this regard, I am a guy who prefers to use the front door. That is to say that it’s up to 
elected governments and parliaments to make such far-reaching decisions. 
I do acknowledge that the adopted sovereign bond purchase programme partly takes 
into account some of the concerns related to earlier programmes: Only a small part of 
the programme is subject to risk sharing among the central banks of the Eurosystem. 
Additionally, the Governing Council decided on limits for the Eurosystem’s purchases 
of  individual  bond  issues  and for  its  overall  purchases  of  debt  of  one  single  country. 
This is designed to ensure that governments continue to rely on the capital markets for 
their funding. 
Despite all these measures, which obviously make the QE programme less problematic 
than  earlier  sovereign  bond  purchase  programmes  which  aimed  to  reduce  the  risk 
premia  of  individual  countries,  one  important  risk  nonetheless  remains:  The  national 
central  banks  will  become  the  most  important  creditors  to  their  governments,  which 
might  ultimately  put  the independence  of monetary  policy  at  risk. The  purchases  will 
make  life  easier  for  finance  ministers.  They  will  not  be  amused  when  the  Governing 
Council considers exiting its ultra-loose monetary policy. And they might be tempted to 
put political pressure on the Eurosystem. In the European monetary union, however, 
fiscal discipline is absolutely essential because the set-up of the monetary union can 
further compound the tendency of governments to finance their spending through debt, 
as  the  consequences  of  bad  policy  choices  can  more  easily  be  externalised  to 
neighbouring countries. 
Finally, I am worried that sovereign bond purchases will undermine structural reforms 
and budget consolidation in euro-area countries – especially if the impression were to 
emerge that the central bank is stepping in to take the place of effective policy action 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
time and again. Structural reforms and sound public finances, however, are essential if 
the euro-area crisis is to be overcome. 
Certainly, structural problems cannot be resolved by printing money. The Eurosystem 
has played a significant role in preventing an escalation of the crisis. However, central 
bank  action  cannot  replace  the  necessary  adjustment  processes.  In  this  regard,  I 
appreciate assurances by European leaders to the effect that QE must not substitute 
structural  reforms.  However,  I  have  to  admit  that  they  made  me  think  of  a  famous 
quotation from Goethe’s Faust: 
Die Botschaft hör ich wohl, allein mir fehlt der Glaube – 
I hear the message well, but lack Faith’s constant trust. 
The future of EMU 
in  connection  with  exaggerated  growth  expectations,  a  decrease 
4. 
Ladies and gentlemen 
Although the media and others often refer to it, for brevity’s sake, as the “euro crisis”, it 
is not actually a currency crisis but elements of a debt crisis, banking crisis and balance 
of payments crisis all rolled into one. 
This cocktail of crises laid bare unfavourable developments in several countries in the 
first decade of EMU. Economies which had significantly higher interest rates before the 
euro  saw  strong  capital  inflows  following  the  introduction  of  the  single  currency. 
Unfortunately,  these  funds  flooded  into  private  or  public  consumption  or  into  an 
oversized housing sector. 
It  was 
in 
competitiveness  caused  by  high  wage  settlements,  as  well  as  insufficient  financial 
regulation,  that  considerable  imbalances  built  up.  These  then  contributed  to  the 
financial, economic and – later – sovereign debt crises. 
The crisis also revealed shortcomings in the institutional design of EMU. One could say 
that the EMU framework was not built to withstand adverse weather conditions. 
When  the  storm  came,  measures  had  to  be  taken  quickly  to  stabilise  the  monetary 
union  and  its  financial  system.  However,  those  measures  have  thrown  the  balance 
between  liability  and  control  out  of  kilter,  because  liabilities  have  been  partially 
mutualised while fiscal decision-making has essentially remained national. 
In  order  to  overcome  the  euro-area  crisis  once  and  for  all,  three  things  have  to  be 
done. 
1. 
2. 
3. 
Let me elaborate on the three items on this agenda. 
The adjustment process at the national level needs to be continued. 
The institutional framework of EMU needs further reform. 
The financial system needs even greater resilience. 
4.1  National adjustment process to be continued 
The adjustment efforts have made considerable progress over the past few years. Most 
of the crisis-hit countries have managed to substantially diminish their structural budget 
deficits. In addition, the current account deficits have largely been reduced. 
Price competitiveness in the crisis-hit countries has also seen significant improvement. 
Measured in terms of the deflators of total sales the competitiveness of the economy 
has improved by 6% in Portugal, 9% in Spain and 12% in Ireland. The competitiveness 
of the Greek economy has risen by as much as 14%. To some extent, these figures 
can  be  attributed  to  the  depreciation  of  the  euro.  Nevertheless,  the  figures  for  the 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
countries I have just mentioned are also positive when measured in terms of the euro 
area. 
Needless  to  say,  the  job  has  not  been  finished  yet.  Structural  reforms  have  been 
implemented, but more needs to be done. 
Structural  reforms  are  the  best  way  to  generate  sustainable  economic  growth  and 
create employment. It is becoming increasingly clear that the efforts are bearing fruit: 
unemployment rates seem to have peaked, and the economies are growing again. 
This makes it all the more important for the achievements not to be compromised. 
The risk of a backlash is particularly high in Greece. However, I firmly believe that it is 
also in Greece’s own interest to do what is necessary to tackle the structural and fiscal 
problems  it  is  facing.  Greece  will  continue  to  need  support,  but  support  can  only  be 
given  if  the  agreements  made  are  complied  with.  Incidentally,  Greece’s  debt  ratio  is 
very high, but the average maturity is quite long and the average interest rate quite low 
– as is the current annual level of debt servicing. Hence, further debt relief would not 
really  change  Greece’s  liquidity  situation  by  much.  But  any  further  relaxation  of  the 
agreed targets would be counter-productive to efforts to regain investors’ confidence in 
Greece’s debt sustainability. And that would come at the expense of taxpayers in other 
euro-area countries. Additionally, it would also be to the detriment of other euro-area 
countries’ governments: it would be much harder for them to justify the rocky path of 
economic reform. 
But at the end of the day, there is no alternative to economic reforms in the euro area – 
and to reforming the EMU framework. 
4.2  Reform of the EMU framework 
Concerning the long-term reform of the EMU framework, the primary objective should 
be to increase the incentives to make sound and responsible decisions within the euro 
area. To this end, it is important to rebalance liability and control. 
Either  we  establish  centralised  rights  to  intervene  in  national  fiscal  policies  or  we 
strengthen the principle of individual national liability. 
The first  option  would  imply  a  kind  of fiscal  union,  that  is  to  say  a  significant  shift of 
fiscal sovereignty to Brussels. 
In  this  regard,  Governor  Carney  in  his  recent  Dublin  Lecture  explicitly  called  for 
“common fiscal  arrangements”  in  the  euro  area. Without  such  risk  sharing,  which  he 
considers effective in federal systems like the US, Canada or Germany, the euro area 
would, he said, find itself “in an odd position”. In the UK, he pointed out, Scotland would 
have been hit much harder by the recent fall in oil prices if it were not in a fiscal union 
with the rest of the UK. However, these federations and the UK, too, have a powerful 
centre,  whereas  the  euro  area  consists  of  19  independent  nations.  A  central  fiscal 
stabiliser  would  require  central  intervention  and  control  rights.  Otherwise  the  path 
would be set towards a transfer union, and that is certainly not the way to a prosperous 
union. 
A  transfer  union  would  be  a  disincentive  to  keeping  public  finances  in  order,  and 
persistent transfers in one direction could undermine political acceptance of EMU. 
The  decision  by  the  newly  elected  Greek  government  to  stop  cooperating  with  the 
Troika shows how unpopular sharing sovereignty rights with foreign creditors is, even 
in  cases  in  which  national  expenditures  are  largely  dependent  on  external  financial 
help. 
In a nutshell, I do not see enough support for such a great leap forward – either in the 
political sphere or among electorates – which is why I do not expect it to occur in the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
foreseeable  future.  That’s  why  the  principle  of  national  liability  needs  to  be 
underscored.  Otherwise,  the  deficit  bias  of  member  states  of  the  euro  area  will  be 
strengthened, which is harmful to the stability of the currency union. 
Reform steps taken since the onset of the euro-area crisis have largely moved in the 
right direction. However, it is not enough to strengthen the fiscal rules; these rules also 
need to be strictly applied. 
The greater emphasis that has recently been placed on the notion of “flexibility”, and 
the  European  Commission’s  comments 
future 
interpretation of the fiscal rules give reason to fear for the binding effect of the rules. 
Relying on fiscal rules alone will not help to overcome the euro area’s vulnerability to 
crises once and for all. On the contrary, additional steps are needed to strengthen the 
disciplining  effect  of  capital  markets  on  fiscal  policy.  In  that  sense,  the  principle  of 
individual  national  responsibility  ultimately  means  that  governments,  too,  must  be 
allowed to fail financially. 
four  weeks  ago  regarding 
its 
4.3  Making the financial system more resilient and effective 
Sovereign default, however, is still a tricky issue where financial stability is concerned. 
Making the financial system more resilient, and banks less vulnerable, is therefore the 
third item on the “to do list” to bring the euro area back on track. This, by the way, is not 
a challenge exclusive to the euro area, although it is particularly relevant there. 
In a comment piece published in the Financial  Times about a year ago, Tim Harford 
wondered:  “Why  can’t  banking  be  more  like  baking?”  Referring  to  the  Great  Fire  of 
London almost 350 years ago, he wrote: “The last time a baker laid waste to the City 
was 1666 […]; bankers seem to be able to perform the trick more frequently.” Despite 
the similarity in spelling there are, of course, significant differences between those two 
lines of business which explain, for example, why we need a European banking union 
but  not  a  baking  union  in  terms  of  a  single  trade  supervision  for  bread makers,  say. 
Systemic importance, the “too big to fail” issue, and information asymmetries are just a 
few  of  the  special  features  that  distinguish  the  financial  sector  from  non-financial 
business areas. 
The financial crisis laid bare that banking regulation – or metaphorically speaking: the 
fire protection – had been insufficient. This was a key lesson learned from the crisis, 
and the regulations have been tightened over the past few years. 
However, the regulatory agenda has not been completed. In order to prevent too much 
business  from  being  shifted  from  the  regulated  banking  sector  to  the  unregulated 
shadow banking sector, we need to adequately regulate the latter as well. 
As I have already said, financial reform is of particular relevance for the euro area – the 
financial system turned out to be the Achilles’ heel of monetary union. 
The  introduction  of  the  single  currency  led  to  financial  integration,  but  the  focus  of 
regulation  remained  primarily  national.  Hence,  the  lack  of  a  banking  union  was  a 
shortcoming of the monetary union. 
The  establishment  of  the  banking  union,  including  a  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism 
based at the ECB and a Single Resolution Mechanism for ailing banks, is a key step 
towards making monetary union more stable in the long term. 
European banking supervision and the single rule book counteract regulatory arbitrage 
and regulatory capture. And as Governor Carney said last year in Davos: “To make the 
system fairer, the days when banks privatised gains but socialised losses must end.” 
The bail-in procedures which kick in if a bank fails, and which will take effect from the 
start of 2016, will help preserve taxpayers’ money. It was not fair to have taxpayers bail 
out creditors of distressed banks, and it reinforced the moral hazard problems of too-
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
big-too-fail.  But  it  was  widely  regarded  as  a  necessary  evil  for  the  sake  of  financial 
stability given the unclear rules on liability. 
While the banking union will help to protect governments from the fate of banks, it will 
do little to protect banks from the fate of governments. Hence, the banking union will 
not  suffice  to  sever  the  disastrous  sovereign-banking  nexus  which  acted  as  a  fire 
accelerant in the crisis. 
And even today, banks in crisis-hit countries in particular are still tempted to over-invest 
in  sovereign  bonds,  notably  of  their  home  country  and  this  tendency  has  increased 
further  in  the  crisis.  This  practice  is  being  encouraged  by  the  preferential  treatment 
afforded to sovereign exposures, which are exempted from the large exposures regime 
and privileged by low or zero capital requirements. 
I  believe  that  regulation  should  stop  encouraging  banks  to  over-invest  in  sovereign 
exposures and to tie their fate to their sovereign’s solvency. If banks were less exposed 
to sovereign solvency, this would also add to the credibility of the no-bail out rule under 
the Maastricht Treaty. In this sense, I appreciate the fact that the Basel Committee has 
initiated  “a  review  of  the  existing  regulatory  treatment  of  sovereign  risk  and  will 
consider  potential  policy  options”.  While  it  is  sensible  to  conduct  this  review  in  a 
“careful, holistic and gradual manner”, it must not be allowed to lead to procrastination. 
It is obvious that regulatory changes should be implemented with transitional periods, 
but a fundamental decision in favour of terminating the preferential treatment should be 
taken soon. 
Ladies and gentlemen 
The creation of a Capital Markets Union by 2019 is one of the “flagship projects” of the 
new Commission, and Commissioner Hill is expected to table a green paper next week. 
I share the view that the creation of a capital markets union could stimulate growth in 
the European Union substantially. But more than that, it could also boost the stability of 
European  monetary  union.  Studies  have  shown  that  private  risk  sharing  through 
integrated  capital markets  is  a  much more  important  shock  absorber than  public  risk 
sharing. 
When the Bank of England’s Deputy Governor Jon Cunliffe recently gave a speech at a 
City of London event, he said: “Although it shares nomenclature with Banking Union, 
Capital Markets Union is a very different animal”. While the banking union requires a 
great  deal  of  institutional  change,  the  Capital  Markets  Union  does  not. The  aim  of  a 
Capital Markets Union is rather to create a single market for capital across all 28 EU 
member states by removing barriers to cross-border investment. 
Deeper  integration  of  European  capital  markets  could  make  a  key  contribution  to 
improving the absorption of macroeconomic shocks and the impact of heterogeneous 
economic developments, not only in the euro area but in the EU as well. 
The more the capital markets exercise this buffer function, the less fiscal policy will be 
responsible for stabilising the economy, which will ultimately also reduce the pressure 
on  monetary  policymakers  to  support  expansionary  fiscal  policy  by  easing  monetary 
policy.  In  this  regard,  Jon  Cunliffe  rightly  pointed  to  the  particular  importance  of  this 
“smoothing through risk sharing” for the euro area “given the relative lack of adjustment 
mechanisms available to individual euro members when they are hit by shocks”. 
Conclusion 
5. 
Ladies and gentlemen 
Before I conclude, I would like to quote Tom Wolfe’s novel The Bonfire of the Vanities, 
which I mentioned at the beginning of my speech: 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
“(…) there was no more talk about Bond Bores these days (…) Not at all! (…) All of a 
sudden,  in  investment  houses  all  over  Wall  Street,  the  erstwhile  Bond  Bores  were 
making so much money they took to congregating after work in a bar (…) to tell war 
stories  …  and  assure  one  another  this  wasn’t  dumb  luck  but,  rather,  a  surge  of 
collective talent. (…) Masters of the Universe!”. 
This paragraph, taken from a work of fiction, refers to the junk bond boom in the 1980s, 
and yet it serves as a striking reminder of other financial bubbles, like the securitisation 
boom  during  the  2000s.  However,  financial  history  has  taught  us  that  “surges  of 
collective talent” should be taken with a pinch of salt. 
The  latest  financial  crisis  clearly  underscored  that  financial  markets  need  strict  and 
prudential regulation. Otherwise, they cannot perform their function of serving the real 
economy, and the stability of the financial system could be put permanently at risk. 
A prosperous economy needs a healthy and efficient financial system. Well-designed 
financial services help economies to grow. 
However, John Kenneth Galbraith also warned: “Financial disaster is quickly forgotten”. 
We should take his words seriously. Complaints of overregulation should not be raised 
because of short-term concerns about one’s own profitability. On the other hand, our 
regulatory  efforts  should  be  subject to  cost-benefit  analyses,  and  any  assessment  of 
their  impact  should  also  take  into  account  the  interactions  between  different 
regulations. 
Hubris, however, is not limited to the private financial sector. Central bankers should 
not overestimate their abilities, either. If you are looking for “Masters of the Universe”, 
you will find them neither in the private financial sector nor at central banks. Perhaps 
you will come across them in dusty old toy boxes. 
Thank you very much for your attention. I now look forward to your questions. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
