  Benoît Coeuré: Interview in L’Economie politique 
Interview with Mr Benoît Coeuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central 
Bank,  in  the  issue  #  66  of  L’Economie  politique  (quarterly  publication  of  Alternatives 
Economiques), conducted by Ms Sandra Moatti in April 2015. 
 Extracts of the interview were published in the May 2015 issue of Alternatives Economiques. 
The ECB has thoroughly overhauled its practices over the last few years. When you 
joined back in January 2012, were the policies we have subsequently seen, such as 
outright monetary transactions (OMTs) and quantitative easing (QE) conceivable? 
The ECB has thoroughly overhauled its practices over the last few years. When you joined 
back  in  January  2012,  were  the  policies  we  have  subsequently  seen,  such  as  outright 
monetary transactions (OMTs) and quantitative easing (QE) conceivable? 
Concerning the massive public asset purchase programme which was announced on 
22 January, why did it come so late? The ECB’s balance sheet had been shrinking for 
months and inflation was moving steadily downwards. Was the wait due to 
disagreements on the Governing Council? 
You have to see this decision in the historical sequence of successive decisions taken by the 
ECB to deal with the crisis. The issues changed pretty fundamentally in 2013–14. In 2011–12 
we were facing a crisis of fragmentation in the euro area. The priority, both from a political 
and  monetary  perspective,  was  to  ensure  that  the  euro  area  remained  intact  and  that 
monetary policy was transmitted to the countries in crisis. So in late 2011 the ECB decided 
on LTROs to tackle the problems of interbank funding, since the risk of the euro area falling 
apart  in  summer  2012  led  Mario  Draghi  to  make  his  famous  statement  in  London  and 
prompted the ECB to come up with outright monetary transactions (OMTs), a tool intended to 
prevent  self-fulfilling  financial  crises  from  pushing  a  country  to  leave  the  euro.  This  risk  of 
break-up was overcome thanks both to the ECB and also to the will of the heads of state, 
who clearly expressed their desire to keep the euro area intact and create banking union. 
In 2013 the nature of the debate changed and became more traditional, applying to growth 
and  inflation,  which  were  too  weak  in the  euro area  as  a  whole.  There  must  have  been a 
moment in late 2013/early 2014 when the euro area collectively felt the financial crisis was 
over  and  the  economy  was  going  to  pick  up  on  its  own.  But  growth  stumbled  in  summer 
2014. On top of that, the tumbling oil price raised fears of possible deflation. We moved from 
a comfort zone where we thought a cyclical upturn would emerge spontaneously towards a 
more dangerous zone where inflation rates would be persistently adrift from our definition of 
price stability (i.e. 2%). That’s what finally led us to decide to buy up assets. 
In this period, we may have been partly feeling our way, or it could just have been caution. 
When you are designing an entirely new tool, you have to take time and do it properly. Our 
concern,  both  during  summer  2012  with  OMTs  and  in  late  2014/early  2015  with  asset 
purchases, was to come up with tools that would suit the specific features of the euro area 
and also find the highest possible level of consent around the table at the Governing Council. 
That needed a process of maturation and time for debate. So while some people may see a 
risk  of  inertia,  in  fact  we  ended  up  with  decisions  that  are  better  designed,  and  ultimately 
stronger and more credible. Don’t forget that the ECB’s Governing Council has 25 members: 
there are only nine on the Bank of England’s Monetary Policy Committee. 
For instance, we had discussions on whether to buy just government securities, or corporate 
bonds  too.  We  concluded  that  the  trade-off  between  complexity  and  impact  was  less 
attractive for corporate bonds. We also talked about risk-sharing; who was going to buy, who 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  was going to shoulder the risk linked to the securities we were going to buy? You need time 
to have that debate and settle it in a way that satisfies the largest number of people. 
There is a great deal of discussion about the effects of the asset purchase programme 
(QE). What can you hope to achieve when long-term yields are already extremely low? 
Within the euro area, the transmission channel that is almost the most important in my view 
is  confidence.  Confidence  that  the  ECB  will  take  its  mandate  to  keep  inflation  below,  but 
close to, 2% seriously. Before we took this step there had been doubts about the willingness 
of the ECB to respect its mandate. But it was the only substantive measure possible in the 
circumstances;  we  had run  out  of  conventional measures  because  the scope  to  lower  key 
rates had been exhausted. 
The second channel is to lower borrowing costs, which aren’t negligible for companies and 
households.  The  policies  combating  fragmentation  in  the  euro  area  have  borne  fruit;  now 
when  interest  rates  for  government  borrowing  fall  it  has  a  noticeable  effect  on  corporate 
borrowing costs across the euro area – which was not the case even two years ago. That’s 
essential  if  investment  is  to  recover.  Sure,  rates  are  already  low,  but  since  QE  was 
announced  and  implemented  at  the  start  of  March  long  and  very  long-term  interest  rates 
have  fallen  significantly  in  all  countries,  including Germany  and  France,  and  even  more  in 
Spain, Italy and those most affected by the crisis, such as Ireland and Portugal. 
The third channel works through portfolio rebalancing: it’s still too soon to assess that. Bank 
and  non-bank  investors  who  sell  us  their  securities  have  a  very  strong  incentive  to  invest 
elsewhere  rather  than  leave  their  money  doing  nothing,  with  deposits  at  the  ECB 
costing -0.20% p.a. The sharp upturn in the real economy should encourage them to lend 
more to business. In that sense, the time is right: the impact of QE is being felt just as the 
recovery  is  being  confirmed,  and  it  will  reinforce  it.  It’s  a  mechanism  that  is  potentially 
powerful. 
The  final  channel,  of  course,  is  the  exchange  rate:  this  is  not  an  objective  in  itself,  but  it 
reflects market participants’ expectations of the different monetary policies being pursued on 
each side of the Atlantic. If you include the oil price too, you have a combination of factors 
favouring recovery and investment. So as things stand right now, there is no reason to worry 
about the euro area recovering in 2015 and 2016. Mind you, all these factors are short-term. 
One possible concern is the ability to boost the potential growth of the euro area, which has 
been hit hard by the crisis. That’s more a long-term issue, though. 
Aren’t you afraid that one of the effects of QE will be to create price bubbles for 
certain assets? Doesn’t that risk clash with the price stability objective? Does the ECB 
have the means to combat these side effects? 
Our  actions  do  have  an  impact  on  asset  prices;  you  just  have  to  look  at  the  way  markets 
have  risen  since  the  public  asset  purchases  started. We  monitor  risks  to  financial  stability 
very closely: Tommaso Padoa-Schioppa used to say this was in central banks’ DNA. But let’s 
not forget that the objective of monetary policy  is price stability. Financial stability  involves 
different  tools.  As  far  as  we  are  concerned,  it’s  a  question  of  bank  regulation  and 
“macroprudential” tools. 
There is one effect you didn’t mention: this policy cuts governments’ interest rate 
costs and potentially gives them room for fiscal manoeuvre again. 
That is not our objective. Monetary policy serves to guarantee price stability and support the 
productive  economy.  Where  countries  have  room  for  fiscal  manoeuvre,  lowering  rates 
increases  the  scope  that  can  be  used  to  support  growth,  particularly  by  increasing 
investment.  Where  countries  do  not  have  this  room  for  manoeuvre,  such  as  France,  my 
advice  would  be  to  use  the  lower  rates  to  lend  credibility  to  debt  reduction,  rather  than  to 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  increase spending or cut taxes. However, that’s not a matter for the ECB to decide. It’s the 
European Commission that is the guardian of the fiscal policy framework in the euro area. 
Is sustainability of public debt one of the objectives of QE? 
No, it is not! First, it would be wrong to judge the sustainability of government debt, which is a 
long-term concept, using current yields and growth rates. The only way to make public debt 
sustainable  is  to  cut  deficits  in  a  sustainable  way  and  improve  the  productivity  of  the 
economy.  Also,  this  is  clearly  not  the  philosophy  enshrined  in  the  treaties;  these  actually 
contain a whole series of provisions aimed at protecting the ECB from fiscal dominance, or in 
other words ensuring that monetary policy is not subject to the objectives of fiscal policy. 
OMTs and QE are monetary policy tools and have a number of safeguards to stop them from 
becoming fiscal  policy  instruments. With  QE, for  example,  the  ECB  cannot  buy  more  than 
one  third  of  a  country’s  debt.  This  cap  is  intended  to  preserve  market  mechanisms  and 
market  discipline,  and  also  to  ensure  that  the  ECB  does  not  become  the  states’  lender  of 
choice. 
Monetary policy always has a distributive impact on all economic agents, whatever the tool 
used. But every decision about QE, whether it be starting it or increasing or decreasing its 
scale, or its duration, will only be taken in line with the objectives of monetary policy, primarily 
the medium-term inflation outlook. 
If countries are counting on QE to gain some time, they are making a mistake. They need to 
make use of it to push through essential reforms so growth is sustainably higher. 
The ECB seems to have broadened its objectives considerably in order to preserve the 
euro area. In fact it seems to be concerned about financial stability and growth as well 
as price stability. Is the ECB now pursuing a triple objective? 
Not at all. First, in the current environment, where inflation is too low, the objective of growth 
is equivalent to the objective of price stability. Ultimately, what we have been doing since the 
start  of  the  crisis  has  been  aimed  at  ensuring  price  stability,  but  this  has  been  done  by 
supporting aggregate demand. There is no contradiction. Of course there may be situations 
where the central bank is caught in a dilemma between the objective of price stability and the 
objective of growth. But that’s certainly not the case today. In addition, looking beyond the 
current  situation,  the  treaties  specify  that  the  Eurosystem  lends  its  support  to  general 
economic policies in the Union, without prejudice to the objective of price stability. 
The  situation  today  as  far  as  financial  stability  is  concerned  is  pretty  clear.  The  ECB  has 
three  functions:  a  monetary  function  with  both  conventional  monetary  policy  tools  (interest 
rates) and unconventional ones (liquidity, asset purchases, etc.). Since banking union was 
put in place the ECB has also had a micro-prudential function regulating banks and a macro-
prudential role. 
So  these  three  functions  give  it  both  an  objective  of  price  stability  and  also  objectives  of 
financial  stability,  but  these  are  clearly  distinct  and  involve  different  tools.  They  are  also 
separate  in  terms  of  governance,  since  the  EU  rules  entrusting  banking  regulation  to  the 
ECB make great efforts to ensure that the decision-making processes be kept apart. So we 
are attached to the principle of separation: different tools for different objectives. 
Isn’t it a little more complicated with macro-prudential policy? 
In macro-prudential matters the ECB intervenes to complement action taken at national level, 
but  on  a  fairly  limited  basis  –  regulating  banks  (technically,  using  tools  identified  in  the 
Capital  Requirements  Directive  or  CRD  IV).  For  instance,  it  can  decide  to  impose  higher 
capital  requirements  on  banks  in  a  country  if  it  feels  loan  growth  is  excessive  and  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  national authorities have not reacted. But it does not have the power to get involved in fiscal, 
structural or regulatory affairs or with players such as insurers and investment funds. 
There are plenty of people who think that a central bank with several potentially 
conflicting objectives cannot remain totally independent. What do you say to that? 
Well  it’s  true  that  an  institution  which  has  more  objectives  than  tools  has  to  constantly 
arbitrate between those objectives. That arbitration needs a political discussion the ECB is 
not  equipped  for,  which  is  why  for  monetary  policy  we  have  a  narrow  mandate  and  for 
financial stability we have other tools. But there’s more to it than that. 
The ECB manages the single currency of 19 countries which do not have the same degree of 
coordination in fiscal, structural and regulatory issues as there is for monetary policy. Hence 
it has to be independent. The fact that we have a narrow mandate, price stability, allows us 
to explain what we are doing and clarify our relationship with the political sphere. It protects 
us  from  a  very  real  temptation:  asking  the  ECB  to  do  everything.  Given  the  lack  of 
coordination between Member States and the incomplete nature of political institutions in the 
euro  area,  this  is  an  irresistible  temptation  within  the  European  system.  The  ECB  holds  a 
kind of fascination for all players, not just the economic ones but also those at the political 
and social level too; they all project their disappointment with economic policy onto it. When 
there is a political vacuum, fascination with the central bank flourishes. 
This is both unrealistic, because in most cases we don’t have the tools to respond to their 
expectations and to do so would frequently breach the mandate we have been given, and 
also  be  democratically  dangerous,  because  we  do  not  have  the  governance  that  would 
authorise us to do so. So having a narrow mandate allows us to spell out what the ECB can 
and  can’t  do  and  remind  other  players  of  their  responsibilities  and,  in  some  cases,  their 
shortcomings. It also gives us a great deal of flexibility, since the objective of price stability 
leaves us plenty of scope to choose our tools, as has been seen during the crisis. 
The ECB has found itself very exposed politically at certain times during the crisis. 
Recently in the case of Greece, its decisions to no longer accept Greek securities as 
collateral and then to limit the volume of government securities held by banks have 
been perceived as an attempt to put pressure on the Greek government. Is it legitimate 
for a supposedly apolitical institution to hold the fate of democratically elected powers 
in its hands? 
The  ECB  is  not  a  political  institution.  Our  code  of  conduct  must  be  that  we  should  avoid 
taking political decisions and refer them to the politicians. 
The best solution over the long term would be to strengthen the coordination of fiscal policies 
and perhaps to move towards a form of democratically legitimate fiscal union, which would 
make it possible to provide monetary policy with full protection against the risk of a Member 
State defaulting. But this is not where we are at present. 
What  we  are  trying  to  do  is  protect  ourselves  and  respect  the  boundary  between  what  is 
technical and what is political by referring to a political framework, in this case the decisions 
of the Eurogroup (the group of euro area finance ministers). 
The new Greek government wants to change the content of the structural reforms, which is 
perfectly  legitimate  because  that’s  what  it  was  elected  to  do.  But  this  creates  a  transition 
period while the contract between the country and the rest of Europe is being redefined. That 
transition  creates  uncertainty,  and  during  this  time  the  country  is  no  longer  able  to  obtain 
funding on the markets. 
On 20 February the Eurogroup agreed on a discussion framework, and it is up to this body to 
decide whether to release some of the funds from the European assistance programme and 
think  about  a  possible  further  programme.  We  have  been  working  within  this  exact 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  framework. It is not up to the ECB or the Bank of Greece to finance the Greek government 
and we will make sure that this does not happen. Not only because it would be illegal – the 
Treaty explicitly prohibits a central bank from financing a government – but also because the 
opposite decision, i.e. to finance a government while a political agreement is being reached, 
would amount to a circumvention of the Eurogroup’s decision. The latter, which represents 
the  democratically  elected  governments,  has  decided  not  to  grant  a  bridging  loan  to  the 
Greek government: what right then would the ECB, which does not hold a political mandate, 
have to do so? We are well aware that we will always be caught between a rock and a hard 
place: our decisions, whatever they may be, can always be interpreted politically by one side 
or another. 
However, the Eurosystem is completely fulfilling the role it has as a central bank, which is to 
finance the Greek economy. Week after week the liquidity provided to Greek banks has been 
increased. Just one figure: last December the loans granted by the Eurosystem to the Greek 
banks amounted to €45 billion. Now, in mid-April, they are at €110 billion, well over twice as 
much.  So  we  are  doing  our  job  as  a  central  bank  for  Greece  but  it  is  not  our  role  to  get 
involved in a political discussion about financing the Greek government. That discussion is 
taking place in Brussels, not in Frankfurt. 
Would you say that QE is helping immunise the euro area against the risk of an exit by 
a Member State, even if this is not its objective? 
I wouldn’t put it like that. It is certainly reducing the risk of contagion in the euro area, but the 
context  right  now  is  very  different from  2012. The  problem for countries  such  as  Portugal, 
Spain and Ireland is no longer an exit from the euro area, far from it. Their main concern now 
is how to capitalise on the return of growth in order to step up the reduction in unemployment 
and return to normal as quickly as possible. I am leaving out Greece, which is a very specific 
case in the light of the discussions ongoing at the moment. 
It was Greece that I had in mind... Isn’t QE making the euro area immune to the risk of 
an exit by Greece? 
The  exit  of Greece  is  not  a scenario  we  are  working  on.  All  the  efforts  being made  at  the 
moment are aimed at updating the relationship with Greece in the light of the new priorities of 
its government, within a framework which remains that of the euro area and which implies 
rights as well as the duty to respect the common rules. So we are not putting the question in 
those terms. 
On the question of risk-sharing, why does the ECB, through arrangements as the 
provision of emergency liquidity by the Greek central bank or the public asset 
purchase programme, pass the risk onto the national central banks? Isn’t this a sign 
of fragmentation of the euro area? 
I don’t think that’s at all the case. First of all, there is nothing new here: there have already 
been transactions where the risk was not entirely shared. For example, when we decided in 
2011 to broaden the range of collateral by allowing corporate debt (additional credit claims, 
as we call them) to serve as a guarantee, the risk was not shared. 
Furthermore,  all  parameters  –  the  timetable,  the  volume,  the  intervention  strategy,  the 
maturities – are decided in Frankfurt by the Governing Council. 
We opted for QE on account of the specific characteristics of the euro area. Such questions 
did not arise in the United States. But we have to ask these questions because the European 
treaties  clearly  state  that  there  needs  to  be  a  separation  between  fiscal  and  monetary 
policies, and that monetary policy must not fulfil fiscal objectives. The treaties also stipulate 
that there are 19 separate fiscal policies and that there is no fiscal union, no eurobonds, no 
common debt. We operate within this system, which we all decided upon in 1992. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  The  debate  about  eurobonds  or  about  fiscal  union  is  important,  and  justly  so:  it  is  too 
important  to  be  decided  by  25  governors  one  Thursday  morning  in  Frankfurt!  It  is  a 
fundamental topic, a deeply political one, and one which needs to be debated in every single 
Member State. Should the decision be taken one day to mutualise budgets or debt, such a 
step will require constitutional reforms in many countries. We cannot take decisions on large-
scale mutualisation of fiscal risks until there has been a political debate on the issue. I don’t 
think  the  political  debate  would  benefit  if  such  decisions  were  taken  by  unelected  civil 
servants. 
And yet there is something very ambiguous about this. On the one hand, OMTs work 
on the promise of shared risk, which you reject in the context of QE... 
The two programmes have different objectives and are a response to different contexts. By 
their very design, OMTs are launched when there is a risk of a country leaving the euro area 
under pressure from the markets. So they are the expression of a need for solidarity or at the 
very least for the cohesion of the monetary union. Incidentally, the countries which are put 
under pressure by the financial markets only have access to OMTs if they have a European 
Union or IMF adjustment programme. 
QE is different. It’s a programme which is aimed at the euro area as a whole, it is in no way 
targeted. Its intention is not to affirm the cohesion of the euro area; it has a purely monetary 
intention, namely to support activity and, ultimately, inflation. There are no centrifugal forces 
within the euro area at present. QE does not respond to the same problems. Incidentally, QE 
does  provide  for  mutualisation  of  20%  of  the  risk,  between  European  institution  bond 
purchases and government bond purchases by the ECB. 
Let’s go back to the question of fiscal union. Do you think that such a development is 
realistic? 
The  ECB  President  contributes  to  the  “Four  Presidents’  Report”  (with  Donald  Tusk,  Jean-
Claude  Juncker  and  Jeroen  Dijsselbloem)  on  the  future  of  Economic  and  Monetary  Union 
requested  by  the  European  Council.  But  the  ECB  is  obviously  not  a  decision-maker: 
constitutional questions such as this go well beyond our remit. 
In  my  opinion,  the  history  of  the  euro  area  shows  that  the  Member  States  have  not 
fundamentally  understood  the  level  of  responsibility  implied  by  taking  part  in  a  single 
currency. National policies – fiscal as well as structural – fail to take sufficient account of the 
reality of the euro and the fact that the decisions taken in one country have an impact on the 
others and on the stability of the single currency. The responsible national policy-makers are 
not only accountable to their own parliament but also to all their partners and have to accept 
advice and judgement. So far, the response has been to create ever more complex rules. 
These  rules  lend  themselves  to  a  great  deal  of  discretion  and  creativity  in  their 
implementation,  which  does  nothing  to  promote  trust  and  credibility.  The  risk  is  that  the 
governments no longer really know which rules they have to apply. 
My personal conclusion is that if sovereignty were more shared in the fiscal and structural 
area, this would re-create space for the political dimension. Rather than applying rules that 
are  barely  understood  and  then  subject  to  obscure  deals  in  Brussels,  a  certain  number of 
decisions would be debated at community level, with transparency and responsibility vis-à-
vis  the  European  Parliament  and  the  national  parliaments.  I  believe,  for  instance,  that  a 
common fiscal capacity within the euro area would be a good thing if it enjoys this democratic 
legitimation. 
Obviously,  there  is  still  a  long  way  to  go.  We  have  to  think  about  how  the  person  who 
manages the budget (let’s say, the “finance minister” of the euro area) would be monitored 
by  the  national  parliaments  and/or  the  European  Parliament.  The  ECB  cannot  answer 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  questions like that. All we can do is to point out a gap in a system which has not yet reached 
maturity and so remains a fragility factor. 
You expressed your concern about long-term growth. Couldn’t the ECB do more to 
relaunch investment in Europe, in particular in ecological transition? 
The issue of ecological transition is a major one, even though it is not yet really on the radar 
of the central banks, wrongly so in my opinion. The Bank of England has incorporated it into 
its research programme, which seems to me a very good thing. 
A  certain  number  of  issues  linked  to  the  way  in  which  our  societies  and  economies  will 
manage the ecological transition ought to be better integrated by the central banks. These 
questions have a huge impact in terms of potential growth as well as financial stability (the 
climate risks can be covered more or less well by different types of financial instrument) and, 
ultimately,  price  stability.  Monetary  policy  is  linked  to  the  general  price  level  but  it  cannot 
ignore  the  structure  of  relative  prices.  We  can  see  clearly  today  that  one  of  the  most 
important questions we are facing is the fall in the oil price. These questions, such as the 
consequences of a European energy policy or of different energy policies within each euro 
area  country,  different  energy  mixes,  between  the  use  of  nuclear  power  or  renewable 
energy...all  these  choices  have  an  impact  on  the  structure  of  relative  prices  and  on 
convergence or divergence at the heart of the euro area. We have to understand better how 
this  issue  will  change  the  way  the  economy  works  so  we  can  adapt  our  monetary  policy 
accordingly. 
It is not for the ECB to encourage particular investment decisions which are carbon-saving to 
a greater or lesser degree or which form part of this or that policy. To do so would be to cross 
the line between monetary and economic policy and give way to the fascination I mentioned 
earlier. And yet we can see clearly that there are very deep political disagreements which the 
ECB cannot settle, on the energy mix, the terms of the ecological transition, etc. However, 
everything  we  are  doing  at  the  moment  forms  part  of  an  approach  aimed  at  rekindling 
investment. Compared with the traditional policies of central banks, which are geared to the 
short term, QE is an extension of the intervention horizon of monetary policy. For instance, 
the average term of the securities purchased as part of QE is nearly nine years. So monetary 
policy  is  having  more  impact  than  before  on  the  financing  conditions  for  long-term 
investments.  This  is  particularly  crucial  for  financing  investments  linked  to  the  energy 
transition. In short, we are creating favourable conditions for long-term investment, and it is 
up to the governments and the European institutions to take advantage of these conditions. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
