  
 
Carlos  da  Silva  Costa:  Policies  and  governance  framework  required  to 
ensure Europe’s prosperity 
Opening  address  by  Mr  Carlos  da  Silva  Costa,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Portugal,  at  the 
Seminar on “Governance and Policies for Prosperity in Europe”, Lisbon, 10 April 2015. 
 Minister of State and Finance, Ladies and gentlemen,  
First of all, I would like to thank the Minister for her invitation to deliver the opening address 
in  this  seminar,  in  which  we  reflect  on  the  policies  and  governance framework  required  to 
ensure Europe’s prosperity. I hardly need to highlight how opportune this is. 
Recent  years  have  seen  deep  changes  in  Europe.  In  many  cases,  such  changes  went 
beyond  what  was  thought  possible  not  long  ago.  Developments  so  far,  however,  are  not 
enough to sustainably ensure the prosperity of the economy in Europe and all its Member 
States.  In  my  opinion,  this  is  the  appropriate  time  to  consider  long-term  issues,  and  to 
discuss what is missing in the Economic and Monetary Union (EMU), so that it may function 
smoothly. 
The EMU  is the result of shared sovereignty among Member States. It is built on ongoing 
negotiations  and  on  catching  up  from  different  starting  positions,  safeguarding  national 
cultures  and  identities,  while  at  the  same  time  ensuring  the  sense  of  belonging  within  a 
group.  This  involves  an  institutional  framework  with  a  large  capacity  to  understand  and 
manage the differences and link the interest of the whole with the specificities of the parts, in 
order to ensure that the whole is greater than the sum of the parts. 
Opening this seminar, I would like to convey to you five messages regarding the reflection on 
the policy and governance framework required to ensure prosperity in Europe. 
The first message is that, most of the time, the European response during the crisis 
has been reactive, delayed and built from national perceptions of the problems faced 
by the Union and, in particular, the euro area. 
In effect, two types of bias in the Monetary Union decision-making process have come to the 
fore during the crisis: 
• 
A reactive bias of the decision-making process: the problems were not foreseen and 
initially  there  was  even  a  tendency  to  deny  them.  As  a  result,  the  problems  were 
only acknowledged belatedly and the willingness to reflect jointly on the causes and 
necessary answers was delayed. For instance, in 2010, at the start of the sovereign 
debt  crisis,  it  was  extremely  difficult  to  recognise  that  we  were  facing  a  common 
problem; 
A national bias in the characterisation and evaluation of the problems: a tendency to 
perceive others’ problems and their solutions based on one’s own situation, i.e. on 
the individual country’s specific situation. In other words, the evaluation of the whole 
is based on an evaluation of its parts, instead of, as would be desired, evaluating the 
whole situation and its interaction with each of its parts. As is known, the whole is 
greater than the sum of the parts. For this reason, considering the whole from the 
viewpoint  of  one  of  the  parts  is  necessarily  simplistic  and  biased.  The  crisis  has 
highlighted the tendency of all Member States to bring their own ways of facing the 
problems and their own a priori considerations to group discussions. In this context, 
the particular problems and the specificity of the viewpoints tend to take precedence 
over  the  vision  of  the  whole.  Therefore,  inter-Member  State  balance  has  been 
contaminated  by  the  rationale  of  relative  size,  which  runs  counter  to  the  rationale 
underlying the European Union. 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  We  cannot  have  an  EMU  with  an  institutional  framework  that,  instead  of  promoting  the 
resolution of the problems, exacerbates them and, in some cases, makes them self-fulfilling. 
In this instance, the adjustment costs are considerably worsened, from the point of view both 
of each part and of the whole group, either the euro area or the European Union. 
The second message is that the constitutional rules contained in the Treaties are the 
basis for mutual trust among the Member States composing the European Union. 
The rules forming the basis for mutual trust in the EMU are enshrined in the Treaties, ranging 
from the Maastricht convergence criteria and European Central Bank Statutes, with regard to 
monetary policy and financial stability objectives, to the ceilings on fiscal deficits and public 
debt set out in the Treaty on Stability, Coordination and Governance. Facing such diverse 
economic, social, cultural and political situations, European countries have had to base their 
notion of belonging and therefore mutual trust on rules that ensured the relationship among 
group members was balanced, eliminating both hegemony/dominance risk and moral hazard 
(the attraction of free riding). Thus, shared sovereignty, aggravated by different preferences 
and  different  institutional  frameworks  and  cultures,  has  imposed  the  need  to  identify  the 
required minimum conditions for the functioning of the Monetary Union. 
This  means  that  the  group  had  to  adopt  rules  not  deriving  from  market  sustainability 
principles,  but  rather  from  the  need  to  install  and  operate  self-imposed  mutual-trust 
mechanisms. The observance of these rules, which I will call constituent rules, is key for the 
survival and development of the whole, i.e. of the group. Therefore, these rules can only be 
changed by a decision of the same nature. Compliance with them is fundamental in order not 
to jeopardise the group. 
The nature of derivative rules, such as, for instance, those in the Stability and Growth Pact or 
the  Macroeconomic  Imbalance  Procedure,  is  different  from  that  of  constituent  rules,  given 
that they are not cornerstones for the survival of the group. These rules are instrumental for 
the resilience of the group when, due to endogenous or exogenous circumstances, the whole 
or the parts deviate from compliance with the rules supporting the group aggregation and, in 
particular, underlying mutual trust among its members. Even though they are also the result 
of a group decision, they may take different forms, depending on the specific circumstances 
faced  by  the  whole  and/or  its  parts,  provided  that  they  are  consistent  with  the  key  or 
constituent rules. Derivative rules may also be somewhat flexible, provided that they do not 
jeopardise  compliance  over  time  with  the  group’s  key  rules.  They  can  therefore  change 
according to the social and economic environment of the whole and its parts, namely when 
considering a shorter or longer deadline for convergence towards compliance with the rules 
of belonging to the group. This decision must be taken by the group, in terms of the need to 
ensure convergence of the parts towards compliance with the principles underlying the levels 
of shared effort achieved so far and, as a result, mutual trust requirements. 
In my opinion, this clarification is very important. It is not the market that disciplines EMU, but 
rather its members, based on the rules to which they are committed. Until 2010, Europe was 
indulgent regarding the implementation of the rules, and considered that the markets would 
monitor  and  discipline;  the  markets,  in  turn,  were  indulgent  in  their  evaluation  of  Member 
States’  economic  situations,  precisely  because  they  considered  that  the  rules  would  be 
complied with. These positions led to a misconception: that it would be possible for the whole 
to function, disregarding compliance by its parts with the constituent rules. This situation of 
mutual deception cannot be repeated. 
The third message I would like to convey is that the rules and operational procedures 
must promote the resilience of sustainability trends in reply to shocks. 
It  is  clear  for  all  of  us  today  that  the  stability  and  prosperity  in  the  euro  area  as  a  whole 
depend on the stability and prosperity of its individual members. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Therefore, at national level, it is fundamental that Member States adopt policies supporting 
medium-term sustained economic growth. This means ensuring the: 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(Sustainability of external accounts; 
Sustainability of public debt; 
Sustainability of private debt; 
Socio-economic cohesion expressed in employment levels aligned with the size of 
the  labour  force,  in  productivity  and  income  levels  aligned  with  public  and  private 
consumption prospects, and in the capacity to provide support to dependents and 
those excluded from the labour market, either temporarily or permanently. 
to  competition,  creating  a  more 
In  order  to  reach  these  goals,  it  is  necessary  to  implement  counter-cyclical  fiscal  policies, 
macro-prudential policies limiting the indebtedness of private economic agents, and income 
policies  safeguarding  the  economy’s  competitiveness.  This  means  it  will  be  necessary  to 
create an institutional framework ensuring that wage and price formation simultaneously take 
into account the objective of nominal monetary policy stability, the safeguarding of business 
competitiveness  in  the  tradable  sectors,  and  investment  attractiveness.  This  investment 
attractiveness is very important because, on the one hand, it increases productivity and, on 
the other, it widens the productive base, and, as a result, the opportunities to create further 
employment and employment with higher value added per asset. Virtuous dynamics such as 
these require: i) the implementation of an institutional framework ensuring, in the context of 
sectoral  and  corporate  business,  the  alignment  of  real  wage  growth  in  the  tradable  sector 
with  a  rise  in  the  sector’s  productivity;  and  ii)  growing  regulatory  competitive  pressure 
ensuring  efficiency  gains  and, therefore,  cost reduction  in  the  non-tradable  sectors  and,  in 
particular,  in  sectors  with  low  competition.  In  this  vein,  it  is  also  necessary  to  carry  on 
structural  reforms  removing  obstacles 
favourable 
environment  to  business  development,  and  promoting  the  absorption  of  know-how  and 
corporate investment in research and development. Moreover, it is crucial to ensure that the 
allocation  of  internal  savings,  especially  via  bank  credit  and  public  nature  instruments,  is 
based  on  efficiency  principles  and  therefore  on  the  economic  and  financial  return  of  the 
investment  projects.  This  condition  is  essential  for  promoting  an  efficient  allocation  of 
resources  and  optimisation  of  potential  growth  associated  with  the  volume  of  disposable 
savings. 
At  European  level,  a  framework  for  the  monitoring  and  surveillance  of  national  policy 
sustainability (most notably, fiscal and wage and price-setting policies) must be implemented 
and equipped with effective corrective instruments. As part of this, steps must be taken to 
safeguard  the  resilience  of  national  adjustments,  ensuring  that  the  economy  –  through  its 
macroeconomic fundamentals – is able to return to a sustainable path following deviations 
resulting  from  (internal  and  external)  exogenous  shocks  or  erroneous  economic  policy 
decisions. This is a particularly important point in the ongoing discussion about the flexibility 
of  fiscal  objectives  for  a  given  Member  State.  Indeed,  what  truly  matters  is  whether  the 
sustainability plan/path is resilient, in other words, whether its mechanisms can return it to a 
path  complying  with  the  constituent  rules,  which  serve  as  the  basis  for  the  group  and  its 
activities.  Naturally,  resilience  increases  proportionally  to  the  better  quality  of  growth.  As 
such, the sustainability of a given country’s financial consolidation and maximum growth are 
not  mutually  exclusive.  On  occasion,  means  are  confused  with  goals,  such  as  confusing 
structural reforms, which are a means, with the goal of ensuring potential growth compatible 
with increased resilience in the economic and financial path of a given economy. Structural 
reforms leading to increased resilience in economies as a response to shocks are those that 
guarantee:  (i) employment  growth  compatible  with  social  cohesion  in  the  long  run; 
(ii) sustainable public finances; and (iii) a response to population developments. 
A  Monetary  Union  with  sustainability  mechanisms  favours  economic  growth,  but  does  not 
guarantee the aggregate’s maximum and sustainable growth. It ensures sustainable public 
finances,  but  not  a  growth  path  consistent  with  the  natural  rate  of  unemployment,  which 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  means  that  it  can  coexist  with  a  suboptimal  equilibrium.  The  nature  of  national  economic 
policies and the coordination of such policies at aggregate level are inextricably linked to the 
sustainability  and  quality  of  the  development  model  for  each  economy  participating  in  the 
euro area. Therefore, it is crucial to define, put in place and legitimate a power centre that 
works on the premise that the whole is greater than the sum of its parts. This means that it is 
necessary  to  guarantee  the  set-up  and  proper  functioning  of  a  coordinating  power  for 
national economic policies bearing in mind not only the parts but also the path of potential 
output and employment in the euro area as a whole and, for that purpose, has its own means 
as well as indirect means to manage aggregate demand, investment and potential output. 
In  the  EU  institutional  framework,  this  role  should  be  played  by  the  Eurogroup.  It  is 
responsible  for  acting  as  a  coordination  centre  and  ensuring  the  consistency  of  national 
policies,  making  use  of  the  entire  range  of  instruments  created  by  the  EU,  such  as 
centralising  the  optimisation  of  the  aggregate’s  path  by  monitoring  spillover  effects  on  its 
constituent  parts. This  is,  unsurprisingly,  a  paradigm  shift:  it  entails  moving  the focus from 
financial or regulatory instruments to policies. Until now, the EU tended to believe that it was 
enough  to  create  instruments,  as  they  would  induce  policies,  as  was  the  case  of  the 
European  Social  Fund  and  the  European  Regional  Development  Fund.  However,  those 
same  instruments  served/induced  different  policies  and  consequently,  different  efficiency 
levels for both the parts and the whole. This should be viewed from the opposite perspective: 
instruments  do  not  induce  policy  optimisation;  policies  require  and  warrant  the  use  of 
instruments  and,  as  such,  they  should  be  employed  according  to  the  policies’  level  of 
consistency with the general interest. 
The fourth message that I would like to convey is that responsibility for compliance 
with fiscal rules should lie with an independent entity. 
National budgets are a matter of common interest, given that the debt sustainability principle 
is an integral part of the institutional principles enshrined in the Treaties. As a constituent rule 
in  the  EU,  it  must  be  safeguarded  while  ensuring  its  independence,  technicality  and 
neutrality. 
I therefore believe it is crucial to establish a central independent entity capable of assessing 
and issuing reasoned opinions on the fiscal adjustment path followed by Member States – a 
European  “Public  Finance  Council”.  This  “Public  Finance  Council”  would  gauge  national 
policies’ compliance with the EMU’s self-imposed rules, but it would not interfere with political 
choices, provided that they were compatible with long-term sustainability. This means that if 
a  country  prefers  to  adopt  an  approach  that  favours  equality  over  efficiency  –  defining 
efficiency as public expenditure yielding returns – it would not be bound by an obligation to 
follow a sustainability path. However, we must bear in mind that the sustainability path would 
not be the same. It is crucial to reach a balance between two situations at opposite ends of 
the spectrum, both of which unfeasible: (i) to grow in the future without creating conditions for 
consensus  in  the  present;  and  (ii)  creating  conditions  for  consensus  now,  but  neglecting 
future  economic  growth.  The  nature  and  quality  of  national  policies  affect  a  country’s 
potential output and, consequently, the political room for manoeuvre within the rules. 
Any  policy  measure  identified  as  necessary  in  the  scope  of  the  “Public  Finance  Council” 
would have to be decided by the Eurogroup, which, as I have mentioned before, should be 
responsible for the aggregate’s economic policy and its consistency with national policies. 
The fifth message that I would like to convey is that, in order to act quickly and 
decisively in times of crisis, we must establish a European Monetary Fund. 
We  must  take  an  institutional  leap  and  turn  the  European  Stability  Mechanism  into  a 
European  Monetary  Fund,  so  as  to  put  in  place  a  specialised  entity  to manage  imbalance 
situations that a Member State may have to overcome. Imbalances may occur following the 
adoption of national policies that are unsustainable in the long run, due to asymmetric effects 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  of  common  shocks  or  specific  shocks  resulting  from  circumstances  outside  the  scope  of 
economic  policy-makers.  In  such  cases,  there  must  be  an  institution  independent  from 
Member  States,  empowered  and  qualified  to  negotiate  with  the  country  in  question  on 
matters of financial assistance with associated conditionality. Empowered, in the sense that it 
cannot depend on the approval, by national parliaments, of conditions and amounts needed 
for that purpose; and qualified, in the sense of having the technological and technical means 
that  make  it  possible  to  act  in  a  quick  and  informed  manner.  The  adjustment  programme 
should be defined on the basis of a contractual approach (and not by imposition) to ensure 
the  policy’s  ownership  by  the  beneficiary  country.  The  existence  of  a  European  Monetary 
Fund  would  help  turn  conditionality  into  the  joint  adoption  of  a  programme  of  internally 
consistent  adjustment  policies  that  are  also  consistent  with  the  restoration  of  a  resilient 
convergence  path  towards  compliance  with  the  group’s  underlying  rationale,  which  I 
previously called constituent rules. The creation of a European Monetary Fund, with a clear 
mandate,  means  and  independence  of  action  from  Member  States  and  removed  from  the 
concept  of guardianship,  will  put  in  place  the  necessary  conditions for the  development  of 
win-win solutions, which is a pillar for the aggregate’s cohesion. 
Final remarks 
In conclusion, I would like to stress that, when reflecting on the policies and the governance 
framework  that  are  crucial  to  guarantee  Europe’s  prosperity,  we  must  separate  what  is 
possible from what is desirable. I have focused my speech on what is possible, but I would 
like to approach an issue that falls within the scope of what is desirable, in other words of 
what is impossible right now but indispensable in the medium run. I mean the need to reflect 
on  faster  responsiveness  and  the  political  upgrading  of  the  European  Commission,  while 
safeguarding  its  specificity:  the  monopoly  initiative,  the  coexistence  between  its  political-
lawmaking and executive functions and – the cornerstone of its institutional role – the equal 
representation of Member States in its collegiate managing body. 
These  days,  the  European  Commission  is  a  key  body  for  ensuring  the  existence  and 
functioning of the European Union as a whole and crucial in terms of thinking and projecting 
this  aggregate  in  the  future.  Indeed,  as  European  integration  progresses  further,  the 
European Commission has evolved from being a fundamentally lawmaking body to being an 
entity  that  today  combines  executive  and  legislative  functions.  Given  the  European 
Commission’s current architecture, it is very difficult to combine both functions. In my opinion, 
the Commission should, in the long run, adopt an internal organisation model similar to that 
of  the  European  Central  Bank.  This  means  establishing  a  Board  of  Commissioners 
comprising a commissioner from each Member State, who, in the scope of a collegiate body, 
will participate in the decision of policy guidelines and associated legislative proposals, and 
an  Executive  Board  that  will  manage  the  day-to-day  business  and  the  implementation  of 
policies  defined  by  the  Board  of  Commissioners.  The  Executive  Board  would  consist  of  a 
small group of commissioners, in proportion to the scope of executive powers entrusted to 
the Commission, appointed on a rotational basis amongst Member States. For instance, the 
definition  of  an  energy  policy  or  the  European  digital  policy  should  be  a  task  for  all 
commissioners (and not only the commissioner in charge of such areas), but decisions on 
the purchase of a building or on staff policy could be delegated to the Executive Board. 
In this context, we should revisit the concept of subsidiarity, but in contrast to what was used 
in  the  past  (when  it  only  gave  powers  back  to  local  authorities).  We  must  develop  on  a 
bidirectional concept, locating at aggregate level issues that are being handled in a disperse 
and  uncoordinated  manner  by  the  parts,  to  the  detriment  of  optimisation.  The  principle  of 
equality between Member States tends to be sacrificed to the principle of “who moves first” 
or “who weighs more”, as was the case, for instance, in energy policy. 
This is something we should ponder on, even though this falls within the scope of what is 
desirable, and, therefore, for the medium run. 
Thank you very much. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
   6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
