  Ong Chong Tee: Confidence in and resilience of the life insurance 
industry 
Speech  by  Mr  Ong  Chong  Tee,  Deputy  Managing  Director  (Financial  Supervision)  of  the 
Monetary Authority of Singapore, at the Life Insurance Association (LIA) Annual Luncheon 
2015, Singapore, 4 March 2015. 
 Dr Khoo Kah Siang, President of the Life Insurance Association, 
Distinguished guests, 
Ladies and Gentlemen. 
1. Thank you for inviting my colleagues and I to the Association’s 13th Annual Luncheon. 
2. Modern life insurance is said to have its beginnings in London more than 300 years ago by 
a company called Amicable Society for a Perpetual Assurance, with the aim of allowing an 
amicable  distribution  of  contributions  to  be  made  by  deceased  members  to  their  surviving 
wives  and  children.  But  even  during  the  times  of  Ancient  Rome,  it  is  believed  that  some 
forms of life insurance existed to help mitigate the costs of burials of deceased members and 
to  provide for their  surviving families. While  clearly  much  has  changed  in  the  industry,  the 
central tenet of the industry has remained – to provide financial protection to dependants and 
in current times, also as a means of savings and wealth management. 
3.  A  life  insurance  purchase  is  in  essence  a  legal  promise.  In  exchange  for  payment  of 
premiums, an insurer will honour claims and make payment as agreed under the insurance 
policy.  Hence  given  the  typically  long  term  nature  of  the  commitments,  confidence  in  and 
resilience of the life insurance industry must underscore its growth and development. If one 
were  to  type  “life  insurance”  and  do  an  image  search  over  the  internet,  a  very  common 
picture is that of the umbrella; and it is easy to understand why – insurance as protection, a 
cover, or a shield. But the umbrella has to be a dependable one, when one needs it most. 
4. Two critical factors underlie consumers’ confidence in the life insurance industry: 
i.  
First, insurers, together with financial advisers, must be regarded as trustworthy and 
reliable.  Consumers  must  be  able  to  depend  on  them  to  provide  appropriate 
financial  advice  and  life  insurance  products  to  meet  their  needs;  and  issues  of 
fairness and transparency must underscore the relationship. 
Second, given the long-term commitments, insurers must be financially resilient to 
be  able  to  weather  different  economic,  financial  and  industry  cycles  and  have 
adequate financial resources to be able to honour claims. 
ii.  
5. Today, let me therefore take stock of two key policy thrusts that MAS has embarked on 
with many of you here – the FAIR initiatives and RBC2 – to enhance trust and resilience of 
the insurance industry respectively. 
Enhancing consumers’ trust in the life insurance industry: FAIR initiatives 
6. I will start with the Financial Advisory Industry Review or FAIR. MAS first announced FAIR 
in 2012 with the formation of a review panel. FAIR aims to improve the quality of financial 
advice provided by the financial advisory industry by promoting fair dealing, and to raise the 
efficiency of the distribution of life insurance and investment products in Singapore. 
7.  There  are  three  key  initiatives  under  FAIR  of  particular  relevance  to  the  life  insurance 
industry.  These  are  the  web  aggregator,  direct  purchase  insurance  products  and  the 
balanced scorecard framework. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Web aggregator 
8.  First,  the  web  aggregator.  Life  insurers  offer  a  wide  range  of  life  insurance  products  to 
cater to the varied financial needs of consumers. However, it can often be a daunting task for 
consumers  to  be  sufficiently  informed  of  what’s  available  to  meet  his  needs  and  to  have 
some easy way to compare life insurance products. 
9.  I  am  pleased  to  note  that  a  web  aggregator  will  be  launched  in  early  April  as  a 
collaborative effort between MAS, CASE and the life insurance industry. This will provide a 
single information portal that will enable consumers to easily look up available life insurance 
products  and  compare  indicative  quotes  based  on  specified  parameters  in  a  user-friendly 
and interactive manner. 
 Direct Purchase Insurance 
10. Second, direct purchase insurance products, or DPI. This is a new class of life insurance 
products for basic needs that is “retail-access friendly”. 
• 
It  will  be  simpler  as  the  features  of  DPI  are  broadly  standardised.  This  allows  a 
consumer to make straightforward product comparisons when deciding which DPI to 
purchase. 
It will be easier to buy  as consumers who know  what they  want and do not need 
financial advice will be able to buy DPI directly from life insurers. 
It will be cheaper as no commissions will be charged. 
• 
11. There has been keen consumer interest in the DPI since its recommendation by the FAIR 
panel. Again, the DPI products will be rolled out in early April, along with the web aggregator. 
MAS will continue to work with the industry and consumer groups to conduct regular reviews 
to ensure that the product suite and features of DPI remain relevant in meeting the needs of 
consumers. 
Balanced Scorecard Framework 
12. Third, the balanced scorecard or BSC framework as proposed by the FAIR panel. MAS 
has  implemented  this framework  in  January  2015  with  a  one  year  transition  period for  the 
industry to be familiar with the framework before the requirements are legislated in January 
2016. 
13.  While  many  financial  advisors  do  their  work  professionally,  it  is  also  a  reality  that 
compensation  system  can  shape  sales  behaviours,  and  sales-based  remuneration  models 
may not always align the interests of financial advisers with the consumers. 
14. Under the BSC framework, a major proportion of a representative’s remuneration will be 
based  on  whether  the  representative  has  acted  professionally  such  as  consumer  needs 
analyses,  recommendation  of  suitable  products,  and  adequate  disclosures.  This  BSC 
initiative  will  help  to  align  the  interests  of financial  advisers  with  their  customers.  Over  the 
longer term, the BSC framework will boost consumer confidence in the professionalism of the 
financial advisory industry. 
Strengthening the resilience of the life insurance industry: RBC2 
15. Let me now turn to the new risk-based capital framework or RBC2. 
Why the move from RBC to RBC2? 
16. Insurance regulators around the world are adopting risk-based capital and Singapore has 
been  a  frontrunner  with  our  current  Insurance  Risk-Based  Capital  (RBC)  framework 
introduced in 2004. This risk framework has served us well, and our insurers have navigated 
largely unscathed through recent financial crises; while the framework allowed for regulatory 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  intervention in a timely and effective manner. Now, I know this begs the question – if it isn’t 
broken, why fix it? 
17. The answer is that the operating environment for global finance including insurance, has 
and  will  become  increasingly  complex  given  the  more  connected  global  markets,  the 
vulnerability  of  contagion,  an  overall  low  interest  rate  environment  that  pushes  investors 
including insurers to target more risky higher-yielding products and potential new risk areas 
such as in some emerging markets or in technology risks. 
18. It is important that our insurance capital framework remains relevant and effective and 
that insurers operating in Singapore are well-capitalised to weather different crises and risk 
forms. 
19. At the global level, the International Association of Insurance Supervisors (IAIS) has also 
embarked  on  the  development  of  capital  standards  for  internationally  Active  Insurance 
Groups (“IAIGs”); while the International Accounting Standards Board is expected to finalise 
its guidance on insurance contracts under IFRS4 sometime this year. 
Progress on RBC2 
20.  Last  year,  MAS  published  our  second  consultation  paper,  which  outlined  our  key 
proposals for RBC2. We also conducted the first quantitative impact study (QIS1) to assess 
the potential impact of the proposed changes on the industry. All direct life and composite 
insurers had participated in QIS1. I would like to thank the LIA and its members for the active 
participation and feedback. Indeed, many of you have expressed understanding and support 
for many of the proposed enhancements in the RBC2 framework. 
21. Let me share a couple of high level observations from the QIS1 results with you. 
22. First, there is an increase in risk requirements compared to the existing RBC framework. 
This  is  to  be  expected,  given  the  more  comprehensive  risk  coverage  and  higher  target 
confidence  level  under  RBC2.  RBC2  targets  a  99.5%  confidence  level  over  a  one-year 
period, which is increasingly seen as the benchmark for insurers globally. From the results 
that I have seen, most of our insurers are able to maintain capital adequacy ratio or CAR of 
well above 100% under the preliminary set of RBC2 proposals. 
23. Some industry players are naturally anxious  if they will still have to maintain the same 
high buffers of way above 100% CAR or FSR under RBC2, as they do currently for RBC. 
This is not our expectation, given that the risk requirements under RBC2 are designed to be 
more risk sensitive, comprehensive and calibrated to a higher target confidence level. 
24. A second observation is the greater differentiation in CAR between firms with different 
risk profiles. This is again to be expected as one of the main objectives of the RBC2 review is 
to  improve  risk  sensitivity  of  the  capital  framework  so  as  to  more  accurately  reflect  the 
different risk profiles of insurers. 
25. MAS will continue to review and study the QIS results and take on board many of your 
feedback and suggestions. 
26. As examples, we are going through comments from some industry participants relating to 
widening the eligibility criteria for the matching adjustment feature of RBC2, the possibility of 
giving  some  credit  to  the  illiquid  nature  of  some  other  liabilities  that  do  not  qualify  for  the 
matching  adjustment,  the  calibration  of  risk  charges  for  equities  and  long-dated  corporate 
bonds, and the calibration of the operational risk charge, which has also been discussed with 
the industry. 
27.  Let  me  emphasize  that  we  will  implement  RBC2  only  after  we  have  done  a  thorough 
calibration  and  assessment. We  want  the  new  capital  framework  to  be more  risk-sensitive 
and  robust,  but  it  should  also  be  fit-for-purpose  and  not  hamper  well  managed  insurance 
businesses  unduly.  At  individual  firm  level,  the  new  framework  does  not  seek  to  make  it 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  better or worse for you compared to the current RBC, but only that how much capital that you 
will hold in future be more sensitive to your risk profile. 
28.  The  MAS  will  embark  on  another  stage  of  consultation  and  we  are  also  targeting  an 
additional QIS in Q2 2015. We will of course work closely with the LIA in this regard. 
Conclusion 
29. Let me conclude with a broad note on talent development for the insurance industry. 
30. Over the years, MAS has been working closely with many of you on various manpower 
development initiatives. The Insurance Talent Development framework jointly developed with 
the industry in particular, focuses on expanding the talent pipeline for leadership positions. 
Last year, MAS successfully rolled out the non-life track under the Insurance Management 
Associate Programme and is now working closely with the Singapore College of Insurance to 
launch the life track this year. 
31. I strongly encourage all of you to continue with your investment in talent development. 
This should go beyond technical competencies but to include issues of ethics and conduct. 
32. To  end off, I  am  sure  some  of  you  may  have  seen  the  internet  discussion  around the 
Chinese New Year on whether this is the Year of the Sheep, the Goat or the Ram. I think 
many of us have settled for the Goat. As one of my colleagues noted, goats are resilient and 
intelligent creatures; able to maintain their balance in the most precarious of places but yet, 
possess a calm and unexcited exterior with a beard that conveys a certain wisdom. So may I 
wish everyone all these fine qualities of the Goat. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
