  Cyril Roux: Ireland’s systemic banking crisis and the preventative 
reforms implemented in its wake 
Introductory  remarks  by  Mr  Cyril  Roux,  Deputy  Governor  (Financial  Regulation)  of  the 
Central  Bank  of  Ireland,  to  the  Oireachtas  (National  Parliament)  Banking  Inquiry,  Dublin, 
10 June 2015. 
 Mr Chairman, Members of the Joint Committee, 
Thank  you  for  the  opportunity  to  share  with  you  my  experience  as  Deputy  Governor  for 
Financial Regulation since I joined the Central Bank of Ireland. 
This Committee has been established, first, to address the reasons Ireland has experienced 
a systemic banking crisis and, second, to review the preventative reforms implemented in the 
wake of the crisis. 
As  regards  the  first  theme  of  inquiry,  I’m  not  close  enough  to  the  Irish  experience  of  the 
previous decade to provide this knowledgeable Committee with special insight. That said, I’m 
well  aware  of  the  severe  economic  hardship  brought  about  by  the  crisis.  Many  Irish 
households and Irish firms still suffer from it today. Hence all parties, including the Central 
Bank, must continue to do their utmost to prevent a replay of the banking crisis and protect 
the financial stability of the country. I’ll share with you what I know of the reforms put in place 
here  after  the  crisis  before  I  joined,  and  I’ll  present  the  further  European  reforms  that  we 
have replaced them with in the past year and a half. 
In October 2013, as I came into office, two independent, large scale exercises were in train 
to assess the effectiveness of the domestic framework that had been designed and put in 
place by my predecessor Mr Matthew Elderfield between 2010 and 2013. 
The  first  one  was  the  Balance  Sheet  Assessment  of  the  three  remaining  covered  banks, 
conducted as part of the 2013 Financial Measures Programme. It concluded with a view that 
the  covered  banks  were  mostly  in  financial  working  order,  and  required  only  moderate 
strengthening  of  their  provisions,  which  they  did  bring  into  their  year-end  accounts,  in  the 
main. 
The second large scale exercise  was the IMF review of Ireland’s observance of the Basel 
Core  Principles  for  effective  banking  supervision.  The  IMF  found  that  since  the  crisis  had 
begun,  the  Central  Bank  had  taken  substantive  steps  to  rebuild  its  functions  in  financial 
regulation and supervision, including changes in the institutional setting, changes of senior 
staff, increases in the quantity, albeit from a very low base, and calibre of supervisory staff. 
The IMF acknowledged the design and implementation of a proactive and intensive approach 
to  supervision,  the  expansion  of  prudential  requirements  and  improvement  in  enforcement 
powers.  Overall  the  IMF  ascribed  to  the  Central  Bank  as  of  2013  a  satisfactory  level  of 
compliance with the aforementioned Basel Core Principles for effective banking supervision. 
Taken together, these two reviews gave me sufficient assurance that Irish banks and Irish 
banking  supervision,  albeit  not  without  need for further  progress,  had  been  put  on  a  more 
solid footing, and that I could direct our 2014 efforts to moving towards the entry into force of 
the Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM). This entailed two major lines of work. 
The first line of work was internal and organisational; I will describe its outcome later. 
The second line of work was the Comprehensive Assessment. Under the leadership of the 
ECB, we conducted, like the other national supervisory authorities, an Asset quality review 
and a stress test of the top 120 Eurozone banking groups. The results were published in the 
Comprehensive Assessment report of the ECB in October 2014. The ECB found that around 
one out of five Eurozone banking groups was in need of recapitalisation. Out of the four top 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Irish banks, only Permanent TSB was found to need supplementary capital to fully withstand 
an adverse stress test. PTSB subsequently raised the required capital in May of this year. 
Let me now change tack and describe the overhaul of the banking regulatory framework. 
Domestically,  between  2010  and  2013,  the  Oireachtas  and  the  Central  Bank  introduced 
several  pieces  of  legislation,  codes  and  regulations  which  much  strengthened  the 
requirements  weighing  in  on  commercial  banks  and  the  hand  of  the  Central  Bank  in 
supervising  them  and  enforcing  against  their  breaches.  These  new  requirements  were 
additional to the prevailing European capital requirement directive. 
Internationally,  between  2010  and  2013,  three  large  initiatives  unfolded  that  are  directly 
relevant to matters of the Inquiry. 
First, in 2010, the EU adopted the European System of Financial Supervision, comprising the 
European  Systemic  Risk  Board  (ESRB)  and  the  three  European  Supervisory  Authorities 
including the European Banking Authority (EBA). The ESRB is tasked with macro prudential 
oversight  in  Europe,  while  the  EBA  is  in  charge  of  banking  supervisory  convergence  and 
drafting secondary legislation. 
Also in 2010, the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision addressed the inadequacies of 
its second agreement and replaced it by the third agreement (Basel III), This third agreement 
forms  the  basis  of  the  new  prudential  banking  regulatory  framework  in  Europe,  adopted 
under  the  Irish  presidency  of  the  EU  Council,  and  enshrined  in  the  fourth  capital 
requirements directive (CRD IV) and the capital requirements regulation (CRR). They have 
been in force from 1 January 2014. 
Finally,  in  2012,  the  EU  heads  of  states  and governments  decided  on  the  Banking  Union, 
which also started to come into force in 2014 as far as the SSM is concerned. 
The changes have been profound. I will try to give you a flavour of the depth and breadth of 
this new, multifaceted regime, starting with CRD IV and CRR. 
Both  the  quantity  and  quality  of  capital  that  banks  are  required  to  hold  are  now  much 
increased. Whereas up to the end of 2013, banks could operate with as little as 2 per cent of 
capital, they need now at least 4.5 per cent of a more tightly defined equity. Furthermore the 
new  regulatory  framework  introduces  the  possibility  for  macro-prudential  authorities  to 
impose  several  additional  capital  requirements,  known  as  buffers,  to  all  banks  in  their 
jurisdiction.  The  Central  Bank  has  been  designated  as  macro-prudential  authority  for  this 
purpose in March 2014. 
From 1 January 2016, as agreed throughout Europe, all banks will have to begin building one 
of  these  buffers,  the  capital  conservation  buffer,  for  an  additional  2.5  per  cent  of  risk-
weighted assets. 
Liquidity  Requirements,  which  were  domestic  until  then,  are  now  harmonised  at  a  much 
tighter  level  under  the  liquidity  coverage  ratio.  The  existing  Central  Bank  Liquidity 
Requirements which were introduced in January 2007 are being replaced by this LCR which 
will be fully binding in 2018. 
The CRR also introduces a net stable funding obligation to enhance a bank’s funding profile 
into the medium term and a leverage ratio requirement which caps banks assets to no more 
than 33 times Tier 1 capital. 
Finally, the quality and granularity of banks’ regulatory reporting have been also significantly 
enhanced from January 2014 by the CRR and subsequent standards and guidelines of the 
European  Banking  Authority,  covering  financial  reporting,  credit  risk,  operational  risk,  own 
funds and capital adequacy ratios. 
The transformation of the regulatory framework for banks, from what it was up to the end of 
2013 to what it is becoming, does not stop at prudential supervisory requirements. Lessons 
were also learned about the way to resolve the difficulties of banks that are failing or likely to 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  fail. This has entailed another change in regulatory framework through the adoption of the 
Bank Recovery and Resolution Directive (BRRD) and the enactment of the Single Resolution 
Mechanism  (SRM).  The  BRRD  and  the  SRM  aim  to  create  a  predictable  framework  for 
resolving banks that fail in the future. 
The  BRRD  provides  a  toolkit  for  resolving  banks,  such  as  the  bailing  in  of  unsecured 
liabilities  in  lieu  of  the  bailing  out  of  the  banks  by  taxpayers.  The  Central  Bank  has  been 
designated  as  the  National  Resolution  Authority  and  is  already  working  with  the  banks  to 
develop resolution plans in line with the BRRD requirements. 
For  larger  Eurozone  banks,  including  our  own,  resolution  decisions  will  be  made  from 
January next  year by the Single Resolution Board in Brussels. It will avail of the new pre-
funded resolution funds in the Eurozone, which are to be gradually mutualised. 
Let me now turn to the transformation of the supervision of Eurozone banks from 2014. 
As I mentioned earlier, in 2012, EU heads of States and governments agreed to transfer the 
responsibility for supervising banks to the European level with the establishment of the SSM. 
Eurozone banks have come under the supervision of the ECB since November 4, 2014. The 
ECB  directly  supervises  the  largest  European  banks,  including  Bank  of  Ireland,  AIB, 
Permanent TSB and Ulster Bank, with our assistance and that of other national supervisors. 
We supervise the smaller banks under the oversight of the ECB. 
The revamped banking supervisory framework put in place at the Central Bank by Matthew 
Elderfield has mostly been superseded by the SSM. Our domestic supervisory engagement 
cycle,  approval  procedures,  and  internal  supervisory  guidance,  enshrined  in  PRISM,  were 
effective from 2011 to October 2014; they have now been replaced by the prescriptions of 
the SSM Supervisory Manual, which are guided by a similar, if not more, tough, intrusive and 
sceptical  ethos.  Daily  supervision  of  the  larger  banks  is  conducted  by  joint  supervisory 
teams, mostly made of Central Bank staff, but always headed by an ECB coordinator based 
in Frankfurt. These coordinators propose draft decisions drawn in consultation with us to the 
Supervisory  Board  of  the  ECB,  where  I  sit.  When  approved,  these  draft  decisions  are 
submitted to the Governing Council and finally signed by the President of the ECB. 
In the Central Bank, Banking Supervision was reorganised and further strengthened in the 
course  of  2014.  Approved  headcount  in  Banking  Supervision  was  brought  up  to  140,  and 
actual headcount has increased to 124. We have thus reduced, albeit partially, the numerical 
gap with Eurozone standards. Instead of two generalist divisions, we now have three: one is 
dedicated to ongoing supervision, one to specialist expertise, and a wholly new third division 
carries  out  onsite  inspections  year  round.  This  structure  aligns  the  Central  Bank  with  the 
organisational requirements of the SSM and further enhances our supervision. 
Let me conclude by restating a few key messages. 
In  our  country,  the  institutional  arrangement  of  Financial  Regulation,  the  engagement 
framework and practice of prudential banking supervision were overhauled during the tenure 
of  Mr.  Elderfield  in  the  wake  of  our  domestic  banking  crisis.  As  of  2013,  much  repair  had 
been achieved. On the European stage, the lessons of the global banking crisis resulted in 
an overhaul of regulation, supervision and resolution that has started unfolding at the end of 
2013.  While  the  EFSF  was  put  in  place  in  2011,  the  CRD  IV,  CRR  and  BRRD  come 
gradually  into  force  from  2014  up  to  the  end  of  the  decade,  the  SSM  is  operational  since 
November  2014  and  the  SRB  will  assume  its  functions  in  January  2016.  These  new 
European  regulations  and  institutional  arrangements  have  in  the  main  superseded  the 
domestic  response  of  the  2010–2013  to  our  national  banking  crisis  and  are  designed  to 
address the challenges of public banking oversight and resolution at a European level, in lieu 
of national decision-making that prevailed until 2013. 
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
