  Loi M Bakani: The future of credit unions given the global regulatory 
trends 
Speech  by  Mr  Loi  M  Bakani,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Papua  New  Guinea,  at  the  Pacific 
Credit Union Technical Congress 2014, Port Moresby, 6 November 2014. 
 1. 
Acknowledgements 
Members of the OCCUL Board 
Board Members of Credit Unions in Pacific 
Distinguished Guest Speakers 
Congress Delegates 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
Introductory remarks 
2. 
Let me begin by thanking OCCUL for inviting me to speak at this Congress on “The Future of 
Credit Unions given the Global Regulatory Trends”, from my perspective as the Governor of 
a Central Bank in the Pacific Region and Registrar of Savings & Loan Societies in PNG. 
I suppose the greatest strength for the credit union movement lies in the model it is built upon 
which  is  based  on  the  interdependence  and  mutual  support  by  each  other,  the  members. 
Credit unions are all about financial inclusion. They provide services to their members who 
may be part of the working class, civil servants, or community based. Credit unions provide 
services for small savers, big savers, small borrowers and big borrowers alike. 
Even  though  our  credit  unions  in  the  Pacific  vary  significantly  from  country  to  country,  in 
terms of the level of development, or maturity they are at and the applicable rulebooks, the 
challenges faced by practitioners and for Regulators are similar. 
Secondly,  credit  unions  provide  competition  in  the  financial  intermediation  market  and  are 
some of the major players in the Pacific region too. The credit union movement will have to 
continue changing with the times to meet its members’ needs, to fend off competition, from 
other financial service providers to survive in a very competitive industry and environment. 
Competition  has  its  benefits.  It  forces  the  credit  unions  to  be  managed  professionally  and 
diversify and improve on the services it provides to its members. Credit unions are another 
tier of financial institutions providing financial services like any other tiers of financial service 
providers.  The  products  and  services  depend  on  how  credit  unions  are  structured  in  each 
jurisdiction. Some operate almost like small commercial banks in a competitive environment, 
while  others  remain  small,  concentrating  on  fewer  basic  services  for  its  membership.  The 
sustainability of the credit union movement requires that credit unions get into increasingly 
riskier  activities  to  survive  in  a  highly  competitive  industry.  In  these  circumstances,  formal 
rigorous supervision will become more critical. 
From  our  experience,  credit  unions  or  savings  &  loan  societies  as  they  are  referred  to  in 
Papua  New  Guinea  (PNG),  are  increasingly  aware  of  their  own  challenges  and are  taking 
measures to maintain their positions or space in the market. However, to do this, societies 
continue  to  seek  the  Registrar’s  endorsement  to  venture  into  these  risky  activities.  We 
wanted to do away with that and therefore have proposed some legislative reforms to give 
boards  and  management  more  opportunities  and  decision  making  in  operation  of  their 
institutions. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
  Increased regulatory compliance 
3. 
In discussing the benefits of credit unions, I am mindful of the increasing need for regulatory 
compliance globally and we in the Pacific are no different. Ladies and gentlemen, I know you 
will agree with me that credit unions have evolved over time. There has been a lot of growth 
in the movement in terms of membership, the growth in asset size and how credit unions do 
business (refer booklet by OCCUL). We cannot allow the movement to be stagnant, it has to 
be guided to adapt to global and domestically driven changes. In doing so, legislative reforms 
have  to  be  made  to  enable  appropriate  and  relevant  regulation  and  supervision  by  the 
Regulator. As we all know, the high demand for regulatory compliance increases costs. This 
is inevitable but one that should be balanced. Increase in regulation can be due to a number 
of reasons: 
 
 
 
A policy change by government or the standard setters. 
Effects of globalisation, for example the Global Financial Crisis. 
Technological innovation is becoming the order of business operations today and if 
credit unions are to survive, reforms should be encouraged to enable changes and 
enhancements  to  be  made.  Technology  is  changing  the  landscape  of  the  way 
business  conduct  themselves.  For  us  in  the  Pacific,  the  population  is  scattered 
throughout  many  small  islands  and  into  the  rural  communities,  which  makes 
provision  of  financial  services  and  accessibility  for  these  services  very  costly. 
Technology  like  the  use  of  mobile  phones  by  credit  unions  will  enable  availability 
and accessibility of services to reach the rural majorities. 
Thirdly,  there  is  increasing  trade  across  borders  made  possible  by  technological 
innovation  and  whilst  it  is  good,  it  has  its  own  risks  such  as  money  laundering, 
terrorism  financing  and  scams.  Thus,  regulation  must  be  appropriate  to  govern 
them. 
Questionable  practices  by  those  entrusted  with  the  duty  to  manage  credit  unions 
resulting  in enacting  rules  to  correct  those  practices.  Topical  issues  today  include 
financial corruption, insider trading, and conflicts of interest. 
  Global regulatory trends 
4. 
Ladies and gentlemen, the credit union sector in the Pacific plays a crucial role in helping to 
meet financial, economic and social needs of our people. However since we are  part of a 
global village, whatever happens in the World economy affects how we do business in the 
Pacific.  This  was  seen  clearly  by  the  recent  global  financial  and  economic  crisis  which 
prompted  governments  to  come  up  with  new  laws  and  rules  to  safe  guard  banks  and 
financial institutions from systemic risks. 
At this point let’s discuss some issues relating to the global regulatory trends. 
The World Council of Credit Union (WOCCU) 2013 Annual Report, highlighted the following 
four  issues  as  key  challenges  to  the  credit  union  movement,  which  are:  1.  Increased 
regulatory burden; 2. Payments innovation; 3. Young adult membership growth; and 4. Small 
credit union sustainability. Those of you who attended the World Credit Union Congress in 
Gold Coast may remember these issues being discussed. 
Firstly, I see these challenges as the key areas that are driving the regulatory trend. Since 
the global financial crisis, governments around the World have tried to push for credit unions 
to come under close scrutiny and regulation, which is good for the credit union credibility but 
can damage the movement. For example, pushing smaller credit unions, to report as per the 
International  Financial  Reporting  Standards  (IFRS)  for  credit  instrument  impairment  and 
BASEL III Requirements. This goes also for AML compliance. Whist they are appropriate for 
bigger banks, they may not be for credit unions because the credit unions are established to 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  promote thrifts and provide access to credit for provident purposes and are an alternative to 
the banks and financial institutions. Therefore, it is becoming increasingly difficult for credit 
unions  to  serve  their  members  when  such  laws  and  regulations  are  ignoring  the  business 
structure and size difference between credit unions and banks. 
However,  if  the  regulation  is  streamlined  to  a  model  conducive  for  credit  unions  to  grow, 
regulation of the sector will be beneficial in the long term. 
In  PNG,  we  have  taken  the  initiative  to  review  the  Savings  &  Loans  Society  Act  in  close 
consultation  and  input  from  the  industry.  The  review  of  the  draft  S&L  legislation  has  been 
completed in 2013 and has now progressed to Parliament to be finalised and passed as law. 
It  is  our  wish  that  the  new  legislation  will  assist  the  industry  to  grow  and  allow  for  the 
expansion of societies/credit unions in the long term. 
We  must  be  committed  to  enhancing  the  credit  union  movement  as  much  as  possible 
particularly with regard to business lending and raising of capital, but at the same time we 
also need greater flexibility in order to serve our members. 
Secondly,  another  trend  the  credit  unions  worldwide  are  embarking  on  is  to  address 
payments  innovation,  where  credit  unions  venture  into  partnerships  with  private  sector  to 
improve their payment systems. As experienced in PNG, some societies have been able to 
build shared mobile phone technology platforms to provide the underserved members with 
access to their accounts and other financial services provided by the society through mobile 
banking products. The PNG financial institutions & credit unions have teamed up with mobile 
network operators such as Digicel to extend their services to the rural areas where banking 
services are not available and thus fulfilling the financial inclusion mandate. 
Thirdly,  we  also  see  a  trend  in  addressing  membership  growth  of  financial  institutions  & 
credit unions through networking workshops, educational awareness and financial inclusion 
expositions  that  are  been  conducted  to  disseminate  information,  open  new  accounts, 
conduct  awareness  and  share  best  practices.  These  new  innovative  products  &  services 
offered  are  effectively  reaching  potential  unbanked  members  through  mobile  phone 
technology,  marketing  outreach,  financial  literacy  and  social  media  advertising.  In  PNG, 
savings & loan societies have signed up and partnered with the mobile service providers & 
the Microfinance Expansion Project funded by the Government and donor organisations to 
open up new savings accounts and promote best practises in the use of these products. 
Fourthly,  to  ensure  sustainability  of  smaller  credit  unions;  Credit  unions  &  financial 
institutions  are  being  challenged  continuously  by  regulatory  burden,  to  improve  or  acquire 
cost effective management information systems and membership growth. This dictates the 
use of systems that are capable to assist and sustain its operations. Therefore credit unions 
have  engaged  with  system  developers  to  discuss  collaborative  solutions  such  as  shared 
back office systems and payments platforms etc. The lessons learnt from such arrangements 
have allowed other collaborative networks that can improve small credit union efficiency and 
allow  them  to  offer  the  full  range  of  products  that  consumers  demand.  In  PNG  FESALOS 
facilitates the ULTRA DATA 3 that is used by member societies to run their operations. 
The future of credit unions 
5. 
Our industry landscape may continue to change every year, but our common  mission and 
values continued to resonate with consumers. Across our global community, we find a variety 
of modern tools and methods to respond to our common challenges. When we collaborate, 
we have the power to share innovative ideas and strategies that help strengthen the future of 
the credit union movement. 
We all know that the global financial crisis created a need to develop an industry model that 
would pave the way towards success for the movement in the Pacific. This has also brought 
with  it  a  need  for  banks  and  financial  institutions  to  be  more  closely  regulated  and  in  turn 
increasing  the  costs  of  compliance.  Currently  there  is  inefficiency  in  capacities  of  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
  regulator  to  properly  regulate  while  on  the  other  hand  the  credit  unions  often  lack  the 
capacity to comply. The industry needs a model tailored to its needs; one that encourages 
expansion and allows consolidation where appropriate to increase services to the members 
under economies of scale. 
We have seen in the last five (5) years a number of countries have undertaken major reforms 
in  legislation  of  credit  unions.  I  understand  this  is  the  same  in  the  Pacific.  Times  have 
changed, and we have to model these changes or else our industry will be left behind. 
Reforms  must  be  appropriate  and  relevant  to  the  challenges  facing  the  movement.  Any 
legislative  reforms  governing  credit  unions  and  societies  in  the  Pacific  should  aim  at 
promoting  growth  and  development  in  the  industry  and  not  stifle  it.  As  our  governments, 
various  regional  groups  and  donors  focus  increasingly  on  regional/Pacific  cooperation  and 
trade, this may provide an opportunity for the CU movement in the Pacific to consider ways 
to expand and sustain itself in future. 
Credit unions are here to stay. Its sustainability depends very much on each of us here today 
in ensuring: 
 
Systems of Good & Strong Governance is in place to ensure accountability at all 
levels,  from  management  through  to  the  board.  Our  members  should  feel 
comfortable that their savings are safe and that they will continue to have access to 
them and other services provided by the society; 
Fit & Proper Persons – having the right people in management and the board is 
critical to the success of credit unions who will drive the credit unions forward; 
Training for staff, management and the board is also critical and should form part of 
the  credit  union  yearly  plans.  Do  not  downplay  the  importance  of  training.  If  you 
want good returns and provision of quality services to members, then training should 
be given the importance it deserves. 
Adequate Risk Management Framework must be in place. Your understanding of 
this area is a must. If you understand, you will work to ensure it is in place. If you 
don’t, then you could be a risk to the entity. 
Suitable  Products  for  Members  –  ensuring  that  products  being  developed  are 
suitable for your members. Credit unions should not be wasting their resources on 
developing products that are not suited for the members. 
Member Protection and Awareness – needed to ensure satisfaction, confidence 
and  sustainability  of  the  industry.  Our  members,  like  any  consumers  demand 
protection  from  improper  practices  in  service  delivery,  want  fair  and  competitive 
service at appropriate cost to them. CUs need to focus on their members welfare in 
regard to services they can access. 
     Conclusion 
6. 
To conclude, I have highlighted that given the ever changing global, regional and domestic 
economic  and  financial  environment,  the  complexity  of  the  financial  system,  products, 
transactions and structures, the complexity of  demands by consumers and membership of 
CUs, there is now a common trend for increased regulation and supervision. Coupled with 
increased  competition  that  CUs  have  to  tussle  with,  other  issues  like  money  laundering, 
terrorism financing, financial corruption and scams have reached the forefront of regulators. 
Making reforms to legislations and regulation are necessary. But the capacity for regulators 
to regulate, and for CUs to comply with them is an ongoing challenge. Finding the balance 
between the two, and the appropriate model for the CU movement is always the challenge 
for regulators. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  Some of you participants will be graduating tomorrow under MCP, and I hope that you are 
already  using  the  new  knowledge  to  meaningfully  contribute  to  the  operation  of  your 
respective credit unions and thus the movement as a whole. If you have not started, start as 
soon as you go back and make a difference. The knowledge you have acquired is not for you 
to keep but to use it. 
I congratulate you for your achievements and wish you all the success in implementing these 
lessons in your institutions. 
I wish OCCUL all the success in hosting this event. 
Thank you for listening & God Bless. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
