  Christian Noyer: Global inflation and monetary policy response in the 
Euro area 
Keynote speech by Mr Christian Noyer, Governor of the Bank of France and Chairman of the 
Board  of  Directors  of  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements,  at  the  “Real  Return:  The 
Euromoney Global Inflation Conference”, Paris, 19 May 2015. 
 The  paths  of  inflation  in  advanced  countries  have  been  puzzling  over  recent  years.  While 
inflation rates fell sharply during the financial crisis and thus behaved as expected, it is much 
harder to explain their behaviour since then. In fact, rather than rebound as might have been 
expected as economic activity stabilised and then recovered, the global inflation rate fell from 
4.2% in 2012 to 3.5% in 2014 and, in OECD countries, prices dropped from 2.3% to 1.7%. 
The drop in inflation is lasting despite the fact that oil prices have stabilised and a recovery is 
under way in the US and UK and burgeoning in the euro area. In the US for example, core 
CPI inflation has fallen from 2.3% in January 2012 to 1.8% in March 2015. In the UK inflation 
rate fell during the same period from 2.6% to reach 1%, below the targeted 2%. 
This persistence of low inflation has consequences for the economic outlook and monetary 
policy. When inflation is low, companies, households and governments have a harder time 
cutting their debt loads, a problem that is still acute in a number of countries in the Eurozone. 
Moreover,  with  low  inflation  expectations,  the  private  sector  may  postpone  expenditures, 
thereby weakening economic activity. 
In fact, inflation is now below target in most advanced economies. As a result central bankers 
are asking themselves whether this decline is caused by common shocks, by a coincidence 
of domestic factors or by structural changes in the reaction of prices to the output gap. 
While  recent  price  developments  in  the  US  and  in  the  UK  are  largely  explained  by  global 
disinflationary  forces,  oil  prices,  currency  appreciation  and  the  sensitivity  of  inflation  to 
unemployment in a context of ongoing economic recovery,1 my overall assessment regarding 
the euro area situation is that a sizeable domestic component is at play. This has motivated 
the bold steps taken by the Eurosystem to counteract the risk of inflation remaining too low 
for too long a period of time. 
Part A – What happened to Euro-area inflation 
Let  me  now  describe  recent  price  developments  in  the  euro  area  in  more  detail.  HICP 
inflation has fallen consistently below our target since January 2013, declining from 2% to 
−0.1% in March 2015. Forecasters have repeatedly been surprised by this evolution. Three 
main reasons have been put forward to explain this. 
A  first  explanation  is  that  forecasting  has  been  complicated  by  the  fall  in  global  crude  oil 
prices and raw materials and its transmission to other sectors. In this regard, recent research 
conducted at the Banque de France supports this view by showing that forecast errors for oil 
prices explain about half of the errors for headline inflation. The oil price futures used in our 
forecasts turned out to be poor predictors in volatile oil markets.2 
                                                 
1   A  recent  BdF  working  paper  argued  that  short-term  unemployment  is  more  meaningful  than  total 
unemployment  when  looking  at  the  Phillips  curve  in  the  US.  Cf.  Ferrara  L.  and  Sestieri  G.  in  Banque  de 
France, Quarterly Selection of Articles, No. 36, Winter 2014-2015. 
2   Bec,  Frédérique  and  Annabelle  De  Gaye  (Nov.  2014),  “How  do  oil  price  forecast  errors  impact  inflation 
forecast errors? An empirical analysis from French and U.S. inflation forecasts.” Banque de France Working 
Paper 523. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
 for  core 
the  need 
inflation  suggesting 
 
 
for 
But  downside  surprises  also  occurred 
complementary  explanations.  One  candidate  is  the  continuous  appreciation  of  the  euro 
between mid-2012 and the beginning of 2014, which has lowered prices of many imported 
non-energy  industrial  goods.  One  can  expect  this  impact  to  be  transitory  as  the  euro  has 
subsequently depreciated since the middle of 2014. This depreciation reflects the differences 
in  the  growth  cycle  between  the  euro  area  and  its  main  partners  and  accordingly  the 
differences in monetary policy. 
Those explanations do not account for the slowdown in domestic prices, which must then be 
attributed  to  an  increase  in  domestic  slack.  For  the  European  Commission  the  output  gap 
widened from −2% in 2012 to −3% in 2013. This came as a surprise because realized GDP 
growth rates in 2013 and 2014 were about 0.5 percentage points lower than forecasts made 
in  2012.3  Our  analysis  suggests  that  this  economic  slack  contributed  substantially  to  low 
inflation. For example, in the fourth quarter of 2014, if we assume no economic slack, HICP 
inflation  would  have  been  higher  by  around  0.8  percentage  points.  Such  a  counterfactual 
exercise  is  however  surrounded  by  a  large  uncertainty.  First,  potential  output  is  hard  to 
estimate.  That  said,  if  potential  output  and  domestic  slack  were  lower  than  assumed,  the 
weakness of inflation would be all the more puzzling. Second, some observers argue that the 
Phillips  curve  of  the  euro  area  is  steeper  than  before,4  partly  explaining  the  low  level  of 
inflation. Although we do not share this diagnosis for the recent past,5 a stronger sensitivity of 
prices to slack might be observed in the future as a result of labor market reforms and lower 
unemployment  in  several  countries.  Third,  downward  nominal  wage  rigidity  may  blur  the 
relationship between  inflation  and  domestic  slack.  Nominal  wage  inflation,  which  remained 
persistent during the crisis, is likely to stay subdued during the recovery, thus leading to a 
lower inflation. 
One caveat specific to the euro area is the asymmetric adjustment process currently at work 
among  jurisdictions.  Member  countries  that  experienced  large  capital  inflows  in  the  years 
preceding the financial crisis experienced significant reductions in price competitiveness. The 
subsequent fiscal and financial adjustments have put a strong downward pressure on prices 
and  wages  (the  HICP  fell  in  2014  in  Greece,  Spain,  Portugal,  Ireland  and  Cyprus).  To 
achieve  relative  price  adjustment  while  keeping  aggregate  euro  area  inflation  close  to  2% 
would require higher inflation in the so-called core economies. In principle, this could occur 
through  a  rebalancing  of  financial  flows  from  Core  to  peripheral  countries  within  the  euro 
area and higher domestic spending in core economies. In practice, net savings rates have 
remained  high  in  several  core  economies  with  capital  instead  flowing  outside  of  the  euro 
area,  mirroring  an  increasing  current  account  surplus.  Downward  price  pressures  are 
therefore occurring in peripheral economies without offsetting upward price pressures in the 
core economies. For example, the year-on year inflation rose in 2014 in Germany by 0.8% 
and in France by 0.6%. 
In  summary,  in  the  Euro  area  half  of  the  decline  in  inflation  can  be  attributed  to  a  fall  in 
energy  prices  and  another  quarter  to  the  fall  in  food  prices.  The  remaining  quarter  is 
explained  by  the  slowdown  in  core  inflation,  which  has  declined  by  0.7  percentage  points, 
reflecting a lower inflation in services and in non-energy industrial goods. 
                                                 
3   European commission forecast of Nov. 2012: 0.1 in 2013 and 1.4 in 2014. Realized growth: −0.4 in 2013 and 
0.9 in 2014. 
4   Peter Praet mentioned this evidence of a steepening in some countries of the Euro Area, in his recent speech 
“Price stability: a sinking will-o’-the-wisp?” during a panel at the IMF Spring Meetings Seminar in Washington 
D.C. in April 2015. See also the working paper of the Banca d’Italia by Riggi, Mariana and Fabrizio Venditti 
(September  2014):  “Surprise!  Euro  area  inflation  has  fallen”  published  in  Questioni  di  Economia  e  Finanza 
237. 
5   Chatelais Nicolas, Annabelle De Gaye and Yannick Kalantzis (11 May 2015) “Low inflation in the Euro area: 
import prices and domestic slack”, Rue de la Banque 6. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  Part B – Monetary policy in the Euro Area 
Let  me  turn  now  to  monetary  policy.  The  Eurosystem’s  decisions  are  based  on  its 
assessment  of  the  path  of  inflation  over  the  medium  term.  Yet,  measuring  inflation 
expectation is a difficult task. One reason is that monetary policy is transmitted to the price 
level with a varying lag. Survey measures of inflation expectations can also be an unreliable 
guide. For example, research conducted at the Banque de France has shown that survey- 
based measures are biased in a systematic and predictable way.6 It has been shown that 
professional  forecasters  surveyed  by  the  ECB  fail  to  systematically  update  their  1-year  or 
2-year  ahead  inflation  forecasts  when  new  information  is  released,  and  the  distribution  of 
their  forecasts  is  wider  when  they  update  them.  This  explains  our  preference  for  using  a 
range of indicators to gauge inflation expectations. Nevertheless, in the last couple of years, 
most  measures  of  inflation  expectations,  be  they  survey-based  or  market-based,  have 
pointed in the same direction of a prolonged period of too low inflation, well below our target 
of being close to but below 2% over the medium term. 
As a consequence, monetary policy has become progressively more accommodative. First, 
in a context of fixed rate full allotment introduced on the 15th of October in 2008 to offset 
liquidity  risk  in  the  market  by  ensuring  banks’  continued  access  to  liquidity,  we  have 
introduced  forward  guidance  to  avoid  an  unwarranted  tightening  of  the  effective  monetary 
policy stance. Initially implemented in July 2013, this guidance was “firmly reiterated” in early 
2014 and remains in place today. Second, the Eurosystem introduced targeted longer-term 
refinancing operations (TLTROs) and the asset purchase programs for covered bonds and 
asset-backed  securities  in  June  2014,  with  the  goal  of  improving  the  transmission  of  our 
monetary policy. Third, the main refinancing rate was cut to 5 basis points and the deposit 
rate entered into negative territory in two steps (–20 basis points). 
However, by January this year it was clear that economic recovery as well as monetary and 
credit indicators were too weak to bring medium term inflation close to but below 2%. Market- 
based measures of inflation expectations, even if prone to liquidity shocks, had been falling 
further below the target and at longer term horizons. The Governing Council was determined 
to act boldly to counteract the risk of a too low for too long inflation. 
In this context, an expanded asset purchase programme was then launched. On March 9th, 
the Eurosystem began purchasing public sector securities in the secondary market along the 
curve from 2 to 30 years, being mindful of being market neutral. Purchases of securities at 
negative  yield  are  permissible,  as  long  as  the  yield  is  above  the  deposit  facility  rate. 
Marketable  securities  purchased  under  this  program  will  be  made  available  for  securities 
lending. 
This programme is intended to stimulate the economy through different channels. 
The  first  one  is  the  portfolio  rebalancing  channel,  in  which  the  fall  in  yields  on  safe 
government bonds induces investors to buy riskier assets, thereby stimulating the economy. 
Since the launch of the programme yields have dropped not only for the assets purchased 
but also for bank and corporate bonds and equity prices have continued to rise. 
A  second  channel  works  through  lowering  and  flattening  the  yield  curve.  The  purchase 
programme  will  continue  until  the  end  of  September  2016  and  beyond  if  we  do  not  see  a 
sustained adjustment in the path of inflation. This reinforces the guidance that interest rates 
will remain low for an extended period of time. 
A  third  channel  is  related  to  increasing  credit supply.  If  the  Euro-system  buys  assets  from 
non-banks or institutions, then these funds will reappear as deposits in the banking system. 
                                                 
6   Andrade and Le Bihan, 2013, Inattentive professional forecasters, Journal of Monetary Economics, volume 60, 
p. 967–982. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
  
 
This creates an additional source of funding for banks which in turn increases the supply of 
credit to the private sector. 
A  last  channel  is  the  signaling  effect.  By  acting  decisively  and  more  aggressively  than 
anticipated, we hope to lift inflation expectations. 
Conclusion 
Let  me  conclude  with  my  assessment  of  the  impact  of  the  QE.  So  far,  recent  indicators 
suggest that our quantitative easing has had a positive effect on inflation expectations. This 
is true when looking at market-based measures at short term horizons, although less so at 
long  term  horizons.  Looking  at  the  recent  release  of  the  ECB  survey  of  professional 
forecasters, there is an upward trend in inflation expectations over the medium to long term. 
But,  as  shown  by  the  US  experience,  re-anchoring  inflation  expectations  takes  time.  The 
Eurosystem  is  ready  to  go  further  if  necessary  to  deliver  on  its  mandate  of  maintaining 
inflation  close  to  but  below  2%.  But  monetary  policy  will  be  more  effective  if,  at  the  same 
time,  governments  increase  the  potential  growth  rate  by  implementing  ambitious  structural 
reforms. 
 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
