  Ewald Nowotny: The Austrian school of economics and Austrian 
economic policy 
Text  of  the  Zilk  Lecture  by  Prof  Dr  Ewald  Nowotny,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  the 
Republic of Austria, at the Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem, 31 May 2015. 
This paper has been prepared with the help of Dr. Paul Ramskogler. 
Accompanying slides can be found on the Central Bank of the Republic of Austria’s website. 
 The tensions of a ceasing empire – the founder generations 
Unlike  the  natural  sciences  economics  is  not  progressing  incrementally.  As  in  any  social 
science  economic  schools  of  thought  rather  reflect  the  character  of  the  societies  in  which 
they are created. Therefore the Austrian school of economics cannot be understood without 
having a thorough comprehension of the institutional environment in which it was created. 
The beginning of the school and its core determinants lay in the Austria of the second half of 
the  19th  century.  This  period  served  as  the  formative  environment  for  the  founders  of  the 
Austrian school of economics: Carl Menger, Eugen von Böhm-Bawerk and Friedrich Wieser. 
It  was  a  period  that  was  characterised  by  a  massive  underlying  tension.  On  the  one  side 
there was a state that progressively lost legitimacy yet continued to claim a massive grasp on 
the life of his subordinates. On the other side there was an increasingly professional elite that 
witnessed the accumulating dysfunctionalities of the empire yet owed its entire reputation to 
it. The internal conflicts arising out of this contradiction turned out to be a huge inspiration for 
the  intellectuals  of  the  time.  Of  course  these  internal  conflicts  also  were  decisive  in  the 
making  of  the  Austrian  school  of  economics.  Let  me  therefore  explore  these  two  major 
influences in more detail. 
The first two generations of the Austrian school of economics lived their early life during the 
first decades of the second half of the 19th century. They thus formed what might be called 
the  first  post-1848  generation.  As  a  result,  the  first  important  political  development  they 
experienced  was  the  immediate  reactionary  backlash  against  the  bourgeois  revolution  of 
1848. Metternich – the powerful former chancellor who had returned from his temporary exile 
taken  in  1848  –  continued  to  strongly  influence  Austrian  politics  until  his  death  in  1860. 
However, also after Metternich’s death, the empire continued to rigorously regulate daily life, 
most ostentatiously through censorship.  
The events of 1848 also had brought Franz Josef I to power, who continued to govern the 
country until 1916. His rule was most strikingly characterized by an obsession with a strict 
Spanish-type  court  ceremonial 
to  his 
contemporaries.  More  relevant  in  daily  life,  however,  was  that  one’s  social  status  was 
strongly  determined  by  the  personal  ties  that  one  could  establish  with  court  members  and 
representatives. Carl Menger, for instance, was a teacher of the unfortunate Crown Prince 
Rudolf for two years.  
The 
in  which  protectionism  and 
importance  of 
interventionism were endemic and affected all parts of public life. Mundane aspects of daily 
life such as verdicts, the granting of trade licenses or at times even the playing schedule of 
theatres  were  subject  to  interventions.  The  huge  bureaucracy  offered  a  more  than  fertile 
ground  for  protectionism.  In  other  words:  The  empire  was  omnipresent,  omnipotent  and 
determined  career  paths.  What  is  more,  the  interventionism  and  protectionism  made  the 
activities of the empire quite often very arbitrary.  
This might not have been as fatal for the empire as it turned out to be, had it still been able to 
deliver successes. However, the Austro-Hungarian Empire – as it became to be called after 
that  appeared  vastly  anachronistic  even 
the  court  created  an  environment 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  1867 – lost a succession of wars and, as a direct consequence, provinces like Lombardy or 
Venetia.  As  a  further  consequence  of  these  defeats  it  lost  much  of  its  importance  in  the 
German-speaking  world  to  the  rising  young  Prussia  and  after  the  Austro-Prussian  war  in 
1866 it finally was expelled from the German confederation – an event substantially reducing 
its significance in international politics. Simultaneously, the intellectual evolution of the 19th 
century and the growing importance of the middle classes brought an alternative concept of 
the sovereign into play. The concept of the emperor as sovereign that was the basis of the 
rule  of  Franz  Josef  I  was  increasingly  contrasted  with  a  view  that  put  the  nation  as  the 
sovereign. The empire thus was increasingly challenged by the concept of the nation state. 
This  development  was  wide-spread  in  the  19th  century  and  not  a  phenomenon  that  was 
limited  to  Austria.  However  in  the  multi-ethnic  society  the  Austro-Hungarian  Empire  that 
hosted so many nations under its common roof it turned out to be particularly devastating. 
The rising tensions amongst the “peoples of Austria” led to an escalating dysfunctionality of 
the parliamentary process that had been introduced only reluctantly anyhow. Eventually the 
ageing Franz Josef I found himself forced to rule by emergency decrees for almost a decade 
around  the  fin  de  siècle  (1897-1906).  On  top  of  this  ever  more  obvious  systemic  political 
crisis there was a systemic economic crisis. Austria had been a late starter in the industrial 
revolution  as  post-feudalistic  elements  and  repressive  commercial  policies  had  inhibited 
faster capital accumulation and the rise of a confident bourgeoisie at an earlier stage. The 
belated industrialization now culminated in the so-called Gründerkrach of 1873. The result of 
this  major  banking  crisis  was  an  ensuing  period  of  economic  stagnation  and  deflation  that 
Austrian economists like Joseph Schumpeter later came to refer to as great depression. The 
deep  irritation  triggered  by  the  experience  of  Austria’s  first  major  economic  crisis  further 
fuelled the rise of alternative concepts to capitalism. In this regard, socialist ideas were most 
prevalent  at  the  fin  de  siècle  –  note  that  Karl  Marx  was  a  contemporary  of  the  first 
generations of the Austrian school of economics. An omnipotent, often arbitrary and, on top 
of  this,  increasingly  dysfunctional  state  thus  triggered  a  deep  and  systemic  crisis  of 
confidence.  This  was  the  first  part  of  the  intellectual  framework  that  should  govern  early 
Austrian economic thinking.  
However,  there  was  a  deep  insoluble  ambivalence  to  this  crisis  of  confidence  for  the  first 
proponents  of  Austrian  economics.  It  should  not  be  forgotten  that  the  main  pillar  of  the 
empire  was  its  bureaucracy.  A  major  basis  for  the  formation  of  this  bureaucracy  was  the 
educational system, which, as early as in 1850, had been subject to fundamental reforms. 
These  reforms  did  not  only  extend  the  curriculum  from  six  to  eight  years  but  shifted  the 
emphasis  of  education  from  religion  and  obedience  to  an  education  in  preparation  of 
academic research duties. It was a school system that – at least compared to its predecessor 
–  rather  encouraged  than  suppressed  critique  and  opposition.  It  cannot  be  overestimated 
how much this added to the vastly fruitful intellectual soil of fin de siècle Vienna. However, at 
the  same  time  the  school  system  created  a  very  elitist  breed,  with  graduates  of  certain 
schools often forming lifelong ties. It is no coincidence that the most important proponents of 
the  second  generation  of  Austrian  economists  –  Friedrich  Wieser  and  Eugen  von  Böhm-
Bawerk  – 
the  well-known  Viennese 
Schottengymnasium.  This  educational  system  formed  the  basis  for  a  highly  trained 
bureaucracy, with a bourgeois class consciousness and a strong, technocratic work ethos. 
Menger, Wieser and Böhm-Bawerk were members of these bureaucratic cadres not only as 
academics  but  also  through  occasional  employment  within  ministries  such  as  the  finance 
ministry or even – as in the case of Böhm-Bawerk – as ministers. The crux  was that they 
derived  their  status  and  reputation  from  being  representatives  of  a  regime  whose 
dysfunctionalities and anachronisms lay blatantly open to everyone who was willing to see. 
The  second  part  of  the  Austrian  intellectual  framework  thus  was  the  extremely  ambivalent 
association with the elite of a crumbling regime.  
The massive tension that arose out of these two – in principle irreconcilable – factors created 
an  extremely  fertile  ground  for  the  intellectuals  of  those  days.  Two  different  reactions 
prevailed:  obsession  with  the  individual  and  therapeutic  nihilism.  Already  during  the 
for  many  years  had  been  class  mates 
in 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Biedermeier of the Metternich period the rising class-consciousness and social presence of 
the  middle  classes  had  been  channelled  into  the  epidemic  cultivation  of  domestic 
aestheticism amid a repressive and contractionary state. The fin de siècle somewhat echoed 
this  escapism  –  now  in  a  more  public  form.  The  arts  turned  toward  an  unprecedented 
aestheticism as represented for instance in the works of Makart, Klimt and Schiele or in the 
music of Johann Strauss. It is not by sheer coincidence that Maurice Ravel later should refer 
to the waltz as a “fantastic whirl of destiny”. Amongst more analytical minds this obsession 
with  one’s  destiny  amid  an  omnipresent  and  arbitrary  state  turned  into  a  twist  toward 
inwardness and an occupation with the individual. Think for instance of the hugely influential 
Sigmund Freud and his psychoanalysis. Another very telling example is the work of Arthur 
Schnitzler  –  not  by  chance  one  of  the  first  masters  of  the  inner  monologue  –  and  his 
explorations of the depths of the human mind. 
However, at the extreme edge this individualistic twist  was taken ad absurdum. This more 
extreme approach amongst intellectuals was the so-called therapeutic nihilism. Originally this 
term had been coined in the medical science at the beginning of the 19th century to describe 
an approach that gave the diagnosis absolute primacy – even if at the cost of dissection – 
over  the  therapy.  At  the  turn  of  the  century  this  attitude  was  widely  adopted  amongst 
philosophers (e.g. Weininger, Wittgenstein), social scientists and other intellectuals (Kraus). 
With  these  intellectuals  therapeutic  nihilism  turned  into  a  more  generalized  view  that 
“diseases” of society or language could not be healed or corrected in any sensible way and 
efforts to do so would be in vain.  
It is fair to say that the Austrian school of economics within its own development covered the 
distance  between  these  two  intellectual  extremes.  In  the  end,  both  the obsession  with  the 
individual  and  therapeutic  nihilism  found  shelter  under  the  theoretical  roof  of  Austrian 
economic analysis. At the beginning, however, the focus on the individual was the prevalent 
force  in  the  making  of  Austrian  economics.  Carl  Menger  introduced  methodological 
individualism and methodological subjectivism into the analysis and thereby became one of 
the fathers of the so called marginalist revolution in economics. From that point on, efforts to 
base a theory of value on any objective criterion – like for instance labor as in the Marxist 
labor  theory  of  value  –  were  outside  the  realm  of  mainstream  economics.  The  concept  of 
marginal utility – first labelled as such by Friedrich Wieser – quickly became the main theory 
of  value  used  around  the  world.  However,  these  innovations  today  are  widely  accepted 
elements of mainstream economic analysis and if it were only for these innovations we would 
find no necessity to discuss a separate Austrian school of economics.  
Yet,  there  were  already  important  concepts  in  the  early  Austrian  economic  discourse  that 
would  later  put  this  school  outside  the  emerging  mainstream  debate.  Already  Menger 
stressed  the  importance  of  uncertainty,  which,  according  to  him,  increases  along  with  the 
accumulating  stock  of  a  society’s  knowledge.  The  concept  of  time  and  path  dependency 
became central to the Austrian theory of capital as put forth by Böhm-Bawerk. The relative 
importance  of  these  aspects  continued  to  increase  steadily  within  Austrian  economic 
thinking. Further, in defining freedom and one’s own responsibility as the basis of the general 
development  of  a  state  Carl  Menger  already  sketched  what  became  the  leitmotif  of  the 
Austrian school of economics. However, contrary to more recent definitions that would define 
freedom  as  the  free  availability  of  opportunities,  the  definition  of  the  Austrian  school  of 
economics always remained a negative one that exclusively defined freedom as the absence 
of constraints. This should become decisive for the spin that later Austrian economists took 
toward analytical nihilism.  
Collapse and exile – the later generations 
Despite  all  the  dysfunctionalities  and  anomalies  a  core  property  of  the  Austro-Hungarian 
Empire  was  the  remarkable  stability  of  its  society.  In  the  institutional  sphere  things  only 
changed  at  glacial  speed.  The  great  stagnationist  phase  at  the  end  of  the  century  further 
helped to accentuate this political stagnation in the economic and social sphere. Against this 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  background, the shock that was triggered by World War I and the dissolution of the Austro-
Hungarian Empire was  even larger. As anachronistic as the empire may have been it had 
been omnipresent and had hardly changed. Now, the man who had governed the empire for 
more  than  sixty  years  was  gone  and  with  him  not  only  the  empire’s  grandeur  but  also  its 
existence  was  a  thing  of  the  past.  The  intellectuals  of  Vienna  had  been  used  to  seeing 
themselves as the elite of the capital of an empire with fifty million inhabitants. Suddenly they 
were situated at the fringe of a six-million people carcass. Long-standing truths were invalid 
and  the  structure  of  the  society  fundamentally  changed.  An  illustrative  example  is  the 
abolishment of the gentry and its nomenclature. Austrian economists of the third and fourth 
generation like Mises continued to use the noble version of their names until the end of their 
days but this nomenclature already had been abolished in 1919 thereby eliminating the “von” 
in  the  names  of  Hayek  and  Mises.  More  decisive  for  the  Austrian  school  of  economics 
however was that the socialist challenges of capitalism now had become a very serious and 
a very real threat. Russia had become a communist country and the financial wealth of many 
Austrians was lost during the period of hyperinflation of 1920-1922, which fuelled the further 
erosion  of  trust  into  capitalism.  The  endemic  rivalry  between  bourgeois  and  socialist 
politicians in Austrian politics had turned into a subcutaneous civil war now that real power 
was at stake. Occasionally this conflict turned into open confrontations that eventually were 
to culminate in a brief civil war.  
Finally, the world economic crisis added to the ongoing conflicts. The Austrian economists 
strongly pushed for a clear laissez faire approach entailing balanced budgets, the absence of 
exchange restrictions and free trade. They later were to receive much of the blame for the 
above-average severity of the crisis in Austria for their role in the design of economic policies 
during  the  crisis.  Nonetheless  with  the  beginning  of  Austro-Fascism  in  1933  the  most 
important  students  of  the  founders  of  the  Austrian  school  of  economics  –  Joseph 
Schumpeter,  Ludwig  Mises  and  August  Hayek  –  already  had  left  Austria  for  universities 
abroad. From now on the Austrian school of economics and the economic development in 
Austria would be increasingly separated.  
It will hardly come as a surprise that the turbulent times of the inter-war period were strongly 
reflected in the mind-set of the third and fourth generations of Austrian economists. While the 
first two generations had contented themselves with the analysis of a largely static economy 
this now radically changed. Austrian economists pioneered the analysis of the business cycle 
in the inter-war years. Innovation and the role of entrepreneurship became a central theme in 
the  works  of  Joseph  Schumpeter.  Mises  too  insisted  on  the  importance  of  entrepreneurs 
amid  an  uncertain  environment.  However,  while  the  occupation  with  a  critique  of  Marxist 
ideas  already  had  been  endemic  among  the  first  generations  it  turned  into  an  obsession 
starting with Mises. Mises spent a considerable part of his career with the effort to prove the 
theoretical  inconsistency  of  the  concept  of  a  planned  economy  and  objected  to  public 
interventions into the economy.  
Mises contrasted with the more reflected Schumpeter. However, with their successor Hayek, 
the Austrian school had completed its transformation toward the libertarian fringe in which it 
is  situated  today.  Hayek  developed  the  economic  concept  of  knowledge  that  already  had 
been present in Menger’s thought into a full-blown attack against any public interventions. In 
the evolutionary concept of an economy that Hayek had in mind no public authority would 
ever  be  able  to  outperform  the  allocative  efficiency  of  markets  due  to  its  incomplete 
knowledge. The Austrian theory of the business cycle in his hands turned into a theory that 
regarded credit creation by public authorities as the main source of economic fluctuations. 
Completely ignoring that problems of this kind might also arise in the private sector, Hayek 
thus fervently argued for an absolute minimum state. He also was one of the most prominent 
Austrian  economists  that  actively  tried  to  influence  the  economic  policies  during  the  world 
economic crisis. As early as in 1930 Hayek’s prime policy recommendation to fight the crisis 
– published in his book “Prices and Production” – was to refrain from any interventions and 
wait  for  markets  to  stabilise  themselves.  This  was  a  recommendation  whose  devastating 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  effect only becomes clear when it is contrasted with the beneficial effects of the successful 
New Deal in the USA that did exactly the opposite. The more mature Hayek’s career became 
the  more  focus  he  put  on  propagating  these  libertarian  ideas  in  the  policy  arena  which 
ultimately led him to found the Mont Pelerin society in 1947.  
Recalling  the  two  extreme  positions  taken  by  the  intellectuals  of  fin  de  siècle  Vienna  – 
individualism  and  therapeutic  nihilism  –  it  thus  is  fair  to  say  that  the  Austrian  school  of 
economics  had  made  a  long  journey  from  the  more  individualistic  positions  of  Menger  to 
eventually  reach  the  climax  of  therapeutic  nihilism  with  Hayek.  Austrian  economists  like 
Wieser  had  been  deeply  concerned  with  problems  arising  out  of  inequality  and  the  law  of 
declining  marginal  utility  in  the  hands  of  Böhm-Bawerk  turned  into  an  intellectual  tool  for 
promoting progressive taxation. Hayek – a Fabian socialist in his youth – with a zeal often 
found  among  converts  now  gave  the  Austrian  school  of  economics  its final  extremist  spin. 
This  extremism  somehow  helps  to  understand  why  later  representatives  of  Austrian 
economics  –  as for  instance  represented  by  Fritz  Machlup  or  Israel  Kirzner  –  never  came 
close to reaching the academic impact of its founders. Somewhat mimicking Hayek’s career 
path from now on the most important influence  of the Austrian school of economics was in 
the political sphere. The influence of the political agenda of the later generations on political 
circles around the world, and especially in the United States, should not be underestimated, 
though.  However,  as  far  as  the  economic  policy  of  the  name-giving  country  –  Austria  –  is 
concerned  the  influence  of  the  Austrian  school  of  economics  remained  very  limited  after 
World War II. To some extent this was one of the major reasons for the remarkable success 
of the Austrian post-war economy. 
Austrian economic policies – a lesson in non-Austrian economics 
The  period  after  the  horrors  of  World  War  II  and  the  Holocaust  marked  the  ultimate 
radicalization  of  the  Austrian  school  of  economics.  However,  this  time  also  brought  a 
structural  shift  in  Austrian  economic  policies.  The  emigrating  generations  of  Austrian 
economists  had  left  a  country  that  was  characterized  by  a  destructive  and  violent  conflict 
between conservatives and socialists and was headed for disaster. However, the terrors of 
World War II and the necessities of the ensuing occupation and reconstruction fundamentally 
altered these dynamics. In lieu of the hostility and distrust, the new style of Austrian politics 
was one of cooperation and compromise. This helped to pave the way for the revitalization of 
the Austrian economy.  
The  most  important  manifestation  of  this  development  was  the  cooperation  of  the  social 
partners.  It  started  in  an  effort  to  stabilize  price  growth  in  the  economy  of  scarcity  of  the 
immediate  post-war  years.  While  these  efforts  only  turned  out  to  be  successful  at  the 
beginning  they  planted  the  seeds  of  the  neo-corporatist  approach  to  economic  policy  that 
was to form the backbone of Austrian post-war economic policy. The basis of this approach 
was a high degree of voluntary cooperation between many of the key players of the social 
partnership  such  as  chambers  representing  employer  and  employee  interests  and  trade 
unions. The cooperation was built around a simple but effective settlement of the concurring 
claims whose incompatibility had caused so many troubles in the inter-war years. Institutions 
representing employee interests acceded to moderate their wage claims in exchange for a 
steady and high degree of investment and the moderation of social hardship by a generous 
social  state.  Bi-  and  tripartite  bodies  became  the  rule  and  had  strong  influence  on  the 
legislative  procedure  thus  decisively  shaping  the  design  of  post-war  Austria.  At  the  same 
time  the  high  level  of  coordination  of  collective  bargaining  made  it  easier  to  internalize 
positive  externalities.  This  helped  to  build  Austria’s  much  acclaimed  system  of  vocational 
training that was to become a basis for Austria’s remarkable productivity growth in the post-
war years.  
Most  importantly,  the  atmosphere  of  mutual  trust  significantly  reduced  uncertainty  and 
thereby  supported  the  high  rates  of  investment  that  were  so  crucial  for  rebuilding  Austria. 
This was decisively supported by the substantial international help that Austria received in 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  the  years  after  the  war.  First  of  all  –  but  not  exclusively  –  the  funds  granted  under  the 
Marshall  Plan  Fund  helped  Austria  to  finance  its  initially  persistent  current  account  deficit. 
This made it possible to start the reindustrialization of the devastated industry. Nationalized 
industries took the key role in this process and the social partnership was crucial, with social 
partners being represented on the boards of the nationalized industry. At the beginning, the 
output of these industries grew much faster than that of the private industries. What is more, 
they were at the cutting edge of innovation and leading in the export sector.  
Eventually this system of moderate wage policies and a high share of nationalized industries 
fused  into  what  came  to  be  labelled  as  Austro-Keynesianism.  An  additional  ingredient  of 
Austro-Keynesianism was a strong anticyclical focus of the fiscal system combined with the 
effort to make the tax system more redistributive. Another key ingredient was the currency 
policy.  The  Austrian  central  bank  pursued  a  hard  currency  policy  and  steadily  reduced 
fluctuations  in  the  exchange  rate  vis-à-vis  the  German  mark.  The  major  motivation  was 
mistrust  against  the  instrument  of  currency  depreciations,  which,  in  other  countries, 
repeatedly had proven as a merely temporary means of relief. Indeed the central bank’s hard 
currency  policy  put  the  Austrian  export  industry  on  projectable  foundations  and  helped  to 
contain  the  uncertainty  that  had  been  vastly  increased  by  the  breakdown  of  the  world 
currency order under the system of Bretton Woods. These initially quite painful policies – in a 
period before the introduction of central bank independence – could only be pursued thanks 
to the backing and support of the social partners. 
This  was  especially  important  as  with  a  growing  distance  to  the  era  of  reconstruction  the 
heavy industry increasingly gave way to the production of consumer goods; a development 
that was further fuelled by the take-off of globalisation and the associated shifts of production 
abroad.  This  process  implied  a  decrease  in  the  relative  importance  of  the  nationalized 
industries.  On  top  of  this  structural  change,  the  nationalized  industries  were  increasingly 
aching  from  a  structural  set-up  that  was  sorely  in  need  of  reform.  The  fact  that  they 
increasingly had to obey to the necessities of regional policies often came at the expense of 
economic efficiency. Thus, in retrospect, the adjustments imposed on Austria’s economy by 
the hard currency policy turned out to be a blessing for Austria. The private sector industry 
was forced to adjust its international competitiveness at a very early stage. This helped the 
private sector to step in and replace the importance of the nationalized industries as the latter 
went  through  a  fundamental  crisis.  This  structural  change  made  Austria’s  economy  fit  to 
sustain the periods of harsh consolidation that later came in preparation for the accession to 
the  EU. What  is  even  more  important: The  increased  price  competiveness  of  the  Austrian 
economy  made  the  integration  into  the  European  economy  far  easier.  The  regained 
profitability  of  the  Austrian  industry  also  supported  the  successful  expansion  into  Eastern 
Europe after the fall of the iron curtain that significantly added to Austria’s economic growth 
of  the  last  decades.  Ultimately,  the  combination  of  a  competitive  industry  with  a  skilled 
workforce and a low degree of labor disputes has also helped Austria to emerge from the 
recent crisis in a relatively strong condition.  
Certainly, any approach to economic policy comes with its specific downsides. The approach 
taken in Austria is no exception to this rule. To some extend the current state of the Austrian 
economy echoes the famous bon mot of the Austria’s former chancellor Bruno Kreisky who 
stated  that:  “a  few  additional  billions  of  debt  cause  me  fewer  sleepless  nights  than  a  few 
additional  hundred  thousands  of  people  being  unemployed”  The  nationalized  industry  and 
the active fiscal policy and large social state have left a large debt burden. This cannot be 
disputed,  yet  Austria’s  national  debt  is  still  at  a  manageable  level.  The  strong  role  of  the 
social partners led to some idiosyncrasies, and limiting room for manoeuvre not only reduces 
uncertainty but also reduces some innovative capacity. The educational system – despite its 
successes in the past – requires a structural overhaul to adapt skill-formation and knowledge 
dispersion to the requirements of a modern computerized society. Finally, the financial sector 
is on its way to undertake some structural adjustments. However, compared with its peers, 
Austria has performed very well, producing decent growth, a skilled population and very low 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  unemployment  rates  at  the  cost  of  some  problems  that  still  are  quite  manageable.  At  the 
bottom line, the non-Austrian economic policy of Austria has been very successful.  
To  sum  up:  The  Austrian  school  of  economics  developed  an  approach  based  on 
methodological individualism and a subjective theory of value. It put knowledge in the centre 
of the analysis and deduced that increasing knowledge would lead to increasing uncertainty. 
As a result – according to Austrian economists only the free interplay of market forces and 
entrepreneurship  can  reveal  the  underlying  knowledge  by  an  undisturbed  determination  of 
prices and profits. A minimum state and strict non-interventionism thus would be the policy 
ideal. 
Economic policy in Austria indeed has tackled key aspects raised by the Austrian school of 
economics  such  as  uncertainty,  the  dispersion  of  knowledge  and  entrepreneurship.  It  is  a 
strange irony however that the success of Austrian economic policy was brought about by 
tackling these problems with policy tools that ran completely counter those recommended by 
the  Austrian  school  of  economics.  Uncertainty  was  handled  by  stabilizing  expectations 
through  corporatist  institutions  and  by  a  generous  social  state.  Knowledge  dispersion  was 
promoted  by  centralized  collective  bargaining  institutions.  While  the  Austrian  school  of 
economics  thus  regarded  uncertainty  as  the  main  argument  why  entrepreneurship 
outperforms  any  public  intervention,  in  post-war  Austria  it  was  only  through  public 
interventions  that  uncertainty  was  brought  to  sufficiently  low  levels  and  entrepreneurship 
could  unfold.  Thus,  where  the  Austrian  school  of  economics  was  obsessed  with  fighting 
constraints to ensure freedom, economic policymakers in Austria tried to ensure freedom by 
equalizing opportunities. Indeed, it was actions contrary to the libertarian recommendations 
by late proponents of Austrian economics that made Austria economically successful. 
 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  Literature 
Backhouse, Roger, 2000; Austrian Economics and the Mainstream: View from the Boundary, 
The Quaterly Journal of Austrian Economics, 3, 2, 31-43 
Blaug, Mark, 1996; Economic theory in retrospect, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press 
Butschek, Felix, 1999; Statistische Reihen zur Österreichischen Wirtschaftsgeschichte – Die 
Österreichische  Wirtschaft  seit  der  industriellen  Revolution,  Wien:  Österreichisches  Institut 
für Wirtschaftsforschung 
Butschek,  Felix,  2011;  Österreichische  Wirtschaftsgeschichte.  Von  der  Antike  bis  zur 
Gegenwart. Wien: Böhlau 
Garisson,  Roger,  2005;  The  Austrian  School  in  Snowdon,  Brian;  Vane,  Howard;  Modern 
Macroeconomics – Its Origins, Development and Current State, Celtenham: Edward Elgar 
Haberler, Gottfried, 1981; Austria’s economic development after two world wars – A mirror 
picture  of  the  world  economy,  in  Arndt,  Sven,  The  Political  Economy  of  Austria,  1981 
Washington: American Enterprise Institute for Public Policy Research 
Johnston, William M., 1972; The Austrian mind - An intellectual and social history 1848-1938, 
Berkeley: University of California Press 
Klausinger,  Hansjörg,  2015;  The  Nationalökonomische  Gesellschaft  (Austrian  Economic 
Association)  in  the  interwar  period  and  beyond,  Department  of  Economics  Working  Paper 
No. 195, Wien: WU 
Kreuzer,  Franz;  Wilhelmer,  Peter  (eds.)  2004;  Big  Brother  und  seine  Masken,  Wege  zur 
Knechtschaft  –  Wege  zur  Freiheit:  Die  Österreichische  Schule  der  Nationalökonomie  und 
ihre Zukunft, Wien: Kremayr and Scheriau/Orac 
Machlup, Fritz, 2004; Ludwig von Mises: A scholar who would not compromise, Mises Daily, 
December 17 
März, Eduard, 1989; Joseph Alois Schumpeter (1883-1950) in Starbatty, Joachim; Klassiker 
des  Ökonomischen  Denkens  –  Zweiter  Band.  Von  Karl  Marx  bis  John  Maynard  Keynes, 
1989 München: Beck.  
Nowotny,  Ewald;  Zagler  Martin,  2009;  Der  öffentliche  Sektor  –  Einführung  in  die 
Finanzwissenschaft. 5. Auflage, Würzburg: Springer 
Rotschild, Kurt W., 2004; Die politischen Visionen grosser Ökonomen. Bern: Stämpfli Verlag 
AG. 
Schorske,  Carl  E.,  1961;  Fin-de-siècle  Vienna  –  Politics  and  culture,  New  York:  Vintage 
Books/Random House 
Screpanti,  Ernesto;  Zamagni,  2005;  An  outline  of the  history  of  economic  thought,  Oxford: 
Oxford University Press 2005 
Streissler,  Erich,  1989;  Carl  Menger  (1840-1921)  in  Starbatty,  Joachim,  Klassiker  des 
Ökonomischen  Denkens  –  Zweiter  Band.  Von  Karl  Marx  bis  John  Maynard  Keynes,  1989 
München: Beck.  
Ungerer  Brigitte,  1999;  Österreichs  Wirtschaftspolitik:  Vom  Austro-Keynesianismus  zum 
Austro-Neoliberalismus? 
In  Karlhofer,  Ferdinand;  Tálos,  Emmerich,  Zukunft  der 
Sozialpartnerschaft – Veränderungsdynamik und Reformbedarf, 1999 Wien: Signum Verlag. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
