   Patrick Honohan: Major banking decisions in Ireland during the financial 
crisis 
Introductory statement by Mr Patrick Honohan, Governor of the Central Bank of Ireland, to the 
Oireachtas (National Parliament) Banking Inquiry, Dublin, 25 June 2015. 
 “Nexus phase” 
I have judged it best to concentrate in this statement mainly on crisis management aspects. 
These were the chief focus of the first years of my term of office from late September 2009 to 
the  end  of  2013.  Besides,  my  previous  appearances  before  the  Inquiry,  and  the  separate 
documentation submitted by the Central Bank have already covered much of the remaining 
ground.1 
Crisis management aspects 
Appropriateness of bank guarantee decision 
1.  
Much of the discussion on the appropriateness of the bank guarantee decision has focused on 
what information was available to the political decision makers on the night of September 29th, 
2008, on what should have been understood by their advisers, given the information that was 
available, and on the alternative short-term courses of action which were available and which 
might have achieved smaller losses for Irish taxpayers, whether that was to involve a sharing 
with other EU governments or a bail-in of some creditors.2 
After all the ink that has been spilled over this issue, nothing has altered the conclusion of my 
May 2010 report which suggested some time should have been bought through emergency 
liquidity  assistance  (ELA)  in  order  to  allow  for  consultation  with  the  ECB  and  other  EU 
Governments, and to obtain a clearer picture of the potential exposure involved in blanket 
guarantee. Probably some extensive form of guarantee would still have to have been granted, 
but it should not have included subordinated debt nor existing senior term debt. Given the 
evident failure of their business models – as was clearly indicated in the documents prepare 
by the investment bank consultants, Anglo and INBS should probably have been dealt with 
separately from the others through immediate nationalization and not included in a general 
guarantee. To what extent additional bail-in of creditors could have been fully effected over 
and above what was subsequently achieved is hard to say. As there was later, there would 
have been strong pressure from EU partners not to bail-in senior debt, and it is unclear whether 
any quid-pro-quo could have been secured in return. 
All in all, the focus on the night of the guarantee has been excessive. As explained below, 
much of the losses and the costs for the Irish people had already been ineradicably incurred. 
Decision to recapitalize banks and alternatives 
2.  
In what follows I focus on the qualitative and policy aspects of this issue as it was dealt with 
during 2010.3 
                                                
1   Taken together with the present statement, those previous pieces of written evidence cover all 31 lines of Inquiry 
proposed in the Direction. 
2   These matters were discussed at my previous appearances before the Inquiry on 15 January and 11 March 
2015. My letter to the Inquiry of 12 February 2015 also refers. 
3   Further details and quantification are included in Honohan (2012). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   
Given the existence of a watertight guarantee enacted through the CIFS legislation of October 
2008,4 in designing policy with regard to bank capitalization I was guided by a fixed principle, 
informed by the Central Bank’s statutory mandate, that any event of default by a bank (as 
would trigger a large cash call on the State) was to be avoided in view of the financial instability 
that this would cause. In practice, this implied that the Central Bank had to ensure that all of 
the  guaranteed  banks  would  continue  to  maintain  regulatory  capital  compliant  with 
international standards. This would help ensure that they had access to the ECB’s standard 
liquidity facilities, as well as, where necessary, ELA.5 
The second principle applied by the Central Bank was that, for the purpose of defining eligibility 
for  access  to  Central  Bank  financing,  regulatory  capital  adequacy  would  continue  to  be 
measured  in  line  with  conventional  accounting  principles.6  Anglo  was  the  first  bank  to 
encounter  problems  in  meeting  regulatory  capital  minima;  their  management  advised  in 
December  2009  that  they  were  likely  to  breach  regulatory  minima  at  end-year  following  a 
reassessment of provisioning needs. This information triggered a request to the Minister for 
Finance for an injection of capital sufficient to maintain capital at the regulatory minimum. The 
Minister undertook to do so and this led to the creation of a Promissory Note (PN) which was 
injected into Anglo in March 2010. The amount of the PN was increased several times during 
2010 when additional provisioning needs were identified. 
While the injection of State capital was essential if the eligibility of Anglo for Central Bank 
financing was to be retained, it was evident that this might complicate subsequent efforts to 
impose burden-sharing on Anglo’s creditors after the ending of the initial guarantee. 
NAMA first tranche and the March 2010 capital adequacy review (PCAR) 
When they became available in late March 2010, the initial NAMA valuations (based only on 
the handful of exposures that had been fully valued in time) implied much higher losses than 
had been generally expected by industry specialists. 
The Central Bank had decided to take the announcement of the valuations of the first tranche 
of NAMA loan purchases as the occasion to the necessary capital infusions for Allied (AIB), 
Bank of Ireland and EBS – the going concern guaranteed banks selling loans into NAMA.7 The 
requirements  announced  by  the  Bank  at  the  end  of  March  2010  (in  what  was  known  as 
PCAR2010)  assumed  that  all  of  the  NAMA  purchases  would  involve  haircuts  as  large  as 
thefirst tranche, and also took account of forward-looking loss estimates in a base case and a 
stress scenario of the non-NAMA books. For example, a flat 5% loan-loss estimate – much 
higher  than  that  assumed  by  the  banks’  managements  themselves  –  was  applied  to  the 
residential mortgage portfolios. These banks were also required to reach capital adequacy 
standards  above  the  existing  international  regulatory  minima  –  thereby  reflecting  trends  in 
international regulatory thinking. The banks were given a 9-month period in which to raise the 
additional capital needed. Bank of Ireland proceeded immediately to raise capital from the 
                                                
4  
In order to allow the banks to continue to fund themselves as deposits and bonds matured during the two-year 
period of the initial guarantee, a further more limited guarantee (known as ELG) on new deposits and bonds 
was provided by the Government from late 2009. 
5   Having run out of eligible assets for normal ECB liquidity operations, Anglo requested ELA in February 2009 
shortly after its nationalization. The amount of ELA it drew fluctuated up to about €15 billion between then and 
late September 2010. 
6   Of course there was the known potential of a large haircut on the purchase of property-related loans by NAMA, 
but the prospective losses might not fully affect accounting measures of capital until the losses were incurred. 
This approach sufficiently balanced the need to ensure adequate capital for prudential purposes with the need 
to avoid needless and damaging acceleration of the crystallization of the costs of the Government guarantee. It 
also took account of the existence of the Government guarantee as a form of quasi-capital support. 
7   A capital adequacy assessment of Anglo and INBS was deferred. PTSB too was not included in that special 
capital adequacy exercise as it was not affected by NAMA purchases. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   
market; Allied (AIB) started to dispose of some of its noncore assets in order to reduce the 
additional cash capital needed. 
Although PCAR2010 increased projected capital requirements, there was, given the prevailing 
uncertainty  surrounding  these  badly-impaired  portfolios,  still  a  large  margin  of  error  which 
might eventually consume the apparent surplus above international minima. Early hopes in the 
Central  Bank  that  comfortable  over-capitalization  could  be  safely  engineered  were  soon 
replaced  by  a  concern  that  there  was  insufficient  information  to  back  what  risked  being  a 
destabilizingly  large  need  of  State  capital  (when  taken  into  account  with  the  steady 
deterioration of the remaining fiscal prospects). The situation was complicated by the extended 
interval over which partial information about the NAMA haircuts would unfold. How could bank 
solvency be assured throughout this period of uncertainty? The “choreography” of this interval 
necessarily involved a risky choice between two options. 
The  first  option  was  to  require  banks  to  build  an  unquestionably  ample  capital  buffer;  the 
problem with this option was the very large potential margin of error in estimates of the NAMA 
haircuts. To announce a sum that the Government would have to inject so that the banks would 
have sufficient capital to cover all eventualities would have triggered an immediate loss of 
market confidence in the Government’s finances (putting paid, for example, to the chance of 
the Government being able to avoid an IMF programme). 
An  alternative,  less  exigent  option  was  therefore  chosen.  This  required  additional  capital 
sufficient to cover NAMA haircuts on the assumption that the first tranche was representative, 
but without a further buffer in case later tranches were worse than the first. These haircuts 
were much more severe than that generally mandated for the European CEBS stress test later 
that summer, but they proved insufficient when information about the second and third NAMA 
tranches became available in August and September. Additional capital requirements had to 
be  announced  in  September  2010  for  Allied  (AIB)  and  also  for  Anglo,  because  of  Anglo 
management’s estimate of additional costs imposed by the split and wind- down plan that the 
Government had already announced earlier in the same month. 
The September 2010 bank funding cliff 
Faced with the steep cliff of bank liability maturities in September, I gave some consideration 
to possible alternative courses of action which might be recommended to Government.8 The 
only safe way forward seemed to continue to rely on ELA while also pursuing all possible steps 
to rebuild confidence…and recognizing that recourse to an IMF Programme would be the fall-
back position. 
It is important to note that the increase in ELA during September 2010 and through to the end 
of the year did not create a new contingent liability for the State, but merely shifted that liability 
from one set of creditors to another. Mar a deir an seanfhocal, “Cibé cé ólfhas ’s é Domhnall a 
íocfhas”. 
                                                
8   One such possibility was for the Government to abrogate the bank guarantee (in respect of Anglo and INBS) in 
August or September 2010 and to bail-in the bond holders and potentially large depositors. While, if successful, 
such a measure would have reduced the amount paid out to bank creditors by the State, it would also have 
represented a very large and conspicuous default of the State on a class of creditors which it had created by 
virtue of the guarantee and confirmed by the CIFS legislation of October 2008. It seemed doubtful whether it 
could even be successfully accomplished: for example, pressure from the ECB might well have resulted in any 
such decision having to be reversed in a way that resulted in the State resuming its obligations in regard to 
these liabilities while still suffering the loss of market credibility implied by a default. The inevitable funding 
difficulties which would ensue, both for the banks and for the sovereign, would have been regarded by European 
partners as having been wholly self-imposed. For such reasons, this course of action (never contemplated to 
my knowledge elsewhere in the Government services) was not recommended by the Central Bank. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
 3.  
Programme of assistance 
  International assistance mooted 
By September 2010 most informed international observers began to factor in a likely need for 
Ireland to enter a programme of official financial assistance. The prospective rapid increase in 
ELA (due to the funding cliff at the end of the initial guarantee period) and the growing evidence 
that the Government’s multi-year fiscal plan would not stabilize the debt dynamics were the 
main influences here. The drip-feed of news about bank recapitalization needs did not help. 
Realizing that ELA that was now likely to increase considerably over the following couple of 
months, ECB officials increasingly looked to official borrowing by the Government as a way of 
getting the ELA repaid promptly. Given the additional interest burden that borrowing from the 
IMF  or  EFSF  would  impose,  the  Government  was  not  interested  in  following  this  line  of 
approach to dealing with the ELA. 
However,  the  growing  yield  spreads  on  Irish  Government  debt  made  recourse  to  official 
borrowing essential to fund the rest of the Government deficit, which was also veering wider 
than had been projected in the Government’s 2009 plan – a plan whose spending and taxation 
policies  had  been  adhered  to,  but  which  had  seen  a  wider  than  projected  deficit  largely 
because of the weaker than projected external demand position. The fact that there were cash 
balances sufficient to cover the deficit for several months did not alter this perspective. 
The move to the EU-IMF Programme 
By the time that spreads on 10-year bonds exceeded 500 basis points on November 4, with 
accelerating depositor outflows also reflecting a loss of confidence, it was clear to me that 
application  for  a  programme  could  no  longer  safely  be  deferred.  The  Minister  agreed  to 
exploratory discussions with Troika officials in Brussels. 
Delayed until November 14 (apparently because of the need for the Troika to agree a strategy 
among themselves), these discussions, attended by about twenty Irish officials, confirmed that 
there was a basis for full negotiations on a programme which, with the approval of the Minister, 
began in Dublin on November 18. These meetings took place in an increasingly tense situation 
of national and international media speculation, market tensions (which had brought the yield 
on Irish Government 10-year bonds above 8 per cent)9 and considerable international official 
alarm at the highest levels. 
In an attempt to restore depositor and public confidence, I was anxious to make a credible 
public statement especially as depositor outflows were accelerating.10 Indeed, the previous day 
had seen an outflow of €900 million of retail deposits – by far the largest daily figure before or 
since. The start of negotiations provided a basis for convincing reassurance, which was clearly 
needed, and I gave a radio interview to that effect on the morning of November 18. 
Meanwhile ECB officials made public and private overtures to the Irish Authorities to encourage 
application for a programme. Given the views of Irish officials, already preparing the ground 
for a programme, these overtures were behind the curve and as such can be considered at 
best as having been largely gratuitous. This includes the letter of the ECB President to the 
Minister for Finance on November 19. 
Implying a significant probability of sovereign default perceived by market participants at that time. 
                                                
9  
10   The Minister for Finance shared this concern and, in a phone call earlier that month, had urged me to make a 
statement of reassurance to depositors; lacking any convincing basis for such reassurance, I demurred at that 
time. Indeed, as late as November 17, senior ECB officials rebuffed my suggestion that I should publicly declare 
that the ECB would continue to support the Irish banks. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   The Programme structure 
The  Programme  finally  agreed  with  the  Troika  largely  reflected  the  4-year  budgetary  plan 
published by the Government at the outset of the negotiations. Indeed, the target date for 
reaching the threshold deficit level of 3 per cent of GDP was pushed back in the negotiations 
to  2015.  But  would  the  implied  degree  of  “fiscal  austerity”  be  sufficient  to  bring  the  public 
finances back on to a sustainable path? Here the remaining question-mark over the banking 
system was key.11 (11) 
The Programme included the requirement for a new and much more comprehensive stress 
test of the banks, capitalization of the banks up to an even higher standard than before, and a 
programme of rapid deleveraging of the banks. 
Provision was made in the Programme’s financial envelope for up to €35 billion in cash to be 
borrowed by the Government and injected into the banks if it proved necessary following the 
stress test. The Central Bank shared the view of other Irish officials that, if €35 billion were 
really  needed  for  that  purpose,  debt  sustainability  of  the  Irish  government  would  be  likely 
unattainable.12  
Indeed, the Central Bank found the financial terms of the Programme unsatisfactory especially 
in regard to the high interest rates and the lack of an insurance mechanism against tail risks in 
the banks.13 Nevertheless, having set out these concerns, I advised the Government in writing 
that it should proceed on the basis of the Programme, given that the alternative of struggling 
forward without access to market finance would have been more economically damaging. If 
the Programme proved unable to deliver a sustainable debt path (as seemed possible, even 
likely14) then it could be renegotiated. The spending and tax adjustments that would have been 
needed if Programme funding was not available would be much more severe. Mar a deir an 
seanfhocal “Ní hé lá na gaoithe lá na scolb.” 
Better financing conditions help make the Programme a success 
Fortunately, there were subsequent considerable improvements in the terms of financing, not 
least through the reduction in EU interest rates (from an initial level of about 5.8 per cent per 
annum)  and  lengthening  of  the  loan  maturities,  and  subsequently  through  the  financial 
arrangements around the liquidation of IBRC. 
These improvements, combined with close adherence to the budgetary targets in the following 
three years, allowed the Government to take the decision to exit the Programme on schedule 
at the end of 2013. 
Despite the risks and the pressures involved at the outset, recourse to the EU-IMF loan proved 
to be a successful policy move for Ireland, limiting the need for fiscal austerity (because funding 
was made available in amounts and at costs far below what the market would have offered), 
and underpinning a relatively rapid return to confidence. Successive Governments’ adherence 
to  the  Programme,  in  difficult  political  circumstances,  helped  restore  Ireland’s  international 
                                                
11   The discussions that took place in the margin of the Programme negotiations about possible bail-in of bank 
senior debt have been described by several participants (cf. Honohan, 2014b). 
12   In the event, despite the Troika’s insistence on higher capital standards and more rapid deleveraging of the 
banks, the additional capital required as a result of the aggressive PCAR2011 stress test of March 2011 was 
met with less than a half of the pencilled-in figure, thanks in part to the bail-in of subordinated debt holders. 
13   This could, for example, have been alleviated through the purchase by a European entity of equity capital in the 
banks. 
14   Unable to provide the normal assurance to their decision-making bodies that the prospective debt profile was, 
with high probability, sustainable, the IMF staff invoked a “systemic risk waiver” that had been created only a 
few months earlier in the context of the Greek loan (cf. Schadler, 2013), in their recommendation that the IMF 
provide this large loan to Ireland. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
   
reputation for disciplined macroeconomic management, a reputation essential for sustained 
recovery of employment and incomes.15  
Promissory Notes 
4.  
The origin of the PNs (for Anglo Irish Bank, INBS and EBS) has been explained in section 2 
above.  The  PNs  were  created  and  provided  to  these  banks  in  order  to  ensure  that  they 
complied with regulatory capital requirements. As liquidity drained from the system in the last 
months of 2010, these PNs became part of the collateral pledged by Anglo to the Central Bank 
of Ireland in return for the growing amounts of ELA that were being provided. 
Both before and after entry into the EU-IMF Programme, the question of finding a long-term 
solution for the  huge  stock  of  ELA  was  increasingly  pressing.  ECB  rules  specify  that  ELA 
should be short-term; but there was no obvious source of an early repayment. A cash call on 
the Government by the Central Bank would have clearly been highly destabilizing. Besides, 
the Government’s contingent liability here had been assumed (as a result of the guarantee of 
September 2008) in the interest of financial stability and in part on the recommendation of the 
Central Bank. It would be strange indeed for the Central Bank to then turn, in a financially 
destabilising manner, on the State, which had only stepped into the situation in order to stem 
a financial stability problem traceable to imprudent bank lending. 
Squaring  this  circle  was  very  challenging,  especially  considering  the  Treaty  prohibition  of 
monetary lending to the Government (TFEU Article 123). Only if the ELA could be extinguished 
and  replaced  by  some  long-term financing facility  could  stability  be  protected.  A  variety  of 
financial  engineering  approaches  was  suggested,  but  in  the  end,  only  one  seemed  both 
compliant with law and acceptable to all involved. It required a liquidation of IBRC under special 
legislation.16, 17  
After the liquidation, the Central Bank was in possession of a PN in the amount of €25 billion 
(as well as about €3.5bn of Government bonds and almost €14bn of NAMA bonds, most of the 
latter obtained in return for the Central Bank’s claim on the remaining assets of IBRC). These 
large acquisitions meant that the Central Bank’s net financial asset holdings were well above 
the normal agreed ceilings. 
The PN, being not freely transferable or marketable, was not an ideal instrument for the Central 
Bank  to  hold,  especially  considering  that  it  would  need  to  be  disposed of.  Accordingly  the 
Central Bank had arranged, as part of the liquidation plan, to exchange the PN for marketable 
bonds. The Government agreed to this on the basis that the bonds to be exchanged would be 
very  long-term  and  carry  floating  rate  interest.  Thus  all  parties  were  satisfied  with  the 
exchange: an end to ELA, acceptable assets on the Central Bank’s books and a satisfactory 
improvement in the terms and conditions of Irish Government debt. 
The  ECB  continues  to  monitor  the  disposal  of  the  bond  portfolio  with  a  view  to  ensuring 
compliance with Article 123. These disposals are being made as quickly as possible subject 
                                                
15   The effectiveness of the Programme and the initial design shortcomings are discussed at greater length in 
Honohan (2014a and 2015a and b). 
16   A different set of financial engineering ideas centred around the idea of “Tap and Swap”. This would have 
involved exchanging the PNs for Government bonds followed by a transaction between the continuing banks 
and IBRC in which IBRC would receive low-yielding mortgage loans in exchange for the Government bonds. 
After detailed consideration no available variant of Tap and Swap was found that would yield overall net benefit 
to the State and therefore this was not pursued. 
17   One of the measures pressed on the Irish authorities by the Troika was the merger of Anglo with INBS, and that 
of  EBS  with  AIB.  From  my  perspective  this  measure  served  no  strategic  purpose,  and  (although,  by 
concentrating more of the ELA – and far fewer deposits – in the new entity being wound down, IBRC, it allowed 
some technical simplification of the subsequent liquidation) seemed a largely pointless cosmetic exercise. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   
to  financial  stability  considerations,  and  have  been  running  well  ahead  of  the  minimum 
schedule announced in February 2013. 
Cost of crisis 
5.  
The  question:  “What  was  the  cost  of  the  crisis?”  is  far  from  unambiguous.  Cost  of  what 
aspects? Cost to whom? Compared to what? Direct costs only or also including the indirect 
costs related to the wider adjustment of the economy and of the cost of borrowing? Including 
all gross outlays, or net of subsequent recoveries? While my earlier appearances before the 
Inquiry have touched on some of these questions, it is worth adding some further discussion. 
Net  cost  of  Government  assumption  of  banking  liabilities.  With  so  many  non- 
• 
performing and other questionable bank loans still awaiting cure or collection, with a 
block of NAMA assets still awaiting sale, and with a large part of the ownership of the 
banking system still in the hands of the Government, it is too soon even to have a 
definitive estimate of even some of the most straightforward versions of the question, 
namely those related to the fiscal costs of making the creditors of the banks whole. In 
January I provided the Inquiry with an estimate of about €40 bn or a little less for this 
dimension of the costs.18 To arrive at that figure one can take the gross fiscal outlay, 
of  about  €64  bn,  subtract  the  guarantee  fees  paid  by  the  banks,  and  the  cash 
recoveries through sale of capital instruments, and the NTMA’s estimate of the value 
of the remaining Government investments in the banks. An adjustment – in practice 
small – should also be made for the time value of money, in order to bring each outlay 
and  receipt  to  a  common  date.  This  figure  will  change  from  time  to  time  as  the 
investments are revalued or realized. Any profit of NAMA, or from the IBRC liquidation 
will also serve to lower the estimate.19 It is noteworthy that the net figure is about the 
same as the aggregate haircut on the NAMA purchases of property- related loans: 
had there been no losses on those, the net fiscal cost of the assumption of banking 
liabilities would have been small. In other words, the main banks had enough pre-
crisis capital (€28 bn between the top two) to absorb the actual and prospective losses 
on residential mortgages. 
Loan losses of the banks. This is another potential cost figure. Banks normally incur 
only very small loan losses. In this crisis the losses of Irish banks and foreign banks 
operating in Ireland greatly exceeded the figure noted under (a) insofar as they burned 
through  all  of  their  equity  capital  (thereby  imposing  sizable  losses  on  private 
shareholders) and much of their subordinated debt. As I have already mentioned in 
public several times, the overall figure here is well in excess of €100bn. (To be sure, 
the banks had made unsustainable profits in the boom years). 
Overall economic cost to Ireland of the banking boom and bust. Of course (a) and (b) 
are  only  partial  views  of  the  overall  costs.  The  boom  brought  some  transitory 
prosperity  even to those  not  directly  involved  in  construction  or  property;  the  bust 
threw many out of work and imposed losses on many Irish people other than those 
that  came  through  the  losses  on  bank  loans.  And  of  course  a  sizable  part  of  the 
economic  downturn  2008–12  was  not  home-grown  but  attributable  to  the  global 
financial crisis. In order to get an overall cost to Ireland of the Ireland-specific banking 
boom and bust we would need to model how the economy might have performed in 
                                                  
18   It is worth noting that this sum is much smaller than the total amount of fiscal belt-tightening that has occurred 
since the end of the boom. Comparing tax and spending policies now with those in 2008, cumulative “austerity” 
savings of about €150 billion have been put in place. This sum continues to grow at close to €30 billion per 
annum (cf. the chart in Honohan, 2015c). 
19   The large crisis and post-crisis period profits of the Central Bank (€8 bn between 2009 and 2014) could also be 
considered an additional offset to the net fiscal costs. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
    
the presence of prudent pre-crisis banking practice. A precise quantification of this is 
impossible, but it is clear that the net cost is well in excess of €100 billion and still 
growing (cf. Honohan, 2015b). 
Cost of the guarantee decision relative to the best alternative available on the night. 
Finally we come to the least important and yet most over-analyzed question in this 
area, namely what was the net economic cost to Ireland imposed by the guarantee 
decision, relative to the best alternative available on the night. What if an alternative 
path had been tried, following prior consultation with EU partners during an interval 
covered by ELA, involving a more limited guarantee, excluding some or all existing 
senior  bonds  and  subordinated  debt,  and  in  conjunction  with  an  attempt  to  get 
agreement that Anglo and INBS bondholders would be bailed-out only on the basis of 
cost-sharing with EU partners? How much (in net national economic terms) might 
have  thereby  been  saved.  This  is  not  a  question  susceptible  of  any  precise 
quantification: could a cost-sharing deal have been successfully negotiated? And if 
not, what then? All in all, a possible net economic saving in the area of €2-€10bn 
could be imagined, but surely no more than that.20 If so, by September 2008, well over 
90 per cent of the net economic cost to Ireland of the boom and bust had become 
unavoidable. 
The other areas of the Inquiry’s focus 
As  mentioned,  this  Statement  does  not  dwell  on  the  other  areas  highlighted  to  me  by  the 
Inquiry, namely regulatory, supervisory and Government, and banking aspects. 
The very extensive changes in regulatory and supervisory staffing, methodology and culture 
2009–2013 brought into the Central Bank have been documented in papers submitted by the 
Central Bank to the Inquiry. I believe that the smooth transition of the prudential aspects of 
Ireland’s supervision of banks to the ECB’s Single Supervisory Mechanism in November 2014 
testifies to the credibility of the transformation that was achieved in those years. 
On the rehabilitation and restructuring of banking in Ireland – aside from the recapitalization 
aspects – in the period 2009–13, I have spoken repeatedly to Oireachtas committees about 
the disappointingly slow progress in dealing with non-performing loans, especially mortgage 
arrears. The banks have now got reasonably effective systems in place to deal with collection 
and  restructuring  on  the  scale  needed,  but  they  did  not  introduce  adequate  systems  until 
chivvied by the Central Bank from late 2011. The mortgage arrears targets introduced in early 
2013 simplified a quantitative assessment of progress being made by the banks. An increasing 
number of loan restructurings, designed to be fully sustainable, have been agreed. Compliance 
with the restructured payments schedule is high, though deeper restructuring would arguably 
increase assurance that the borrowers would not fall again into arrears and would reduce debt 
overhang in the economy at large. However, despite all of the efforts, including the initiation of 
court repossession proceedings, there is still insufficient engagement between borrower and 
lender in a large number of cases. The resulting lengthy delays leave the borrowers in a limbo 
of over-indebtedness and hamper both the borrowers’ and the banks’ ability to put the crisis 
behind them. 
                                                
20   For example, the lower figure might correspond to a scenario where all attempts to get some cost-sharing failed 
and it was decided to go ahead nevertheless with covering all senior creditors; the higher sum might possibly 
have been attained if a very favourable risk-sharing deal had been negotiated. Failing that, if Anglo and INBS 
were put into liquidation, over €30 billion in guarantee-related outlays might have been saved, but these fiscal 
savings would have been substantially offset by the wider economic disruption costs which would have been 
triggered and which could, to take a phrase from my 2010 Report (albeit there relating to a slightly different 
scenario), “have run into tens of billions of euros”. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   References 
Honohan,  Patrick.  2012.  “Recapitalisation  of  Failed  Banks:  Some  Lessons  from  the  Irish 
Experience”. Lecture given to the 44th Annual Money, Macro and Finance Conference, Trinity 
College, Dublin, 7 September 2012. 
Honohan, Patrick. 2014a. “Ireland’s EU-IMF Programme: Delivering what it said on the tin”. 
Address to  the  European  Commission  DG-ECFIN  Conference (in  collaboration  with  Trinity 
College Dublin) Future Directions for the Irish Economy. 10 January 2014. 
Honohan, Patrick. 2014b. “Brian Lenihan and the Nation’s Finances” in Brian Murphy, Mary 
O’Rourke and Noel Whelan, eds., Brian Lenihan: His Times and Trials (Dublin: Irish Academic 
Press), pp. 64–82. 
Honohan, Patrick. 2015a. “Some Lessons Learnt from the EU-IMF Programme”, Speech at 
the IMF-CEPR-Central Bank of Ireland Conference Ireland-Lessons from Its Recovery from 
the Bank-Sovereign Loop, Dublin Castle, 19 January 2015. 
Honohan, Patrick. 2015b. “Where did all the money channelled into property-backed lending 
go? Irish Times, 31 January 2015. 
Honohan,  Patrick.  2015c.  “Reconciling  Diverse  Interests  in  an  International  Stabilisation 
Programme: Some Thoughts about the EU-IMF Programme for Ireland.” Speech at Institute 
for New Economic Thinking (INET) Annual Conference, Paris, 9 April 2015. 
Schadler, Susan. 2013. “Unsustainable debt and the political economy of lending: Constraining 
the IMF’s role in Sovereign Debt Crises.” CIGI Papers 19, Center for International Governance 
Innovation, Washington DC. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
