  Hiroshi Nakaso: Development finance in the economy facing double 
trilemmas 
Article by Mr Hiroshi Nakaso, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan, contributed to the Joint 
IMF-Bank  Indonesia  Conference  “Future  of  Asia’s  Finance:  Financing  for  Development 
2015”, 2 September 2015. 
 Accompanying charts can be found at the end of the speech or on the Bank of Japan’s website. 
Introduction 
It is a great honor for me to contribute to the Joint IMF-Bank Indonesia Conference. Under 
the title “Future of Asia’s Finance: Financing for Development 2015”, I will first look back at 
Japan’s post-war experience of financing for the development of specific industries, and will 
then  explain  lending  behavior  of  Japanese  banks  including  their  involvement  in  project 
finance for emerging Asian countries in the last two decades. Based on these two examples 
regarding Japan’s financial intermediation function, I will finally share my views on policies for 
the  stability  of  development  finance  in  emerging  economies  facing  double  trilemmas,  i.e., 
Mundell’s and Schoenmaker’s trilemmas. 
Evaluation of the priority production system in Japan after World War II: Importance of 
price stability 
A period of strong economic expansion known as the “Asian Miracle” ensued in the aftermath 
of World War II, characterized by a “flying geese” pattern of development. This began in the 
1960s with high growth in Japan, followed by economic take-off in other Asian countries. To 
begin with, I would like to look at the situation during the period of post-war reconstruction in 
Japan. 
The  situation  immediately  after  the  end  of  World  War  II  in  Japan  was  characterized  by  a 
combination of severe problems such as ruined infrastructure, a sluggish recovery in goods 
production,  and  high  inflation.  For  example,  as  shown  in  Figure  1,  the  level  of  industrial 
production dropped significantly to about 30% of the peak level before the war (1934–36). 
The stagnation of production at that time was caused not so much by a lack of production 
facilities as by a shortage of raw materials such as coal and steel. The coal production level 
in domestic mines dropped below 40% of the peak level before the war (1934–36) due to the 
lack  of  digging  materials  made  of  steel.  In  turn,  the  steel  production  industry  remained 
stagnant due to the coal shortage. 
In order to overcome this situation, the Japanese government at that time applied the “priority 
production system”, in which resources such as materials, funds and labor were mobilized 
intensively and with priority being given to key industries such as coal and steel in order to 
reconstruct Japan’s post-war economy. This policy was applied from 1947 to 1949. 
The  priority  production  system  is  considered  to  have  had  a  stimulating  effect  on  Japan’s 
economy. However, most funding for the priority production system was central bank money 
provided through the “price-support subsidy system” and the Reconstruction Finance Bank. 
In  the  price-support  subsidy  system,  the  government  provided  subsidies  to  suppliers  of 
important materials  such  as  steel for  the  differentials  between  sales  prices  and  production 
costs in order to enhance production, and these subsidies were financed through borrowing 
from  the  Bank  of  Japan.  The  Reconstruction  Finance  Bank  was  a  government-sponsored 
bank  established  in  1947  to  lend  to  the  aforementioned  key  industries  such  as  coal,  and 
most of its funding also depended on financing by the central bank. 
Both the price-support subsidy system and the Reconstruction Finance Bank supported the 
priority  production  system  and  contributed  to  the  reconstruction  of  Japan’s  economy,  but 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  their dependence on central bank money became a factor causing high inflation (Figure 1). 
Inflation heightened the opportunity cost of holding deposits, with deposit avoidance behavior 
being  observed  among  a  large  proportion  of  households.  The  decrease  in  deposits  then 
caused  a  decline  in  private  financial  institutions’  lending  to  firms  in  comparison  with  GDE 
(Figure 2). In sum, the inflation tolerant aspect of the priority production system weakened 
the  financial  intermediation  function  and  impeded  fund  flows  from  household  savings  to 
corporate investments, thereby having a negative impact on the economy. The net effect of 
the priority production system on economic reconstruction was lessened due to high inflation. 
Japan’s  experience  of  post-war  reconstruction  suggests  that  price  stability  is  a  necessary 
condition  for  a  stable  financial  intermediation  function,  and  that  policy-makers  should  pay 
attention  to  price  stability  in  order  to  fully  realize  the  effect  of  mobilizing  resources  for 
financing development. 
Role shared by public finance and private finance in the context of infrastructure 
investment 
After overcoming the period of post-war confusion, Japan entered a period of rapid growth 
(during  the  1960s).  In  its  initial  stage,  funding  by  the  World  Bank  supported  Japan’s 
engagement in big infrastructure projects such as construction of the Shinkansen, the bullet 
train line, the Tomei (Tokyo and Nagoya) Motor Expressway, and several power plants. This 
kind of social capital then improved the productivity of the Japanese economy, leading to a 
virtuous economic cycle. 
Development  finance  during  the  period  of  rapid  growth  was  also  served  by  the  so-called 
“guidance policy finance” of the Fiscal Investment and Loan Program (FILP). Postal savings 
funds deposited with the Ministry of Finance’s Trust Fund Bureau were on-lent to the FILP, 
and  the  Development  Bank  of  Japan,  which  acquired  the  assets  of  the  Reconstruction 
Finance  Bank  in  1952,  allocated  funds  for  industrial  development  to  meet  national  and 
regional development goals, as one of the major recipients of FILP funding. 
Since the 1970s, social infrastructure investments have been financed through the issuance 
of Japanese government bonds. Many empirical analyses suggest that the productivity effect 
of social capital is significant and contributes to a rise in potential growth of the Japanese 
economy.  While  the  government-led  system  worked  well  in  Japan  in  the  latter  half  of  the 
20th century,  an  important  issue  to  be  tackled  emerged  as  outstanding  government  debt 
continued to rise significantly and fiscal conditions became severe: how to introduce private 
funds and the necessary know-how to social infrastructure development. In order to tackle 
this problem, the PFI (private finance initiatives) Law was promulgated in 1999, and an action 
plan for the drastic reform initiatives of PFI/PPP (public private partnerships) was launched in 
2013. By making use of PFI/PPP, safer, convenient, and resilient social infrastructure will be 
developed efficiently. 
Loans to emerging countries by Japanese banks 
Asian countries face issues similar to Japan’s, i.e., how to increase PPP from the economic 
efficiency perspective in addition to effective utilization of financing from foreign countries. As 
there  is  huge  demand  for  infrastructure  funding  in  Asian  countries,  Japanese  banks  have 
recently  been  actively  increasing  their  project  financing  and  syndicated  loans,  which  have 
contributed to promoting infrastructure projects in these countries. 
However, we should also be mindful of the historical record of fluctuation in the amount of 
lending to Asian countries by Japanese banks. When the Asian financial crisis broke out in 
the  late  1990s,  Japanese  banks  drastically  reduced  their  lending  to  Asian  countries 
(Figure 3).  The  background  factors  include  a  decline  in  both  their  lending  capacity  and 
demand for funding in the Asian region. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Limits on the funding capacity of Japanese banks and the deterioration of their equity capital 
was  the  most  significant  factor  at  that  time,  considering  that  the  scale  of  the  reduction  in 
loans by Japanese banks was much bigger than that among U.S. and European banks. For 
Japanese  banks,  the  burden  of  disposing  of  domestic  non-performing  loans  that  had 
mounted up after the bursting of the asset bubbles resulted in erosion of their equity capital. 
The Japanese financial crisis in the late 1990s led to a decline in their creditworthiness and 
hence the loss of their funding capacity in foreign currencies. 
Since the mid-2000s, Japanese banks have returned their balance sheets to soundness and 
started to increase their loans to Asian countries (Figure 3). In contrast to U.S. and European 
banks, among which lending to Asian countries was disrupted after the Lehman crisis due to 
their deteriorating balance sheets, Japanese banks have been constantly engaged in project 
finance and have increased their share of syndicated loans. 
Financing for development and stability of the global financial system 
As I have discussed so far, the financial system of emerging countries has been affected by 
the lending behavior of advanced countries’ banks, and this trend will continue. Therefore, as 
a prerequisite to the stability of development finance in emerging countries, stability must be 
maintained  in  the  financial  intermediation  function  of  advanced  countries’  banks  and 
domestic banks. 
As the financial globalization process evolves, it is important for us to pay attention to two 
kinds of trilemmas in order to stabilize the financial system and facilitate development finance 
in emerging countries (Figure 4). As Japan’s post-war experience, which I explained in the 
first part of this article, suggests, price stability  is important for fully realizing the effects of 
financing for development. However, in emerging countries, monetary tightening against the 
backdrop  of  inflationary  pressure  due  to  overheating  of  the  economy  often  induces  carry 
trades  and  accompanies  a  rapid  increase  in  capital  inflows  from  advanced  countries.  This 
boosts the economy further and/or leads to a surge in asset prices and financial imbalances. 
In such conditions, it is difficult for policy-makers facing Mundell’s Trilemma to achieve price 
stability  by  choosing  the  combination  of  national  monetary  policy  and  capital  mobility. 
Therefore, it is important to use macroprudential policy tools in order to mitigate the effect of 
capital flows on the real economy and the financial system, and this then contributes to the 
stability of development finance. 
When  conducting  macroprudential  policy,  global  (or  regional)  financial  coordination  is 
important  beyond  the  national-level  financial  policy  framework.  In  a  country  faced  with 
Schoenmaker’s Trilemma, it is impossible to simultaneously achieve national financial policy, 
capital  mobility  and  financial  stability  including  the  stability  of  development  finance1 
Therefore, a global (or regional) macroprudential perspective is indispensable for maintaining 
financial stability while allowing for capital mobility. The Chiang Mai Initiative – a multilateral 
currency swap arrangement among Asian countries – and cross-border usage of collateral 
assets,  which  are  eligible  instruments  for  central  banks,  are  notable  examples  of  regional 
financial coordination to complement macroprudential policy of each country. 
In addition to global financial coordination, when considering macroprudential policy, global 
financial  regulation  is  also  a  key  factor.  If  the  financial  intermediation  function  of 
internationally active banks subject to macroprudential regulation is stable, then financing for 
development is also expected to be stable in emerging countries. 
During the Asian financial crisis, U.S. and European banks filled lending gaps that Japanese 
banks had left as a result of their withdrawal from the cross-border lending arena, whereas 
during the recent global financial crisis, these roles were reversed. This kind of substitution 
                                                
1  Dirk Schoenmaker (2011), “The Financial Trilemma,” Economic Letters, 111, 57–59. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  by  internationally  active  banks  may  have  somewhat  mitigated  the  shortfall  in  financing  for 
development in emerging countries. However, it’s not beyond the realms of possibility that all 
internationally active banks might cut lending simultaneously in the next crisis. It is desirable 
that  as  many  internationally  active  banks  as  possible  constantly  maintain  their  lending 
without severe disruptions. To this end, global regulations are expected to play a crucial role 
from a longer-term perspective. 
Finally,  in  relation  to  global  regulation,  let  me  share  my  views  on  an  ongoing  issue.  Last 
December,  the  BCBS  (the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision)  published  a 
consultation  document  entitled  “Revisions  to  the  standardised  approach  for  credit  risk”.  In 
this  document,  it  is  proposed  that the risk  weight for corporate  exposures,  project finance, 
and equities be heightened. Not a few market participants have sent comment letters to the 
BCBS, pointing out that a significant increase in risk weight leads to a decrease in banks’ 
capital  ratios,  and the  potential  impact  on financing for  development  can  be  huge. While I 
understand that the revisions proposed by the BCBS were made to reflect the experience of 
the last global financial crisis, a thorough cost-benefit analysis including an examination of 
the impact on financing for development is necessary. 
Conclusion 
As the Japanese case shows, the productivity effect of social capital is significant, and stable 
development finance supported by price stability contributes to an improvement in potential 
economic growth. In order for emerging countries to stabilize development finance, not only 
price  stability  but  also  effective  utilization  of  financing  from  advanced  countries’  banks  is 
indispensable.  Facing  the  double  trilemmas,  an  adequate  combination  of  monetary  policy 
and  macroprudential  policy  is  needed  to  achieve  price  stability  and  stabilize  capital  flows 
including  those  banks’  loans,  which  will  contribute  to  higher  potential  growth  among 
emerging economies. 
 
 4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    5 
     6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
