   R Gandhi: Future and new thoughts on co-operative banks 
Speech by Mr R Gandhi, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the Silver Jubilee 
celebrations of the National Institute for Rural Banking (NIRB), Bengaluru, 19 June 2015. 
 Assistance provided by Mr P K Arora is gratefully acknowledged. 
The co-operative movement in India is more than a century old; regulation thereof is also more 
than a century old with the first major impetus provided by the passage of the Co-operative 
Society Act in 1904. The co-operatives have come a long way and have seen many ups and 
downs since then; they have played the original role in financial inclusion and taking care of 
banking and credit needs of the lower and middle strata of society, in the length and breadth 
of India, more specifically even in the remote villages. 
Looking back 
I.  
2. Traditionally, the co-operative structure is divided into two parts viz. rural and urban. The 
three  tier  Short  Term  Cooperative  Credit  Structure  (STCCS)  consists  of  more  than 
90,000 Primary Agricultural Credit Societies (PACS), 367 District Central Cooperative Banks 
(DCCBs) and 33 State Cooperative Banks (StCBs) whereas the urban side is dotted with 1579 
Urban  Cooperative  Banks  (UCBs).  Even  with  such  a  large  number  of  co-operative  banks, 
considering the total asset size, their share in the Indian banking sector is not more than 5%. 
Thus, it may be observed that the true potential has not been achieved by co-operative banks. 
Let me elaborate some important recent reasons for this. 
Reluctance for technology adoption 
3. In today’s technology driven world, one cannot ignore the role of technology in providing 
competitive banking services. However, reluctance of co-operatives to adopt new technology 
and implement CBS system has proved to be a major impediment to their growth. 
4. UCBs were prescribed a staggered timeline for the implementation of CBS with December 
2014 as the final deadline. However, only 913 UCBs are fully CBS compliant and 330 UCBs 
are in the process of implementing CBS. Further, 336 UCBs are yet to start the process of 
implementation. Based on the requests received from UCBs, RBI has also taken up the matter 
with IDRBT to prescribe some uniform minimum benchmarks for the CBS and some cloud-
based solution could be worked out which is cost effective yet reliable to smaller UCBs. 
5. As regards rural co-operatives, NABARD, as part of its mandate of institutional development, 
launched an ambitious yet much needed attempt to bring the RCBs on CBS platform. In all, 
201 banks (DCCBs / StCBs) joined the project with as many as 6953 branches already on 
CBS platform. Outside NABARD project, 177 banks out of 178 licenced cooperative banks 
have  completed  implementation  of  CBS.  But  much  more  is  definitely  needed  to  be 
accomplished. 
Decline in co-operative character 
6. The co-operative character of co-operative banks is on the wane as was evident from a 
recent  study  conducted  by  CAB,  Pune.  The  study  pointed  to  low  attendance  in  AGMs, 
restrictive  practices  in  admitting  new  members,  low  voting  turnout  for  election  of  new 
management,  re-election  of  the  same  management  or  their  family  members,  unanimous 
elections, lack of meaningful discussions in AGMs, etc. Thus, it was observed that the co-
operatives especially UCBs are losing their cooperative character. In the process, some of 
them have become ‘too big to be a cooperative’. To keep the spirit of democracy alive, urgent 
steps need to be taken by the institutions themselves to keep co-operatives relevant to their 
members. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   Lack of professionalism and corporate governance 
7. Weak corporate governance has been one of the major factors that is plaguing the sector 
and has led to bank failures / unsatisfactory growth of the sector. Co-operation being a State 
subject,  RBI  does  not  have  adequate  control  on  the  management  of  these  banks.  The 
provisions of Section 10A of the B. R. Act, 1949 are not applicable to them. The criteria for 
CEO / Board members as envisaged in Section 10B of the Act are also not prescribed. 
8.  To  address  this  problem,  Malegam  Committee  had  suggested  a  new  organizational 
structure for UCBs consisting of a Board of Management, in addition to the Board of Directors. 
The  idea  was  segregation  of  the  ownership  of  a  UCB  as  a  co-operative  society  from  its 
functioning as a bank. While the Registrar of Co-operative Societies would continue to exercise 
control and regulation of the UCB as a co-operative society, RBI would exercise control and 
regulation on its function as a bank. The Committee recommended that it should be made as 
a licensing condition for a UCB. 
9. Pursuant to the recommendations of the High Power Committee on Urban Co-operative 
Banks constituted by the RBI in 2001, presence of atleast two professional directors on the 
board of UCBs was made mandatory. It is also made one of the enabling conditions for co-
operatives  to  be  termed  as  Financially  Sound  and Well  Managed  (FSWM).  However,  it  is 
observed that 111 UCBs are still not having professional directors on their Board which has a 
negative bearing on their overall performance. The Constitution (97th Amendment) Act 2011 
has  tried  to  impart  some  professionalization  to  the  Board  of  co-operative  banks  but 
professional management on the lines of commercial banks remains a far cry in the current 
set-up. 
II.  
Current issues 
Transition to niche or universal commercial banks 
10.  RBI  had come  out with  a  discussion  paper  on  “Banking  Structure  in  India  – The Way 
Forward”  in  August  2013.  The  paper  envisaged  four  tier  banking  structure  consisting  of 
International Banks at Tier I, National Banks at Tier II, Regional Banks at Tier III and Local 
Banks at Tier IV. The paper has brought to the fore a case for re-orienting the existing banking 
structure to make it more dynamic and amenable to meet the needs of the economy and had 
suggested basic building blocks of the re-orientation exercise which inter alia included setting 
up of specialized / differentiated banks and conversion of Urban Co-operative Banks which 
meet the necessary criteria into commercial banks or Local Area Banks / small banks. Thus, 
the paper identifies the need of co-operative banks in the lowest tier in serving the needs of 
the community. 
11. RBI has already come out with the guidelines for Small Finance Banks and Payments 
Banks. As per the guidelines, Small Finance Banks (SFBs) shall primarily undertake basic 
banking activities of acceptance of deposits and lending to unserved and underserved sections 
including small business units, small and marginal farmers, micro and small industries and 
unorganised  sector  entities,  distribution  of  mutual  fund  units,  insurance  products,  pension 
products, become an AD Category II dealer, etc. The annual branch expansion plans should 
be  in  compliance  with  the  requirement  of  opening  at  least  25  per  cent  of  its  branches  in 
unbanked rural centres and the area of operation of small finance banks would be the whole 
Union of India. 
12. UCBs in contrast have a limited area of operation and can extend their area of operation 
with the prior approval of RBI and open branches anywhere in their area of operation without 
any limit on the number of branches to be opened in a particular area. UCBs in addition to the 
services permitted for SFBs are also permitted to open specialized branches, undertake intra-
day short selling in secondary market transactions in government securities, undertake ready 
forward  contracts  in  corporate  debt  securities,  open  currency  chests,  access  Liquidity 
Adjustment  Facility  (LAF),  membership  to  NDS-OM,  engage  the  services  of  Business 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   
Correspondents (BC) / Business Facilitators (BF), act as PAN service agents and issuer of 
Pre-paid  payment  instruments,  trading  facility  to  demat  account  holders,  mobile  banking, 
access to centralized payment systems like RTGS, NEFT, etc. Thus, it may be observed that 
co-operatives provide universal banking services in a niche geographical area whereas small 
banks are mandated to provide niche services throughout India. 
13. It will be interesting to see as to how UCBs react to the opportunity provided to them. 
Whether they would continue as existing banks or convert themselves to universal banks with 
ability to offer every possible product to customers albeit at a cost of tighter supervision and 
compliance to more stringent Basel II and III norms or give up their universal character and 
offer only niche products by converting to SFBs. 
14. Rural cooperative banks are differentiated entities in terms of their structure, capital funding 
and mandate to cater to the credit needs of small and marginal farmers and rural artisans. 
These banks have access to refinance facilities from NABARD and interest subvention for 
agricultural loans from the respective State Governments in order to increase / maintain flow 
of  agricultural  credit.  In  pursuit  of  public  policy,  several  social  welfare  schemes  of  State 
Governments are channelized through these institutions. It can be said that rural cooperatives 
are  also  functioning  as  ‘niche’  banks  with  limited  area  of  operation  catering  to  the  local 
clientele. 
Increased competition from SFBs and payment banks 
15. The mandate of SFBs to serve the unserved and underserved sections make them natural 
direct  competitors  of  the  co-operative  banks.  The  major  advantage  that  the  co-operatives 
currently have is their deep-rooted connections with specific communities and people of lower 
strata which keeps them in good stead compared to SFBs for mobilization of low cost deposits 
which are a prerequisite for profitable business. Being local in nature and intricately interwoven 
with the local community, the co-operatives have a clear advantage over the proposed SFBs. 
It is easier for them to create trust among its target community and bring customers within their 
fold. Even though cooperative banks’ share in total agricultural and urban credit has come 
down over the years in terms of amount, they are the leaders in terms of the number of small-
ticket loans which commercial banks hesitate to take up on account of high cost of servicing 
small value accounts. 
16.  However,  SFBs  and  payments  banks  with  reliance  on  high-end  technology  can  pose 
significant  challenges  to  cooperative  banks.  Payments  banks  sponsored  by  telecom 
companies can easily capture the remittance business from these banks. Co-operative banks 
have to substantially alter their approach to protect their turf from this competition onslaught. 
Relevance of co-operative banks 
17. With still a sizable population remaining without access to formal institutional finance, the 
issue  of financial  inclusion  has  taken  a  whole  new  meaning  in this  21st  century.  Financial 
inclusion is not only about credit, but involves providing a wide range of financial services, 
including saving accounts, insurance, and remittance products. Co-operative banks with their 
peculiar character of local feel and democratic set-up are automatically placed at the centre of 
any meaningful financial inclusion drive. Ensuring the last mile connectivity will only help these 
banks to sustain their business. However, for these to happen, co-operative banks need to 
focus on corporate governance and imbibe the current distributive technology to offer low cost 
products and turn the tide in their favour against the likely onslaught of competition from small 
finance and payments banks. 
Position of unlicensed DCCBs 
18. As there were many unlicensed cooperative banks operating in the country, the Committee 
on Financial Sector Assessment (CFSA) (Chairman: Dr. Rakesh Mohan) had recommended 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   
that no unlicensed cooperative bank may be allowed to operate in cooperative space beyond 
31 March 2012. 
19. As on March 31, 2009, there were 31 State Cooperative Banks (StCBs) and 371 District 
Central  Cooperative  Banks  (DCCBs)  functioning  as  part  of  short-term  cooperative  credit 
structure. Out of these, 313 banks (StCBs-17 and DCCBs-296) were unlicensed. The Reserve 
Bank  of  India  in  pursuit  of  its  commitment  to  allow  only  licensed  cooperative  banks  to  do 
banking  business  in  India  relaxed  the  licensing  parameters  that  enabled  290  cooperative 
banks (StCBs / DCCBs) to get banking license from RBI. Only 23 banks remained unlicensed 
as  on  date 
(Uttar  Pradesh  –16,  Jammu  &  Kashmir  
– 3, Maharashtra – 3, and West Bengal – 1). 
20. Regulatory action was initiated by RBI against unlicensed banks by issuing directions to 
them prohibiting from acceptance of fresh deposits in May 2012, and show-cause notices were 
issued for rejection of their applications for grant of license in March 2013. Further, Speaking 
orders  were  issued  to  four  banks  in  May  2014  rejecting  their  license  applications  and 
requisitions were made to the RCS for appointment of Liquidators. 
21. Present Status of revival of 23 unlicensed banks – Financial Package by PMO 
i. 
four  States  viz. 
in 
The Union Cabinet in its meeting held on November 5, 2014 approved a financial 
package for the revival of the 23 unlicensed DCCBs. Total capital infusion required 
was estimated at ₹ 2375.42 crore, comprising GOI Share  – ₹ 673.29 crore, State 
Government’s share – ₹ 1464.59 crore and NABARD’s share – ₹ 237.54 crore. 
For the purpose of implementation of the Scheme, a tripartite agreement in the form 
of  Memorandum  of  Understanding  (MoU),  stipulating  the  conditionalities  and 
deliverables was to be signed by Government of India, concerned State Governments 
and NABARD. The MOU has been finalized in consultations with RBI. Government of 
India and all the four State Governments and NABARD had signed the MoU. 
GOI  had  released  its  share  of  funds  to  three  States  viz.  Uttar  Pradesh 
(₹  401.17 crore),  Maharashtra  (₹  129.70  crore) and West  Bengal  (₹  31.20  crore). 
While, the State Governments of Maharashtra and West Bengal have released their 
share  to  the  DCCBs  fully,  the  Uttar  Pradesh  Government  has  released  its  share 
partially. As against the total amount of ₹ 1074.57 crore to be released for 16 DCCBs, 
Uttar Pradesh Government has released ₹ 610.00 crore to 11 DCCBs (10 DCCBs 
fully and one DCCB partially), because of budgetary constraints for the financial year 
2014–15. The Jammu & Kashmir Government had signed the MoU on March 31, 2015 
and the Central Government is yet to release the funds. 
ii. 
iii. 
22. After getting NABARD’s recommendations that the bank has attained the licensing norms, 
RBI would consider issuing of license to the banks and Directions would be withdrawn, subject 
to final order of the court. 
Status of negative net-worth DCCBs 
23. As per the latest data made available by NABARD, besides 23 unlicensed DCCBs, two 
licensed DCCBs in Karnataka viz. (i) Kolar-Chikballarpur DCCB [ (-) ₹ 2.60 crore] and Shimoga 
DCCB [ (-) ₹ 10.43 crore] were having negative networth as on March 31, 2014. We have 
advised NABARD to take up the matter with the State Government / RCS to take suitable 
measures for recapitalisation of the banks so as to ensure that the banks achieve a minimum 
CRAR of at least 7% by March 31, 2015. We have also taken up with the Chief Secretary, 
Karnataka State Government and RCS of the State to initiate steps for recapitalization of these 
banks. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   Way forward 
III.  
24. Considering the inherent challenges in the sector, it is required to put in place measures 
for the long term health of the sector. Earlier, RBI was not able to take coordinated action as it 
could have destabilized the sector. The sector has shown considerable improvement today 
and time, is perhaps, ripe to strengthen the framework to a level of regulatory comfort. It is 
possible of getting co-operative banks to move towards regulatory capital requirements over a 
period of time by nudging capital compliance towards industry standards based on a practical 
timeline. Further, in the context of changing landscape, a view needs to be taken whether a 
fresh round of co-operative bank licensing is due and put in place a definite migration path for 
FSWM co-operatives to make the transition to SFBs / commercial banks and at the same time 
continue efforts relating to governance reforms. 
25. It is pertinent to examine the merit and possibility of amending Cooperative Acts in states 
to the effect the provisions requiring every borrower having a voting share do not weaken the 
UCBs;  you  all  will  recall  that  such  provisions  have  led  to  an  anomalous  situation  where 
borrowers, who create the risk, control the bank and the depositors who bear the risk don’t. 
26. The possibility of acquiring shares by members at the book value at the time of entry and 
divest the shares at the book value at time of exit also needs to be examined, the purpose of 
the exercise would be to create appropriate incentives so that members get the benefit or 
otherwise of the reserves that are built during their membership. 
Conclusion 
IV.  
27. Cooperative banks are unique in terms of their structure, clientele and credit delivery. The 
resilience  and  stability  shown  by  these  banks  during  the  recent  global  financial  crisis  has 
underscored their importance in the financial system of both developed and emerging market 
economies. Despite their inherent weaknesses in terms of low capital, poor management and 
intrusive policies of State, cooperative banks in India have successfully weathered several 
challenges  during  their  century  old  existence  and  continued  to  grow  in  the  competitive 
environment which emerged following the Economic and Financial Sector Reforms initiated in 
1991. RBI has initiated several policy measures to strengthen the cooperative banking sector 
by  gradually  introducing  the  prudential  norms  and  regulatory  prescriptions  on  par  with 
commercial banks. It is heartening to see that cooperative banks are showing keen interest in 
diversifying their business and broad-basing their clientele. One can hope that changes in the 
existing legal framework, supportive regulatory environment, adoption of technology and re-
orientation of business strategy can act as enablers for cooperative banks to contribute more 
meaningfully in the equitable economic growth across regions through their delivery model. 
28. Thank you all for your patient listening. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
