  Andreas Dombret: The first six months of European banking supervision 
– an NCA’s perspective 
Speech  by  Dr  Andreas  Dombret,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Deutsche 
Bundesbank, at the ILF (Institute for Law and Finance) Conference on the Banking Union, 
Frankfurt am Main, 4 May 2015. 
 1.  
Introduction 
Ladies and gentlemen 
Thank you for inviting me to speak at today’s ILF Conference on the Banking Union. It is a 
great pleasure to be here. And again, the ILF has shown impeccable timing: it is six months 
to the day since we erected the first pillar of the European banking union. 
For on 4 November 2014, the ECB became the direct supervisor for the 123 largest banks in 
the euro area. Together, these institutions account for more than 85% of the aggregate total 
assets  of  the  euro  area’s  banking  sector. That  makes  the  ECB  one  of the  world’s  biggest 
banking supervisors. 
Yet  the  ECB  is  not  walking  alone;  it  is  being  accompanied  by  the  national  supervisors. 
Ultimately,  European  banking  supervision  rests on  the  shoulders  of  both  the  ECB  and  the 
national supervisors. 
Let me therefore share with you my view, as a national supervisor, of the first six months of 
European banking supervision. 
The benefits of European banking supervision 
2.  
Shifting banking supervision from the national to the European level harnesses three specific 
benefits. 
First, European banking supervision makes it possible for banks throughout the euro area to 
be  supervised  according  to  the  same  high  standards.  These  standards  will  emerge  from 
sharing insights and empirical findings internationally, and from adopting best practices from 
each national approach to banking supervision. The option of conducting cross-border peer 
reviews is another way in which the goal of establishing a common set of high standards can 
be achieved. 
Second, European banking supervision makes it possible to effectively identify and manage 
cross-border problems. This is essential, because large banks usually operate in more than 
one country. The failure of the Franco-Belgian bank Dexia in 2011 is a classic case in which 
banking  supervision  with  a  cross-border  focus  could  have  improved  crisis  management. 
Another example is Germany’s Hypo Real Estate, which folded in 2009. 
Third, shifting banking supervision from the national to the European level adds a  layer of 
separation  between  supervisors  and  the  banks  they  supervise.  This  will  prevent  domestic 
supervisors from handling their banks with kid gloves out of national interest. 
At a more general level, the ultimate forte of European banking supervision is that it blends a 
comprehensive  and  impartial  European  perspective  with  the  expertise  and  experience  of 
national supervisors. That being said, we need to strike a balance between harmonisation, 
subsidiarity and proportionality if this combination is going to work. 
We have to embrace the benefits of supervising banks throughout the euro area according to 
a  set  of  harmonised  standards.  At  the  same  time,  we  have  to  implement  supervisory 
practices that are proportionate to the special characteristics of individual institutions, and we 
have to build on the experience and expertise of national supervisors. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  With that balance in mind, let us take a tour through the day-to-day operations of European 
banking supervision and see where we stand. 
Supervising “significant institutions” 
3.  
The banks most immediately affected by the new system are the 123 banks that fall under 
direct  ECB  responsibility.  The  ECB  has  1,000  employees,  most  of  whom  are  located  in 
Frankfurt,  to  supervise  these  mostly  very  large  and  complex  banking  groups.  Since  these 
institutions are located in 19 different countries, the ECB has to rely on the support provided 
by  the  national  supervisors,  on  their  expertise  and  experience,  on  their  resources,  and  on 
their presence on the ground. 
That is why ongoing banking supervision is the responsibility of joint supervisory teams, or 
JSTs for short. JSTs are headed by ECB staff but mainly comprise national supervisors. The 
Bundesbank, for instance, is represented in all the joint supervisory teams for German banks 
as  well  as  in  a  number  of  teams  for  foreign  banks.  Altogether,  supervisors  from  the 
Bundesbank are represented in 34 of the 123 joint supervisory teams. 
You  can  imagine  that  all  this  requires  national  supervisors  to  adjust  –  not  just  from  an 
organisational point of view, but also from a personal standpoint. Supervisors who, for years, 
were responsible for national banks have suddenly been thrust into an international working 
environment. This is exciting and challenging at the same time, and it will take some time for 
everyone to adjust to their new surroundings. What we have seen in the first six months has 
been quite encouraging, though. 
From an organisational point of view, the Bundesbank has already adapted. Altogether, we 
have  established  three  new  organisational  units.  First,  we  have  set  up  a  staff  unit  to 
coordinate those colleagues from the Bundesbank who work in the JSTs. Second, we have 
created  a  new  division  to  analyse  the  foreign  banks  which  fall  under  European  banking 
supervision.  Third,  we  have  established  a  secretariat  to  prepare  the  meetings  of  the 
Supervisory  Board,  the  decision-making  body  of  European  banking  supervision.  This 
organisational set-up will ensure that the Bundesbank can contribute to European banking 
supervision in an effective and efficient manner. 
As  for  the  banks  falling  under  direct  ECB  responsibility,  we  can  conclude  that  national 
supervisors nonetheless still have a major role to play. Here, we have succeeded in striking a 
balance between harmonisation and subsidiarity. 
We still have some way to go as far as proportionality is concerned, however. In my view, we 
have to tailor supervisory processes to better suit the size of individual banks – and their joint 
supervisory  teams,  too,  for  that  matter.  The  largest  and  smallest  JSTs  differ  quite 
substantially in size – the largest comprise around 70 full-time supervisors, the smallest just 
5. Past experience has shown that JST workloads often exceed capacities, particularly so for 
the smaller teams. 
So  bearing  this  in  mind,  there  are  two  lessons  we  can  learn  from  the  first  six  months  of 
European banking supervision. First, the joint supervisory teams need to be of a sufficient 
size to be able to perform their supervisory duties in an effective manner. Second, the size of 
a  joint  supervisory  team  should  be  proportionate  to  the  size  and  significance  of  the 
supervised  institution.  In  other  words,  we  have  to  emphasise  proportionality  as  a  guiding 
principle in organising the JSTs for differently sized banks. 
Supervising “less significant institutions” 
4.  
Now,  what  about  the  other  banks?  What  about  banks  that  do  not  fall  under  direct  ECB 
supervision? These less significant institutions, as they are known, or LSIs for short, account 
for less than 15% of the aggregate total assets of the euro area’s banking sector. In terms of 
quantity, however, they  account for the bulk of the banking system. Across the euro area, 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  around  3,400  institutions  are  classified  as  “less  significant”;  1,700  of  them  are  located  in 
Germany. 
And it is with regard to these institutions that harmonisation, subsidiarity and proportionality 
have  to  be  balanced  with  particular  care.  As  a  general  rule,  LSIs  continue  to  be  directly 
supervised by the national competent authorities, although the LSI sector as a whole will be 
overseen  by  the  ECB  in  matters  of  risk  concentration.  Furthermore,  the  ECB  and  the 
supervisors  are  currently  developing  joint  standards  for  the  supervision  of  these  smaller 
banks.  And  again,  harmonising  standards  up  to  a  certain  degree  is  a  necessary  and 
welcome measure. 
That said, it is particularly  important with regard to less significant institutions that we give 
national supervisors sufficient scope to account for the particular characteristics of individual 
institutions. Supervising LSIs should be a matter for national supervisors. This would conform 
with the principle of subsidiarity and represent the most effective and efficient solution. 
Taking decisions 
5.  
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  striking  a  balance  between  harmonisation,  subsidiarity  and 
proportionality is a prerequisite for reaping the full benefits of European banking supervision 
– and it is certainly a formidable challenge. Yet there is another challenge we have to master 
if European banking supervision is to work. The challenge I’m talking about now has to do 
with decision-making processes. 
Since the ECB is responsible for European banking supervision, the Governing Council is the 
highest  decision-making  body,  not  just  for  monetary  policy  issues  but  also  for  matters  of 
banking supervision. These two areas of responsibility intersect at the banks. Besides being 
a crucial element in the monetary policy transmission process, banks are also the object of 
banking supervision. This, of course, gives rise to conflicts of interest, as it creates a banking 
supervisor with access to central bank liquidity. 
In practice, a situation may arise in which the Governing Council might be tempted, out of 
monetary  policy  concerns,  to  alter  decisions  that  the  Supervisory  Board  proposed  from  a 
supervisory perspective. 
To minimise such conflicts of interest, a governance structure has been put in place to limit 
the  Governing  Council’s  involvement  in  supervisory  decisions.  Time  will  tell  whether  this 
structure  truly  helps  to  avoid  conflicts  of  interest  between  monetary  policy  and  banking 
supervision,  or  whether  it  might  have  been  better  to  create  an  independent  banking 
supervisor. 
What about regulation? 
6.  
Supervisors can only ever be as effective as the rules and regulations they apply. And in this 
regard,  the  financial  crisis  has  exposed  a  number  of  shortcomings  in  the  regulatory 
framework.  Amongst  other  things,  the  crisis  underscored  the  need  for  a  more  harmonised 
regulatory  approach  –  ideally  one  which  would  eventually  create  a  level  playing  field  for 
supervisors and banks alike. 
In Europe, we have done a lot of work to meet these requirements – first and foremost by 
introducing the Single Rulebook. Amongst other things, this package implements the Basel 
III  framework  and  assures  the  harmonised  implementation  of  the  rules  throughout  all 
member states. Nevertheless, there is still room for further improvement. 
Today, European supervisory  legislation offers around 150 options to choose from. And at 
the  national  level,  these  options  have  been  exercised  in  many  different ways.  To  be sure, 
sometimes  it  is  reasonable  to  interpret  rules  against  the  backdrop  of  specific  national 
circumstances,  but  sometimes  it  is  not.  So  we  need  to  analyse  all  the  options  and 
discretionary  scope  provided  at  the  national  level  very  carefully.  Those  that  reflect  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  diversity of different markets and different credit institutions, we should keep. Those that do 
not, we should phase out. The  ECB and the national supervisors have just kick-started this 
evaluation process. 
Conclusion 
7.  
Ladies and gentlemen, I think it is fair to say that European banking supervision has got off to 
a  clean  start.  But  if  it  is  to  be  a  lasting  success,  we  still  have  to  overcome  a  number  of 
challenges.  In  my  speech  today,  I  outlined  the  need  to  strike  a  balance  between 
harmonisation, subsidiarity and proportionality; I highlighted the challenge posed by decision-
making processes; and I discussed the challenge of addressing the harmonisation of options 
and national discretionary scope within the regulatory framework. 
A lot of work still lies ahead of us. But as Jean Monnet, one of the founding-fathers of the 
European Union, once said: “to make all men work together, you have to show them that, 
beyond their divergences or over and above frontiers, they have a common interest”. Bearing 
this in mind, let us all work together in order to achieve our common goal of a stable financial 
system that serves the real economy. 
Thank you for your attention. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
