  Kerstin af Jochnick: Does the Riksbank have to make a profit? 
Challenges for the funding of the Riksbank 
Speech by Ms Kerstin af Jochnick, First Deputy Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank, at the 
Swedish House of Finance (SHoF), Stockholm, 23 January 2015. 
 The Riksbank is in good form! Last year the foreign currency reserves brought in more than 
SEK 30 billion. This in turn meant that the Riksbank’s equity increased by almost the same 
amount. (We will reveal the size of the reported profit at the beginning of February.) In the 
long  run,  the  largest part  of  the  Riksbank’s  profits  are  paid back  to  the government  in  the 
form  of  dividends,  and  over  the  past  25  years  the  Riksbank  has  paid  in  more  than 
SEK 210 billion to the Treasury. 
Although the amounts involved here are very large, we rarely discuss the Riksbank’s profits 
or  equity.  This  is  because  the  Riksbank’s assignment  does  not concern  making  a  profit; it 
involves maintaining price stability and promoting a safe and efficient payment system. 
However,  it  is  important  to  remember  that  if  we  are  to  perform  our  tasks  and  ensure  the 
Riksbank’s  independence,  we  must  have  adequate  financial  resources.  Carrying  out  our 
monetary policy assignment and the task of promoting a safe and efficient payment system 
includes  measures  that  are  made  in  various  ways  through  the  balance  sheet.  All  of  these 
measures affect the size of the balance sheet, the profits and equity. It is therefore important 
that  the  Riksbank’s  equity  is  of  an  adequate  size  to  retain  the  confidence  of  the  financial 
sector. 
Does  the  Riksbank  have  to  make  a  profit?  Well,  a  profit  only  becomes  important  when  it 
affects  the  balance  sheet  and  thereby  the  Riksbank’s  ability  to  carry  out  its  tasks.  The 
Riksbank does not need to make a profit every year, but in the long run it is important that 
the Riksbank does make a profit. We need to be able to build up buffers to cover our costs 
so  that  we  can  carry  out  our  task  regardless  of  the  government  and  the  Riksdag,  the 
Swedish parliament. It is therefore important that the Riksbank is not financially dependent 
on  them.  Moreover,  EU  legislation  requires  that  a  central  bank  should  have  adequate 
financial resources to carry out its tasks independently. 
The main reason why I have chosen to talk about the Riksbank’s possibilities to make a profit 
is that it is not self-evident that the Riksbank will always report large profits year after year. 
The coming five-year period actually looks rather gloomy from this perspective. 
The low interest rates and expectations of rising interest rates further ahead mean that we 
share this situation with many other central banks. It is linked to the way the Riksbank has 
prepared itself to be able to manage its tasks in the future. The Riksbank has deliberately 
altered its balance sheet in recent years, but there are also changes in our environment that 
have  affected  the  balance  sheet,  leading  to  its  current  composition.  The  way  the  balance 
sheet looks, combined with the developments in interest rates and yields on the Riksbank’s 
assets and liabilities also have decisive significance for the Riksbank’s capacity to make a 
profit. 
We  need  to  understand  the  Riksbank’s  balance  sheet  to  be  able  to  understand  the 
connections.  How  has  the  balance  sheet  developed  over  time?  And  what  do  we  think  will 
happen  to  it  in  the  future?  How  does  our  current  balance  sheet  affect  the  Riksbank’s 
possibilities to make a profit? 
In conclusion, I intend to comment on the current situation with very low international interest 
rates, and what will happen if (or rather when) interest rates begin to rise. What will this entail 
for the Riksbank’s possibilities of making a profit? 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
  The Riksbank’s measures are reflected in the balance sheet 
The  Riksbank  thus  does  not  have  the  aim  to  make  a  profit,  but  the  bank’s  possibilities  to 
make profits are nevertheless very important. They are connected to the Riksbank being able 
to conduct its monetary policy independent of the government and parliament. The Riksbank 
needs to be financially independent to do this in a credible manner. In plain language, this 
means that the bank needs to have sufficient resources at its disposal to be able to carry out 
its tasks without being governed by subventions from the government. 
When the Riksbank carries out its tasks, this usually has consequences for the Riksbank’s 
balance sheet. Most of the instruments the Riksbank uses to steer the interest rate are also 
items  on  the  balance  sheet.  The  Riksbank  currently  steers  the  interest  rate  through  its 
monopoly  on  supplying  a  payment  system  for  transferring  money  between  the  banks 
(including the Riksbank) and above all by determining the conditions for this. It is mainly the 
conditions  for  the  banks’  deposits  and  loans  with  the  Riksbank  that  are  used  as  an 
instrument to steer interest rates in the economy. Prior to the financial crisis, the transactions 
in  the  Riksbank’s  different  instruments  were  relatively  small,  but  this  changed  during  the 
financial crisis. Then we used our balance sheet to supply the banks with liquidity. 
Up  to  autumn  2008,  the  Riksbank’s  balance  sheet  was  around  SEK  200  billion,  but  it 
increased dramatically during the crisis to at most SEK 763 billion in July 2009. The reason 
the balance sheet more than tripled was that the Riksbank began lending large amounts in 
US dollars and Swedish krona to the Swedish banks from October 2008. The dollar loans 
were largely funded by the Riksbank in its turn borrowing dollars from the Federal Reserve. 
The  lending  in  krona  resulted  in  the  banks’  holdings  of  Swedish  krona  increasing,  funds 
which were ultimately deposited with the Riksbank. This was reflected in the balance sheet in 
the form of larger monetary policy liabilities.1 
The  Riksbank  and  the  banking  system  comprise  a  closed  system,  which  means  that  the 
money the Riksbank lends out must automatically return to the Riksbank. During the financial 
crisis,  the  Riksbank  thus  functioned  as  intermediary  and  replaced  the  market  funding  the 
financial  agents  were  no  longer  willing  to  provide.  Instead  of  one  bank  lending  to  another 
bank, the central bank steps in and lends money to the bank needing market funding and at 
the  same  time  the  central  bank  offers  a  risk-free  investment  to  the  bank  that  no  longer 
wishes to provide market funding. 
Unlike the larger central banks, the Riksbank did not buy any securities during the financial 
crisis, considering the loans against collateral to be sufficient. This meant that the Riksbank 
could  relatively  quickly  cease  its  extraordinary  measures  when  the  situation  improved  and 
the loans matured. 
Many central banks’ balance sheets are still much larger than they were prior to the financial 
crisis, which reflects the central role played by the central banks, not merely during the actual 
crisis  but  also  during  the  recovery  phase.  Monetary  policy  has  been  very  expansionary  to 
support economic developments, with very low interest rates and continued comprehensive 
central bank loans in various forms. 
Although the Riksbank was able to phase out its extraordinary measures relatively quickly, 
compared  with  other  countries,  the  Riksbank’s  balance  sheet  has  for  various  reasons 
changed since before the crisis. So let us go through why the balance sheet looks the way it 
does. 
                                                 
1   The concept “monetary policy liabilities” is used as a generic term for the items ‘liabilities to credit institutions 
in  Sweden  related  to  monetary  policy  operations  denominated  in  Swedish  kronor”  and  “debt  certificates 
issued”. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  How has the Riksbank’s balance sheet developed over the past decade? 
Let  us  examine  (a  simplified  version  of)  the  Riksbank’s  balance  sheet  from  the  year-end 
2004.  Ten  years  ago,  the  balance  sheet  total  was  SEK  183  billion.  The  asset  side  was 
dominated by the gold and foreign currency reserves, which amounted to SEK 166 billion. In 
addition, we had a monetary policy claim on the Swedish banks of SEK 17 billion.2 At that 
time  the  Riksbank  lent  money  to  the  banking  system  and  this  was  done  through  the 
monetary policy repo transaction (therefore the name repo rate). 
The  assets  are  largely  funded  through  the  Riksbank  over  the  year  issuing  banknotes  and 
coins to a value of SEK 109 billion. The bank’s equity amounted to SEK 65 billion. The small 
liability to the IMF is a result of Sweden’s membership of the International Monetary Fund. I 
do not intend so say so much about this item now. 
Let us now compare this with how the balance sheet looks today. As you can all see, a lot 
has happened over the past ten years. For instance, we can observe that: 
 
The  foreign  currency  reserve  is  SEK  325  billion  larger.  This  increase  is  mainly 
because  we  have  borrowed  the  equivalent  of  SEK  200  billion  in  foreign  currency 
through  the  Swedish  National  Debt  Office  to  strengthen  the  foreign  currency 
reserve. 
The Riksbank’s balance sheet 2004 and 2014 
SEK billion 
Source: The Riksbanken 
                                                  
2   The formal term in the  balance sheet is “lending to credit institutions in  Sweden related to monetary  policy 
operations denominated in Swedish kronor”. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
     We have once again acquired a securities portfolio in Swedish krona. The Riksbank 
previously had a portfolio of Swedish securities but then this was phased out more 
than ten years ago. 
The  stock  of  notes  and  coins  has  declined,  partly  due  to  card  payments  and 
electronic payments becoming more common. 
As  a  consequence  of  this,  we  now  have  monetary  policy  liabilities  instead  of  a 
monetary policy claim. This means that we are now borrowing excess liquidity from 
the banking system instead of lending money to cover a liquidity deficit. I will return 
to this issue later on. 
One thing that is immediately apparent when comparing today’s balance sheet with the one 
from  ten  years’  ago  is  that  the  debt  items  the  Riksbank  does  not  pay  interest  on,  that  is, 
notes and coins and equity, have gone from comprising almost 100 per cent to hardly 40 per 
cent of the Riksbank’s total funding today. This means that the probability of the Riksbank 
making losses in certain years has increased. I will return to this, but let us first look a little 
closer at the changes in the Riksbank’s balance sheet. 
The foreign currency reserve has strengthened 
The  largest  change  in  the  Riksbank’s  balance  sheet  is  the  strengthening  of  the  foreign 
currency reserve. One can say that a central bank has three reasons for holding a foreign 
currency  reserve.  The  first  is  to  make  interventions  in  the  foreign  exchange  market,  the 
second  is  to  maintain  a  readiness  to  supply  the  financial  system  with  liquidity  in  foreign 
currencies and the third is to meet obligations to international organisations. 
The  Riksbank’s  foreign  currency  reserve  was  strengthened  partly  because  Sweden’s 
commitments to the International Monetary Fund (IMF) have increased, but mainly because 
the Riksbank is to manage the task of ensuring that the payment system in Sweden functions 
safely and efficiently. The serious situation abroad and the Swedish banks’ extensive funding 
in foreign currencies mean that the risks of disruptions to the financial system are higher than 
before. The role of the Riksbank in this situation is, when necessary, to be able to provide 
liquidity  assistance  at  short  notice.  With  today’s  Swedish  banking  system,  it  may  also  be 
necessary to provide such assistance in foreign currencies. We therefore asked the National 
Debt  Office  on  two  occasions  to  borrow  foreign  currency  on  our  behalf  to  strengthen  the 
currency  reserve.  All  in  all,  we  borrowed  foreign  currency  to  a  value  equivalent  to 
SEK 200 billion. 
However, the foreign currency reserve has grown by SEK 325 billion, while the strengthening 
by means of the National Debt Office loans amounted to SEK 200 billion. The difference is 
partly  due  to  the  krona  being  weak  during  2014  and  the  value  of  the  foreign  currency 
reserve,  measured  in  krona,  therefore  having  increased.  The  krona  depreciation  is  also 
visible  in  the  fact  that  the  value  of  the  foreign  currency  loans,  which  a  year  ago  was 
SEK 193 billion, now amounts to SEK 228 billion. But the foreign currency reserve has also 
grown as a result of the return on the bonds in the foreign currency reserve being reinvested 
in new bonds instead of used to pay dividends to the government.  As a result of this, the 
Riksbank  has  instead  had  to  borrow  from  the  banks  that  are  its  monetary  policy 
counterparties  to  pay  the  dividends.  This  has  contributed  to  the  banks’  net  claims  on  the 
Riksbank  having  increased  by  almost  SEK  50  billion  over  the  past  ten  years,  which  has 
means that we have gone from having a monetary policy claim to a monetary policy liability. 
The Riksbank has reintroduced a portfolio in Swedish krona 
On the asset side, we now also have a portfolio of Swedish government bonds in Swedish 
krona.  Let  me  just  comment  here  on  why  we  have  once  again  acquired  a  securities 
portfolio  in  Swedish  krona.  Most  central  banks  have  a  securities  portfolio  in  their  own 
currency. The Riksbank also had such a portfolio during the 1990s and this consisted mainly 
of government bonds, as well as a minor holding in treasury bills and mortgage bonds. In 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  2001, the portfolio was transferred to the Swedish National Debt Office. In autumn 1999, The 
Riksbank’s  market  commitment  repo  facility  was  transferred  to  the  Swedish  National  Debt 
Office  and  the  assessment  was  made  that  a  domestic  securities  portfolio  at  the  Riksbank 
would not fulfil any important monetary policy function. 
However, the experiences of the financial crisis 2008–2009 show how important it is to be 
able to quickly implement measures beyond the ordinary measures used by a central bank to 
implement  monetary  policy.  During  the  crisis  the  Riksbank  took  several  extraordinary 
measures  to  improve  the  functioning  of  the  financial  markets  and  the  monetary  policy 
transmission mechanism. Other central banks implemented similar measures. Unlike many 
other central banks, the Riksbank did not buy any government bonds or covered bonds, but 
these possibilities were discussed. 
One important lesson from the crisis is that new measures require considerable preparation. 
After the crisis, we therefore decided that it is a good idea to make practical preparations for 
a crisis even during normal circumstances by supplementing the Riksbank’s toolbox with a 
limited  securities  portfolio  in  Swedish  krona.  This  ensures  that  necessary  systems, 
agreements, routines and knowledge are already in place if it becomes necessary to quickly 
implement extraordinary measures. Given that we now have a repo rate close to zero and we 
are discussing which unconventional measures might be appropriate if inflation does not rise 
towards two per cent, it is good that the Riksbank has created the possibility and knowledge 
to manage a bond portfolio. This means that we now can quickly and simply purchase and 
sell  bonds,  something  that  would  previously  have  taken  us  much  longer.  So,  in  technical 
terms  we  are  prepared  to  increase  the  size  of  the  portfolio  if  and  when  it  should  prove 
necessary. 
The general public’s use of cash is declining 
One important item on the liabilities side of the balance sheet is outstanding banknotes and 
coins. The Riksbank has the monopoly on issuing banknotes and coins in Sweden and is 
responsible  for  supplying  the  country  with  cash.  The  size  of  this  item  depends  on  the 
demand from the general public for cash. Previously, the stock of notes and coins used to 
grow over time in line with growth in the economy, but this has not been the case in recent 
years. Since 2007, the demand for notes and coins has instead declined, both in relation to 
GDP and in absolute figures. As far as I know, we are alone in the world with regard to the 
latter development. It is not entirely clear why this is so, but the fact that Sweden is in the 
forefront  with  regard  to  the  use  of  card  payments  and  electronic  payments  has  probably 
contributed. 
The value of outstanding banknotes and counts amounted to SEK 109 billion ten years ago 
and  comprised  60  per cent  of  the  Riksbank’s  balance  sheet  total.  At  the  end  of  2014,  the 
item  had  declined  to  just  over  SEK  83  billion  and  now  comprises  only  17  per  cent  of  the 
balance sheet total. The Riksbank assesses that cash will remain a means of payment for 
the foreseeable future, although it will probably decline in significance.3 The replacement of 
the  Swedish  banknotes  and  coins  that  will  take  place  between  autumn  2015  and  summer 
2017  increases  uncertainty  over  how  much  cash  will  be  in  circulation  during  the  coming 
years. 
What does it mean for the Riksbank when the amount of cash in circulation declines? Well, 
when  this  happens  the  banks  do  not  need  to  hold  such  large  stocks  of  cash  as  before. 
Instead, they deposit the money in their accounts with the Riksbank. What this means for the 
Riksbank’s balance sheet is that when the liabilities item banknotes and coins declines, the 
item monetary policy liabilities increases by the same amount. Over the past ten years, the 
item banknotes and coins has declined by SEK 25 billion, and the monetary policy liabilities 
                                                 
3   The Swedish retail payment market, Riksbank Study, June 2013 (page 8). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
  item  has  thus  increased  by  the  same  amount.  In  this  way,  the  Riksbank  misses  out  on 
interest-free  funding,  as  the  Riksbank  pays  interest  on  the  monetary  policy  liabilities. 
Although this is not so relevant at present when the repo rate is at zero, in the long run the 
Riksbank’s profits will shrink in line with the decline in the use of cash. 
I  should  perhaps  take  the  opportunity  to  say  here  that  the  Riksbank  is  in  general  positive 
towards developments on the payments market that in many cases lead to both safer and 
more efficient payments. But one cannot disregard the fact that a decline in the use of cash 
will also reduce the Riksbank’s opportunities for interest-free funding. 
The Riksbank borrows instead of lending 
The changes in the Riksbank’s balance sheet that I have mentioned here have led to a major 
change in the liquidity position of the banking system towards the Riksbank. Ten years ago, 
the banking system had a structural deficit of liquid funds with regard to the Riksbank. This 
means that the Riksbank had to regularly lend money to the banking system. Since 2010, the 
banking system has instead had a structural surplus of liquid funds and the Riksbank now 
borrows  these  funds  from  the  banking  system.  The  most  important  explanations  for  the 
banking  system  moving  from  deficit  to  surplus  are  that  the  dividend  payments  to  the 
government have not been taken from the assets; the Riksbank has instead borrowed money 
to pay the dividends, and that the general public’s demand for cash has declined. 
This  change  is  reflected  in  the  Riksbank’s  balance  sheet  in  that  we  now  carry  out  our 
monetary  policy  operations  on  the  liabilities  side  of  the  balance  sheet.  But  it  makes  no 
difference  to  our  ability  to  implement  monetary  policy.4  Regardless  of whether  the  banking 
system has a deficit or a surplus of liquidity in relation to the Riksbank, our monetary policy 
system works by means of our determining the conditions for the banks’ deposits and loans 
with the Riksbank, which determines the shortest interest rate – the overnight rate – so that it 
comes closer to our policy rate, what is known as the repo rate. The repo rate thus states 
which level the Riksbank wants for the overnight rate, which is currently zero per cent. The 
overnight rate in turn affects interest rates charged to the general public and thereby activity 
and prices in the economy. 
The Riksbank’s need for funding is increasing 
The most important fundamental consequence in the changes to the balance sheet between 
2004  and  2014  is  that  the  Riksbank  now  has  a  larger  funding  need  than  before.  I  shall 
explain why. The reason is that the foreign currency reserve needs to be much larger than 
before, as the banks’ funding in foreign currency has expanded so much over the past ten 
years. And this means that the traditional funding sources, equity and banknotes and coins, 
are not enough. 
How should the Riksbank fund its assets? As I have already described, the Riksbank chose 
to borrow foreign currency on the international capital market through the Swedish National 
Debt Office when the foreign currency reserve was strengthened. We assessed that this was 
the most suitable procedure at the time and it functioned well and is still doing so. 
Although the Riksbank is able to borrow euros and dollars at a low cost on the capital market 
through  the  National  Debt  Office,  the  interest  expenditure  for  the  currency  loans  is  higher 
than the return the Riksbank receives on the money when it is invested in safe assets with 
very low risk. The difference is around 0.2 per cent. This means that the strengthening of the 
foreign  currency  reserve  of  SEK  200  billion  costs  the  Riksbank  around  SEK  400  million  a 
year. One can regard this cost as a form of insurance premium that the Riksbank considers 
is worth paying to ensure a good level of preparedness for a crisis. As the Swedish banking 
                                                 
4   See Peter Sellin and Virginia Queijo von Heideken: “The banking system’s liquidity surplus and interest rate 
formation” in Sveriges Riksbank Economic Review 2014:3. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  system is so large and important to the Swedish economy, this cost can be considered small 
in relation to the costs that might arise if the banking system ceased functioning. 
The  reinforcement  of  the  foreign  currency  reserve  thus  reduces  the  Riksbank’s  profits  by 
around SEK 400 million a year. This is one of the reasons why it is has been discussed in 
various contexts whether the banks should contribute to the costs of the reinforcement. The 
Riksbank has previously argued that it would be reasonable if the banks stood for the cost of 
the part of the foreign currency reserve needed to manage emergency liquidity assistance5, 
and we will probably have reason to return to this question in the future. 
How can the Riksbank obtain funding in the future? 
By going through the balance sheet in this way, we can clearly see that the Riksbank has 
little  opportunity  to  influence  how  it  obtains  funding.  We  have  already  observed  that  the 
banknotes and coins item is declining and that there is nothing the Riksbank can do about 
this  –  it  is  part  of  the  technological  developments  taking  place.  With  regard  to  foreign 
currency loans, I mentioned that the interest expenditure for them exceeds the income on the 
assets the loans fund. 
The Riksbank’s equity exceeds SEK 100 billion. This means that the Riksbank has a good 
capacity  to  manage  potential  losses.  And  it  is  important  for  our  credibility.  EU  legislation 
prescribes that it is the highest decision-making body in the central bank that shall decide on 
the  size  of  the  bank’s  equity.  It  is  of  course  important  that  the  decision  is  made  after  a 
preparatory  process  that  is  transparent  and  predictable,  with  a  healthy  balance  between 
promoting  on  the  one  side  the  need  of  the  Riksbank  to  have  sufficient  equity  on  each 
occasion  and  on  the  other  side  the  interest  of  the  Swedish  government  to  minimise  the 
Riksbank’s costs for tying up capital. 
To summarise, we can note that the Riksbank currently only has one source of funding that it 
determines itself, namely monetary policy liabilities. In other words, the Riksbank can always 
make payments by increasing liquidity in the banking system. But all other forms of funding 
are affected in one way or another by things beyond the bank’s control. At present, the repo 
rate is at zero and this means that the Riksbank does not have any interest expenditure for 
the monetary policy liabilities. But this is temporary, and as the repo rate is raised, the bank’s 
interest expenditure will increase. This will also mean that profits decline. 
The coming years – profits declining, no dividends 
I  have  now  spent  some  time  on  describing  the  Riksbank’s  balance  sheet  and  discussing 
some of the challenges the bank is facing. But I have not yet said anything about the largest 
challenge for the bank in the short term. By this I mean the extremely low interest rates, both 
here in Sweden and abroad. 
As  I  have  already  mentioned,  the  foreign  currency  reserve  shall  be  managed  so  that  the 
Riksbank can provide emergency liquidity assistance in foreign currency at short notice. The 
assets therefore need to be easy to sell. They must also retain their value. Therefore, the 
foreign  currency  reserve  largely  consists  of  very  safe  government  bonds,  mainly  from  the 
United States and Germany. 
The yields on US and German government bonds are currently very low. As the Riksbank’s 
income largely consists of the return on the foreign currency reserve, one must realise that 
the Riksbank currently has fairly limited opportunities to earn money. Let us look at a simple 
calculation, based  on  how  things looked  ten  years  ago,  and  compare  this  with  the  current 
situation. 
                                                 
5   See, for instance, the speech by Lars Nyberg on 17 May 2011: “Is it dangerous to borrow dollars?” 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
  Net interest income has declined 
At the end of 2004, the Riksbank had assets worth SEK 183 billion. The interest rate then 
was  around  four  per  cent  (measured  as  an  average  over  the  currencies  included  in  the 
reserve).  A  rough  estimate  of  the  Riksbank’s  net  interest  income  is  then  SEK  7.3  billion 
(183 x 4%). As the assets were financed almost completely by the banknote and coin stock 
and the bank’s equity, interest rate expenditure was low. The cost of the small IMF liability 
was just under SEK 300 million, so net interest income was around SEK 7 billion. This should 
be set against the Riksbank’s costs for conducting its operations, which amounted to around 
SEK  750  million  a  year.  Net  interest  income  was  thus  almost  ten  times  higher  than 
expenditure. 
If we make the same calculation for 2014, the picture is rather different. Based on the interest 
rates that applied at the turn of the year, net interest income is around SEK 3.5 billion. Now 
the  bank  also  has  sizeable  interest  expenditure  amounting  to  SEK  2.4  billion  (and  this 
despite the repo rate being zero, so the bank does not pay interest on liabilities in Swedish 
krona). Net interest income is thus SEK 1.1 billion, which still covers the costs of conducting 
the bank’s operations – but now with a much smaller margin than before. 
As  you  can  all  see,  this  is  a  very  rough  and  simplified  calculation.  The  return  on  a  bond 
portfolio is not just determined by the interest rate at a particular point in time, but also by the 
yield  curve  and  how  it  moves  over  time.  We  have  calculated  this,  too,  and  when  we 
estimated  the  expected  return  on  the  foreign  currency  reserve,  we  have  used  data  from 
interest rate forecasts by the National Institute of Economic Research.6 
From 1988 onwards, the Riksbank’s results have on average exceeded SEK 8 billion a year. 
I have chosen 1988 as starting year as this was when we began to apply the principles for 
how to calculate the size of the dividend, which still apply today. In brief, the principles entail 
the dividend level remaining stable, the majority of the profit shall be paid as a dividend, and 
that the calculation shall not take into account developments in the government budget. In 
concrete  terms,  this  means  that  80  per  cent  of  the  average  results  in  the  past  five  years 
(adjusted  for  exchange  rate  effects)  shall  be  paid  as  dividend  to  the  government.  The 
majority  of  the  profit  has  been  paid  to  the  Treasury.  The  fact  is  that  if  we  include  the  two 
extra dividends of SEK 20 billion each paid at the beginning of the 2000s, the Riksbank has 
paid somewhat more than its profits in dividends during this period. The smallest dividend 
paid during the period is that paid in spring 2014, SEK 3.3 billion. 
Losses await 
If we instead look ahead, we see that the Riksbank will probably make losses over a couple 
of years. The results for 2014 (which have not yet been established) were still positive, but if 
interest rates rise in the way that the National Institute of Economic Research forecasts, it will 
be some time before the Riksbank can show a profit again. It looks as though the bank will 
have losses in the years 2015–2018 amounting to around SEK 5 billion a year. 
 
                                                  
6   The Riksbank regularly makes forecasts for the bank’s dividends to the state as part of the National Financial 
Management Authority’s work on planning the state finances. In this work, all of the public authorities use the 
National Institute of Economic Research’s forecasts for economic developments. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 The Riksbank’s profits and dividends 1988–2018 
SEK billion 
  Sources: The National Institute of Economic Research and the Riksbank 
This development is not unique to the Riksbank. Many of those who have invested in bonds 
will  face  losses  when  interest  rates  rise.  Those  that  are  hit  the  hardest  will  be  the  central 
banks that have applied what is known as quantitative easing in recent years, that is, they 
have bought large volumes of bonds with long maturities to stimulate the economy. 
The fact that the Riksbank makes losses in turn means that the bank will not be able to pay 
dividends  to  the  government  for  some  years.  As  the  dividend  payment  is  based  on  the 
results from the past five years, it will decline with a time lag, and the forecast at the moment 
is  that  we  will  pay  two  further  dividends  before  the  losses  take  over  and  the  dividend 
payments become zero. 
This is of course a setback for the government’s income. And as the  dividends cannot be 
negative when the Riksbank makes a loss, the bank must bear the losses, which will reduce 
our equity. As we have equity of a good SEK 100 billion, we can manage this without any 
infringement of our financial independence. 
The Riksbank is financially strong 
I  have  now  described  how  the  Riksbank’s  balance  sheet  has  changed  over  the  past  ten 
years. I have also tried to show how this affects the bank’s capacity to make a profit. 
Some changes are the result of active decisions by the Riksbank. Decisions the Riksbank 
has  made  as  a  preventive  measure  to  be  sufficiently  prepared  to  manage  a  changed 
situation. I am of course mainly thinking of the reinforcement of the foreign currency reserve 
here, but also the decision to acquire a portfolio of Swedish securities again. Other changes, 
such  as  the  decline  in  the  use  of  cash  and  international  interest  rates,  are  beyond  the 
Riksbank’s control. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
  Changes in the Riksbank’s balance sheet will lead to the bank’s profits slowly shrinking. We 
must therefore consider more carefully than before how we can best fund our assets. The 
expected rise in interest rates has a much greater effect on the bank’s profits in the short 
term, but on the other hand the effect is temporary. 
Although there is no lack of challenges, the Riksbank is financially strong. This is important to 
be able to perform our task in the best possible way. The bank has substantial equity, which 
may well be needed if the Riksbank is forced to adopt unconventional methods to bring up 
inflation. 
Finally: Does the Riksbank have to make a profit? Yes, it does actually. We must be able to 
cover our costs. And we must be able to build up buffers. But if our finances are stable, then 
our capacity to perform our tasks will not be jeopardised because we lose money during a 
few years. 
 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
