  DeLisle Worrell: Challenges and opportunities for Barbados’ IBFS sector 
Remarks by Dr DeLisle Worrell, Governor of the Central Bank of Barbados, at the 5th Annual 
International Business and Financial Services Sector Conference, Bridgetown, 10 April 2015. 
 This annual conference is an opportunity to reflect on the challenges and opportunities for 
Barbados’ IBFS sector, and to assess how we may improve on our performance and mastery 
of our circumstances. For all of our history Barbadians have made our living as tiny players 
on a global market. By and large, over time, we have made a success of it, and as a result 
we now enjoy an enviable quality and style of life. The challenges we face in the IBFS sector 
are  of  the  same  nature  as  the  challenges  our  economy  has  always  faced  in  international 
competition with players much larger than ourselves. The lessons of our past are that you 
must know your strengths and operate well within them, you must make a game plan based 
on those strengths, you must arm yourself fully with research and information, you should 
implement your strategy in a flexible, responsive way, and you should prepare and commit 
yourself for the long haul. These are the lessons we must apply in facing the new challenges 
in the IBFS sector. We face new challenges, often referred to by acronyms such as BEPS, 
FATCA, FAPI rules, etc. They are well known and I do not need to repeat them here, but 
they are serious and they affect our Canadian business, which is the bulk of our sector. 
In  responding  to  the  current  challenges  we  are  playing  to  our  strengths.  Our  value 
proposition is that international companies can establish subsidiaries in Barbados to perform 
international transactional services that they would otherwise do in a major metropolis such 
as Toronto or New York. They are able to reduce costs and be more competitive because 
wages for skilled professionals in Barbados are so much lower. They are able to offer the 
same quality of service because Barbados boasts international levels of social and economic 
infrastructure, and excellent communications with North America, Europe and beyond. We 
have regulatory and legal oversight systems that are constantly being upgraded in light of 
guidance  from  the  Basel  Committee,  the  IMF,  the  FSB,  the  FATF,  the  Global  Forum  and 
other  international  bodies.  We  have  a  large  and  expanding  network  of  range  DTA’s  and 
BIT’s.  We  are  constantly  expanding  our  range  of  products.  And  we  are  not  a  tax  haven; 
companies operating in Barbados, including IBC’s, are liable to pay corporation tax. 
We are seeking new opportunities to strengthen IBFS activities, with the exploration of new 
markets in Latin America, Africa, the Middle East and elsewhere. We are also introducing 
new products and services geared to the needs of the various markets from which we draw 
our clients. 
This conference offers an opportunity to share ideas and information on how we may perfect 
our strategy and message. We will begin by looking into the future a bit, with a panel and 
discussion  on the  prospects  of  business  with  Cuba,  a  country  with  which  Barbados  has a 
long history of diplomatic and other relationships. We will also be discussing issues of the 
regulatory framework, and initiatives to strengthen institutional support and facilitation of the 
industry.  Our  final  presenter  today  will  suggest  ways  forward  for  the  wealth  management 
industry. 
We  live  in  an  interconnected  world  in  which  the  execution  and  financing  of  international 
commerce  is  open  to  competition  to  all  nations,  large  and  small.  We  can  be  assured  of 
Barbados’  future  as  a  player  in  this  global  market,  so  long  as  we  strive  always  to  offer  a 
superior value proposition. I look forward to today’s discussions towards that objective. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
