  
 
Patrick Honohan: Institutional reform in the Central Bank of Ireland since 
2009 
Introductory statement by Mr Patrick Honohan, Governor of the Central Bank of Ireland, at 
the Oireachtas Banking Inquiry, Dublin, 15 January 2015. 
 The  Report  that  I  submitted  to  the  Minister  for  Finance  in  May  2010  entitled  The  Irish 
Banking Crisis: Regulatory and Financial Stability Policy 2003–8 responded to a request by 
the  then  Minister  for  a  “preliminary  investigation  of…the  performance  of  the  respective 
functions of the Central Bank and Financial Regulator” over that period. Drawing on internal 
files  as  well  as  interviews  of  key  officials,  the  Report  was  able  to  provide  answers  to  two 
questions: First, why was the danger from the emerging imbalances in the financial system 
that led to the crisis not identified more clearly and earlier and headed-off through decisive 
measures? Second, when the crisis began to break, were the best containment measures 
adopted? 
The Report noted the relevance of factors other than the performance of the Central Bank 
and Financial Regulator (including the performance of directors and senior management of 
the  banks,  as  well  as  their  auditors  and  accountants,  as  well  as  pro-cyclical  elements  of 
Government policy), but, in line with the terms of reference, it focused on the design of micro-
prudential  aspects;  the  approach  to  overall  financial  stability;  and  the  failure  to  undertake 
decisive and effective remedial measures. 
As far as micro-prudential policy is concerned, the supervisors did not accumulate enough 
relevant information, because of 
1. 
an  excessive  reliance  on  a  regulatory  philosophy  that  implicitly  trusted  that  well-
governed  banks  could  be  relied  upon  to  remain  safe  and  sound.  This  approach 
emphasised process over outcomes, and downplayed the quantification of risk; and 
deficiencies in skills and staff resources. 
2. 
There  should  have  been  a  greater  degree  of  intrusiveness  and  assertiveness,  and  a  less 
deferential  approach  to  the  banking  industry.  This  would  have  disrupted  the  pattern  of 
inconclusive engagement with the banks, a pattern which spilled over to the macro-prudential 
arena, reflected in the fact that the belated and relatively modest tightening in 2006 of capital 
requirements  for  high  loan-to-value  mortgages  was  adopted  only  after  prolonged  and 
agonised debate. 
In  terms  of  the  analysis  of  systemic  risks,  the  language  of  successive  published  financial 
stability reports was too reassuring: a triumph of hope over reality. 
Much has been made of the institutional separation of the regulatory authority from the rest 
of the Central Bank. The 2003 legislation did create the risk of ambiguity with regard to which 
entities  were  responsible  for  what.  Certainly,  communication  between  the  macroeconomic 
specialists  assessing  systemic  risks  and  the  micro  prudential  supervisors  dealing  with 
individual banks was not fully effective: each side felt they would have acted more vigorously 
had  they  been  more  aware  of  what  the  other  knew.  But  that  probably  reflected  a  lack  of 
mutual understanding of the methodology and professional language as between economists 
and supervisors more than the institutional separation, which was by no means rigid. In the 
end,  senior  officials  in  both  institutions,  as  well  as  many  elsewhere  at  home  and  abroad, 
were too optimistic about the strength of the economy and the Irish banks. 
One  should  recall  that  several  other  central  banks  and  financial  regulatory  authorities 
suffered similar failures in the run-up to the crisis. But (with the exception of Iceland) they 
had  not  allowed  the  scale  of  their  banking  systems  to  get  so  completely  out  of  control  as 
happened in Ireland. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
The  Report’s  section  on  crisis  containment  includes  an  assessment  of  the  29  September 
2008 decision to guarantee substantially all of the liabilities of the banks. While several other 
countries followed suit in subsequent days with more limited guarantees, the guaranteeing of 
subordinated  debt  of  the  banks  was  clearly  a  mistake;  the  formal  guarantee,  backed  by 
legislation,  of  all  long-dated  debt  was  also  unnecessary  and  bound  to  constrain  the 
authorities’  ability  to  restructure  or  wind-down  failed  banks  before  the  expiry  of  the  initial 
guarantee. 
With  the  benefit  of  hindsight  –  had  the  regulatory  authorities  had  any  notion  that  heavy 
losses could be involved – an alternative strategy (mentioned in a footnote on page 132 of 
the May 2010 Report) of putting Anglo (and INBS) into liquidation on September 29, while 
standing behind the rest of the system, should have been more favourably considered. Given 
how resistant external authorities subsequently proved to be to the imposition of losses on 
unguaranteed senior bank debt of failed banks, external partners might have responded to 
such  an  idea  with  compromise  proposals  that  might  have  alleviated  the  subsequent 
pressures  on  the  Irish  Exchequer.  More  generally,  greater  consultation  with  EU  partners 
would have been highly desirable and could have helped Ireland to be less on the back foot 
in subsequent negotiations. 
Despite the passage of time, I see no reason to alter the assessments I made in May 2010.1 
Accordingly, extensive changes have taken place within the Central Bank to ensure that the 
identified shortcomings have been removed as far as possible. While not strictly the topic for 
today’s hearing, it seems appropriate to include some words on this. 
Institutional reform in the Central Bank since 2009 
The  2010  legislation  (Central  Bank  Reform  Act  2010)  confirmed  the  reintegration  of  the 
regulatory and supervisory apparatus fully within the Central Bank. The separate Authority 
was  abolished  and  its  powers  transferred  to  the  renamed  Central  Bank  Commission,  with 
most  regulatory  powers  delegated  to  the  Deputy  Governor  (Financial  Regulation).  The 
legislation also introduced some other changes including a clearer definition of the goals of 
the Central Bank. 
Extensive  actions  were  launched  to  enhance  the  Central  Bank’s  capacity  and  ensuring  its 
delivery of an intrusive and effective risk-based financial supervision as well as a pro-active 
approach  to  systemic  financial  stability  policy.  These  have  been  addressing,  inter  alia,  the 
identified  issues  of  insufficient  cooperation  and  limited  communication  between  different 
divisions  and  sections,  an  unduly  hierarchical  structure  and  deference  to  authority  and  a 
reluctance to carry decisions to conclusions and effective action. 
There  have  been  significant  changes  in  the  policy  approach.  For  example,  banking  is  no 
longer de facto exempt from enforcement actions as it was in practice before 2008: banks 
now  know  that  regulatory  breaches  leave  them  open  to  penalties.  Thanks  to  the  new 
legislation the Central Bank’s focus is no longer blurred by the potentially conflicting objective 
of  developing  the  financial  services  industry.  Substantial  expansion  of  staff  on  supervision 
and regulation (responding not only to objective assessment against comparators that more 
staffing  was  needed  but  also  to  public  demand  that  underachievement  could  not  be 
1   At the time of the report, only a broad indication of  the potential fiscal costs could be attempted, given the 
unprecedented scale of troubled loans and the fact that so few had yet been worked through (only a handful of 
NAMA’s  loan  purchases  had  been  priced),  and  other  complexities.  Even  now  a  precise  estimate  is  not  yet 
possible: current valuations of the State’s banking shares suggesting a figure for the net long-term fiscal costs 
of bank recapitalisation of the order of 22 per cent of 2008 GDP may be compared to the “in excess of 15 per 
cent” mentioned in the report. (The latest figure is still within the maximum of the range that I conjectured at an 
Oireachtas Committee hearing in the summer of 2009, before I became Governor). 
2 
BIS central bankers’ speeches
  tolerated).  This  included  injecting  new  energy  and  a  fresh  approach  by  opening  up  the 
numerous senior appointments that needed to be made to candidates outside of the Bank. 
I will not elaborate here on the additional powers which have been sought by the Bank and 
granted  by  the  Oireachtas  on  various  regulatory  and  resolution  issues.  As  far  as  bank 
supervision is concerned, the EU Single Supervisory Mechanism SSM has (since November 
2014)  taken  over  much  of  the  decision-making,  while  implementation  remains  primarily  a 
locally-managed task. 
There are improved decision making processes in regulation (separation of policy and risk, 
and  enforcement  functions  from  supervision;  significant  strengthening  of  the  legal  division; 
emphasis on better working interaction between the macro and micro prudential staff). There 
is an extensive and continuing programme of cultural renewal engaging all staff and using 
many  tools  (clearer  definition  of  mission;  performance  management;  all-staff  meetings; 
monthly  cascade  briefings;  investment  in  IT  systems;  leadership  training  etc.)  in  order  to 
ensure  a  more  effective  working  environment  (more  conducive  to,  among  other  things, 
constructive challenge). 
Current plans involve even greater use of on-site inspection of banks, as well as a thoroughly 
overhauled  organisational  structure  to  further  decentralise  decision-making,  cooperative 
working and career progression. 
No regulatory system can or even should attempt  to eliminate all possibility of failure, and 
regulation  and  supervision  must  be  able  to  change  with  a  constantly  changing  financial 
industry. But I think the more assertive and risk-based system of prudential supervision that 
we  now  have  in  place  has  struck  the  right  balance  and  will  help  ensure  that  the  banking 
system  helps  the  economic  performance  of  Ireland,  rather  than  causing  the  economic 
destruction which we have all been seeking to repair and rebuild. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
