  R Gandhi: Financial frauds – prevention: a question of knowing 
somebody 
Speech by Mr R Gandhi, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the “2nd National 
Conference  on  Financial  Frauds  Risks  &  Preventions”,  organized  by  the  Associated 
Chambers of Commerce and Industry of India (ASSOCHAM), New Delhi, 26 June 2015. 
 Assistance provided by Ms N. Mohana is gratefully acknowledged. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, it’s a great pleasure for me to be amidst all of you this morning to 
inaugurate the conference on Financial Frauds – Risks and prevention. 
“There are three things in the world that deserve no mercy – hypocrisy, fraud, and 
Introduction 
2. 
tyranny” – Frederick William Robertson. 
There is no universally accepted definition for the term “fraud”. The laws in many countries 
do not define fraud; it actually needs no definition; it is as old as falsehood and as versatile 
as  human  ingenuity.  Fraud  is  a  generic  term  embracing  all  the  multifarious  means  which 
human ingenuity can devise and are resorted to by one individual to gain an advantage over 
another by false suggestions or by suppression of the truth. 
Section 25 of the Indian Penal Code (IPC) states that a “person is said to do a thing 
3. 
fraudulently if he does that thing with intent to defraud but not otherwise.” IPC also does not 
specifically  define  what  a  fraud  is;  but  we  all  know  that  certain  offences  like  cheating, 
concealment,  forgery,  counterfeiting,  mis-appropriation,  breach  of  trust  and  falsification  of 
accounts involve elements of fraud in their commission. 
4. 
Can frauds be wished away? Obviously, we can’t wish them away. We can only be 
consciously on our vigil to ward off frauds and initiate exemplary action on the perpetrators of 
fraud which will serve as deterrents to intending fraudsters. 
5. 
Banks and financial institutions are easy prey to fraudsters. As long as banks and 
financial institutions handle huge sums of money as financial intermediaries they will always 
be the target of ingenious fraudsters trying to relieve them of the money. But our endeavour, 
as I just mentioned, has to be to prevent it, detect it at the earliest if it happens and minimise 
its negative fallout. This entails a constant state of vigil against frauds and emerging fraud 
risks in the economy. 
Type of frauds 
6. 
The  bank  frauds  are  primarily  deposit  related,  advances  related  and  services 
related. Of these, the deposit related frauds which used to be big in number though not in 
size,  have  been  on  the  wane,  thanks  to  the  improvements  in  cheque  and  payment 
processing, usage of technology and tightening the provisions of the Negotiable Instruments 
Act.  The  advances  related  frauds  continue  to  be  the  major  concern  for  banks,  especially 
because of their size and far reaching implications to their financial soundness and integrity. 
A special variety of frauds, which are increasing in number and in terms of speed, are the 
cyber frauds. Yet another special type relates to trade or documentary credit related, special 
because of cross border implications. 
7. 
When  we  discuss  about  bank  frauds,  we  will  not  discuss  about  bank  frauds 
committed  by  third  parties  which  can  suitably  be  classified  as  thefts.  These  types  include 
cyber frauds committed by tricksters, or techsters. For our discussions, we will include bank 
frauds committed by some connected parties like the depositors, the borrowers, the users of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
bank services or by their own staff, their outsourced agencies, their vendors, their agents like 
assayers, valuers, auditors, etc. 
Root cause of financial frauds 
8. 
Financial  frauds,  more  specifically  the  advances  related  frauds,  occur  because  of 
breach of contract and trust. It could be because of the pledged or mortgaged assets are 
compromised or divested off; or the documents are forged; or the funds availed are diverted 
or  siphoned  off;  or  the  documentary  credits  like  the  letters  of  credit  or  guarantees  are 
misused, etc. 
9. 
The root cause of financial frauds can be reduced to one single phenomenon. It is 
failure  to  Know  Its  Somebody  –  i.e.  failure  to  Know  Its  Customer,  or  failure  to  Know  Its 
Employee, or failure to Know Its Partner / Vendor. 
Bankers’ response to frauds 
10. 
What the fraudsters do not understand is the systemic response of banks when they 
have  been  tricked  into facing  the  consequences  of frauds. The  bankers’  reactions  include 
withdrawal  from  lending,  being  risk  averse,  losing  confidence  in  documentary  credit, 
excessive collateralisation or documentation, demands on personal guarantees, collapse of 
need based lending systems like MPBF, Tandon and Chore Committee norms, etc. These 
are in addition to the bankers’ efforts to recoup the losses through higher interest rates and 
charges. 
The three KY principles 
11. 
When  banks  are  faced  with  frauds,  their  financials  are  expected  to  bear  the 
immediate impact. Because of this implication, and if uncontrolled it can cause systemic risk, 
the regulators usually have an extra oversight on banks about frauds. More often than not, 
the  frauds  lead  to  tighter  regulations.  These  aim  towards  bringing  in  both  corrective  and 
preventive measures. As I said earlier, if a bank has to prevent fraud, it must follow the three 
KY Principles. It must Know its Customer; it must Know its Employee and it must Know its 
Partner i.e. Know Your Customer, Know Your Employee and Know Your Partner, the Three 
KYs. 
The first KY – Know Your Customer (KYC) 
12. 
When one thinks of KYC norms frequently the emphasis is on the different type of 
documents to be obtained from an account holder which will establish that KYC norms have 
been  followed.  In  a  scenario  where  many  frauds  are  committed  by  submitting  forged  and 
fabricated documents, such an emphasis is too narrow and will result in us missing the wood 
for the trees. 
13. 
A  bank,  apart  from  obtaining  the  relevant  documents,  should  make  an  effort  to 
“know  the  customer”  in the real  sense  –  his  background,  his  stated  activities  /  profession, 
what his signature style of operation is or digital foot print is, in case of online transactions, 
etc. A robust KYC system envisages such an understanding. This observation of his pattern 
of  transactions  will  let  the  bank  draw  up  a  customer  profile.  Once  this  is  established  any 
exception  to  the  norms  can  raise  a  red  flag  and  tracked  or  confirmed  with  the  customer. 
Banks  should  become  adept  in  pattern  recognition  and  do  discreet  investigations  on  the 
suppliers  /  buyers  to check  if  they  are  in  the same  line  of  business  or are  bogus  entities. 
Such timely checks help identify frauds at an early stage. 
14. 
Banks need to invest in data analytics and also intelligence gathering to make fraud 
detection as near to real time as possible. Data analytics solutions can crunch huge data and 
give us the patterns, that too in a visual, easily understandable format. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
15. 
Another  strong  trend  in  the  future  would  be  the  profiling  of  the  customer  across 
different channels or medium – online, offline, corporate loans, personal loans, etc. At least 
in respect of customers perceived to be of high risk, very large advance accounts, we need 
to use Big data for analysing information from disparate sources e.g. data available with the 
banks, the  social  network  activities,  identifying  relationships  that  are  usually  invisible.  This 
way we may be able to analyse transactions and be able to predict the likelihood of a fraud 
happening. 
16. 
On a bank level, each bank should segment its customers based on their risk profile 
and transaction patterns and develop appropriate response systems for exceptional patterns 
noticed and fortify systemic level controls. 
17. 
But one word of caution though. I don’t think banks can sit back after investing in a 
software  or  establishing  a  fraud  risk  management  system.  The  business  landscape  is 
generally  dynamic  and  with  ingenious  fraudsters  we  are  dealing  with  people  who  always 
change their strategies to be one step ahead of bankers and regulators and the police. As 
such, when it comes to fraud risk management, a bank has to be like a referee in a football 
game, always moving with the players and be alive to changes in the game and take action. 
The second KY – Know Your Employee (KYE) 
18. 
Several frauds are insider jobs; or at least with the abetment of insiders. Bankers 
are generally people of integrity. The selection process is highly sensitized in this respect. 
Still, some bad apples do escape or become rotten. Banks have to take extra care to have 
continuous vigil on their staff. Background checking for antecedents, checks and balances, 
periodic  rotations,  vigilance  assessments,  internal  audits,  etc.  techniques  will  have  to  be 
employed to know the employees better and as preventive measures. 
The third KY – Know Your Partner 
19. 
Modern  day  banking  necessitates  that  a  bank  join  hands  with  partners,  agents, 
vendors.  Outsourcing  peripheral  and  several  operational  activities  involves  deploying  and 
trusting somebody else’s employees. Varied activities as diverse as cash logistics to IT and 
data management are being entrusted to third parties. Banking Correspondents and Banking 
Facilitators are emerging as another set of persons closely associated with a bank. If frauds 
are to be prevented effectively, banks have to know their partners. 
Regulatory response 
20. 
The Reserve Bank has been issuing instructions from time to time on the preventive 
and  corrective  measures  that  banks  should  adopt.  One  set  of  instructions  relate  to 
information  sharing.  The  importance  that  the  Reserve  Bank  had  always  attached  to  is 
information  sharing  among  banks,  which  has  been  again  reinforced  and  made  an  integral 
part of the monitoring of potential frauds. 
To  facilitate  this,  banks  have  been  advised  to  assign  Unique  Customer  Identity 
21. 
Numbers (UCIN). Database on credit information, centralized registry for recording security 
interests  Central  Registry  of  Securitisation,  Asset  Reconstruction  and  Security  Interest 
(CERSAI),  centralized  know  your  customer  registry,  Central  Repository  of  Information  on 
Large Credits (CRILC), etc have been established or being built to share information among 
the bankers. A Central Fraud Registry is also being planned. 
22. 
Another  initiative  in  this  respect  is  the  List  of  Wilful  Defaulters.  Fraudsters  are 
included  in  this  list.  With  this  List  in  hand,  the  banks  get  not  only  cautioned  about  the 
fraudsters, they can also bring in certain deterrent action against them. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  The new framework to deal with frauds 
23. 
Recently, we had constituted an Internal Working Group that went into the causes 
for  delays  in  detecting frauds, suggest  ways  to  compress  the  time  between  occurrence of 
fraud and detection and also to remove any other impediments that may prevent deterrent 
actions  taking  place.  The  Group  after  wide  consultations  had  recommended  for  a  new 
framework to deal with frauds. The study revealed that there were a lot of delays in detecting 
a  fraud  and  in  quite  a  few  large  value  frauds,  the  time  taken  was  more  than  five  years. 
Further  to  this  initial  delay,  in  case  it  was  a  consortium  or  multiple  banking  facility,  the 
divergent opinion among the financing bankers on whether an account was a fraud or not 
also  contributed  to  further  delays.  Any  delay  in  detection  of  fraud  entails  further  delays  in 
filing  of  complaints  with  law  enforcement  agencies  and  other  consequent  actions.  Such 
delays, it is needless to add, enable a fraudster to enjoy banking facilities with impunity and 
ensnare more bankers and other innocent individuals in his net. The money trail gets cold 
and  prospects  of  recovery  becomes  dim  as  each  day  passes.  This  scenario  calls  for  a 
focussed response from the regulators, bankers and other stakeholders. 
24. 
The best way to prevent frauds especially, loan frauds is to tone up the appraisal 
process.  A  good  appraisal  can  weed  out  many  undesirable  or  flawed  proposals  that  may 
eventually turn out to be fraud. A good appraisal does not mean only analysing the financial 
statements  and  projections  submitted  by  the  potential  borrowers.  It  requires  going  beyond 
the given and independently gathering intelligence on the potential borrower. This requires 
accessing  public  databases,  news  reports  on  any  adverse  governmental  action  like  raids, 
etc. A good appraisal should also take into account problems brewing in the industry, in the 
promoters’ group, etc. which may show the direction in which a company’s operations will go 
and  whether  there  is  inherent  resilience  in  the  promoters  and  the  project  to  face  rough 
weather and come out unscathed. 
25. 
While diligent appraisal is a major factor in eliminating dodgy borrowers, subsequent 
monitoring also plays a vital role in identifying potential frauds. In many cases we find that 
the  discovery  that  stocks  have  been  clandestinely  sold,  diversion  to  related  parties  and 
siphoning  off  of  funds  have  taken  place  and  documents  provided  had  been  fabricated,  is 
made after the account shows stress and becomes an NPA. Any action taken at that stage is 
as useful as locking the proverbial stable doors after the horse has bolted. 
26. 
It is obvious that if anyone wants to identify potential frauds before they happen, it is 
possible only by continuous monitoring. We have therefore prescribed stage wise actions in 
the life cycle of a loan account and also prescribed actions that a bank may take in each 
stage to safeguard its interest. A system of identifying Red Flagged Accounts based on Early 
Warning Signals has been put in place. A red flagged account is one where a suspicion of 
fraudulent activity is thrown up by the presence of one or more Early Warning signals. The 
presence of these signals should trigger a detailed investigation into the RFA. 
27. 
As one of the major problems in fraud risk management was time delays in dealing 
with a fraud, we have prescribed time limits within which certain actions like investigating for 
fraud should be completed and a decision on whether an account is indeed a fraud or not is 
made. Similarly the delays and divergent stands taken by banks in a consortium or multiple 
banking  arrangements  have  also  been  tackled  by  spelling  out  time  lines  for  actions  like 
informing other banks of a Red Flagged Account, commissioning a forensic audit and arriving 
at  a  consensus/majority  decisions,  etc.  If  frauds  have  to  be  minimised  it  is  not  enough  to 
tighten the actions incumbent on banks alone. In preventing frauds a major part is played by 
the deterrent actions and punishments that are meted out to the fraudsters. Towards this end 
henceforth the fraudster borrowers will not be able to avail bank finance for five years after 
full repayment of the dues. This is of course in addition to the criminal complaints to be filed 
with police or CBI. This is expected to build in a disincentive for any borrower to consider 
committing a fraud on banks. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
28. 
As I mentioned earlier, containing frauds means focussed action by all stakeholders, 
not leaving any flank uncovered. One of the flanks was the criminal investigations done by 
law enforcement agencies and bringing to book fraudsters soon after a fraud is committed. 
To facilitate this and smoothen the process of commencing the investigations the Reserve 
Bank  has  been  working  with  the  Ministry  of  Finance  and  coordinated  actions  have  been 
initiated. 
Fraud prevention 
29. 
I have dwelt on loan frauds at length as they form a major portion of frauds reported 
by banks. However the aspects of continuous monitoring and timely action on the basis of 
any early warning signals apply equally well to other types of fraud like deposit frauds, cyber 
fraud, etc. 
30. 
It is here that I am sure that adhering to the KYC norms and real time transaction 
monitoring, transaction analysis, centralized databases, etc. rigours will come in handy for 
banks. 
Fraud risk and governance 
31. 
It is when we think of the dynamic nature of frauds’ landscape that we need to pay 
attention to certain systems and enduring values in a bank. Without a strong system guiding 
the anti-fraud initiatives of a bank, the responses to quick changing fraud risks may end up 
being knee jerk reactions than the flexible and appropriate measures that are called for. This 
requires a look at the corporate governance in banks and board level ownership of the anti-
fraud initiatives. 
32. 
The Board of a bank should be proactive in understanding the fraud risks facing the 
bank  and  also  put  in  place  a  robust  anti-fraud  machinery.  They  should  have  a  deep 
understanding  of  the  institution’s  strengths  and  weaknesses  and  be  able  to  steer  the 
institution in the right direction. For this they need to retain their common sense in the face of 
an information overload. As a famous saying goes, you can find out if a man is clever by his 
answers, but you can find out if a man is wise by his questions (Naguib Mahfouz). As another 
saying  goes,  the  wise  man  doesn’t  give  the  right  answers,  he  poses  the  right  questions 
(Claude Levi-Strauss). 
33. 
The Board needs to ask the right questions. They need to assess the robustness of 
the  internal  controls,  with  each  new  threat  detected  and  be  in  a  position  to  get  the  data 
analysed in a holistic fashion. 
34. 
Our recent initiatives in separation of the post of Chairman and Managing Director in 
banks is also aimed at giving the much needed breadth of vision to the Chairman without 
being harried by the day to day running of a huge organisation. 
35. 
The Board needs to show the way by enunciating the ethical values of the bank and 
by  exemplary  actions  when  frauds  and  insider  collusions  are  detected.  Another  way  to 
empower the employees is to put in place a whistle blower policy and having a standard and 
impartial  procedure  to  deal  with  such  complaints.  That  the  bank  will  deal  firmly  and 
consistently  with  any  fraud  and  employees  can  without  fear  escalate  their  concerns  and 
insights  on  potential  frauds  to  the  Top  Management  will  send  out  a  strong  message  and 
convince each employee to own the anti-fraud initiative of the bank. It will not be the preserve 
of the Board, the chief executive officer or the fraud monitoring department of a bank alone. 
Conclusion 
36. 
To  conclude,  let  me  say  that  the  fraud  preventing  and  corrective  measures  and 
principles are not confined only to the Boards of banks. As the members of ASSOCHAM can 
readily  empathise,  these  are  needed  in  all  the  enterprises. The  ethical  values  in  business 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  
 
serve  as  beacons  for  businesses;  though  buffeted  by  economic  downturns,  and  by  the 
pressures to be profitable, the ethical values  will dictate the enterprises avoid the perilous 
temptations  of  the fraud  triangle  –  that  of  pressures,  opportunities (gaps  in  systems )  and 
rationalisation. 
37. 
Financial Frauds and wish the conference all success. 
38. 
I  thank  ASSOCHAM  for  giving  me  the  opportunity  to  share  my  perspectives  on 
Thank you very much for your patient attention. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
