  Erkki Liikanen: Major structural change in the Finnish economy 
Speech  by  Mr  Erkki  Liikanen, Governor  of the Bank  of  Finland, at the 70th  anniversary of 
Oras (a Finnish company), Helsinki, 7 May 2015. 
 1949s and 1950s 
After  the  Second  World  War  the  Finnish  economy  and  society  was  in  front  of  huge 
challenges: 10 % of the population had to be relocated from Karelia which we lost to Soviet 
Union. The war reparations paid to Soviet Union in 1945–1951 accounted for 2–6 % of the 
GDP annually. In the first post-war years, the reparation costs constituted almost a quarter of 
all government expenditure. 
Still, Finns had a lot of confidence on the future. The most striking example was the baby 
boom. Over 100 000 babies were born in 1945–1949 and still in 1950 close to 100 000. The 
baby boom had a deep impact on the society and economy then and still has. The high birth 
rate  further  boosted  the  need  for  new  homes.  In  addition  to  residential  construction,  also 
public construction was booming, as new schools were needed. 
Encouraged by the favorable domestic demand conditions, new entrepreneurs entered the 
market  during  the  years  of  the  baby  boom.  Erkki  Paasikivi  was  one  of  them  and  in  1945 
founded Oras in Rauma. 
The Finnish economy was growing rapidly also in the 1950s .But the export-led growth was 
more volatile reflecting the international business cycle. The Korean boom in 1950 and 1951 
and recession in 1952 had a deep impact on the forest industry and its supply chain. 
Oras instead grew from 15 employees in 1950 to 20 in 1952. It was still a small company, but 
it  already  went  actively  abroad  and  especially  to  Germany  to  get  the  best  available 
technologies. 
A  fundamental  problem  for  Finland  at  the  time  was  the  choice  between  savings  and 
consumption.  To  improve  long-term  growth  prospects,  more  investment  was  needed.  The 
new investment were mainly funded by domestic savings by postponing consumption. Many 
Finnish  people  seemed  to  be  more  interested  to  improve  their  standard of  living  here  and 
now. 
Obviously  Erkki  Paasikivi  realized  early  the  importance  of  postponing  consumption.  The 
profits from their business was retained in the company and invested for growth. Investments 
in R&D were made and productivity was improved. 
1960s and 1970s 
Major structural changes in the Finnish economy accelerated in the 1960s and early 1970s. 
Finland  transformed  from  an  economy  dominated  by  agriculture  to  an  industrial  country. 
Migration from countryside to cities increased, as the baby boomers were entering the labor 
markets. 
As  many  as  30  000  new  homes  were  built  every  year  in  the  1960s.  A  third  of  them  were 
government subsidized ARAVA homes. People all over the country were building their own 
houses. Living standards of the Finnish people were growing rapidly. One sign were modern 
bath rooms and saunas with showers built in the new homes. 
My family was a typical case. I was in a primary school, when my parents built our own Arava 
house in Mikkeli in 1959. We got the running water and sewerage only in 1963. Then came 
the first products from Rauma into our home in Mikkeli. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  The world economy grew steadily in the 1960s and still in early 1970s. Finland had already 
joined the IMF and World Bank in 1948, and GATT in 1949. In 1961 Finland was accepted as 
an  associate  member  in  EFTA. Thus  Finland  was  able  to  guarantee  that  her  industry  had 
access to export markets equal with Sweden. So the Finnish economy was able to integrate 
with the Western world at the same time when the bilateral trade with the Soviet Union was 
important for our exports. 
Deeper  integration  to  international  trade  not  only  helped  Finnish  companies  to  enter  new 
export  markets  but  also  facilitated  technological  spillovers  from  abroad  to  help  Finland  in 
catching up the technology gap with the more advanced economies. 
International  competition  also  posed  new  challenges for  the  Finnish  economy,  as  low  cost 
countries  entered  the  markets  for  low-end  products.  Competing  only  or  mainly  with  price 
would  mean  decreasing  the  wages  and  the  living  standards.  The  other  option  was  to  use 
more  advanced  technologies  and  to  introduce  products  with  higher  quality.  This  was  the 
policy Oras followed. 
1980s 
In 1988, as a young minister of finance I visited Oras in Rauma for the first time. I learned a 
lot then and even more last weekend when I had a chance to read the new excellent history 
of the company written by Timo Herranen. Many investments were taking place at the time in 
Rauma and atmosphere was positive. 
Pekka Paasikivi was running the company during my visit. Jukka and Jari Paasikivi had also 
important responsibilities in the firm. What impressed me most in the factory? Actually, there 
were four things. 
The first was how complex a product a faucet actually was. And this was well before the ICT 
revolution. 
The second were the casual industrial relations in the factory at the time. There was a very 
low hierarchy. 
Thirdly,  I  remember,  how  big  a  role  was  given  to  design.  I  am  happy  to  hear  that  Jorma 
Vennola, the designer whose style we all know, is here with us. 
And fourthly, an important focus of Oras was on internationalization. 
All in all, it was also important to learn that a family company can grow fast when it is growth- 
and innovation -oriented and profits are retained in the company to finance growth. 
Generally,  the  sentiment  in  Finland  was  gradually  turning  more  international  in  the  1980s. 
The Finnish companies started to go international not only by establishing new sales units, 
also  by  making  acquisitions  to  enlarge  their  market  shares.  A  number  of  family-owned 
companies  followed  this  path.  Oras  was  among  them.  It  was  not  possible  to  maintain  the 
high  pace  of  growth  by  a  company  mainly  based  in  Finnish  markets.  They  had  to  seek 
growth from abroad. 
Also  the  drivers  for  economic  growth  were  changing  in  the  1980s:  According  to  professor 
Matti Pohjola, up until the mid-seventies investment of physical capital was the main driver of 
productivity and growth in Finland. It was only from the end of 1970s onwards, when human 
capital, like investments in education and R&D started to dominate. 
One of the trends of the late 1970s and the early 1980s was that the baby boomers were 
increasingly entering the top positions in business and politics. In Oras, the new generation 
was also taking the lead, as Pekka Paasikivi was nominated as the new CEO of ORAS in 
1979. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  1990s 
In summer 1990 I moved with my family moved to Brussels. When we arrived at Zaventem 
airport, we were welcome by Oras faucets in the toilets. Later I went to see a football match 
in Anderlecht. In the stadium we saw a small billboard of Oras: the red color and a faucet 
was easy to recognize. Later we understood that to win market shares was not as easy. 
When  we  left  Brussels  in  2004,  the  faucets  were  in  the  news.  The  cartel  case  on  faucet 
market  had  just  been  opened.  Oras  was  not  part  of  the  cartel  of  a  number  of  European 
companies. They were severely fined by the European Commission a few years later. 
The domestic depression of the 1990s was deep in Finland. High interest rates and the later 
devaluations of markka hit many companies and bankruptcies went up. The collapse of trade 
with the Soviet Union had its important role. GDP fell steeply and unemployment grew fast. 
Unlike  many  other  Finnish  companies,  Oras  had  not  taken  major  risks  in  its  foreign 
operations. So it avoided exchange rate losses but benefited from improved competitiveness. 
Trade to the Soviet Union had a smaller role for the company than for many others. So in the 
difficult conditions of depression, Oras did relatively well. 
The depression of the 1990 was deep but not very long. The pre-recession level of the GDP 
was reached in 1995, and the era of Nokia-Finland was about to start. Also the integration 
process  of  Finland  with  the  Western  Europe  was  completed,  when  Finland  joined  the 
European Union in 1995. 
The early 1990’s were a turning point not only to the ICT industry but to the Finnish economy 
as a whole. Up until the depression, the Finnish companies typically adapted more advanced 
technologies  from  abroad.  In  the  early  1990s,  this  catching  up  process,  was  largely 
completed. Thus, instead of catching up the technological frontier, the Finnish manufacturers 
themselves had to push that frontier forward. 
In its own industry, Oras has been pushing that frontier forward in the 1990s and at the same 
time it came more and more international. After acquisitions the personnel grew above one 
thousand. 
2000’s 
At the turn of the millennium, the growth paths of Oras and the Finnish population started to 
diverge. Whereas Finland started to grey, Oras continued to grow. And in a new way. 
Major  investments  were  made  in  public  companies  while  staying  firmly  as  an  industrial 
enterprise. Also brothers Pekka, Jukka and Jari Paasikivi reorganized their division of work. 
The  baby  boomers  started  to  reach  retirement  age  so  that  in  the  end  of  the  decade,  the 
working age population turned to gradual decline. 
New  history  of  Oras  gives  also  an  interesting  window  to  labor  relations  in  different  times. 
According  to  the  history  also  the  management says  that  it  has  made  some misjudgments. 
Early retirement schemes were not successful, because a lot of silent senior knowledge left 
the company. 
Relations with the unions have mostly worked but there have also been occasional tensions 
between the employer and the trade union. In the 1970’s, one reason was internal political 
struggle within the union. 
I am happy to see here Keijo Huunonen and Esko Sillanpää whom I learned to know well 
also  from  the  book.  Recently  the  company  has  responded  to  the  aging  problem  and  the 
looming shortage of work force with its own way. Oras has created a program that aims to 
support  the  work  ability  and  transfer  of  skills  from  senior  workers  to  younger  cohorts. 
Interesting and positive innovations, not always without problems. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  Thus, in 2014, the average retirement age in Oras was over 63 years, which is two  years 
more than the national average. 
The way forward? 
The global economic outlook is challenging. According to the IMF outlook from two  weeks 
ago, the recovery of the  world economy continues, but it is happening slowly. In the short 
term, the decline in the price of oil, along with the adjustment of exchange rates are boosting 
the recovery. 
The emerging economies grow slower this year than in the last year. Russia is falling and 
also  Brazil  has  difficulties.  China  continues  to  grow,  but  not  as  fast  as  before.  India  is 
keeping the pace, because it is benefiting from lower oil prices and its population growth. 
USA grows, in spite of recent signs of softness. Euro area is improving, too. The lower oil 
prices and ECB’s monetary policy, along with the exchange rate movements, support growth. 
Also  fiscal  consolidation  has  proceeded  and  is  not  the  same  sort  of  drag  in  the  future  as 
before. 
The question today is: Will Finland be able to benefit from the recovery of euro area? 
We are facing four major challenges. 
1. The economic crisis has hit us hard, but it is was not the financial crisis. Our banks and 
financial markets have continued to function properly. Instead, our economy has entered a 
phase of major structural change, due to the recent fall in the share of the ICT sector and the 
decreasing consumption of certain important categories of paper. 
2. Finland has lost part of its competitiveness since 2007. Our unit labor costs have grown 
more than 10 % higher than those of our competitors. 
3. Retirement of baby boomers means that our labor force is shrinking 0.5 % a year for still 
one decade ahead. 
4. Due to the fall of the GDP, our public sector is bigger than our national economy can well 
finance in the medium and long term. 
And in addition to this, a geopolitical crisis has taken a toll of our growth. 
What can we do? What do we have to do? 
In June 2011 I invited with Timo Kalli, the chairman of the Parliamentary Supervisory Council 
two  businessmen  and  a  new  M.P.  who  was  a  former  businessman  to  Bank  of  Finland  to 
discuss the economic situation. One of the businessmen was Jari Paasikivi from Oras, who 
is having its 70th anniversary today and the new M.P. was Juha Sipilä, who forming a new 
government today. The agenda has developed but not fundamentally changed. 
We have three major tasks. 
1.  We  need  to  restore  cost  competitiveness  of  our  economy.  This  is  the  pre-condition  to 
create growth and jobs. Social partners. 
2. We need to make structural reforms to promote growth and improve possibilities to create 
jobs. Here the new government needs to move fast with decisions and their implementation. 
3. We need to consolidate our public finances. We cannot move a growing debt burden to 
our children and grand-children. 
Here we need a strong government and functioning relations between social partners. 
Today I want to congratulate Oras for its 70-year history. I want to extend my congratulations 
to all in the company, the employees, the management, and the owners. The success has 
required major efforts for a long time from all of them. Thank you! 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
