  Benoît Cœuré: Embarking on public sector asset purchases 
Speech by Mr Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
at  the  Second  International  Conference  on  Sovereign  Bond  Markets,  Frankfurt  am  Main, 
10 March 2015. 
 I  would  like  to  thank  Marie  Hoerova,  Peter  Hoffmann  and  Andreas  Moser  for  their  contribution  to  the  speech.  
I remain solely responsible for the opinions expressed herein. 
Summary 
On 9 March the Eurosystem launched its public sector purchase programme (PSPP). On that 
day the ECB and the national central banks of the euro area purchased €3.2 billon of public 
sector  bonds,  putting  the  programme  on  track  to  reach  a  total  of  €60  billion  in  March. 
Monetary  policy  is  implemented  in  normal  times  in  money  markets.  Stepping  into  bond 
markets  creates  challenges  and  might  have  unintended  consequences.  One  key  principle 
underlying the implementation of the PSPP is the minimisation of unintended consequences, 
which  can  be  ensured  by  obeying  the  concept  of  market  neutrality.  We  do  want  to  affect 
market prices but we will not suppress the price discovery mechanism. The Eurosystem will 
ensure a high degree of transparency around its interventions and will closely monitor their 
impact  on  market  liquidity  and  collateral  availability.  Some  market  reports  have  suggested 
that  we  may  not  be  able  to  buy  the  intended  amounts  of  government  bonds.  While  the 
effective supply of eligible securities is undoubtedly lower than the total amount outstanding, 
it will still be substantially higher than the amounts we intend to purchase. If this is the case, 
there will be a price at which we can buy the quantities needed to meet our monthly targets. 
In other words, we may face a scarcity of bonds, but we won’t face a shortage. And there are 
good  reasons  to  expect  that  scarcity  will  materialise  first  and  foremost  in  those  market 
segments with a higher duration, potentially helping to maximise the economic impact of our 
operations. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
It is a great pleasure for me to speak to you tonight. 
As  you  all  know,  the  Eurosystem  launched  its  public  sector  purchase  programme  (PSPP) 
yesterday, 9  March. On that day the ECB and the national central banks of the euro area 
purchased €3.2 billon of public sector bonds, putting the programme on track to reach a total 
of  €60  billion  of  public  and  private  sector  bonds  in  March,  as  intended  by  the  Governing 
Council.  The  PSPP  is  the  latest  of  a  suite  of  asset  purchase  programmes  (APP),  which 
include asset-backed securities (ABSPP) and covered bonds (CBPP3). 
The PSPP is a new programme for the euro area, but it can hardly be called a revolution in 
central banking. Central banks around the world have relied on large-scale asset purchase 
programmes to further stimulate the economy and fulfil their mandates after hitting the zero 
lower bound. Accordingly, when the Governing Council decided on 22 January to launch the 
PSPP, it agreed unanimously that it is a monetary policy tool in a legal sense, although views 
differed  on  the  timing  of  such  a  programme.  In  our  case,  the  ultimate  goal  of  these 
operations  is  to  bring  back  medium-term  inflation  in  the  euro  area  to  levels  close  to,  but 
below, 2%, in line with our price stability mandate. 
Monetary  policy  is  implemented  in  normal  times  in  money  markets  by  buying  and  selling 
short  dated  securities  or,  in  the  case  of  the  ECB,  by  lending  to  banks  against  adequate 
collateral. While the ultimate goal is the same, when the lower bound is reached the actual 
implementation  of  monetary  policy  also  has  to  take  place  in  bond  markets,  which  central 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  banks  in  normal times  only  affect  indirectly.  Stepping  into  this  new  domain  creates  certain 
challenges and might even have unintended consequences. These, however, should not be 
interpreted  as  constraining  the  effectiveness  of  monetary  policy.  But  they  do  provide 
guidelines and a framework for defining the operational features of the PSPP. And outlining 
these features is the topic of today’s speech. 
Transmission 
1. 
The PSPP is designed to strengthen the impact of our asset purchases already under way. 
Conceptually, large-scale asset purchases by a central bank may have an effect through a 
number of channels. 
First, large-scale security purchases mechanically reduce the supply of securities available in 
the secondary market, which results in higher prices and lower yields through the creation of 
scarcity.  Importantly,  this  effect  is  by  no  means  limited  to  the  individual  bonds  that  are 
purchased. Instead, the existence of “preferred-habitat investors” – agents with a preference 
for securities with a specific maturity – gives rise to “local” spillovers that also compresses 
the  yield  of  bonds  with  a  similar  maturity.1  In  addition,  asset  purchases  also  reduce  the 
overall  duration  risk  borne  by  the  market  as  securities  are  exchanged  into  central  bank 
reserves.  This  lowers  the  interest  rate  risk  borne  by  investors  and  accordingly  affects  the 
entire term structure, despite having a more pronounced effect on long-term bonds.2 Notice 
that these two effects just mentioned have different implications for the effectiveness of asset 
purchases – local versus global impacts – and therefore need to be taken into consideration 
when implementing the PSPP. 
Second, our asset purchases will also affect the prices of riskier securities. In particular, the 
compression  of  interest  rates  creates  incentives  for  investors  to  re-balance  their  portfolios 
away  from  riskless  securities.3  In  the  context  of  the  euro  area  economy,  which  is  largely 
bank-based, we would expect banks to shift their portfolios from bonds to riskier investments 
such as loans to firms and households. This would provide further stimulus to the economy, 
eventually helping us achieve our price stability mandate, and ex post, decreasing the overall 
level of risk in the economy. 
Finally,  our  intention  to  expand  the  central  bank  balance  sheet  until  end-September  2016 
also  constitutes  an  important  signal  of  our  expansionary  monetary  policy  stance  over  an 
extended  horizon.  In  this  sense,  the  PSPP  also  complements  our  forward  guidance  on 
interest  rates.  Forward  guidance  has  proved  very  effective  in  shielding  euro  area  financial 
conditions from global shocks. Thanks to PSPP, it now extends over a longer horizon. This 
effect may be further amplified by an increase in investor confidence, which in turn will further 
reduce heterogeneity across the euro area countries. 
                                                
1  
In  this  case,  the  idiosyncratic  behaviour  of  such  investors  influences  the  yield  of  a  particular  bond;  see 
Vayanos, D. and J. L. Vila, 2009, “A Preferred-Habitat Model of the Term Structure of Interest Rates,” NBER 
Working Paper No. 15487. For an empirical assessment of preferred habitat models in the case of US large-
scale asset purchases, see Carpenter, S., S. Demiralp, J. Ihrig and E. Klee, 2013, “Analyzing Federal Reserve 
Asset  Purchases:  From  whom  does  the  Fed  buy?”  Federal  Reserve  Board  Finance  and  Economics 
Discussion Series 2013-32. 
2  See Adrian, T. and H.S. Shin, 2010, “Liquidity and leverage,” Journal of Financial Intermediation 19, 418–437. 
Large-scale asset purchases can ease investors risk constraints, and thus lower the market price of risk; see 
Greenwood, R. and D. Vayanos, 2014, “Bond supply and excess bond returns,” Review of Financial Studies, 
forthcoming. 
3   For  an  empirical  assessment  of  this  transmission  channel  for  the  US  and  UK  purchase  programmes, 
respectively, see Carpenter, S., S. Demiralp, J. Ihrig and E. Klee, 2013, “Analyzing Federal Reserve Asset 
Purchases:  From  whom  does  the  Fed  buy?”  Federal  Reserve  Board  Finance  and  Economics  Discussion 
Series  2013-32,  and  Joyce,  M.A.S.,  Z.  Liu  and  I.  Tonks,  2014,  “Institutional  investor  portfolio  allocation, 
quantitative easing and the global financial crisis”, Bank of England Working Paper No. 510. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  It is important to stress that some of these mechanisms are already at work. Following the 
announcement  of  the  expanded  asset  purchase  programme  on  22  January,  we  saw  a 
decline in the forward interest rates across all maturities, as well as a decline in government 
and  corporate  debt  yields,  and  a  rise  in  equity  prices.  For  example,  10-  and  20-year 
government  debt  yields  declined  overnight  by  14  and  19  basis  points,  respectively,  in  the 
case of France, and by 17 and 32 basis points in the case of Spain.4 Note that a relatively 
more  pronounced  effect  on  longer-term  government  yields  suggests  that  the  duration 
channel is at work. Similarly, corporate bond yields (7–10 year maturity) declined by 10 basis 
points  in  case  of  AA-rated  bonds  and  by  13  basis  points  in  case  of  BBB-rated  bonds, 
showing  that  the  lower  risk-free  rate  and  the  portfolio  rebalancing  effect  were  already  at 
play.5 
Design and implementation 
2. 
Let me now turn to the implementation of the PSPP. 
What is the Eurosystem buying? 
The  spectrum  of  securities  covered  by  the  PSPP  includes  (i)  nominal  and  inflation-linked 
central  government  bonds,  and  (ii)  bonds  issued  by  recognised  agencies,  international 
organisations  and  multilateral  development  banks,  provided  they  are  located  in  the  euro 
area. Of these, only securities with a residual maturity ranging from two to 30 years will be 
eligible.  In  terms  of  overall  breakdown,  we  intend  to  allocate  88%  of  the  total  purchases 
conducted  under  the  PSPP  to  government  bonds  and  recognised  agencies,  and  12%  to 
securities issued by international organisations and multilateral development banks. An initial 
list  of  the  international  organisations  and  multilateral  development  banks  whose  securities 
are eligible for the PSPP has been published on the ECB’s website6. 
How is the Eurosystem buying? 
Purchases  are  to  be  split  across  eligible  euro  area  jurisdictions  according  to  the  ECB’s 
capital key, and within each jurisdiction we will purchase securities roughly according to the 
nominal  amount  outstanding.  To  preserve  normal  secondary  market  functioning,  our 
purchases  will  be  subject  to  a  security-specific  limit  of  25%  and  an  issuer-specific  limit  of 
33% in terms of nominal value. The issue share limit of 25% prevents the Eurosystem from 
forming  a  blocking  minority  in  the  event  of  a  debt  restructuring  involving  collective  action 
clauses. Moreover, we will apply a blackout period around the issuance of new securities on 
the primary market. 
In line with our regular monetary policy operations as well as ongoing purchase programmes, 
the  PSPP  will  be  coordinated  centrally  by  the  ECB,  but  implemented  in  a  decentralised 
fashion. To this end, the ECB will directly buy 8% of the total amount and limit its purchases 
to  government  bonds  and  agency  securities  across  all  eligible  jurisdictions.  The  remaining 
92%  will  be  purchased  by  national  central  banks,  and  follow  a  specialisation  scheme 
whereby each national central bank restricts its activity to domestic bonds issued by the local 
government and recognised agencies. Purchases will be allocated across issuers from the 
various euro area countries on the basis of the ECB’s capital key. 
In case the envisaged amounts to be purchased in a jurisdiction cannot be attained, national 
central  banks  will  conduct  substitute  purchases 
international 
organisations and multilateral development banks located in the euro area. These purchases 
issued  by 
in  bonds 
                                                
4  Cumulative change between the end-of-the-day value on 21 January and 23 January 2015. 
5  Cumulative change between the end-of-the-day value on 21 January and 23 January 2015. 
6  See http://www.ecb.europa.eu/mopo/liq/html/pspp.en.html. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  will  be  subsumed  under  the  12%  allocation  to  international  organisations  and  multilateral 
development banks, which will be purchased by some national central banks and be subject 
to loss sharing. 
Purchases of government bonds by national central banks will not be subject to loss sharing. 
As I recently said, we have taken into account the specificities of the euro area, meaning that 
we operate in an environment of decentralised national fiscal authorities, and the ECB has 
no mandate to engage in large-scale pooling of fiscal risks. 
I am sure you are well aware that a substantial fraction of the euro area securities market is 
currently  trading  at  prices  which  imply  a  negative  nominal  interest  rate.  The  German  yield 
curve, for instance, now trades at a negative yield almost out to the seven-year maturities. 
More than half of the outstanding stock of nominal German sovereign bonds with maturities 
between two and 30 years trades at a negative yield. However, we will still purchase such 
securities  as  long  as  their  yield  to  maturity  exceeds  the  rate  on  the  ECB’s  deposit  facility, 
which currently stands at -20 basis points. 
This decision has two implications. First, it provides a strong commitment by the Eurosystem 
to implement the PSPP in all eligible jurisdictions. Second, it curbs expectations about future 
government bond yields falling below the deposit facility rate, which could ultimately have a 
negative effect on banks’ incentives to sell government bonds. 
The transactions under the PSPP will be conducted via institutions eligible for participation in 
the Eurosystem’s regular monetary policy operations as well as other regular counterparties 
used by the Eurosystem for the investment of its euro-denominated investment portfolios. 
Will the Eurosystem be able to meet its quantitative targets? 
Some  market  reports  have  suggested  that  the  Eurosystem  may  not  be  able  to  buy  the 
intended amounts of government bonds in the market. Let me state firmly that at this point 
there are no signs of issues in respect of sourcing the bonds. There were similar concerns in 
other countries at the time they launched large-scale asset purchases and yet they had no 
problems meeting their quantitative targets. And as so often in economics, the question boils 
down to an issue of supply and demand, and whether there will be a market clearing price. 
The  concerns  can  be  justified  only  if  there  is  a  mismatch  between  the  effective  supply  of 
securities and the intended scale of our purchases. If that is the case, there will be no price 
that  can  clear  supply  and  demand,  and  this  would  prevent  us  from  buying  the  desired 
amounts. 
Concerns about the potential scarcity of bonds are based on three main factors. 
First, there are expectations that net issuance from euro area jurisdictions over the life of the 
programme will be modest. Indeed, the European Commission forecasts that the aggregate 
euro area public budget deficit will fall to -2.2% in 2015 and -1.9% in 2016. 
As  a  result,  the  net  issuance7  of  medium-  and  long-term  securities  by  the  euro  area  debt 
management  offices  (DMOs)  in  2015  is  expected  to  be  around  €200  billion.  Looking  at 
individual countries, a large majority will have a positive net issuance in 2015, but there are a 
few  countries,  e.g.  Germany,  where  net  issuance  is  expected  to  be  marginal  or  even 
negative. 
Note,  however,  that  the  average  weighted  price  of  bonds  for  the  two  to  30-year  maturity 
range is well above par, which should mitigate concerns about the reduction of net issuance 
to some extent, as the purchase target refers to settled (rather than nominal) amounts. 
                                                
7  Net issuance is defined as new debt minus redemptions. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Furthermore,  in  the  defined  maturity  range  of  two  to  30  years,  the  nominal  outstanding 
volumes are around €4.6 trillion for central government bonds, €277 billion for agencies and 
€400  billion  for  supranationals.  This  is  way  above  the  combined  target  amount  of  the 
purchases to be conducted under all our asset purchases programmes of €60 billion each 
month, at least until September 2016. 
The  discussion  therefore  reaches  a  totally  different  conclusion  depending  on  whether  one 
looks at net flows or at stocks, or to put it differently, whether the Eurosystem will face the 
marginal seller or the average seller in the market. And indeed, concerns expressed are not 
only about the overall supply of assets, but also about the size of the effective supply. 
In fact, some asset holders may not be willing to sell. This may happen because of external 
constraints linked to specific business models or regulations imposed on them. 
This  second  concern  result  from  the  assumption  that,  for  instance,  insurance  companies, 
pension  funds  or  banks  are  unwilling  to  sell  government  bonds  in  order  to  comply  with 
regulatory requirements. 
These concerns seem to be overrated, at least for banks. For several reasons. 
First,  when  banks  sell  a  bond  to  the  Eurosystem,  they  will  receive  central  bank  reserves, 
which  in  the  current  low  interest  rate  environment  can  be  viewed  by  banks  as  close 
substitutes for government bonds, and which count towards fulfilling e.g. the required liquidity 
ratios. Second, banks can realise a capital gain on the sale of their government bonds and, 
in doing so, bolster their capital position and therefore their capacity to extend loans. Third, 
irrespective  of  the  desirable  review  of  the  current  regulatory  framework  of  sovereign 
exposures8,  it  is  in  the  best  interest  of  banks  to  reduce  their  exposure  to  their  respective 
government, which should increase their willingness to sell.9  
Finally, the third factor that could reduce effective supply is the potential lack of attractive 
investment  alternatives  in  an  environment  of  compressed  credit  spreads  and  the  buy-and-
hold nature of much of the investment community. But note that, at least in the initial phases 
of the PSPP, international banks and asset managers are the most likely sellers of their euro 
area government bond holdings. And these investors are generally felt to have more flexible 
mandates. 
So, while the effective supply of eligible securities is undoubtedly lower than the total amount 
outstanding, I do believe that it will still be substantially higher than the amounts we intend to 
purchase. If this is the case, there will be a price at which we can buy the quantities needed 
to meet our monthly targets. In other words, we may face a scarcity of bonds, but we won’t 
face  a  shortage.  Scarcity  is  a  fact  and  not  a  problem  per  se.  Allocating  scarce  resources 
through  prices  is  the  way  our  economies  work.  And  in  the  light  of  the  factors  I  have  just 
listed, there may be good reasons to expect that scarcity will materialise first and foremost in 
those market segments with a higher duration, potentially helping to maximise the economic 
impact of our operations, as outlined in the section on transmission mechanism. 
Minimising the unintended consequences 
3. 
As outlined in the introduction, one key principle underlying the implementation of the PSPP 
is  the  minimisation  of  unintended  consequences.  This  can  be  ensured  by  obeying  the 
concept of market neutrality of our operations. 
                                                
8  See the “ESRB report on the regulatory treatment of sovereign exposures”, March 2015. 
9  Fitch  Ratings  (2014),  Protecting  Eurozone  banks  from  the  Sovereigns,  17  November.  See  also  Barwell, 
R. (2015),  “Two  birds  with  one  stone:  Sourcing  QE  bonds  and  solving  the  sovereign  bank  nexus”,  Der 
Querdenker, RBS Research, 27 February. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  By this  we do not imply that we do not want to have any impact on the market. Monetary 
policy  decisions  always  and  everywhere  have  an  impact  on  market  prices.  I  have  already 
mentioned the potential channels through which the programme might have an impact, and 
we  have  already  seen  a  substantial  decline  in  interest  rates  following  our  January 
announcement.  In  fact,  interest  rates  had  already  fallen  substantially  prior  to  the  January 
announcement, and previous experiences with QE suggest that they will continue to do so in 
the coming months.10  
The concept of market neutrality means that, while we do want to affect prices, we do not 
want to suppress the price discovery mechanism. We will operationalise this principle by 
ensuring  a  high  degree  of  transparency  around  our  interventions  and  by  closely 
monitoring their impact on liquidity and collateral availability. 
Transparency 
Transparency plays a crucial role in the successful implementation of the PSPP. It has been 
a  key  element  in  other  jurisdictions  where  large-scale  asset  purchases  have  been 
introduced, and it is likely to be even more important in the euro area. This is because we are 
facing the task of communicating our actions to market participants in 19 different countries 
with heterogeneous market structures and investor clienteles. In order to ensure a sufficient 
degree of transparency, we will publish the aggregate amount of securities purchased on a 
weekly basis. The residual maturity of securities held per jurisdiction will be communicated 
once a month. 
We  have  also  announced  that  within  each  jurisdiction  securities  will  be  purchased  in 
proportion to the total amount outstanding, which will be done with certain degree of flexibility 
to  accommodate  counterparty  offers  in  a  smooth  manner.  This  should  prevent  significant 
dislocations along the yield curves and other similar undesirable market distortions. It also 
creates  a  certain,  albeit  imperfect,  degree  of  predictability  for  market  participants,  which 
enables  them  to  accumulate  inventories  in  order  to  satisfy  our  demand.  Finally,  the 
Eurosystem’s presence in the market will not be erratic, but smooth and consistent over time, 
which should further preserve orderly markets and mitigate excessive short-run volatility. 
Market liquidity 
Another  important  issue  concerning  the  successful  implementation  of  the  PSPP  is  market 
liquidity. 
Currently,  the  market  for  euro  area  government  debt  constitutes  one  of  the  most  liquid 
segments of global financial markets, and investors can transact large amounts of securities 
without  moving  market  prices  to  a  significant  degree.  The  Eurosystem  is  committed  to 
preserving  this  situation  by  ensuring  that  the  transactions  underlying  the  PSPP  are 
conducted in a way that minimises any negative side effects on market functioning. 
In fact, a smooth and efficient execution will guarantee the programme’s efficiency because 
liquidity  is  strongly  correlated  across  markets,  especially  those  for  assets  with  similar 
characteristics.11 
Indeed, our experience shows that the negative impact of non-standard measures, provided 
they are properly designed, on market liquidity is at most temporary. 
                                                
10  See  D’Amico,  S.  and  T.  King,  “Flow  and  stock  effects  of  large-scale  treasury  purchases:  Evidence  on  the 
importance of local supply,” 2013, Journal of Financial Economics 108, 425-448, and Krishnamurthy, A. and 
A.  Vissing-Jorgensen,  “The  Effects  of  Quantitative  Easing on  Interest  Rates:  Channels and  Implications  for 
Policy,” 2011, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Fall 2011, 215-265, among others. 
11  See  Cespa,  G.  and  T.  Foucault,  “Illiquidity  Contagion  and  Liquidity  Crashes,”  2014,  Review  of  Financial 
Studies 27, 1615–1660. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  A case in point is the ECB’s fixed rate full allotment policy, introduced end of 2008, which 
was  considered  by  certain  market  observers  as  having  a  persistent  negative  impact  on 
money market activity. 
Recent  data,  however,  indicates  that  the  euro  money  markets  are  in  a  healing  phase12. 
Aggregate  turnover  for  all  instruments  in  the  euro  money  market  expanded  by  4%  to 
€79 trillion  in  the  second  quarter  of  2014  alone  compared  with  the  second  quarter  of  the 
2013, following an increase in turnover by 6% for the whole of 2013. The gradual recovery in 
money  market  activity  and  the  overall  improvement  in  market  functioning  in  2013  were 
therefore confirmed in 2014. 
Accordingly, the preservation of market liquidity can be considered as a prerequisite for the 
proper working of the portfolio rebalancing channel that is at the heart of our asset purchase 
programmes.  To  this  end,  we  will  take  particular  care  to  avoid  exacerbating  any  existing 
market  frictions.  More  specifically,  we  will  try  to  avoid,  to  the  extent  possible,  purchasing 
specific  securities  such  as  current  cheapest-to-deliver  bonds  underlying  futures  contracts, 
securities commanding “special” rates in the repo market as a sign of temporary scarcity, and 
other assets displaying significant liquidity shortages. 
The  practical  experiences  from  similar  purchase  programmes  conducted  by  other  central 
banks, such as the Federal Reserve, the Bank of England and the Bank of Japan, indicate 
that  such  steps  are  very  effective  in  safeguarding  a  well-functioning  market.  This  is  also 
corroborated by recent academic research.13 
Collateral availability: securities lending 
Still, purchases of securities by a central bank following a buy-and-hold strategy are likely to 
reduce the effective supply of purchased securities available to market participants. 
In the case of the PSPP, securities purchased by the Eurosystem may be valued by market 
participants  not  only  for  their  coupons  but  also  for  collateral  services  they  provide.  For 
instance,  one  of  the  papers  presented  today  at  the  conference  shows  how  purchases  of 
government bonds under the Securities Market Programme increased the scarcity of certain 
Italian  government  bonds  in  2011  and  2012,  with  the  impact  being  more  pronounced  for 
securities  that  were  already  in  high  demand.14  Demand  for  collateral  securities  may  be 
further  amplified  by  incoming  regulation,  for  example  by  the  moving  of  over-the-counter 
derivatives trading towards central counterparties.15 
Concerns regarding reduced availability of collateral are evident in specific segments of the 
repo  market.  For  example,  term repo  in  German  collateral  for maturities  longer  than  three 
months has traded below the deposit facility recently, at around -25 bps. That said, let me 
emphasise once again that there is a difference between scarcity and shortage. The problem 
would  be  a  shortage  of  collateral  and/or  an  impaired  price  mechanism.  To  avoid  any 
shortage  of  assets  that  are  used  as  collateral,  especially  at  the  high  end  of  the  credit 
spectrum, PSPP securities (as well as CBPP3 and SMP securities) will be made available to 
the  market  through  securities  lending.  This  will  enable  securities  purchased  by  the 
Eurosystem to be used in private transactions and relieve frictions in the functioning of the 
market, such as failed repo deliveries, which may arise from our purchases. 
                                                
12  See “European Central Bank: Euro Money Market Survey, October 2014”. 
13  See Song, Z. and H. Zhu, “QE Auctions of Treasury bonds,” 2014, Finance and Economics Discussion Series, 
Federal Reserve Board. 
14  See Corradin, S. and A. Maddaloni, “The Importance of Being Special: Repo Markets During the Crisis,” 2015, 
working paper. 
15  See Committee on the Global Financial System (2013), “Asset encumbrance, financial reform and the demand 
for collateral assets”, Publications No 49, May. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  Other  central  banks  that  have  conducted  large-scale  asset  purchases  instituted  such 
securities lending facilities. For example, the Bank of England made their entire gilt holdings 
available to the UK’s Debt Management Office, which then lent them to market participants 
on  demand.  A  similar  arrangement  may  be  more  challenging  to  implement  for  the 
Eurosystem as there are 19 different jurisdictions to deal with and 19 DMOs. Being mindful of 
the  institutional  set-up  of  the  euro  area,  we  will  implement  securities  lending  in  a 
decentralised fashion. 
Securities  lending  will  not  only  be  important  to  ensure  collateral  availability  but  also  for 
market  liquidity  in  general.  The  ability  to  borrow  securities  from  the  Eurosystem  will  allow 
intermediaries  to  continue  quoting  competitive  prices,  as  it  gives  them  more  time  to 
subsequently  cover  their  open  positions  in  the  market.  By  supporting  market  liquidity, 
securities  lending  will  be  an  essential  element  for  the  success  of  our  asset  purchase 
programmes. 
Thank you very much for your attention. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
