  Yves Mersch: Swedbank Economic Outlook Seminar 
Speech by Mr Yves Mersch, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
at the Swedbank Economic Outlook Seminar, Stockholm, 18 May 2015. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
There  is  an  old  saying  that  “with  money,  Latin  and  a  good  horse,  you  can  get  through  all 
Europe”.  These  days  a  good  command  of  Latin  does  not  help  you  much  outside  of  the 
Vatican City. Most of us prefer to travel by plane or train. But at least in the 19 countries of 
the euro area, the money a citizen holds in his or her pocket crosses all national borders. 
This  only  remains  the  case,  however,  if  that  money  keeps  its  value  –  which  is  our 
responsibility at the ECB. So I would like this morning to talk about the measures we have 
taken  to  meet  that  responsibility  over  the  last  year,  and  to  give  you  my  view  on  how  we 
should address the risks they can entail. 
Responding to low inflation 
From December 2011 onwards inflation in the euro area began a sustained downward drift, 
reaching its trough in January 2015. Responding to this situation would be challenging for 
monetary  policy  in  any  circumstances,  but  was  made  especially  difficult  because  nominal 
interest rates were already very low. 
In  this  context  we  have  taken  what,  at  face  value,  may  appear  to  be  a  series  of  very 
unconventional  measures  –  negative  deposit  rates,  ABS  purchases,  sovereign  bond 
purchases, to name but a few. But it is important to underscore that the objective of these 
measures  remains  thoroughly  conventional:  to  secure  medium-term  price  stability.  And  in 
actual fact they fit together as a coherent package that reinforces our traditional monetary 
policy strategy of steering inflation developments largely through the bank lending channel. 
This package has three parts. 
The first part has been measures to increase the influence of our interest rate policy over 
the shape of the yield curve – especially the longer-term maturities that have the strongest 
link to loan pricing in the real economy. 
So, as the inflation outlook has deteriorated we have both reduced our main refinancing rate 
to the lower bound and introduced measures to augment the impact of those very low short-
term rates on longer-term rates. This has included steering downwards expectations about 
the expected path of short-term rates; and introducing a negative interest rate on our deposit 
facility,  which  has  helped  further  flatten  the  yield  curve.  Overall  this  has  measurably 
increased the traction of our interest rate policy on relevant market rates. 
Yet it is one thing for the central bank to reduce markets rate at maturities that are pertinent 
to loan pricing; it is another for financial intermediaries to reflect those lower rates in the price 
and availability of credit for firms and households. As late as the middle of last year, viable 
firms  were  still  struggling  to  access  finance  in  parts  of  the  euro  area.  The  percentage  of 
financially constrained but viable SMEs – defined as those with positive turnover in the last 
six months seeking a bank loan – was estimated to have varied from around 1% in Germany 
and Austria to a quarter of the SME population in Spain and as much as a third in Portugal. 
The second part of our response has therefore been to improve the transmission of loose 
market financing conditions into the actual borrowing conditions of firms and households. 
In  this  context,  between  June  and  September  last  year  we  launched  our  credit  easing 
package  to  strengthen  banks’  incentives  to  improve  the  availability  and  lower  the  price  of 
credit. In parallel, we gave our full technical and operational support to the Comprehensive 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
  
 
Assessment  of  bank  balance  sheets  –  the  supervisory  exercise  aimed  at  forcing  banks  to 
acknowledge non-performing exposures and to raise provisions and capital where needed. 
This exercise was powerful in the sense that it accelerated what had until that point been a 
slow process of balance sheet repair in the euro area; banks strengthened their capital by 
over €200 billion in advance of the outcome. In this way the new monetary policy impulse 
coming from our credit easing package coincided with a banking sector in a stronger position 
to transmit it. 
But  as  these  measures  were  coming  into  effect  the  euro  area  was  hit,  like  all  advanced 
economies, with a further downward shock to inflation emanating from the steep fall in global 
oil prices. In normal times my preference would naturally have been to look through such a 
development  provided  that  it  did  not  feed  into  medium-term  expectations.  Indeed,  we  had 
seen inflation fall into negative territory driven by oil prices in 2009, and we had not reacted 
because we were confident that it would be transitory. The conditions we faced in January 
this year, however, gave us no such comfort. 
Our analysis showed that the persistence of low inflation across a range of statistical metrics 
was higher than in 2009. Measures of core inflation were also less sticky. But for me what 
was  decisive  was  the  loosening  in  the  anchoring  of  inflation  expectations  we  were 
witnessing,  even  at  maturities  and  at  horizons  that  we  would  normally  expect  to  be  more 
resilient to short-term inflation dynamics. This was in stark contrast to 2009 where inflation 
expectations hardly moved, even at the short end. 
The public sector purchase programme 
It  was  in  this  context  that  we  launched  the  third  part  of  our  response,  the  ultima  ratio 
decision  to  purchase  assets,  including  public  ones,  as  a  tool  of  monetary  policy.  It  was 
absolutely crucial that we lifted and re-anchored inflation expectations and warded off these 
potential second round effects. This is not only because stable inflation expectations are vital 
for medium-term price stability. It is also because, with interest rates at the effective lower 
bound, any fall in inflation expectations implies a rise in real interest rates, counteracting the 
credit easing we were trying to engineer. 
In fact, by January 2015 expected real rates had started rising – increasing by almost half a 
percentage point in the previous few months alone. The cost of deflation protection had also 
gone up by 185 basis points between 2 December 2014 and 9 January 2015, showing that 
investors saw a material risk that inflation could fall further. We therefore had to react pre-
emptively  and  decisively,  and  at  the  lower  bound  this  leaves  a  single  option  –  large-scale 
become  the  only  tool  to  reinforce  the  monetary  policy  impulse  in  a  way  that  has  an 
immediate and meaningful impact on expectations. 
While our switch to asset purchases had already begun in September with the launch of our 
private asset purchase programme, it was clear by January interventions in those markets 
alone  would  not  be  sufficient  to  achieve  the  required  impact.  To  firmly  lift  and  re-anchor 
expectations we needed to alter both the  composition of our programme – to broaden the 
channels through which it would raise future inflation and hence affect expectations today – 
and the size – so that the monetary policy impulse through each of those channels would be 
stronger.  The  only  markets  in  which  we  could  achieve  this  dual  effect  were  public  sector 
assets. 
I  currently  see  our  public  sector  purchase  programme  working  through  three  main 
transmission channels. 
First, it is creating strong direct price effects in markets that are key for loan dynamics. Most 
importantly, for loans that are priced against the sovereign yield curve nominal rates are now 
extremely low across nearly all euro area countries, with real rates lower still. Our purchases 
of non-sovereign public assets are also reinforcing a revival in credit, albeit through different 
channels.  For  example,  our  purchases  are  effectively  lowering  the  funding  costs  of 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  
 
supranational  lending  institutions,  such  as  the  European  Investment  Bank,  and  of  national 
development agencies, such as KfW in Germany. And we continue to broaden our universe 
of eligible agency bonds , because our aim is not to become the largest creditor on the euro 
area. 
Second, our programme is creating portfolio rebalancing effects as investors are displaced 
across asset classes – affecting risk preferences – and across jurisdictions – affecting the 
exchange rate. This process has multiple transmission channels to real economy but one key 
one is through banks: on the liability side, portfolio rebalancing reduces the cost of market 
debt for banks, and on the asset side, it increases the opportunity cost of holding henceforth 
still  risk-free  securities,  such  as  government  bonds,  over  extending  loans  to  the  real 
economy. 
Third, asset purchases have a strong signalling effect. They send a powerful signal that we 
will  not  allow  price  stability  to  be  jeopardized,  which  helps  re-anchor  inflation  expectations 
and lower real interest rates. And they also signal that liquidity will keep expanding, which 
supports  a  flattening  of  the  term  structure  and  further  supports  the  easing  of  real  interest 
rates and the exchange rate. The effectiveness of these signalling effects is predicated on 
the  implementation  of  our  programme  in  full,  as  we  have  communicated  –  that  is,  we  will 
maintain the pace and volume of our intervention until we see a sustained return of inflation 
towards a level below, but close to, 2 % over the medium-term. 
In  all  these  ways,  our  asset  purchase  programme  therefore  represents  a  continuation  and 
extension of our existing measures – it reinforces our credit easing and more generally the 
bank lending channel. In this sense, I share the view that “quantitative easing” is something 
of a misnomer. To be sure, the quantity dimension of large-scale asset purchases matters, 
but only insofar as it affects prices and hence credit conditions. 
At the same time, we have to clearly distinguish instruments and objectives. In extraordinary 
circumstances  we  may  need  new  instruments  to  meet  our  traditional  objective.  But  what 
anchors trust in the central bank is that our objective and strategy stay, constant – and this is 
even more important when monetary policy becomes more unconventional. For this reason, 
innovative  ideas  to  change  our  strategy,  such  as  targeting  a  price  level,  would  in  fact  be 
counterproductive in the current environment. Out goes also the misguided idea to increase 
our definition of price stability. 
To  paraphrase  a  well-known  quote, when  the  facts change,  we  might  need  to change  our 
instruments – but we do not change our mission. 
Managing the side effects 
In terms of reaching our objective, our package of measures is already having strong effects 
– perhaps stronger even than many observers anticipated. The latest data on bank lending 
show continued improvements in the cost of credit, the availability for credit and the demand 
for  credit.  Confidence  has  also  notably  improved,  with  the  latest  European  Commission 
economic  sentiment  indicator  confirming  the  pick-up  in  both  consumer  and  business 
confidence.  And  the  more  confident  firms  and  households  feel  in  the  recovery,  the  more 
credit should continue to improve. 
Crucially, our intervention in January also first halted and then reversed the fall in inflation 
expectations.  For  example,  the  5-year  forward  5-year  ahead  inflation-linked  swap rate  has 
risen from its trough of below 1.5% in January to more than 1.8% now. This helped lower real 
interest  rates  by  almost  50  basis  points  at  medium-term  maturities. And  it  has also  meant 
that we have experienced all the upsides of oil price shock in terms of lower input prices and 
higher real incomes and, by preventing second round effects, none of the downsides in terms 
of lower wage settlements and higher real debt burdens. 
Still, despite the success of our programme so far, it is important that we do not get carried 
away.  Unconventional  monetary  policy  must  remain  exceptional  and  time-bound.  This  is 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
  
 
because the longer such measures persist, the greater the risks that can come with it. And in 
the  euro  area  context  there  are  two  main  risks  that  can  in  principle  arise:  first,  greater 
financial instability (and let me stress here I am talking only about the situation in the euro 
area and not in other jurisdictions); and second, the delay of much needed structural reforms. 
To provide a framework for how to think about these risks I find it useful to invoke the well-
known “Tinbergen rule”, which states that a macroeconomic authority must have at least as 
many instruments as it has objectives. 
In terms of the first risk – financial stability – one has to distinguish between conflicting and 
complementary  objectives.  In  normal  times,  it  might  be  appropriate  for  monetary  policy  to 
take financial stability into account in its assessment of the appropriate level of interest rates. 
The reason is that, especially if one extends the concept of the medium-term, raising rates to 
choke  off  excessive  credit  developments  will  actually  contribute  to  our  price  stability 
objective. It helps to prevent deflationary episodes emanating from large financial crises. 
And  the  symmetrical  argument  is  also  true:  lowering  rates  in  a  downturn  to  support  the 
financial  sector  will  safeguard  the  transmission  of  monetary  policy  and  hence  support  the 
achievement of our mandate. In this sense, I am supportive of the “leaning against the wind” 
argument in both directions, provided instruments and objectives are consistent. 
We are in such a complementary environment today. At present we see no evidence that low 
interest  rates  are  contributing  to  leverage-driven  financial  imbalances  in  the  euro  area. 
Indeed,  the  most  serious  financial  stability  risks  tend  to  be  associated  with  excessive 
developments  in  bank  credit,  and  there  are  no  signs  of  that  in  the  euro  area  on  average 
today. 
However, were we to enter a conflicting environment, the logic of the Tinbergen rule would 
become more apparent. 
On  the  one  hand,  if  for  example  a  bond  bubble  were  emerging  but  inflation  was  still  low, 
raising  rates  to  combat  that  financial  stability  risk  would  run  contrary  to  our  price  stability 
objective. On the other hand, if inflation were rising banks but banks in the euro area were 
still repairing their balance sheets, raising rates could have damaging consequences for the 
banking sector. 
Given the hierarchical nature of the ECB’s mandate, if we were to face such conflicts, where 
price stability and financial stability point in different directions for the path of interest rates, 
we would have to put price stability first. This is our legal obligation. And from an economic 
point  of  view,  in  circumstances  where  financial  stability  effectively  becomes  a  distinct 
objective from price stability, the Tinbergen rule implies there have to be instruments other 
than interest rates to address it. 
Those  instruments  are  of  course  macro-prudential  policies.  Following  the  introduction  of 
CRDIV we now have a wide range of new tools available to the competent authorities in the 
euro area and, with the creation of the SSM, a stronger framework to coordinate those tools 
and  prevent  inaction  bias  at  the  national  level.  Should  we  see  any  indications  that  low 
interest rates are leading to financial imbalances, the first line of defence is for the competent 
authorities to make full use of these new but hardly tested instruments. 
The  division  of  labour  is  clear:  monetary  policy  should  focus  on  price  stability;  macro-
prudential policy on financial stability. 
Yet  I  am  also  sympathetic  to  the  view  expressed  by  the  BIS  that  we  need  to  approach 
macro-prudential with “a mix of ambition and humility” – that is, we need to be ambitious in 
using the new tools we have, but we also need to be humble in recognising their limitations. 
Research  is  so  far  relatively  limited  about  the  channels  through  which  macro-prudential 
policies work and the magnitude of their effects. Moreover, as most macro-prudential tools 
are  in  fact  micro-prudential,  conflicts  of  competence  between  respective  authorities  could 
occur. This all the more that the degree of Europeanisation of micro- and macro-prudential 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 the  best  defence  against  any  conflicts  between 
 
 
competencies is not the same – not to speak of the competence pooling of sovereignty in 
monetary policy. 
And  in  any  event,  macro-prudential  tools  tend  to  be  more  effective  in  building  resilience 
against financial shocks than preventing those shocks in the first place. 
For  this  reason,  it  would  make  sense  in  my  view  for  us  to  remain  fully  committed  to 
developing and implementing effective macro-prudential policies, but at the same time not to 
blindly pin all our hopes on them. 
Ultimately 
financial  instability  and 
unconventional  monetary  policy  is  for  that  policy  to  last  for  no  longer  than  is  strictly 
necessary. This means that we need to maintain the pace and volume of our interventions, 
as  we  have  communicated,  so  that  inflation  rises  back  towards  2%  as  quickly  as possible 
and that monetary policy can begin once more to normalise. 
But it also means something more: if interest rates are low because the natural rate is low, 
then for interest rates to rise back to more normal levels the natural rate will have to rise as 
well.  And  insofar  as  a  low  natural  rate  reflects  weak  investment  demand  caused  by 
diminishing labour supply and low productivity growth, this may only be possible in a context 
of structural reforms aimed at boosting supply capacity. This brings me to the second risk of 
unconventional  monetary  policy:  that  it  could  in  principle  delays  the  very  reforms  that  are 
necessary for monetary policy normalisation. 
Let me say upfront that the evidence we can see in the euro area at the moment suggests 
that this is not necessarily the case. Some countries have recently taken steps in the right 
direction – but more can and needs to be done. 
My hope is that governments are recognising that accommodative monetary policy and low 
oil prices, rather than removing the need for reforms, creates the perfect environment to do 
them.  Research  suggests  that  reforms  can  be  more  costly  in  a  weak  macroeconomic 
environment and, in particular, when there are serious credit constraints. With our successful 
credit easing policy we are progressively removing each of those barriers. 
More generally, however, I would question how much monetary policy decisions should be 
based  around  reform  incentives.  Applying  again  the  Tinbergen  rule,  this  creates  two 
objectives to be attained with one instrument – and just as for financial stability, in the current 
environment  those  objectives  conflict.  The  ECB  has  to  prioritise  price  stability  rather  than 
acting as the censor of governments. Euro area governments as a community must ensure 
that each economy meets the requirements of membership. And it is in this context that I and 
other ECB Executive Board members have recently called for a stronger Economic Union in 
the euro area with improved common governance of structural reforms. 
Conclusion 
Let me conclude. 
The diminishing price pressures over recent years have required the ECB to act  forcefully 
and  repeatedly  to  fulfil  its  mandate.  This  culminated  in  January  2015  with  our  decision  to 
expand  our  asset  purchase  programme  to  stave  off  deflationary  risks  and  stop  the  fall  of 
inflation expectations. In doing so we have sent a strong signal that we will safeguard price 
stability no matter what. This is our mandate as enshrined in the Treaty. And although our 
instruments have changed our conviction and mission have not. 
Some might wish that we use our armoury for other purposes. But we will not be moved. We 
are an independent institution. Our rules are non-negotiable and we do not act for the benefit 
of interest groups or individual countries. Nor can financial stability considerations override 
our primary objective. Monetary dominance will always prevail. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
