  Yannis Stournaras: Greek economy – current developments, challenges 
and prospects 
Speech  by  Mr  Yannis  Stournaras,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Greece,  at  the  Hellenic 
Observatory of the London School of Economics, London, 25 March 2015. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It  is  a  great  pleasure  to  be  with  you  tonight.  I  will  share  with  you  my  thoughts  on  the 
prospects of the Greek economy and I will focus on four issues: First, the achievements so 
far during the difficult years of the economic adjustment. Second, current developments in 
the Greek economy and future challenges and prospects, in view of the 20 February 2015 
Eurogroup  agreement  and  the  20  March  high  level  agreement  between  the  Greek 
government and the EU partners. Third, the reasons why Grexit is not an option. Fourth, 
issues related to the sustainability of Greek public debt. 
Economic adjustment during the past five years 
a)  
Since the beginning of the crisis, five years ago, Greece has come a long way in adjusting its 
fiscal and external imbalances and has implemented a bold programme of structural reforms. 
First, there has been unprecedented fiscal consolidation. In 2013, Greece returned to a 
primary  surplus  in  the  general  government  for  the  first  time  since  2002.  Moreover,  by 
achieving a primary surplus (as defined in the programme) of 1.2% of GDP, it outperformed 
the  programme  target  of  a  balanced  primary  result  in  the  general  government.  Fiscal 
consolidation achieved a more than 11 percentage point improvement in the primary budget 
as  a  percentage  of  GDP  over  the  period  2009–2013,  despite  the  deepening  recession. 
Adjusting  for  the  effect  of  recession,  the  improvement  in  the  “structural”  primary  budget 
balance over the period 2009–2013 reached 18 percentage points of GDP, at least twice as 
much as the adjustment in other programme member-states. 
Second, competitiveness has been restored.  Greece  has  now  recovered  all  of the  cost 
competitiveness it had lost relative to its trading partners since joining the euro area. Cost 
competitiveness has improved by more than 25 per cent since 2009. According to the ECB’s 
Harmonized  Competitiveness  Indicators,  Greece  has  been  one  of  the  best  performers  in 
improving labour cost competitiveness over the period 2000–2014. 
This development reflects the effect of structural reforms in the labour market, which have 
allowed more flexibility in the process of wage bargaining, as well as the impact of the sharp 
rise in unemployment  on labour costs. Structural competitiveness is also showing signs of 
significant improvement, as suggested by indicators compiled by the OECD, the World Bank 
and the World Economic Forum. 
Third,  external  adjustment  has  been  significant.  The  current  account  in  2014  was  in 
surplus for the second year in a row (0.9% of GDP) with exports of both goods and services 
increasing  at  a  faster  rate  than  that  of  the  previous  year.  This  development  marks  a 
significant turnaround of the current account balance of about 15 percentage points of GDP 
since 2008. Adjustment came primarily through a decline in imports of goods, particularly in 
2009,  when  world  trade  collapsed  due  to  the  global  recession.  However,  after  2009, 
adjustment was nearly equally shared between exports and imports. 
It is worth highlighting that, during the last four years, exports of goods have rebounded, with 
growth rates of real exports outpacing those of the euro area average. Moreover, the share 
of  goods  exports  in  extra-EU  trade  has  nearly  doubled  and  the  share  in  world  trade  has 
increased  by  about  30%  since  2010.  These  developments  have  occurred  despite  the 
adverse liquidity and financial conditions faced by Greek exporters. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
  
 
By  contrast,  exports  of  services  underperformed  until  recently  largely  as  a  result  of 
uncertainty, which had a negative impact on tourism, and global factors, which affected the 
performance of the shipping industry. Nevertheless, exports of services rebounded in 2013 
and  2014  after  years  of  underperformance,  reflecting  both  a  strong  tourism  season  and, 
more recently, a rebound of the global shipping sector. 
Fourth, the policy agenda has included structural reforms. A series of structural reforms 
have been implemented in labour and product markets as well as in public administration. 
In the labour market significant changes were adopted aiming at: 
– 
– 
– 
better aligning wage developments with firm performance; and 
enhancing labour mobility across sectors. 
More  specifically,  reforms  involved  measures  to  decentralise  wage  bargaining  to 
firm level, reduce minimum wages and increase flexibility. 
Progress with structural reforms in product and services markets, by contrast, was markedly 
slower than in the labour market. Nevertheless, according to the OECD, Greece ranks first in 
the  responsiveness  to  structural  reform  recommendations  made  by  the  Organisation. 
Moreover,  according  to  the  Euro  Plus  Monitor  2014,  Greece  ranks  first  in  the  adjustment 
progress among twenty-one European economies, based on indicators capturing fiscal and 
external adjustment, labour costs and structural reforms. 
This period also witnessed significant institutional changes geared towards streamlining the 
public  administration  and  downsizing  the  public  sector.  In  the  period  2010–2013,  public 
sector employment fell by more than 20% or 180,000 employees. New institutional reforms 
were adopted that lay the foundations for ensuring the better control of public spending and 
improving public financial management. Finally, the Greek authorities have greatly reshaped 
the taxation system by  adopting the Income Tax and Tax Procedures Codes and the new 
unified  Property  Tax.  Measures  have  also  been  adopted  to  bolster  the  autonomy  of  the 
revenue administration in order to strengthen the collection of current and overdue revenue. 
All these reforms will boost the growth potential of the Greek economy in the long term. Bank 
of Greece staff estimates suggest that structural reforms in labour and product markets are 
likely  to  increase  potential  growth  by  about  1.6%  per  annum  over  a  period  of  ten  years, 
mainly coming from gains in total factor productivity. 
Lastly, bank recapitalization and considerable consolidation have taken place. 
Over the past few years, the landscape of the banking system has changed significantly with 
the number of banks being reduced through mergers, takeovers and resolutions. Today the 
system  comprises  four  core  banks  and  a  number  of  smaller  banks.  The  four  core  banks, 
following  recapitalization  and  the  implementation  of  restructuring  plans,  are  well-placed  to 
meet  the  new  challenges  that  the  banking  system  faces  going  forward.  This  was  also 
confirmed by the results of the Asset Quality Review and the EU-wide stress test exercise, 
conducted by the European Central Bank (ECB) in cooperation with the European Banking 
Authority (EBA), made public on 26 October 2014. 
Current developments, challenges and prospects 
b)  
Recent  data  suggest  that,  after  six  years  of  deep  recession,  the  economy  has  started  to 
rebound since the second quarter of 2014. Real GDP grew by 0.8% in 2014, positive for the 
first  time  since  2007.  The  increase  in  GDP  is  driven  by  buoyant  exports  of  goods  and 
services,  the  recovery  of  private  consumption  and  investment  in  machinery  and  transport 
equipment.  The  pickup  in  economic  activity  also  led  to  a  strong  rebound  of  dependent 
employment and the decline in the unemployment rate, which, however, remains particularly 
high. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  
 
Based on the latest available data, GDP growth in 2015 is projected to be higher than in 
2014 and to pick up even further in 2016. The main elements of uncertainty weighing on the 
prospects for economic activity in the medium term refer to our ability to fulfil successfully the 
transitional  agreement  struck  with  our  partners,  a  possible  deterioration  in  public  finances 
and reform fatigue. 
If these uncertainties can be contained, then the economy will show strong growth in 2015, 
driven by exports of goods and services and by private consumption and supported also by 
rising business investment. 
Exports of goods and services are expected to remain one of the growth drivers in 2015, with 
the global economic environment projected to improve as growth rates pick up both in the EU 
and the other markets and world trade strengthens. A positive impact is also expected from 
the further improvement in structural competitiveness and possibly in cost competitiveness, 
combined with restored access to financing for Greek businesses and an improving business 
climate. 
Disposable  income  developments,  the  declining  general  level  of  prices  and  reduced 
uncertainty  are  expected  to  affect  consumer  spending  positively  in  the  course  of  2015. 
Private consumption is therefore expected to increase in the year as a whole, supported by 
the  fall  in  oil  prices  and  the  ensuing  strengthening  of  Greek  households’  real  disposable 
income. 
However,  although  recent  hard  data  show  that  the  economy  continues  to  show  signs  of 
stabilizing, soft data paint a mixed picture, with PMI and some sentiment indicators softening 
over the past two months. 
Financial indicators (such as Greek sovereign and corporate bond yields and stock prices), 
which  had  improved  significantly  from  mid-2012  up  until  autumn  2014  in  line  with  the 
improved macroeconomic performance of the country and the consistent implementation of 
the adjustment programme, have been deteriorating over the last months. 
The 20 February Eurogroup agreement combined with the 20 March high level 
agreement alleviated part of the uncertainty 
The Eurogroup’s decision on 20 February 2015 to grant Greece an extension of the current 
programme  and  its  approval  on  24  February  of  the  Greek  government  reform  measures 
alleviated  part  of  the  uncertainty  and  gave  Greece’s  government  time  to  complete  the 
reforms  still  pending  and  to  set  its  own  priorities.  As  a  follow  up,  on  9  March,  the  Greek 
authorities presented to the Eurogroup a more detailed list of reform measures which allowed 
the  commencement  of  the  evaluation  process.  As  reaffirmed  by  the  joint  statement  by 
Greece and the EU on 20 March, the Greek authorities are expected to present a full list of 
specific reforms to be considered by the Eurogroup. These positive developments led to a 
stabilization of bank deposits, after some outflows during the past three months. However, a 
large  risk  premium  has  been  built  into  Greek  financial  assets,  which  still  remains  at  high 
levels. 
The Greek government is now proceeding fast towards agreeing a reform programme with 
the EU partners and the involved institutions and making progress in the implementation of 
the  agreed  policy  actions.  The  20  March  high  level  agreement  in  Brussels  confirmed  the 
willingness of  all  parts  to  respect  the  rules  of  the  game  and  the  procedures  agreed  in  the 
Eurogroup of 20 February. 
Once  the  implementation  of  the  current  agreement  is  under  way  and  Greece  fulfils  its 
commitments, then financing and liquidity constraints for the Greek state and Greek financial 
and non- financial corporations will ease and Greek assets should be expected to recover. 
Moreover, the decision by the ECB’s Governing Council to lift the waiver affecting marketable 
debt  instruments  issued  or  fully  guaranteed  by  the  Hellenic  Republic  will  soon  be 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
  
 
re-examined and should be revoked, as in similar cases in the past, as long as Greece fulfils 
its current agreement with its EU partners. 
The full implementation of the agreed reforms and the conclusion of the evaluation process 
are prerequisites for the restoration of confidence to the prospects of the Greek economy. 
Moreover, upon the conclusion of the current evaluation procedure, the Greek government in 
close cooperation with our EU partners should reach a mutually beneficial agreement on the 
follow-up arrangement involving a credible reform and medium term fiscal policy programme 
backed by a reliable credit line paving the way for Greece’s return to international financial 
markets. 
These  actions  will  enable  Greece  to  benefit  from  July  2015  onwards  from  the  recently 
announced ECB decision on the implementation of Quantitative Easing (QE) at least up until 
September 2016. 
Provided that uncertainty is quickly resolved, the positive momentum of the economy will be 
maintained and economic recovery will gain speed over the course of the year. 
Policy actions that promote long term growth 
In the long term, the growth outlook of the Greek economy is expected to improve following 
the  rebalancing  of  fundamentals  such  as  the  twin  deficits  and  competitiveness,  provided 
reforms continue and emphasis is placed on the following priorities: 
 
innovation, 
flexibility  and 
increase  price 
Speeding up structural reforms in the product and services markets in order to 
enhance  competition  and 
improve 
competitiveness. 
Consolidating fiscal achievements. Efforts must focus on structural measures to 
strengthen  the  independence  and  efficiency  of  tax  administration,  with  the  aim  to 
tackle tax and social contribution evasion. The application of modern, risk-based tax 
audit methods and the activation of a nationwide asset registry are fundamental in 
the fight against tax evasion. 
Reviewing tax exemptions and other favourable tax treatment. Tax exemptions 
and favourable tax treatment, including reduced VAT rates, need to be reviewed and 
streamlined. 
Lowering  tax  rates  and  reviewing  the  efficiency  of  public  spending.  To  the 
extent that fiscal achievements are safeguarded, a lowering of the direct and indirect 
tax  rates  will  become  possible.  On  the  expenditure  side,  efforts  to  better  target 
social  benefits  must  continue,  while  the  existing  exemptions  from  the  general 
pension system provisions must be re-examined. 
Increasing  public  sector  efficiency.  Completing  the  national  cadastre  and 
eliminating the chronic obstacles to the efficient and speedy delivery of justice are 
fundamental  prerequisites 
the  efficient 
deployment  of  human  resources  and  a  transparent  staff  appraisal  framework  that 
rewards productivity and work ethic. 
Strengthening  active  labour  market  policies  with  particular  emphasis  on 
education and training, as a way to improve the job-finding chances of people on 
the  sidelines  of  the  labour  market,  such  as  the  long-term  unemployed  and  young 
people, who have borne the burden of unemployment. 
Managing in an effective way non-performing loans (NPLs). Greek banks must 
now  adopt  an  active  management  of  distressed  loans,  in  a  manner  that  not  only 
eases the burden on cooperating borrowers facing temporary difficulties in servicing 
their debt, but also enables banks to unlock funds tied up in troubled loans that are 
unlikely  to  be  repaid.  The  banking  sector  must  be  assisted  in  this  effort  through 
for  a  well-functioning  state,  as  are 
      4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  
 
improvements  in  the  legal  framework  that  would  lift  restrictions  on,  for  instance, 
(pre-) bankruptcy procedures, out-of-court settlements or, as already mentioned, a 
speeding up of the judicial procedure. 
Grexit is not an option 
c)  
After  six  years  of  severe  recession  and  five  years  of  fiscal  adjustment,  the  economy  has 
stabilized  and  is  showing  signs  of  improvement.  If  this  momentum  is  maintained,  the 
economy is likely to return to a steady growth path in the next few years. 
Grexit is not an option to Greece for the simple reason that the competitiveness of the Greek 
economy has been restored over the past five years through internal devaluation and bold 
reforms in the labour market. Hence, Grexit would deliver no benefit but a lot of pain. 
In case of Grexit, the Greek economy would enter another deep recession characterized by 
extremely tight financing and liquidity conditions, on account of massive deposit outflows and 
a dramatic fall in confidence and living standards. These developments would lead to trade 
disruption,  push  unemployment  further  up  and  reduce  government  revenues,  generating 
fiscal  and  financing  gaps  and  concerns  for  the  stability  of  the  financial  system.  As  a 
consequence, another round of fiscal consolidation would be required, while capital controls 
would  be  imposed  and  a  deposit  freeze  could  also  be  required.  Moreover,  the  rapid 
depreciation  of  the  new  currency  would  serve  to  improve  Greece’s  international  price 
competitiveness, but this would also drive higher inflation as import prices rise. As a result, 
the  gains  from  depreciation  would  be  only  temporary.  Finally,  de-anchoring  of  inflation 
expectations  would  imply  substantially  higher  inflation,  requiring  a  tightening  of  monetary 
policy. Hence, leaving the euro would not allow the country to run an independent monetary 
policy, as the primary goal of the central bank would be to stabilize the value of the currency. 
Grexit would also risk the elimination of EU-budget related inflows to Greece (cohesion and 
structural funds, agricultural subsidies). Overall, Grexit would imply huge costs for the Greek 
people,  firms  and  the  Greek  financial  system.  IMF  and  official  debt  would  run  in  arrears, 
while foreign law bonds would force Greece into a lengthy litigation process in international 
courts. In the event of such actions, it is uncertain how long it would take until Greece would 
regain  access  to  financial  markets and  would  depend  on  the  eventual  resolution of  official 
foreign law debt. 
On top of all, a Grexit scenario could also have negative contagion effects on weak euro area 
countries, by introducing a permanent convertibility risk premium into sovereign bond yields 
and financial asset prices. Last but not least, Grexit might entail very substantial geopolitical 
risks. 
 Actions to improve debt sustainability 
d)  
Turning to public debt sustainability, some points are worth-highlighting: 
 
Nearly 80% of Greece’s general government debt is held by the official sector, i.e. 
bilateral loans by EU countries under the GLF, IMF and EFSF loans, as well as debt 
securities held by the ECB and NCBs. 
Up until now, Greek debt has benefited from the lowering of the interest rate and the 
extension  of  maturities  on  the  GLF  loans.  The  interest  rate  charged  on  bilateral 
loans  from  euro-area  partners  is  Euribor  plus  50  basis  points,  which  is  currently 
about 0.56% per year. GLF loans have an average maturity of about 16 years. In 
addition, the lending rate from the European Financial Stability Facility (EFSF) is a 
mere 1–10 basis points over the average borrowing cost of the EFSF. The average 
maturity of  EFSF loans is over 25 years with the last loan expiring in 2051, while 
Greece  benefits  also  from  the  deferral  of  principal  payments  on  GLF  and  EFSF 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
   
 
loans by 10 years and a 10-year grace period for interest payments on most EFSF 
loans. 
Moreover, Greece has been receiving the profits made by the ECB and NCBs on 
their Greek government bond holdings (SMP and ANFA). 
As a consequence of these actions, the average maturity of the Greek government debt has 
increased from 6.3 years in 2011 to about 16.5 years by end 2014 and debt servicing costs 
have  decreased  to  levels  comparable  with  other  southern  European  countries  (i.e.  around 
4.3% of GDP in 2014), while the actual debt servicing cost is much lower, i.e. about 2.6% of 
GDP  if  one  takes  into  account  that  the  interest  paid  to  the  ECB  and  euro-area  national 
central  banks  (NCBs)  is  returned  to  Greece  and  interest  payments  on  EFSF  loans  are 
deferred. Taking into account the fall in interest rates over the past three months, the actual 
interest expenditures of Greece will be likely about 2% of GDP in 2015. 
In  view  of  the  existing  favourable  debt  servicing  arrangements,  it  can  be  argued  that  the 
stock of debt, despite amounting to approximately 177% of GDP, need not pose such a big a 
concern, conditional on there being a credible commitment to the agreed fiscal targets and 
the implementation of structural reforms which can improve the growth potential of the Greek 
economy in the long term. 
However, in view of the progress achieved so far in terms of reaching primary surpluses and 
meeting the various conditions incorporated in the adjustment programme, further debt relief 
should  be  provided  to  Greece  along  the  lines  of  the  Eurogroup  decision  of  27  November 
2012.  This  is  necessary  for  achieving  a  further  credible  and  sustainable  reduction  of  the 
Greek  debt-to-GDP  ratio  and  in  order  to  smooth  out  a  demanding  government  borrowing 
profile post 2022/23, i.e. after the expiration of the 10-year grace period currently applied on 
GLF interest payments and on EFSF loan principal and interest payments. 
There are various ways to do that without losses for euro area creditors. 
For example: 
 
By reducing the lending rate on the Greek Loan Facility by setting the spread over 
the Euribor – currently at 50 basis points – to zero; 
by a further 10-year extension of the maturity profile of EFSF and GLF loans. 
 
The  combination  of  these  actions  would  amount  to  a  net  present  value  benefit  of  about 
17 percent  of  2015  GDP  for  Greece  over  the  next  35  years,  thus  improving  debt 
sustainability. This will also make possible a relaxation of fiscal targets, making some room 
for additional investment spending and catering social needs. 
In fact, extending maturities and reducing interest rates on the outstanding debt may improve 
the growth outlook of the Greek economy and, hence, provide further support to public debt 
sustainability. 
Bank  of  Greece  Staff  estimates  that  a  permanent  reduction  of  the  interest  payments  –to- 
GDP ratio by 0.6 percentage points can lead to an increase in real GDP by a total of 4–7% 
over the next ten years, depending on the fiscal policy mix. This corresponds to a boost in 
real  GDP  growth  of  ½  percentage  point  per  year  on  average  for  a  ten-year  period.  The 
economic  rationale  that  debt  relief  of  this  form  can  provide  a  “growth  dividend”  is  that 
reducing the debt servicing costs can free up resources which can be used for investment, 
job  creation  and  economic  growth.  The  growth  dividend  is  more  pronounced  if  such  debt 
relief  is  combined  with  a  credible  expenditure  based  fiscal  consolidation  programme. 
However, broadening the tax base and fighting tax evasion should not be expected to weigh 
negatively on growth performance. 
Alternative options could also be considered to improve the sustainability of Greece’s public 
debt. However, they  might be more contentious as they likely involve some costs for euro 
area partners. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  Concluding remarks 
Concluding, the immediate challenges of the government are to: 
 
consolidate fiscal achievements, further specify and agree with the institutions the 
full list of specific reforms by the end of April 2015, 
implement  the  agreed  reforms  in  order  to  allow  for  a  speedy  and  successful 
conclusion of the current evaluation procedure. 
 This  would  allow  Greek  banks  to  regain  full  access  to  the  ECB’s  monetary  operations, 
alleviating liquidity pressures, reducing the funding costs for the Greek financial system and 
the Greek economy as a whole, and exploiting the accomodating monetary policy applied by 
the ECB in the Eurozone. 
The conclusion of the current evaluation procedure by the end of June 2015 will pave the 
way  for  a  final  agreement  on  the  follow  up  arrangement  between  Greece  and  the  EU 
partners. This should involve a credible medium term fiscal and structural reform programme, 
backed  up  by  a  reliable  credit  line,  as  well  as  further  debt  relief  along  the  lines  of  the 
November 2012 Eurogroup decision. These actions are prerequisites for strengthening both 
economic growth and employment and for Greece’s return to international financial markets, 
thus, signaling the definitive exit from the crisis. 
The  new  Greek  government  has  a  unique  opportunity  to  implement  bold  structural 
reforms, which would be backed by a large majority of political forces in the country. 
This is in my view a historical opportunity which should not be missed. 
Thank you very much for your attention. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
