  Urjit R Patel: Encouraging young enterprising skills in India 
Speech by Dr Urjit R Patel, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the Business 
Standard  Best  B-School  Project  Awards,  Welingkar  Institute  of  Management  Development 
and Research, Mumbai, 12 January 2015. 
 I  am  honoured  to  be  part  of  the  Business  Standard  Best  B-School  Project  Awards  to  be 
presented  today  for  recognising  the  bright  young  talent  of  business  schools  in  India.  I 
understand that this is the 7th edition of the Award, and 158 colleges have participated from 
across  the  country  with  a  wide  range  of  projects.  This  conveys  the  high  esteem  that  the 
award is held in, its popularity among B-School graduates, and the impact it has made over 
the years in recognising and honouring young professional talent. The teams are evaluated 
on the basis of the rigour of their work, innovative approaches, structure of the content and 
the  meaningful  solutions  they  provide  for  diverse  business,  social  and  organisational 
challenges. 
The  function  symbolises  “out  of  box”  thinking  and  the  entailed  enterprising  skills  of  the 
“Young  India”.  It  epitomises  a  tribe  of  budding  professionals  who  are  not  risk-averse  and 
have “fire in the belly” to take a leapfrog into the future. 
Frankly, I am deeply envious of the young students that I see in front of me. They have the 
dreams, desire and the capability to create new business models and modern enterprises, 
which  India  critically  needs  at  this  juncture.  There  are  several  notable  inter-locking  drivers 
that have been recently initiated or reinforced with vigour, which will complement our budding 
graduates’ innate talent. 
• 
An  emphasis  on  entrepreneurship  for  solutions.  To  absorb  a  labour  force  that 
increases by about one million per month requires many more entrepreneurs, tens 
of thousands, if not hundreds of thousands, more. 
The national objective to make India a global manufacturing hub and a substantive 
part  of  international  supply  chains.  The  “Make  in  India”  vision/strategy  is  apposite 
and  provides  a  much  needed  “focal  point” to  inculcate  durable  competitiveness  in 
key sectors of our economy. 
The stress on improving India’s ranking in the “Ease of Doing Business index”. This 
provides  a  measurable  gauge  to  determine  how  we  progress.  The  repeated 
commitment  and  associated  ground-level  changes  already  taking  place  towards 
deepening  “Policy-driven”  governance  (and  less  government)  is  mission  critical  in 
this context. 
Uncertainty has been lifted in key sectors like coal and spectrum. 
In  today’s  world,  terms  like  “game-changer”  and  “transformative”  are  often  used 
loosely,  and  are,  therefore,  more  ubiquitous  than  warranted.  But  the  “Jan  Dhan 
Yojana”  scheme  implemented  almost  wholly  by  our  public  sector  banks,  whereby 
100  million  bank  accounts  have  been  opened  for  those  who  were  unbanked,  is 
unequivocally  a  “game-changer”.  It  provides  an  unprecedented  scaffolding  and  a 
spring  board  for  meaningful  financial  inclusion  and,  concomitantly,  substantial 
financial deepening of our economy. 
At the recent “Gyan Sangam” gathering of bankers and top-level policy makers in 
Pune,  important  and  far  reaching  changes  were  discussed.  I  am  virtually  quoting 
from the official website two of these in the interest of brevity: 
    –  We should redefine the metric for effective lending, viz., prioritise loans 
to enterprises which will generate more employment. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   A call for an end to lazy banking; banks are asked to take on a proactive 
role in helping the common man. 
In other words, bankable labour-intensive enterprises should benefit as we go forward in this 
direction. 
There are 3 potential corollaries: 
(i)  
First, a much larger number of small business loans will be encouraged rather than 
an overriding emphasis on very large loans per se. 
Second, in the context of discussions on priority sector policy/guidelines, finance for 
small  entrepreneurs,  SMEs  and  employment  creation  may  be  reinforced.  (RBI’s 
licensing  policy  for  small  finance  banks  has  stipulated  higher  exposure  to  priority 
sectors.) 
Third, banks may have to revisit at an opportune time (not now) in due course (that 
is,  in  the  future)  the  individual  company/group  credit  exposure  limits,  as  well  as 
sector exposures as part of their learning for the future for better risk management 
practices over the business cycle. 
Lastly, the hard earned macroeconomic stability provides an important backdrop for 
optimal decisions by all stakeholders. We have to preserve this. The dramatic fall in 
oil prices is a boon for us. It saves, on an annualised basis, around US$ 50 billion, 
roughly, one-third of our annual gross POL imports of about US$ 160 billion. This is 
on  a  back-of-the-envelope,  top-line  basis.  Of  course,  there  will  be  leakages  and 
other  set-offs.  But  our  external  situation  undoubtedly  improves.  The  welcome 
development  enhances  our  disposable  income  (which  will  increase  consumer 
demand for other goods and services), reduce input cost of our businesses (which 
will increase margins and help to enthuse investment demand), and aid government 
finances by reducing the energy subsidy burden in the budget. 
(ii)  
(iii)  
 Let  me  conclude  by  quoting  a  participant  at  the  inaugural  session  of  this  year’s  Vibrant 
Gujarat Global Summit: “India will be a bright spot in an otherwise mediocre global economic 
outlook”. 
Thank you, once again, for giving me the opportunity to speak at the 7th Business Standard 
Best B-School Project Awards function. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
