  Amando M Tetangco, Jr: BANCNET 25th Anniversary 
Speech by Mr Amando M Tetangco, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the 
central  bank  of  the  Philippines),  at  the  BANCNET  25th  Anniversary,  Makati  City,  24  July 
2015. 
 I am delighted to be with you tonight to celebrate Bancnet’s 25th Anniversary. 
Silver  Anniversaries  are  always  important.  You  have  come  so  far,  and  the  future  beckons 
with  exciting  opportunities.  And  so,  happy  anniversary  and  congratulations  to  all  the 
members, officers and staff of Bancnet. 
From the point of view of the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas, there are many reasons for you to 
celebrate. Let me cite a million reasons why: 
• 
113 member institutions as of end-2014 represent an ATM cardholder base of over 
73  million.  By  March  this  year,  the  number  had  increased  to  nearly  78  million 
cardholders. 
The high volume of switched transactions reached almost 500 million in 2014 or an 
average of 1.36 million transactions per day. 
 With  the  on-going  integration  of  Megalink  into  Bancnet,  you  are  creating  a  unified  ATM 
switch network in the Philippines. Finally, this is happening. 
These are significant milestones indeed but the story is not complete. Our eyes are now set 
on creating a National Retail Payment System or NRPS and Bancnet should be part of this 
grand journey. 
What is NRPS? Well, NRPS envisions Filipinos to have easy access to financial services and 
have accounts to make payments, and receive or transfer funds to other accounts anytime, 
anywhere, at a reasonable price from any digital device. 
Efficient retail payments contribute to the stability and efficiency of the financial system and 
the economy as a whole. 
Studies have shown that shifting from paper based to electronic-based payment system can 
generate an annual savings up to 1% of gross domestic product (GDP). 
How  can  this  potential  market  impact  your  business?  Based  on  country  diagnostics 
conducted by the Better Than Cash Alliance (BTCA), of which the Philippines is a member, 
Filipinos make about 2.5 billion payment transactions per month worth US$74 billion, but only 
1% are transacted electronically; 99% of the transactions are paid either in cash or checks. 
NRPS will allow us to start reversing this ratio. In other words, you have the option to have a 
bigger slice of this huge pie. 
Indeed,  while  implementing  the  NRPS  is  most  challenging,  it  also  represents  vast 
opportunities from the business point of view. 
Equally  significant,  digitization  of  payments  can  promote  greater  financial  inclusion.  Our 
National Baseline Survey in Financial Inclusion showed that only 4 out of 10 Filipino adults 
currently  have  savings,  of  whom  only  32.7%  put  their  money  in  banks.  The  survey  also 
indicated that 47% of Filipinos have debts but banks contribute only 4.4% of their borrowings; 
the rest are from family, relatives, friends and informal lenders. 
Ladies and gentlemen, the NRPS initiative is a rare opportunity for all of us to work together 
to  do  something  that  can  be  a  real  positive  game  changer  for  the  economy  and  for  our 
people. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  I  call  upon  the  Bancnet  community  therefore  to  give  your  full  support  to  establish  a  safe, 
efficient, and reliable national retail payment system. 
As Albert Einstein once said, it is not enough to be a success, strive to be of value. 
Once again, congratulations to Bancnet on its 25th Anniversary. Mabuhay po tayong lahat! 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
