  Yves Mersch: Interview in Börsen-Zeitung 
Interview  with  Mr  Yves  Mersch,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  European  Central 
Bank, in Börsen-Zeitung, conducted by Mr Mark Schrörs and published on 8 April 2015. 
 Mr Mersch, the start of the ECB’s public sector purchase programme has made a deep 
impression  on  the  financial  markets:  the  stock  markets  are  up,  the  euro  is  sharply 
down  and  the  returns  on  euro  government  bonds  have  clearly  fallen  again.  How 
surprised are you by the strength of the impact of quantitative easing (QE)? 
It’s true, long-term interest rates have fallen further, in some cases to all-time lows. All in all, 
the financing conditions for the economy have improved. There are also signs that we will 
soon  be  moving  into  positive  territory  again  in  terms  of  lending.  It  would  perhaps  be 
somewhat bold to claim that the better mood in the economy is solely due to QE. But it is 
clear that QE is having a signalling effect and this channel is working very successfully. 
But  aren’t  such  reports  about  the  successful  effect  of  QE  on  the  real  economy 
somewhat  premature?  Previously,  even  the  ECB  used  to  say  that  monetary  policy 
measures take 12–18 months to have an effect. 
Yes, but monetary policy also works via the signalling channel and in this case it works very 
effectively and quickly. Now we have to wait and see how the other channels work. However, 
the decision on QE certainly came at the right time. 
Because the economy of the euro area was at a turning point, not least because of 
cheaper oil? 
At the beginning of the year we had weakly positive signs. With QE, this development has 
strengthened. 
But isn’t there also a danger of “overdosing”? 
The  Governing  Council  will  carefully  monitor  the  situation  every  month.  We  have  now 
adopted a plan that we intend to follow up on: we are making purchases to the tune of €60 
billion  every  month  until  September  2016.  This  forms  the  basis  for  our  March  projections, 
which envisage a slow return to an inflation rate that is close to our understanding of stable 
prices:  accordingly,  we  shall  be  at  1.8%  in  2017.  However,  if  we  see  that  we  are  going 
beyond that figure, it would of course be appropriate to consider whether we need to adjust 
our plan. 
In other words, if the new projections in June foresee an overshooting of the inflation 
target of just below 2% in 2017, as is currently conceivable, would you be in favour of 
a discussion to reduce purchases or to stop them earlier? 
Let me say again: we have specified a course of action and we’ll be sticking to it. If we see 
that it is bringing us more quickly to our goal, we are of course not so tied to our decisions 
that we could not adjust our course of action. Incidentally, that also applies should we do not 
come close to the target. We cannot in either instance turn our eyes from reality. 
Some market participants are claiming that the ECB is putting its credibility at risk in 
the  case  of  a  reduction  [of  the  purchases].  But  wouldn’t  it  also  be  a  problem  if  the 
forecast were to rise above 2% and you were to continue with QE and not react? 
What you are mentioning plays into the discussion on price-level targeting... 
...in which a central bank specifies a certain price development which it has to achieve 
every  year.  If  it  doesn’t  manage  it,  the  bank  has  to  steer  towards  it  all  the  more 
resolutely in the following year. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  The proponents argue that we should declare this to be a new strategy. But in my view, that 
would be the wrong approach: it would be a fundamental change in an environment in which 
steadfastness and anchoring a proven strategy are very important. Moreover, in theory and 
under  certain  conditions  this  approach  may  be  clever,  but  in  practice,  it  is  a  highly 
questionable experiment. 
So  you  don’t  believe  in  allowing  temporarily  higher  inflation  in  future,  because 
inflation was significantly below the 2% target in recent years? 
I don’t find this approach at all convincing. Such a change in our strategy would, in my eyes, 
be  incompatible  with  stability.  The  Governing  Council’s  decision  refers  to  “…a  sustained 
adjustment in the path of inflation that is consistent with its aim of achieving inflation rates 
below, but close to, 2% over the medium term”. 
QE is ostensibly the answer to the long-lasting very low inflation. But is that really so 
dangerous if it is due to falling oil prices? 
I also distinguish between an undershooting of zero inflation, which is mainly attributable to 
temporary  phenomena  such  as  the  price  of  oil,  and  on  which  we  can  effectively  have  no 
influence,  and  a  general  fall  in  the  price  level.  Before  January,  however,  the  proportion  of 
goods for which the rate of increase was less than 0.5% was steadily rising. Also, inflation 
expectations slumped from 1.8% to 1.4%. These were the arguments that persuaded me to 
recognise that we had to turn to the final resort. 
This means you would have voted in January for QE if a formal vote had been taken in 
the Governing Council? 
I’ve never said publicly how I vote in the Council – because that is forbidden and all those 
voting respect this. 
Sometimes  one  has  the  feeling  of  being  a  “topsy-turvy  world”:  the  Fed,  which  has 
traditionally been very worried about deflation, is relatively relaxed in view of the oil-
price-depressed  inflation.  The  ECB,  however,  which  has  always  warned  against 
exaggerated fears of deflation is very alarmed. How come? 
As  far  as  I  can  remember,  we  have  never  been  in  a  situation  where  things  have  turned 
negative  so  quickly.  I  would  not  say  that  in  January  we  were  already  at  a  point  where 
consumers postpone their purchases in the expectation of falling prices. But the danger was 
that  we  were  heading  for  such  a  situation.  In  addition,  lending  has  been  falling  for  years. 
Since  April  2014,  the  situation  has  been  improving,  but  at  a  worryingly  slow  pace.  That’s 
another reason why we could not just sit back and say, things will get better by themselves. 
We have a mandate and should try to achieve that goal not only over a five-year cycle, but 
as soon as possible. 
You mentioned inflation expectations. A closely followed indicator is the “5y5y” rate, 
i.e.  the  markets’  expectations  the  of the inflation rate in five  years’  time for the  five 
years thereafter. This rose at the start of QE, but only slightly. Are you disappointed? 
We are not 5y5y fetishists. We know the weaknesses of individual indicators. But what has 
worried me was the sagging that occurred under a certain limit. When it dropped to 1.4%, it 
was a free fall and there was a risk of a de-anchoring of inflation expectations. At 1.7% to 
1.8%,  we  are  now  back  at  a  level  of  expectations  that  is  more  closely  in  line  with  our 
medium-term projections. 
How great is the risk that the ECB may at some time no longer find enough bonds to 
purchase?  Sure,  ultimately  everything  depends  on  the  price.  But  it  can’t  be  in  your 
interest to pay excessive prices. 
High prices inversely mean low interest rates – that is now precisely what we are aiming for. I 
don’t think there will be any shortage generally: many euro bonds have been issued and are 
available on the market because foreign investors have other regulatory requirements. In one 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  segment  or  another  there  may  be  a  shortage. Then  we  have  to  see  how  we  handle  it. Of 
course,  the  range  of  public  offerings  is  defined  very  broadly  and  extends  beyond  central 
government. In any case, the programme is being constantly monitored. 
Some people are speculating that the ECB could reduce its deposit rate of –0.2% still 
further in order to increase the pool of available bonds, as the rate forms the lower 
limit at which government securities can be bought with a negative return. 
This  is  certainly  a  theoretical  possibility.  But  we  must  always  ask  ourselves  whether  an 
instrument is appropriate and proportionate. Such a cost/benefit analysis, to my mind, rules 
out that we are going down further with the deposit rate. We have also repeatedly said that 
we have reached the lower  limit in respect of the interest rates. Please take a look at our 
most  recently  published  “account”,  the  non-verbatim  summary  of  the  monetary  policy 
discussion of the Governing Council members. 
With the launch of QE the euro has fallen in value once again. It has stabilised more 
recently. Are you pleased about that? When does a devaluation become a problem? 
Exchange rate developments are always dangerous when they are extreme and out of line 
with  fundamentals.  That  still  applies.  For  me,  it’s  time  for  the  highest  level  of  alarm  when 
attempts  are  made to  use  the  exchange  rate  as  an  instrument  –  and  under  the  pretext  of 
returning  to  stable  prices,  in  order  to  improve  competitiveness.  That  would  deviate 
completely from our obligations, as laid down in the EU Treaty. That would be a red alert. 
But  didn’t  we  reach  that  point  a  while  ago,  according  to  some  commentators  from 
Rome or Paris? 
There will always be atavistic reactions. But I do not want to overstate them. We at the ECB 
have no exchange rate target, and we don’t even use the exchange rate as an intermediate 
target. We are aware that it plays an important role in inflation. That’s all. Let me stress that it 
would be a mistake to regard the exchange rate as an instrument of general economic policy. 
The  QE  programme  is  currently  designed  to  come  to  an  abrupt  end  between 
September and October 2016. The Federal Reserve has been finding out how difficult 
it is to exit and has been tapering its purchases. Does the ECB have to make some 
adjustments in that respect? 
First of all, I’m very glad you asked me about the exit. Many others are only focusing on what 
else the ECB can do. We still have a lot of persuading to do. But of course you have a point, 
we  absolutely  have  to  avoid  “cliff-edge”  effects.  The  entire  monetary  policy  is  oriented 
towards smooth developments. So that’s a question which we will have to deal with when the 
time comes. But we are not yet at that point. 
But when embarking on such a policy shouldn’t you have an exit strategy ready? 
I am convinced that we have not yet arrived at a point where we need to conduct a public 
discussion on the exit. 
In  Germany  there’s  a  debate  raging  about  the  ECB’s  inflation  target  of  “below,  but 
close to, 2%”. Some are saying that price stability is actually 0% and that it is crazy for 
the ECB to use all ways and means to create inflation. 
We  had  a  detailed  discussion  on  this  matter  in  the  early  2000s  under  the  ECB’s  chief 
economist at the time, Otmar Issing. We quickly and unanimously concluded that we should 
not have an inflation target of 0%. In that scenario we would tend to be deflation-oriented, not 
least because of statistical distortions in measuring prices. An economy therefore needs a 
little inflation in order to have a buffer. I don’t think much at all of unsettling our definition of 
price stability – just as I don’t think much of questioning our strategy, as we have seen in the 
discussion on price-level targeting. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  
 
Greece  is  currently  another  major  issue  for  the  ECB.  How  painful  is  it  for  you  to 
rubber-stamp the emergency liquidity assistance (ELA) for Greece’s banks in volumes 
of more than €70 billion? 
For ELA decisions we apply our rules strictly. This works both ways: I’d really feel the pain if 
we didn’t observe our rules. But of course we have to be careful that this step doesn’t lead to 
hidden monetary financing of governments. This risk increases if a country has no access to 
markets. 
With this argument the ECB is also rejecting Athens’ attempt to raise the limits for the 
issuance of short-term government securities, the T-bills. Bundesbank President Jens 
Weidmann however goes one step further. He already sees a problem if Greek banks 
extend T-bills, i.e. perform a “rollover”. Is he right or is he too strict? 
The ECB’s Governing Council has not yet reached a conclusive opinion on that matter. For 
me, this is a dynamic process: the more a country – and a banking system – loses market 
access and the less likely it looks to regain it soon, the greater the risk of indirect monetary 
financing,  and  the  stricter  we  have  to  be.  Our  response  has  been  to  observe  the  current 
situation  very  closely  and  promptly  in  order  to  prevent  any  circumvention  of  the  ban  on 
monetary financing. The supervisory arm also has a role to play here. 
That means that the course is set and that no more T-bills should be issued, but it can 
even amount to a requirement for Athens to reduce the volume? 
We have to see how the situation develops. But I also uphold the applicable legislation. 
The  government  in  Athens  is  complaining  that  the  ECB  was  less  severe  with  the 
previous government in 2012. 
No, the rules are the same. At that time there was a programme, a cooperative government 
and the prospect of a successful review of the programme and its implementation. Currently, 
we are far from agreement. Promises alone are not enough. That applies especially  when 
they are undermined in public. 
How frustrated are you by the government in Athens? The fragile recovery in Greece 
seems to be stalled and government finances are deteriorating. 
The  figures  have  clearly  got  worse.  That’s  no  surprise.  It  also  shows  how  dangerous  the 
crisis is if it leads to parties from the far ends of the political spectrum bearing responsibility 
which  have  no  experience  of  government  or  of  how  Europe  works.  This  then  requires  a 
period of adaptation in a phase when there is no time. 
In your view, would it make sense to introduce capital controls in order to stop the 
enormous outflows of capital? 
Capital  controls  are  alien  to  a  monetary  union  and  they  should  only  be  invoked  in  an 
emergency. 
Or is it too late because a lot money has already “fled”? 
We certainly have to keep an eye on the situation. 
How likely is it that Greece deliberately or “accidentally” leaves the euro area? 
If you have a chance to shape things, you don’t assume that the result will be an accident. 
Instead, you do everything to avoid an accident. That is our approach, and that is, I think, the 
approach throughout Europe. But one can also clearly say: we have our rules in Europe, and 
everyone must stick to them. 
Large-scale purchase of government bonds by the ECB, new flexibility in the stability 
pact – is there a fundamental change under way in the monetary union, away from the 
idea of a stability union? 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  I  would  of  course  prefer  to  have  no  country  in  the  [excessive]  deficit  procedure  and  debt 
reduction going faster. But compared with other regions in the world, we are not doing that 
badly.  However  we  have  to  do  much  more  to  raise  our  growth  potential.  To  that  end, 
structural  reforms  are  urgently  needed.  In  that  respect  every  country  –  and  I  stress  every 
country  –  still  has  a  lot  to  do.  Some  countries  are  still  not  tackling the  issue  of  an  ageing 
population. But I don’t believe that we have basically said goodbye to a stability union. We 
still have the corresponding body of regulations. I would also be pleased to see that being 
applied in a more targeted way. 
How can that be done? 
It  has  been  shown  that  common  rules  alone  do  not  suffice  to  provide  the  necessary 
discipline.  In  my  view,  stronger  institutions  are  therefore  needed  at  European  level,  a 
deepening of the monetary union. The crucial question is then: what can we still do without 
changing the EU Treaty. I don’t see much room for manoeuvre there. 
Are you still convinced that the euro is more of a boon than a bane? Some observers 
have long been saying that it only sows discord. 
I continue to stand by it: the euro has brought Europe a lot – economically and much more 
than that. I can only warn against allowing ourselves, as Europeans, to be divided. I’m glad 
that  the  political  will  exists  in  almost  all  countries  to  stand  together.  That  also  shows  how 
strong  the  cement  of  cohesion  via  the  single  currency  has  become.  It  also  makes  me 
confident that together we can find a way out of this crisis. 
In  monetary  policy  circles  there’s  a  discussion  raging  about  the  “new  normal”.  Are 
non-standard instruments and mini or even negative rates the new normal for central 
banks? 
No. We are quite clearly in the unconventional area. That’s why these measures have a time 
limit. In the case of some of them the question will arise whether in future they should be a 
regular component of the “normal” tool box. As for our purchases of government bonds from 
euro area countries however, I don’t see that happening. Perhaps at some time there will be 
a  new  permanent  monetary  policy  instrument  for  the  ECB  via  a  system  of  new  European 
bonds. But I can’t imagine that without a change to the Treaty. In addition, I remain sceptical 
about the concept of secular stagnation. 
And what about negative interest rates? 
I  don’t  regard  them  as  being  justified  over  the  long  term  either.  We  have  taken  these 
measures in order to return as soon as possible to our normal instrument, the positive key 
rate. Yet it’s structural reforms that should take us back to an economic environment with no 
negative real interest rates. 
So  you  believe  that  at  some  time  we’ll  have  key  rates  of  3%  or  4%  again?  Many 
observers can hardly believe that and the problems the Fed is having in reversing its 
interest rate policy are strengthening such beliefs. 
No question about it: if we don’t manage to raise growth potential interest rates will not be 
able  to  rise  in  a  sustainable  way.  That’s  why  it’s  essential for  policy-makers  and  business 
people  to  make  the  necessary  adjustments.  Rates  at  0%  are  definitely  not  normal  and 
shouldn’t be so. And that’s why the debate about higher levels of investment is so important. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
