  Haruhiko Kuroda: Monetary policy – its effects and implementation 
Opening remarks by Mr Haruhiko Kuroda, Governor of the Bank of Japan, at the 2015 BOJ-
IMES  Conference,  hosted  by  the  Institute  for  Monetary  and  Economic  Studies,  Bank  of 
Japan, Tokyo, 4 June 2015. 
 Introduction 
I. 
Good  morning,  ladies  and  gentlemen.  It  is  my  great  honor  to  say  a  few  words  at  the 
beginning  of  the  22nd  BOJ-IMES  Conference.  On  behalf  of  my  colleagues  at  the  Bank  of 
Japan and myself, I would like to express my sincere welcome to all of you. 
At last year’s conference titled “Monetary Policy in a Post-Financial Crisis Era,” we had active 
discussions  on  fundamental  issues  of  monetary  policy  during  the  period  of  slow  economic 
growth  following  the  global  financial  crisis.  Since  then,  there  has  been  further  progress  in 
research  on  the  effects  of  unconventional  monetary  policy  in  academic  and  central  bank 
circles. Besides, growing attention has been paid to renewed debate over the slow recovery 
after  the  financial  crisis,  as  represented  by  the  thesis  of  secular  stagnation.  Against  the 
backdrop  of 
Its  Effects  and 
Implementation”  as  the  theme  of  this  year’s  conference.  The  aim  is  not  only  to  keep 
monetary  policy  at  the  center  of  the  discussion,  but  also  to  put  greater  emphasis  on 
implications for policy conduct in practice. I hope that, in light of the progress in monetary 
policy research and the recent developments in the global economy, we will have frank and 
lively discussions on the monetary policy challenges that we central bankers currently face. 
To kick things off, I would like to raise some issues relevant to these challenges. 
factors,  we  have  selected  “Monetary  Policy: 
these 
II. 
Global economic conditions and current issues concerning the conduct of 
monetary policy 
Over  the  past  year,  the  global  economy  as  a  whole  has  been  recovering  moderately. 
However, we have observed considerable differences in developments of economic activity 
and  prices  among  countries  and  regions.  In  reflection  of  these  differences,  diverging 
directions  of  monetary  policy  among  the  United  States,  Europe,  and  Japan  have  become 
increasingly  apparent.  This  certainly  was  a  major  feature  of  monetary  policy  in  the  global 
context for the past year. Meanwhile, headline inflation rates dropped globally, due primarily 
to a plunge in crude oil prices. With these significant developments in mind, I would like to 
raise three current issues concerning the conduct of monetary policy.  
The first issue concerns the effects of unconventional monetary policy and its transmission 
channels. In terms of monetary policy implementation, the European Central Bank launched 
the expanded asset purchase programme in January, and many of the major central banks 
have  now  adopted  quantitative  easing  (QE).  On  the  research  front,  academic  and  central 
bank circles have accumulated studies on unconventional policy that have been conducted 
vigorously to date. These studies have demonstrated that unconventional measures, such as 
QE and forward guidance, have been generating monetary easing effects, primarily through 
influencing  long-term  interest  rates  and  asset  prices,  as  well  as  inflation  expectations.  I 
believe  that  it  will  be  meaningful  if  we  can  further  promote  a  common  understanding  on 
unconventional policy by sharing the various insights obtained from both implementation and 
academic research of monetary policy. 
The second issue pertains to inflation expectations and the decline in crude oil prices. The 
plunge in crude oil prices since 2014 has posed a new challenge for the conduct of monetary 
policy.  In  October  2014,  the  Bank  of Japan  decided  to  expand  quantitative  and  qualitative 
monetary easing (QQE). This policy decision aimed at maintaining the improving momentum 
of  expectation  formation  and  at  pre-empting  manifestation  of  a  risk  that  the  decline  in  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  inflation  rate,  even  though  caused  by  the  oil  price  decline,  could  delay  conversion  of  the 
deflationary mindset, which had been progressing steadily under QQE. The background to 
the  policy  decision  is  that,  unlike  the  United  States  and  other countries where  medium- to 
long-term inflation expectations have been well anchored, Japan is in the midst of drastically 
changing  the  deflationary  mindset;  namely,  re-anchoring  inflation  expectations  to  the  price 
stability  target  of  2  percent. Inflation  expectations  are  obviously  one  of  the  most  important 
variables  for  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy.  Therefore,  it  is  a  major  policy  concern  for 
central bankers to gain a better understanding of how to measure inflation expectations, how 
such  expectations  actually  affect  firms’  price-  and  wage-setting  behavior,  as  well  as 
households’  consumption  decisions,  and  how  to  evaluate  the  degree  to  which  inflation 
expectations are anchored. I hope that further progress will be made in research in this field. 
The  third  issue  is  how  to  deal  with  the  international  spillovers  induced  by  the  diverging 
directions  of  monetary  policy  among  advanced  economies.  In  emerging  economies, 
monetary  authorities  have  paid  more  attention  to  developments  in  foreign  exchange  rates 
and international capital flows that are influenced by major central banks’ policy actions and 
announcements  of  their  future  directions  of  policies.  In  addressing  these  international 
spillovers,  how 
flow 
management policy in combination has come to be a crucial issue, particularly for countries 
that have financial system vulnerability. 
to  use  monetary  policy,  macro-prudential  policy,  and  capital 
Policy issues concerning slow post-financial crisis recoveries 
III. 
Thus  far,  I  have  explained  the  three  issues  central  banks  now  face  in  the  conduct  of 
monetary  policy.  Next,  I  would  like  to  raise  some  policy  issues  from  a  longer-term 
perspective. In the wake of the global financial crisis, economic recoveries around the world 
have been modest relative to past recoveries despite the implementation of unconventional 
monetary  policy.  For  the  past  year  or  so,  academic  and  central  bank  circles  have  actively 
discussed  how  to  interpret  this  fact.  Such  discussions  have  been  initiated  by  Lawrence 
Summers’ revisit to the “secular stagnation thesis” advocated originally by Alvin Hansen in 
the late 1930s. Various views have been raised regarding the causes of slow post-financial 
crisis recoveries; for example, the persistent weakness on the demand side of the economy 
and the low productivity on the supply side. 
There have been wide-ranging interpretations and views on secular stagnation. In light of the 
discussions over slow post-financial crisis recoveries, I would like to raise three policy issues. 
The first issue is to what extent central banks should consider the impact on the supply side 
of  the  economy  in  conducting  monetary  policy.  As  a  backdrop  of  the  slow  recoveries 
following  the  global  financial  crisis,  it  has  been  pointed  out  that  the  interaction  between 
demand  and  supply  has  gained  importance. That  is, the  weakness  in  demand  impairs the 
supply  side  mainly  by  discouraging  workers  from  participating  in  the  labor  market  and 
dampening firms’ investment in capital stock and in research and development. Furthermore, 
a decline in expectations about future economic growth may cause insufficiency of demand. 
That said, the conventional view takes the supply side, such as the potential growth rate and 
the natural rate of unemployment, as a given in the conduct of monetary policy. How would 
the mechanism of slow recoveries affect such a conventional view? 
The  second  issue  is  with  regard  to  what  monetary  policy  tools  are  desirable  under  a  low 
natural rate of interest. If the natural rate remains at a relatively low level over the medium to 
long term, compared with in the past, as suggested by the secular stagnation thesis, then the 
nominal interest rate is likely to stay around zero. Furthermore, even after the normalization 
of interest rates, the nominal rate might fall back to zero or to a very low level. In that case, 
would  unconventional  monetary  policy  continue  to  be  important  even  “beyond  the  exit”? 
Moreover, would it eventually be regarded as conventional in an economy under the “new 
normal”? 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  The third issue concerns the optimal policy mix for an economy undergoing medium- to long-
term stagnation with a low natural rate of interest. What would be the best policy mix among 
monetary  policy,  fiscal  policy,  and  structural  reform  in  such  a  situation?  Are  there  any 
constraints to the implementation of the best policy mix, such as mounting government debts 
or  constraints  under  a  common  currency  area?  What  alternative  mix  of  policies  could  be 
considered as a second best choice? 
Concluding remarks 
IV. 
Every word and deed of central banks around the globe has been drawing more attention as 
the diverging directions of monetary policy among advanced economies become apparent. 
The issues I have raised so far are all complex, and there are no quick, definitive solutions 
for them. Nevertheless, I strongly believe that, at this one-and-a-half day conference, we will 
address the issues we currently face and find our way forward through lively discussions. I 
trust that many of you are familiar with the story of Peter Pan, in which it says, “the moment 
you doubt whether you can fly, you cease forever to be able to do it.” Yes, what we need is a 
positive attitude and conviction. Indeed, each time central banks have been confronted with a 
wide range of problems, they have overcome the problems by conceiving new solutions. I am 
sure that we all can share a conviction backed by our collective experience and wisdom. I 
would like to close my remarks now as we ready ourselves for discussion. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
