  R Gandhi: Public sector banks – at cross road 
Speech by Mr R Gandhi, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the “Indian PSU 
Banking  Industry:  Road  Ahead”  Summit,  organized  by  the  Bengal  Chamber  of  Commerce 
and Industry, Kolkata, 10 January 2015. 
 Assistance provided by Ms Anupam Sonal is gratefully acknowledged. 
Ladies and Gentlemen! 
1. 
It is a pleasure and privilege to be among the banking and industry participants at 
this  Conference  on  “Indian  PSU  Banking  Industry:  Road  Ahead”  organised  by  the  Bengal 
Chamber of Commerce and Industry. The theme of the Conference is very contemporary. In 
recent times, the PSBs position in the banking pecking order has been seriously challenged. 
There are lot of churning of ideas to restore greater strength in them. I thought today I can 
discuss certain thoughts which I feel are very important for the PSBs to seriously consider in 
that respect. 
2. 
India  has  a  real  long  history  of  banking.  According  to  the  Indian  Central  Banking 
Enquiry Committee (1931), money lending activity in India could be traced back to the Vedic 
period, i.e., 2000 to 1400 BC. The existence of professional banking in India could be traced 
to  the  500  BC.  Kautilya’s  Arthashastra,  dating  back  to  400  BC  contained  references  to 
creditors, lenders and lending rates. After the independence of the country in 1947, keeping 
in tune with the then economic policy, banking sector was highly regulated. The public sector 
banking commenced in India with the nationalisation of the then Imperial Bank as State Bank 
of  India  in  1955.  One  of  the  defining  moments  of  Indian  banking  industry  is  the  bank 
nationalisation in 1969, when 14 private sector commercial banks were nationalised. In the 
aftermath of a balance of payment crisis situation in 1991and with the advent of economic 
reforms  India  embarked  upon  financial  sector  liberalization  in  a  phased  manner.  Banking 
industry  was  deregulated  by  way  of  allowing  entry  of  new  private  sector  banks;  ten  new 
private  Indian  banks  were  set  up  in  1993,  followed  by  two  banks  in  2003.  Other  notable 
features towards deregulation of banking sector included allowing 74% foreign investment in 
private  sector  banks,  doing  away  with  licensing  of  branches  of  domestic  scheduled 
commercial  banks  in  a  phased  manner,  deregulation  of  interest  rates,  widening  and 
deepening of financial markets, etc. 
3. 
Indian  banking  sector  comprises  of  different  types  of  institutions  to  cater  to  the 
divergent  banking  needs  of  various  sectors  of  the  economy.  There  are  typical  commercial 
banks which operate on all India basis. There are government owned banks, privately owned 
banks and foreign owned banks. There are also small banks with limited areas of operation. 
Credit cooperatives were created to cater to the credit, processing and marketing needs of 
small and marginal farmers organised on cooperative lines. Cooperatives expanded also in 
urban and semi-urban areas in the form of urban cooperative banks to meet the banking and 
credit  requirements  of  people  with  smaller  means.  Regional  Rural  Banks  were  created  to 
bring  together  the  positive  features  of  credit  cooperatives  and  commercial  banks  and 
specifically address credit needs of backward sections in rural areas. Further, there was an 
experiment of establishing Local Area Banks, albeit on a smaller scale, to bridge the gap in 
credit availability and strengthen the institutional credit framework in the rural and semi-urban 
areas.  Most  recently,  we  have  decided  to  experiment  with  new  types  of  banks  under  our 
differential  licensing  policy.  Accordingly,  we  have  invited  applications  for  Small  Finance 
Banks  and  Payment  Banks.  These  banks  will  operate  in  their  own  niche  areas  of  small 
finance and payments services. 
4. 
In  India,  the  universal  banking  model  is  followed.  As  regards  the  structure  of 
universal banks, the conglomerate structure is bank-led, i.e., banks themselves are holding 
companies  which  operate  certain  businesses  through  Subsidiaries,  Joint  Ventures  and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Affiliates. The general principle in this regard is that para-banking activities, such as credit 
cards, primary dealer, leasing, hire purchase, factoring etc., can be conducted either inside 
the  bank  departmentally  or  outside  the  bank  through  subsidiary/  joint  venture  /associate. 
Activities such as insurance, stock broking, asset management, asset reconstruction, venture 
capital funding and infrastructure financing can be undertaken only outside the bank. Lending 
activities must be conducted from inside the bank. Investment banking services are provided 
by the banks as an in-house departmental activity or through subsidiary. 
5. 
The Indian banking system has grown phenomenally over the years. What has been 
the  actual  contribution  of  banks  for  mobilizing  savings  and  engineering  investments  in  the 
Indian economy? The aggregate deposits which stood at just ₹ 8 billion as on March 1951, 
grew to ₹17 billion by March 1961, ₹59 billion by March 1971, ₹380 billion by March 1981, 
₹1925 billion by March 1991, ₹9629 billion by March 2001 and ₹52080 billion by March 2011. 
As at end March 2014, it reached ₹85,331 billion. The Bank credit increased from ₹5 billion 
as at end March 1951, to ₹13 billion by March 1961, ₹47 billion by March 1971, ₹254 billion 
by March 1981, ₹1164 billion by March 1991, ₹5114 billion by March 2001, ₹39420 billion by 
March 2011 and ₹67352 billion by March 2014. The branches which stood at 8262 in 1969 
expanded to 1,16,450 by March 2014. The other types of touch-points numbered 3,37,678 as 
at end March 2014. The number of ATMs were 1,60,055 as on that date. 
6. 
The  major  share  of  this  growth  story  belongs  to  the  public  sector  banks.  PSBs 
dominated the banking system with a market share of 72.1% as at end March 2014 distantly 
followed by NPBs (15.9%), FBs (7.2%) and OPBs (4.9%). As at end of March 2014, the total 
capital of the PSBs stood at ₹5652 billion; their share in total deposits was 77.22%, share in 
total advances was 75.74%. However, their CRAR was 11.40%, against 13.01% of all banks. 
Their gross NPA was 4.36% vs 3.83% of all banks: their total stressed assets were 10.67% 
vs  9.03%  of  all  banks.  If  we  look  at  the  corresponding  figures  for  the  New  Private  Sector 
Banks at CRAR of 16.59%, gross NPA of 1.73% and total stressed assets of 3.28%, we get 
a  feeling  of  the  tight  spot  that  the  PSBs  find  themselves  in  today.  If  we  look  at  their 
performance ratios, a deep despondency sets in. The PSBs’ ROE was very low at 9.71 as at 
end March 2014 vs 17.06 of the NPBs. ROA was at 0.50 vs 1.83. 
 
The PSBs need a hard relook on their structure, functioning methods and financial 
7. 
and risk management. 
Firstly, Capital Planning for PSBs needs to be considered over a long term horizon. 
a. 
Approximately, as high a sum of ₹4.50 lakh crore in Tier 1 capital (which includes ₹ 2.40 lakh 
crore  equity  capital)  will  be  needed.  Recently,  it  has  been  reported  that  the  GOI  is 
contemplating scaling down their holdings in PSBs to 52%. This may not be sufficient to fully 
meet the capital needs of the PSBs under Basel III norms particularly since the projections 
are based on minimum requirements. We also have to remember that Pillar II assessment 
has not taken off effectively/ fully as of now. The PSBs will have to chart out a clear capital 
raising  plan  over  the  next  five  years.  The  PSBs  should  actively  consider  several  options 
including, non-voting rights share capital, differential voting rights share capital, golden voting 
rights share capital, etc. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  b. 
Secondly, there is a need to reflect on the Holding Company Structure in respect of 
the  PSBs.  The  Nayak  Committee  recommendations  in  the  matter  look  at  the  Bank 
Investment Company Structure from the limited perspective / single angle of separating the 
GOI  investments  from  the  PSBs.  There  are  deeper  ramifications  on  this  aspect  and  the 
whole  issue  must  be  looked  at  from  multiple  dimensions  including  that  of  the  financial 
stability perspective. The suggestions made in the Shyamala Gopinath Report on the Bank 
Holding Company structure need to be given a serious consideration. The objective must be 
threefold  –  i)  help  reduce  capital  requirement  impact  on  the  GOI  ii)  financial  stability 
perspective, and iii) strengthening corporate governance by reducing government influence 
and interference; 
c. 
Thirdly,  the  Performance  Appraisal  System  (PAS)  needs  a  complete  revamp. 
Currently  the  PAS  makes  no  meaningful  distinction  between  individuals  for  identifying  or 
deploying talent, skills and / or specialisation; nor does it guide determining compensation. 
The  system  needs  reshaping  so  as  to  serve  as  the  mainstay  for  evaluating  employees’ 
performance, assessing compensation and developing leadership. 
d. 
Fourthly, the Public Sector Banks (PSBs) have hardly any meaningful participation 
in  the  financial  markets,  i.e  in  the  BCD  instruments.  This  restricts  /  curtails  the  financial 
market  development.  A  selected  set  of  foreign  banks  and  the  new  Private  Sector  Banks 
dominate the financial markets in India. PSBs need to engage proactively, especially, in the 
derivative instruments for hedging their risks. Treasury function is relatively weak in PSBs. 
Well  established  and  robust  Treasury  is  a  must  for  the  purpose;  they  must  build  up 
specialisation  and  should  have  sufficient  number  of  specialists.  The  vigilance  aspect  on 
treasury losses/ losses from transactions will need to be rationalised just as in other areas of 
PSB operations. 
e. 
Fifthly, the PSBs should have a relook on their  portfolios. Currently, their portfolio 
share  in  advances  to agriculture,  industries,  services,  retail  and  other  services  account for 
13.90%,  46.32%,  20.93%,  15.74%  and  3.11%.  They  will  need  to  rebalance  this,  from  the 
perspective of diversification. 
f. 
Sixthly, the Retail Banking in PSBs needs a complete overhaul in terms of products, 
instruments  and  methods  for  deployment.  As  India  is  poised  for  re-entering  high  growth 
period,  and  as  greater  number  of  individuals  will  have  higher  income  and  higher  financial 
needs, PSBs should be ready to meet these needs. 
g. 
Seventhly,  the  PSBs  should  look  at  financial  inclusion  as  a  profitable  business 
proposition and not as a matter of compliance with the RBI and government requirements. 
Extensive and smart use of ICT, mobile and internet banking as well as the Aadhaar linkage 
for  customer  identification  and  authentication  can  make  this  truly  possible.  Banks  need  to 
come out of the brick and mortar branch set-up mindset, and reorient the business models in 
accordance with changing times and requirements as well as improve profitability. We must 
not distrust the ability of the rural and/ or poor, small and marginal businesses/ operators/ 
farmers to understand and use basic / simple technology. The mobile and internet revolution 
in India has proved that already. 
h. 
Eighthly,  the  PSBs  should  grab  the  opportunity  offered  to  them  during  the  Gyan 
Sangam, the retreat for the PSB chiefs at Pune last week. Now that Government has clearly 
articulated  that  the  PSBs  will  take  their  own  commercial  decisions,  the  PSBs  will  have  no 
excuse hereafter for any poor performance. 
i. 
Ninthly, level playing field is on the cards. Already banking regulations and priority 
sector norms are increasingly owner agnostic. Now government also desires that the PSBs 
are professionally managed and operated. This augurs well for the PSBs. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  8. 
To conclude, we can easily agree that the PSBs are at the cross road. They are now 
being  increasingly  enabled  to  compete  on  professional  basis.  They  are  being  assured  of 
autonomy for their commercial decision making. Given these changed environment, it is time 
that they deliver value for the nation which provides its capital. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
