  Benoît Cœuré: Drawing lessons from the crisis for the future of the euro 
area 
Speech by Mr Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
at “Ambassadors Week”, Paris, 27 August 2015. 
 Your Excellencies, 
Thank you for your invitation. Here in the ministry where Robert Schuman made his historic 
declaration on 9 May 1950, everyone understands that the European project is inextricably 
an economic and political project. 
The same is true of the euro. The single currency reflects a political desire to unite Europe 
and  aims  to  reap  the  benefits  of  a  larger  and  better  integrated  economic  area  to  support 
growth and job creation. 
The current crisis represents a fundamental test of our monetary union’s ability to achieve 
that dual objective, and it seems to me that there are two lessons that we should learn from 
it. 
The first  is  that  the  people  of  Europe  and  their  governments  are far  more  attached  to  the 
single currency than certain observers have suggested. 
The second is that our institutional framework is not yet sufficient to complete Economic and 
Monetary Union when it comes to economic, fiscal and financial matters. The ECB does not 
currently  have  a  strong  political  counterpart  in  these  areas.  Thus,  our  monetary  union  will 
remain imperfect, will not be as prosperous as it could be and will face the risk of repeated 
crises if we fail to address our economic and political differences. 
As the authors of a recent article entitled “Monnet’s Error?” concluded, the European project 
is  on  hold:  “There  is  no  desire  to go  backward  [and]  no  interest  in going forward,  but  it  is 
economically unsustainable to stay still.”1  
I would like to say a few words today about the major challenge that this poses and what we 
can do about it. 
The paradox of the euro during the crisis 
1. 
It  should  be  noted,  first  of  all,  that  the  euro  has  proved  to  be  something  of  a  paradox: 
confidence  in  the  single  currency  remains  very high,  despite the fact  that  the  euro  area  is 
struggling  to  emerge  from  the  crisis  and  the  fragilities  of  our  economic  and  political  union 
have threatened the integrity of the euro area on several occasions. 
Confidence in the single currency 
a) 
During the crisis, certain observers have underestimated the extent to which the people of 
Europe and their governments support the euro. 
In spring 2015 a very large majority of the population of the euro area was in favour of the 
single  currency.2  69%  of  respondents  to  the  Eurobarometer  survey  were  in  favour  of 
Economic and Monetary Union and the euro, 25% were against it and 6% were undecided. 
                                                
1  Guiso,  L.,  Sapienza,  P.  and  Zingales,  L.,  “Monnet’s  Error?”,  paper  presented  at  the  Brookings  Panel  on 
Economic Activity, autumn 2014. 
2  See Standard Eurobarometer 83, Question QA18.1. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  That figure of 69% is close to the highest value recorded since 2004 for that question (which 
stands at 70%). 
The countries of the euro area have also reaffirmed, on several occasions, their commitment 
to the euro and their determination to preserve our monetary union. On 13 July they made it 
clear that they wanted Greece to remain in the euro area. Indeed, not only has the euro area 
not shrunk, as some people have forecasted, it has actually grown in size. The figures speak 
for  themselves:  the  number  of  member  countries  has  increased  by  almost  50%  since  the 
start of the financial crisis, rising from 13 to 19.3 
The  rest  of  the  world  has  also  maintained  its  confidence  in  the  euro.  The  single  currency 
continues  to  play  a  key  role  at  international  level,  remaining  one  of  the  world’s  two  major 
currencies,4  and  its  share  of  global  foreign  exchange  reserves  has  remained  broadly 
unchanged  since  the  crisis  began  in  2007.5  This  year,  against  the  background  of  the 
historically  low  interest  rates  in  the  euro  area,  the  euro  has  been  increasingly  used  as  a 
funding  currency  by  international  borrowers.6  And  in  April  2015  Mexico  became  the  first 
sovereign state to issue a bond denominated in euro with a maturity of 100 years. 
There are several different factors that could explain that confidence in the single currency. 
First of all, the euro forms an integral part of the European identity.7 It is also considered to 
guarantee stability (by protecting purchasing power) and provide protection against the risk 
of exchange rate crises. This aspect is directly linked to the credibility of the ECB’s monetary 
policy, which has demonstrated its ability to act to maintain price stability. Finally, sharing a 
currency establishes common interests, from both a financial and a geopolitical perspective. 
We can build on that confidence in the euro in order to strengthen our monetary union. The 
ECB’s fundamental objective is to protect the euro, hence it is imperative that we fulfil our 
mandate  by  keeping  inflation  below,  but  close  to,  2%,  which  explains  all  of  our  monetary 
policy decisions during the crisis. 
The fragilities of our economic union 
b) 
At the moment, however, there is no such confidence in our ability to fully reap the economic 
benefits of our monetary union and ensure stability and growth in the euro area. In the spring 
of 2015, 45% of respondents in the euro area said they believed that the worst of the crisis 
was yet to come.8 
                                                
3  Malta and Cyprus joined the euro area in 2008, followed by Slovakia in 2009, Estonia in 2011, Latvia in 2014 
and Lithuania in 2015. 
4  European Central Bank, The international role of the euro, July 2015. 
5  At constant exchange rates, the euro’s share of global foreign exchange reserves has fallen by 1 percentage 
point (to 22%) since the end of 2007, while that of the US dollar has declined by 5 percentage points (to 63%). 
Thus, the decline in the share of the euro at current exchange rates is essentially a reflection of the euro’s 
depreciation over that period. In 1998 the combined share of the national currencies that preceded the euro 
stood at 15%. 
6  Accounting for almost 30% of new issuance. 
7  A Eurobarometer survey conducted at the end of 2014 for the European Parliament found that the euro was 
the  most  important  element  of  the  European  identity  (being  mentioned  by  50%  of  respondents  in  the  euro 
area), ahead of the values of democracy and freedom (49%), culture and history. See European Parliament 
Eurobarometer 82.4, Question QP11, January 2015. 
8  According  to  the  spring  2015  Eurobarometer  survey  referred  to  above.  In  the  European  Parliament 
Eurobarometer survey, 51% of respondents said that having the euro had not mitigated the negative impact of 
the crisis. Finally, in a survey conducted by Opinium Research between 29 June and 10 July 2015, 63% of 
respondents  in  the  euro  area  (a  sample  of  more  than  6,000  people  living  in  France,  Germany,  the 
Netherlands, Italy, Spain and Portugal) said they thought that the Greek debt crisis had been handled badly at 
European level. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  The crisis showed that excessive imbalances and fragilities had been allowed to develop in a 
number  of  euro  area  countries  in  the  absence  of  sufficient  safeguards:  investment  in  the 
housing  sector  instead  of  the  productive  economy,  excessive  risk  taking  in  the  banking 
sector and massive external indebtedness. Participating countries have taken the benefits of 
the euro for granted without acknowledging their shared responsibility.9 The negative effects 
of  this  process  became  brutally  apparent  during  the  euro  area  sovereign  debt  crisis,  and 
even now, five years after that crisis began, they are still weighing on economic activity and 
employment. 
The  consequences  are  not  just  economic;  they  are  also  political.  In  the  worst  affected 
countries, convergence in GDP per capita has been reversed, casting doubt on one of the 
fundamental  objectives  of  the  single  currency.10  Unemployment  hits  the  young  hardest, 
creating a lost generation. What is more, recent studies have shown that increases in debt 
and unemployment in one euro area country affect confidence in the EU in other  Member 
States  as  well.11  This  is  an  additional  element  of  the  interdependence  that  the  single 
currency has created among the countries that use it. 
the 
future  of 
responsibility 
for  policies  concerning 
An imperfect political response 
c) 
Thus, we have a shared interest in resolving the imbalances and economic fragilities in the 
euro area. However, the political response during the crisis has been complicated by several 
factors. 
It has been necessary to develop new instruments as a matter of urgency in the midst of the 
crisis.  Some  of  those  instruments,  particularly  the  financial  assistance  programmes,  are 
governed  by  a  decision-making  mechanism  which  is  not  conducive  to  the  development  of 
shared 
the  euro  area.  This 
intergovernmental decision-making process involves endless negotiations, particularly when 
it comes to issues with redistributive implications, and highlights the differences between the 
positions  of  the  various  Member  States.  Thus,  it  runs  the  risk  of  a  conflict  between  the 
legitimate democratic interests of individual countries, without offering sufficient legitimacy at 
European level in return. 
The  raison  d’être  of  this  approach  is,  admittedly,  to  allow  each  government  to  sign  up  to 
shared decisions. However, experience shows that it does not ensure that governments take 
ownership  of  those  decisions  at  national  level.  What  is  more,  it  does  not  prevent  the 
polarisation  of  the  debate  at  European  level  or  the  temptation  to  engage  in  nationalist 
posturing. Finally, it does not facilitate the establishment of a growth strategy based on the 
aggregate position of the euro area, the systemic risks associated with national fragilities and 
interaction between these various levels.12 
To  sum  up,  maintaining  this  approach  would  condemn  us  to  a  future  of  low  growth  and 
repeated  crises.  At  a  time  when  global  growth  may  be  slowing  down,  it  is  our  shared 
responsibility to avoid the same fate befalling the euro area. 
                                                
9  The overconsumption of the benefits of monetary union, like that of natural resources, is an example of the 
“tragedy  of  the  commons”.  See  Hardin,  G.,  “The  Tragedy  of  the  Commons”,  Science,  Vol.  162,  No  3,859, 
13 December 1968. 
10  “Real  convergence  in  the  euro  area:  evidence,  theory  and  policy  implications”,  Economic  Bulletin,  Issue  5, 
ECB, May 2015. 
11  Ioannou,  D.,  Jamet,  J.-F.  and  Kleibl,  J.,  “Spillovers  and  Euroscepticism”,  Working  Paper  Series,  No  1815, 
ECB, June 2015. 
12  These  various  points  are  addressed  in  a  recent  interview  with  Le  Monde,  which  was  published  on  27  July 
2015. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  Renewing the European project 
2. 
We  must  be  clear,  however:  the  euro  area  is  an  irreversible  project,  not  simply  a  fixed 
exchange rate system. This statement is all the more necessary as the recent negotiations 
concerning  Greece  have  let  the  evil  genie  of  a  country  exiting  the  euro  area  (even 
temporarily) out of the bottle. The exit of a member country would inevitably lead economic 
actors  to  wonder  who  would  be  next,  with  all  the  potential  destabilising  effects  that  such 
speculation could entail. The genie will not be put back in its bottle once and for all until it is 
clear that such a risk will not rear its head again. 
We need to use the confidence in the single currency to build institutions that will reinforce 
the cohesion of our economic and political union. 
To achieve this, we need to recreate the sense of shared responsibility. This will require the 
objectives of political and economic integration in the medium term to be better defined, and 
work  will  need  to  begin  immediately  to  implement  them.  And  as  this  will  not  be  possible 
without  the  support  of  European  citizens,  we  must  respond  to  their  concerns  in  the  short 
term, by reducing unemployment and consolidating the recovery. 
Our shared goals 
a) 
Since 2010, the integration of the euro area has progressed under the pressure of the crisis, 
with agreements often reached at the last minute. We all have in mind Jean Monnet’s remark 
that “Europe will be forged in crises, and will be the sum of the solutions adopted for those 
crises”.13 But some of these solutions, improvised in a hurry, are not always long lasting. For 
example,  the  European  Stability  Mechanism  is  an  impressive  achievement  and  could 
become the foundation of a “euro area Treasury”, under the condition that it is brought under 
the umbrella of the EU’s treaties and under the control of the European Parliament.14 
“Integration by crisis” has proved effective, but it no longer inspires the support of the citizens 
(if it ever did). So, the euro must be associated with a positive “narrative” and equipped with 
the necessary instruments, making sure that they are subject to democratic oversight. 
What  are  Europe’s  collective  goals?  What  are  the  public  goods  that  require  joint  action? 
Obviously,  the  scope  of  such  reflection  goes  beyond  just  the  economic  sphere;  it  also 
encompasses  key  determinants  of  power,  such  as  technology,  energy  and  even  foreign 
policy and security. In federations, public investment in such common goods is centralised.15 
Here  in  the  European  Union,  we  are  a  long  way  from  that.  And  yet,  we  face  the  same 
international challenges. 
We  are  asking  ourselves  these  questions  so  we  can  identify  what  we  must  do  better 
together, but also to avoid the duplication of competences by identifying areas where political 
action is more effective and legitimate at local or national level.16 
                                                
13  Monnet, J., Mémoires, Fayard, 1976. 
14  The “Five Presidents’ Report” (“Completing Europe’s Economic and Monetary Union”, a report prepared by  
J.-C. Juncker, in close cooperation with D. Tusk, J. Dijsselbloem, M. Draghi and M. Schulz, 22 June 2015) 
recommends  integrating  the  intergovernmental  solutions  (the  Treaty  on  Stability,  Coordination  and 
Governance in the Economic and Monetary Union, the Euro Plus Pact, the Intergovernmental Agreement on 
the Single Resolution Fund and the European Stability Mechanism) into the legal framework of the EU.  
15  Cottarelli,  C.  and  Guerguil,  M.  (eds.),  Designing  a  European  Fiscal  Union:  Lessons  from  the  Experience of 
Fiscal Federations, Routledge, 2014. 
16  In  particular,  the  economic  literature  uses  as  a  criterion  the  comparison  between,  on  the  one  hand,  the 
heterogeneity of preferences and situations and, on the other, the externalities linked to different policies. It 
also  highlights  the  need  for  a  dynamic  approach  to  take  into  account  the  economic  and  political  factors  of 
convergence and divergence. See, in particular, Alesina, A. and Wacziarg, R., “Is Europe Going Too Far?”, 
Journal  of  Monetary  Economics,  Carnegie-Rochester  Conference  Volume,  1999,  pp.  1–42;  Cœuré,  B.  and 
Pisani-Ferry,  J.,  “The  governance  of  the  European  Union’s  international  relations:  how  many  voices?”,  in 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
In the economic sphere, what should our shared goals be? The “Five Presidents’ Report”17 
seeks to answer this question from the perspective of our monetary union. But the question 
is also relevant for the internal market, and thus for the European Union as a whole. 
The Five Presidents’ Report stresses that we need to reinforce the stability of our economies 
by developing solidarity mechanisms, in particular within the monetary union, while ensuring 
that  governments  and  economic  actors  behave  responsibly.  This  is  what  has  been  done 
within  the  framework  of  the  banking  union,  and  it’s  what  we  must  aim  to  do  within  the 
framework of the capital markets union.18 
Likewise,  greater  risk  sharing  in  the  fiscal  sphere  presupposes  sufficient  economic 
convergence  among  participating  countries.  Solidarity  cannot  turn  into  a  system  of 
permanent transfers, which is not part of the founding “contract” of monetary union. To put it 
another  way,  this  is  about  establishing  a  new  European  social  contract,  which  can  be 
designed only under John Rawls’ “veil of ignorance”.19 
Such  greater  risk  sharing  also  presupposes  responsible  fiscal  policies,  which  are  in  the 
interests  of  both  individual  countries  and  their  neighbours.  I  want  to  make  this  clear:  we 
cannot  advocate  a  Europe  of  solidarity  while  believing  that  the  economic  policies  of  each 
euro  area  country  are  the  business  of  that  country’s  parliament  alone.  The  crisis  has  fully 
exposed that contradiction. 
Second,  efficiency  gains  could  be  achieved  if  we  were  to  progressively  pool  certain 
resources  within  the  framework  of  the  single  market  –  with  such  action  being  justified  by 
economies of scale and scope, network effects and externalities. This was the logic behind 
the establishment of the European Coal and Steel Community in 1951, and today it informs 
the Juncker Plan, as well as efforts to develop an energy union and a single digital market. 
The joint implementation of a political project and an economic strategy also assumes that 
our political union will be strengthened. 
To  remedy  the  “executive  deficit”20  –  in  other  words,  to  reduce  the  difficulties  involved  in 
taking decisions that I mentioned earlier – we should favour sharing decisions that affect the 
future of the euro area within common institutions with a European mandate and democratic 
oversight at European level. How would the Governing Council of the ECB have dealt with 
the crisis if it was just a club of 19 national governors making decisions by consensus? 
Following the lead of Jean-Claude Trichet,21 I have spoken out in favour of the creation of a 
finance  ministry  for  the  euro  area  under  the  oversight  of  the  European  Parliament.  This 
ministry  could  be  responsible  for  preventing  economic  and  fiscal  imbalances,  managing 
                                                                                                                                                   
Sapir, A. (ed.), Fragmented Power: Europe and the Global Economy, Bruegel, 2007; and Jamet, J.-F., “The 
Optimal Assignment of Prerogatives to Different Levels of Government in the EU”, Journal of Common Market 
Studies, 49, 2011, pp. 563–584. 
17  “Completing  Europe’s  Economic  and  Monetary  Union”,  a  report  prepared  by  J.-C.  Juncker,  in  close 
cooperation with D. Tusk, J. Dijsselbloem, M. Draghi and M. Schulz, 22 June 2015. 
18  Building  a  Capital  Markets  Union,  Eurosystem  contribution  to  the  European  Commission’s  green  paper, 
21 May 2015. 
19  Rawls, J., A Theory of Justice, Harvard University Press, 1971. See also Cœuré, B., “Revisiting the European 
social contract”, speech given at the European Conference at Harvard – Europe 2.0 Taking the Next Step, 
Cambridge, Massachusetts, 2 March 2013. 
20  Chopin,  T.,  “Vers  un  véritable  pouvoir  exécutif  européen:  de  la  gouvernance  au  gouvernement”,  Question 
d’Europe No 274, Robert Schuman Foundation, 15 April 2013; and Véron, N., “The Political Redefinition of 
Europe”, opening remarks at the conference organised by the Swedish Financial Markets Committee (FMK) 
on “The European Parliament and the Financial Markets”, Stockholm, 8 June 2012. 
21  “Building Europe, building institutions”, speech by Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the ECB, on receiving the 
Charlemagne Prize 2011 in Aachen on 2 June 2011. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  crises  in  the  euro  area  and  managing  the  budgetary  capacity  envisaged  by  the  Five 
Presidents’ Report, as well as representing euro area governments in international economic 
and financial institutions. 
What to do in the short term 
b) 
None  of  what  I  have  mentioned  will  be  possible  without  the  support  of  European  citizens. 
What  do  they  expect?  That  unemployment  will  fall  and  growth  will  strengthen.  There  is  a 
temptation to leave it up to the low oil price and the ECB’s accommodative monetary policy. 
Monetary  policy  can  support  growth  but  it  cannot  create  it  in  a  lasting  way.  And  the 
effectiveness  and  legitimacy  of  euro  area  governance  will  not  be  increased  by  placing 
excessive demands on the central bank – quite the opposite. 
I think it is vital in the short term that the banking union be finalised, with, in particular, an 
early agreement on a common backstop for the Single Resolution Fund and the progressive 
implementation  of  a  European  deposit  insurance  scheme,  accompanied  by  reforms 
uncoupling once and for all the solvency of banks from that of governments. Second, if the 
euro area is one economy and not the sum of 19, we must have a common growth strategy 
based  on  the  identification  of  our  structural  weaknesses  and  a  collective  discussion 
regarding  the  reforms  to  be  implemented.  The  key  words  must  be  “productivity”  and 
“employment rate”, which are positive-sum games – not “competitiveness”, which is a zero-
sum game. Participating countries will not support euro area growth by competing for their 
neighbours’ market shares. 
Conclusion 
There is nothing inevitable about the status quo, but, to go beyond it, we need to rediscover 
the spirit of Robert Schuman. In 1950, this French Foreign Minister had the political courage 
to  propose  to  Germany  that  the  two  countries  pool  their  economic  resources22  and  share 
sovereignty within a common institution.23 This gave birth to European integration. 
Let’s not forget that shared ambition is a powerful driving force. Herbert Blankenhorn, then 
Adenauer’s diplomatic advisor, recorded in his diary the Chancellor’s words of 24 May 1950 
and the optimism inspired in him by Schuman’s plan: “Wenn Furcht beseitigt werde, werde 
Europa  wie  ein  genesender  Kranker  seine  Kräfte  wiederfinden”24  [“Once  fear  has  been 
overcome, Europe, like a convalescing patient, will find its strength again”]. 
Thank you for your attention. 
                                                
22  Carbon and steel production. 
23  “The  French  government proposes  that Franco-German production  of  coal and  steel as  a  whole be placed 
under a common High Authority, within the framework of an organisation open to the participation of the other 
countries of Europe.” Declaration by Robert Schuman, French Foreign Minister, 9 May 1950. 
24  Quoted  by  Rieben,  H.,  Nathusius,  M.,  Nicod,  F.  and  Camperio-Tixier,  C.,  Un  changement  d’espérance:  La 
Déclaration  du  9  mai  1950,  Jean  Monnet  Foundation  for  Europe,  European  Research  Centre,  2000,  
pp. 251–253. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
