  Sabine Lautenschläger: Interview in Der Spiegel 
Interview with Ms Sabine Lautenschläger, Member of the Executive Board of the European 
Central  Bank,  in  Der  Spiegel,  conducted  by  Mr  Michael  Sauga  on  7  January  2015  and 
published on 10 January 2015. 
 Mario Draghi, the President of the European Central Bank, intends to undertake large-
scale  purchases  of  European  government  bonds  in  order  to  counter  the  rate  of 
inflation in the euro area. Will you agree to that? 
Inflation in the euro area has been below the targeted rate of just under 2% for quite some 
time now, and forecasts for the next few months predict little change. That is why it has been, 
and continues to be, right and proper for the ECB to discuss appropriate countermeasures. 
However, I am currently not convinced by large-scale purchases of government bonds. 
Why not? 
In monetary policy-making, I regard purchases of government bonds as the last resort. In this 
context,  the  peculiarities  of  the  euro  area  as  a  currency  area  encompassing  19  sovereign 
states must be taken into account. There must a threat of exceptional risks materialising, and 
there  must  be  reasonable  balance  between  the  benefits  of,  and  risks  entailed  in,  such  a 
programme. I do not believe that to be the case at present. What we should do instead is 
wait until the measures that we have put into place only recently can take full effect. 
Despite  these  measures,  which  include  the  negative  interest  rate  on  deposits  and 
purchases of securitised private sector credit, December for the first time saw inflation 
in the euro area drop to below zero. Many economists are warning of deflation such as 
that  experienced  by  the  global  economy  in  the  1930s  when  consumers  no  longer 
wanted to buy anything because they all expected prices to continue to fall. Isn’t that 
reason enough for decisive intervention? 
I don’t want to gloss over the situation, but you can’t speak of deflation at the moment. What 
we are observing is a persistently low inflation rate that is due, among other factors, to the 
fact  that  prices  of  energy  and  food  have  declined  significantly.  At  the  moment,  however,  I 
cannot see any signs of consumers expecting steadily falling prices and thus changing their 
spending patterns. 
The  purchases  of  government  bonds  are  intended  not  only  to  raise  the  rate  of 
inflation, but also to encourage banks, in particular those in southern Europe, to again 
extend more loans to the corporate sector. Can that work? 
I  have  my  doubts  in  that  respect.  Credit  institutions  in  southern  Europe  are  currently  not 
suffering  from  a  lack  of  liquidity.  The  European  Central  Bank  has  ensured  that  through  a 
number  measures  over  past  months.  Rather,  many  banks  are  hesitant  in  extending  loans 
because they believe that there is too great a risk that debtors will not  be able to redeem 
them. I  do  not  expect  that  the  ECB  purchasing government  bonds  on  a  large  scale  would 
change that in a sustained manner. Instead, banks must again be in a position to see that 
their borrowers have decent economic prospects. 
How could that be brought about? 
Above  all,  national  governments  could  contribute  to  this  goal  by  implementing  effective 
structural reforms to improve the competitiveness of industry. If a company is competitive, it 
has a future, the risk of default is lower and banks extend loans with lower risk margins. 
Draghi’s  reasoning  is  different.  He  wants  to  boost  economic  activity  by  using  the 
purchase programme to bring interest rates in the crisis countries down still further. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Interest rates  are  already  very  low.  In  Italy  and  Spain, for  instance, the yields  on  ten-year 
government  bonds  are  just  below  the  yield  on  comparable  US  bonds.  How  much  more 
should  yields  decline  and  how  large  must  a  programme  be  to  achieve  such  a  decline?  In 
addition, I am asking myself whether, by forcing yields down further, we would not encourage 
governments to increase their debt again, instead of focusing on sustainable budgetary and 
economic policies. That would be the exact opposite of what is necessary. 
The Federal Reserve System, too, has bought government bonds for trillions of dollars 
in recent years – and was successful. Does that not give you reason to rethink? 
The  comparison  with  the  Fed  is  misleading  because  we  have  a  different  economic  and 
political set-up in the euro area. Moreover, the bond purchases undertaken by the Fed were 
particularly successful as long as the yields on  government bonds were still comparatively 
high,  i.e.  immediately  after  the  major  financial  crisis  in  2008.  In  Europe,  the  yields  on 
government bonds are comparatively low even today. 
Doubts  similar to  yours  have  also  been  expressed  by  Jens Weidmann,  President  of 
the Bundesbank. In the Governing Council, however, there is a majority in favour of 
the plans announced by Draghi. Do you not fear that the German representatives at 
the ECB are yet again adopting a dangerous minority position? 
There is little point, in my view, to speculate about majorities in the Governing Council before 
the discussion of the design of a purchase programme has even taken place. Moreover, this 
is not about German positions. The only issue that is crucial for me is whether large-scale 
government bond purchases are appropriate for our currency area and whether the benefits 
are greater than the risks. And I am sceptical about that. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
