  Yannis Stournaras: Exit from the crisis and return to economic growth 
Speech  by  Mr  Yannis  Stournaras,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Greece,  at  the  82nd  Annual 
Meeting of Shareholders, Athens, 26 February 2015. 
 Agreement with our partners to avoid a stalling of recovery and to bolster growth 
After six years of severe recession, the downturn in Greece came to an end in 2014, with 
economic  activity  resuming  positive  growth  rates.  This  development,  combined  with  the 
elimination  of  the  high  fiscal  and  current  account  deficits  and  with  the  implementation  of 
significant reforms, arguably suggests that the necessary conditions are now in place for a 
definitive exit from the crisis and for accelerated growth in the immediate future. 
However, this optimistic outlook has been clouded by a protracted period of uncertainty that 
peaked in recent weeks. The Eurogroup’s decision on 20 February 2015 to grant Greece a 
loan extension and its approval on 24 February of the Greek government reform measures 
alleviate the uncertainty and give Greece’s new government time to complete the reforms still 
pending and to set its own priorities. This is a positive outcome, as it averts a rift between us 
and  our  partners  that  would  have  had  dire  consequences  for  the  Greek  economy  and 
beyond.  In  order  to  seize  this  window  of  opportunity,  however,  we  must  pursue  the 
negotiations in a spirit of cooperation and trust and promptly conclude a mutually beneficial 
final  agreement  with  our  partners.  At  this  crucial  time,  what  is  needed  is  a  coordinated 
national effort, in close collaboration with European and international institutions, to ensure 
that  the  sacrifices  made  by  Greek  citizens  will  not  have  been  in  vain  and  to  facilitate  the 
economic restructuring needed for sustainable growth. The Bank of Greece stands ready to 
contribute to this effort with all of its resources. 
Economic recovery in 2014 in a deflationary environment 
2014  marked  the  return  of  economic  activity  to  positive  growth  rates  after  six  consecutive 
years  of  deep  recession,  during  which  GDP  contracted  by  more  than  25%.  The  available 
quarterly GDP data indicate that the recession has clearly been winding down since the first 
quarter of 2014, with year-on-year growth in 2014 returning to positive territory (0.8%) for the 
first time since 2007, driven by higher exports of goods and services and increased private 
consumption. More specifically, in the period from January to September 2014: 
• 
Exports increased by 8.4%, largely as a result of improved competitiveness, with a 
strong performance from tourism and shipping exports. 
Private consumption increased by 1.5%, on the back of stabilised real disposable 
income, a declining general level of prices and reduced uncertainty. 
 Other significant positive developments were the recovery of total employment by 0.3% 
and of dependent employment by 2.3%, while the number of unemployed decreased for the 
first time since 2008, by 3.3%. Nevertheless, the unemployment rate remains high and the 
highest in the EU. Another major concern is that the long-term unemployment rate continues 
to rise, which increases the risk of human capital depreciation. 
Unit  labour  costs  decreased  further  in  2014  on  the  back  of  higher  productivity  and  lower 
employer  contributions,  thereby  helping  the  economy  gain  in  competitiveness.  Structural 
competitiveness  in  Greece  has  been  showing  signs  of  improving  since  2013.  More 
specifically, according to the World Economic Forum’s global competitiveness index, Greece 
moved up the ranking to 81st place, from 91st in 2012, while according to the World Bank’s 
ranking on the “ease of doing business”, Greece advanced to 61st place, from 65th and 89th, 
respectively, in the past two years. However, low access to financing, red tape and tax policy 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  instability  remain  the  biggest  drags  on  the  international  competitiveness  of  Greek 
businesses. 
The  over-performance  against  the  primary  surplus  target  set  in  the  Economic 
Adjustment  Programme  by  1.2%  of  GDP  in  2013  was  a  milestone  achievement  that 
provides a solid base for the attainment of the fiscal target in 2014 for a third consecutive 
year. However, the general government fiscal outcome in 2014 faces downside risks, largely 
associated with the uncertainties in the last weeks of the year, combined with a back-loaded 
revenue schedule. These uncertainties have increased following the completion of the state 
budget execution for 2014, which pointed to significant tax revenue shortfalls, especially in 
December. 
Despite an increase in public investment, total investment remains particularly low, reflecting 
a decrease in private investment mainly on account of limited bank lending and the high cost 
of  borrowing.  The  fall  in  private  investment  was  primarily  concentrated  in  residential 
investment, whereas productive business investment has started to show signs of recovery. 
For the first time since 2008, the increase in investment in the third quarter of 2014, albeit 
moderate at 1%, may be signalling a longer-lasting recovery trend. 
Global financial markets 
Global financial market conditions continued to improve in the first half of 2014. Gradually, 
however, from the third quarter onwards, increasing investor uncertainty about the banking 
sector of euro area countries, signs of economic recovery losing momentum in the euro area 
and slackening growth in the global economy led to a surge in volatility in European capital 
markets. 
Against this background and given country-specific factors weighing on the rating of Greek 
government  bonds  (mainly  associated  with  uncertainties  about  political  developments), 
Greek government bond yields once again spiked, returning to levels not seen since the third 
quarter of 2013. 
Developments in the Greek corporate bond market were also negative in 2014. During most 
of  the  year,  the  yields  on  Greek  corporate  bonds  moved  broadly  in  line  with  the  yields  on 
bonds issued by European non-financial corporations, which have higher credit ratings. From 
the  end  of  October,  however,  Greek  corporate  bond  yield  developments  decoupled  from 
those in European corporate bonds and followed the same sharp upward course as Greek 
government bond yields. 
Developments in the Greek stock market were also negative in 2014, albeit not throughout 
the  entire  year.  The  prices  of  shares  on  the  Athens  Exchange  dropped  significantly, 
especially  bank  shares,  although 
the  ECB’s  recent  Comprehensive 
Assessment reconfirmed that the systemic Greek banks were adequately capitalised. 
the  results  of 
The Greek banking system remains strong despite the turbulence 
The  strengthening  of  banks’  capital  bases  and operating  profits  before provisions,  the first 
steps  towards  addressing  the  issue  of  non-performing  loans  and  the  activation,  as  of 
4 November 2014, of the Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM) were the main developments 
for the Greek banking system in 2014. 
First,  in  early  2014,  the  Bank  of  Greece  released  the  findings  of  its  stress  test  of  Greek 
banks. This, together with the downward trend of Greek government bond yields at the time, 
gave banks easier access to capital market funding. Towards the end of the year, the ECB 
completed its Comprehensive Assessment, which reconfirmed the capital adequacy of Greek 
systemic banks. 
Despite these favourable developments, the banking system continues to face serious 
challenges, first and foremost the need to address non-performing loans (NPLs). The 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  ratio of NPLs to total loans remained particularly high (September 2014: 34.2%, December 
2013:  31.9%).  On  the  upside,  however,  the  pace  of  new  NPL  formation  has  slowed  down 
markedly and the NPL coverage ratio from accumulated provisions has risen significantly. 
Finally,  the  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism  (SSM),  which  is  the  new  banking  supervision 
system  composed  of  a  supranational  authority  (the  ECB)  and  the  national  competent 
authorities of the participating Member States, was activated on 4 November 2014. In order 
to  ensure  consistent  supervisory  practices  and  approaches,  the  ECB  and  the  national 
authorities use a single rulebook, and a Joint Supervisory Team, formed of staff of the ECB 
and  the  national  supervisors,  is  established  for  each  significant  bank.  The  ECB  directly 
supervises some 120 significant banks, including Greece’s four systemic banks. This direct 
supervision  will  involve  examining  banks’  lending,  borrowing  and  investment  activities  and 
overall compliance with European and national prudential regulation. 
The  decision  by  the  ECB’s  Governing  Council  on  4  February  2015  (lifting  the  waiver  of 
minimum  credit  rating  requirements  for  marketable  debt  instruments  issued  or  fully 
guaranteed  by  the  Hellenic  Republic)  does  not  create  liquidity  problems  for  the  Greek 
banking system: the banking system, now standing on sounder foundations after its recent 
consolidation,  is  well-capitalised  and  furthermore  has  access  to  liquidity,  albeit  at  a  much 
higher  cost,  from  the  Bank  of  Greece  through  the  Emergency  Liquidity  Assistance  (ELA) 
mechanism.  This  decision  by  the  ECB’s  Governing  Council  will  soon  be  re-examined  and 
should  be  revoked,  as  in  similar  cases  in  the  past,  so  long  as  Greece  fulfils  its  recent 
agreement with its partners. 
Positive outlook for 2015 
Based on the latest available data, GDP growth is projected to be positive in 2015 and to 
pick up in 2016. The main elements of uncertainty weighing on the prospects for economic 
activity in the medium term refer to our ability to fulfil the transitional agreement struck with 
our partners, a possible deterioration in public finances and reform fatigue. 
If  these  uncertainties  can  be  contained,  then  the  economy  can  and  should  continue  to 
recover in 2015, driven by exports of goods and services and by private consumption and 
supported also by rising business investment. 
Exports of goods and services are expected to remain one of the growth drivers in 2015, with 
the global economic environment projected to improve as growth rates pick up both in the EU 
and the other markets and world trade strengthens. A positive impact is also expected from 
the further improvement in structural competitiveness and possibly in cost competitiveness, 
combined with restored access to financing for Greek businesses and an improving business 
climate. 
Disposable  income  developments,  the  declining  general  level  of  prices  and  reduced 
uncertainty  are  expected  to  affect  consumer  spending  positively  in  the  course  of  2015. 
Private consumption is therefore expected to increase in the year as a whole, supported by 
the  fall  in  oil  prices  and  the  ensuing  strengthening  of  Greek  households’  real  disposable 
income. 
The favourable outlook for investment should be supported by: (a) the deployment by 
domestic  credit  institutions  and  businesses  of  resources  from  the  National  Strategic 
Reference Framework (NSRF) and the utilisation of co-financing and guarantee instruments 
available 
the  National  Fund  of 
Entrepreneurship  and  Development  (ETEAN);  (b)  further  progress  in  major  infrastructure 
projects  –  especially  Greece’s  four  main  highways  –  and  the  potential  of  public-private 
partnerships, which have an immediate growth impact and can leverage investment capacity 
in the building materials industry and supporting services; (c) the Investment Plan for Europe 
jointly promoted by the European Commission and the EIB through the establishment of a 
new European Fund for Strategic Investments; and (d) the very accommodative stance of the 
Investment  Bank  (EIB)  and 
the  European 
from 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  single  monetary  policy  which  is  expected  to  help  improve  financing  conditions  for  sound 
businesses.  A  favourable  impact  will  also  come  from  the  execution  of  projects  under  the 
Public Investment Programme with an overall budget of €6.4 billion for 2015. 
Another  factor  that  could  considerably  boost  the  investment  climate  is  the  completion  of 
major  privatisations.  As  the  Bank  of  Greece  has  mentioned  in  the  past,  insofar  as 
privatisations  involve  productive  foreign  direct  investment,  they  can  deliver  a  number  of 
benefits  for  the  privatised  businesses,  in  terms  of  knowhow  transfer,  modernisation  and 
efficiency, and for the economy as a whole by enhancing competitiveness and extroversion, 
as well as by helping to reduce the government’s borrowing requirements and – ultimately – 
public debt in the medium term. 
The recovery is still fragile and leaves no room for complacency 
As mentioned above, the main uncertainties weighing on the prospects for economic activity 
in the medium term refer to our ability to bridge the time for discussions on an agreement 
with  our  partners,  as  well  as  to  the  onset  of  fiscal  and  structural  reform  fatigue.  Signs  of 
uncertainty are already visible in the economic sentiment indicators, which appear to have 
lost some of their upward momentum in late 2014 and early 2015, as well as in the budgetary 
slippages  in  December  2014  and  January  2015.  Lower-than-expected  growth  in  the  euro 
area and geopolitical risks are additional potential factors of uncertainty. On the other hand, 
the further decline in oil prices, the very accommodative stance of the ECB’s monetary policy 
conducive to improved financing conditions, the prospect of a rebound of private investment 
once economic uncertainty dissipates, as well as the depreciation of the euro are expected to 
impact favourably on domestic economic activity. 
Adoption of a national growth policy focused on reforms, for a definitive exit from the 
crisis and attainment of sustainable growth 
Greece’s positive macroeconomic performance in 2014 and optimistic prospects reflect the 
significant  changes  made  in  recent  years  with  tangible  benefits,  but  also  serious  negative 
side-effects. Key achievements include restored fiscal balance and the virtual elimination of 
the current account deficit, the latter reflecting a sharp contraction in domestic consumer and 
investment demand, but also an improvement in competitiveness. Also, headway was made 
with a number of structural reforms in the functioning of the State, while steps were taken to 
modernise the tax system and tax collection mechanism and broaden the tax base. On the 
downside  however,  these  positive  results  have  taken  a  heavy  toll  on  the  economy  and 
society in terms of income, employment and human and physical capital. 
These hard-won achievements must be preserved and consolidated, as they provide a 
cornerstone for the desired shift towards a new, export-led growth model. This is why  it is 
imperative to quell uncertainties and ward off the risks that could cancel out the substantial 
progress  made  and  undermine  growth.  The  tremendous  sacrifices  made  by  the  Greek 
people must not be in vain. 
Amongst the crucial matters being debated at present are the ongoing negotiations with our 
partners and the securing of smooth financing conditions for the Greek economy as well as 
of unhindered bank funding. 
One key area that will facilitate the conclusion of a final agreement is the advancement of the 
structural  reforms  still  pending.  These  reforms  are  much  smaller  in  scope  and  would 
entail low cost compared with the huge changes made in recent years at a very high 
price for Greek society. Once these pending reforms are completed, there will be nothing 
but gains ahead for the economy. Needless to say, Greece would then have to implement its 
own  programme  of  further  reforms  to  solidify  its  basis  for  sustainable  growth  and  social 
wellbeing. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
If we, on our part, adhere to our commitments, our partners can in turn be expected to 
reiterate their decision, as explicitly stated at the Eurogroup meeting of 27 November 
2012,  to  consider  further  measures  to  alleviate  Greece’s  debt  burden.  This  could  be 
achieved by the methods envisaged in that Eurogroup statement or by other methods and 
would boost Greece’s growth prospects, provided that economic policy  stays committed to 
fiscal adjustment, primary surpluses and reforms to re-launch the economy. This would also 
allow the required primary surpluses to be gradually reduced, freeing up more resources for 
the  financing  of  the  economy.  Let  us  not  forget  that  such  further  measures  to  ensure  a 
reduction  of  Greek  public  debt  were,  back  in  November  2012,  made  conditional  to,  and 
meant as a reward for, fiscal adjustment. This adjustment is now a reality. 
Reaching a new agreement with our partners may be a necessary condition for the recovery 
to take root and gain traction. However, it is not an adequate condition for jump-starting the 
economy. At the present crucial juncture, what we need  is a comprehensive and coherent 
growth plan geared towards strengthening the productive capacity through investment and, 
more importantly, through structural reforms. 
The first practicable measures that would pave the way in this direction include: 
(a) 
Completing the reforms already launched, pursuing structural reforms in the 
goods and services markets and developing a “smart economy”. The further 
opening-up of closed professions, as well as of those goods and services markets 
that, according to OECD recommendations, still lack effective competition, must be 
speeded  up.  The  privatisation  strategy  needs  to  give  priority  to  accelerating  the 
processes  presently  in  course  that,  as  mentioned  previously,  would  help  increase 
the efficiency of the companies being privatised, improve competitiveness, make the 
economy more export-oriented and – in the end – reduce public debt. Meanwhile, 
the available EU funding resources (under e.g. the NSRF, the Investment Plan for 
Europe)  must  be  harnessed  towards  supporting  knowledge  and  innovation  and 
towards exploiting our comparative advantages in sectors of the “smart economy”, 
including the culture and creative industries. 
Consolidating fiscal achievements. The fiscal  achievements  must  be  preserved 
and  consolidated.  Efforts  must  focus  on  structural  measures  to  strengthen  the 
independence  and  efficiency  of  tax  administration,  with  the  aim  to  tackle  tax  and 
contribution evasion. The application of modern, risk-based tax audit methods and 
the activation of a nationwide asset registry are fundamental in the fight against tax 
evasion. 
Reviewing tax exemptions and other favourable tax treatment. Tax exemptions 
and favourable tax treatment, including reduced VAT rates, need to be reviewed and 
streamlined. Actions that could start immediately include the scrutiny, cost analysis 
and gradual abolition of the various exemptions from the general tax rules, unless 
they concern: (a) social groups hard hit by the crisis or living in conditions of poverty 
or (b) growth incentives providing much-needed stimulus to economic activity. 
Lowering  tax  rates  and  reviewing  the  efficiency  of  public  spending.  To  the 
extent that action under the preceding point is implemented, a lowering of the direct 
and indirect tax rates will become possible, with positive impact on growth without 
jeopardising  fiscal  sustainability.  On  the  expenditure  side,  efforts  to  better  target 
social  benefits  must  continue,  while  the  existing  exemptions  from  the  general 
pension system provisions must be re-examined. The strengthening of the financial 
framework  for  local  governments  needs  to  be  completed,  in  order  to  curb  the 
accumulation  of  arrears,  while  the  newly  established  Independent  Fiscal  Council 
must assume an enhanced and effective role. 
Increasing  public  sector  efficiency.  The  remaining  reforms  in  the  public  sector, 
mainly geared towards greater operational efficiency, transparency and equitability, 
(b) 
(c) 
(d) 
(e) 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
 (f) 
(g) 
(h) 
 for 
through 
instance 
the  development  of 
its  structural  component.  However, 
must be taken forward. The generalised application of automated online procedures 
is an important means for improving the interaction of citizens and businesses with 
the  State  and  can further  serve  as  a  backstop against  corruption.  Completing  the 
national cadastre and eliminating the chronic obstacles to the efficient and speedy 
delivery of justice are fundamental prerequisites for a well-functioning state, as are 
the  efficient  deployment  of  human  resources  and  a  transparent  staff  appraisal 
framework that rewards productivity and work ethic. 
Strengthening  active  labour  market  policies  and  reducing  the  number  of 
unemployed.  The  absorption  of  the  unemployed  is  expected  to  be  a  gradual 
process  that  will  take  time,  given  the  current  slack  in  the  labour  market.  A  de-
escalation  of  unemployment  –  particularly  amongst  youth  and  the  long-term 
unemployed  –  and  a  gradual  recovery  of  the  employment  rate  are  expected  to 
benefit, in addition to growth, from active employment policies, as programmes and 
actions  financed  by  the  NSRF  2014–2020  are  phased  in.  Actions  that  promote 
employment, 
local  employment 
partnerships  and  vocational  training  programmes,  will  also  be  instrumental  in 
tackling  unemployment,  especially 
this 
strengthening  of  active  policies  needs  to  be  combined  with  eligibility  controls  and 
results-based assessment of programmes and with a fight against undeclared and 
uninsured work. 
Effective  management  of  non-performing 
(NPLs).  The  effective 
management of non-performing loans will have a positive knock-on effect on lending 
to sound businesses, given that banks’ ability to extend new credit is closely linked 
with  the  smooth  and  timely  repayment  of  existing  loans.  The  NPL  management 
model  to  be  chosen  must:  (a)  not  give  rise  to  moral  hazard;  and  (b)  enable  the 
identification  of the most  appropriate  workout  solutions  and,  where  possible,  ease 
the burden on cooperating borrowers facing temporary difficulties in servicing their 
debt.  Apart  from  effective  NPL  management,  the  consolidation  of  positive  growth 
rates  will  obviously  contribute  significantly  to  improving  the  NPL  recovery  rate,  by 
generating a self-reinforcing process of NPL reduction as the debt servicing capacity 
of households and businesses increases. 
Securing  the  smooth  financing  of  the  Greek  economy.  The  capacity  of  the 
banking system to finance the real economy does not depend on capital adequacy 
alone, but also on its liquidity. Following the recent capital increases, Greek banks 
have a sufficient capital base, but their liquidity has come under considerable strain, 
especially in the last few months. The stock of outstanding deposits is significantly 
lower  today  than  it  was  before  the  crisis,  plus  the  banks  still  have  no  access  to 
money  markets.  After  the  recent  decision  by  the  ECB’s  Governing  Council  (4 
February 2015) to exclude securities issued or guaranteed by the Hellenic Republic 
from the list of collateral acceptable for open market operations, the value of eligible 
securities held in Greek bank portfolios dropped significantly. Greek banks can still 
obtain liquidity from the Bank of Greece through the emergency liquidity assistance 
(ELA) mechanism, but, as entailed by the rules of the Eurosystem, at substantially 
higher cost. Hence, there is need for Greece to fulfil its recent agreement with our 
partners as soon as possible, so that this decision can soon be revoked. 
loans 
 In the past few years, we have covered some very rough ground at high cost to the 
whole of Greek society. If we can address the relatively few issues still pending and 
complete the first phase of the effort launched in 2010, we will then be able to move on 
to the next phase, in which the growth potential of the economy will be considerably 
enhanced. Rapid growth will enable the implementation of more effective policies for 
restoring social cohesion which has been eroded by the crisis. The priorities of these 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
policies should be geared towards reducing unemployment and correcting inequality 
in  the  distribution  of  the  burden  from  the  adjustment  effort.  For  this  to  happen,  we 
must remain firmly committed to the country’s European course and fulfil the recently 
concluded agreement as soon as possible. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
