Patrick Honohan: Where did all the money channelled into property-
backed lending go? 
Article by Mr Patrick Honohan, Governor of the Central Bank of Ireland, originally published 
in the Irish Times on 31 January 2015. 
 Accompanying chart can be found at the end of the speech. 
Imagine how the Irish economy would have performed if the banks hadn’t borrowed all that 
money to finance property-backed loans. 
During 2002–2007 a vast sum in the order of twice annual GDP (much of it borrowed from 
abroad) was channelled by the banking system into property-backed lending. 
Where did all this money end up? That was the question recently asked by Colum Kenny in 
this  newspaper,  and  also  addressed  to  me  at  the  Banking  Inquiry.  As  we  take  steps  to 
ensure that there is no return to boom-and-bust conditions, it is indeed timely to revisit this 
question, which has puzzled many. 
One approach to answering the question seeks to construct a kind of audit trail. Thus some 
of “the money” was paid out for construction work, wages, materials and profits – including 
bank profits. Some was received by those who sold property at high prices. These receipts 
were in part saved, and in part spent, by the recipients, either leaking out of the country in 
payment for imports or adding to tax revenue. 
But that audit trail narrative misses a large part of the story. A fuller answer must take into 
account  the  damaging  effects  the  spending  of  the  money  had  on  prices  and  wages;  on 
investment  patterns  and  the  productive  structure  of  the  economy;  on  the  Government’s 
spending and tax rate decisions; and on the levels of indebtedness of households and firms. 
The only way of getting to grips with the question from this deeper perspective is to pose it in 
terms  of  a  clearly-defined  counterfactual.  Imagine  how  the  Irish  economy  would  have 
performed  if  the  banks  hadn’t  borrowed  all  that  money  to  finance  property-backed  loans. 
Knowing this will allow us to restate the question “where did the money go?” in terms that, 
while complicated, are amenable to answer. For the difference between the actual and this 
counterfactual tells us where that money went. 
Start  with  the  capital  gains  and  losses  from  credit-financed  property  transactions  at  what 
turned  out  to  be  evanescent  bubble  prices.  The  counterfactual  economy  would  not  have 
seen these transactions which left some sellers richer and many buyers poorer. Note that, in 
principle,  the subsequent fall  in  prices  did  not  affect  these  sellers:  their gains  were  “in the 
bag”. In  contrast, the  purchasers  at  bubble  prices  experienced  losses  when  prices fell.  As 
most  of  the  purchases  were  funded  by  debt  accumulation,  many  of  these  borrowers  – 
whether household or corporate – found themselves with negative equity and, in the wider 
downturn, many soon also became unable to service their debt. 
When  borrowers  defaulted,  these  transactions  ultimately  resulted  in  losses  also  for  the 
banks’ shareholders (and sub debt holders), and – notoriously – for the Government which 
stepped in to prevent other creditors of the banks losing. Naturally, much attention has rightly 
focused on the €40 billion or so of ultimate losses assumed by the Government under that 
heading.  A  broadly  similar  amount  was  lost  by  bank  shareholders,  etc.  And  there  are  two 
other  big  categories  of  capital  gain  and  loss:  I  think  the  aggregate  gains  by  Irish  property 
sellers  are  plausibly  of  the  same  order  of  magnitude,  as  are  the  aggregate  losses  being 
nursed by borrowers. 
But, large though these four categories of winnings and losses from property transactions at 
bubble  prices  are,  they  need  to  be  considered  alongside  the  even  larger  and  still  growing 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
accumulated  difference  between  income  in  the  actual  Irish  economy  and  that  in  the 
counterfactual scenario. 
I  won’t  pretend  to  have  precise  figures  on  how  aggregate  income  and  employment  would 
have panned out in the counterfactual scenario of no property bubble, but the broad outlines 
are clear. 
The  counterfactual  no-bubble  Irish  economy  would  have  grown  much  more  slowly  than 
actual  in  the  period  up  to  2007,  and  much  faster  in  the  post-crisis  years.  For  example 
(according to one simulation) some 130,000 fewer houses would have been completed over 
that period, with total employment about 60,000 smaller by 2007, and despite less migration 
into Ireland, the unemployment rate would have drifted more than 2 percentage points higher 
than actual. Lower revenue would have pushed the Government accounts into deficit and a 
higher debt ratio at the outset of the global financial crisis. Household incomes would have 
been much lower too, with per capita personal consumption running about 8 per cent lower 
than actual in 2007. 
Of  course,  different  households  were  affected  in  differing  degrees,  resulting  in  large 
distributional shifts which are the subject of important ongoing research. 
Heading  into  the  global  recession,  then,  the  Irish  economy  would  have  been  smaller,  with 
more moderate  wage  rates  and  a  somewhat  higher  Government  debt  and  deficit. It  would 
have  been  better  placed  to  absorb  what  was  coming.  Ireland  would  have  been  hit  by  the 
global  recession,  of  course,  but  our  recovery  would  not  have  been  held  back  by  the 
implosion of a bloated construction sector, by the collapse in tax revenue and by excessive 
debt. And the Government would not have lost the confidence of the financial markets. 
Without these burdens, it is plausible that Ireland would have done at least as well as the 
euro area’s lack-lustre post-2008 performance. If so, by 2013, living standards would have 
been about 15 per cent above their actual level, and employment about 8 per cent higher. 
And  this  development  would  have  continued  into  the  years  ahead,  remaining  well  above 
what our damaged (albeit recovering) actual economy will deliver. The gap between actual 
and counterfactual is illustrated in the accompanying diagram. 
The boom and the bust both damaged our economy. The boom, and the decisions that were 
taken during it, meant that Ireland had to adjust down from living standards that could never 
have been sustained, with sizeable and capricious shifts in the distribution of wealth. Despite 
the path of recovery, the economy still markedly underperforms relative to what could have 
been achieved had we curtailed the property bubble. 
The Irish banking crisis, like so many others throughout history, illustrates why it is vital to act 
pre-emptively (as with the mortgage measures announced by the Central Bank this week), to 
ensure that we don’t face such intractable challenges again. 
With  rising  employment  and  a  steady,  albeit  slow,  working  through  of  household  and  firm 
over-indebtedness,  a  gradual  narrowing  of  the  gap  between  what  is  and  what  might  have 
been is in prospect, as long as we do not let borrowing – public or private – get out of hand 
again. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 