  Mario Draghi: Structural Reforms, inflation and monetary policy 
Introductory speech by Mr Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank, at the ECB 
Forum on Central Banking, Sintra, Portugal, 22 May 2015. 
Accompanying charts can be found at the end of the speech. 
 Summary 
Structural  and  cyclical  policies  –  including  monetary  policy  –  are  heavily  independent. 
Structural  reforms  increase  both  potential  output  and  the  resilience  of  the  economy  to 
shocks.  This  makes  structural  reforms  relevant  for  any  central  bank,  but  especially  in  a 
monetary union. 
For members of monetary union resilience is crucial to avoid that shocks lead to consistently 
higher  unemployment,  and  over  time,  permanent  economic  divergence.  It  therefore  has 
direct implications for price stability, and is no less relevant for the integrity of the euro area. 
This  is  why  the  ECB  has  frequently  called  for  stronger  common  governance  of  structural 
reforms that would make resilience part of our common DNA. 
Structural reforms are equally important for their effect on growth. Potential growth is today 
estimated to be below 1% in the euro area and is projected to remain well below pre-crisis 
growth rates. This would mean that a significant share of the economic losses in the crisis 
would  become  permanent,  with  structural  unemployment  staying  above  10%  and  youth 
unemployment elevated. It would also make it harder to work through the debt overhang still 
present in some countries. Finally, low potential growth can have a direct impact on the tools 
available to monetary policy, as it increases the likelihood that the central bank runs into the 
lower bound and has to resort recurrently to unconventional policies to meet its mandate. 
The  euro  area’s  weak  long-term  performance  also  provides  an  opportunity.  Since  many 
economies are distant from the frontier of best practice, the gains from structural reforms are 
easier  to  achieve  and  the  potential  magnitude  of  those  gains  is  greater.  There  is  a  large 
untapped potential in the euro area for substantially higher output, employment and welfare. 
And the fact that monetary policy is today at the lower bound, and the recovery still fragile, is 
not, as some argue, a reason for reforms to be delayed. 
This is because the short-term costs and benefits of reforms depend critically on how they 
are implemented. If structural reforms are credible, their positive effects can be felt quickly 
even  in  a  weak  demand  environment.  The  same  is  true  if  the  type  of  reforms  is  carefully 
chosen.  And  our  accommodative  monetary  policy  means  that  the  benefits  of  reforms  will 
materialise faster, creating the ideal conditions for them to succeed. It is the combination of 
these demand and supply policies that will deliver lasting stability and prosperity. 
 In  every  press  conference  since  I  became  ECB  President,  I  have  ended  the  introductory 
statement with a call to accelerate structural reforms in Europe. The same message was also 
conveyed repeatedly by my predecessors, in three quarters of all press conferences since 
the  introduction  of  the  euro.  The  term  “structural  reforms”  is  actually  mentioned  in 
approximately one third of all speeches by various members of the ECB Executive Board. By 
comparison, it features in only about 2% of speeches by governors of the Federal Reserve. 
Our  strong  focus  on  structural  reforms  is  not  because  they  have  been  ignored  in  recent 
years. On the contrary, a great deal has been achieved and we have praised progress where 
it has taken place, including here in Portugal. Rather, if we talk often about structural reforms 
it is because we know that our ability to bring about a lasting return of stability and prosperity 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
does  not rely  only  on  cyclical  policies  –  including  monetary  policy  –  but  also  on structural 
policies. The two are heavily interdependent. 
So  what  I  would  like  to  do  today  in  opening  our  annual  discussions  in  Sintra  is,  first,  to 
explain what we mean by structural reforms and why the central bank has a pressing and 
legitimate interest in their implementation. And second, to underline why being in the early 
phases of a cyclical recovery is not a reason to postpone structural reforms; it is in fact an 
opportunity to accelerate them. 
The importance of structural reform 
Structural reforms are, in my view, best defined as policies that permanently and positively 
alter the supply-side of the economy. This means that they have two key effects. 
First,  they  lift  the  path  of  potential  output,  either  by  raising  the  inputs  to  production  –  the 
supply and quality of labour and the amount of capital per worker – or by ensuring that those 
inputs are used more efficiently, i.e. by raising total factor productivity (TFP). And second, 
they  make  economies  more  resilient  to  economic  shocks  by  facilitating  price  and  wage 
flexibility and the swift reallocation of resources within and across sectors. 
These two effects are complementary. An economy that rebounds faster after a shock is an 
economy  that  grows  more  over  time,  as  it  suffers  from  lower  hysteresis  effects.  And  the 
same structural reforms will often increase both short-term flexibility and long-term growth. 
For  example,  reforms  aimed  at  encouraging  reallocation  will  not  only  support  faster 
adjustment, but also higher productivity through raising allocative efficiency.1 Reforms aimed 
at strengthening competition will not just encourage greater price flexibility, but also higher 
investment as young firms are able to enter new markets and expand more quickly.2 
A comprehensive package of structural reforms will therefore tend to increase both resilience 
and growth. These are clearly issues in which any central bank has a keen interest. But this 
is  especially  true  for  the  central  bank  of  a  monetary  union  –  and  even  more  so  in  the 
conditions we face today. Let me explain why. 
Increasing resilience to shocks 
In terms of resilience, the ability of each economy in a monetary union to adjust quickly to 
shocks is essential for price stability and, over time, for the long-term viability of the union. 
This is because, faced with a negative demand shock, a more flexible economy will tend to 
react by immediately lowering prices, but agents will then expect inflation to rise again as the 
shock  fades,  ensuring  a  firm  anchoring  of  inflation  expectations.  By  contrast,  an  inflexible 
economy  is  more  likely  to  adjust  through  higher  unemployment,  which  exerts  a  more 
prolonged downward pressure on inflation and is therefore more likely to weigh on inflation 
expectations. This in turn can lead to higher real interest rates and compound the effect of 
the shock. 
Whereas  in  a  single  country  setting  the  central  bank  could  respond  directly  to  such  a 
contractionary  effect, 
to 
developments  in  particular  countries.  There  are  also  no  large-scale  fiscal  transfers  across 
countries in the euro area to play a compensating role in supporting demand. This implies 
that economies with insufficient flexibility risk more prolonged disinflation, consistently higher 
unemployment, and over time, permanent economic divergence. 
in  a  monetary  union  monetary  policy  cannot  be 
tailored 
                                                
1   Bartelsman, E., J. Haltiwanger, and S. Scarpetta (2013), “Cross-Country Differences in Productivity: The Role 
of Allocation and Selection.” American Economic Review, 103(1): 305–34. 
2   Haltiwanger,  J.  (2012),  “Job  Creation  and  Firm  Dynamics  in  the  United  States.”  Innovation  Policy  and  the 
Economy, vol. 12. April 2012. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
The way different euro area economies have reacted to the crisis bears this point out. Labour 
and  product  market  rigidities  contributed  to  a  more  painful  adjustment  process  in  the 
stressed economies, which was initially driven more by compression of demand than by a 
reduction of costs relative to other economies, albeit with differences across countries based 
on their initial degree of flexibility (Chart 1).3 As a result, we now face a situation of significant 
divergence in unemployment across the euro area (Chart 2). 
This  has  direct  implications  for  price  stability:  slow  adjustment  has  contributed  to  the 
protracted  disinflation  we  have  witnessed  since  2011  and  to  making  inflation  expectations 
more fragile. But it is also directly relevant for the ECB through its effect on the integrity of 
the currency. Like any political union, the cohesion of the euro area depends on the fact that 
each  country  is  permanently  better  off  within  the  union  than  without.  Convergence  is 
therefore  essential  to  bind  the  union  together,  while  permanent  divergence  caused  by 
structural heterogeneity has the opposite effect. 
For this reason, that every national economy is sufficiently flexible should be accepted as a 
part  of  our  common  DNA.  It  has  to  be  a  permanent  economic  feature  that  comes  with 
participation in the euro area, in the same way that the Copenhagen Criteria are permanent 
political features of membership of the EU. 
And this is why, as I have said many times, I believe there is a strong case for governance of 
structural  reforms  to  be  exercised  jointly  at  the  euro  area  level:  to  help  each  country  to 
achieve  the  necessary  level  of  resilience;  and  to  ensure  that  they  maintain  that  resilience 
permanently.4 Since structural reforms in any euro area country are a legitimate interest of 
the  whole  union,  there  needs  to  be  stronger  ownership  of  reforms  not  just  at  the  national 
level, but at the European level as well. 
Several countries have however made significant progress with structural reforms during the 
crisis, and we can already see how this has altered the relationship between inflation and 
unemployment. Various estimates of the euro area Phillips curve show that, while the slope 
has varied over time, it has steepened in recent years. In particular, there is evidence that 
inflation  has  become  increasingly  responsive  to  cyclical  conditions  in  countries  that  have 
reformed their product and labour markets, such as Spain5 and Italy6. 
Raising potential growth 
Besides this issue of resilience, as the central bank of the euro area we also have another, 
equally direct interest in structural reforms. This is related to their effect on growth – or more 
specifically, the challenges posed by a period of low potential growth. 
International institutions currently estimate potential growth to be below 1% in the euro area, 
compared with above 2% in the US (Chart 3).7 This is in part a result of the effects of the 
crisis on investment and, via hysteresis, structural unemployment. But it also reflects weak 
underlying trends in productivity growth and labour supply. Consequently, while some of the 
                                                
3   Bartelsman,  E.,  F.  di  Mauro  and  E.  Dorrucci  (2015),“Eurozone  rebalancing:  Are  we  on  the  right  track  for 
growth? Insights from the CompNet micro-based data.” www.voxeu.org. 
4   Draghi, M. “Stability and Prosperity in Monetary Union.” Speech at the University of Helsinki, 27 November 
2014. See also keynote address at the Süddeutsche Zeitung Führungstreffen Wirtschaft, November 2013. 
5   Banco de España (2013), “Variation in the cyclical sensitivity of Spanish inflation: an initial approximation.” 
Economic Bulletin, July–August 2013. 
6   Riggi, M., and F. Venditti (2014), “Surprise! Euro area inflation has fallen.” Banca d’Italia Occasional Papers 
No. 237, September 2014. 
7   European  Commission, Winter  2015  projections;  IMF,  April  2015 WEO;  OECD,  November  2014  Economic 
Outlook. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  
 
effects of the crisis on investment and employment are expected to unwind, potential growth 
is projected to remain well below pre-crisis growth rates. 
This is problematic for at least three reasons. 
First,  it  would  mean that  the  output  gap  would  close  at  a  notably  lower  level  of  output,  at 
which  point  monetary  policy  would  have  to  return  to  a  more  neutral  stance  (Chart  4).  A 
significant share of the economic losses suffered across countries would therefore become 
permanent. Structural unemployment would stay around 10%. Youth unemployment would 
also  remain  elevated,  with  devastating  effects  for  individuals  in  terms  of  labour  market 
“scarring”.8 And this would ultimately affect society as a whole as, given our demographics, 
realising the potential of the young and their capacity for innovation is essential for long-term 
sustainability. 
Second, a situation of persistently low potential growth would make it even harder to work 
through the debt overhang that still exists in parts of the euro area. For firms that took on 
debt based on pre-crisis growth expectations, low potential growth acts as a major barrier to 
new investment, as any profits generated will likely be absorbed by servicing existing debt. 
And  we  do  see  signs  that  this  effect  has  been  operative  in  euro  area:  there  is  a  clear 
negative  correlation  between  corporate  debt-to-GDP  levels  in  different  countries  at  the 
beginning of the crisis and the evolution of business investment since. 
Third, low potential growth can have a direct impact on the tools available to monetary policy 
to deliver its mandate. The reason is that low potential growth implies a lower equilibrium real 
interest rate, which in turn means that, faced with a negative output gap, nominal policy rates 
need to go lower still to steer output back to potential. This materially increases the likelihood 
that central bank policy runs into the constraint set by the effective lower bound for interest 
rates, which is not far below zero. It therefore also increases the likelihood that we have to 
resort recurrently to unconventional policies to meet our mandate. 
When in 2003 we clarified our objective to keep inflation below but close to 2%, we assumed 
an  equilibrium  real  interest  rate  of  2%  on  average.9  The  probability  of  hitting  the  effective 
lower  bound  under  this  assumption  was  very  low.  Today,  imperfect  indicators  of  the 
equilibrium real rate, such as real forward rates at long horizons, suggest that it may have 
fallen  to  much  lower  levels.  In  this  context,  higher  potential  growth  would  facilitate  the 
stabilisation task of monetary policy by allowing the equilibrium real rate to rise. 
The untapped potential of the euro area 
For all these reasons, structural reforms that reverse the downward drift in potential growth 
are now vital for the euro area, which is why I believe, as the guardian of the currency, we 
have a legitimate interest in talking about them. But we should recognise that our weak long-
term performance also provides an opportunity. Since many economies are distant from the 
frontier of best practice in at least some policy areas, the gains from structural reforms are 
easier to achieve and the potential magnitude of such gains is greater. 
To  give  just  one  example,  research  by  the  OECD  suggests  that  committed  convergence 
towards  best  practice  across  labour  and  product  markets,  tax  policy  and  pensions  would 
                                                
8   Arulampalam,  W.,  P.  Gregg,  and  M.  Gregory  (2001),  “Unemployment  Scarring.”  The  Economic  Journal, 
vol. 111, November 2001. 
9   Coenen, G. (2003), “Zero lower bound: is it a problem in the euro area?” ECB Working Paper Series No. 269, 
September 2003. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
raise GDP per capita by about 11% after ten years for the average EU country. In the US, 
which starts from a more favourable position, the benefit would be under 5%.10 
And it is not difficult to understand why the benefits of reform could be so high in the euro 
area.  High 
levels  of  structural  unemployment,  compounded  by  high  numbers  of 
underemployed  and  discouraged  workers,  imply  a  latent  potential  in  our  economies  for  a 
major positive shock to labour supply (Chart 5). We also have scope for a large catching-up 
in terms of productivity growth. TFP has increased by only 1.5% between 2000 and 2014 in 
the euro area, far below the 10.9% increase in the US over the same period (Chart 6). 
The  type  of  policies  that  could  release  this  upward  shock  to  potential  growth  are  not  just 
those focused on price flexibility. They include, on the labour supply side, policies aimed at 
providing  job  search  support  for  the  long-term  unemployed  and  requalification  for  the  low 
skilled. And on the TFP side, policies that encourage the reallocation of resources – which 
could be powerful in the euro area given the wide and skewed distribution between the least 
and  most  productive  firms11  (Chart  7)  –  and  policies  that  accelerate  the  diffusion  of  new 
technology, where the euro area on the whole lags some way behind the US (Chart 8). 
There are many other examples one could give. The important point, however, is that in the 
euro  area  today  structural  reforms  are  not  about  creating  minor  efficiencies  or  marginal 
gains.  They  are  about  unleashing  an  untapped  potential  for  substantially  higher  output, 
employment  and  welfare.  And  in the  current  environment, this  would  play  a  crucial  role  in 
ensuring that the ongoing cyclical recovery becomes a stronger, structural recovery. 
Structural reform in a fragile demand environment 
This  discussion  on  the  importance  of  structural  reforms  leads  in  principle  to  only  one 
conclusion: the earlier they take place, the better. 
However,  while  most  of  us  might  agree  with  this  statement  in  normal  times,  the  fact  that 
interest rates have reached the effective lower bound, coupled with the still fragile cyclical 
situation, makes the situation less straightforward. In particular, the question has been raised 
as  to  whether  implementing  structural  reforms  when  the  economy  is  still  weak  would  be 
counterproductive,  in  the  sense  that  it  would  make  it  harder  to  achieve  our  mandate  by 
further reducing short-term demand. 
One argument that has been put forward in this context is that, if reforms lead to a credible 
increase in aggregate supply, they  will exert downward pressure on inflation expectations. 
And if nominal interest rates cannot fall because monetary policy is at the lower bound, real 
interest rates will then rise, creating contractionary short-term effects.12 
A  parallel  argument  in  favour  of  postponing  structural  reforms  relates  to  their  short-term 
effects on employment. The reasoning is that reforms implemented at the trough of the cycle 
or too early in the recovery may increase job insecurity among workers, which may in turn 
result in a rise in precautionary savings and thereby reduce consumption. Factors such as a 
                                                
10   Bouis, R., and R. Duval (2011), “Raising the Potential Growth after the Crisis: A Quantitative Assessment of 
the  Potential  Gains  from  Various  Structural  Reforms  in  the  OECD  Area  and  Beyond.”  OECD  Economics 
Department Working Papers No. 835, January 2011. 
11   Lopez-Garcia, P., F. di Mauro, and the CompNet Task Force (2015), “Assessing European Competitiveness: 
The new CompNet micro-based database.” ECB Working Paper No.1764. 
12   Eggertsson, G., A. Ferrero, and A. Raffo (2014), “Can Structural Reforms Help Europe?” Journal of Monetary 
Economics, 61, January 2014. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  
 
depressed  housing  market  would  also  exacerbate  these  effects  by  hindering  geographical 
mobility and the reallocation of resources.13 
There is some empirical foundation to these concerns. For example, research suggests that 
reforms  that  increase  employment  flexibility,  such  as  reducing  employment  protection,  are 
more  likely  to  depress  demand  during  downturns.14  I  would  however  reject  the  conclusion 
that this means all structural reforms should be postponed. 
The reason is that the short-term impact of structural reforms does not just depend on when 
they are implemented, but how – namely, the credibility of reforms, the type of reforms and 
their interaction with other policy measures. And if structural reforms are well-designed along 
these parameters, they can in fact have a largely neutral, if not positive impact on short-term 
demand – and even in adverse cyclical conditions. 
Credibility of reforms 
First, if reforms are credible their positive effects on short-term demand, via confidence, can 
more than compensate for any negative effects on inflation via increased supply. 
This  is  because,  for  firms,  an  upward  shift  in  potential  growth  implies  higher  expected 
revenues and higher future profitability, which should in turn encourage them to bring forward 
investment  into  the  present.  And  investment,  remember,  raises  both  supply  tomorrow  and 
demand today. It can therefore in no way be construed as being detrimental to our monetary 
policy objective. 
A  similar  logic  applies  to  households  and  their  life-cycle  income.  Reforms  that  raise 
expectations of life-cycle income should immediately support current consumption. To give 
just  one  example  of  this  effect,  an  extension  of  the  retirement  age  should  lift  not  only 
medium-term supply – by expanding the active population – but also short-term demand, by 
reducing the need for precautionary savings ahead of retirement. 
But credibility is crucial in determining how quickly these positive effects materialise. If there 
is  uncertainty  about  the  timeline  over  which  reforms  will  be  implemented,  or  about  the 
commitment of successive governments to maintaining them, it will take longer for firms and 
households  to  adjust  their  expectations  and  the  benefits  of  reforms  will  be  delayed.15 
Moreover, if reforms are not perceived to be sustainable under a wide variety of conditions 
Moreover, if reforms are not perceived to be sustainable under a wide variety of conditions – 
for example, if a pension reform is unrealistic over the longer-term – agents will anticipate a 
reversal  in  the  future  and  refrain  from  adjusting  their  behaviour  today.–  for  example,  if  a 
pension reform is unrealistic over the longer-term – agents will anticipate a reversal in the 
future and refrain from adjusting their behaviour today. 
We  have  used  our  Euro  Area  and  Global  Economy  (EAGLE)16  model  to  analyse  for  a 
medium-sized euro area country the effect of credibility and timely implementation17 – in this 
                                                
13   Andrews,  D.,  A.  Caldera  Sanchez,  and  A.  Johansson  (2011),  “Housing  Markets  and  Structural  Policies  in 
OECD Countries.” OECD Working Papers, No. 836, January 2011. 
14   Gnocchi, S., A. Lagerborg, and E. Pappa (2014), “Do labor market institutions matter for business cycles?”, 
Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, vol. 51, February 2015. 
15   Giavazzi,  F.,  and  M.  McMahon  (2008),  “Policy  Uncertainty  and  Precautionary  Savings.”  NBER  Working 
Papers 13911, National Bureau of Economic Research. 
16   Gomes, S., P. Jacquinot, and M. Pisani (2010), “The EAGLE. A model for policy analysis of macroeconomic 
interdependence in the euro area.” ECB Working Paper Series No. 1195, May 2010. 
17   Under full credibility, firms anticipate the full amount of the implied long-run increase in output, which leads to 
an immediate increase in asset prices and, hence, firms’ net worth, triggering more investment already in the 
short term. Similarly, households anticipate an increase in real wages and, hence, life-cycle income which in 
turn supports current consumption. In the case of imperfect credibility, firms and households instead partially 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
case for a structural reform in the services sector – and we find the benefits of reforms are 
clearly brought forward, even in a situation where monetary policy is constrained by the zero 
lower bound (Chart 11). This provides a strong rationale to implement reforms in a way that 
is  committed,  credible  and  consistent.18  And  such  an  approach  is  in  fact  And  such  an 
approach is in fact even more important for reforms to yield short-term benefits in the special 
environment we face today. 
Following seven years of crisis marked by several false dawns, firms and households have 
become  more  hesitant  about  taking  on  economic  risk.  This  is  mirrored  in  the  fact  that 
medium-term  growth  expectations  among  forecasters  have  not  only  shifted  downwards  in 
that  period,  but  the  distribution  of  possible  outcomes  has  also  widened  (Chart  9).  In  this 
uncertain context credibility is key, as the strength of the reform signal has an even stronger 
determination over the magnitude of the short-term benefits. 
Type of reforms 
Those short-term benefits can also be maximised, however, if the type of reforms is carefully 
chosen. How structural reforms affect the economy is of course complex, but the evidence 
suggests that the short run gains can be amplified if reforms are well designed, packaged 
and sequenced19, with a focus on measures that minimise short-term costs. 
For example, the experience of Germany during the crisis suggests that reforms aimed at 
adjustment through the intensive margin – that is, working hours and wages – are less likely 
to have negative short-term effects than reforms that operate through the extensive margin – 
i.e. dismissals.20 This is supported by new micro level research from the Eurosystem which 
shows  that,  for  a  larger  sample  of  countries,  firms  with  flexibility  at  the  plant-level  have 
reduced employment less during the crisis than those bound by centralised wage bargaining 
agreements,  partly  because  they  have  been  more  able  to  adjust  wages  to  economic 
conditions.21 
Moreover, if reforms are targeted specifically at frictions that hold back investment demand, 
their  short-term  effects  should  be  largely  positive,  even  at  the  bottom  of  the  cycle.  For 
instance,  reforms  directed  at  sectors  with  large  pent-up  demand,  such  as  professional 
services and retail trade, could be expected to elicit a rapid investment response.22 Indeed, 
our EAGLE simulations show that the short-term benefits from structural reform in the service 
sector arise mainly via a strong reaction of investment. 
                                                                                                                                                   
adjust over time their knowledge of the favourable long-run effects. The analysis also captures the notion that 
credibility is endogenous and adversely affected by delaying reform implementation. 
18   For  more  on  the  importance  of  front-loading  structural  reforms  see  speech  by  Cœuré,  B.,  on  “Structural 
reforms: learning the right lessons from the crisis”, at the Bank of Latvia Economic Conference 2014, Riga, 
17 October 2014. 
19   Blanchard, O., and F. Giavazzi (2003), “Macroeconomic Effects of Regulation and Deregulation in Goods and 
Labor Markets.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 118, February 2001. 
20   See for example Burda, M.,  and J. Hunt (2011), “What Explains the German Labour Market Miracle in the 
Great  Recession?”  NBER  Working  Papers  No.  17187,  June  2011;  and  Brenke,  K.,  U.  Rinne,  and 
F. Zimmermann (2013), “Short-Time Work: The German Answer to the Great Recession.” International Labour 
Review Vol. 152, Issue 2, June 2011. 
21   Di  Mauro,  F., and  M.  Ronchi (2015),  “Centralisation  of  wage  bargaining  and  firms’ adjustment  to the  great 
recession: A micro-based analysis.” CompNet Policy Brief, No. 8. May 2015. 
22   See for example Forni, L., A. Gerali, and M. Pisani (2010) “Macreconomic Effects of Greater Competition in 
the Service Sector: the case of Italy.” Macroeconomic Dynamics, 2010; or Faini, R., J. Haskel, G. Navaretti, 
C. Scarpa and C. Wey (2006), “Contrasting Europe’s Decline: Do Product Market Reforms Help?” in Boeri, 
T., M. Castanheira, R. Faini, and V. Galasso (eds.), Structural Reforms Without Prejudices, Oxford University 
Press. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  
 
Similarly, reforms designed to reduce bottlenecks to new investment that come from onerous 
business conditions should also have mainly benefits in the short-term. This would include 
measures  such  as  reducing  the  administrative  burden  on  young  firms,  or  speeding  up 
insolvency proceedings that raise the opportunity cost of investment by tying up capital for 
years  longer  than  initially  assumed.  For  many  euro  area  countries  there  are  several  “low 
hanging fruit” that can still be picked in this area (Chart 10). 
The EAGLE simulations show that if reforms are also well coordinated across the euro area, 
the short-term benefits for a medium-sized country can be further maximised, especially in 
terms  of  limiting  the  downward  effects  on  inflation  (Chart  12). This  reinforces  what  I  have 
said about the need for stronger common governance of structural reforms in the euro area: 
if all countries reform together, then all countries benefit more. And these findings hold even 
under the assumption that monetary policy is constrained. 
Interaction with other policy measures 
But it is also important to underline that this assumption is in fact inaccurate for the euro area 
today. Contrary to models in the literature, monetary policy is not constrained because we 
have reached the lower bound. Rather, as I laid out in a recent speech in Washington, I think 
we have demonstrated in recent months how effective monetary policy can be when it has to 
resort to unconventional measures.23 
The difference this makes in terms of the short-term effects of reforms is clearly visible in our 
EAGLE simulations. With monetary policy able to respond to any negative inflation shocks 
consumer price inflation is barely affected (Chart 13). 
What  has  been  constrained  in  the  euro  area  in  recent  years  is  fiscal  policy,  as  some 
countries faced a loss or near loss of market access. But we should remember that, in these 
circumstances, structural reforms are in fact crucial to support fiscal stabilisation. Insofar as 
they  raise  expectations  of  future  government  revenue,  they  make  public  debt  more 
sustainable, lessen the constraint of market discipline, and thereby reopen fiscal space. 
In any event, demand is today being meaningfully buttressed in the short-term by monetary 
policy,  and  the  stance  of  fiscal  policy  is  broadly  neutral.  The  arguments  for  postponing 
structural reform therefore become less convincing still. Any reforms undertaken now will in 
fact have an improved interaction with macroeconomic stabilisation policies. And I would go 
even  further:  I  would  argue  that  our  current  monetary  stance  in  fact  makes  accelerating 
structural reforms desirable, because it brings forward their positive demand effects. 
For example, the literature suggests that a well-functioning banking sector is key to reap the 
short-term benefits of reforms, as it ensures that funds flow quickly to the new investment 
opportunities  they  create.24  In  this  context,  the  combination  of  our  interest  rate  and  credit 
easing  policy,  together  with  the  recently  completed  Comprehensive  Assessment  of  bank 
balance sheets, can be seen as creating the ideal conditions for reforms to succeed. 
By bringing real interest rates well below the medium-term growth rate, this policy package is 
creating strong price incentives to invest. And by improving the transmission of those low real 
rates  into  actual  borrowing  conditions,  it  ensures  that  the  financial  sector  can  quickly 
reallocate finance to firms that capitalise on those incentives. 
In this way, accommodative monetary policy supports structural reform by ensuring that the 
investment  and  employment  benefits  materialise faster.  And  structural  reform,  by  reducing 
                                                
23   Draghi, M. “The ECB’s recent monetary policy measures: Effectiveness and challenges.” Camdessus Lecture 
at the International Monetary Fund, 14 May 2015. 
24   Bouis, R., O. Causa, L. Demmou, R. Duval, and A. Zdzienicka (2012), “The Short-Term Effects of Structural 
Reforms: An Empirical Analysis.” OECD Working Papers, no. 949. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
uncertainty about the future macro- and microeconomic outlook, supports monetary policy by 
releasing the pent-up investment demand that accommodative policy creates. 
It  should  therefore  be  clear  that  the  argument  that  accommodative  monetary  policy 
constitutes  an  excuse for  governments  and  parliaments  to  postpone  their  reform  efforts  is 
incorrect. In fact, I would submit it actually makes reforms less socially and politically costly, 
as it reduces the time it takes for reforms to produce positive effects. All this confirms my 
main contention that the current environment, per se, creates no reason for delay. 
Conclusion 
Let me conclude. 
The  economic  outlook for  the  euro  area  is  brighter  today  than  it  has  been  for  seven  long 
years. Monetary policy is working its way through the economy. Growth is picking up. And 
inflation expectations have recovered from their trough. 
This is by no means the end of our challenges, and a cyclical recovery alone does not solve 
all  of  Europe’s  problems.  It  does  not  eliminate the  debt  overhang  that affects  parts  of  the 
Union. It does not eliminate the high level of structural unemployment that haunts too many 
countries.  And  it  does  not  eliminate  the  need  for  perfecting  the  institutional  set-up  of  our 
monetary union. 
But  what  the  cyclical  recovery  does  achieve  is  to  provide  near  perfect  conditions  for 
governments  to  engage  more  systematically  in  the  structural  reforms  that  will  anchor  the 
return  to  growth.  Monetary  policy  can  steer  the  economy  back  to  its  potential.  Structural 
reform can raise that potential. And it is the combination of these demand and supply policies 
that will deliver lasting stability and prosperity. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  9 
     10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    11 
   12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
