  Carolyn Wilkins: Liquid markets for a solid economy 
Remarks  by  Ms  Carolyn  Wilkins,  Senior  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  to  the 
Chambre de commerce du Montréal métropolitain, Montréal, Quebec, 5 May 2015. 
 I’d like to thank Alexandra Lai, Césaire Meh, Chris Graham and Jing Yang for their help in preparing this speech. 
Introduction 
Good afternoon. It’s a real pleasure to be here in Montréal, where I have family roots. I want 
to talk today about an important financial force that affects all of us who invest and borrow. 
I’m  talking  about  financial  liquidity,  in  all  of  its  forms.  Right  now,  liquidity  is  going  through 
some important changes. 
We are all affected by liquidity, whether we realize it or not. If you are a business person, you 
need funding liquidity, which means that you have reliable access to financing on reasonable 
terms. If you invest in the stock market or in corporate bonds, you need market liquidity so 
you can buy or sell assets quickly, at predictable prices. The same is true if you are a saver 
through  certain  kinds  of  mutual  funds  that  promise  you  access  to  your  savings  when  you 
want them. 
As a central banker, I want the economy to have the right level of liquidity available at the 
right price so the financial system can keep working smoothly for businesses and households 
and the Bank’s monetary policy actions work the way they are supposed to, in order to meet 
our inflation target.1 
Today I’ll talk about what has been happening to liquidity in the financial system. I’ll start by 
looking  back  at the recent financial  crisis  and  the  lessons  we  learned. Then  I’ll  review  the 
reforms  that  are  being  implemented  in  Canada  and  elsewhere  and  talk  about  how  the 
financial system is evolving and what all this may mean for you. Finally, I’ll discuss the next 
steps  we’re  planning  at  the  Bank  of  Canada  to  promote  a  smoothly  functioning  and  safe 
financial system. 
The crisis and its lessons 
The seeds of the crisis were sown in a time when liquidity seemed to be everywhere. Think 
back to 2006, when it was relatively easy for businesses to get loans and households to take 
out mortgages. Financial institutions, particularly in the United States, were so eager to boost 
profits by extending credit that they started bundling mortgages and securitizing them. These 
securities satisfied the demand for so-called safe assets that gave a higher return. 
Memories  become  more  painful  as  we  move  into  2007.  Canada  had  a  sound  financial 
system, but we still ran into trouble. During the summer, the more-than-$32 billion market for 
Canadian non-bank asset-backed commercial paper (ABCP) froze. Companies that relied on 
this market for funding were hurt, along with investors, including some of Quebec’s largest 
firms, which suddenly had no market for the paper. 
While there were some doubts about the assets behind the paper, the shortage of liquidity 
undoubtedly worsened the crisis and spread it to other markets. A lack of transparency about 
the assets and a poorly designed liquidity backstop didn’t help. Ironically, even though some 
said that ABCP was backed by just about anything, the underlying assets in the Canadian 
                                                
1  D. W. Diamond, and R. Rajan, “Liquidity Shortages and Banking Crises,” Journal of Finance, 60, no. 2 (2005): 
615–47. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  paper ultimately turned out to be relatively sound, and the losses felt by the investors were 
largely the result of the market freeze. 
The affected companies, the provincial and federal governments, and the Bank of Canada 
worked  hard  to  negotiate  the  Montreal  Accord.  This  included  a  standstill  agreement  and 
rescheduling of payments, along with protection for smaller investors. 
I chose this example because we’re  in  Montréal, but there are plenty more that show that 
liquidity can evaporate quickly for reasons that aren’t immediately obvious.2 But it was clear 
in 2008 with Bear Stearns and Lehman Brothers that, when liquidity disappears, everybody 
can feel the consequences, and they are very expensive.3 The fallout from the crisis because 
of credit and liquidity issues is estimated to have cost the global economy more than US$10 
trillion in lost output. 
The response 
A lot has been done, both in Canada and globally, to respond to the lessons taught by the 
crisis. The goal is to strengthen the world’s financial system so that it functions well, reducing 
the costs and chances of any future crisis.4 It’s also to make sure taxpayers won’t be on the 
hook for the cost of any future turmoil. Let me mention some of the most important reforms. 
Internationally,  policy-makers  gathered  at  the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision  to 
establish  new  regulatory  standards.  The  Basel  III  package,  as  it’s  called,  is  perhaps  best 
known for its regulations that determine how much capital banks need to have, while taking 
into account how risky their assets are, and how much leverage they are allowed to take on. 
Globally, banks have doubled the amount of Tier 1 capital they hold, and Canada’s banks 
have been at the forefront of this effort. 
Equally  important  are  the  standards  that  make  banks  more  resilient  from  a  liquidity 
perspective. I was pleased to be one of Canada’s representatives in Basel and to chair the 
working group  on  liquidity.  Two  new  rules  are  being  implemented. The Liquidity  Coverage 
Ratio  means  that  banks  will  have  enough  high-quality  liquid  assets  available  to  meet  their 
needs  in  the  case  of  a  stress  scenario  that  lasts  30  days,  thereby  ensuring  that  they  can 
continue to operate when access to funding may be impaired. The other new standard is the 
Net  Stable  Funding  Ratio,  which  will  work  to  reduce  banks’  over-reliance  on  short-term 
funding for longer-term assets.5 These rules make it less likely that banks will face a funding 
shortfall, which could lead to them overly restrict funding to companies and households. 
In addition to Basel III, the Financial Stability Board (FSB) has been leading work to ensure 
that  banks  have  crisis-management  frameworks  in  place  should  they  come  under  serious 
stress that threatens their viability. These include recovery frameworks, which would allow 
banks  to  shore  up  capital,  restore  confidence  and  get  funding  liquidity  flowing  again.  The 
FSB has also led work on so-called resolution frameworks to be used if a bank’s recovery 
                                                
2  M.  K.  Brunnermeier,  “Deciphering  the  Liquidity  and  Credit  Crunch  2007–2008,”  Journal  of  Economic 
Perspectives  23,  no.  1  (2009):  77–100;  C.  Gauthier  and  M.  Souissi,  “Understanding  Systemic  Risk  in  the 
Banking  Sector:  A  MacroFinancial  Risk  Assessment  Framework,”  Bank  of  Canada  Review  (Spring  2012):  
29–38. 
3  F.  Allen  and  D.  Gale,  “Financial  Fragility,  Liquidity,  and  Asset  Prices,”  Journal  of  the  European  Economic 
Association 2, no. 6 (2004):1015–48. 
4  T.  Ahnert,  “Rollover  Risk,  Liquidity  and  Macroprudential  Regulation,” Working  Paper  No.  2014–23,  Bank  of 
Canada, 2014. 
5  Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (BCBS), “Basel III: The Liquidity Coverage Ratio and Liquidity Risk 
Monitoring Tools,” January 2013; BCBS, “Basel III: The Net Stable Funding Ratio,” October 2014; T. Gomes 
and  C.  Wilkins,  “The  Basel  III  Liquidity  Standards:  An  Update,”  Bank  of  Canada  Financial  System  Review 
(June 2013): 37–43. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  actions aren’t enough to get the bank back on its feet. These will allow national authorities to 
either maintain the bank’s critical operations and eventually return it to viability, or wind up 
the institution at minimal cost to taxpayers. 
The final response I’ll mention has to do with ensuring that the most important markets for 
funding liquidity, such as the repo market for government securities, can keep operating in 
times of stress. As we saw with Lehman Brothers, when a financial institution comes under 
suspicion, others may avoid trading with it. When a bank can’t get funding, that’s when it may 
call in its loans or cut its lines of credit, and companies feel the pain directly. 
One way of increasing resilience in financial markets, including repo markets, is to establish 
a  central  counterparty  (CCP)  service.  Canada  has  developed  such  a  service  here  in 
Montréal.6 The Bank of Canada has designated it as systemically important. That means we 
oversee it, in co-operation with the Autorité des marchés financiers, the Ontario Securities 
Commission  and  the  British  Columbia  Securities  Commission.  The  Bank  has  authority  to 
oversee all systemically important financial market infrastructures. 
The implications 
This  response  by  global  and  national  authorities  has  meant  a  lot  of  change.  Taken  as  a 
whole, the reforms make the world’s financial system safer. However, that safety isn’t free. 
Like all regulations, the Basel rules on capital and liquidity come with costs, both direct and 
indirect. For example, financial institutions have to make decisions about how to best allocate 
their  capital.  The  more  assets  they  hold,  and  the  riskier  those  assets  are,  the  greater  the 
capital  charges  they  incur. Those  extra  costs  will  either  reduce  profits  or  be  passed  on  to 
customers,  perhaps  in the form  of  somewhat  higher  interest  rates  or  stricter  conditions  on 
loans, or a reduction in some business lines altogether. 
The  reforms  are  also  affecting  market  liquidity  in  a  number  of  ways.7  We’ve  seen  some 
financial institutions that traditionally act as market-makers for bond trading cut back on this 
activity. In the United States, dealer inventories of corporate bonds have fallen to less than 
half  their  pre-crisis  levels.8  At  the  same  time,  there  is  more  demand  for  safe  assets.  The 
Basel rules on capital and liquidity are increasing the demand for high-quality assets such as 
government bonds. 
It’s not all about regulation, though. Those same bonds are being bought and held by many 
institutions  for  separate  reasons.  Certain  central  banks  are  stimulating  their  economies  by 
buying assets. Some central banks and sovereign wealth funds are accumulating reserves. 
The  International  Monetary  Fund  estimates  that  the  world’s  official  international  reserves 
quadrupled to US$11 trillion in the 10 years ending in 2013. These purchases are reducing 
the pool of bonds available for trading and for use as collateral. Further, financial institutions 
have become more risk-averse in general, going beyond regulatory requirements to build up 
cushions of high-quality assets. 
We’re hearing a lot of commentary about how liquidity may be diminishing in secondary bond 
markets, especially for corporate bonds. We see that the average size of a transaction has 
dropped  and turnover rates  are  down  from  pre-crisis  levels.  Bid-ask  spreads  remain  wider 
than they were in 2006.9  
                                                
6  The  service  is  run  by  the  Canadian  Derivatives  Clearing  Corporation.  It  also  clears  derivatives  contracts 
traded on the Montréal Exchange and some over-the-counter derivatives. 
7  Committee on the Global Financial System, “Market-Making and Proprietary Trading: Industry Trends, Drivers 
and Policy Implications,” CGFS Papers No. 52, November 2014. 
I. Fender and U. Lewrick, “Shifting Tides – Market Liquidity and Market-Making in Fixed Income Instruments,” 
BIS Quarterly Review (March 2015): 97–109. 
Ibid. 
8 
9 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  
 
In sovereign bond markets, there are mixed signals.10 On the one hand, bid-ask spreads in 
the United States and Europe are very close to what they were before the crisis. On the other 
hand,  in  some  cases  average  transaction  sizes  may  be  smaller  than  they  were,  and  the 
market may not be as deep. 
Liquidity  is  also  influenced  by  the  players  in  the  market.  The  shadow  banking  system  is 
growing in size and influence”.11 Here, I’m referring to institutions such as hedge funds that 
intermediate credit but operate outside of the regular banking system. Despite the ominous-
sounding name, shadow banks have an important, positive role to play in the economy. Their 
influence is growing, along with the amount of assets they have to manage. They have also 
introduced a number of new financial products and innovations. 
While  Canada’s  shadow  banking  sector  is  relatively  small  compared  with  those  of  other 
countries,  we  are  still  closely  involved  in  international  efforts  to  monitor  it.12  The  Financial 
Stability Board has been coordinating these efforts and publishes regular monitoring reports. 
Canada is also an active participant in the FSB’s thematic peer-review of shadow banking, 
and I’m leading the team that will conduct it. 
Let  me  give  you  an  example  of  the  kind  of  risk  that’s  worth  watching.  At  the  global  level, 
institutional funds are growing. This includes funds, such as open-ended mutual funds and 
some exchange-traded funds (ETFs), where investors can sell or redeem their investment on 
short notice. This can be the case even if the assets held by the funds are relatively illiquid. 
The salient question is what happens if many funds see large numbers of investors asking to 
redeem  at  the  same  time.  The  worry  is  that  fund  managers  may  not  have  enough  cash 
holdings and may be forced to incur large losses as they sell assets to cover redemptions.13 
There  are  stress-test  results  that  suggest  that fund  managers  are  holding  enough  cash  to 
cover  all  but  the  largest  redemption  shocks.14  But  it’s  far  from  clear  that  all  investors  and 
savers appreciate the liquidity and redemption risks involved in some funds. I’m not trying to 
tar all these funds with the same brush, but I would say everyone should be aware of all the 
risks involved in investing, including liquidity risks. 
The bottom line on the reform package is that the risks of financial transactions will be priced 
more appropriately. This will make funding and market liquidity marginally more expensive. 
But weighed against the cost of another crisis, it’s a small price to pay.15  
The backstop 
The  Bank  of  Canada  has  a  role  to  play  in  promoting  the  stability  and  resilience  of  core 
funding  markets,  in  normal  times  as  well  as  during  times  of  extraordinary  market  stress. 
Today, we’re publishing two consultation papers that spell out how we intend to adjust our 
                                                
10  Ibid. 
11  Z. Pozsar, “A Macro View of Shadow Banking: Do T-Bill Shortages Pose a New Triffin Dilemma?” in Is U.S. 
Government Debt Different? edited by F. Allen et al. (Philadelphia, PA: FIC Press, 2012), 35–44. 
12  T. Gravelle, T. Grieder and S. Lavoie, “Monitoring and Assessing Risks in Canada’s Shadow Banking Sector,” 
Bank of Canada Financial System Review (June 2013): 55–63. 
13  M. Feroli, A. K. Kashyap, K. L. Schoenholtz, and H. S. Shin, “Market Tantrums and Monetary Policy,” Chicago 
Booth Research Paper No. 14–09, 2014. 
14  Morgan Stanley and Oliver Wyman Blue Paper, Wholesale & Investment Banking Outlook, 19 March 2015. 
15  Financial  Stability  Board  and  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision,  “Assessing  the  Macroeconomic 
Impact  of 
the  
Macroeconomic Assessment Group, December 2010, available at http://www.bis.org/publ/othp12.pdf; Bank of 
Canada, 
Impact  
Assessment  for  Canada,”  Special  report,  August  2010,  available  at  http://www.bankofcanada.ca/wp-
content/uploads/2010/09/report.pdf. 
to  Stronger  Capital  and  Liquidity  Requirements,”  Final  Report  of 
International  Capital  and  Liquidity  Standards:  A  Macroeconomic 
the  Transition 
“Strengthening 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  financial market operations and emergency lending policies. These two papers can be found 
on  our  website.16  My  colleague,  Deputy  Governor  Lynn  Patterson,  will  talk  in  detail  about 
initiatives relating to the Bank’s market operations in a speech in Vancouver next week. Let 
me walk you through the highlights, while stressing that you should infer nothing from these 
proposals for the current or future stance of monetary policy. 
First, the Bank is proposing to reduce the amount of benchmark government bonds we buy 
at government bond auctions for our own balance sheet. This will help liquidity by increasing 
the amount of such newly issued securities that will be available to other buyers. For its part, 
the  Bank  will  buy  some  of  the  assets  we  need  in  the  secondary  market  for  government 
bonds.  Second,  we  are  exploring  changes  to  our  securities-lending  program.  This  would 
assist primary dealers that contribute to market liquidity but that need to borrow securities, 
while  still  encouraging  the  market  to  clear  itself.  Finally,  we  intend  to  set  up  a  regular 
program of term repo operations that will not only help us manage our balance sheet, but 
also give us timely insight about liquidity conditions in short-term funding markets. 
These steps will all help markets in normal times. But we need to be ready for when times 
aren’t so normal. We’re using this period of relative calm to sharpen our tools that could be 
used in any future periods of stress. 
During  the  crisis,  the  Bank  set  up  a  temporary  term  repo  facility  that  reduced  short-term 
funding pressure for primary dealers, which improved market conditions.17 At its largest, the 
facility grew to $42 billion. What we are now proposing, in addition to the regular term repo 
program  I  just  mentioned,  is  a  Contingent  Term  Repo  Facility  that  we  can  activate  at  our 
discretion  when  we  see  severe  liquidity  problems  that  are  market-wide.  The  facility  would 
offer liquidity for terms of up to one month that could be made available to primary dealers 
and, in some circumstances, other institutions if we judge it necessary for the stability of the 
financial system. 
In  addition  to  this  facility  to  deal  with  extraordinary  market-wide  stress,  we  are  proposing 
changes to how we deal with liquidity issues at individual institutions. This is our traditional 
role as lender of last resort. What this role means is that we act as a backstop to make sure 
that  a  liquidity  shortage  in  one  place  doesn’t  turn  into  widespread  stress  for  the  whole 
system. We haven’t done a comprehensive review of this role since 2004, and it’s time to 
take the lessons of the crisis on board. 
Our  Emergency  Lending  Assistance  (ELA)  was  traditionally  meant  for  financial  institutions 
that were judged to be still solvent, but unable to access liquidity. In an emergency situation, 
it can be very difficult to distinguish insolvency from illiquidity. So we will now restrict ELA to 
those institutions that have in place the credible frameworks for recovery and resolution that I 
spoke of earlier. This will ensure that any lending will be part of a coordinated effort taken by 
the institution and the authorities, as needed, to bring a distressed institution back to viability. 
And  if  it  can’t  recover  on  its  own,  the  authorities  can  do  what  is  needed  to  restructure  or 
liquidate the business while maintaining any functions that are critical to the financial system 
and without exposing taxpayers to loss. 
We are also clarifying that we would, under certain conditions, provide emergency lending to 
provincial institutions such as caisses populaires or credit unions and their centrals. Because 
these institutions can get liquidity support from their provincial centrals, we would limit ELA to 
cases that have implications for the Canadian financial system. As well, we are prepared to 
provide  emergency  lending  to  address  liquidity  problems  at  key  Canadian  market 
                                                
16  Available at https://en.ews.staging.boc.ets.net/2015/05/public-consultations-bank-canada-framework-financial-
market-operations/. 
17  E. Enenajor, A. Sebastian and J. Witmer, “An Assessment of the Bank of Canada’s Term PRA Facility,” The 
North American Journal of Economics and Finance 23, no. 1 (2012): 123–43; Bank of Canada Working Paper 
No. 2010–20. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  infrastructures that are overseen by the Bank. This is essential because infrastructures such 
as CCPs are becoming more important. 
Finally,  we  are  adjusting  the  range  of  collateral  we  would  accept  as  a  last  resort  for 
emergency  loans.  This  collateral  could  include  mortgages,  which  would  give  a  stressed 
institution more capacity to accept ELA in an emergency. To be clear, this would only occur 
after all other collateral had been exhausted. 
I  should  stress  that  these  policies  are  for  extremely  rare  occasions  –  the  Bank  hasn’t 
activated its ELA policy in roughly 30 years. And the guiding principles behind these changes 
are the same as those that led the international response to the crisis – we want to minimize 
the  risk  of  a  future  systemic  crisis  while  protecting  taxpayers  from  bearing  the  cost  of 
recovering or resolving a troubled financial institution. 
Conclusion 
A  solid  economy  rests  on  reliable  funding  and market  liquidity. We  learned  from  the  crisis 
that liquidity can be a fickle friend, and its absence can amplify financial distress. 
The reforms to date will make the financial system safer. They are designed to lower the risk 
profile  of  core  financial  institutions  and  to  increase  the  resilience  of  funding  and  market 
liquidity in times of market stress. The transition is challenging market participants to adjust 
their business models to the new reality. I hope that you better understand the importance of 
liquidity so you can make appropriate financial decisions for you and your companies. 
The  Bank  of  Canada  will  continue  to  promote  the  economic  welfare  of  Canadians  by 
supporting the stability and resilience of our financial system. We are adjusting our liquidity 
policies to contribute to the smooth functioning of the financial system in normal times. And, 
should another major bout of liquidity turmoil arise, we will be ready. 
If we all do our part, a more robust financial system will emerge, to the benefit of the people it 
ultimately serves: businesses and households who save and borrow. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
