  Simon M Potter: Money markets and monetary policy normalization 
Remarks  by  Mr  Simon  M  Potter,  Executive  Vice  President  of  the  Markets  Group  of  the 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York, at the Money Marketeers of New York University, New 
York City, 15 April 2015. 
 I  would  like  to  thank  Julia  Gouny,  Deborah  Leonard,  and  Eric  LeSueur  for  their  excellent  assistance  in  the 
preparation of these remarks and colleagues in the Federal Reserve System for numerous insightful comments 
and suggestions. 
Accompanying charts can be found at the end of the speech. 
It  is  a  pleasure  to  speak  again  at  the  Money  Marketeers.  Much  has  happened  with  the 
implementation  of  monetary  policy  in  the  sixteen  months  since  I  last  addressed  this 
audience: 
• 
Recognizing  a  substantial  improvement  in  the  outlook  for  the  labor  market,  the 
Federal  Open  Market  Committee  (FOMC)  concluded  its  outcome-based  asset 
purchase  program  in  October  2014,  having  completed  a  total  of  $1.6  trillion  in 
Treasury and agency MBS purchases over nearly two years. 
The  Federal  Reserve  has  continued  to  test  operational  tools  that  it  can  use  to 
control  interest  rates  with  a  large  balance  sheet,  through  a  continuation  of  the 
overnight  reverse  repurchase  agreement  (ON  RRP)  exercise  that  began  in 
September 2013, as well as through term RRPs and the Term Deposit Facility. 
The  FOMC  revised  and  augmented  its  communications  around  the  approach  it 
intends to implement when it becomes appropriate to begin normalizing the stance 
of monetary policy. 
The  FOMC’s  forward  guidance  on  the  future  stance  of  policy  has  changed.  In 
March, the Committee reaffirmed its view that the current zero to ¼ percent target 
for the federal funds rate remains appropriate to support continued progress toward 
maximum  employment  and  price  stability.  Noting  that  economic  conditions  were 
unlikely to  warrant an increase in the target range at the April meeting, it advised 
that such an increase could be warranted at any later meeting, depending on how 
the economy evolves. 
   My  comments  today  will  focus  on  the  Federal  Reserve’s  readiness  to  implement  policy 
firming  when  directed  to  do  so  by  the  FOMC.  In  this  context,  I  will  discuss  the  Federal 
Reserve’s ongoing refinement of its approach to policy normalization, with a focus on initial 
steps to leave the zero lower bound and some of the considerations that have directed the 
Committee away from a fixed-rate, full-allotment ON RRP facility. I will then review results of 
our  testing,  which  inform  our  confidence  in  that  approach.  I  will  also  discuss  the  Federal 
Reserve’s flexibility to adapt its operational and analytical tools to the dynamic nature of the 
markets in which we operate. 
As always, these views are mine alone and do not necessarily reflect those of the New York 
Fed or the Federal Reserve System.  
Ongoing refinements in the Federal Reserve’s approach to policy normalization 
With the conclusion of the FOMC’s asset purchase program last October and the ongoing 
reinvestment of principal repayments, the System Open Market Account’s (SOMA) securities 
portfolio stands at $4.25 trillion. This portfolio is associated with some $2.9 trillion in excess 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  the 
it  did  before 
financial  crisis.1  Against 
reserve balance liabilities – a level at which the Open Markets Trading Desk (the Desk) will 
be  unable  to  move the effective federal funds rate  up  or  down  with  small  variations  in  the 
supply  of  reserves,  as 
this  backdrop, 
implementation of monetary policy will require a new operational approach to influence short-
term interest rates when the FOMC determines it is time to start raising them. 
The  FOMC  outlined  its  anticipated  approach  to  policy  normalization  –  that  is,  raising  the 
federal funds rate and other short-term interest rates to more normal levels, and reducing the 
Federal Reserve’s securities holdings – in a statement of Policy Normalization Principles and 
Plans published after the September 2014 FOMC meeting, with additional details provided in 
the March 2015 FOMC meeting minutes.2 In its September statement, the Committee noted 
its plans to reduce monetary policy accommodation by raising its target range for the federal 
funds rate. The Federal Reserve intends to move the federal funds rate into the target range 
primarily by adjusting the interest rate it pays on excess reserve balances (IOER), and will 
use an ON RRP facility and other supplementary tools, as needed, to help control the federal 
funds  rate.  The  Committee  noted  that  an  ON  RRP  facility  will  be  used  only  to  the  extent 
necessary  and  will  be  phased  out  once  it  is  no  longer  needed  to  help  control  the  federal 
funds rate. 
With respect to the Fed’s balance sheet, the Committee intends to reduce securities holdings 
in a gradual and predictable manner, primarily by ceasing to reinvest repayments of principal 
on securities held in the SOMA.3 In the longer run, the Committee intends that the Federal 
Reserve will hold no more securities than necessary to implement monetary policy efficiently 
and effectively, and that it will hold primarily Treasury securities. 
The March 2015 minutes augment the September Principles and Plans with additional details 
about  the  FOMC’s  intended  operational  approach  at  the  commencement  of  policy  firming. 
Specifically, the Federal Reserve intends to target a range for the federal funds rate that is 
25  basis  points  wide,  and  to  set  the  IOER  rate  and  the  offering  rate  associated  with  an 
ON RRP facility equal to the top and bottom of the target range, respectively. It intends to 
allow aggregate capacity of the ON RRP facility to be temporarily elevated to support policy 
implementation. It can also adjust the IOER rate and parameters of the ON RRP facility, and 
to use other tools such as term operations, as necessary for appropriate monetary control 
based on policymakers’ assessments of the efficacy and costs of their tools. The Committee 
expects that it will be appropriate to reduce the capacity of the ON RRP facility fairly soon 
after it commences policy firming. 
I’d like to explore some of these elements in more detail. 
                                                
1   This measure of reserves includes current balances of RRPs conducted under the Desk’s operational exercise 
and  term  deposits.  In  actuality,  balances  held  in  these  categories  shift  the  composition  of  the  Federal 
Reserve’s liabilities away from reserves, although they don’t reduce the total size of the balance sheet. Note 
that the total quantity of reserves in the banking system is largely a byproduct of Federal Reserve activities 
(such as asset purchases or lending programs) and the private sector’s demand for other Federal Reserve 
liabilities (such as currency). Individual bank lending transactions can redistribute reserves, but they do not 
change the total quantity of them. See Todd Keister and James J. McAndrews, “Why Are Banks Holding So 
Many  Excess  Reserves?”  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York  Current  Issues  15,  no.  8,  December  2009. 
http://www.newyorkfed.org/research/current_issues/ci15–8.pdf. 
2   The  FOMC’s  September  2014  Normalization  Principles  and  Plans  and  March  2015  meeting  minutes  are 
and 
http://federalreserve.gov/newsevents/press/monetary/20140917c.htm 
available, 
http://federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomcminutes20150318.htm. 
respectively, 
at 
3   The  Committee  further  specified  that  it  expects  to  cease  or  commence  phasing  out  reinvestments  after  it 
begins  increasing  the  target  range  for  the  federal  funds  rate;  the  timing  will  depend  on how  economic  and 
financial conditions and the economic outlook evolve. The Committee said that it does not currently anticipate 
selling agency mortgage-backed securities (MBS) as part of the normalization process, but noted that limited 
sales might be warranted in the longer run to reduce or eliminate residual holdings. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  First:  IOER.  The  Federal  Reserve  began  paying  interest  on  reserve  balances  in  October 
2008;  interest  rates  on  required  and  excess  reserve  balances  have  both  been  ¼  percent 
since mid-December 2008.4 The Federal Reserve intends to use adjustments to the IOER 
rate – a rate it directly administers – as the main tool for moving the fed funds rate and other 
short-term interest rates into its target range. 
The  IOER  rate  is  essentially  the  rate  of  return  earned  by  a  bank  on  a  riskless  overnight 
deposit held at the Fed, thus representing the opportunity cost to a bank of using its funds in 
an alternative manner, such as making a loan or purchasing a security. In principle, no bank 
would want to deploy its funds in a way that earned less than what can be earned from its 
balances maintained at the Fed. Even though banks are the only institutions eligible to earn 
IOER, arbitrage should lift market rates up to the level of the IOER rate. In practice, however, 
with the large levels of excess reserves in the system, certain institutional aspects of money 
markets  –  including  bank-only  access  to  IOER,  credit  limits  imposed  by  cash  lenders  and 
other  impediments  to  market  competition,  and  the  costs  of  balance  sheet  expansion 
associated with arbitrage activity – appear to create frictions that have made IOER act more 
like a magnet that pulls up short-term interest rates than a firm floor beneath them.5 
Second: An ON RRP facility. The FOMC will supplement the magnetic pull of changes in the 
IOER rate with an ON RRP facility to help control the federal funds rate.6 Under the facility, 
the Desk will offer general collateral reverse repurchase agreements at a specified offering 
rate  to  a  broad  set  of  counterparties  –  including  several  types  of  nonbank  financial 
institutions that are significant lenders in U.S. money markets. 
ON RRPs, particularly if offered at full-allotment – that is, fulfilled for any amount demanded 
at  the  designated  rate  –  are  conceptually  similar  to  IOER  for  banks  in  that  they  provide 
access to a risk-free overnight investment.7 An ON RRP facility can therefore help firm the 
floor beneath interest rates by widening the universe of counterparties that are unwilling to 
lend at rates below those available directly from the Fed. A facility can also help to alleviate 
some of the frictions that may curb the effectiveness of IOER in a system with large levels of 
excess  reserves  by  enhancing  market  competition  through  a  strengthening  of  large  cash 
lenders’  bargaining  positions,  and  by  reducing  the  amount  of  reserves  held  by  banks  and 
therefore associated balance sheet costs. 
Third: A 25 basis point target range for the federal funds rate bounded by the IOER and ON 
RRP rates. Framing the stance of policy in terms of the federal funds rate focuses monetary 
policy on a rate that is familiar to the public. Meanwhile, setting a target range, rather than a 
                                                
4   Congress granted the Federal Reserve the authority to pay interest on reserve balances held by depository 
institutions in 2006, with an effective date of October 2011. The implementation of this ruling was accelerated 
to  October  2008  during  the  financial  crisis  to  enhance  the  Federal  Reserve’s  ability  to  control  short-term 
interest  rates  amid  the  reserve-expanding  credit  programs  and  asset  purchases  it  initiated  at  that  time. 
Although the rates of interest on required reserve balances and excess reserve balances are currently equal, 
they need not be the same. 
I spoke about these dynamics in December 2013 and October 2014 speeches, available at  
http://www.newyorkfed.org/newsevents/speeches/2013/pot131202.html and 
http://www.newyorkfed.org/newsevents/speeches/2014/pot141007.html. 
5  
 
 
6   When the Desk conducts a reverse repo transaction, it sells Treasury securities held in the SOMA under an 
agreement to repurchase the securities at a pre-determined price. The difference between the sale price and 
the repurchase price, together with the length of time between the two legs of the transaction, implies a rate of 
interest (the reverse repo rate) paid by the Federal Reserve to its counterparty. The transaction leaves the 
size of the SOMA’s securities portfolio unchanged, but shifts some of the liabilities on the Fed’s balance sheet 
from bank reserves to reverse repos while the trade is outstanding 
7   Unlike IOER, however, a full-allotment ON RRP facility would theoretically offer a perfectly elastic supply of a 
safe asset at a fixed rate. In practice, the amount of ON RRPs that the Federal Reserve could supply would 
likely be limited by the lesser of the level of excess reserves or the amount of securities available from the 
SOMA portfolio for such transactions. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  point  target,  is  viewed  as  appropriate  for  providing  some  flexibility  in  interest  rate  control 
when  the  quantity  of  reserves  remains  elevated.  As  for  the  Fed’s  tools  for  policy 
implementation, setting the IOER and ON RRP rates at the upper and lower bounds of the 
target range is a straightforward arrangement at the start of policy firming.8 A spread of this 
size  between  the  Federal  Reserve’s  two  administered-rate  tools  is  expected  to  be  narrow 
enough to provide sufficient interest rate control but wide enough to preserve a reasonable 
volume of trading in the federal funds market and to keep the Federal Reserve’s footprint in 
the nonbank financial sector from growing too large. As suggested by operational guidance 
in the March minutes, policymakers may adjust either side of the spread between these two 
rates, as needed, once normalization is under way. 
Fourth: Qualifications around the use and settings of an ON RRP facility. The FOMC intends 
to use an ON RRP facility only to the extent necessary and will phase it out when it is no 
longer needed to help control the federal funds rate. But what is necessary, and how can the 
facility be phased out? 
As  the  minutes  of  recent  FOMC  meetings  show,  Committee  participants  differ  in  their 
answers to those questions, but all agree that demonstrating sufficient control over money 
market rates during the critical early stages of policy normalization is a priority. Against this 
backdrop, the Committee has noted that it plans to allow the aggregate capacity of the facility 
to be temporarily elevated to support policy implementation at liftoff, but also expects that it 
will be appropriate to reduce ON RRP capacity fairly soon after policy firming commences. 
While  the  $300  billion  aggregate  cap  on  ON  RRP  usage  employed  during  exercise 
operations to date has generally provided sufficient capacity to establish a floor on the level 
of  money  market  rates,  it  is  difficult  to  know  ex  ante  whether  the  same  amount  will  be 
adequate  once  we  move  away  from  the  zero  lower  bound.  Providing  capacity  that  market 
participants will judge sufficient to meet demand with a high degree of certainty can therefore 
enhance the confidence of policymakers and market participants that the facility will support 
short-term interest rates at the time of liftoff. 
It  is  important  to  note  that  allowing  for  elevated  capacity  in  an  ON  RRP  facility  is  not  the 
same as offering a fixed-rate, full-allotment facility. Through testing, we’ve learned that the 
fixed-rate  and  full-allotment  features  are  not  necessary  for  securing  interest  rate  control. 
Moreover, by supplying a perfectly elastic quantity of a risk-free asset at a fixed-rate, a fixed-
rate, full-allotment ON RRP facility might have undesirable effects on financial stability and 
the Federal Reserve’s role in financial intermediation.9  
In periods of financial stress, the availability of a fixed-rate, full-allotment facility could enable 
a  rapid  or  unexpected  expansion  that  exacerbates  disruptive  flight-to-quality  flows  by 
facilitating a run away from funding financial institutions and nonfinancial corporations. This 
dynamic could undermine financial stability. Separately, an ON RRP facility might affect the 
                                                
8   The  spread  between  the  IOER  and  ON  RRP  rates  should  not  be  confused  with  the  FOMC’s  stance  on 
monetary policy, expressed through a target range for the federal funds rate. Nor should it be thought of as a 
“corridor” operating framework for policy implementation. Within a corridor framework, relatively small changes 
in the supply of reserves can have a significant effect on equilibrium short-term rates, and the penalties and 
costs of holding too many reserves or too few reserves (set by rates on marginal deposit or lending facilities, 
respectively), generally limit the range of rate movements in the market. In an environment in which the supply 
of reserves far exceeds the demand, however, changes in the supply of reserves are not linked to movements 
in market rates. Instead, with elevated levels of reserves, the Federal Reserve’s operating framework more 
closely resembles a “floor” framework, in which interest rate control is established by directly administering a 
minimum rate (or here, a range of rates) in money markets. 
9   A fuller discussion of the secondary effects of an ON RRP facility and options for addressing them can be 
found in  Joshua  Frost,  Lorie Logan,  Antoine  Martin,  Patrick  McCabe,  Fabio  Natalucci,  and  Julie  Remache, 
“Overnight RRP Operations as a Monetary Policy Tool: Some Design Considerations,” Federal Reserve Bank 
of  New  York  Staff  Reports,  no.  712,  February  2015.  http://www.newyorkfed.org/research/staff_reports/ 
sr712.pdf. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Federal Reserve’s role in financial intermediation – particularly if it were permanently in place 
– by expanding the Federal Reserve’s presence in short-term funding markets or potentially 
altering the structure and functioning of money markets in unanticipated ways.10 These risks 
are  likely  small  given  the  sizable  level  of  excess  reserves  currently  in  the  system,  which 
establishes  the  Federal  Reserve’s  large  footprint  in  money  markets.  However,  the  risks 
associated with offering a perfectly elastic supply of ON RRPs at a fixed rate could increase 
as the level of excess reserves declines over the course of normalization and an ON RRP 
facility becomes less important to support interest rate control. 
These  risks  inform  the  Committee’s  desire  to  phase  the  facility  out  when  it  is  no  longer 
needed to control the federal funds rate. Indeed, money market rates should become more 
closely  aligned  with  the  IOER  rate  as  the  quantity  of  reserve  balances  in  the  system 
approaches  greater  levels  of  scarcity,  likely  reducing  the  need  for  supplementary  support 
from  an  ON  RRP  facility.  And  since  ON  RRPs  just  swap  one  Federal  Reserve  liability  for 
another – reserves for reverse repos – demand for RRPs should recede as the asset side of 
the Fed’s balance sheet shrinks. There is, therefore, a natural “glide path” for the ON RRP 
facility to be phased out over time as the SOMA securities portfolio runs off and the size of 
the balance sheet is reduced to the smallest size needed for effective and efficient monetary 
policy implementation. 
The  pace  at  which  the  portfolio  runs  off  will  be  influenced  by  a  wide  range  of  variables, 
including the FOMC’s decisions about its securities portfolio, the future path of interest rates 
(which  will  affect  the  prepayment  speed  of  the  Fed’s  agency  mortgage-backed  securities 
portfolio), and currency growth. Under a set of baseline assumptions from the end of 2014, 
the level of reserves is projected to fall below $1 trillion in early 2019 and to reach its steady 
state in late 2020 (Figure 1).11  
In the meantime, we can introduce features into the facility’s design that would limit its size 
even as it supports interest rate control. Examples include managing the spread between the 
IOER rate  and  the  ON RRP  rate to  influence  demand for the facility,  setting  a  cap  on the 
facility’s size through individual or aggregate limits, and establishing an auction mechanism 
to allocate usage. If needed, the Committee can adjust these levers to discourage usage and 
shrink the footprint of the facility. The Committee has already directed the Desk to include 
some of these features in its testing. 
Finally:  The  FOMC  noted  that  it  is  prepared  to  adjust  the  details  of  its  approach  to  policy 
normalization in light of economic and financial developments. Flexibility is a critical element 
of the Federal Reserve’s approach to policy normalization. Policymakers have said that they 
will  adjust  the  IOER  rate  and  parameters  of  an  ON  RRP  facility,  and  use  other 
supplementary tools as necessary – including term tools – during the normalization process. 
In  doing  so,  they  will  weigh  the  efficacy  and  costs  of  each  of  the  tools  in  their  arsenal  to 
ensure that they are optimizing policy objectives while maintaining appropriate interest rate 
control. 
I’ll now explain our confidence in and readiness to implement this approach. 
                                                
10   That said, to the extent that an ON RRP facility’s existence provides a credible outside investment option to 
money market lenders, it could potentially improve competition and support interest rate control even without 
large actual use of the facility. 
11   These assumptions are derived from responses to the Desk’s Survey of Primary Dealers (December 2014), in 
which  respondents  expected  liftoff  to  occur  in  the  second  quarter  of  2015  and  principal  reinvestments  of 
SOMA securities holdings to end two quarters later, and include a neutral assumption that the FOMC returns 
to a long-run operating framework with a relatively low level of excess reserves. Survey results are available at 
http://www.newyorkfed.org/markets/survey/2014/December_result.pdf.  For  more  details  on  this  projection 
scenario,  please  see  the  Report  on  Open  Market  Operations  during  2014  (Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New 
York, April 2015), available at http://www.newyorkfed.org/markets/annual_reports.html. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  Preparedness to implement normalization 
Extensive  testing  of ON  RRPs  and  other  supplementary  tools  have  provided  policymakers 
with  confidence  that  they  will  be  able  to  maintain  control  over  interest  rates  –  that  is,  that 
rates will move up with increases in the IOER rate – during the normalization process.12  
An important determinant of the effectiveness of an ON RRP facility is whether a sufficiently 
wide set of nonbank counterparties has access to it. The New York Fed currently executes 
RRPs  with  163  counterparties  comprising many  of  the major  cash  lenders  in  secured  and 
unsecured money markets – including money market funds that manage about 70 percent of 
the total U.S. money market fund assets under management and account for more than a 
quarter  of  total  tri-party  repo  lending  against  government  collateral.13  This  provides  a  high 
degree  of  confidence  that  we  are  transacting  with  an  adequate  set  of  counterparties  to 
achieve our policy execution objectives.14  
Throughout the testing regime, the Desk has varied the settings and design of the reverse 
repo operations, with operational results informing subsequent changes. We’ve operated at 
different times of the day, increased the maximum bid limit per counterparty, and introduced 
an aggregate cap of $300 billion and a single-price auction mechanism to allocate awards 
should the sum of submitted bids exceed the cap. We’ve also adjusted the offering rates and 
tested  ON  RRPs  in  conjunction  with  term  RRPs  at  quarter-ends.  These  adjustments  have 
allowed us to learn how ON RRPs might be used to support the monetary policy objectives of 
the FOMC. 
Our  testing  has  demonstrated  that  ON  RRP  operations  can  set  a  soft  floor  on  short-term 
interest  rates.  That  is, while  some  trades  may  occur  below  the  ON  RRP  offering  rate,  the 
volume-weighted averages of most money market rates have been above the ON RRP rate 
on nearly all days (Figure 2). 
Data across a range of money markets provide evidence that changes in the ON RRP rate 
affected  pricing  for  both  unsecured  and  secured  instruments  and  that  the  operations 
successfully set a floor on short-term interest rates. While market participants are aware of 
the success in producing a floor from such volume-weighted rates as the fed funds effective 
rate  and  GCF  Repo  Index®,  the  Desk  has  been  also  examining  detailed  transaction-level 
data  for  evidence  that  the  ON  RRP  sets  a  floor  on  nearly  all  overnight  money  market 
transactions. 
                                                
12   The payment of interest on reserves has been in place since October 2008, although the Federal Reserve 
Board recently requested public comment on proposed technical changes to the methodology for calculating 
IOER. The proposal intends to enhance the effectiveness of changes in the IOER rate in moving the federal 
funds rate into the target range when changes in those rates do not coincide with the beginning of a reserve 
maintenance  period.  Further  information  is  available  at  http://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/press/ 
bcreg/20150413a.htm. 
13   With  the  addition  of  25  expanded  counterparties  who  were  cleared  to  participate  fully  in  RRP  operations 
starting  on  March  16,  2015,  the  Desk’s  163  RRP  counterparties  comprise  141  expanded  counterparties 
(105 money market funds, 12 government sponsored enterprises, and 24 banks) plus 22 primary dealers. A 
list  of 
is  available  at  http://www.newyorkfed.org/markets/ 
expanded_counterparties.html. 
the  Desk’s  reverse  repo  counterparties 
14   Consistent with the temporary nature of the ON RRP facility, the New York Fed does not expect to increase 
the  total  number  of  RRP  counterparties  further,  unless  the  addition  of  new  counterparties  is  deemed 
necessary  to  support  the  implementation  of  monetary  policy.  Thus,  the  number  of  expanded  RRP 
counterparties is not expected to exceed 150. Additional firms that meet the eligibility criteria are allowed to 
submit applications, but will be added to the counterparty list only if the maximum number of expanded RRP 
counterparties has not been reached. On March 9, 2015, the Desk released a policy statement indicating that 
it  could  remove  an  entity  from  the  RRP  counterparty  list  for  failing  to  meet  prescribed  eligibility  and 
participation 
criteria.  The 
is  available  at  http://www.newyorkfed.org/markets/opolicy/ 
operating_policy_150309.html. 
statement 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  A series of rate adjustments last November and December was particularly instructive in this 
examination. During the six-week test, the offering rate was temporarily lowered from 5 basis 
points  to  3  basis  points,  then  raised  to  7  basis  points  and  10  basis  points.15  The  Fed’s 
FR 2420  data  on  bank  borrowing  activity  show  that  after  each  increase  in  the  ON  RRP 
offering  rate,  the  distribution  of  fed  funds  trades  shifted  toward  higher  rates,  with  the  vast 
majority of trades being executed at rates at or above the offering rate (Figure 3). The same 
patterns  were  observed  in  detailed  data  on  brokered  fed  funds  and  Eurodollar  trades,  the 
latter of which encompasses a larger volume and wider set of lenders than fed funds, and 
also in secured markets. Examining in particular individual repo trades where money market 
funds and GSEs supply cash to counterparties over the tri-party platform, we saw repo rates 
shift higher and nearly all trading volume occur at or above the ON RRP rate. Thus, the rate 
on  the  ON  RRP  facility  performed  as  a  floor  for  nearly  all  overnight  money  market 
transactions, exactly as theory would predict for even small and temporary rate changes in 
the offering rate. 
After subsequently lowering the ON RRP offering rate back to its exercise baseline of 5 basis 
points in mid-December, secured rates declined. Interestingly however, average unsecured 
rates  remained  at  somewhat  elevated  levels,  even  as  a  portion  of  the  activity  returned  to 
lower rate levels (Figures 4 and 5).16 The drivers of this dynamic remain unclear and illustrate 
the complexity of money markets, but may partly reflect some lenders in unsecured markets 
gaining information about their relative bargaining power as a result of the ON RRP tests.17 
Overall, observations from testing and reports from market participants suggest that ON RRP 
operations generally work the way we have expected, with market participants evaluating the 
attractiveness of ON RRP investments relative to other opportunities available to them in the 
market.  Indeed,  take-up  in  the  operations  generally  increases  as  the  spread  between 
alternative  market  rates  and  the  ON  RRP  offering  rate  narrows,  and  aggregated  usage 
patterns differ across counterparty types.18  
Take-up, particularly for prime money market funds, substantially increases around quarter- 
and  year-ends,  when  cash  investors’  access  to  other  short-term  investments  can  become 
more limited. All else equal, the decline in the supply of short-term investment alternatives 
can create volatility in market rates, so the Federal Reserve’s ability to provide investment 
capacity through ON RRPs at these times may be important for monetary control. Tellingly, 
the only time the $300 billion aggregate cap on ON RRP operations was reached was in the 
September  2014  quarter-end  operation,  soon  after  the  cap’s  introduction  surprised  market 
participants,  leaving  them  searching  for  investment  options  when  less  than  two  weeks 
remained  before  quarter-end.  Money  market  rates  softened  over  that  period  as  lenders 
sought to protect themselves against the risk of not having their bids fully filled in the Fed’s 
                                                
15   An  October  29,  2014,  policy  statement  announcing 
http://www.newyorkfed.org/markets/opolicy/operating_policy_141029.html. 
the  details  of  the 
test  plan 
is  available  at 
16   A similar dynamic is present in the brokered Eurodollar data. 
17   Money market prices also appear to reflect some stickiness. Much money market activity is over the counter, 
potentially  leading  to  search  frictions  and  bargaining.  Anecdotal  evidence  suggests  that  lenders  typically 
interact  directly  with  a small number  of counterparties, perhaps  because  a  portion of  the  activity  is derived 
from costly relationship lending. These factors may contribute to imperfect competition. 
18   Money  market  funds  account  for  a  substantial  majority  of  take-up,  and  their  participation  is  particularly 
responsive  to  rates  on  ON  RRPs  relative  to  those  in  the  tri-party  repo  market.  Government-sponsored 
enterprises account for the next largest share of take-up, with participation sensitive not only to market rates 
but also to non-price factors like their intra-month cash flow cycles. Not surprisingly, participation by banks and 
primary dealers tends to be more limited, because banks have access to higher-yielding IOER and primary 
dealers are typically net cash borrowers in the repo market. However, primary dealer take-up does increase 
when  repo  rates,  particularly  in  the  inter-dealer  market,  fall  below  the  ON  RRP  rate.  Take-up  data  by 
counterparty 
“Historical  Data”  at 
http://www.newyorkfed.org/markets/omo/dmm/temp.cfm. 
type,  updated  with  a  quarterly 
lag,  are  available  under 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  quarter-end operation. Indeed, requested bids in the September 30 operation exceeded the 
cap by about $100 billion, some bids were only partially filled, and ON RRPs were awarded 
at a stop-out rate of zero percent. 
In  December  2014  and  March  2015,  the  early  provision  of  additional  investment  capacity 
through term RRP operations spanning the quarter-end dates, on top of the $300 billion of 
capacity provided through ON RRPs, provided confidence to money market counterparties 
that  sufficient  investment  opportunities  would  be  available.19  Absorbing  some  investment 
demand in term operations ahead of those quarter ends likely kept demand for ON RRPs on 
the  quarter-end  dates  below  the  cap  and  helped  to  keep  money  market  rates  above  the 
ON RRP offering rate. Given an apparent high degree of substitutability between overnight 
and  term  RRPs,  cumulative  take-up  in  these  operations  helps  us  to  assess  variability  in 
potential  demand  for  safe  investments  around  peak  times  and  to  evaluate  how  much 
capacity the Federal Reserve might need to provide in an ON RRP facility to satisfy demand 
sufficiently to maintain interest rate control (Figure 6).20 
While our testing suggests that the current parameters of ON RRP operations have worked 
successfully with IOER to control short-term interest rates, there are limits to what we can 
learn from testing. Importantly, we will likely not know the level of support that proximity to 
the zero lower bound has provided to money market rates until we start to move away from 
it.  Demand  for  ON  RRPs  following  liftoff  could  remain  relatively  steady.  But  it  could 
conceivably be much greater than what we have seen at higher levels of interest rates or as 
regulatory and structural changes in money markets boost demand for safe assets, which I 
will  discuss  momentarily.  Additionally,  having  some  excess  capacity,  also  known  as 
headroom,  in  ON  RRP  operations  over  expected  usage  is  important  for  the  facility’s 
effectiveness in helping to control rates. One might want such headroom – which provides 
confidence to market participants that an ON RRP cap will not bind – to be somewhat higher 
on average if take-up in ON RRP operations becomes more volatile. Given the importance of 
a successful liftoff to the Federal Reserve’s credibility, the FOMC has indicated an intention 
to set ON RRP capacity at a temporarily elevated level when policy firming commences to 
support policy implementation. 
As always, the Federal Reserve will monitor financial markets closely and make adjustments 
in its execution of monetary policy, as needed, to achieve its mandated objectives. 
Changes in money markets 
The  operational  approach  for  policy  normalization  I  described  earlier  refocuses  the 
mechanism for  implementing  monetary  policy  back  to money  markets, after  the  post-crisis 
period in which policy has been driven by large-scale asset purchases. However, we will be 
operating  in  a  complex,  dynamic,  and  still-evolving  market  environment  that  looks  much 
different  from  the  money  markets  in  which  the  Fed  last  operated  actively  to  achieve  its 
interest  rate  objectives.  Still,  these  markets  are  no  less  important  for  the  transmission  of 
monetary policy or the broader U.S. financial system than they were before. 
                                                
19   In order to explore how term tools might be used more broadly during normalization, the Desk also conducted 
a series of one-week term RRP operations in mid-February through early-March 2015. The Federal Reserve 
has also continued to test its Term Deposit Facility, which provides a term investment option for credentialed 
depository  institutions.  Recently,  TDF  tests  varied  the  rates  and  maximum  awards  and  introduced an  early 
withdrawal feature that provides favorable treatment of term deposits under the U.S. liquidity coverage ratio. 
20   The December 2014 and March 2015 quarter-ends, respectively, had a total of $397 billion and $378 billion in 
awarded bids outstanding between term and overnight operations combined. These amounts are close to the 
$407 billion in bids that were submitted in the ON RRP operation at the September 2014 quarter-end, only 
$300 billion of which were filled. On non-quarter-end days, take-up has averaged less than $150 billion. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  In recent years, money market trading dynamics have changed, reflecting the effects of Fed 
monetary policy as  well  as other factors. The expansion of the Federal Reserve’s balance 
sheet and the introduction of payment of interest on reserves have significantly altered the 
motivation  for  many  fed  funds  trades.21  With  an  abundant  supply  of  reserves  available, 
banks’  need  to  borrow  funds  to  meet  their  reserve  requirements  or  to  clear  financial 
transactions has been dramatically reduced. Meanwhile, entities that have surplus cash but 
are  not  able  to  earn  IOER,  such  as  Federal  Home  Loan  Banks,  lend  funds  at  sub-IOER 
levels  to  banks  that  borrow  them  for  the  purposes  of  depositing  them  at  the  Fed  to  earn 
IOER. 
As a result, the size of the fed funds market has declined relative to pre-crisis levels and the 
nature  of  most  fed  funds  activity  has  changed.  Nevertheless,  trading  volumes  remain 
reasonably robust. Since July 2014, the average overnight borrowing in the fed funds market 
that  banks  report  to  the  Fed  through  our  FR  2420  reporting  form  has  been  roughly 
$50 billion, with an average of about 300 transactions per day (Figure 7).22 Moreover, longer-
term correlations between fed funds and other money market rates remain robust, with the 
fed funds rate remaining a suitable measure of banks’ marginal borrowing costs. 
A variety of regulatory changes and other developments have also influenced motivations for 
participating  in  fed  funds  and  other  money  markets.  Liquidity  and  capital  rules  affect  the 
management  of  bank  balance  sheets  and  the  costs  of  many  money  market  transactions, 
affecting  banks’  incentives  to  engage  in  short-term  borrowing,  arbitrage  between  different 
money  market  rates,  and  provide  customers  access  to  their  balance  sheets.  Notably, 
regulatory changes affect different institutions in different ways. For example, changes to the 
calculation of FDIC deposit insurance assessment fees affect primarily domestic banks. The 
implementation  of  Basel  III  banking  standards  also  varies  by  jurisdiction,  so  the  rules  for 
foreign bank branches operating in the United States are somewhat different than those for 
domestic institutions.23 
The effects of regulatory requirements on money market dynamics can be seen especially 
around  key  financial  reporting  dates.  As  many  market  commentators  have  noted,  some 
borrowers actively manage their balance sheets on quarter-end dates. The perceived costs 
associated  with  new  regulatory  requirements  on  capital  and  liquidity  ratios  may  further 
incentivize such behavior, particularly by foreign institutions. Borrowers’ responses appear to 
contribute to the period-end dynamics I described earlier, including declines in money market 
volumes, increased volatility  in money market rates, and elevated participation in the RRP 
operations  as  cash  investors  face  temporarily  reduced  investment  options  from  private 
counterparties.  Importantly,  the  increase  in  RRP  take-up  can  be  understood  as  a 
consequence, rather than a cause, of private market balance sheet reductions on quarter-
end dates. 
There have also been changes to the business models of many money market participants. 
Following the financial crisis, many financial institutions have sought to adjust their balance 
sheets  to  enhance  their  liquidity  positions  and  reduce  reliance  on  short-term  wholesale 
funding.  Cash  lender  business  models  have  also  adapted,  with  changes  to  some  lenders’ 
willingness  to  take  credit  risk.  For  example,  Fannie  Mae  and  Freddie  Mac  have  not  been 
active lenders in the fed funds market since 2011. 
                                                
21   Although  the  currently  elevated  level  of  reserves  creates  unique  temporary  dynamics,  the  introduction  of 
IOER, (which would have been implemented regardless of monetary policy responses to the financial crisis) 
represents a permanent change in the Federal Reserve’s operating framework. 
22   Drawing on public filings of market participants, we estimate that this figure captures approximately 80 percent 
of all overnight fed funds transactions. 
23   For  foreign  banks—the  predominant  borrowers  of  fed  funds—the  Basel  III  leverage  ratios  are  largely 
calculated on a period-end basis. In contrast, the U.S. version of the ratio uses daily averaging. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
  Recent SEC money market fund reforms are beginning to change the landscape of the U.S. 
money  fund  industry  and  will  likely  influence  investor  use  of  prime  funds  relative  to 
government funds or other investment options. Money fund reforms are one of many factors 
expected  to  increase  demand  for  high-quality,  short-term  assets  –  a  trend  that  will  have 
implications for the relative pricing across different money market instruments and flows to 
different investment options, including Fed RRPs. 
We  are  also  attentive  to  changes  in  money  market  infrastructure  and  technology.  For 
example,  the  tri-party  repo  market  has  undergone  significant  changes  in  its  settlement 
process and infrastructure since the crisis. Recent changes to the timing of settlement and 
maturity of tri-party repo trades have implications for market participants, such as making tri-
party repo investments unattractive for lenders requiring morning return of funds. 
All these factors contribute to changing dynamics in money markets, with some potentially 
resulting in greater demand for Federal Reserve liabilities. 
New data collection on money markets 
In addition to developing new tools and approaches to operate in this environment, the Fed is 
also  improving  tools  that  support  daily  implementation  of  monetary  policy  and  analysis  of 
money  market  conditions.  In  April  of  last  year,  the  Fed  launched  the  FR  2420  Report  on 
Selected Money Market Rates, a mandatory daily collection of fed funds, Eurodollar, and CD 
transactions  from  around  fifty  domestic  banks  and  one  hundred  U.S.  branches  of  foreign 
banks.24  The  goal  of  initiating  this  data  collection  was  to  better  understand  institutional 
behavior  in  money  markets,  and  indeed,  as  indicated  in  observations  shared  with  you  this 
evening,  our  findings  have  already  helped  us  analyze  results  of  our  operational  tests  to 
prepare for normalization. 
These  data  also  present  an  opportunity  to  make  additional  improvements  in  light  of  the 
recent international focus on identifying best practices for reference rates.25 Earlier this year, 
the Fed announced plans to improve the process for calculating the fed funds effective rate 
by transitioning the data source from data supplied by federal funds brokers to data reported 
directly  by  banks  through  FR  2420.26  The  new  data  source  includes  more  activity  and 
transaction-level data, which will make the calculation process more robust. 
The Fed also announced it would begin daily publication of a second, broader measure of 
unsecured  bank  borrowing  activity  based  on  transactions  in  both  federal  funds  and 
Eurodollars.  This  rate,  called  the  overnight  bank  funding  rate,  will  provide  increased 
transparency on broad overnight funding costs for U.S.-based banking offices. 
In order to implement these changes, improve monitoring and analysis of unsecured money 
markets,  and  support  supervisory  objectives,  the  Fed  recently  proposed  a  number  of 
enhancements to the FR 2420 data collection, which are intended to capture a larger share 
of  fed  fund  and  Eurodollar  transactions.27  These  enhancements  would  add  about  30  new 
                                                
24   The FR 2420 reporting form is available at http://www.newyorkfed.org/banking/reportingforms/FR_2420.html. 
An  April  8,  2015,  Liberty  Street  Economics  blog  post  provides  additional  analysis,  available  at 
http://libertystreeteconomics.newyorkfed.org/2015/04/the-fr-2420-data-collection-a-new-base-for-the-fed-
funds-rate.html. 
25  For  information  on  principles  guiding  this  international  work,  please  refer  to  the  Principles  for  Financial 
Benchmarks,  Final  Report  (The  Board  of  the  International  Organization  of  Securities  Commissions,  July 
2013), available at http://www.iosco.org/library/pubdocs/pdf/IOSCOPD415.pdf. 
26   The  February  2,  2015,  statement  regarding  planned  changes  to  the  calculation  and  the  publication  of  an 
http://www.newyorkfed.org/markets/opolicy/ 
available 
rate 
at 
is 
overnight 
funding 
operating_policy_150202.html. 
bank 
27   The  proposal 
is  available  at  https://www.federalregister.gov/articles/2015/04/07/2015–07920/proposed-
agency-information-collection-activities-comment-request. 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  domestic institutions that are fed funds borrowers and lead to the collection of much more 
robust Eurodollar activity, including Eurodollar transactions from Caribbean branches that are 
managed and controlled by the U.S. offices of foreign banks. These proposed revisions are 
available for public comment until June 8, 2015, and implementation of the changes to the 
published  rates  will  occur  after  revisions  to  the  FR  2420  are  complete,  which  is  expected 
within a year. 
Conclusion 
In conclusion, although the Federal Reserve will be removing its policy accommodation in a 
much-changed  money  market  environment,  the  Desk  is  ready  to  implement  policy  firming 
when the FOMC determines that economic and financial conditions warrant it. The minutes 
of the March FOMC meeting outline the Federal Reserve’s intended operational approach, 
and our testing program gives us confidence that we have the necessary tools to enable a 
smooth liftoff. The minutes highlight that policymakers will be particularly careful at the start 
because demonstrating appropriate control over the federal funds rate and other short-term 
rates is a priority. This may entail elevated aggregate capacity in an ON RRP facility at liftoff 
because  we  don’t  know  how  much  support  we  are  currently  getting  from  the  zero  lower 
bound, which creates some uncertainty about the demand for ON RRPs. However, the ON 
RRP  will  be  used  only  to  the  extent  necessary  for  monetary  policy  control  because  it  has 
some potential financial stability and footprint costs associated with it. Moreover, the Federal 
Reserve  has  a  number  of  backup  tools  should  things  work  differently  than  expected,  and 
policymakers will make changes as necessary as normalization proceeds. 
 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
  12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13 
  14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 15 
