  Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Scaling up for a more inclusive and more 
responsive financial system 
Speech by Mr Amando M Tetangco, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the 
central  bank  of  the  Philippines),  at  the  Bank  Marketing  Awards  of  the  Bank  Marketing 
Association of the Philippines, Makati City, 28 August 2015. 
 The officers and members of the Bank Marketing Association of the Philippines under the 
leadership  of  President  Mike  Villareal,  colleagues  in  the  banking  industry,  distinguished 
guests, ladies and gentlemen, good evening. 
In its website, BMAP describes itself as “an organization of banking institutions which seeks 
to upgrade the practice of bank marketing in the country.” 
On  its  41st  year,  BMAP  remains  true  to  its  mandate.  Tonight,  with  the  Bank  Marketing 
Awards,  BMAP  rewards  the  best  bank  marketing  programs  and  inspires  its  members  to 
aspire for award-winning excellence. 
I am therefore pleased to be with you tonight to congratulate BMAP and tonight’s awardees. 
You have raised the bar of excellence and henceforth will serve as benchmark in the years to 
come. After all, it is said that we do not forget our “firsts.” 
This  means  that  the  next  batch  of  winners  must  be  truly  exceptional  to  be  equally 
memorable. I hope therefore that BMAP succeeds in sustaining this drive to excel that stands 
to benefit your banks, your customers, and ultimately our economy. 
Your timing is perfect. Last month, we launched our National Strategy for Financial Inclusion 
or  what  we  call  NSFI  as  well  as  the  results  of  our  National  Baseline  Survey  for  Financial 
Inclusion. I am positive that both will help you craft marketing programs with optimum results. 
The NSFI integrates the financial inclusion programs of 13 government institutions including 
the  Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas.  It  also  provides  a  platform  for  government-private 
partnerships for financial inclusion as a means to achieve inclusive growth. To see how is 
relevant to you and your bank, you may visit our website at www.bsp.gov.ph. 
For now, let me share some of the highlights of our National Baseline Survey on Financial 
Inclusion which was completed early this year: 
1. 
Ninety-seven  percent  (97%)  of  Filipino  adults  believe  that  it  is  important  to  save 
money and to have the way or means to save money. And yet, our survey indicated that only 
4 out of 10 Filipinos actually save money. 
2. 
their money in banks. 
3. 
Six out of ten adults with bank accounts indicated that the bank’s reputation is their 
main  consideration  in  opening  a  deposit  account.  Other  considerations  are  interest  rates, 
minimum maintaining balance, proximity of the bank branch, and quality of client service. 
4. 
than  85%  of 
respondents  indicate  that  they  want  to  access  financial  services  from  formal  financial 
institutions, majority of them still borrow from family, friends and informal lenders. Banks as 
source of borrowing stood only at 4.4. 
5. 
The  primary  considerations  in  borrowing  money  are:  interest  rates,  loan  amount, 
period  to  pay  for  the  loans,  ease  of  loan  application,  reputation  of  the  credit  institution, 
amortization, collateral, fees, and processing time. 
Of those who save, 70% keep their money at home; while only 30% of savers keep 
Forty-seven  percent  of  Filipinos  borrow  money.  While  more 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
Ladies  and  gentlemen. These survey  results  provide  useful  insights  on  how  to  serve  your 
customers  better  and  how  to  expand  your  market.  Indeed,  there  is  so  much  untapped 
potential that bank marketing experts such as yourselves can reach, develop, and grow with. 
As  we  move  toward  ASEAN  integration,  growing  and  protecting  your  market  will  become 
more challenging. It is best to work on this now. 
In selecting tonight’s awardees, I understand BMAP selected as criteria four key factors in 
making a marketing program successful: these are strategy, creativity, execution and results. 
Applying  these  factors  to  your  products  and  programs  should  help  you  develop  solid  and 
excellent marketing programs. 
In  general,  a  product  can  be  upgraded  when  it  is  no  longer  in  its  prime.  In  our  industry, 
however, the ultimate product is public trust. It is a product that is fragile, demands constant 
care and requires special packaging. 
And while public trust may seem to be generic, we must also recognize the socio-economic 
diversity of our archipelago. The point is, that it will take marketing savvy and creativity to 
make all these details come to life in a holistic and integrated manner. 
Ladies and gentlemen. The challenge is not one of sales; it is about marketing. By that, I 
mean the ability to package specific products to those who need the specific features of the 
product. This is important in banking where we adhere to a fiduciary responsibility and must 
constantly meet the bar of client suitability. 
As banking and finance is typically too esoteric to the general public, this is where creativity 
is a must. You need to bridge the demands of a differentiated public to the array of products 
and services that are available and possible. You need to distill the complexities of banking 
to messages that the broad public can relate to and base their decisions on. This should help 
you build a lasting relationship with your clients. 
This  lasting  relationship  is  the  ultimate  measure  of  public  trust;  it  validates  the  value 
proposition that your bank presents to the general public. 
And if the growth of the banking industry and the increased state of financial inclusion are to 
be  used  as  measures,  then  we  certainly  must  recognize  the  efforts  of  the  best  in  bank 
marketing programs. 
This initiative underscores the convergence in the goals of BMAP and the BSP which is to 
enable more Filipinos to benefit from banking services. 
I am therefore pleased that your awards cover best financial inclusion program, best kiddie 
savings program, best program in social media, best product program, best brand program 
and best electronic delivery channel. 
Ladies and gentlemen, we continue to reap the benefits of a strong banking industry. Not 
only are we expanding, the banking industry has remained a pillar of strength in our economy 
in  the  face  of  new  volatilities  in  the  global  financial  landscape.  That  said,  we  do  have  to 
recognize that we need to address the gaps in our financial inclusion goals. 
This is where BMAP can play a significant role. 
Our ultimate stakeholder, our ultimate market in our efforts is the Filipino financial consumer. 
We want Filipino financial consumers to develop good money habits that will them achieve 
financial independence. 
Indeed,  the  triumvirate  of  financial  access,  financial  education  and  consumer  protection 
makes  perfect  sense  because  there  is  a  clear  message  that  is  defined  for  a  particular 
audience.  Again,  here  is  another  case  of  marketing:  targeting  specific  products  and 
calibrated  interventions  for  specific  audiences  under  specific  conditions.  Given  this,  I  am 
already looking forward to next year’s set of Bank Marketing Award winners. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
At this point, I want to thank BMAP for continuing to expand its partnership with the BSP – 
the  latest  being  with  our  FCPD  on  the  Project  BRO  campaign  (BSP  Reaches  Out)  to 
emphasize the value of developing saving as a habit at a young age. The “alkansya” gives us 
that  cultural  backdrop  for  this  effort  and  I  thank  BMAP  for  providing  the  alkansya  and 
shouldering the freight cost to Davao, Digos, Dipolog and Iloilo for this campaign. 
I  also  look  forward  to  BMAP  finally  reaching  our  goal  of  opening  one  million  (1,000,000) 
kiddie accounts within the next few months. Supported and empowered by our major banks, 
the BSP-BMAP Kiddie Account Program has generated for us international recognition and 
award as a best practice model that other countries admire but till now could not implement. 
I am also pleased to share that our reward program for the best financial teachers in public 
schools is now on its third year under the DepEd-BSP Guro ng Pag-Asa (Gantimpala Para 
sa Ulirang Pag-tuturo ng Pag-iimpok at Araling Pansalapi). The objective of the program is to 
continue  to  raise  the  level  of  excellence  in  teaching  saving,  money  management  and 
entrepreneurship  to  millions  of  our  schoolchildren  starting  from  Grade  I.  Secretary  Luistro 
has issued a memorandum circular to public school teachers across the country about our 
third Guro ng Pag-Asa. 
With financial lessons taught well in schools, we can look forward to raising a new generation 
of Filipinos who have developed the habit of saving and managing their personal finances 
successfully. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  we  all  want  a  bright  tomorrow,  not  only  for  ourselves  but  for  our 
children and their children’s children. We know that this means we have to invest today to 
shape the future. 
The awards that you launch today is a step in the right direction. We should make time to 
recognize  those  who  excel  and  continue  to  raise  the  bar  of  excellence  within  the  banking 
industry. 
Once again, congratulations to all the awardees. Your peers have gathered here tonight to 
celebrate your success and commit to do better in the years ahead. 
Finally,  let  us  congratulate  BMAP  and  its  leadership  for  serving  as  a  catalyst  for  positive 
change and for its continuing collaboration with the BSP in the areas of financial inclusion, 
financial education, and consumer protection. 
Mabuhay ang BMAP! Mabuhay ang ating mahal na bansang Pilipinas! 
Maraming salamat sa inyong lahat! 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
