Peter Praet: Interview in Süddeutsche Zeitung 
Interview with Mr Peter Praet, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, in 
Süddeutsche Zeitung, conducted by Mr Markus Zydra on 27 January 2015 and published on 
31 January 2015. 
 Mr Praet, the ECB has decided to spend €1.1 trillion on purchases of government bonds. 
Has the euro area now become safer? 
I expect economic growth to develop along favourable lines in the coming months. The low oil 
price and neutral fiscal stance will help, financial markets are more confident, the exchange rate 
of the euro will support exports and structural economic reforms are having positive effects in 
some countries. All is not perfect, but thanks also to our decision, there will be a positive impact 
on the economy. 
The ECB is buying government bonds to boost inflation and thereby economic growth. 
Are low petrol prices bad? 
That  is  a  natural  argument.  When  petrol  prices  are  falling,  people  are  happy.  However, 
monetary policy does not focus on individual prices, but rather on the overall price level. On 
average, prices in the euro area fell by 0.6% in January, and inflation rates will remain negative 
in the coming months. In Germany, prices fell by 0.5%, year on year, in January. We need to 
make sure that the euro are does not slip into a self-reinforcing downward spiral of falling prices 
and wages. 
The Bundesbank does not see that as a problem. 
If  inflation  in  the  euro  area  were  to  rise  to  4%,  everybody  would  expect  the  ECB  to  do 
something  about  it.  Consequently,  the  ECB  also  has  to  step  in  when  inflation  falls  to  nearly 
zero. Price stability is threatened from above and below. We have a mandate under European 
law  to  maintain  price  stability.  For  very  good  reasons,  the  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB 
defined  price  stability  many  years  ago  as  inflation  close  to,  but  below,  2%  over  the  medium 
term – and it did so with the support of Germany and the Bundesbank. 
Why has the ECB set its inflation target at 2%? Stable prices should mean 0% inflation. 
With an inflation target of 0%, there would be no buffer. If an economic shock occurs in such 
cases, you have deflation straight away. 
Is that so dangerous? The prices of computers have been falling for years. Surely that is 
good. 
Cheaper computers are a good thing. Deflation means that prices in the economy as a whole 
are  falling  steadily.  In  such  a  situation,  workers’  wages  are  too  high  in  comparison  with  the 
overall  price  level,  and  collective  wage  agreements  cannot  simply  be  changed.  Therefore, 
production becomes too expensive and businesses stop investing because they assume that 
demand  is  falling.  It  is  a  vicious  circle  that  leads  to  sharply  declining  economic  activity  and 
rising unemployment – the Great Depression in the United States in the 1930s has taught us 
that. 
Can the risk of deflation be regarded as real at present? 
We are  not  expecting  deflation,  but  there  are  risks  that  need to  be  addressed.  Prevention  is 
better than cure. That is why we had to take action before the damage is done, because the 
inflation  expectations  of  consumers  and  businesses  are  falling.  That  is  dangerous.  Also,  a 
period of low inflation that is too prolonged entails significant risks. 
People buy what they need, and whatever they can afford. Inflation expectations do not 
play any role in that. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Oh  yes,  they  do.  People  are  guided  by  expectations,  even  though  they  may  not  always  be 
aware of it. People have an idea of what their future holds, of what they want, what they will 
spend  and  what  they  earn.  They  make  rough  estimates  of  what  they  can  afford.  If  these 
expectations are not fulfilled, they experience a shock. And there was a risk of that occurring in 
the euro area, because deflation means less growth and lower income. 
The ECB is doing all this solely for the benefit of crisis countries, i.e. Italy and co. 
No, we work for the euro area as a whole. We have attempted to achieve our goals through low 
key interest rates, through purchases of covered bonds and through favourable loans to banks. 
All that has helped, but not to the extent desired, nor did it achieve what was required. That is 
the reason why we will now start purchasing government bonds. We have to use all instruments 
of monetary policy to ensure price stability across the euro area. 
What makes you so sure? 
I do not know  what historians will  write about the ECB at some time in the future, but every 
single measure we have taken was taken with due consideration of the risks involved, including 
the  risk  entailed  if  we  had  not  done  anything.  What  is  also  clear,  however,  is  that  the 
governments must now implement structural reforms. 
Why does the ECB not put euro area governments under greater pressure? 
This is not our role. If we were to make deals with governments on the basis of the principle 
that the ECB will do this, if you do that, we would lose our independence through such political 
give-and-take. And we would lose our credibility. 
Couldn’t you have put off the purchases of government bonds a little longer? 
Some members of the Governing Council are of the opinion that such a measure should only 
be taken when deflation is a given. Nonetheless, almost all experts believe that it is far more 
difficult to combat deflation when in the midst of such developments. In that case, the central 
bank would have to spend many times as much and would still not be sure that deflation will be 
overcome successfully. That is the risk we wanted to rule out. 
The  idea  of  helicopter  money  has  also  been  discussed  in  academic  circles:  the  ECB 
could give euro area citizens a one-off gift of €1,000 in order to boost the economy. 
You rightly say in academic circles … but how is this money then distributed. Should everybody 
get the same amount of money, rich and poor? It would be for parliaments to decide how to 
distribute  it.  But  the  ECB  would  then  be  directly  involved  in  the  monetary  financing  of 
governments, which it is not allowed to do. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
