  Lawrence Schembri: Building trust, not walls – the case for cross-border 
financial integration 
Remarks  by  Mr  Lawrence  Schembri,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  to  the 
Windsor–Essex Regional Chamber of Commerce, Windsor, Ontario, 25 June 2015. 
 Before I built a wall I'd ask to know 
What I was walling in or walling out, 
And to whom I was like to give offence." 
—Mending Wall by Robert Frost 
Introduction 
Good afternoon. Thank you for the invitation to speak to you today. I am especially pleased 
to be in Windsor in 2015, which marks the 50th anniversary of the path-breaking Canada–
U.S. Auto Pact.11 The benefits of the pact and subsequent Canada–U.S. trade agreements 
are plainly evident in the steady flow of commercial traffic here at Canada’s busiest border 
crossing. Windsor  residents  understand  better  than  most  that  Canada  remains  the  largest 
trading partner of the United States. In 2014, trade between our countries amounted to more 
than $850 billion—40 per cent of Canada’s entire GDP. 
You also understand that this high level of trade is not just a feature of geography. It is the 
result of almost 200 years of good-neighbour collaboration, founded on trust, not walls. As a 
result of these co-operative efforts, we have achieved a high degree of cross-border access 
and economic integration that is the envy of the world. And most importantly, both countries 
have benefited. 
Today, I want to talk to you about cross-border financial collaboration, another key aspect of 
our relationship with the United States, as well as with other countries. 
We  all  know  that  a  well-regulated  and  globally  integrated  financial  system  is  essential  for 
promoting trade and achieving sustainable economic and employment growth. However, the 
recent  global  financial  crisis  clearly  demonstrated  that  while  financial  systems  are  indeed 
highly integrated across countries, many were inadequately regulated and supervised. 
In  Canada,  our financial  system  was,  and  is,  well  regulated  and  supervised.  No  Canadian 
banks failed during the crisis.2 The strength of our financial system helped us avoid the worst 
of the damage. Yet, we still lost 430,000 jobs and our exports plunged by more than 16 per 
cent.3 That experience taught us a valuable lesson. In a trading economy like ours, keeping 
our own financial house in order is not sufficient to shelter us from global financial storms. 
We need financial stability not just within countries but across them. 
The G-20 responded to the crisis with a comprehensive financial reform agenda, coordinated 
by  the  Financial  Stability  Board  (FSB),  to  address  the  exposed  weaknesses,  to  promote 
global financial stability, and to enhance financial and economic integration. Since then, FSB 
member countries have made unprecedented progress on these objectives. 
                                                
1  Canada and the United States have signed three major trade liberalization agreements over the past 50 years: 
the 1965 Auto Pact, the 1988 Canada–U.S. Free Trade Agreement and the 1994 North American Free Trade 
Agreement, which also included Mexico. 
2  The  banking  system  did,  however,  require  significant  liquidity  support  because  of  the  severe  disruption  to 
global funding markets. 
 M.  Carney,  “Exporting  in  a  Post-Crisis  World”  (speech  to  the  Greater  Kitchener-Waterloo  Chamber  of 
Commerce, Waterloo, Ontario, 2 April 2012). 
3 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  I’ll  start  with  a  brief  overview  of  important  reforms  to  the  global  banking  system  and  to 
shadow  banking—which  refers  to  credit  intermediation  activities  outside  the  traditional 
banking system—that have made the financial system as a whole safer.4 Then, I’ll zero in on 
two reform areas that need more work: global banks that are “too big to fail” and over-the-
counter (OTC) derivatives markets. Finally, I’ll say a few words about a third policy issue that 
is critical for supporting financial integration—cross-border payments. 
Reforming the financial system 
Led  by  the  G-20,  the  FSB  and  the  international  standard-setters  are  developing  and 
monitoring the implementation of the required regulatory standards.5 Their successful reform 
efforts  have  helped  rebuild  trust  in  financial  integration  that  was  severely  damaged  by  the 
crisis. 
A significant accomplishment is the Basel III framework, which has made global banks much 
stronger and more resilient. The framework, which requires banks to hold more capital and 
liquidity  and  imposes  a  backstop  leverage  limit,  has  largely  been  finalized.6  Although  the 
deadline for full implementation is not until 2019, many jurisdictions, including Canada, are 
well ahead of schedule.7  
As for shadow banking activities, they represented key sources of financial instability during 
the crisis through faulty subprime mortgage securitization and runs on money market funds 
and  repo markets. The FSB  is  creating  a  comprehensive  approach to monitor  and  assess 
these non-bank credit intermediation activities. 
Regulatory  standards  have  been  developed  for  several  of  the  activities.  For  example, 
standards  exist  for  securitization,  specifically  risk  retention  and  disclosure;  money  market 
funds, including liquidity and valuation; and repo and securities-lending transactions, chiefly 
minimum haircuts. Several other types of shadow banking entities, such as broker-dealers, 
investment funds and finance companies, have been categorized by their economic function 
within  a  principles-based  regulatory  framework.  Policy  tool  kits  have  been  developed  for 
each. 
Implementation of these standards is ongoing globally and in Canada and will be monitored 
and promoted by country and thematic peer reviews conducted in 2015. 
The next priority is to make further headway on the two areas I mentioned earlier—ending 
the  threat  of  banks  considered  too  big  to fail  and  improving  the  safety  of OTC  derivatives 
markets—that pose complex cross-border issues. 
Ending Too big to fail 
To address the problem of too big to fail, most clearly exemplified by the hugely disruptive 
failure of Lehman Brothers in September 2008, the FSB has taken three bold policy actions. 
                                                
4 
5 
 The FSB reform objective for shadow banking is to transform it into resilient market-based finance. 
 The international financial standard-setters include the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (BCBS), the 
International  Organization  of  Securities  Commissions  (IOSCO),  the  Committee  on  Payments  and  Market 
Infrastructures (CPMI), and the International Association of Insurance Supervisors (IAIS). 
 Basel  III  “is  a  comprehensive  set  of  reform  measures,  developed  by  the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking 
Supervision, 
risk  management  of  banks.”  See 
to  strengthen 
www.bis.org/bcbs/basel3.htm. 
 The  Office  of  the  Superintendent  of  Financial  Institutions  (OSFI)  has  obliged  Canadian  banks  to  meet  or 
exceed Basel III standards on an accelerated timetable. For example, since 2013, Canadian banks have been 
required to hold at least 7 per cent of Common Equity Tier 1 capital, compared with the Basel requirement to 
hold 4.5 per cent by 2015. OSFI has also required full implementation of the Liquidity Coverage Ratio (LCR) 
beginning in 2015, rather than the 2019 requirement under Basel III. 
regulation,  supervision  and 
the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
6 
7 
2 
   First,  the  effectiveness  of  the  supervision  of  large  internationally  active  banks  has  been 
increased. 
Second, approximately 30 of the most systemically important global banks—those so large 
that their failure would have an impact on the entire financial system—have been identified 
and will have to hold more capital to make them safer and discourage them from becoming 
even more systemically important. At this point, there are no Canadian banks on this list. 
In  Canada,  however,  the  Office  of  the  Superintendent  of  Financial  Institutions  (OSFI) 
identified  six  of  our  banks  as  systemically  important  at  the  domestic  level,  mandated  that 
they hold 1 per cent more capital and strengthened its oversight of them. 
Third, and perhaps most significant, the FSB has developed a set of policy standards, known 
as the Key Attributes for Effective Resolution Regimes, to resolve these global banks when 
they  become  non-viable.8  The  objective  of  resolution  is  to  maintain  their  critical  functions, 
such  as  deposit  taking, payments  and  lending, without  disrupting  the financial  system  and 
without  taxpayers  being  the  first  line  of  defense.9  The  Key  Attributes  were  a  major 
breakthrough, and these standards are gradually being implemented. 
However, because these global systemically  important banks operate in many jurisdictions 
through  subsidiaries  and  branches,  we  need  to  tackle  a  number  of  difficult  cross-border 
home-host issues. 
For  example,  whose  rules  will  govern  the  resolution,  those  of  the  home  jurisdiction  of  the 
parent bank or those of the host jurisdiction of the subsidiary or branch? 
Where will the capital to absorb losses be held? In the parent bank? The subsidiary? 
How  do  we  ensure  that  cross-border financial  contracts  are  maintained and  not torn  up  in 
resolution? 
The FSB is methodically addressing each of these questions and making solid progress.10 In 
the  meantime,  there  is  a  risk  that  some  countries,  understandably  concerned  about  the 
safety of their own financial systems, may take measures that run counter to the spirit of the 
G-20 reforms to promote financial integration. 
An example of this is the set of rules governing foreign bank operations in the Dodd-Frank 
Act of 2010, the most comprehensive reform of the financial system that the United States 
has undertaken since the Great Depression.11 Under Dodd-Frank, subsidiaries and branches 
of  international  banks  of  a  certain  size  will  have  to  meet  separate  capital  and  liquidity 
requirements inside the United States.12  
                                                
8 
9 
 The Key Attributes are 12 essential features that the FSB considers necessary for the resolution regimes of 
all jurisdictions. See www.financialstabilityboard.org/2014/10/r_141015. 
 In  the  2015  federal  budget,  the  government  announced  that  it  plans  to  adopt  measures  to  ensure  that 
“systemically important banks’ shareholders and creditors are responsible for bearing losses, thereby giving 
them  stronger  incentives  to monitor  banks’  risk-taking  activities.”  One of  the measures  “would  allow  for  the 
permanent  conversion  of  eligible 
into  common  shares.”  See 
www.budget.gc.ca/2015/docs/plan/toc-tdm-eng.html. See also the Department of Finance’s consultation paper 
on bank recapitalization, at www.fin.gc.ca/activty/consult/tpbrr-rpcrb-eng.asp. 
liabilities  of  a  non-viable  bank 
10   The 
FSB’s 
progress 
report 
on 
resolution 
regimes 
is 
available 
at 
www.financialstabilityboard.org/2014/11/report-to-the-g20-on-progress-in-reform-of-resolution-regimes-and-
resolution-planning-for-globally-systemically-important-financial-institutions-g-sifis. 
11   See  sections  165  and  166  of  the  Dodd-Frank  Wall  Street  Reform  and  Consumer  Protection  Act,  at 
www.sec.gov/about/laws/wallstreetreform-cpa.pdf. 
12   The  Fed’s  final  rule  on  strengthening  the  supervision  and  regulation  of  foreign  banking  organizations  is 
available at www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/press/bcreg/20140218a.htm. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  What does this mean for Canadian banks? Our largest banks have sizable U.S. operations. 
Some will likely meet the size threshold and will be subject to these new requirements. 
These  national  rules  will  not  only  impose  new  legal  and  administrative  costs  on  Canadian 
banks, but might also constrain their ability to allocate capital and liquidity efficiently in the 
North American market.13 And if a Canadian bank with U.S. subsidiaries were to fail, it bears 
asking  whether  the  pre-emptive  actions  of  U.S.  authorities  would  create  obstacles  for  the 
orderly  resolution  of  the  consolidated  bank  by  Canadian  authorities,  led  by  the  Canada 
Deposit Insurance Corporation. 
This “one-size fits all” approach overlooks the existing degree of integration between our two 
economies,  Canada’s  impressive  record  for  financial  stability  and  the  fact  that  Canadian 
banks have long been active and well trusted in the United States.14  
That, in brief, is where we stand at the moment on cross-border bank-resolution issues. And, 
as you will see in a minute, the cross-border issues related to OTC derivatives are equally 
complex. 
Making Over-the-counter derivatives markets safer 
OTC  derivatives  were  largely  unregulated  before  the  crisis.  For  example,  when  Lehman 
Brothers failed, it had roughly one million outstanding derivatives contracts. No one outside 
the  company  knew  the  full  extent  of  Lehman’s  exposures.  Uncertainty  rippled  through  the 
market,  spreading fear about  the  solvency  of  other  banks  and  impairing  the  functioning of 
markets.  This  experience  highlighted  the  interconnectedness  within  markets  and  how  the 
failure of one institution can pose a systemic risk that threatens the entire financial system. 
Under the G-20 reforms aimed at reducing systemic risk, countries have agreed to report all 
transactions  to  trade  repositories  and  to  centrally  clear  all  standardized  contracts.  Again, 
much  progress  has  been  made  on  improving  the  reporting  and  central  clearing  of 
transactions.15  The  challenge  ahead  is  to  ensure  that  the  rules  for  on-the-ground 
implementation of some of these reforms are consistent across jurisdictions. 
To understand how complicated this is, it is useful to compare the processes for the Basel III 
framework with that for OTC derivatives. Because the Basel Committee already had granular 
rules for bank regulation, a process was established to achieve a multilateral consensus on 
the next set of bank standards. For OTC derivatives, no such process existed because they 
had previously been largely unregulated. 
The United States—the jurisdiction most affected by the crisis—was the first to respond, with 
the Dodd-Frank Act. Other countries were slower off the mark, and this has led to differences 
                                                
13   For  well  over  a  century,  major  Canadian  banks  have  safely  raised  funding  and  managed  liquidity  through 
branch operations in U.S. money markets. See, for example, C. A .E. Goodhart, The New York Money Market 
and the Finance of Trade, 1900-1913 (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1969). 
14   In C. W. Calomiris and S. H. Haber, Fragile by Design: The Political Origins of Banking Crises and Scarce 
Credit (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2014), the authors remark that “the extraordinary stability of the 
Canadian  banking  system  has  been  one  of  its  most  visible  and  oft-noted  characteristics  for  nearly  two 
centuries.” 
15   The third OTC derivatives reform priority, expanding the use of trading platforms, is being implemented more 
gradually. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
in implementation, especially among major jurisdictions.16 These differences are slowly being 
resolved.17  
In the meantime, market participants are trying to cope with these regulatory inconsistencies. 
As  a  consequence,  the  costs  of  cross-border  trade  are  rising  and  markets  are  starting  to 
fragment. Canada and other jurisdictions are caught in the middle. 
One of the ways countries are managing these inconsistencies is by recognizing each other’s 
regulatory approaches when they achieve similar prudential outcomes. 
In this regard, the U.S. Commodity Futures Trading Commission (CFTC), which took the lead 
in  OTC  derivatives  rule-making  in  the  United  States,  has  recognized  that  OSFI’s 
requirements are equivalent to the U.S. rules in a number of cases.18  
However, the Commission still wants Canadian banks to submit to its oversight, which could 
include  on-site  visits.  Canadian  and  U.S.  authorities  are  working  together  to  limit  the 
additional burden this places on affected banks. 
As noted, monitoring exposures in the derivatives market is important for helping to reduce 
systemic  risk.  To  do  so,  authorities  need  access  to  transactions  data  held  in  trade 
repositories. However, a provision in Dodd-Frank that requires authorities using these data to 
sign  an  indemnity  in  the  event  of  their  misuse  effectively  precludes  the  Bank  of  Canada, 
OSFI  and  others  (including  the  U.S.  Federal  Reserve)  from  obtaining  this  information.19 
Consequently, the data on OTC transactions performed by Canadian banks and reported by 
them to U.S. trade repositories are currently not being used to assess systemic risk in the 
OTC derivatives market. 
To summarize, national authorities should strive to build trust and achieve more cross-border 
recognition  of  comparable  regulatory  requirements.  Such  an  approach  would  reduce 
regulatory  uncertainty  and  enhance  the  ability  of  market  participants—ranging  from  global 
banks  to  small  factory  owners  and  farmers—to  hedge  risks  and  protect  themselves  from 
economic shocks. 
Improving cross-border payments 
Let  me  turn  now  to  cross-border  payments,  an  issue  that  all  of  you  have  likely  had  some 
experience  with  as  consumers  or  in  your  businesses.  As  you  know,  sending  funds  to  or 
receiving them from the United States or any other country is slow, inconvenient and costly. 
                                                
16   S. O’Malia, “No Answer Yet to Cross-Border Concerns,” International Swaps and Derivatives Association, 11 
May 2015. Available at http://isda.derivativiews.org/2015/05/11/no-answer-yet-to-cross-border-concerns. 
17   The  Financial  Stability  Board  publishes  an  annual  report  on  the  implementation  of  reforms  in  the  OTC 
derivatives  market.  The  2014  report  is  available  at  www.financialstabilityboard.org/2014/11/eighth-progress-
report-on-implementation-of-otc-derivatives-market-reforms/. 
18   The  Dodd-Frank  Act  allows  exemptions  where  there  is  comparable,  comprehensive  supervision  and 
regulation in the home country. See Sections 725 and 733 of the Dodd-Frank Act. 
19   Sections  728  and  763  of  the  Dodd-Frank  Act  require  U.S.-based  trade  repositories  to  obtain  a  written 
indemnification agreement from the authorities confirming that they will indemnify the trade repository and the 
U.S. regulatory commissions for any expenses arising from litigation relating to the information. The CFTC has 
released  an  interpretative  statement  allowing  some  access  to  data  reported  under  non-U.S.  regulatory 
regimes but has applied this only to authorities that directly regulate the trade repository. In recent speeches, 
Federal  Reserve  Board  governors  Lael  Brainard  and  Jerome  Powell  have  called  for  increased  data 
transparency regarding OTC derivatives. See L. Brainard, “The Federal Reserve’s Financial Stability Agenda” 
(speech at the Hutchins Center on Fiscal and Monetary Policy, Washington, D.C., 3 December 2014); and J. 
Powell, “Financial Institutions, Financial Markets, and Financial Stability” (speech to Stern School of Business, 
New York, 18 February 2015). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  You won’t be surprised to hear that a recent report by the Federal Reserve described cross-
border payments in much the same way.20 And you’ll be pleased to hear that the Fed and the 
Bank of Canada are working with the financial industry, including payments associations, to 
promote efforts within their respective jurisdictions to modernize cross-border payments.21  
In its report, the Fed argued that the U.S. payments system is at a critical juncture because 
of three factors: 
• 
• 
• 
technological advances in high-speed data networks; 
the related need to ensure the safety and security of payments; and 
user  demands  for  faster,  less  costly  domestic  and  cross-border  payments, 
manifested by the growth of other means, such as PayPal. 
from  regulatory  requirements 
To improve cross-border payments, a number of key barriers need to be addressed. They 
range 
lack  of 
standardization  of  electronic  formats.  Standardizing  formats  would  allow  more  business 
information  to  be  transmitted  with  payments.  These  barriers  are  not  easy  to  overcome. 
Resolving them, however, will significantly increase efficiency and greatly reduce the costs of 
cross-border payments. 
laundering  rules 
for  anti-money 
to  a 
Building trust to move forward 
What can we do to overcome these challenges to cross-border integration? 
The ideal, of course, would be a broad agreement among all G-20 members. But securing a 
multilateral compromise could take several years. Still, we shouldn’t abandon this possibility. 
The  FSB  has  helped  build  trust  through  its  consensus-forming  processes  and  should 
continue  to  press  for  the  timely  development  and  consistent  implementation  of  global 
minimum standards.22  
In this vein, and especially with regard to Canada, we should urge U.S. authorities to respect 
the G-20 leaders’ agreement at the 2014 Brisbane Summit to defer to each other’s regulatory 
requirements when they achieve a similar prudential outcome.23 If this were to occur, Canada 
would clearly benefit, given its strong and crisis-tested regulatory and supervisory framework. 
At the same time, it would be wise to consider alternative approaches. 
                                                
20   See Payment System Improvement—Public Consultation Paper, The Federal Reserve Banks, 10 September 
https://fedpaymentsimprovement.org/wp-content/uploads/2013/09/Payment_System_Improvement-
2013, 
Public_Consultation_Paper.pdf. 
21   The 
for 
Fed’s 
strategies 
improving 
can 
at: 
www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/press/other/20150126a.htm. 
the  Canadian  Payments 
Association  is  leading  the  work  to  modernize  the  payments  system.  For  details  on  improvements  to  the 
payments system in Canada, see L. Embree and P. Miller, “Improving the Foundation of Canada’s Payments 
System,”  Bank  of  Canada  Review  (Spring  2015:  26–34)  and  L.  Schembri,  “A  Dual  Vision  for  the  Canadian 
Payments System (speech to the Canadian Payments Association, Charlottetown, Prince Edward Island, 27 
June 2014). 
system 
In  Canada, 
payment 
found 
the 
be 
22   For  FSB  Chair  Mark  Carney’s  most  recent  report  on  too-big-to-fail  initiatives  and  other  issues,  see 
www.financialstabilityboard.org/2015/04/fsb-chairs-letter-to-g20-on-financial-reforms-progress-on-the-work-
plan-for-the-antalya-summit. 
23   The G-20 leaders agreed that “jurisdictions and regulators should be able to defer to each other when it is 
justified by the quality of their respective regulatory and enforcement regimes, based on similar outcomes, in a 
non-discriminatory way, paying due respect to home country regulation regimes.” See “Jurisdictions’ Ability to 
Defer  to  Each  Other’s  OTC  Derivatives  Market  Regulatory  Regimes,”  FSB  report  to  G20  Finance  Ministers 
and  Central  Bank  Governors, 
at  www.financialstabilityboard.org/wp-
content/uploads/r_140918.pdf. 
18  September 
2014, 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  For  instance,  Canada  and  the  United  States  should  consider  the  option  of  a  bilateral 
agreement  on  the  resolution  of  banks  with  cross-border  operations  in  order  to  clarify 
responsibilities and enhance co-operation.24 We have a long history of stable financial and 
economic integration, and U.S. financial institutions and legal frameworks are similar to ours. 
If any two jurisdictions could achieve such an agreement, it is Canada and the United States. 
We could set an example for other countries. 
In this regard, the 1988 free trade agreement between Canada and the United States offers 
a  useful  precedent.  It  served  as  a  template  for  other  regional  agreements  at  a  time  when 
multilateral trade negotiations were making little headway. 
On  cross-border  payments,  we  should  come  to  terms  on  more  efficient  arrangements, 
including  harmonizing  standards,  reducing  processing  times  and  establishing  direct  links 
between our respective  systems. We could, for instance, explore opportunities to enhance 
the  existing  FedGlobal  program  for  cross-border  payments,  which  is  currently  limited  to 
northbound transactions.25  
Conclusion 
Let  me  conclude  with  a  few  words  of  wisdom  from  a  great  American  poet.  In  his  poem 
“Mending  Wall,”  Robert  Frost  questions  his  neighbour’s  belief  in  the  old  adage  that  “good 
walls  make  good  neighbors.”  Instead,  Frost  writes,  before  we  build  a  wall  we  should  first 
consider what we are “walling in or walling out.” The message I take from his words is that 
good neighbours should work together to build trust, not walls. 
Canada  and  the  United  States  have  long-established  economic  and  financial  ties  built  on 
trust that have served both countries well. Today, we have a unique opportunity to advance 
the global financial reform agenda in the critical, but thorny, areas of bank resolution, OTC 
derivatives and payments. We both have much to gain by strengthening financial integration 
between our countries. More efficient cross-border financial services will facilitate more trade. 
And more trade will contribute to stronger economic growth in both countries. 
                                                
24   The  Canada  Deposit  Insurance  Corporation  and  the  Federal  Deposit  Insurance  Corporation  have  a 
memorandum of understanding in place to consult, co-operate and share with each other information on the 
resolution of cross-border banks. Nonetheless, a more comprehensive bilateral resolution agreement—which 
builds  on  the  FSB’s  ongoing  work  on  cross-border  resolution  issues,  including  total  loss  absorbency  and 
recognition of resolution actions—would reduce uncertainty, increase confidence in the resolution regime and 
help foster a more integrated banking sector. 
25   FedGlobal ACH Payments, which is owned by the Federal Reserve Bank Services, sends cross-border ACH 
(automated clearing house) credit payments to more than 35 countries in addition to debit payments that are 
to Canada only. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
