 Peter Praet: Interview in Les Echos 
 Interview with Mr Peter Praet, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
in  Les  Echos,  conducted  by  Ms  Isabelle  Couet  on  2  February  2015  and  published  on 
5 February 2015. 
 The  Greek  finance  minister  came  to  the  ECB  yesterday.  What  do  you  think  of  his 
proposals and what are the margins for negotiation? 
The ECB is not involved in the discussions between Greece and its creditors. We hold Greek 
government  bonds,  bought  on  the  secondary  market  to  improve  the  transmission  of  our 
monetary policy decisions. But the ECB’s position is clear: the Treaty does not allow us to 
take any decision which would entail funding a government through monetary policy. 
Are Greek banks in danger? What conditions do they need to meet in order to keep 
their access to ECB liquidity? 
The  conditions  for  access  to  ECB  liquidity  are  clear  and  published  on  the  ECB  website, 
accessible to everyone. We are transparent about our rules. If the conditions are no longer 
met, the ECB has to decide on the consequences. 
How do you envisage the future of the ECB within the Troika? 
The ECB has been led to assume a role that has put a lot of pressure on the institution. We 
have  lived  up  to  our  responsibility  to  ensure  that  our  monetary  policy  can  work.  It  was  a 
question of stepping into the breach, as Europe did not have the appropriate institutions. But 
that doesn’t mean that we are satisfied with the situation as it stands. 
With regard to the economy, at –0.6%, inflation is sinking into negative territory. Has 
the ECB failed to fulfil its mandate? 
It is true that there is a heightened risk of too prolonged a period of low inflation. We have 
deferred the point in time when we expect a return to inflation of below, but close to, 2% in 
the medium term, which is our monetary policy objective. And precisely in order to fulfil our 
mandate,  we  took  a  number  of  important  monetary  policy  decisions,  in  particular  the 
expanded asset purchase programme announced in January. If the ECB hadn’t done what 
was necessary since 2007, we would today be in the midst of a great depression. This is not 
the  case.  And  neither  has  the  deflationary  scenario  materialised.  We  have  never  stopped 
being vigilant and taking the necessary decisions. 
Regarding the launch of quantitative easing (QE), why do you think that this tool will 
really support the economy? 
Because  the  programme  comes  at  the  right  time.  We  are  seeing  the  first  signs  of  an 
improvement in financial conditions in the euro area, which suggests that QE will be able to 
bear fruit, particularly via the credit channel. The latest indicators of monetary growth show 
that we are definitely at a turning point and that outstanding credit should start to rise again. 
For its part, the most recent survey of banks conveyed more optimism as far as demand is 
concerned.  There  are  also  signs  of  an  improvement  in  consumption  as  it  benefits  from 
conducive  structural  reforms.  Another  positive  development  is  that  we  have  witnessed  a 
reduction in lending rates to small and medium-sized enterprises, which has been especially 
noticeable  in  the  most  fragile  countries  (Greece,  Ireland,  Italy,  Portugal  and  Spain)  since 
September. Then there is the decline in the euro and the fact that the fiscal policies of the 
euro area are becoming more neutral overall. Lastly, the fall in the oil price and, of course, 
our monetary policy decisions themselves will contribute to this positive demand shock. All of 
this is helpful. 
So, it could be argued that there was no urgent need to launch this programme? 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  to 
the 
the  ECB’s 
indicators  of  expected 
inflation  have  not  reacted 
On  the  contrary,  it  was  imperative  to  act  to  prevent  inflation  expectations  from  becoming 
unanchored. It was a distinct possibility, considering the fall in oil prices. By launching QE 
now, we aim to anchor inflation expectations. 
But 
announcements … 
It’s  normal  for  it  to  take  a  little  time.  It’s  not  an  exact  science,  but  the  context  should  be 
favourable, and although I remain cautious, I am confident. Everybody should make the most 
of this opportunity to give growth a further boost, each in his or her field of responsibility. 
Will QE be good for banks? 
In  terms  of  the  lending  conditions  offered,  banks  are  now  lagging  slightly  behind  demand. 
There are those that claim our financial asset purchase programme will further reduce their 
margins, while some financial institutions already lament the strong competitive pressure and 
complain of regulatory burdens. Yet, the announcement on QE drove banking sector share 
prices  higher.  At  the  same  time,  we  should  be  especially  mindful  that  this  sector  will 
inevitably benefit from the economic recovery. 
Is there a risk that financial institutions may resist and not sell the bonds they hold at 
the ECB? 
Banks  can  realise  a  capital  gain  on  the  sale  of  their  government  bonds  and,  in  doing  so, 
bolster  their  capital  position  and  therefore  their  capacity  to  extend  loans.  In  the  case  of 
insurance companies, the situation is not as clear cut, especially if they’ve already used all 
their scope for diversification towards assets with a higher risk profile than sovereign debt. 
Has the ECB entered into an exchange rate war by launching a programme that puts 
pressure on its currency? 
No. The exchange rate is not an objective of our monetary policy. Our objective is to maintain 
price stability over the medium term. Right now that means avoiding inflation staying too low 
for too long. The level of the euro depends on a number of factors, including the monetary 
policy decisions of the ECB, but also those of other countries, in particular those of the US 
Federal  Reserve.  But  it  seems  to  me  that  the  exchange  rate  now  reflects  the  economic 
divergence that exists between the United States and the euro area better than it did before. 
Has the ECB exhausted its options with QE? 
No, the central bank would still be able to act should that turn out to be necessary. But let’s 
not talk about new measures when a programme involving monthly purchases of €60 billion 
is about to get under way and many conditions are in place for it to be effective. 
Are you satisfied with the risk-sharing solution that has been found? 
Yes, I am. Whatever people say, since the liquidity injections will happen at the right time and 
will benefit the economy, the debate on loss-sharing ought to remain theoretical. The most 
important  thing  will  have  been  to  avoid  being  paralysed  by  this  debate  when  taking  our 
monetary  policy  measures.  Finding  a  lasting  solution  to  this thorny question  is  outside  our 
remit. It would involve putting in place a fiscal union at the political level, which is a task that 
lies ahead. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
