  Daniel Mminele: Policy implications of some key market developments 
Address by Mr Daniel Mminele, Deputy Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at the 
Financial Markets Department’s Annual Cocktail Function, Pretoria, 3 March 2015. 
 Introduction 
Ladies and gentlemen, good evening. 
Thank you for attending this year’s Financial Markets Department cocktail function. 
It  has  almost  become  tradition  for  me  to  take  stock  of  major  global  and  domestic  market 
developments that occurred during the past year, and to briefly reflect on their implications 
for South Africa. In the past, we also used this event to brief you, our partners in financial 
markets  and  other  stakeholders,  on  key  projects  undertaken,  changes  and  innovations 
introduced in the Financial Markets Department. 
This year, though, I would like to take a slightly different approach. Rather than providing a 
detailed  review  of  operations  over  the  past  year,  I  will  look  at  what  I  think  are  potential 
challenges that market participants and policymakers are likely to be confronted with in the 
period ahead. Given the time constraints, I will focus on the policy implications of some key 
market developments. 
You will, however, not be deprived of information about recent developments and activities of 
our  Financial  Markets  Department.  I  have  the  pleasure  of  announcing  the  launch  of  the 
newsletter called FMD update, copies of which will be available tonight. The newsletter will 
also be available on the Bank’s website. 
What has not changed and will not change is the importance of central bank interaction and 
communication with the markets, especially in light of the new views on the role of forward 
guidance in its various forms. Forward guidance, in more formal or less formal ways, appears 
to  have  graduated  from  what  was  essentially  a  crisis-fighting  instrument  to  now  being 
advocated by some as part of the standard toolkit of central bankers, even in normal times. 
Recent experience has shown how sensitive financial asset prices have become to changes 
in  signals  over  future  policy.  We  therefore  continue  to  value  our  ongoing  interaction  with 
yourselves  as  market  participants,  as  you  are  in  essence  part  of  our  transmission 
mechanism of monetary policy. 
Monetary policy divergence, the stronger US dollar, and global imbalances 
But let me get back to market issues and policy. 
One of the key trends observed over the last few quarters has been the steady appreciation 
of the US dollar against the backdrop of divergent monetary policies in advanced economies. 
At first glance, such a recovery in the US currency seems consistent with the improvement in 
US  economic  prospects.  US  GDP  growth  continues  to  outpace  that  of  the  eurozone  and 
Japan, and most economists agree that ‘the healing process’ of balance sheets in the private 
and  public  sectors,  a  necessary  adjustment  following  the  global  financial  crisis,  is  more 
advanced  in  the  US  than  in  some  of  the  other  advanced  economies.  In  view  of  these 
improvements,  and  of  perceptions  that  the  US  economy  is  likely  to  prove  fairly  resilient  to 
foreign-exchange appreciation, market participants have discounted earlier rate hikes in the 
US than in other major blocs, and widening yield and forward rate differentials have favoured 
the US dollar. As you are aware, the actual timing for a lift-off in US interest rates remains 
the subject of much debate and speculation. Conversely, the resulting currency depreciation 
in  regions  like  Europe,  Japan  and  Latin  America  is  seen  as  growth-enhancing  and  also 
assisting, in some cases, with warding off the risk of deflation. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
  The  marked  appreciation  of  the  US  dollar  may,  however,  revive  other  concerns.  We  have 
seen  a  very  strong  correlation  between  the  stronger  dollar  and  weaker  commodity  prices. 
While this is in part a logical consequence as the US dollar is the currency of denomination 
for trading in many commodities, the firming in the US currency appears to have contributed 
to  an  unwinding  of  long  speculative  positions  in  commodity  futures,  which  has  possibly 
exacerbated  the  overall  price  decline.  Some  have  argued  that  the  risk  that  such  an 
unwinding  of  positions  could  extend  to  other  financial  assets  through  portfolio  rebalancing 
effects should not be underestimated. Hence, it may not be a coincidence that the stronger 
dollar was accompanied by a rise in financial market volatility, a subject I will address in more 
detail  later.  Finally,  it  may  be  worth  asking  whether  the  stronger  dollar  and  stronger  US 
growth  will  not,  as  has  already  happened  in  earlier  decades,  exacerbate  current-account 
imbalances or result in widening global imbalances, at a time when external surpluses in the 
eurozone and China are rising again and the US trade deficit is drifting wider. 
How has this affected South Africa? A corollary to the rising US dollar has been depreciating 
emerging market currencies, including the rand. The downward trend of the rand versus the 
US dollar continued in 2014. At R11,71 to the US dollar as of 2 March, the bilateral exchange 
rate is approximately 7,0 per cent weaker than a year ago and only marginally stronger than 
the  low  of  R11,87  reached  at  the  height  of  the  2008  global  financial  crisis.  However, 
compared with other emerging market currencies, the rand was certainly one of the better-
performing currencies against the US dollar and has regained some of the ground it had lost 
in earlier years. Yet, unlike previously, this weakening of the rand against the US dollar has 
not resulted in depreciation on a trade-weighted basis. In fact, the effective exchange rate 
has been relatively stable since the beginning of 2014. On 2 January 2014, the TWI was at a 
level of 68,3 while on 2 March 2015 it was virtually unchanged at 68,4. For 2015, up to and 
including 2 March, the rand has appreciated by 2,1 per cent on a trade-weighted basis. This 
is  explained  by  the  fact  that  while  there  has  been  a  marginal  depreciation  against  the  US 
dollar of close to 2 per cent, the rand has appreciated by 6,3 per cent against the euro. 
This reconfiguration in currency markets arising from the stronger US dollar, which happens 
to  coincide  with  easing  policies  in  other  parts  of  the  world,  has  led  some  observers  to 
highlight the risk of new currency wars. Any currency wars which inhibit international trade 
will affect economies highly dependent on exports and will certainly trigger uncertainty, with 
an adverse impact on capital flows to emerging market economies. It is for this reason that 
the G-20 agenda argues against the use of competitive devaluations as a deliberate policy 
measure. 
The volatility of domestic bond yields 
Another important development over the past year has been the decline in long-term South 
African  bond  yields,  even  as  the  rand  continued  to  weaken  against  the  US  dollar.  For 
example, while off its late-January lows, the yield on the R186 bond is still about 130 basis 
points below early-2014 levels. The current yields are nevertheless still substantially higher 
than the levels that prevailed prior to the ‘taper tantrum’. Before bond yields started rising to 
the current levels of 7,66 per cent, the R186 bond traded at 7,04 per cent towards the end of 
January.  The  strong  bond  market  rally  in  January  was  due  to  market  participants  having 
scaled down their expectations for interest-rate hikes compared with what they projected in 
early 2014 due to the oil price having declined sharply, to the point that domestic inflation 
was  no  longer  expected  to  exceed  the  upper  end  of  the  target  range  over  the  forecasting 
period,  and  real  domestic  GDP  growth  having  also  fallen  short  of  earlier  expectations. 
Furthermore,  non-residents  were  net  buyers  of  domestic  bonds  to  the  value  of  more  than 
R9,1 billion. 
Bond yields reversed course as non-residents started selling domestic bonds (approximately 
R13,7  billion  in  February).  There  were  also  rising  concerns  and  uncertainty  as  to  the 
sustainability of the low oil price. There were indications that broad measures of longer-term 
inflation expectations – as depicted by the  BER survey –  had not declined significantly, at 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  least not as much as market measures like break-even inflation expectations, which was a 
key factor behind the decline in long-term bond yields in January. 
The Bank will continue monitoring the international and domestic factors driving bond market 
volatility. Increased volatility would be a source of risk as it could undermine capital inflows 
and put pressure on the balance of payments. In that respect, it may be worth reflecting on, 
in particular, what the relationship should be between long-term interest rates and the price 
of oil. Indeed, a decline in oil prices should depress the inflation rate in the short term but at 
the  same  time  provide  a  boost  to  real  GDP  growth,  and  as  a  result  need  not  have  a  big 
impact on long-term inflation expectations. A strong rally in longer-term bonds on the back of 
lower oil prices may be justified in places like the eurozone, where market participants fear 
that even a few months of negative headline inflation readings might entrench deflation; yet 
one cannot make a similar case in South Africa. After all, more likely, the decline in long-term 
SA bond yields was influenced by the strong correlation between domestic and foreign term 
premiums,  especially  with  the  US.  However,  this  pattern  highlights  the  vulnerability  of 
domestic yields to any sudden steepening in global yield curves. 
Causes of the recent uptrend in volatility 
While global long-term yields are still below the average levels that prevailed in the second 
half of last year, most indicators of financial market volatility, especially in the fixed-income 
and currency markets, have tended to move higher in recent months. Furthermore, at least 
compared to the period of relative stability around mid-2014, these indicators seem prone to 
swings that are both more frequent and bigger in magnitude. In a word, volatility seems to be 
getting more volatile. 
Some commentators argue that this volatility is driven by, among others, geopolitical events, 
uncertainties  about the  timing  and pace  of  US  rate  rises, tensions  arising  from  needing  to 
find  sustainable  solutions  for  Greece,  and  doubts  about  how  successful  QE  will  be  in  the 
eurozone. These factors have a significant bearing on this rise in volatility. Rising volatility in 
several  financial  assets  seems  to  have  been  correlated  with  higher  oil  price  volatility  as  a 
result of the drop in crude prices, which may sound a bit counterintuitive as lower oil prices 
typically  bring  about  a  better  growth/inflation  mix  in  the  world’s  largest  economies.  While 
demand and supply factors are responsible for the over US$50 per barrel decline in the price 
of Brent crude, we do not have a full understanding of the drivers of the oil price decline. In 
fact, there are indications that financial factors, while not dominant, did have some bearing 
on oil price movements. Or was the oil price decline seen as a harbinger of deflation in some 
regions?  It  could  also  be  a  reflection  of  deeper  structural  economic  weaknesses  that  will 
complicate  the  task  of  policymakers,  and  thereby  challenge  the  valuation  of  many  asset 
prices. Only time will tell. 
At the same time, the side effects of regulatory changes introduced in recent years, and in 
particular limitations on banks’ proprietary trading, appear to have reduced the willingness of 
established  primary  dealers  to  hold  sizable  inventories  of  fixed-income  securities,  and  to 
continue  to  make  markets  in  the  less  liquid  issues.  As  a  result,  turnover  has  tended  to 
decline  relative  to  amounts  outstanding  in  many  of  these  markets.  At  a  time  when  fund 
managers (both private and public) have tended to diversify their portfolios and hold larger 
quantities of these less liquid issues, the risk of a sudden plunge in liquidity, and subsequent 
sharper price swings, may rise should asset managers be required to substantially reduce 
their positions in a relatively short period. 
Yet,  while  these  constraints  to  market  liquidity  are  likely  to  be  a  sign  that  new  regulations 
could  be  having  unintended  and  undesired  side  effects,  they  should  not  be  used  as  an 
excuse  to  put  on  hold  the  search  for  greater  fairness,  transparency  and  ethics  in  financial 
markets, both internationally and at home. In a world where both the size and the complexity 
of financial transactions keep increasing, yet where a growing number of intermediaries and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
  trading technologies mean a decline in the personal relationship between buyers and sellers, 
the need for trust, strong culture and appropriate values becomes even more important. 
This  requirement  is  illustrated  by  recent  findings  on  collusive  practices  in  reference  rate 
setting  and  foreign-exchange  markets  over  recent  years,  which  resulted  in  huge  financial 
penalties for the institutions involved. In the absence of trust, acceptable norms and values, 
market participants would require additional risk premiums to protect against the risk of unfair 
pricing,  implying,  in  the  long  run,  restrictions  in  access  to  credit,  suboptimal  returns  for 
savers,  and  overall  constraints  to  economic  growth  and  development.  In  South  Africa,  the 
Bank has spearheaded several initiatives in recent years with respect to strengthening codes 
of conduct for Jibar and foreign-exchange markets, and, more recently, a push to enhance 
transparency in the broader money market. Yet professional associations and their members 
still need to play a key role, at home and abroad, in enforcing greater and more efficient self-
regulation. 
Concluding remarks – implications for the Bank’s policy 
What  does  this  all  mean  as  we  go  deeper  into  2015?  The  big  themes  that  we  saw  in  the 
closing stages of 2014 are still with us. In addition to domestic growth and inflation trends, 
the outlook for South African financial markets, similar to other emerging market economies, 
will  likely  be  dominated  by  four  factors,  namely:  the  pace  of  normalisation  in  US  interest 
rates, growth and monetary policy dynamics in the eurozone, growth developments in China 
(large  and  to  a  lesser  extent  in  other  emerging  market  countries),  and  the  outlook  for 
commodity  prices.  These  developments  appear  to  have  set  the  tone  for  higher  volatility  in 
global  markets  and  a  possibly  more  challenging  environment  for  emerging  market 
economies, especially those whose private and public entities have borrowed heavily in US 
dollars  in  recent  years  and  in  some  instances  have  invested  in  oil-related  activities.  While 
shock changes to sentiment seem to affect markets more (as exhibited by this heightened 
volatility), the ability of the market to absorb such events still seems to be intact, but spill-over 
effects could be more pronounced. 
Policymakers will have to deal with the increasingly complex nature of various cross-currents 
that characterise the current environment. Such factors of uncertainty require a high degree 
of vigilance from monetary authorities, even as inflation falls lower than we expected a few 
quarters ago. Although it is clear that policymakers globally have been given some reprieve 
as a result of the decline in oil prices, there still exists much uncertainty as to its drivers and 
its sustainability, which makes us vulnerable to a correction or reversal in prices from current 
levels.  In  such  an  environment,  it  is  important  to  remain  vigilant  and  not  to  declare  early 
victories  because  of  what  appear  to  be  temporary  dynamics  around  headline  inflation 
outcomes,  but  to  continue  to  be  guided  by  a  forward-looking  approach  over  the  medium 
term. 
Amid  such  new  developments  and  uncertainties,  the  Bank  will  continue  to  abide  by  its 
mandates of price and financial stability. The Bank is cognisant of how the oil price decline 
has  significantly  changed  the  near-term  inflation  outlook,  however,  the  former’s  long-term 
impact  on  both  growth  and  inflation  will  depend  on  how  persistent  the  decline  is. 
Consequently,  the  Bank  has  made  moderate  downward  revisions  to  its  core  inflation 
forecast, projecting average rates of 5,5 per cent in 2015 and 5,1 per cent in 2016, versus 
rates  of  5,7  per  cent  and  5,3  per  cent,  respectively,  at  the  time  of  the  November  MPC 
meeting. 
Furthermore, several factors may preclude the normal positive boost that a marked oil price 
decline  typically  provides  to  a  country’s  growth-inflation  mix,  highlighting  the  uncertainties 
surrounding these forecasts. The currency remains a major factor of uncertainty, for while the 
rand’s real effective exchange rate is relatively low by historical standards and showed signs 
of stabilising last year, the persistence of a structurally large current-account deficit, coupled 
with the uncertainties I mentioned earlier about market liquidity and volatility and asset price 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  valuations, highlight the risk of reduced portfolio inflows, even outflows, and further currency 
depreciation. 
At  the  same  time,  on  the  wage  front,  the  continued  rigidity  in  wage  demands  and 
settlements, at a time when labour conflicts have risen and productivity has slowed, raises 
doubts  as  to  the  extent  that  a  temporary,  oil-driven  drop  in  inflation  can  feed  into  a  more 
benign  wage-price  spiral.  Finally,  on  the  real  economy  side,  the  country’s  well-publicised 
power  supply  constraints,  while  limiting  the  growth  benefits  of  the  oil  price  drop,  raise 
questions about the extent to which potential growth, and the output gap, may be trimmed 
over the next few years. 
Such  factors  of  uncertainty  require  a  high  degree  of  vigilance  from  monetary  authorities, 
even as inflation falls lower than we expected a few quarters ago. The more benign projected 
inflation path, in an environment where growth in credit and property prices does not signal 
any build-up in financial imbalances, gives the Bank some room to pause in its interest rate 
normalisation  process.  Yet,  risks  related  to  currency  moves,  capital  flows  and  overall 
financial market volatility will have to be closely monitored in coming quarters. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
