  Andreas Dombret: Banks – allowing them to fail 
Statement  by  Dr  Andreas  Dombret,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Deutsche 
Bundesbank, at the Euromoney Conference on Germany, Berlin, 29 April 2015. 
 Introduction 
1.  
Ladies and gentlemen, 
Thank  you  for  the  invitation  to  speak  at  the  Euromoney  conference  on  Germany.  It  is  a 
pleasure to be here today. 
Shortly after the financial crisis broke out in 2008, regulators around the world embarked on 
a regulatory reform in order to prevent such a crisis from happening again. This regulatory 
reform is as complex and multi-layered as the crisis itself. Still, many observers wish there 
was a silver bullet that would solve the crisis with one clean shot. I shall begin my speech 
with a disappointing message: there is no such silver bullet. 
However, if we dig deep enough we uncover a problem that lies at the heart of the crisis and 
relates to one of the core characteristics of any well-functioning market economy. Despite the 
ongoing regulatory reform, this problem has not yet been entirely solved. 
Capitalism, religion and the banks 
2.  
So  which  problem  am  I talking  about?  It  is  usually  labelled  the  “too  big to fail”  problem. It 
refers to banks that are so big, so interconnected or so important that their failure might bring 
down the entire financial system. Consequently, the government has an incentive to step in 
and bail out these banks in order to prevent a systemic meltdown. 
Banks that were deemed “too big to fail” therefore operated with implicit government support 
that  was  provided  free  of  charge.  Such  support,  however,  can  induce  banks  to  engage  in 
risky transactions. If things go well they take the profit, but if things go wrong the taxpayer 
foots the bill. Obviously, this is a less than optimal situation from any point of view but the 
banks’. 
How  can  we  solve  this  problem?  The first  step is  to  reduce  the  likelihood  of  a  large  bank 
failing. To this end, regulation has, among other things, imposed stricter capital requirements 
in general and introduced surcharges for systemically important banks. But capital can only 
shield  against  losses  up  to  a  point.  A  system  that  entirely  prevents  the  failure  of  banks  is 
neither possible nor desirable. 
We have to remind ourselves that the risk of failure is a core feature of any well-functioning 
market economy. It not only encourages competition, but also leads to a situation in which 
the  best  ultimately  prevail.  This  is  what  Joseph  Schumpeter  famously  called  “creative 
destruction”.  Allan  Meltzer  put  an  even  finer  point  on  it  when  he  said:  “Capitalism  without 
failure is like religion without sin. It doesn’t work.” 
With regard to banks that are deemed “too big to fail”, we therefore have to do away with the 
system that shields them at the taxpayer’s expense from the forces of “creative destruction”. 
To  be  clear,  this  by  no  means  implies  that  we  actually  want  banks  to  fail  per  se.  But  the 
threat  of  failure  is  a  huge  incentive  for  owners,  creditors  and  other  stakeholders  to  act 
prudently and with foresight. 
From “too big to fail” to a well-functioning market economy 
3.  
To allow even large banks to fail we have to build a viable resolution regime. Such a regime 
would allow these banks to fail without disrupting the entire financial system. They would be 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  able  to  fail  in  line  with  market  principles  and  in  an  orderly  and  predictable  fashion.  The 
ultimate ‘entrepreneurial burden’ would be shifted from the taxpayer to banks – and that is 
the right thing to do. 
At the European level, a common legal framework for resolution has been established by the 
Bank  Recovery  and  Resolution  Directive,  or  BRRD  for  short.  Authorities  now  have  a 
coherent set of instruments at their disposal for a smooth banking resolution process. The 
BRRD also sets out a clear hierarchy for the bailing-in of owners and creditors. Starting in 
2016, bail-ins will become mandatory for failing institutions in the EU. Bail-ins are in and bail-
outs are out, so to speak. 
However,  given  the  global  scope  of  the  financial  system,  we  ultimately  need  a  global 
approach.  Consequently,  the  G20  have  just  agreed  to  a  proposal  on  capital  structure 
requirements for global systemically important banks. In particular, these banks will need to 
ensure  a  minimum  amount  of  total  loss-absorbing  capacity,  or  TLAC  for  short.  This 
requirement  may  be  as  high  as  20%  of  risk  weighted  assets  and  must  be  at  least  6%  of 
unweighted assets, which is twice the Basel III leverage ratio. 
It is essential that the TLAC requirements are finalised on schedule by the end of this year so 
that they can enter into force by 2019. Until then, much remains to be done. Among other 
things, we have to develop rules on how to allocate internal TLAC between local subsidiaries 
of banks in order to prevent ring-fencing. 
Of  course,  the  proposal  should  not  be  watered  down  in  the  process.  For  instance,  TLAC 
instruments should be strictly subordinated to instruments not included in TLAC in order to 
ensure transparency and legal certainty. We also need clear rules that restrict the holdings of 
TLAC instruments by other banks in order to limit the risk of contagion. Here, a number of 
potential  approaches  are  currently  under  discussion.  These  include  deductions  from  total 
capital, punitive risk weights and large exposure limits. 
Conclusion 
4.  
To  sum  up:  many  people  blame  untamed  market  forces  for  the  financial  crisis  of  2008.  I 
argue  that  it  was,  in  fact,  not  too  much  market  but  too  little  that  contributed  to  the  near-
collapse  of  the  financial  system.  A  core  characteristic  of  any  well-functioning  market 
economy  was  absent  from  the  financial  sector,  namely  the  threat  of  failure.  Large  banks 
operated  with  implicit  government  support  that  distorted  their  incentives  for  prudent 
behaviour and eventually cost taxpayers billions of euros. 
Therefore, the regulatory reforms aim to reintroduce the principle of individual failure into the 
financial system. To reach this objective we have to establish mechanisms that allow banks 
to fail without disrupting the entire financial system. We have made significant progress both 
at the European and at the global level. And although we have not yet reached our objective, 
I am confident that we will eventually do so. 
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
