  Lesetja Kganyago: Role of the forecast in monetary policy decision 
making at the South African Reserve Bank 
Address  by  Mr  Lesetja  Kganyago,  Governor  of  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank,  at  the 
Sake24 Economist of the Year Presentation, Johannesburg, 18 June 2015. 
 Good evening ladies and gentlemen. It is an honour for me to be the keynote speaker at this 
event,  which  recognises  economists  for  their  forecasting  abilities.  Those  of  you  here  this 
evening will understand better than most the difficulties involved with forecasting: that it is not 
an exact science, and at times it is more akin to being an informed “best guess”. Forecasting 
is difficult. Inevitably we are dealing with an unknown and unknowable future. But whether 
we are policy makers or making long term investment decisions, we have to take a view of 
the future.  
As monetary policy makers, our time horizons are long. Our policy instruments act with a lag, 
with interest rate decisions taken today only having their full impact on inflation in about 18 to 
24 months time. In my remarks to you this evening, I will expand on the role of the forecast in 
monetary policy decision making at the Bank. We recently announced that in the interest of 
increased transparency, we will publish the assumptions underlying our forecasts as of the 
July MPC meeting. Although it is not my intention to reveal the assumptions this evening, I 
will  make  some  general  comments  about  the  importance  of  these  assumptions,  and  the 
process we adopt in arriving at them. 
Although the inflation and growth forecasts are an integral part of the monetary policy-making 
process, it is important not to overstate their role. We do not, and should not, mechanistically 
use the forecast when making decisions. A great deal of subjective judgement goes into the 
process.  Models  are  simplified  approximations  of  reality;  they  are  not  reality.  But  they  do 
provide a useful basis for discussion of the policy stance.  
Contrary  to  what  some  people  believe,  inflation  targeting  is  not  a  simple  framework  that 
requires  a  predictable  or  mechanistic  reaction  to  deviations  of  expected  inflation  from  the 
target.  A flexible  inflation  targeting  regime, for  example,  allows  for temporary  deviations  of 
inflation  from  the  target.  How  far  and  for  what  period  such  expected  deviations  can  be 
tolerated depends on prevailing circumstances, the expected trajectory of inflation, as well as 
on  our  assessment  of  the  risks  to  the  forecast.  So  deviations  under  conditions  of  weak 
growth  may  entail  different  outcomes  than  deviations  under  conditions  of  strong  domestic 
demand. Similarly, a given inflation trajectory can elicit different policy responses at different 
times depending on how the MPC members assess the risks to the forecast. A forecast with 
a strong upside risk could see a very different policy response to one with a strong downside 
risk.  
Such  considerations  make  it  difficult  for  us  to  give  a  simple  answer  to  the  often  asked 
question  as  to  what  period  of  time  are  we  prepared  to  tolerate  a  deviation  of  (forecast) 
inflation  from  the  target.  The  answer  is  generally,  that  it  depends.  It  depends  on  how 
confident we are that inflation will return to the target; on how we see the risks; on the state 
of the economy; on how comfortably to within the target range inflation is expected to return, 
and  how  sustained  this  is  expected  to  be;  and  how  well  anchored  we  judge  inflation 
expectations to be. If inflation expectations are not well anchored, even short term deviations 
of inflation from target could cause inflation to accelerate away from the target. Conversely, 
well  anchored  inflation  expectations  could  allow  for  a  more  extended  deviation  of  inflation 
from the target.  
So our tolerance of deviations from the target depends on our assessment of these various 
factors.  Past  history  may  be  a  guide  to  our  reaction  function,  but  it  would  be  important  to 
control  for  these  various  factors.  These  factors  would  also  play  an  important  role  in 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  determining the strength and amplitude of the interest rate cycle. The need for well thought-
through  judgement  complements  the  different  kind  of  rigor  provided  by  model-based 
assessments.  
Forecast error can come about for various reasons, including model specification uncertainty; 
structural changes in the economy or unexpected events that are not adequately accounted 
for  in  the  model;  or  faulty  exogenous  assumptions  that  are  put  into  the  model.  These 
exogenous  assumptions  play  an  important  role  in  determining  the  forecast.  If  the 
assumptions  are  not  credible,  the  value  of  the  forecasts  deteriorates.  The  exogenous 
assumptions  of  the  Bank’s  core  model  include  the  international  oil  price;  international 
commodity prices; global inflation and global growth; government consumption expenditure 
growth; administered price increases; the real effective exchange rate; and the policy interest 
rate.  Some  assumptions  are  generally  more  important  than  others,  and  some  may  be  of 
greater  interest  at  different  times,  depending  on  the  extent  of  their  current  and  expected 
movements.  For  example,  the  oil  price  assumptions  would  be  of  greater  interest  at  times 
when real oil price trends change direction, such as recently experienced.  
The  assumptions  of  the  model  can  have  a  significant  impact  on  the  longer  term  forecast 
trajectory, as we have to take a view of the behaviour of these variables over a two to three 
year time horizon. Given the importance of the assumptions, a lot of time is spent deciding 
on them, and these discussions are an integral part of the MPC process. In fact, it is through 
the assumptions that the MPC members take ownership of the forecast, by making the final 
decision  about  the  assumptions.  To  briefly  describe  the  process:  the  modelling  team,  in 
conjunction  with  the  various  units  in  the  Bank,  will  analyse  the  relevant  data,  and  bring 
proposals to a meeting with the MPC members. Each assumption is then discussed and the 
reasons  interrogated,  and  where  deemed  appropriate,  the  MPC  members  may  require  a 
change in the assumptions. Of course it is possible that MPC members may have differing 
views.  Under  such  circumstances  the  majority  view  will  prevail,  but  such  differences  will 
ultimately be reflected in the balance of risks to the forecast.  
Our  assumptions  are  benchmarked  against  various  external  forecasts.  For  example,  our 
assumption of world growth is based to a large extent on our trading partner growth forecasts 
generated by the IMF. These forecasts are then used to derive a global growth assumption 
weighted  by  the  shares  of  these  countries  in  South  Africa’s  international  trade.  Our 
assumption of government consumption expenditure is based on National Treasury budget 
projections.  
The international oil price assumption is more challenging. Some central banks simply use 
the prevailing futures prices, while recognising the shortcomings of this approach. Apart from 
trying to get an understanding of the oil market dynamics, we also look at the forecasts of 
various oil analysts and institutions in order to get an idea of the consensus view, and we 
benchmark  our  decision  against  that.  However,the  divergence  between  the  highest  and 
lowest forecasts is often quite wide, particularly during periods of oil price volatility, reflecting 
the high degree of uncertainty in the market.  
Often the assumptions change marginally or not at all. But the challenge emerges when we 
have to take a view on variables during periods of high volatility. For example, between 2011 
and  2014,  the  international  oil  price  was  relatively  stable,  and  our  assumptions  changed 
marginally,  if  at  all,  from  meeting  to  meeting.  During  the  second  half  of  2014,  very  few 
analysts  expected  prices  to  fall  as  much  as  they  did.  Indeed,  during  June  of  that  year, 
geopolitical risks were posing an upside risk to these prices. As prices began to decline from 
August,  we  initially  had  incremental  downward  adjustments  to  the  near-term  oil  price 
assumption,  but  the  longer  term  assumptions  were  relatively  unchanged.  By  January  it 
became  clear  that  oil  prices  were  likely  to  remain  lower  for  longer,  resulting  in  a  more 
substantial downward revision over the entire forecast period. However, we did not believe 
that the price would remain at the levels of around US$45 per barrel, and we also assumed 
an upward trend over the forecast period. To date our assumptions have been more or less 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  in line with actual outcomes. But changes in supply and demand conditions in international 
oil markets could require adjustments to these assumptions, with implications for the longer 
term inflation forecast.  
A similar situation, but in the opposite direction, faced the MPC during the 2006-08 period of 
rising oil prices. At that time the market price continually surprised on the upside, (ultimately 
reaching around US$150 per barrel), until the global financial crisis took the oil price on the 
downside  of  the  roller  coaster  ride  to  levels  of  around  US$35  per  barrel.  Under  such 
conditions, it is always difficult to know whether prevailing trends will persist over the forecast 
period, or if prices will stabilise or indeed decline. But we have to take a view, and whatever 
we  decide  could  have  a  marked  bearing  on  the  inflation  trajectory,  given  the  5,7  per  cent 
weight of petrol in the CPI basket.  
The other important and volatile assumption in the model is the exchange rate. Again, we 
have to try and look through short term volatility and focus on longer term trends. In order to 
take account of movements between the currencies of South Africa’s major trading partners, 
(for example the recent sharp depreciation of the euro against the US dollar), we focus on 
the  effective  or  trade-weighted  exchange  rate.  Given  the  difficulties  in  forecasting  the 
exchange rate, we make a simplifying assumption of a constant real exchange rate over the 
forecast  period.  This  implies  a  change  in  the  nominal  effective  exchange  rate  in  line  with 
South Africa’s inflation differentials against its trading partners. We generally set the starting 
point at the prevailing index level, unless the MPC assesses this level is to be significantly 
out of line, in which case it may be set at a level deemed to be more appropriate. The focus 
of our discussions then becomes assigning the balance of risks to this forecast. We also look 
very  carefully  at  different  exchange  rate  scenarios,  to  get  an  idea  of  the  sensitivity  of  the 
forecast to various alternative exchange rate outcomes.  
Administered  prices,  apart  from  petrol,  are  generally  fairly  predictable,  particularly  where 
multi-year price determinations exist, as in the case of electricity tariffs. However, the recent 
application  by  Eskom  for  a  significant  tariff  review  has  increased  the  upside  risk  to  the 
forecast. While we would not be surprised if some of the Eskom request is acceded to, the 
quantum  and  timing  is  uncertain.  Given  these  uncertainties,  the  MPC  decided  to  assign  a 
higher upside risk to the forecast, and wait for the outcome of the Nersa decision, due at the 
end of June, before changing the electricity price assumption. But in the meantime, we have 
analysed the impact of a number of scenarios on the inflation forecast. A scenario where the 
full 25 percent increase is granted to Eskom would increase inflation over a year by about 0,5 
percentage points.  
Perhaps  the  most  contentious  assumption  is  that  of  the  policy  interest  rate.  There  is  no 
unanimity  among  central  banks  as  to  how  to  deal  with  this  issue.  Broadly,  there  are  four 
different  approaches.  The  first  approach  is  to  assume  an  unchanged  policy  rate  over  the 
forecast period. While this allows us to assess the implications for inflation of an unchanged 
policy stance, it has the drawback that it is unrealistic during periods of regular changes to 
the policy rate. The second approach allows for an endogenously determined interest rate 
path- one that would be consistent with achieving the inflation target over the forecast period.  
A third approach would be to incorporate the MPC’s subjective view of the interest rate path 
over the forecast period. This approach is also used as a means to provide forward guidance 
to  the  market,  and  has  been  adopted  for  some  time  in  some  countries  including  New 
Zealand, Norway and Sweden. However, there is some risk that the public interprets this as 
an unconditional commitment to a particular interest rate path. A look at the so-called Fed 
“dots” (which represent the expectations of individual FOMC members of future policy rates) 
reveals a fairly wide dispersion of views among FOMC members, but also shows how these 
views  can  change  from  meeting  to  meeting.  Similarly,  the  New  Zealand  experience  with 
publishing  a  forward  path  shows  how  significantly  the  expected  path  can  change  between 
meetings. This has led Charles Goodhart to argue that forward guidance of this nature may 
be more useful over short periods than over longer time horizons.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  The fourth approach is to adopt an exogenous market-based interest rate path. This path is 
also subject to change, and therefore prone to some of the same problems as the previous 
alternative. The benefit of approaches that do not assume a constant interest rate is that they 
give some sense of the effect of policy on inflation.  
Our current approach is to assume a constant interest rate path in our core model, but the 
MPC  is  provided  with  alternative  forecasts  based  on  a  market-based  interest  rate  path. 
Furthermore,  we  have  developed  a  General  Equilibrium  Model,  which  generates  an 
endogenous  interest  rate  path,  and  the  results  are  also  presented  to  the  MPC  at  each 
meeting. However, only the forecasts of our core model are published.  
At this stage, we continue with the practice of assuming an unchanged path, and providing 
qualitative  guidance  to  the  market. This  includes  specifying  the  risks  to  the  forecasts,  and 
signalling, when appropriate, our view of the interest rate cycle. It is important to emphasise 
that any signal, whether quantitative or qualitative, should not be seen as an unconditional 
commitment to specific actions. The use of a non-constant interest rate assumption remains 
a subject of discussion in many central banks, and we will continue to work on the utility of 
moving to such an approach.  
Our forecasts are continually changing, at times marginally, at other times more markedly. 
This  should  not  be  surprising:  the  underlying  assumptions  often  change  in  unpredictable 
ways,  sometimes  significantly,  and  this  requires  a  change  in  our  assumptions.  We  also 
benchmark our forecasts against forecasts of other institutions and analysts, and as seen in 
the various regular consensus surveys, those forecasts are subject to change as well. Once 
a  year,  we  undertake  an  assessment  of  our  forecasts,  including  a  comparison  of  the 
accuracy  of  our  forecasts  relative  to  those  of  financial  market  analysts.  Generally  our 
forecasts have compared favourably on this basis, and the results are published once a year 
in a box in the Monetary Policy Review.  
Our inflation forecasts this year have been subject to quite significant changes, mainly due to 
changing assumptions of some of the underlying variables, For example, our inflation forecast 
for 2015 changed from 3,8 per cent in January, to 4,8 per cent in March. Factors that were 
central to these revisions included the unexpected increase in the Road Accident Fund levy in 
the petrol price; changes in the international oil price; and the impact of the drought on spot 
prices of maize and wheat and their possible implications for food prices later in the year.  
As set out in the May MPC statement, our latest forecasts suggest that inflation will average 
4,9 per cent in 2015, 6,1 per cent in 2016 and 5,7 per cent in 2017, with a peak of around 
6,8 per  cent  in  the  first  quarter  of  next  year. While  the  headline  forecast  deteriorated  only 
somewhat compared to that of the March MPC meeting, the upside risks to the forecast were 
assessed  to  have  deteriorated  quite  markedly.  And  should  these  risks  transpire,  we  could 
see a more significant change in the forecast by the next meeting. Further depreciation of the 
exchange  rate,  an  expected  increase  in  electricity  tariffs,  and  higher-than-expected  wage 
settlements,  have  the  potential  to  worsen  the  inflation  outlook.  Moderating  downside  risk 
arose primarily from risks to GDP growth. Our latest forecast is for growth of 2,1 per cent and 
2,2  per  cent  in  2015  and  2016  respectively,  rising  to  2,7  per  cent  in  2017.  This  growth 
forecast assumes an easing of the electricity supply constraint by 2017. Hopefully there is 
not too much downside risk to this assumption!  
In conclusion, given the inherent difficulties with forecasting, the best we can do is to ensure 
that  we  continue  to  develop  our  suite  of  models,  and  keep  up  with  the  latest  international 
advances and trends. Although we can continually increase the sophistication of our models, 
a  model  will  never  be  a  perfect  representation  of  the  economy,  and  the  assumptions  will 
always  be  subject  to  change.  And  given  the  risks  to  the  forecasts,  policy  decisions  will 
inevitably require a degree of subjective judgement. I would not want to forecast the winner 
of this competition, but I wish all of the finalists the best of luck and heartiest congratulations 
to the winner.  
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
