  Jacqueline Loh: Enhancing linkages between Asia and the Middle East 
Welcome  address  by  Ms  Jacqueline  Loh,  Deputy  Managing  Director  of  the  Monetary 
Authority  of  Singapore,  at  the  6th  World  Islamic  Banking  Conference  Asia  Summit, 
Singapore, 3 June 2015. 
 Your  Excellencies,  distinguished  guests,  ladies  and  gentlemen,  good  morning.  To  all  our 
foreign guests, a warm welcome to Singapore 
Introduction 
1. 
I am very honoured to be invited to deliver the Welcome Address for the 6th World 
Islamic  Banking  Conference  Asia  Summit.  I  am  pleased  that  this  conference  continues  to 
attract a growing number of industry professionals from Asia and the Middle East, with total 
attendance more than doubling since it was launched in 2010. This underscores the bright 
prospects for Islamic finance in Asia. 
Growing Asia-Middle East connectivity 
2. 
Trade  and  investment  flows  between  Asia  and  the  Middle  East  have  grown 
substantially  over  the  last  decade,  supported  by  strong  domestic  demand  and  investment 
opportunities  in  both  regions.  This  growing  connectivity  is  expected  to  strengthen  in  the 
coming  years,  notwithstanding  uncertainties  in  the  global  outlook.  Let  me  share  3  key 
observations. 
3. 
Firstly,  trade  between  the  two  regions  continues  to  grow  strongly.  In  the  past 
decade, exports from the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) to Asia expanded five-fold, and 
growth of GCC’s exports to Asia has surpassed that to the rest of the world. Asia’s exports to 
GCC have also increased five times, registering an annual growth rate of 15% over the past 
ten years. 
4. 
Secondly,  inter-regional  investments  are  growing.  Investments  into  the  GCC  are 
being  driven  by  several  positive  factors:  infrastructure  development  to  cater  for  its 
hydrocarbon  sector,  rapidly-growing  populations,  market  liberalisation  and  diversification 
beyond oil and gas. A 2014 industry survey1 by Mergermarkets highlighted that investments 
from Asia into the GCC would soon equal that traditionally sourced from Europe, as Asian 
companies become more active in the Middle East. The converse is also true. Attracted by 
Asia’s  good  growth  prospects, GCC  investors  have  increased  their  investments  not just  in 
energy  markets,  but  also  in  telecommunications, finance,  and  other  industries  in  Asia.  For 
instance,  GCC  state-owned  oil  firms  have  been  investing  in  ASEAN  energy  sectors,  while 
GCC  Sovereign  Wealth  Funds  (SWFs)  are  also  showing  interest  in  the  agriculture  sector 
across ASEAN. 
Thirdly, continued growth of GCC and Asian economies, and an expanding network 
5. 
of Free Trade Agreements, will reinforce connectivity between the regions. Notwithstanding 
more volatile and lower oil prices, the IMF expects the GCC to expand 3.4% in 20152, and 
3.2% in 2016. Asia will remain the world’s fastest growing region, recording 5.6% growth in 
2015, before easing slightly to 5.5% in the following year. Trade and investment linkages will 
be strengthened with the conclusion of trade discussions between GCC and China, Korea, 
                                                
1  Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) Investment Outlook 2014, Mergermarkets. 
2 
IMF Regional Economic Outlook Update for Middle East & Central Asia, May 2015. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  India, Pakistan, Malaysia and ASEAN. Singapore has already concluded a comprehensive 
FTA with the GCC, which recognises Islamic finance in the definition of financial services. 
Cross-border Islamic finance set to grow 
6. 
The  global  Islamic  finance  industry  has  been  on  an  upward  trajectory  in  the  past 
decade, with total assets exceeding US$2 trillion in 2014, from US$700 billion in 2005. Most 
of  this  demand  stemmed  from  Middle  East  and  Asia,  and  stronger  trade  and  investment 
linkages  between  these  regions  will  reinforce  the  growth  momentum  in  Islamic  finance. 
Looking ahead, the following key trends will also augur well for the outlook for cross border 
Islamic finance: 
7. 
First, increasing wealth accumulation in the Middle East region. This will expand the 
pool  of  Islamic  funds  seeking  diversification  into  foreign  investments.  Asia  will  be  a  key 
investment  destination,  as  stronger  growth  prospects  compared  to  developed  economies 
present  opportunities  for  higher  investment  returns,  which  would  in  turn,  increase  the 
demand for Shariah-compliant assets in Asian markets, including Singapore, Malaysia and 
Indonesia. Reflecting this trend, GCC banks have already been expanding their operations in 
Singapore  in  recent  years  to  support  the  deployment  of Islamic funds  to  corporates  in  the 
region, through Islamic bank financing, and sukuk issuances. 
8. 
Second, more countries are boosting their Islamic finance services and capabilities, 
in response to the growing demand for Islamic finance solutions. Singapore, for instance, has 
seen a steady increase in Islamic finance activities, while Hong Kong has recently issued its 
second sukuk and Japan is amending its financial regulations to facilitate Islamic financing. 
9. 
Third,  there  is  scope  to  extend  Islamic  finance  solutions  to  meet  infrastructure 
financing needs in Asia and in the Middle East. In particular, the Asian Development Bank 
(ADB)  has  been  working  with  the  Islamic  Development  Bank  (IDB)  to  provide  Islamic 
infrastructure  financing  solutions  to  their  member  countries  in  these  two  regions.  This 
includes developing and participating in innovative financing structures such as the Islamic 
Infrastructure Fund and the International Islamic Liquidity Management Corporation. The IDB 
is  also  exploring  a  potential  link-up  with  the  planned  Asian  Infrastructure  Investment  Bank 
(AIIB). This could spur the use of sukuk to fund some of Asia’s infrastructure needs, and tap 
a growing pool of Islamic investors across the Middle East and Southeast Asia. 
Islamic finance in Singapore 
10. 
As  an  international  financial  centre  and  one  that  serves  as  a  gateway  for 
investments  into  Asia,  Islamic  finance  is  an  important  asset  class  that  complements 
Singapore’s  strong  conventional  financing  and  capital  market  capabilities.  Islamic  finance 
activities  in  Singapore  are  broad-based,  covering  Islamic  banking,  asset  management  and 
capital markets, which mirror our conventional strengths: 
• 
Islamic  banking  assets  in  Singapore  have  grown  by  73%  since  2010,  and  are 
increasingly  cross-border  in  nature.  Consistent  with  the  pattern  for  conventional 
finance,  Islamic  banking  liabilities  sourced  from  the  region  are  subsequently 
deployed to Southeast Asia and the GCC; 
Assets under management have also risen, by 22% since 2010. Singapore is home 
to Sabana REIT, which is the largest Islamic REIT globally by asset size. In 2013, 
Sabana also launched a corporate sukuk programme in Singapore to help finance 
its purchase of industrial properties; and 
Islamic capital market activities have also taken off, with 31 sukuk issuances over 
the  last  five  years.  We  have  more  sukuk  issuances  than  other  conventional 
jurisdictions, with total outstanding issuance reaching a high of S$3.8 billion in 2014, 
compared to S$440 million in 2009. 
  2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  11. 
To  support  the  development  of  Islamic  finance  in  Singapore,  MAS  established  a 
Sukuk  Facility  in  2009  to  provide  SGD  Islamic  regulatory  assets  for  banks  undertaking 
Islamic finance activities here. We remain the only conventional central bank to have done 
so.  There  have  been  8  issuances  to-date  totalling  S$600  million,  supported  by  robust 
demand,  with  the  latest  issuance  in  November  2014  being  our  largest  yet.  Our  sukuk 
programme has facilitated the growth of banks’ Islamic finance assets in Singapore, and also 
encouraged  corporates  to  issue  sukuk  to  meet  demand  from  financial  institutions  and 
investors. 
12. 
Going  forward,  we  will  continue  to  strengthen  our  Islamic  finance  regime  and 
capabilities  to  enable  us  to  support  opportunities  from  deepening  trade  and  investment 
linkages between Asia and the Middle East, as well as infrastructure projects within the Asian 
region. In infrastructure for example, an estimated US$60 billion will be needed annually until 
2022 to meet the basic infrastructure needs in ASEAN alone3. The asset-backed nature of 
Islamic  finance  makes  sukuk  ideal  for  financing  of  infrastructure  projects  and  would 
complement ongoing work by Singapore to enhance the bankability of infrastructure projects 
in the region and involve more capital market participants. 
13. 
In the meantime, it will be important to continue to strengthen key foundations such 
as global regulatory standards and best practices for Islamic finance, and capacity building 
and talent development. To facilitate further growth of Islamic finance in Singapore, MAS is 
working with the industry and other government agencies to provide clarity and certainty in 
the  regulatory  and  tax  treatment  for  sukuk.  For  example,  some  industry  players  have 
suggested that pre-approved standardised templates for common sukuk structures could be 
introduced to expedite issuance. 
14. 
Building Islamic finance expertise has also been highlighted as crucial to supporting 
the  continued  growth  of  the  industry.  The  Singapore  Management  University’s  (SMU) 
International Islamic Law and Finance Initiative is now in its 6th year, and seeks to carry out 
research  and  develop  thought  leadership  in  Islamic  law  and  finance,  in  collaboration  with 
institutions  in  UK,  Malaysia  and  Indonesia.  SMU  also  offers  a  Masters  in  Islamic  Law  and 
Finance,  and  will  be  graduating  its  third  cohort  of  students  this  year.  In  addition,  Islamic 
finance has also been included as an eligible subject area under MAS’ Finance Scholarship 
Programme, and industry players could look to tap on this scheme to groom promising talent. 
Conclusion 
To conclude, the deepening linkages between Asia and Middle East will continue to 
15. 
present  significant  opportunities  for  Islamic  finance.  I  hope  the  WIBC  Asia  Summit  will 
provide  a  useful  platform  for  various  stakeholders  from  Asia,  Middle  East  and  beyond,  to 
explore new ideas and build networks to catalyse further growth. I wish all of you a fruitful 
conference. 
                                                
3  An overview of infrastructure opportunities in ASEAN, KPMG. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
