  Barry Whiteside: Promoting Fiji’s youth to “be Money Wi$e” 
Address  by  Mr  Barry  Whiteside,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Fiji,  at  the  “be  Money 
Wi$e”  Nasinu  Schools  Competition,  Nasinu  Financial  Inclusion  Exposition,  Nasinu  Town, 
23 July 2015. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, girls and boys, 
Good  morning  to  you  all  and  a  special  bula  vinaka  and  welcome  to  our  students  and 
teachers who have come here today. I hope this will be a fun-filled day for all of you. I can 
still remember the joy I got taking time off school for special visits or other activities outside of 
the normal everyday curriculum. 
Introductory comments 
First, let me say how delighted I am to be here with you this morning to mark the start of 
some very exciting and competitive events which we have planned for your benefit. 
All this activity is part of our “be Money Wi$e program” organised by the Reserve Bank and 
our capital markets colleagues, to help you learn more about money matters. This event is 
really for you. So I must thank your principals and teachers for bringing you out here today. 
However, before we get into the excitement of the competitions, I would just like to share a 
few  messages  which  I  hope  will  help  give  you  some  idea  in  planning  for  a  successful 
financial future. 
Be Money Wi$e – what the students can do for themselves 
At the Reserve Bank, we run a campaign which we call the “be Money Wise program”. It is 
part of the Capital Markets Awareness platform, targeting school students. Its objective is to 
promote the importance of acquiring good money management skills with a particular focus 
on understanding the concept of investing and all the various investment products available 
here in Fiji. 
So  girls  and  boys,  “be  Money Wise”  is  designed  to  teach  you,  and  all  the  children  in  Fiji, 
“money smart” principles. This is done through creative, fun-filled activities, some of which 
you will get to do over the course of today. We envision, that over time, such activities will 
lead to the development of a culture of financial prudence (smartness), preparing you well for 
your adult working life. 
Relating money to future goals 
So let’s first talk about money, and how important it is in our everyday lives. 
Many people, unfortunately, feel it is the only thing in life, while others think the opposite and 
feel they have no need for it at all, and many sayings have developed around these opposing 
views. 
I feel there has to be a balance. It is clear that money does play an important role. Without it, 
you would not be able to attend school and we would not be able to host today’s events for 
you. 
At this stage, it is your parents or guardians that have the responsibility to earn money for 
you and your family’s needs. 
While it is their responsibility at this time to earn money, you also have the responsibility to 
use  the  money  that  they  give  you  wisely.  Within  a  few  years,  you  will  finish  Secondary 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
School and will either need to progress further through tertiary level education or find a job, 
or even start up your own small business. Whichever path you choose for yourself, it is never 
too early to start setting your goals and planning for your future. . 
The importance of saving 
Savings, or setting aside a portion of your earnings for some future goal in life is a further 
concept that you should know about. This is an important skill that you will need and  it is 
important that you learn to do it now whilst still at school. I encourage you and your teachers 
to start small savings schemes amongst yourselves and friends to help you learn the habit of 
saving. There is a saying by Brigham Young which states that …“A fool can earn money; but 
it takes a wise man to save and dispose of it to his own advantage.” 
Introducing the concept of the capital market 
Another important concept that you should know about is the capital markets. 
When you need money, where do you go? As children, most of you would probably go to 
your parents. (More than likely you would know which parent would give in to your request 
for a few dollars to go to the movies or just hang out at Damodar City!). As a boy I always 
knew which parent would accept my story, though it would have meant a few extra chores to 
do about the house. 
Schools and communities that need money go to their members or the public to raise funds. 
People and businesses usually go to a bank to borrow when they need money. Our parents 
and even your teachers may have taken loans to buy a house or a car. 
But for businesses there is an alternative place where they can go to raise funds and this 
place is called a capital market. Capital markets are similar to the market where we go to buy 
food  and  vegetables,  because  this  is  where  people  gather  to  buy  or sell  things.  However, 
instead  of  buying  and  selling  food  and  vegetables,  in  a  capital  market  they  buy  and  sell 
“financial instruments”. 
Financial instruments are pieces of paper that provide evidence of a financial obligation or 
promise to pay the buyer at some future date. The buyer is known as an investor. The sellers 
of  these  instruments  are  usually  businesses  who  want  to  raise  long  term  funds  for  their 
various projects. 
Investments can earn the investor a regular income in the form of interest or dividends. It is 
also  possible  that  the  value  of  the  investment  may  increase  over  time  so  that  when  the 
investor decides to sell, there would be some additional income over and above what he or 
she initially paid. 
In Fiji, we have a small and developing Capital Market and currently there are three main 
types  of  financial  instruments  that  are  sold.  These  are  Equities  or  stocks  (though  more 
commonly  known  as  shares),  Bonds,  and  Units.  As  I  had  mentioned  earlier,  investing  in 
these instruments can earn you a regular income. 
You will get to know a little more about these instruments over the course of the day through 
Mervin and our team here and I understand there may be some pop quizzes to keep you on 
your  toes.  Also  if  you  want  more  information,  please  talk  to  our  team  members  or  the 
representatives of the various financial institutions. I understand there are a good number of 
financial  institutions  represented  in  the  various  booths  here  today,  so  let  this  be  a  great 
learning experience! 
Closing 
Ladies and gentlemen, girls and boys, I have spoken for far too long, and this is meant to be 
a fun day! 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
To all the students and children here today, now that you have learnt a little about the capital 
markets,  I  have  got  to  say  that  it  is  never too  early  to  start  saving  and forming  a  savings 
habit. By doing this you will be able to set yourself goals that can positively impact on your 
financial future and that of your family and future family. We want you, even as students, to 
start thinking about how you can use the capital markets to help achieve your future goals. 
I congratulate the students from the Nasinu Schools who have entered the contests and wish 
them well in their time on this stage. I urge you all to take part in these competitions which 
will  be  organised  over  the  course  of  today.  This  is  an  opportunity  to  have  fun,  win  great 
prizes and all the while learning new skills. 
Finally, I thank all those who have put this program together, the Ministry of Education, the 
sponsors, the principals and school teachers and I wish you all a fun-filled learning day. 
Vinaka vaka levu. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
