  S S Mundra: A new banking landscape for New India 
Keynote address by Mr S S Mundra, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the 
Mint’s  Annual  Banking  Conclave,  2015  on  “A  New  Banking  Landscape  for  New  India”, 
Mumbai, 29 January 2015. 
 1. Smt. Arundhati Bhattacharya, Chairman, State Bank of India; Smt. Chanda Kochhar, MD 
and  CEO,  ICICI  Bank  Limited;  Smt.  Shikha  Sharma,  MD  &  CEO,  Axis  Bank  Limited;  Shri 
Aditya Puri, MD, HDFC Bank Limited; Shri Sunil Kaushal, Regional Chief Executive, India & 
South  Asia,  Standard  Chartered  Bank  as  also  other  senior  members  of  the  banking  and 
financial sector; members of the print and electronic media; ladies and gentlemen! 
2. At the outset, let me thank Tamal and the Mint Management for inviting me to deliver the 
keynote address at the Mint Annual Banking Conclave. This event has become one of the 
most awaited events on the calendar of bankers. I last attended this event as a panelist in 
January  2014  when  the  topic  for  panel  discussion  was  “Indian  Banking:  A  New  Banking 
Landscape” and this time it is enlarged to “A New Banking Landscape for New India.” 
3. When I sat down to think about the theme of the Conclave, I wondered what is new about 
India. Is it the new political regime and consequential policy changes? Is it the tag of being 
the new growth leader in the world economy? Is it a more financially included India that is 
being thought about or is it a ‘digital’ or ‘connected’ India that is new. I think it is a bit of all 
and  beyond.  We  all  know  that  political  stability  is  a  necessary  precursor  to  a  sustained 
economic development anywhere in the world and a democratically elected government with 
decisive mandate is capable of launching significant pro-growth reforms. 
Defining contours of New India 
4. What are the defining contours of the new India? What are the themes that would play out 
over the next decade or two? To my mind, there are seven key themes which would define 
the Indian economy and Indian banking sector in the days to come. These are: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Let me elaborate on a few of these in greater detail and delve upon the impact they could 
have on the banking system going forward. 
demography 
urbanization 
digitization 
industrialization 
education 
inclusion and 
global integration 
Demography 
a)  
5. Much has been talked about the demographic dividend that India possesses. At its current 
pace of growth, the Indian population is predicted to exceed China by 2025. Further, while 
China’s working-age population may peak around 2015 and shrink for a decade and a half 
thereafter, 68% of India population would be within the working age range (15–64) until 2030. 
Life expectancy of the Indian population is also slated to increase to about 70 years by 2030. 
While on the one hand the numbers present sustained opportunity for the banks in terms of 
new stream of customers, it also presents challenges. These challenges are in the form of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  diverse behavior patterns that customers in different age groups display. The banks would 
need  to  continuously  foretell  the  customers’  preferences  and  focus  their  strategies  on 
meeting them proactively. 
Urbanisation 
b)  
6.  India  is  also  witnessing  a  growing  trend  of  urbanisation.  By  2030,  urban  population  is 
estimated to rise to 631mn recording an annual increase of 2.6% as against an annual rise of 
1.1% in the overall population. This would mean that 41.8 % of the population would be living 
in  urban  agglomerations  as  against  31%  today.  While  even  at  that  percentage,  the  urban 
population would be far lower than the global average at 50% presently; this would open up 
huge  business  opportunities  for  the  banks  for  creation  of  public  infrastructure,  housing, 
consumption, education needs of customers and so on. 
Digitization 
c)  
7. Digitisation is another area which is being pursued relentlessly by the new Government. 
There is massive focus on enhancing internet penetration in the country through accelerated 
broadband connectivity. The internet penetration has seen a sharp growth over the last year, 
however, the extent of internet penetration at 20% pales in comparison to other developing 
countries like China (46%), Brazil (53%) and Russia (59%); let alone the developed nations 
like US, UK and Japan where the number is in excess of 85%. In these low numbers lie the 
inherent opportunities for the banking sector. As the number of internet users in the country 
grows, the banks would be able to better utilize this medium as a delivery channel. On the 
other hand, the mobile penetration in the country is significantly high at around 930.20 mn 
and beckons as an opportunity to be tapped. 
Industrialization 
d)  
8. The new Government’s ‘Make in India’ pitch also touches the right cords and efforts are 
afoot to increase the presently stagnant share of manufacturing in GDP to around 25–30 % 
by  2025  from  15%  at  present.  If  that  materializes,  it  would  mean  addition  of  90  million 
domestic jobs and attendant corporate and retail business opportunities. 
Education 
e)  
9. Likewise, there is tremendous scope of improving the level of education in the country by 
strategic  focus  on  the  four  Es  i.e.  Expansion,  Equity  and  Inclusion,  Excellence  & 
Employability. It would entail significant changes in consumer awareness, needs, demands 
and expectations. 
Financial inclusion 
f)  
10. The launch of the PMJDY scheme with a focus on linking each household with a bank 
account  has  received  extremely  positive  response.  At  last  count,  the  number  of  accounts 
opened under the scheme had reached 12.14 crore. I don’t need to emphasize the avenues 
that this scheme has opened for the bankers. Moreover, it is just a stepping stone. Major part 
of the work has to commence now. 
Global integration 
g)  
11. That brings me to the last theme of growing global integration, which I believe is already 
having significant repercussions on the financial sector. Be it the quantitative easing by the 
advanced economies and the subsequent withdrawal of it, convertibility of currency, making 
or  breaking  of  regional  alliance  of  economies  and  currencies  etc.  There  could  be  other 
hitherto  unforeseen  developments  too  affecting  the  global  structure  of  finance.  Let  me 
highlight  two  recent  headlines  reported  in  Financial  Times:  One,  the  potential  exclusion  of 
Russia from the SWIFT payment system and the other about withdrawal from correspondent 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  banking relationships in 30 jurisdictions by three of the world’s biggest banks. Ostensibly, the 
motivation for these banks to sever their ties with the lenders in developing nations has been 
to  limit  the  risk  of  being  hit  by  regulatory  sanctions  on  account  of  breaches,  money 
laundering and terrorist finance. Events such as these, though having their origin in specific 
jurisdictions, have the potential to significantly impact the business and finance elsewhere in 
the globe. 
12. Under the circumstances, it would be important for the banks to keep track of emerging 
trends  and  be  prepared  not  only  to  negotiate  through  the  imminent  challenges,  but 
simultaneously be ready to latch on to the opportunities that present themselves. 
Key actors/acts in the new banking landscape 
13.  Let  us  see  what  would  be  the  impact  of  these  themes/developments  on  the  key 
actors/acts in the new banking landscape. 
14. Customers, employees, owners and regulators comprise the key stakeholders in the 
banking system. In the emerging landscape, the banks would have to contend with a set of 
customers  who  are  more  educated,  better  informed  and  well-networked.  The  banks  may 
probably be forced to hard sell their products and services using a variety of media across 
the physical and the virtual world. As the complexity of the products/services demanded by 
the customers increases, the banks would have to not only focus on upgradation of skillsets 
of their employees but also on their retention. Also the new competition would potentially pull 
down  the  ROEs  that  the  owners  currently  enjoy  rendering  it  difficult  to  persuade  future 
investors to put in more capital in the banks. In case of public sector banks, the ownership 
structure itself may change with Government bringing down its stake in these banks. They 
would, thus, also join the race to seek private capital. 
15.  As  we  have  witnessed,  the  regulators  across  the  globe  have  been  particularly  very 
severe  on  failings  of  the  regulated  entities  on  the  consumer  protection,  money  laundering 
and  fair  market  conduct  front.  This  regulatory  activism  is  evident  in  the  frequency  and 
quantum of penalties levied on banks worldwide. Post crisis, the banks in US and Europe 
alone have been forced to cough up approximately $230 bn in penalties and legal cost so 
far.1 Next two years are likely to see another $70 bn being forked out by the banks for the 
same  reasons.  These  are  staggering  numbers.  We  have  also  seen  some  enforcement 
actions  in  our  jurisdiction  but  these  are  pretty  benign  in  comparison.  Believe  me;  Indian 
regulators  have  been  relatively  more  tolerant  thus  far.  Some  of  you  who  have  overseas 
operations are well aware of the tough stance that the host regulators adopt. Banks would 
need to gear up to face stricter regulatory regime. 
16. The new banking landscape would impact the processes currently in vogue in the sector. 
Let me highlight some of these in greater detail. 
Competition and consolidation 
17. Competition and consolidation in the sector is an impending development that the banks 
would have to contend with sooner rather than later. Two new private sector banks should 
start  operating  within  this  calendar  year.  Further,  the  small  finance  banks  and  payments 
banks  might  mark  their  presence,  may  be,  later  in  the  year  or  by  early  next  year  and  so. 
There could be consolidation and mergers between the existing market players. No doubt, 
the pie is big enough to accommodate new players and there is plenty of opportunity for the 
well-organised  and  mainstream  regulated  players  to  wean  away  the  customers  from 
unregulated shadow banking entities. But, the existing players can afford to stay in denial at 
                                                
1   http://www.irishtimes.com/business/financial-services/us-european-banks-have-paid-230bn-in-legal-costs-
since-2009–1.2064163. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  their own peril. We have seen competition giving a tough run to the monopoly players. It has 
happened in the aviation sector, the telecom sector and there is no reason why it would not 
happen in the banking sector. And believe me, this is not the end of new competition for you. 
RBI has been indicating about the possibilities of the bank licensing process being put on tap 
or introducing more varieties of differentiated banks. Also, there is a healthy appetite from the 
foreign banks to enter this country. 
18. The entry of new competitors alone would not mean dramatic changes soon. Banking is 
a  business  of  scale  which  the  new  players  cannot  build  overnight.  New  banks  would  start 
small and scale up over a period of time. Not only would there be a competition for business 
but also for talent. The processes would be forced to be more efficient. 
Technology 
19. I have already talked about a paradigm shift being brought about by technology in the 
way  the  social  interactions  are  taking  place.  Growing  mobile  and  internet  penetration  has 
opened  new  avenues  for  the  entrepreneurs.  This  is  reflected  in  the  way  the  new  age 
customer  transacts  her  business.  If  all  traditional  businesses  have  been  impacted  by 
technology,  banking  could  not  have  remained  unaffected.  As  a  flip-side  to  its  well-
documented  advantages  in  terms  of  efficiency  and  effectiveness  of  service  delivery, 
technology has also fast tracked the process of customer alienation- first in the form of ATMs 
and  then  in  the  form  of  internet  and  mobile  banking.  In  this  sense,  banks  have  become 
faceless  entities.  This  transition  calls  for  a  change  in  the  way  the  banks  interact  with  and 
retain their customers. I will shortly return to the expectations built around the integration of 
technology in the banking services and its impact on the banks. 
Risk Management 
20. Risk Management in banks is of the same vintage as the banks themselves. The banks 
are  in  the  business  of  taking  risks  and  hence  they  need  to  have  a  risk  management 
framework in place. It’s been more than a decade and a half since RBI first released the risk 
management guidelines for banks in India. But, my own sense is that risk management has 
been pursued in our banking system more under compliance compulsions and has not been 
dovetailed in the banks’ businesses processes as much as they ought to have been. As the 
complexity in the financial world grows, the banks would need to carefully consider and set 
their risk appetite after duly evaluating their capital level as also the skillsets of the officials 
entrusted with the management of risks. 
21. As I said before, the defining elements of the new India would have far-reaching impact 
on  each  of  the  actors  and  the  acts  in  the  new  banking  landscape.  These  elements  would 
interplay and provide shape to the new banking order. It would be interesting for you to pick 
up  these  7  contours,  4  actors  and  3  acts  and  interplay  them  to  build  probable  business 
scenarios. You may be amazed to see the range of possibilities and challenges. Let me now 
return to the subject of technology, which is widely perceived as the ‘be all and end all’ of the 
new in banking. 
Technology – a great enabler 
22. I would begin by quoting Brett King, the author of famous book “Bank 3.0”. 
“Customers don’t use channel or products in isolation of one another. Everyday 
customers would interact with banks in various ways. They might wire money to a 
third party, visit ATM to withdraw cash, go online to check salary credit, pay an 
utility bill , use their credit card to purchase some goods from a retailer, fill out a 
personal loan application online, ring up the call center to see what their credit 
card balance is or report a lost card. More sophisticated they are, they may also 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  trade some stocks, transfer some cash from their Euro A/c to USD a/c put up a 
lump sum in a Mutual Fund or sign up a home insurance policy online”. 
23. The above statement denotes the diverse set of banking applications which technology 
can support In fact, there is a need of a single channel solution to multiple product offerings. 
It must, however, be remembered that technology is just an enabler and not a panacea for all 
ills.  Most,  if  not  all,  Indian  banks  have  invested  heavily  in  web-based  and  mobile-based 
delivery solutions. Each of these channels is supported by a different vendor and each one 
uses different technology which increases complexity and involves cost. Further, technology 
is  ever  evolving  and  adoption  of  new  technology  for  staying  contemporaneous  is  a  costly 
proposition.  Hence,  unless  we  are  able  to  optimally  exploit  all  the  capabilities  of  the 
technology enabled delivery solutions, we could be looking at unproductive investments. 
24.  While  there  is  a  lot  of  euphoria  around  the  adoption  of  mobile  banking  and  mobile 
payments, the model has been relatively less successful barring a few countries where the 
right  environmental  factors  existed.  I  am  talking  here  about  the  delivery  of  financial  and 
payment services by using the mobile device rather than its use as an access channel for 
internet  banking  etc.  In  the  Indian  context,  an  objective  analysis  would  reveal  various 
reasons  for  slow  adoption.  On  the  other  hand,  there  are  technical  issues  like  type  of 
handsets, variety of operating systems, encryption requirements, inter-operable platforms or 
the  lack  of  it,  absence  of  standardised  communication  structures,  difficulty  in  downloading 
application, time lag in activation etc. These get accentuated by the operational difficulties in 
on-boarding  merchants  and  customers  and  customer  ownership  issues.  The  interplay  of 
these  factors  has  stymied  the  deployment  and  adoption  of  mobile  banking  as  an  effective 
and  widely  accepted  delivery  channel.  Issues  of  coordination  and  cooperation  between 
banks and telcos, is another aspect which acts as either a driver or a barrier to the adoption 
of mobile banking. These issues need to be quickly resolved if the mobile has to serve as an 
influential delivery channel for distributing banking products and services in India. 
25. Let me also highlight some opportunities that technology throws up. Take for example the 
results displayed on the Google search page which is personalized. Each time an individual 
runs a search at Google, the website collates details of the sites visited/links clicked by that 
individual and loads more of those websites his/her future searches. There are more ATM 
transactions  than  searches  on  the  Google  webpage  at  present.  However,  the  kind  of 
personalisation Google has achieved in its searches has not been attempted in the area of 
advertisement on ATMs.. This could be an area for the banks and their software vendors to 
work on in future so as to generate further sales leads. 
Few Qs seeking As 
26.  Let  me  leave  you  with  some  questions  that  the  banking  profession  and  the  bankers 
would need to find answers to ensure their relevance in the emerging landscape. 
Can there be a possibility of account number portability on similar lines as mobile 
(i)  
number portability? So, if an individual is not happy with the service received at one bank, he 
can possibly opt for shifting his banking relationship, lock, stock and barrel to another bank. 
Of course, there could be issues around loan contracts etc. but there is no reason to believe 
that such challenges cannot be surmounted and pave the way for a massive disruption in the 
way banking is conducted today. 
How  long  can  the  banks  continue  increasing  their  retail  loan  portfolio?  Unless 
(ii)  
some means to pool and distribute these loans to other investors in the market is created, 
the retail lending pipeline can get chocked quite quickly. 
How is crowd funding going to impact lending business of the banks in future? The 
(iii)  
amount of funds raised by crowd funding platforms worldwide has increased progressively 
from $ 1.5 bn in 2011 to $ 2.7 Bn in 2012 and further to $ 5.1 bn in 2013. I hear some of you 
say it is negligible in volume. The pace of growth however, is quite fast and combined with 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  
 
the  peer-to-peer  lending  business  this  could  create  disruptions,  at  least  for  some  of  the 
players who operate in the same segment. 
If  Mobile  Banking  were  to  succeed,  would  plastic  money  still  be  needed? 
(iv)  
Basically there are two questions rolled in one. First, whether mobile banking can succeed 
and if that is the case what implications would it have for the future of ATMs and the debit 
cards that have been issued by banks. There is justifiably a growing need for reducing the 
reliance  placed  on  cash  by  the  system  and  hence,  if  more  and  more  people  moved  to 
mobile/internet based payments, the plastic cards and the investments made thus far, would 
be rendered useless unless put to more imaginative uses. 
What IFRS implementation would mean for the banking system? IFRS accounting 
(v)  
could  potentially  overstate  assets  or  overstate  capital  position.  The  question  is  how 
prudential regulation would exist alongside IFRS? Proposed impairment calculations under 
IFRS,  accounting  for  interest  income  on  Effective  Interest  Rate  basis  and  presence  of 
multiple  systems  for  operations  and  accounting  of  different  portfolios  would  mean  that  IT 
systems would have to be upgraded/realigned for IFRS migration. Banks would also need to 
overcome challenges around converging policies for financial accounting and tax accounting 
for preparation of financial statements. The banks would need to train their staff in various 
departments like credit, and treasury, etc. for acquiring proficiency in IFRS accounting. 
Would  the  large  corporates  continue  to  borrow  from  the  banks?  Of  late,  the 
(vi)  
global  markets,  particularly  the  emerging  market  economies,  have  been  flush  with  funds 
flowing  in  on  account  of  variants  of  QEs  launched  by  the  Central  Banks  in  the  Advanced 
Economies.  Many  large  corporate  houses  have  been  able  to  access  funds  at  very  cheap 
rates without needing to reach out to banks. The sustained deflationary trends in the Euro 
Area  and  Japan  portend  further  bouts  of  QEs  which  can  adversely  impact  the  lending 
business  of  banks  in  the  emerging  markets.  Further,  the  large  corporates  in  developed 
countries normally access financial markets directly for their funding requirements rather than 
commercial banks. Hence, even while this time-specific event of QEs might fade away, as 
Indian  economy  and  the  financial  markets  mature,  more  and  more  large  corporates  could 
start bypassing banks for their funding requirements. 
(vii)   Would the pain from the loans restructured earlier return to haunt the banks? My 
understanding  is  that  the  prolonged  global  economic  slowdown  might  have  thrown  off  the 
projections made earlier at the time of restructuring the advances in the immediate aftermath 
of the crisis. As the moratorium period comes to a close, the banks would need to take a 
hard look at the techno-commercial viability of these projects and take the losses wherever 
the  viability  seems  in  jeopardy.  Timely  decisions,  including  for  recall/recovery  of  the  loan, 
wherever the financial prospects are unviable, would be critical. 
Conclusion 
27. Before I conclude, let me also give a perspective on the global regulatory reforms and 
how it might impact the Indian banks. Basel III norms have been announced and set to be 
implemented as per the indicated timeline, with the liquidity regime already kicking in from 
January 1, 2015. So you are well-versed with the new regulatory phrases- leverage, capital 
conservation  buffers,  counter-cyclical  capital  buffers  etc.  The  D-SIBs  guidelines  have 
also been announced and the list of banks considered systemically important in the domestic 
context would be unveiled in August 2015. Besides, being subjected to stricter capital and 
liquidity  buffers,  these  banks  may  also  be  nudged  to  prepare  detailed  ‘recovery  and 
resolution  plans’.  Negotiations  are  also  on  at  the  Financial  Stability  Board  level  for 
implementation  of  a  TLAC  (Total  Loss  Absorbency  Capital)  framework  for  the  banks 
identified as G-SIBs. The essence of all the above discussion is that the banks would need to 
substantially augment their capital bases to stay in the business. The question is where do 
you find such capital? 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  28. I have covered much broader landscape than I had originally intended to. I believe the 
elite  panel  gathered  here  today  would  deliberate  on  the  issues  raised  and  also  reflect  on 
them later. I once again thank Mint for inviting me and wish you all a fruitful deliberation. 
 
Thank you! 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
