  Vítor Constâncio: Reinforcing financial stability in the euro area 
Speech by Mr Vítor Constâncio, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, at the Official 
Monetary and Financial Institutions Forum (OMFIF) City Lecture, London, 8 May 2015. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Thank you for inviting me to speak about the elements needed to reinforce financial stability 
in  the  euro  area.  In  what  follows,  I  will  start  by  recalling  the  benefits  of  current  monetary 
policy for financial stability. I will then turn to those risks for financial stability that should be 
addressed by supervision and macroprudential policy. While recent regulatory efforts have 
made the banking sector more resilient, I see a need to expand the set of macroprudential 
instruments  that  focus  on  the  non-bank  financial  sector.  In  my  intervention  today,  I  will 
therefore  outline  the  associated  elements  which,  in  my  view,  are  still  incomplete  for 
safeguarding financial stability. 
The interplay of monetary policy and macroprudential policy 
Low nominal growth has been the underlying factor of the main risks for financial stability in 
the euro area. The financial crisis, the slow recovery and the low inflation rate, particularly in 
the euro area, have created an environment of low interest rates in financial markets, which 
has been further accentuated by a necessarily accommodative monetary policy. The policy 
pursued by central banks has been essential to stabilise our economies and to dispel the risk 
of  possible  deflationary  episodes  or  of  a  prolonged  “low-flation”  regime.  In  particular,  a 
possible  further  reduction  in  inflation  expectations  would  have  had  a  direct  effect  on  real 
interest  rates  leading  to  an  unwarranted  tightening  of  financial  conditions  with  an 
unfavourable impact on inflation and economic growth. 
It has to be recognised that a prolonged period of low interest rates contributes to “search for 
yield” and possible rich asset valuations which may generate financial stability concerns. This 
environment however, is the result of weak economic conditions and low inflation, the related 
market players’ decisions, and the central bank’s response to these conditions. Low medium 
and  long-term  interest rates  are  not  just  caused  by  monetary  policy.  As  the  last few  days 
have shown, market players’ decisions may overwhelm central bank policies. Furthermore, in 
the last decades, there has been a global trend for lower real interest rates which is related 
to secular stagnation resulting from a continuous deceleration of total productivity growth and 
an increase in planned savings. Monetary policy short-term rates are low because of these 
developments, not the other way around. At the same time, monetary policy needs to remain 
accommodative in order to normalise inflation levels close to our objective, thus leading to 
higher interest rates. 
Consequently, the ECB monetary policy measures that have been taken since summer last 
year,  including  most  recently  the  expanded  asset  purchase  programme  (EAPP),  not  only 
contribute  to  maintaining  price  stability  but  are  also  beneficial  for  financial  stability. 
Specifically, I expect the current monetary policy stance to strengthen aggregate demand in 
the euro area on the back of lower real interest rates and improved confidence. Higher actual 
and expected inflation closer to our price stability objective also help alleviate the real debt 
burdens of households, firms and governments, which otherwise could have been subject to 
adverse  debt  dynamics.  Credit  worthiness  of  firms  and  households  should  improve  on 
account  of  higher  net  worth  induced  by  asset  price  increases.  Moreover,  as  bank  funding 
cost should continue to decline, I expect to see a further easing of credit standards on loans 
to enterprises as was already noticeable in the latest ECB Bank Lending Survey. 
Our policy is indeed working according to plan. Conditions in a host of asset markets, from 
equities  to  bonds  or  foreign  exchange,  have  reacted  in  the  expected  way  through  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
portfolio rebalancing transmission channel of monetary policy. In the euro area, equity prices 
have gone up by 13% since January. Corporate bond yields came down by 49 basis points 
since  June  last  year  and  the  most  recent  (March)  data  on  bank  lending  rates  shows  that 
rates decreased by 70 basis points, with respect to last year. This last point shows that our 
policies are also improving the credit channel, which is confirmed by the fact that credit (bank 
loans) to the private sector reached a turning point, as shown by net positive monthly flows in 
the last three months. More expansionary financial conditions are supporting the recovery as 
well as the increase of inflation expectations. In fact, the 5y/5y ahead swap rate went up from 
1.6% in January to 1.8% at present. 
No  policy  intervention  is  without  side  effects.  Indeed,  as  I  mentioned  already,  a  very 
accommodative  monetary  policy  stance  geared  towards  maintaining  price  stability  in  the 
presence of already generously priced asset markets may also lead to potential risks for the 
stability of the financial system. Nevertheless, monetary policy must be focused on inflation 
and/or  growth  according  to  the  different  central  bank  mandates  and  therefore,  such  risks 
need to be addressed by policy instruments dedicated to ensuring resilience while curbing 
cyclical excesses – that is, supervision and macroprudential policy. 
In  the  current  situation,  we  see  that  risks  stemming  from  excessive  risk-taking  or  any 
misaligned  asset  prices  are  contained  in  the  euro  area.  This  assessment  is  supported  by 
continued  moderate  private  sector  credit  expansion  and  leverage.  However,  we  have 
certainly noticed that equity prices have continued to rise – albeit from previously low levels – 
and that sovereign bond yields are historically low. Moreover, ECB estimates suggest that 
corporate  bond  risk  premia  are  moving  towards  levels  seen  before  the  financial  crisis.  In 
addition, co-movements in financial markets have increased since summer 2014. 
These  developments justify  the  need for  close monitoring  with  a  particular focus  on  asset 
markets but also on banks, insurers and pension funds as well as the less-regulated non-
bank financial sector and the non-financial private sector. 
As financial and business cycles are not always aligned across countries and sectors in the 
euro  area,  area-wide  monetary  policy  needs  to  be  complemented  by  more  targeted 
macroprudential  policy.  Unlike  monetary  policy  that  influences  the  euro  area  across  the 
board, macroprudential policy instruments can be applied in a granular manner, addressing 
risks at the country, sector and institutional level. Macroprudential policy therefore provides 
the most appropriate instruments for mitigating financial stability risks, thereby supporting the 
price-stability oriented monetary policy. 
In that respect, concerns about the stability of the banking system have been addressed over 
recent  years,  through  efforts  to  put  a  comprehensive  regulatory  framework  in  place  and 
notably the set-up of banking supervision at the European level with the establishment of the 
Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM). The regulatory framework for banks is at this stage 
largely in place. But a few important elements such as leverage ratio, the Net Stable Funding 
Ratio (NSFR) and Total Loss Absorbing Capacity (TLAC), which should be finalised in order 
to complete our framework for banks, are outstanding. In addition, macroprudential tools for 
the banking sector are also available but should be extended to also encompass LTV (Loan-
to-Value)  and  DTI  ratios  (Debt-to-Income),  the  leverage  ratio,  limits  to  specific  large 
exposures to shadow banks and to maturity transformation. 
Given the achievements in the regulatory framework for banks and the changing landscape 
in the euro area financial system, our attention naturally shifts to the more opaque and less 
regulated  parts  of  the  financial  system.  Let  me  next  turn  to  what  is  needed  beyond  the 
banking system. 
The need for macroprudential tools beyond banks 
So  far,  the  regulatory  reform  has  largely  focused  on  the  banking  sector  with  the  effect  of 
activities and assets in other sectors growing faster than in the banking sector. Growth of the 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
non-bank financial sector in the euro area has gathered pace in recent years, following the 
global financial crisis, accompanied by a shift to market-based funding. The expansion of the 
non-money  market  investment  funds  sector  has  been  the  main  source  of  growth  of  the 
shadow banking sector. 
Using  the  Financial  Stability  Board’s  (FSB)  broad  definition  of  shadow  banking,  assets  of 
non-bank financial entities in the euro area have more than doubled over the past decade, to 
reach  EUR  23.5 trillion  by  December  2014.  Since  2009,  non-bank  entities  have  increased 
their share in total assets of the financial sector from 33% to 37%, while, in parallel, credit 
institutions  have  seen  their  share  of  intermediation  shrink  from  55%  to  49%  of  the 
approximately EUR 60 trillion of total assets in the euro area financial system. 
This strong growth and increasing role of non-bank entities in the euro area financial system, 
warrants  closer  scrutiny  of  their  structural  and  cyclical  developments,  including  risks  to 
financial stability. 
Non-bank entities are increasingly important providers of credit to the real economy. On the 
positive side, they represent a second source of funding for the real economy in addition to 
banks, and help diversify the funding base of financial and non-financial corporates. This will 
be  particularly  important  in  times  of  deleveraging  in  the  banking  sector.  However,  the 
growing  role  of  non-bank  entities  in  the  euro  area  implies  that  the  systemic  relevance  of 
these  entities  is  also  on  the  rise.  Non-banks  can  also  exert  costs  on  the  wider  financial 
system and can, just as easily as banks, become excessively risky and too-big-to-fail. What 
this  requires  is  enhanced  monitoring,  a  broader  regulatory  perimeter,  strengthened 
supervision and the development of a more comprehensive macroprudential toolkit. 
At the current juncture, two factors in particular warrant attention. First, there is a growing 
concern over the potentially destabilising role of non-bank entities in sharp price adjustments 
in asset markets. Solvency concerns are muted due to a high share of equity, for instance in 
the investment funds sector, while key vulnerabilities result from liquidity transformation and 
the  procyclical  provision  of  liquidity  to  financial  markets.  Second,  the  use  of  leverage 
embedded  in  derivatives  positions  as  well  as  securities  lending  and financing  transactions 
has become widespread, potentially adding to liquidity spirals in a stress scenario. Any large-
scale  portfolio  rebalancing  among  investment  funds  could  therefore  result  in  significant 
swings  in  asset  prices  and  market  liquidity,  possibly  increasing funding  costs for key  euro 
area sectors. 
The investment fund sector provides a case in point: while the ECB believes that the sector 
is overall adequately regulated in the EU from an investor protection point of view, i.e., by the 
UCITS and Alternative Investment Fund Managers Directives, concerns have risen over the 
past few years that this sector in particular, could be part of future systemic events. These 
are now worldwide concerns expressed by the IMF or the FSB. 
One of the main vulnerabilities stemming from the investment fund sector relates to the so-
called  liquidity  spirals.  These  may  be  triggered  if  funds  are  confronted  with  strong 
redemptions or increased margin requirements, as these could result in forced selling into 
markets with low liquidity. With these liquidity conditions, initial asset price adjustments would 
be amplified, triggering further redemptions and margin calls, thereby fuelling such negative 
liquidity spirals. The market impact of large-scale outflows could be aggravated by strategic 
complementarities among fund investors, in particular, resulting from first mover advantages 
and asset managers being forced to adjust portfolios in a timely manner. Market impact of 
investment  funds  is  potentially  strong,  in  particular  for  the  euro  area  secondary  bond 
markets, as investment funds hold a substantial and growing proportion of the debt securities 
of euro area banks, governments and non-financial corporates. 
Liquidity  and  maturity  transformation  outside  the  regulated  perimeter  have  been  further 
spreading  risks  across  institutions  and  countries  during  the  global  crisis.  While  regulatory 
reforms  have  addressed  the  most  apparent  problems,  new  players  and  business  models 
which require close monitoring are likely to emerge. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  
 
The growing size and the associated risks arising from non-bank entities and activities call 
for  efforts  to  strengthen  the  supervisory  framework  for  this  sector.  Entities  and  activities 
outside  the  regulatory  perimeter  will  require  enhanced  oversight  and  supervision.  The 
following three points are particularly relevant to achieve this. 
First, we need more information, and we need to develop a monitoring framework for the rest 
of  the financial  system. Second,  we  need  to  create  and  develop  macroprudential  tools for 
both  entities  and  activities  in  the  non-bank  sector.  And  finally,  we  need  to  strengthen  our 
regulatory  and 
the  efficient  application  of 
macroprudential measures. 
Let me expand on each of these three points. 
institutional  base 
in  Europe 
to  ensure 
A monitoring framework beyond banking 
A  prerequisite  for  an  efficient  application  of  macroprudential  tools  beyond  banking  is  the 
need  to  have  sufficient  knowledge  and  information  about  the  entities  and  activities  in  this 
space. 
While  very  few  sectors  in  the  euro  area  involved  in  financial  intermediation  remain  truly 
unregulated,  monitoring  of  non-bank  entities  at  the  euro  area  level  remains  largely 
fragmented due to data limitations. The recent collection by the ECB of balance sheet items 
of investment funds and the Financial Vehicle Corporation (FVCs) classification exercise has 
provided detailed data and enabled a better surveillance of the euro area non-bank financial 
sector. However, granular statistics are still not available for more than 50% of the sector’s 
assets. Following the recent ESA 2010 reclassification, some limited information is available 
on size, asset composition, and geographic distribution of this “residual”. 
Limited balance sheet statistics would provide some weight to the assumption that most of 
the  residual  entities  are  Special  Financing  Institutions  (SFIs)  or  holding  companies  which 
would not be included in the FSB concept of shadow banking. 
Coverage of the investment funds sector is much more comprehensive, where the ECB has 
collected statistics on the types of funds, and their asset and liability decomposition. Still, the 
ability of the authorities to monitor and map specific risks in the euro area remains limited. 
Gaps remain with respect to synthetic leverage created by derivatives as well as securities 
lending  and  financing  transactions  in  the  shadow  banking  sector. Targeted  data  collection 
projects have been initiated to fill these gaps, including derivatives reporting under EMIR and 
further reporting requirements of securities transactions under MiFID. 
Another angle to address risks in the non-bank sector is to shed further light on and monitor 
certain  activities  that  give  rise  to  stability  concerns,  notably  in  the  derivatives,  repo  and 
securities  financing  markets.  Risks  in  these  markets  may  also  be  created  by  entities 
domiciled in jurisdictions outside the euro area, which may otherwise escape the monitoring 
perimeter. 
Macroprudential tools for non-bank entities 
The importance of market-based finance and in particular of asset managers and the new 
vulnerabilities  they  may  create,  lead  me  to  strongly  share  the  view  recently  voiced  by  a 
number of prominent supervisors that we need to push ahead to develop a toolkit of policy 
measures.  Most  importantly,  the  FSB  has  started  looking  into  the  financial  stability  risks 
associated  with  asset  management  activities,  as  well  as  longer-term  structural  financial 
stability issues that may arise. 
This is not to say that the asset management sector is unregulated. In fact, we have a very 
successful investment fund regulation in Europe. However, this regulation is largely tailored 
to protect investors rather than to contain risks for financial stability. We need to turn some of 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
the  instruments  already  available  to  managers  of  investment  funds  into  macroprudential 
tools. 
Specifically, additional liquidity requirements, guided stress tests, minimum and time-varying 
load, and redemption fees should be part of the macroprudential toolbox. Well defined limits 
to leverage, especially synthetic leverage built-up with derivatives, should also be introduced. 
In  general,  it  is  necessary  to  intensify  the  oversight  of  systemically  important  non-bank 
institutions as is the case in the U.S.A. We need to curtail risks from these systemic players 
and raise their resilience through the financial cycle. A first step in this direction is the work 
done by the FSB that develops a common methodology to identify systemically significant 
non-bank and non-insurers. The FSB is currently also working on the systemic risks in the 
asset management industry. 
Other measures concern activities or instruments used in the market-based financial sector. 
In particular, I have in mind minimum and countercyclical haircuts for Securities Financing 
Transactions  (SFT).  Countercyclical  haircuts  would  limit  volatility  and  leverage  in  financial 
markets more effectively than the minimum haircut requirements recently recommended by 
the  FSB.  Another  important  FSB  workstream  focuses  on  re-hypothecation  and  re-use  of 
securities in the repo market. These create chains of inside liquidity that enhance the “illusion 
of liquidity”, which tend to disappear in times of stress. 
Further work to understand the effects of these tools and how best to apply them in practice 
is encouraged. 
A new regulatory and institutional base in Europe 
I have listed a number of tools that would help safeguard financial stability in the euro area. 
However, the legal and institutional base would need to be changed in order to implement 
the  policies  required  to  address  the  risks  from  non-banks.  This  is  particularly  true  in  the 
context of the implementation of the Capital Markets Union, because it implies the creation of 
a single rulebook for capital markets oversight and the clear definition of the mechanisms at 
the  European  level.  These  would  need  to  be  adjusted  in  order  to  ensure  the  harmonised 
application of such a rulebook in the whole single market. I presume that an enhanced role 
for ESMA will have to be considered. 
In this context, it is paramount that authorities, through the development of a macroprudential 
framework, have the tools to deal with the build-up of systemic risks at their disposal. We 
also need to establish the legal base to place systemically important non-banks within the 
perimeter of enhanced supervision in Europe. In the United States, non-bank Systemically 
Important Financial Institutions (SIFIs) (designated by the U.S. Financial Stability Oversight 
Council) are placed under enhanced prudential supervision by the Federal Reserve Board of 
Governors.  This  step  has  already  been  implemented  for  some  institutions  while  non-bank 
SIFI designation is being studied for some large asset managers. I believe it is important that 
competent authorities in Europe are equipped with similar powers. 
Conclusion 
Let me conclude. 
Our current monetary policy setting is beneficial not only for euro area price stability but also 
for financial stability. At the same time, we are aware that a build-up of risks in the financial 
system can arise in a situation of protracted low interest rates and abundant liquidity. Such 
risks  should  be  addressed  by  macroprudential  policy  in  a  targeted manner  at  country  and 
sector level. 
It is essential to ensure that our financial system is well capitalised, liquid and resilient, in 
dealing  with  the  challenges  to  financial  stability  and  avoiding  future  financial  crises.  This 
holds  particularly  for  Europe  with  its  heterogeneous  financial  system.  We  are  currently 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  
 
experiencing a significant shift away from bank-intermediated finance and this process will 
continue in the future. A broadened toolkit is therefore required. We need the ability to take 
decisive and intrusive macroprudential policy decisions and a framework that is sufficiently 
broad  to  capture  all  relevant  systemic  institutions  and  activities.  This  becomes  even  more 
critical when monetary policy needs to be accommodative, as I expect will be the case for the 
foreseeable future in the euro area. 
Thank you for your attention. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
