  Norman T L Chan: How can the banking industry regain the moral and 
ethical high ground it once enjoyed before the Global Financial Crisis 
Speech by Mr Norman T L Chan, Chief Executive of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority, at 
the Asian Banker Summit, Hong Kong, 15 April 2015. 
 Emmanuel (Daniel), Helen (Wong), Hans (Eichel), Gary (Stern), Ladies and Gentlemen, 
1. 
It is always good to see the Asian Banker Summit return to Hong Kong. It has been 
four years since our city last hosted the Summit in 2011 when I talked about the Monetary 
Authority’s supervisory philosophy on universal banking. A lot has happened since then. But 
of  particular  relevance  to  us  here  today  are  the  significant  waves  of  regulatory  activity  we 
have witnessed in those intervening years. Activity both in terms of rolling out new standards 
but also, very visibly, in enforcement action. Libor manipulation in 2012, followed by Forex 
rigging,  sanctions  breaches,  money  laundering  and  a  fairly  constant  stream  of  mis-selling 
allegations – structured bonds, mortgages, Payment Protection Insurance. 
2.  
Against this background, I have to say that I was pleased to see the thorny subject 
of  ethical  behaviour  within  the  financial  services  industry  as  a  key  theme  for  this  Summit, 
although I would like to confine my remarks today to the banking industry and not the entire 
financial services industry. I was really encouraged by the implicit acceptance, in putting this 
on the agenda of a banker’s summit, that it is primarily for the industry to seek to regain the 
moral and ethical highground it once enjoyed. I wholeheartedly agree. This is not something 
which can, or should, be regarded as a “policing” or “enforcement” matter for the regulator. 
Getting caught out, taking the fine as a “cost of doing business” and moving on with making 
money, is just not acceptable as a sustainable banking business model going forward. I do 
not subscribe to the view that banks’ primary role is to generate maximum shareholder value, 
leaving  the  regulator  to  worry  about  the  safety  of  deposits  and  the  interests  of  the  banks’ 
customers.  Now,  don’t  get  me  wrong  I  am  not  thinking  of  banks  as  break-even  utility 
operations but, making a reasonable return should be a result of what banks do – to quote 
Jack  Welch  when  talking  to  the  FT  a  few  years  ago  “Shareholder  value  is  a  result  not  a 
strategy”.1  
3.  
Having  a  licence  or  franchise  to  take  deposits,  which  represent  the  hard  earned 
savings of millions of people, and use these funds for private gain is a privilege conferred by 
society on a bank, which merits exemplary professional and ethical behaviour. 
Returning to the theme of the Summit “regaining the moral and ethical highground” – 
Moral and ethical highground: trust and respect 
4.  
what do we really mean here? I think, in a word, “trust”. With “trust”, comes “respect”. 
5.  
In  the  past,  banking  was  regarded  as  a  reputable  profession  and  bankers  were 
highly  trusted  and  respected  both  by  their  customers  and  by  members  of  the  public  more 
generally. This was not surprising as basically customers entrusted their life savings to their 
bankers  and  the  preservation  and  safety  of  their  hard-earned  money  was  in  the  hands  of 
those  bankers.  Although  nowadays  customers  still  place  their  life  savings  with  banks, 
bankers no longer enjoy the same high degree of trust and respect from society, especially 
after the Global Financial Crisis. What has changed so dramatically to bring the reputation of 
bankers so low? 
                                                 
1   FT.com – March 12, 2009 “Welch condemns share price focus”. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
  Change in modality and governance structure of banking 
6.  
Well, the modality and governance structure of banking have changed a great deal 
over the last century. More importantly, these changes have created an incentive system that 
leads to a misalignment and disconnect between the interests of the owners of banks (i.e. 
the shareholders), bank management and customers. 
7.  
Not  so  very  long  ago,  banking  was  a  business  conducted  by  individuals,  families 
and  (more  latterly)  private  partnerships,  where  the  owners  and  managers  of  banks  had 
ample “skin in the game”. They stood to lose not only their investments in the banks but also 
their  entire  family  wealth  or,  in  some  more  extreme  cases,  even  their  liberty,  should  their 
actions,  or  the  actions  of  their  partners,  result  in  the  failure  of  their  bank.  This  naturally 
served to temper the degree of exuberant risk-taking. Partners or managers in a bank were 
in for the long haul, with their investments and family wealth tied into the firm until retirement. 
So it was not just their next year’s bonus that was at risk. This evident “alignment of interest” 
between  the  bank  owners  or  managers  and  the  bank’s  customers  and  creditors  clearly 
helped promote trust. 
8.  
That said, although some US investment banks only moved from the partnership to 
public ownership model in the past 25 years, it is the case that other commercial banks have 
been structured as public joint stock banks with limited liability since the 19th century. So if 
limited liability has existed for two hundred years, in at least commercial banking, with the 
attendant  potential  “agency”  risks  (i.e.  shareholders  with  limited  skin  in  the  game  and 
managers  with  relatively  little  capital  invested),  what  else  has  been  at  work  to  create  the 
problems which so vividly surfaced in the Global Financial Crisis? 
What has changed: bank management 
9.  
First, bank employees’ time horizons have shifted. By this I mean that in the past 
employees, for a variety of reasons, tended to be much more “stable” in the sense of their 
ties to a given employer. An employee might join a bank, work their way steadily up through 
its ranks and then, on retirement after 30 or 40 years of service, receive a pension from the 
bank. So the employee identified their near and longer term future with that bank: another 
form of “skin in the game” and alignment of interest. However nowadays, not many banks 
offer pensions and it is much more common for employees to advance their own careers, as 
“freelancers”, by hopping from one institution to another to secure promotion or higher pay. In 
these circumstances, employees naturally identify less with the employing institution as their 
future is not, in their mind, inextricably linked with it. They work at banks not for banks.2  
10.  
Now this is of course also a two way street, in the sense that banks in their turn can 
on  occasion  nowadays  be  very  adept  at  severe  downsizing  if  market  conditions  turn.  So 
loyalty works both ways and has over the years declined. 
What has changed: incentives for risk-taking 
11.  
Business profiles and activities have also changed over time. Simple deposit-taking 
and lending businesses have been combined with investment banking, securities and capital 
markets, and even proprietary-trading activities, to form large, complex organizations, raising 
clear  issues  of  cultural  compatibility  across  businesses  with  very  different  objectives,  time 
horizons and employee profiles. In an environment where near term profits are very highly 
prized and rewarded, it is all too easy to see how the more aggressive of the approaches 
introduced into the mix (with the power of traders rising in line with trading profits in buoyant 
                                                 
2   Report of the UK Parliamentary Commission on Banking Standards “Changing banking for good”, Volume II 
paragraph 120. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  
 
markets) might prevail in shifting a culture from a client focus to one that is overly defined by 
financial performance. 
12.  
It is interesting, when comparing and contrasting cultures within banking, to consider 
for  a  moment  Glass-Steagall  and  its  separation  of  commercial  and  investment  banking  to 
prevent commercial banks from trading securities with their customers’ deposits. 
13.  
Passed  during  the  Great  Depression,  following  a  number  of  bank  runs  which 
destabilized  the  US  economy,  Glass-Steagall’s  motivation  rested  on:  real  or  perceived 
conflicts  of  interest,  in  the  form  of  collusion  between  banks  and  their  affiliates  with  the 
affiliates borrowing from the banks to buy securities and then selling securities to repay the 
banks’  debts  and  worries  that  banks  would  engage  in  risk-taking  speculation,  trading  with 
customers’ deposits rather than lending to promote economic growth. The “firewall” created 
by  Glass-Steagall  was  gradually  weakened  over  the  years  and,  as  you  all  know,  was 
eventually repealed in 1999. Some argue that this repeal contributed to the Global Financial 
Crisis. Joseph Stiglitz, the Nobel prize winner, summed it up thus: “Commercial banks are 
not supposed to be high-risk ventures; they are supposed to manage other people’s money 
very conservatively….. Investment banks, on the other hand, have traditionally managed rich 
people’s money – people who can take bigger risks in order to get bigger returns.”3 
14.  
When repeal of Glass-Steagall brought investment and commercial banks together, 
it would appear from the events over the last decade or so that the investment bank culture 
came out on top. The prevailing business strategy becoming pursuit of the high returns that 
could be obtained only through increasing leverage and risk-taking. 
What has changed: commoditisation of banking relationships 
15.  
As  well  as  bolting  together  different  businesses  with  different  cultures  to  achieve 
growth at a much faster pace than would be possible “organically”, banks have over the past 
few decades expanded from serving more limited numbers of wealthy customers to covering 
the  mass  market.  Where  once  the  local  bank  manager  might  have  expected  to  know  a 
significant  number  of  his  customers  personally,  now  customer  numbers  are  so  large  as  to 
render  relationship  banking  (outside  of  specialist  areas  such  as  private  banking)  all  but 
impossible. The result? Well a degree of commoditisation, and perhaps inevitably alienation. 
As a banker cannot possibly engage with the vast majority of his customers, personal bonds 
are much weaker or indeed no longer created, blocking off another avenue through which 
relationships  built  on  trust  might  develop.  At  the  same  time,  customers  have  increasingly 
regarded  banking  as  a  transactional  relationship  and  are  willing  to  jump  from  one  bank  to 
another just for the sake of a slight improvement in the interest rate received on deposits. 
What has changed: short termism of shareholders 
16.  
And  if  banks’  customers  and  creditors  have  changed  –  what  about  their 
shareholders? Well, returning for a moment to our earlier discussion. The owners, now in the 
form of hundreds of thousands of shareholders, have only limited “skin in the game”. Their 
personal or family wealth, outside of their bank shares, is not at stake if the bank fails and 
they can now in most cases exit from their shareholdings swiftly through trading on a stock 
exchange. So their perspectives can now be much shorter-term and, as they alone benefit 
from increases in a firm’s “value”, they may actually favour greater risk-taking to maximise 
share price valuation in that shorter-term. This “short-termism” mindset is more pronounced 
amongst  some  asset  managers  and  hedge  funds,  which  in  recent  years  would  appear  to 
have  accumulated  increasing  amounts  of  bank  shares  and  become  more  proactive  in 
                                                 
3   Capitalist Fools. Joseph E Stiglitz January 2009 (The Great Hangover: 21 Tales of the New Recession from 
the Pages of Vanity Fair). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
  
 
exerting pressure on bank management. As these asset managers are themselves rewarded 
on the basis of the annual valuation of their funds’ holdings, including the bank shares, they 
have every incentive to push the banks to achieve higher profitability. So board directors and 
senior management were, and still are, under constant pressure to pursue higher RoEs. It is 
not  difficult  to  see  why  capital  raising,  which  improves  the  resilience  of  banks,  is  often 
rejected  or  delayed  as  it  is  negative  for  share  prices  in  the  short  term.  The  result?  Banks 
have no choice but to leverage up and take bigger risk in order to meet the targets that the 
shareholders demand. 
Modern banking at crossroads 
17.  
So where do we go from here? As I mentioned earlier, while bank regulators clearly 
play  an  important  role  in  influencing  banking  operations,  it  is  really  up  to  the  industry  to 
decide what it can and should do to regain the trust and respect that banks once enjoyed. 
We  should  bear  in  mind  bank  regulators  are  a  consequence  of  the  emergence  of  modern 
banking. However, as discussed earlier, the modality and incentive system for banking were 
very different in the old model of banking : there was a high degree of alignment of interest 
between  bank  owners,  bank  management  and  bank  customers,  which  has  over  the  years 
been significantly eroded. 
18.  
Again,  don’t  get  me  wrong.  I  am  not  advocating  that  we  should  go  back  to  old-
fashioned banking. It is far too difficult, if not impossible, to turn the clock back this far and to 
do so might mean the loss of some beneficial innovations over the years. However, there is 
considerable  public  interest  in  ensuring  that  banking,  which  remains  the  predominant 
channel of intermediation between savers and borrowers in our society, functions efficiently 
and effectively, with a high degree of professionalism and strong ethical standards. 
19.  
It is against this backdrop that the international community, through G20, Financial 
Stability Board (FSB), Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (BCBS) etc. has sought to 
overhaul  the  banking  regulatory  framework  and  banking  standards  in  the  aftermath  of  the 
Global Financial Crisis. Some of the reform measures have been designed to address the 
problems arising from the misalignment of interest amongst the key stakeholders in banking. 
While some bankers may think, rightly or wrongly, that these reform measures represent a 
degree of overkill, the public sector firmly believes that the current regime of “heads you win, 
tails  I  lose”  must  not  be  allowed  to  continue.  What  I  mean  here  is  the  regime  in  which 
bankers pocket huge bonuses in good times (or even in bad times as in the case of AIGFP 
and  Merrill  Lynch)  and  when  the  banks  run  into  trouble  the  public  sector,  for  fear  of  a 
systemic  failure,  comes  to  the  rescue  with  a  bailout  using  public  funds.  This  is  clearly 
unacceptable. So the choice is obvious. New regulations dealing with capital buffers, liquidity 
management, leverage, bankers’ compensation, ringfencing of deposit-taking business from 
riskier  operations  etc.  have  been  introduced.  Also  notable  are  the  measures  specifically 
designed to mitigate the moral hazard arising from “too-big” or “too complex” to fail situations. 
Separately, there is a trend of regulators seeking to beef up their efforts to ensure that banks 
do  not  constantly  place  their  own  commercial  interests  ahead  of  those  of  their  customers. 
Protection  of  consumers  and  investors  is  nothing  new  but  it  has  recently  attracted 
considerable public support that more is needed. 
20.  
For  sure,  regulators  will  continue  to  pursue  further  changes  in  banking.  This  is 
ongoing  and  there  is  still  some  way  to  go.  In  the  process,  there  will  be  arguments, 
frustrations and inevitably pushback. No doubt the new standards and regulations will lead to 
some changes in the behaviour and business models of banks. However, I do not for one 
moment  believe  that  regulators  and  regulatory  measures  alone  can  possibly  redress  all  of 
the problems stemming from the misalignment of interest amongst the various stakeholders 
in banking. Regulators can set standards and provide some external checks and balances. 
But there is no substitute for internal governance and controls that are designed to achieve 
the  desired  behavioural  change  across  the  entire  firm.  In  this  context,  it  is  crucial  that  we 
have buy-in from the owners, directors and management of the banks. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  
 
Only when the public sector and the owners, directors and managers of banks share 
21.  
the same goals and objectives can we induce the desired outcomes on a sustainable basis. 
Only when shareholders cease to put unreasonable pressures on bank management to keep 
on improving RoEs can regulators feel comfortable that the bank is not incentivised to take 
the short-term view on business growth and profitability. Only when bank management is not 
rewarded  based  on  short-term  financial  performance  can  we  be  less  concerned  that  bank 
managers  will  take  excessive  risks  for  near  term  bonus  or  share  option  value.  Only  when 
board  directors  understand  that  they  are  accountable  not  only  to  shareholders  but  also  to 
customers and society more broadly through the regulatory agency can we be confident that 
effective governance and internal controls will be put in place. In short, banks need to own 
the common goal and to promote  the appropriate culture, values and practices across the 
firm, which are to put the safety of the bank and the interest of depositors and customers 
ahead of the banks’ own commercial interests, just as the old fashioned bankers did in the 
past. Only when this happens will bank managers and employees change their mindset from 
“what can we get away with” to “what is the right thing to do”. Only when this happens can 
the banking industry regain the trust and respect that bankers used to enjoy in the not so 
distant past. 
22.  
I am a pragmatist and not blind to the challenges that lie ahead in achieving what I 
have just described. However, I am also an optimist. Looking to the owners of banks, whilst 
shareholding  may  be  diverse,  there  are  “clusters”  of  shareholders,  such  as  pension  funds 
and sophisticated institutional investors, who understand that short-termism tends to produce 
negative outcomes over time and as such should be prepared to counter such tendency. As 
for  the  boards  of  directors,  I  am  hopeful  that  the  independent  non-executive  directors  will 
play  an  increasingly  important  role  in  instituting  and  monitoring  proper  governance  and 
internal control systems within banks, provided they are suitably empowered and supported 
by  the  shareholders  and  regulators.  As  for  the  management  and  staff  of  banks,  desired 
behavioural changes will come if the owners and boards show the way and institute the right 
values, controls and compensation arrangements., 
Conclusion: a matter of choice 
Ladies and gentleman, I am not entirely sure whether, in making this speech today, I 
23.  
will make myself any more or less popular amongst bankers. But this is not relevant at all. 
The important thing is that I am very pleased to be given this precious opportunity to share 
with  you  my  heartfelt  thoughts  on  why  bankers  have  lost  a  great  deal  of  public  trust  and 
respect and how they might regain these sentiments. Bankers clearly have a choice on what 
to do and where they want to go. By the same token, regulators also have a choice on what 
to do, but that choice depends crucially on what the bankers themselves elect to do or not to 
do. I sincerely hope that the public sector and the bankers can work together to ensure the 
sustainable  and  healthy  development  of  the  banking  industry.  At  the  end  of  the  day,  the 
society  also  has  a  choice.  After  all,  no  profession  or  industry  can  evolve  or  develop 
independently from or against the wishes and expectations of the society. Thank you very 
much. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
