  Javier Guzmán Calafell: The normalization of monetary policy in the 
United States – challenges for emerging market economies 
Remarks by Mr Javier Guzmán Calafell, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Mexico, during the 
panel  on  “Central  banks’  policies:  the  new  normal  in  monetary  policy,  the  USD  and 
implications for emerging market”, at the 21st Reserve Management Serminar, organized by 
UBS AG, Ermatingen, Switzerland, 16 June 2015. 
 The views expressed in this document are strictly personal and do not necessarily coincide with those of Banco 
de México’s Board. 
I  am  very  honored  to  have  the  opportunity  to  participate  in  this  Conference.  I  thank  the 
organizers for the invitation to share with this distinguished group my views on some of the 
challenges that emerging market economies (EMEs) will be facing as monetary policy in the 
United States is normalized. 
EMEs  displayed  a  remarkable  performance  in  the  years  that  preceded the  global financial 
crisis. During 2000–2007, real GDP growth for the group as a whole was more than double 
that observed in the advanced economies, while also showing a significant acceleration with 
respect to the 1990s.1 Furthermore, emerging economies recovered quickly from the adverse 
impact of the crisis, with growth peaking in 2010 at a pace, again, more than twice as much 
as that in the advanced economies. 
Ever since, however, the pace of economic activity in EMEs has been continually declining, 
with  growth  in  2015  expected  to  mark  the  fifth  consecutive  year  of  deceleration.  This  has 
been the result of a number of factors, chief among them lower rates of actual and potential 
growth in the advanced world; the continued slowdown in China, as the economy transitions 
towards a more sustainable growth path and the sources of demand rebalance; the end of 
the  commodity  price  boom,  and  particularly  the  sharp  fall  in  oil  prices,  that  has  adversely 
affected the terms of trade of many of these economies; and the emergence of internal and 
external  vulnerabilities,  as  well  as  supply  side  constraints,  in  a  number of  countries  of  the 
group. 
With the expectation of an increase in interest rates in the United States as monetary policy 
in this country normalizes, external conditions for emerging economies are unlikely to make a 
turn for the better in the foreseeable future. In fact, we are already witnessing a tightening of 
global  financial  conditions,  and  net  private  capital  inflows  for  the  group  as  a  whole  are 
expected  to  fall  in  2015  to  the  lowest  level  since  2009.2  While  this  is  the  result  of  a 
combination  of  factors,  including  the  situation  in  Greece  and  problems  of  a  geopolitical 
nature, the prospect of an upward trend of interest rates in the United States seems to be 
playing a major role. In this context, the date of the first increase in the federal funds rate has 
become one of the main issues of concern for both market participants and emerging market 
economies’ authorities. 
The  process  of  monetary  policy  normalization  in  the  United  States  is  surrounded  by  a 
significant amount of uncertainty. The Federal Reserve has made clear that adjustments to 
the federal funds rate will depend on the evolution of the economy, and particularly on further 
improvement on the labor market and reasonable prospects that inflation will move back to 
its  2  percent  objective  over  the  medium  term.  However,  as  a  result  of  a  combination  of 
                                                
1  The annual average rate for EMEs in the period was 6.5 percent, compared with 2.7 percent in the advanced 
economies, and 3.7 percent in emerging economies during 1990–1999. 
Institute of International Finance (2015): “Capital Flows to Emerging Markets”, May 28. 
2 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  factors,  assessment  of both  the  underlying  strength  of the  labor market  and  of  inflationary 
pressures  is  particularly  difficult  under  current  circumstances.  Furthermore,  the  impact  of 
normalization on emerging market economies is also uncertain, as is the possible timing of 
such impact, especially since markets are likely to anticipate such a move. Federal Reserve 
officials have insisted that rather than the date of the first increase, the focus should be on 
the  subsequent  pace  of  interest  rate  adjustments,  which  is  expected  to  be  gradual. 
Nevertheless,  thus  far  this  has  been  of  little  help  to  calm  market  and  emerging  countries’ 
anxieties. 
The above concerns are understandable when put against the recent experience. 
First,  as  advanced  economies  engaged  in  a  process  of  monetary  policy  easing  and 
international interest rates dropped to historical minima in the aftermath of the global financial 
crisis, a surge in foreign capital inflows to EMEs was observed. Three features of these flows 
are  particularly  relevant:3  a)  they  represented  a  major  redirection  of  capital  flows  towards 
EMEs, which implied that the latter received close to half of global flows between 2010 and 
2013, quite far from what fundamentals in those economies could explain; b) contrary to the 
experience of the preceding period, portfolio flows gained an increasingly important share; 
and  c)  in  an  environment  of  strong  appetite  for  risk,  EMEs  issuance  of  below  investment-
grade  debt  jumped  swiftly.  Furthermore,  as  a  side  effect,  such  inflows  gave  rise  to  a 
significant  appreciation  of  real  exchange  rates  and  a  rapid  expansion  of  credit,  including 
through the shadow banking system, in many EMEs, thus increasing their vulnerability. 
Second, the “taper tantrum” episode of 2013 provides further evidence  on the significance 
that spillovers from shifts in monetary policy in the advanced economies, even when they are 
only perceived and do not actually occur, can have on emerging markets. Expectations of an 
unwinding of the unconventional monetary policy implemented in the United States led to a 
strong market reaction during that period. Consequently, financial volatility rose sharply and 
capital flows to EMEs fell, leading to pressures on the exchange rates and asset prices in 
these  economies,  increased  external  risk  premia,  and  in  general  a  severe  tightening  of 
financial conditions. Some authors have stressed the significance of financial market turmoil 
during  May-August  2013,  despite  the  relatively  small  decrease  in  capital  flows  to  EMEs 
(about 1% of GDP).4 
It  is  of  course  natural  to  ask  to  what  extent  the  above  experiences  are  applicable  to  the 
current situation. In other words, is the normalization of monetary policy in the US likely to 
have a major impact on EMEs? Here we have divergent views. 
On  the  one  hand,  there  are  those  who  believe  that  the  outlook  for  emerging  market 
economies is not as gloomy as it seems: 
• 
The  upcoming  tightening  cycle  will  most  likely  take  place  within  the  context  of  a 
firmly established recovery in the United States, which is a scenario that has seen 
emerging market economies thrive in the past. As a reference, some estimates point 
out that, over the year following the beginning of the last three tightening cycles in 
the  United  States,  industrial  production  in  emerging  markets  grew  between  7.5% 
and 10%, while export volumes did so by some 10% to 15%.5 All in all, the argument 
                                                
3  See  Sahay,  R.  et  al.  (2014):  “Emerging  Market  Volatility:  Lessons  from  the  taper  tantrum”,  IMF  Staff 
Discussion Note No. 14/09, September. 
4  See  Dahlhaus,  T.  and  G.  Vasishtha  (2014):  “The  Impact  of  U.S.  Monetary  Policy  Normalization  on  Capital 
Flows to Emerging-Market Economies”, Bank of Canada Working Paper 2014–53, December.  
5  See  Musalem,  Alberto  G.  (2015):  “US  macroeconomic  and  regulatory  developments  and  emerging  market 
economies”,  speech  at  the  International  Financial  Conference  Annual  Meeting,  Cartagena,  Colombia,  9 
March. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    goes, higher interest rates in the United States associated to a stronger economy in 
that country are a net positive for emerging market economies. 
The ongoing efforts from the part of the Federal Reserve and other central banks in 
the  advanced  economies  in  terms  of  their  communication  with  the  public  and  the 
transparency  of  their  decisions,  are  expected  to  play  a  key  role  on  how  markets 
react and emerging economies are affected as monetary policy in those economies 
goes  back  to  normal.  As  evidence  in  support  of  this  argument,  it  is  noted  that 
anticipated  interest  rate increases  by  the  Federal  Reserve  have  been  followed  by 
minor  pullbacks  in  capital  inflows  to  emerging  markets,  while  the  impact  of 
unanticipated moves has been much larger.6 
After years —and perhaps decades in some cases— of continued policy efforts in 
some key areas, emerging economies in general are today more resilient than they 
were in the past to external shocks. 
On  the  other  hand,  there  are  also  compelling  arguments  calling  for  extra  caution  going 
forward,  as  international  financial  markets  adjust  to  monetary  policy  normalization  in  the 
United States: 
• 
Unconventional monetary policies affect financial markets in a way that differs from 
the  more  conventional  interest  rate  policy,  and  the  extent  of  such  difference  is 
largely unknown. For instance, the large-scale asset purchase programs deployed 
by  the  Federal  Reserve  and  other  central  banks  in  advanced  economies  have 
affected global interest rates along the yield curve through a significant compressing 
effect on bond risk and term premia, something that does not necessarily follow from 
changes  in  short-term  interest  rates.7  Thus,  there  is  a  risk  that  such  premia,  and 
particularly  the  term  premium,  quickly  decompress,  giving  rise  to  an  abrupt 
adjustment of long-term interest rates as the Federal Reserve begins to tighten. 
The marked divergence in the expected path for the federal funds rate between that 
implied by market instruments (such as federal funds futures or overnight indexed 
swaps)  and  that  obtained  from  FOMC  projections  and  forecasters  surveys, 
increases the possibility of surprises and sharp adjustments in financial markets. 
The share of the nonbanking sector in the intermediation of international credit has 
risen  substantially  after the  crisis,  with  the growing role  of the  asset  management 
industry being particularly noteworthy. It has been noted that this kind of investors 
may  be  more  prone  to  herd  behavior,  and  therefore  EMEs  may  be  facing  an 
increased risk of contagion during episodes of financial turbulence.8 
  It is of course impossible to determine ex ante which of these views is correct. As far as I’m 
concerned,  the  conclusion  is  obvious.  In  the  face  of  an  uncertain  scenario  with  very  high 
potential  costs,  it  is  far  better  for  policymakers  to  err  on  the  side  of  caution.  Therefore,  a 
close look at the factors that in the past have contributed to alleviate the difficulties resulting 
from similar episodes is clearly warranted. 
                                                
6  See International Monetary Fund (2011): “International Capital Flows: Reliable or Fickle?”, Chapter 4 of World 
Economic Outlook, April. 
7  See  Dudley,  William  C.  (2015):  “The  global  implications  of  diverging  monetary  policy  settings  in  advanced 
economies”,  speech  at  the  Sixth  High  Level  Conference  on  the  International  Monetary  System:  Monetary 
Policy Challenges in a Changing World, Zurich, Switzerland, 12 May. 
8  See for instance IMF, Global Financial Stability Report, October 2014. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  
 
Several elements stand out in this respect.9 First, at the onset of an external shock of this 
nature,  markets  respond  rather  indiscriminately  towards  emerging  market  economies  as  a 
group, with differentiation following after a relatively short time span. Secondly, differentiation 
is made on the basis of the strength of economic fundamentals. In particular, economies with 
stronger external and fiscal accounts, lower inflation, more international reserves, and sound 
and  deep  financial  sectors,  to  name  a  few,  normally  experience  more  subdued  market 
reactions.  This  also  underlines  the  importance  of  building  policy  buffers  during  favorable 
times. Third, markets reward timely and credible policy action, as economies that respond to 
emerging challenges in a flexible way and with appropriate instruments generally fare better. 
Fourth,  even  though  using  the  foreign  exchange  rate  as  a  shock  absorber  has  proved 
effective  in  helping  emerging  economies  to  better  endure  a  tightening  of  global  financial 
conditions, intervention in this market may be useful to cope with temporary bouts of volatility 
in  a  situation  of  adequate  international  reserves  and  an  exchange  rate  which  is  not 
overvalued; however, the effectiveness of intervention tends to disappear when the degree of 
market  uncertainty  reaches  very  high  levels.  Finally,  growth  potential  is  another  major 
element  of  differentiation  during  episodes  of  turbulence;  more  specifically,  the  better  the 
prospects for growth the less severe the likely consequences of financial turmoil. 
Undoubtedly,  putting  in  practice  the  above  lessons  will  determine  to  a  great  extent  the 
success  of  emerging  market  economies  in  coping  with  the  possible  turbulence  that  lies 
ahead. However, I would like to emphasize that advanced economies are not exempt from 
responsibility in this respect. 
Federal  Reserve  officials  have  repeatedly  noted  that  promoting  growth  and  stability  in  the 
United States is the most important contribution the Federal Reserve can make to the global 
economy, and that this is precisely the focus of monetary policy in this country.10 They have 
also  stressed  the  need  for  effective  communication  to  limit  the  risk  of  surprises  and  the 
possibility of abrupt market responses. 
I have no quarrel with these arguments, and I believe there is widespread recognition of the 
major efforts undertaken by the Fed to increase transparency and communication in recent 
years.  However,  I  see  room  for  further  action  from  advanced  economies  in  at  least  three 
areas. 
First, unconventional monetary policies, though fundamental to overcome the global financial 
crisis  and  underpin  the  recovery  of  demand  in  recent  years,  provide  only  a  temporary 
stimulus to economic activity. Ensuring adequate and sustained rates of growth implies the 
adoption of measures focused on enhancing efficiency and productivity that go well beyond 
the reach of monetary policy. Indeed, there is a lot that advanced economies still need to do 
to meet these needs. 
Second,  actions  taken  by  major  central  banks  have  important  consequences  for  other 
economies  which  deserve  careful  consideration.  Yet,  an  adequate  understanding  of  such 
spillovers is still lacking. Although literature on the subject is scant and definitive conclusions 
are difficult to arrive at, to have an idea of the challenges we are facing, it may be useful to 
note that recent research carried out at the BIS concludes that US quantitative easing has 
                                                
9  See, among others, Sahay, R. et al. (2014): “Emerging Market Volatility: Lessons from the taper tantrum”, IMF 
Staff  Discussion  Note  No.  14/09,  September;  World  Bank  (2015):  “Hoping  for  the  Best,  Preparing  for  the 
Worst: Risks around U.S. Rate Liftoff and Policy Options”, Special Feature 1 in Global Economic Prospects, 
June; Eichengreen, Barry and Poonam Gupta (2014): “Tapering Talk: The Impact of Expectations of Reduced 
Federal Reserve Security Purchases on Emerging Markets”, Policy Research Working Paper No. 6754, The 
World Bank, January; and International Monetary Fund (2013): “Taper Talks: What to Expect when the United 
States Is Tightening”, Box 1.1 in World Economic Outlook, October. 
10  See for instance Dudley, William, Op. Cit. and Fischer, Stanley (2015): “The Federal Reserve and the Global 
Economy”, remarks at the conference held in honor of Professor Haim Ben-Shahar, Tel Aviv, Israel, 26 May. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
had  a  greater  impact  on  emerging  market  economies  than  on  the  US  economy  itself.11 
Greater  awareness  among  advanced  economies  of  the  consequences  of  their  monetary 
policy actions would be a major step forward for a more productive dialogue with EMEs. 
Third,  the  room  for  expanding  international  cooperation  is  wide.  The  strengthening  of  the 
global  safety  net  is  a  key  area  in  this  respect.  The  creation  of  a  permanent  and  broad 
network of bilateral central bank swap facilities; the conclusion of the still pending IMF reform 
and the deepening of efforts in this direction, to provide the institution with proper resources 
and  more  legitimacy  in  its  decision  making;  and  greater  collaboration  between  multilateral 
organizations  and  regional  financial  arrangements,  should  clearly  be  part  of  these 
endeavors. While some of these tasks need the involvement of both emerging and advanced 
economies, the crucial role of the latter is evident. 
I would  like to conclude my intervention by stressing that, beyond the challenges resulting 
from  the  beginning  of  the  cycle  of  interest  rate  increases  in  the  United  States,  emerging 
market economies will face a less favorable external environment in coming years. On the 
one hand, potential growth in the main advanced economies and China has declined and the 
prospects are not very encouraging either. As a result, emerging economies as a group will 
probably be facing a weaker demand for their exports, and thus further pressures on their 
external  and  fiscal  balances.  Furthermore,  and  related  to  this,  the  projected  evolution  of 
commodity prices in the medium and long term implies a deterioration of the terms of trade 
for an important subset of these economies, vis-à-vis the levels that existed before the global 
financial crisis. Lastly, in the face of a gradual but very prolonged increase in interest rates in 
the United States, conditions of access to external financing will tighten. It is clear, then, that 
the deterioration of external conditions should not be seen as a short term phenomena, and 
that  EMEs  should  strengthen  their  domestic  sources  of  economic  growth.  This  implies 
ensuring macroeconomic and financial stability, the timely tackling of any potential sources of 
vulnerability,  both  internal  and  external,  and  the  implementation  of  any  structural  reforms 
required to encourage investment and productivity growth. 
                                                
11  See Chen Q. et al. (2015): “Financial crisis, US unconventional monetary policy and international spillovers”, 
BIS Working Paper No. 494, March. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
