  Mario Draghi: Interview in Handelsblatt 
Interview  with  Mr  Mario  Draghi,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  in  Handelsblatt, 
published on 2 January 2015. 
 Mr President, the Pope is of the opinion that, these days, Europe is looking old and 
sick. Do you share his opinion? 
Draghi: Europe needs to regain its self-confidence after the crisis. This cannot happen by 
miracle.  It  hinges  upon  European  Governments  and  European  Institutions.  It  requires  the 
introduction  of  reforms  and  a  stable  financial  framework.  This  way,  European  citizens  will 
regain confidence in their future and their opportunities. Confidence is the prerequisite for a 
society in which people buy and invest. Europe can do that and I am firmly committed to that 
goal. The Pope says that, also for the sake of the rest of the world, Europe should regain 
youth and health, and it is in our power to make it happen. 
What is causing this lack of confidence that you refer to? 
Draghi: It is a legacy of the various crises that happened in 2008 and  2009 which clearly 
revealed the weaknesses in the old framework. 
And what did you find? 
Draghi: We found that the debt levels of banks and nation-states were too high. Important 
rules  of  a  market  economy  –  for  example,  the  rule  that  risk  and  responsibility  go  hand  in 
hand – had been forgotten. All this contributed to shatter the confidence of many people in 
Europe. This is why Europe is in need of structural reform. I have been saying this for a very, 
very long time. I can only repeat it. 
You  keep  saying  it  but  you  are  not  being  heard.  The  ratio  of  debt  to  GDP  has 
continued to rise everywhere in the West. In Europe, the government debt to GDP ratio 
has risen by almost 50% since the start of the financial crisis in autumn 2008. At the 
moment,  only  five  of  the  18  euro  area  countries  do  not  exceed  the  debt  limits  laid 
down in the Stability and Growth Pact. 
Draghi: This is partly due to the fact that, in some parts of Europe, there has been absolutely 
no growth over the past few years. However, more recently, most countries have started to 
grow  again,  though  weakly,  and  to  put  their  fiscal  positions  in  order  and  to  undertake 
structural reforms. And, as a result, debt levels are falling for the first time. But, this takes 
time. Moreover, progress on the important structural reforms – more flexible labour markets, 
less bureaucracy, lower taxes – is clearly too slow. 
Can you be more specific, Mr President? Which countries in the euro area need to do 
more? 
Draghi: All of them. 
Including Germany? 
I  said  all  of  them,  some  more  than  others.  I  welcome  the  German  government’s 
announcement  of  additional  public  investment  in  infrastructure.  Every  country  has  its  own 
agenda.  Those  governments  that  have  already  implemented  reforms  are  now  reaping  the 
benefits. This applies first and foremost to Germany with its Agenda 2010. Germany is now 
much more robust and stable than the rest of the euro area countries. Such examples are 
encouraging. Once upon a time, southern Germany was farmland. Now, it is the hub of new 
technologies. 
What about the highly indebted countries in southern Europe? 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
Draghi: Spain has begun its liberalisation with great courage and is now one of the fastest-
growing  countries.  In  France  and  Italy,  the  willingness  to  implement  reforms  is  growing. 
Some  have  been  approved  e.g.  the  labour  market  reform  in  Italy,  others  have  been 
presented and are being discussed, which has taken time. The real challenge is to put it into 
practice.  I  understand  the  impatience.  Reforms  have  waited  too  long.  It  is  now  time  to 
implement them. That’s my message. 
And what about Greece specifically? 
Draghi:  It’s  now  for  the  Greek  electorate  to  decide  about  the  future  composition  of  the 
parliament and the government. 
Jean-Claude  Juncker,  President  of  the  EU  Commission,  nonetheless  wants  to  give 
France, Italy and Belgium more time to reduce their much too high debt. All three are 
in breach of the agreed fiscal rule of spending no more than 3% of national income on 
new debt. Should another exception be made? 
Draghi: It is up to the EU Commission to judge this. In March, it will give its judgement on the 
behaviour of the countries in question. For the ECB, it is important that the European Stability 
and Growth Pact is adhered to, because compliance with the rules that we gave ourselves is 
a primary source of confidence. 
In reality, your expansionary monetary policy, which is pumping trillions of euro into 
the markets, is just buying the governments more time – and it seems that no one is 
really using this time. Do you feel alone in your fight to save Monetary Union? 
Draghi: We have a mandate. It is to keep inflation close to but below 2%. That is our legal 
obligation. And we must deliver, within our mandate given by the European Treaty. But it is 
quite  clear  that  our  monetary  policy  would  be  much  more  effective  if  the  governments 
implemented structural reforms. 
The ECB acts and waits ... 
Draghi: It acts and delivers. The others must also do their duty. 
The question is why you see price stability at 2% inflation at all. 0% would be much 
better, wouldn’t it? 
Draghi: The 2% target was decided by the Governing Council in 2003. It would certainly not 
help confidence if targets were changed when it becomes difficult to meet them! Otherwise, 
when we had 3% inflation, we could have set 3% as the target. We must be reliable. Inflation 
has been low for some time now. This is partly due to falling oil prices and corrections of high 
prices in some countries, but also to weak demand. Core inflation has been around 0.7% for 
a year. 
No major central bank has an objective of 0%. The reason is simple. If one aims at 0%, half 
the time inflation will be positive and half the time it will be negative. And when inflation is 
negative  and  interest  rates  have  fallen  to  zero,  one  cannot  lower  interest  rates  to  bring 
inflation back to zero. 
Do you fear deflation, i.e. declining prices and wages? 
Draghi: The risk cannot be ruled out completely, but it is limited. The important thing is what 
inflation  rate  people  expect  over  the  medium  term.  Since  June,  we  have  seen  that  these 
expectations  have  declined.  If  inflation  remains  low  for  a  long  time,  people  might  expect 
prices to fall even further and postpone their spending. We are not there yet. But we need to 
tackle this risk. 
…  and  the  result  is  grotesque.  The  central  bank  fights  for  more  inflation.  That’s 
strange for Germans, whose country has suffered two periods of hyperinflation and 
fears  a  new  currency  reform.  Do  you  understand  the  unease  of  the  people  of  this 
country? 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
Draghi: History shows that falling prices can be as damaging to the prosperity and stability of 
our countries as high inflation. That is why our mandate is symmetric. And that is why we are 
now ensuring that the risk of deflation you just asked me about does not materialise. You, as 
a journalist, also have a duty to explain. Public opinion in Germany is very important for us. 
Your  intentions  are  good,  the  effects  of  your  policies  are  simply  not  acceptable  for 
many  citizens.  People  are  worried  about  their  savings  and  pensions.  They  did  not 
invest money, like Goldman Sachs, in shares, options and highly controversial bonds, 
but focused with your majority – rather conservatively – on savings books, German 
government bonds and life insurance policies. Because of the ECB’s low interest rate 
policy, they are currently experiencing a clear drop in wealth. Savings accounts and 
insurance policy pay-outs are melting. 
Draghi: Interest rates have been very, very low for a long time – and they will presumably 
stay like that for a while longer. People see that the returns on their savings and the profits 
from their life insurance policies are shrinking. We understand the concerns of savers. But 
now let me ask a question: is that the only factor? My answer is no. After the crisis, Germany 
became  a  safe  haven.  A  lot  of  money  therefore  flowed  into  the  country,  with  the  result  of 
falling interest rates on medium and long term bonds – the interest rates of which are not set 
by the ECB. This has hurt some savers but also benefitted borrowers, for example those who 
bought houses. 
Wait a minute – it was your institution which lowered the key interest rate step by step, 
to 0.05% at the moment. Savings are no longer worth very much in this environment. 
Draghi:  In  an  environment  of  widespread  economic  weaknesses  and  falling  inflation,  our 
monetary policy has to be accommodative. Is that cause or effect? We have to look at the 
whole euro area. If we raised interest rates, the crisis would be worse. Stability would suffer – 
and that would hurt investors and savers even more. We are keeping interest rates low to 
stimulate the real economy and to achieve price stability. 
In order to save the euro, you announced decisive measures in the middle of 2012 – 
“whatever it takes”. Does that mean that you are consciously putting German savings 
at risk to save the euro? 
Draghi: No. Quite the opposite. The risk for the German tax payer has gone down. Recall 
that  internal  loans  between  some  central  banks  in  the  ECB  system,  the  famous  Target  2 
loans, were previously much higher. They have already gone down by half. 
The answer is not really reassuring. Low interest rates are still low interest rates. 
Draghi: In the United States, interest rates were also low and people complained about it. 
When the recovery took hold, long term interest rates started to rise again. Likewise in the 
euro area, interest rates will rise and normality will return. 
Many  German  savers  feel  expropriated  nonetheless.  What  is  your  advice?  What 
should they do? 
Draghi: Insurers and banks, whose business it is to assess risk and reward, should give the 
answer. 
What does that mean? Investors should spread their risks around the world? 
Draghi: I can’t give any advice here. I’m a central banker, not an investment adviser. 
The United States is in a better situation, with the economy growing stronger. The Fed 
can afford to relax, unlike the ECB in the euro area. Why is Europe in such a worse 
position? 
Draghi: One reason is the lack of effective structural reforms. The ECB has created better 
possibilities  for  banks;  they  can,  in  principle,  lend  more.  But  there  are  countries  where  a 
young entrepreneur must wait nine months before getting a permit to open his business. And 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  even then, he must pay a license fee – and that’s before he’s made the first sale. So what 
incentive does this entrepreneur have to borrow money from a bank? That’s a true story. And 
there are hundreds like it. 
You’re complaining about state obstacles? 
Draghi: I am complaining about too much bureaucracy and too high taxes. Here in Europe, 
we  have  some  of  the  highest  taxation  in  the  whole  world.  That’s  a  big  competitive 
disadvantage. 
… not for Apple, Google and Starbucks, which pay only 1–2% in taxes in Europe. 
Draghi: Aside from that: in the euro area citizens pay between 45% and 55% of their income 
to the state. And that compares with 35% in the United States and 33% in Japan. The triad of 
weakness in the reform process, bureaucracy and the tax burden hinder Europe’s recovery. 
If we don’t solve this, our growth will remain weak. 
Your  diagnosis  is  undoubtedly  correct,  but  does  it  really  allow  for  an  effective 
therapy? If crisis countries were to lower taxes, wouldn’t their deficits initially become 
even bigger? 
Draghi: My advice is therefore: don’t give up on fiscal consolidation! But fiscal policy must 
nevertheless be designed in a more growth-friendly way. Spending on investment must be 
increased  –  and  this  means  on  research,  education  and  the  digital  agenda.  Other 
expenditure, and also taxes, should be reduced. 
In  comparison  with  the  United  States,  the  political  vacuum  in  Europe  stands  out.  A 
uniform leadership is missing, the euro area is politically fragile and fragmented, and 
the only pan-European institution with force appears to be the ECB. 
Draghi: The way Europe is governed must improve. The Union must become better than the 
one we know today. Once it was very helpful to have established common fiscal rules … 
… which were not followed? 
Draghi: Yes, unfortunately that was the case in 2003 and 2004. The agreed rules should be 
observed.  They  are  important  for  mutual  trust,  which  in  turn  is  the  basis  for  sharing 
sovereignty. The next stage is a stronger political union. We still have a long way to go. 
Angela Merkel and the other political leaders may well have European convictions, but 
in everyday life they have remained national decision-makers. The nation states have 
rather revived in the wake of the financial and economic crisis. 
Draghi: The nation states do not need to be abolished, but their policies need to be better 
coordinated.  Why  can  we  not  make  structural  reforms  together,  in  parallel  across  several 
countries?  Why  do  the  countries  not  establish  common  objectives  and  monitor  debt 
developments together? 
Perhaps there is simply a lack of European leadership. 
Draghi:  The  various  countries  and  markets  are  closely  intertwined.  If  a  country  is  not 
competitive, if it cannot stand on its own feet, if the labour market has become stagnant, then 
it  will  become  a  burden  for  other  countries.  That  is  why  there  is  no  alternative  to  a  pan-
European perspective. Europe is more European than some politicians think. 
Many believe that you are the only real player in Europe. A single word uttered by you 
can move the markets. Is that not too much power in the hands of one individual? 
Draghi: That is a gross overstatement and does not correspond to reality. My interpretation 
of our mandate is very narrow: we need to deliver price stability. 
Your interpretation is not and cannot be that narrow in reality. The objective of price 
stability  cannot  be  achieved  in  isolation  from  all  of  the  other  measures,  such  as 
economic growth, innovation levels, unemployment and government expenditure. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
Draghi: The  ECB  has  always  been  very  careful  about  what  it says. We  remain  within  our 
mandate. 
Jens Weidmann, the President of the Bundesbank, does not agree with that though. 
Draghi: We do not disagree about our mandate. 
Weidmann apparently does not consider it either legal to buy government bonds on a 
grand scale, as currently planned by the ECB. 
Draghi: We have had several interesting conversations, but as far as I know, he does not 
say that. The purchase of government bonds is one of the tools in our toolbox, which we can 
use  to  fulfil  our  mandate.  But  we  cannot  breach  Article  123  of  the  Treaty,  which  forbids 
monetary financing. 
Your plans come very close to that. 
Draghi: No that is wrong. When the ECB decided to buy government bonds a few years ago, 
this was to repair the transmission mechanism of monetary policy and therefore was within 
the mandate. These are the only government bonds the ECB has ever bought so far. 
How close is your institution to buying the next large batch of government securities? 
Draghi: The ECB’s Governing Council has instructed the staff and Eurosystem committees 
to prepare concrete measures. 
How much money are we talking about? 
Draghi: That’s difficult to say. The risks of not fulfilling our mandate of price stability are in 
any  case  higher  than  they  were  six  months  ago.  Our  mandate  is  symmetric.  We  have  to 
avoid too high inflation and we have to avoid too low inflation as well. Headline HICP inflation 
has been on average 0.3% since July 2014, in other words for 6 months already. 
Nevertheless,  you  wish  to  expand  the  ECB’s  balance  sheet  from  €2  trillion  to 
€3 trillion. Is that correct? 
Draghi: We are making technical preparations to alter the size, pace and composition of our 
measures  in  early  2015,  should  it  become  necessary  to  further  address  risks  of  a  too 
prolonged period of low inflation. The Governing Council agrees unanimously on that. 
The  euro  is  becoming  weaker  and  weaker.  Did  you  encourage  this  currency 
depreciation to bring down the price of European exports? 
Draghi:  The  exchange  rate  is  not  an  ECB  policy  target,  even  if  the  exchange  rate  is 
important for price stability and growth. The recovery is weaker and unemployment is higher 
than  expected  a  few  months  ago.  That  has  contributed  to  a  weak  exchange  rate.  It’s  a 
natural  outcome  of  diverging  monetary  policy  paths  in  the  US  and  the  euro  area.  Markets 
expect  a  less  accommodative  monetary  policy  in  the  United  States.  This  contributes  to  a 
stronger dollar. 
Even if Germany has no interest, and can have no interest, in them at the current time, 
does  Europe  not  ultimately  need  eurobonds,  i.e.  common  bonds  guaranteed  by  all 
states. 
Draghi:  That  requires  trust  in  your  partner.  Asking  this  now  is  the  wrong  question  at  the 
wrong time. Such a climate of trust first needs to arise. 
The ECB is providing ample money to the economy. Much of this probably flows into 
the  markets  for  shares,  real  estate  and  art.  Bubbles  emerge.  Does  this  point  to  the 
next crisis? 
Draghi: We understand such concerns. But the ECB is highly alert in this regard. Though we 
cannot with certainty exclude this possibility in the future, we don’t see speculative bubbles at 
this  time.  Bank  credit  has  not  increased  very  sharply.  Before  the  crisis,  bank  credit  had 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  expanded  far  too  much  and  too  quickly  which  contributed  to  creating  financial  bubbles  in 
several  parts  of  the  world.  People  were  speculating  with  borrowed  funds.  That  is  not 
happening now. 
Nikolaus von Bomhard, CEO of the largest reinsurance group Munich Re, thinks there 
is too much liquidity in the market. He finds that the situation is far more serious than 
many  people  believe,  and  states  “the  collateral  damage  caused  by  what  the  central 
banks in Europe are now doing is considerable”. 
Draghi: Our monetary policy stance is determined by our medium term assessment of price 
stability.  It  is  very  accommodative  and  rightly  so.  However  there  may  be  some  local 
exaggerations in some regions and markets, for example in a few regions the prices for real 
estate rose sharply. Their causes are local and should be addressed using the appropriate 
local instruments. The answer to this should come from the new macroprudential instruments 
and not from monetary policy. 
Stock  prices  have  increased  considerably.  In  their  search  for  yield,  investors  have 
obviously  discovered  equity  as  a  way  out.  The  price  of  Allianz  shares  has  doubled 
over the past three years, without there having been any change in the management, 
the strategy or the products. 
Draghi: Such developments are possible at the local level, also on the property market. But I 
would not see our policy as the cause.  Many companies have been able to increase both 
their turnover and their profit in real terms. 
All in all, you cannot be satisfied with what has been attained. When a patient looks up 
a doctor and finds, time and again, that all he does is increase the dose without that 
having the desired effect, that will surely have an impact on the patient’s confidence in 
the doctor, won’t it? 
Draghi: It is not true that our monetary policy is not having an effect. The ECB has ensured 
stable prices throughout its history. You should also look at the financial markets – before 
and  after  the  announcement  of  our  programmes!  You  will  see  something  major:  trust  has 
returned.  At  the  same  time,  we  have  created  a  banking  union  from  scratch,  including 
harmonised  banking  supervision  by  the  ECB.  That  has  also  strengthened  confidence.  But 
these improvements have not yet been passed on in full to the real economy. 
We are about to enter into a new year. What economic developments do you expect 
for 2015? 
Draghi:  The  moderate  recovery  is  continuing.  It  is  fragile  and  uneven.  Recently,  14  of 
18 countries have recorded positive growth, only two are in recession. Europe is gradually 
becoming stronger. I am confident that we’ll see all countries in the euro area grow this year. 
And after that? 
Draghi:  I  am  prudently  optimistic.  We  believe  that  the  combination  of  an  expansionary 
monetary policy with government reforms will bring back much of the confidence lost. 
Is it still legitimate to speak of Europe in a “crisis”? Or would you say that the crisis is 
already part of history? 
Draghi: The issue is rather an extended period of weakness than a crisis. 
Is a “black zero”, i.e. no government budget deficit, an important objective at present? 
Is Germany setting the right priorities in this respect? 
Draghi: I do not want to comment on that. Investment is low everywhere, also in Germany. 
Public  sector  investment  is  lower  than  the  historical  average.  The  International  Monetary 
Fund believes that there is an investment-to-GDP gap of 0.7%. The ECB believes the figure 
to be lower. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
Thus,  no  warning  about  a  policy  that  also  builds  upon  a  consolidation  of  public 
finances? 
Draghi:  Consolidation  is  the  basis for  sustained  growth.  Excessive  debt  led  Europe  into  a 
dead-end. 
You  are  under  immense  pressure.  Europe  is  looking  to  you,  the  heads  of  state  or 
government, as well as the general public and industry. Do you like such challenges, 
or do you tend rather to suffer under them? 
Draghi:  It  is  important  for  anybody  who  has  responsibility  to  be  aware  of  the  obligations 
entailed. That accompanies me through the day. That is what gives me strength. 
That sounds very Prussian for an Italian. 
Draghi: I believe that fulfilling one’s obligations is not a national peculiarity of the Germans. 
Is it one of the obligations of the President of the ECB to develop an exit strategy in 
case matters turn out to be different to what we have discussed here, for instance if 
the  euro  area  were  to  break  into  two  halves?  It  would,  at  any  rate,  be  difficult  for 
monetary policy to lastingly bridge an economic divide if governments fail to find one 
another. 
Draghi:  A  breakup  of  the  euro  area?  That  will  not  happen.  That  is  also  why  there  is  no 
Plan B. 
The political domain always needs a Plan B if things develop less well than envisaged 
is the view of, for example, Henry Kissinger, US Secretary of State for many years. In 
an interview he gave to Handelsblatt, he advised those with responsibly in Europe to 
think of alternatives. 
Draghi: Kissinger is a politician, I am not. 
And that is to remain so? 
Draghi: (laughs) I don’t want to be a politician. 
Not  even  as  State  President  of  Italy,  your  home  country?  President  Napolitano,  the 
current incumbent, intends to retire shortly. 
Draghi: My period of office as President of the ECB runs until 2019. 
Mr Draghi, thank you for the interview. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
