  Fernando Restoy: Presentation of the book “Financial regulation: the 
solution or the problem?” 
Closing  address  by  Mr  Fernando  Restoy,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Spain,  at  the 
presentation of the book “Financial regulation: the solution or the problem?”, Fundación de 
Estudios Financieros, Madrid, 5 March 2015. 
 Good morning. 
Many thanks for your introduction and for the opportunity to participate in the presentation of 
this report on financial regulation by a group of veritable authorities on the matter. I have had 
professional dealings with all of them to some extent in recent years and, in particular, with 
the report’s coordinator, José Pérez, who contributed to my joining the Banco de España – 
when  he  was  Director  General  of  the  Research  Department  –  some  years  ago  and  who 
therefore bears some responsibility for me being here before you today. 
The  book’s  title  is  admittedly  a  provocative  one:  “Financial  regulation:  the  solution  or  the 
problem?”  It  is  comforting  to  see  that  the  work’s  conclusion  is  not  that  regulation  is  the 
problem and, therefore, that deregulation is the solution. On the contrary, I believe that the 
authors, on the whole, appreciate the effort made to strengthen prudential regulation and, in 
particular, to gear it to the aim of achieving more and better capital. 
At the same time, I understand and largely share the concern to avoid excesses. Regulation, 
like the vast majority of public policies, is no free lunch. It is there to redress market failings 
that harm the collective well-being. Yet it also introduces distortions into resource allocation 
that  may  prove  costly.  Accordingly,  ahead  of  any  regulatory  proposal  it  is  more  than 
advisable to assess the scope of these distortions. 
The  book,  in  various  chapters,  correctly  identifies  potential  adverse  effects  of  what  is 
categorically referred to as a “regulatory tsunami” or even, as one author puts it, a “regulatory 
orgy”. The text broaches the possibility that the pace and scope of regulatory change might 
be  affecting  the  liquidity  of  certain  securities  markets  and  also  risk-taking  by  relatively 
unsupervised  sectors,  and  may  be  reducing  banks’  loan-granting  capacity  or  lessening 
competition,  among  other  developments.  The  authors 
the 
reasonableness  of  the  changes,  their  parameterisation  and  their  implementation  schedule 
must be properly evaluated taking into account not only their direct contribution to financial 
stability but also possible side-effects. 
One  idea  intimated  in  the  analysis  is  that,  given  the  risks  over-regulation  entails,  an 
alternative  approach  might  be  to  economise  on  regulatory  changes  and  to  increase 
supervisory  intensity  instead.  That  is  to  say,  there  should  be  an  attempt  to  contain  the 
avalanche  of  new  regulatory  requirements  applicable  across  the  board,  replacing  some  of 
them with intrusive supervisory measures, adapted to each bank’s specific situation. This is 
admittedly a very attractive idea which I would like to explore in the rest of my speech. 
rightly  suggest 
that 
Supervisory challenges 
Until  recently,  core  supervisory  actions  in  many  jurisdictions  had  focused,  perhaps 
excessively, on the surveillance of banks’ solvency through the monitoring of capital ratios as 
defined under current regulations. 
It is nevertheless true that the implementation of Basel Pillar 2 on the basis of the regular 
supervisory  review  exercises  has  somewhat  changed  the  situation.  Pillar  2  allows  specific 
requirements to be made of each bank on the basis of its risk profile so as to cover aspects 
not contained in Pillar 1 (minimum regulatory capital ratios). In that way the supervisor can 
regulate  solvency  requirements  by  adjusting  them  to  each  bank’s  situation,  thereby 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  extending the supervisor’s discretion and reinforcing its role, while reducing commensurately 
the relative significance of the general solvency requirements set in the regulations. 
Likewise, the inclusion of stress tests as a supervisory tool extends the supervisor’s capacity 
to  impose  capital  requirements  or  other  constraints  on  banks  when  this  is  necessary  to 
withstand adverse scenarios, even if such scenarios are rather unlikely. Once again, this tool 
broadens the weight of supervisory action. 
That said, in order to optimise the scope of supervision, supplementary instruments – that 
are not always available in accordance with the prudential regulations in force – are needed. 
For instance, not in all jurisdictions must the supervisor expressly authorise the eligibility of 
certain capital instruments, the acquisition of qualifying holdings in other financial institutions 
or dividend pay-outs charged to reserves. 
Above all, effective supervision should occasionally be based on discretionary actions rather 
than  mere  application  of  the  instruments  expressly  provided  for  under  the  regulations.  In 
particular,  the  supervisor  should  have  the  real  capacity  to  influence  bank  managers’ 
decisions through moral suasion and to formulate non-legally binding recommendations, in 
the  sure  knowledge  that  they  will  in  practice  be  very  widely  followed.  Supervisory  actions 
would otherwise be excessively hampered by a regulatory framework which, despite having 
been honed in recent years, can hardly envisage all situations of supervisory significance or 
include the full range of instruments needed to tackle such situations with the speed required 
in each instance. 
Finally,  it  is  difficult  for  supervision  to  be  effective  if  it  does  not  include  a  thoroughgoing 
review of banks’ financial statements. Allow me to elaborate on this point. 
Evidently,  an  essential  aim  of  supervision  is  to  oversee  banks’  solvency  through  the 
monitoring of capital ratios. Insofar as these ratios are calculated on the basis of accounting 
information, it is essential to ensure that such information properly reflects the value of the 
bank’s assets and liabilities. It is true that auditors and securities supervisors also perform 
this  task.  However,  the  specific  nature  and  complexity  of  bank  business,  the  evident 
relationship  between  published  financial  information  and  financial  stability,  and  the 
occasional lack of specificity of prevailing accounting principles all make it advisable that the 
prudential supervisor should contribute to encouraging supervised banks to follow the best 
practices,  in  full  conformity  with  current  regulations  and  the  distribution  of  competencies 
among institutions thereunder. 
Consequently,  the  effectiveness  of  the  supervisory  framework,  which  has  doubtless  been 
broadly  strengthened  by  the  changes  to  prudential  regulation,  depends  on  three  aspects: 
firstly,  the  legal  availability  of  a  broad  set  of  instruments  through  which  requirements  or 
restrictions  may  be  imposed  on  banks;  secondly,  the  ability  to  effectively  influence 
management decisions and policy through formally non-binding actions, and finally the ability 
to ensure the accounts give a fair view of the bank’s financial situation. 
True,  these  elements  have  largely  been  present  in  the  supervisory  framework  in  place  in 
Spain in recent years. The Banco de España has had a relatively extensive range of powers 
and has, in the exercise of its supervision, frequently used moral suasion and the issuance of 
recommendations,  which  banks  have  always  followed.  Further,  it  has  been  empowered  to 
issue  accounting  rules  affecting  individual  statements,  which  banks  and  audit  firms  have 
used  as  a  frame  of  reference  to  properly  complete  with  the  consolidated  statements  that, 
generally, must adhere throughout the European Union to International Financial Reporting 
Standards (IFRSs). 
This  supervisory  approach  is  not  identical  to  that followed  in  other  jurisdictions. Within the 
Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM), most authorities, including the ECB, have somewhat 
less  extensive  powers  than  the  Banco  de  España.  Moreover,  in  various  European 
jurisdictions, the supervisory strategy adheres to a greater extent than in Spain to the strict 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  use of the supervisory instruments formally recognised in the rules, with less dependence on 
recommendations or informal guidelines. 
For example, a recommendation, like the one made by the Banco de España in 2013 that the 
cash  dividends  paid  that  year  should  not  exceed  25%  of  consolidated  profit,  would  be 
relatively unusual in other countries. As you know, the recommendation made by the SSM 
Supervisory  Board  on  this  matter  in  January  was  only  restrictive  for  those  banks  whose 
solvency ratios failed to comply with the minimum levels in line with regulatory requirements. 
The  more  formalistic  approach  to  supervision  to  be  found  in  other  jurisdictions  provides 
greater  clarity  regarding  the  scope  of  supervision.  It  also  facilitates  identification  of  the 
respective responsibilities of bank managers and supervisors. However, rigidly subjecting to 
strict rules and standards of conduct naturally reduces the supervisor’s ability to identify and 
correct in good time potentially destabilising developments for the bank. 
In the field of accounting, the experience of the asset quality review recently conducted by 
the  SSM  shows  that  there  are  appreciable  discrepancies  between  the  specific  accounting 
criteria used in the different jurisdictions, although IFRS principles must be applied in all of 
them. 
In Spain’s case, as I have already mentioned, the criteria followed are those established by 
the circular of the Banco de España on public and confidential financial reporting rules and 
formats (known as the accounting circular). In other countries the criteria applied have been 
established over time and, generally, with less involvement of the supervisor. 
The  harmonisation  of  these  criteria  would  be  highly  desirable,  especially  in  relation  to  the 
classification  of  exposures  (an  area  in  which  the  European  Banking  Authority  has  made 
notable progress in recent months) and, in particular, provisioning policy. It should be noted 
that, although the supervisor may adjust the capital requirements, imposing higher levels of 
capital does not sufficiently make up for the lack of adequate provisions. That is because the 
level of provisions always has direct and transparent implications for the profit or loss of the 
bank,  while  an  increase  in  the  minimum  capital  requirements  via  Pillar  2  is  not  usually 
transparent (as the Pillar 2 requirements are not public) and, in most cases, does not have 
any practical effect, insofar as the bank has a capital buffer that enables it to cover the new 
requirements. Accordingly, the supervisor should be concerned to promote the application of 
rigorous  and  uniform  provisioning  criteria  involving  the  appropriate  recognition  on  the 
balance sheet of the value of each exposure. 
Clearly, the formal publication of binding accounting criteria by the SSM may be contested, 
insofar as accounting does not form part of its competencies according to the EU regulation 
under which it was set up. At the same time, subjecting all banks active in the markets to 
IFRSs  for  consolidated  accounts,  certainly  reduces  its  ability  to  exert  an  influence  in  this 
area.  In  short,  the  Spanish  experience  shows  both  the  usefulness  and  feasibility  of  an 
involvement of the supervisor that is compatible with the law in force. 
The  need  for  this  involvement  is  heightened  by  the  entry  into  force  in  2018  of  the  new 
standard (IFRS 9) under which banks will switch from using the concept of incurred loss to 
that  of  expected  loss  in  order  to  calculate  the  credit  portfolio  provision.  This  standard  is 
undoubtedly an improvement on the current situation, since it enhances the measurement of 
the risks of loans and receivables. At the same time, it significantly increases the complexity 
of  calculating  provisions  and,  thus,  increases the  risk  of  heterogeneous  application  across 
banks, which is something the supervisor should be aiming to mitigate. The work under way 
in the Basel Committee on this matter is therefore very timely. 
My  comments  so  far  imply  that  there  are  in  practice  significant  obstacles  to  satisfying  the 
legitimate  expectations  that  a  rigorous  and  granular  supervision  will  help  moderate  the 
intensity of the regulatory changes needed to promote financial stability. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  The regulatory frameworks in force and different supervisory cultures, along with the difficulty 
of  becoming  more  involved  in  accounting  practices,  often  place  considerable  limits  on  the 
intensity of supervision attainable. 
This explains why the actions of the authorities to prevent financial crises largely rest on the 
definition of clear and demanding prudential standards to underpin the work of supervisors. 
In  the  area  of  the  SSM,  these  restrictions  are  particularly  significant  at  the  moment  since, 
given the variety of supervisory practices and cultures in place, only adequate codifying of 
rules and procedures can help to ensure that banks are treated equitably, even if this means 
that some of the benefits, in terms of supervisory effectiveness, that an appropriate amount 
of discretion involve, have to be sacrificed. 
Clearly,  as  the  new  European  supervisory  regime  matures,  we  must  strive  to  develop  a 
specific action framework that incorporates the best practices and that is sufficiently robust to 
enable its application to be adapted appropriately to each specific circumstance. 
Thank you for your attention. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
