  Øystein Olsen: Economic perspectives 
Annual  address  by  Mr  Øystein  Olsen,  Governor  of  the  Norges  Bank  (Central  Bank  of 
Norway), to the Supervisory Council of Norges Bank and invited guests, Oslo, 12 February 
2015. 
Accompanying charts can be found at the end of the speech. 
 An oil-driven economy 
It is no coincidence that the walls in this hall cover the monetary history of modern Norway. 
The exhibit begins with the speciedaler from 1817 and continues up to the current banknote 
series.  Money  is  at  the  core  of  central  banking.  The  central  bank’s  task  is  to  ensure  the 
availability of means of payment and to preserve trust in the value of money. Low and stable 
inflation is the primary objective of monetary policy. 
People must also be assured that banknotes are genuine. It has become increasingly difficult 
to  prevent  the  counterfeiting  of  banknotes.  The  current  banknote  series  is  due  for 
replacement and work on a new series is well underway. 
The new banknotes are intended to function as a calling card for Norway. The choice of the 
sea as the theme embraces both our past and present. 
We have always made good use of the opportunities the sea has provided. It has been our 
lifeblood, and it has been a main artery. Fishing, shipping and trade have been a source of 
livelihood for many. With its changing face and magical power, it has also inspired artists. 
“Nothing is so boundless as the sea, nothing so patient.”1 
So begins Alexander Kielland’s first novel. Kielland, who was born and raised in Stavanger, 
could scarcely suspect the inconceivable wealth the sea was so patiently concealing under 
the sea floor. 
The discovery of oil was the start of an amazing era for the Norwegian economy. When the 
first oil was brought to the surface in 1971, income levels in Norway were low compared with 
other western countries (see Chart 1). 
The picture has reversed since then. We have gradually caught up to the wealthiest nations. 
Measured by GDP per capita, Norway now ranks at the top (see Chart 2). 
The large revenues from the oil industry have been managed soundly. Norway’s economy is 
in  good  order.  Well-functioning  institutions  and  a  high  degree  of  trust  between  different 
groups in society provided a good starting point. At an early stage, it was established that the 
oil  and  gas  resources  belong  to  the  Norwegian  people.  The  tax  system  and  framework 
conditions for the petroleum industry were designed so that the large revenues would accrue 
to the state. The stage was set for greater prosperity, with prospects for growth in both public 
and private consumption. 
The discovery of oil in the North Sea provided ample opportunities for Norwegian business 
and industry. The extraction of oil at great sea depths would require the development of new 
technologies. This also entailed the building up of expertise in our own country, which would 
secure a full order book for many years ahead – not only off our own shore. The activities on 
the Norwegian continental shelf would provide a boost to other industries in Norway. 
                                                
1   Alexander Kielland (1880): Garman & Worse (Translation by W.W. Kettlewell). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Developing a new industry and spending the associated revenues also entailed challenges. 
The  challenges  were  discussed  in  a  white  paper  in  1974,  Report  no.  25  to  the  Storting, 
entitled “The role of the petroleum industry in Norwegian society”. If room was to be provided 
for  supplying  the  oil  sector  and  for  increased  consumption  of  goods  and  services,  other 
industries would have to give way. The mechanisms described in the white paper are well 
known. 
I quote: 
“A  transfer  of  production  and  jobs  between  firms  and  industries  can  occur  via 
increased domestic cost pressures.” 
“Labour market pressures provide increased opportunities (...) for wage earners 
to find higher paid jobs.” 
“Firms 
downscale (...).” 
in  export-  or  import-competing 
industries  (...)  may  be  forced 
to 
The country was indeed braced for structural changes and the attendant costs. But the white 
paper made it clear that restructuring was a necessary precondition for reaping the benefits 
of economic growth. 
We  now  know,  more  than  40  years  later,  that  the  structural  changes  did  indeed  come  to 
pass. The industry structure of our economy has changed. 
A  growing  number  of firms,  not  only  machinery  companies,  have  targeted  the  oil  industry. 
Labour shedding in some sectors has freed up labour for other uses. 
Oil companies have shown the capacity and the willingness to pay. Tax rules have favoured 
investment  spending.  Earnings  have  been  solid.  The  companies’  employees  have  been 
wage winners here in Norway (see Chart 3). 
A  state-of-art  oil  service  industry  has  emerged.  New  products  and  technological  solutions 
have been developed. For many, the contracts on the Norwegian continental shelf have been 
a springboard to new export markets. 
There  is  a  wide  array  of  examples  of  company  turnarounds.  Let  me  offer  one:  The 
manufacturing company Øglænd in Rogaland, established by Jonas Øglænd from Sandnes 
as far back as in the 1860s, launched the bicycle brand DBS in 1932, which later became a 
household  name  in  Norway.  Today, the  company,  which  is  one  of  Norges  Bank’s  regional 
network  contacts,  is  one  of  the  world’s  leading  producers  of  suspension  systems.  Its 
customers  are  mainly  oil  and  gas  production  companies.  The  company  has  more  than 
doubled its turnover over the past three years. Around three-quarters of its sales are outside 
Norway. 
The oil and gas industry has been decisive for the strong growth in the Norwegian economy 
over the past 40 years. But the past 15 years stand out. From the end of the 1990s, the price 
of North Sea oil rose from about USD 10 per barrel to over USD 100 per barrel. Large shares 
of the sizeable oil revenues were transferred to our sovereign wealth fund, the Government 
Pension Fund Global (GPFG). GPFG assets are now more than double the GDP of Norway’s 
mainland economy. 
High  oil  prices  and  a  profitable  petroleum  production  industry  have  been  accompanied  by 
record-high oil investment in recent years (see Chart 4). The level in 2014 was equivalent to 
overall  investment  in  domestic  non-oil  industries.  The  positive  spillovers  to  the  oil  service 
industry and other private operators have been substantial. Employment has remained high 
and unemployment low, even when the financial crisis hit in 2008. 
The  Norwegian  economy  has  made  use  of  favourable  winds  and  seized  the  opportunities 
offered. The other side of the coin is an economy that has become increasingly dependent 
on oil, and thereby more vulnerable to changes in oil prices and petroleum revenues. The 
vulnerability manifests itself in several ways. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  A large share of the business sector and the labour market is now linked to the oil industry. A 
relatively  small  share  is  directly  employed  in  the  oil  and  gas  production  industry.  But  if 
account is taken of all the suppliers to the petroleum sector, about 1 in 9 jobs in Norway, a 
total of 300 000, are linked to the oil industry.2 Exports from Norway to the oil industry in other 
countries account for a growing share of this activity, and this may be a path forward in the 
face of a decline in petroleum investment in Norway. But should oil prices concurrently fall, 
that path may narrow. 
Moreover, labour costs in Norway have reached high levels. The cost level in the business 
sector  has  increased  sharply  in  relation  to  our  trading  partners  (see  Chart  5).  With  lower 
activity and earnings from the petroleum sector, oil service companies must seek inroads into 
other markets, which may be demanding with a high cost level. 
Substantial oil revenues and spillovers from the oil sector have driven up house prices and 
household  debt.  Debt  has  risen  markedly  faster  than  income.  The  debt  burden  on  both 
younger  and  older  households  has  increased,  but  the  burden  on  younger  households  is 
heaviest (see Chart 6). Today’s households of age 30 have an average debt equivalent to 
three times their disposable income. Ten years ago, the burden on households of the same 
age was substantially lower. 
Households  have  borrowed  heavily  to  buy  primary  and  secondary  homes,  possibly  on  the 
expectation of continued high income growth. The price of an average dwelling has almost 
doubled  over  the  past  ten  years,  with  the  sharpest  rise  in  cities  located  near  oil  industry 
areas. 
High debt levels give rise to vulnerabilities. The risk of default on residential mortgages, with 
large direct losses for banks, is nonetheless small. We have a solid social safety net, which 
provides an assurance in the event of income shortfalls. But in the case of a downturn that 
leads  to  higher  unemployment,  the  high  debt  levels  will  prove  uncomfortable  for  many 
households.  Should  house  prices  fall  at  the  same  time,  the  degree  of  discomfort  will 
increase. If house prices fall by 30 percent, one in four households will hold debt in excess of 
the value of their dwelling.3 If many households curb consumption in order to reduce debt, the 
economy  in  aggregate  will  be  adversely  affected.  Firms  may  then  encounter  payment 
problems, with a risk that rising bank losses may amplify the downturn. 
From a unique economic position to restructuring 
Oil prices have fallen by nearly 50 percent since summer. The price decline comes on top of 
a planned adjustment to a lower activity level in the oil sector. 
We have experienced that oil prices fluctuate. Market expectations indicate that prices will 
edge up again from today’s level. Low growth in the world economy has restrained growth in 
oil consumption, while the high prices prevailing in recent years have led to increased supply 
and more energy-efficient production methods. Last year, growth in global oil demand hit a 
five-year low, while non-OPEC production was record-high. 
New shale oil extraction technology has boosted the global supply of oil. Over three years, 
US oil production rose by more than 50 percent (see Chart 7). The additional supply from US 
shale oil is more than twice as high as Norwegian oil production. 
                                                
2   Estimate  based  on  calculations 
in  Blix  Prestmo,  Strøm  and  Midsem  (2015):  Ringvirkninger  av 
petroleumsnæringen  i  norsk  økonomi  [Spillovers  from  the  petroleum  industry  to  the  Norwegian  economy]. 
Forthcoming  report  from  Statistics  Norway.  Petroleum-related  exports  from  mainland  Norway  are  also 
included. 
3   Share of home-owning households. Debt is here defined as gross debt less bank deposits. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  Even though the price decline is putting a brake on exploration activity and the development 
of  new  fields,  we  can  expect  further  advances  in  the  new  technology  and  its  wider  use. 
Looking ahead, we must prepare ourselves for an environment of lower oil prices compared 
with  the  levels  seen  in  recent  years.  It  would  be  unwise  to  act  on  the  assumption  that  oil 
prices will again settle around USD 100 per barrel. 
It has long been clear that activity on the Norwegian continental shelf would decline. The fall 
in oil prices in recent months has accelerated and amplified an announced decline in activity. 
Norwegian  exporters  of  oil-related  goods  and  services  to  other  oil-producing  nations  may 
also face a decline. 
This  does  not  mean  that  the  oil  age  is  nearing  an  end.  Nearly  half  of  known  oil  and  gas 
reserves on the Norwegian continental shelf have not yet been extracted.4 Over the past few 
years, large new discoveries have been made. One of them – Johan Sverdrup – will soon be 
ready  for  development.  The  Norwegian  oil  service  industry  can  expect  new  orders. 
Nonetheless, the Norwegian economy must adapt to considerably lower demand from the oil 
sector.  From  being  in  a  unique  economic  position,  Norway  is  now  headed  for  a  period  of 
restructuring. 
The Norwegian business sector showed a high degree of willingness and ability to shift to oil-
related activity during the boom. The proximity to the continental shelf was an advantage for 
many  firms.  The  shift  to  an  oil-driven  economy  with  a  high  wage  capacity  has  been  a 
comfortable journey. The journey forward, where the oil service industry must downscale and 
other  trade-exposed  industries  must  grow,  will  be  more  challenging.  After  many  years  of 
relatively high wage growth in Norway, the domestic cost level must again be brought more 
closely into line with that of our trading partners. 
A  necessary  adjustment  of  the  cost  level  in  Norway  can  occur  by  means  of  lower  wage 
growth in Norway than in other countries and a depreciation of the krone exchange rate. The 
economic policy pursued will be of importance for how the adjustment takes place. 
In  Norway,  monetary  policy  is  geared  towards  keeping  inflation  low  and  stable.  The 
operational target of monetary policy is consumer price inflation of close to 2.5 percent over 
time.  The  inflation  target  provides  the  economy  with  a  nominal  anchor.  When  inflation 
expectations are firmly  anchored, monetary policy serves as the first line of defence when 
the economy turns down. 
Over  time,  monetary  policy  can  only  influence  inflation.  Monetary  policy  cannot  assume  a 
primary  responsibility  for  delivering  the  necessary  structural  changes  in  the  Norwegian 
economy.  But  via  the  exchange  rate  channel,  monetary  policy  can  help  facilitate  the 
necessary restructuring process. 
Without  our  own  national  currency  the  situation  would  be  more  challenging.  The  social 
partners would have to go it alone. The experience of some European countries shows that 
this can be demanding. With a floating exchange rate, the necessary adjustment of the cost 
level  can  take  place  faster,  and  may  prove  less  painful.  The  krone  exchange  rate  can 
function as a stabiliser. The depreciation of the krone through autumn last year indicates that 
this mechanism is functioning (see Chart 8). 
The  monetary  policy  credibility  built  up  over  the  years  is  now  of  considerable  benefit. 
Continued  confidence  that  inflation  will  remain  low  and  stable  over  time  is  a  necessary 
precondition for a pronounced weakening of the krone concurrent with a low key policy rate. 
The benefit associated with a currency of our own disappears if the temporary rise in inflation 
associated  with  a  krone  depreciation  is  countered  by  higher  wage  increases.  The  result 
would be a higher key policy rate and a stronger exchange rate than would otherwise be the 
                                                
4  
Including  reserves  that  have  been  approved  for  development  by  holders  of  oil  rights  and  other  proven 
resources in fields and discoveries. Source: The shelf in 2014, Norwegian Petroleum Directorate. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  through  autumn.  Already 
case  and,  not  least,  higher  unemployment.  The  social  partners  have  a  particular 
responsibility in this regard. 
In December last year, Norges Bank lowered the key policy rate by 0.25 percentage point to 
1.25  percent.  Norges  Bank  gave  weight  to  the  weakening  of  the  growth  outlook  for  the 
Norwegian  economy  observed 
last  winter,  oil  companies 
announced  a  period  of  downscaling,  with  cuts  in  investment,  headcounts  and  costs.  This 
tendency is being reinforced by the sharp fall in oil prices, which is having adverse spillover 
effects on the mainland economy and may lead to higher unemployment. 
Low  interest  rates  may  increase  the  risk  that  debt  and  asset  prices  reach  unsustainable 
levels.  Financial  imbalances  may  trigger  or  amplify  an  economic  downturn.  Norges  Bank 
gives  weight  to  this  consideration  in  interest  rate  setting.  The  goal  is  to  avoid  an  abrupt 
economic downturn and higher unemployment further out. 
If  financial  imbalances  build  up,  the  countercyclical  capital  buffer  for  banks  may  be 
increased.  The  authorities  may  also  have  to  consider  other,  more  targeted  measures  in 
response to rapid rises in house prices and debt in order to mitigate the risk associated with 
the high level of household debt. 
Norway has been among the first countries to introduce new capital requirements for banks 
and  their  capital  ratios  have  increased.  Norwegian  banks  are  therefore  more  resilient  to 
shocks than only a few years ago. A solidly capitalised banking system also has a greater 
capacity to intermediate credit during a period of restructuring. 
Norwegian government finances are solid. This has been of great benefit, particularly during 
the financial crisis. It may be tempting to increase public spending to soften the impact of a 
fall in oil prices on the real economy. The risk is that it may hold back the restructuring that is 
needed if oil prices remain low for a long period. Increased public spending may push up the 
cost of labour and stem the flow of labour to other exposed industries. 
When the economy turns down, with a pronounced rise in unemployment, fiscal policy can 
help support economic activity. But the Norwegian economy is still far from being in a crisis 
situation. Unemployment remains low. 
The international economic picture is mixed 
Six years have now passed since the global economy was severely hit by the financial crisis. 
The Norwegian economy quickly rebounded, supported by robust public finances and strong 
growth in the petroleum sector. Other advanced economies have experienced a more difficult 
time (see  Chart  9).  Excessive  debt,  in  both the  private  and  public  sector, has  led to  weak 
activity and high unemployment in many of those countries. 
Global  growth  can  be  expected  to  pick  up  gradually  over  the  coming  years. The fall  in  oil 
prices  is  a  positive  factor  for  the  world  economy.  But  the  picture  is  mixed.  In  the  US,  the 
recovery  is  on  a  firm  footing.  An  expansionary  monetary  policy  appears  to  be  having  the 
intended effect and both consumption and investment have turned up again. Unemployment 
has come down. The federal budget deficit has been substantially reduced partly thanks to 
higher  economic  activity.  Developments  in  the  UK  and  Sweden,  two  of  Norway’s  major 
export markets, have also been positive, although inflation remains a challenge. 
The  situation  in  the  euro  area  appears  to  be  more  problematic.  A  large  portion  of  the 
workforce is idle alongside production equipment. Inflation is worryingly low. Monetary policy 
easing  and  substantial  liquidity  provision  to  the  banking  sector  have  so  far  not  been 
sufficient. Moreover, the impetus from emerging economies has waned. Sluggish investment 
is  the  main  drag  on  growth  in  Europe.  Elevated  uncertainty  surrounding  economic 
developments,  high  corporate  debt  and  tight  bank  credit  standards  are  holding  back  the 
willingness and ability to invest. The result is a self-reinforcing mechanism that is difficult to 
unravel. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  With policy rates near zero, the central banks of major advanced countries have employed 
unconventional measures to stimulate activity and combat the risk of deflation. Large-scale 
securities  purchases,  including  government  bonds,  have  been  made.  The  bonds  are 
recorded  in  central  banks’  balance  sheets.  The  US  and  the  UK  were  among  the  first 
countries  to  launch  asset  purchasing  programmes  in  the  wake  of  the  financial  crisis.  Until 
recently,  the  European  Central  Bank  (ECB)  had  largely  used  a  different  channel,  namely 
supplying large loans to the banking system on favourable terms. Three weeks ago, the ECB 
decided to take it a step further and will soon start purchasing government bonds on a large 
scale. 
Government bond buying drives up prices and pushes down yields. The purchases may also 
push up equity prices and prices of riskier assets. The aim of these central bank operations 
is to stimulate lending and investment via lower long-term interest rates. There is evidence to 
suggest  that  the  measures  have  contributed  to  softening  the  downturn  and  boosting 
production in the UK and the US. 
The ECB’s asset purchase programme may prove to have a weaker effect on interest rates 
and investment in the euro area. Long-term interest rates are already very low. Inflation is at 
risk of becoming negative and is propping up real interest rates. The willingness of firms to 
invest is still being restrained by uncertainty and weak growth prospects. 
When central banks buy government bonds on a large scale, they pay using new money. A 
common  concern  is  that  pumping  new  money  into  the  economy  fuels  inflation.  Conditions 
have not been normal in recent years, however. The challenge now facing the euro area is 
weak growth combined with the risk of falling prices. 
Even though growth in the world economy is gradually picking up, it is unlikely that we will 
again see the high growth rates observed in the years prior to the financial crisis. Perhaps 
this  is  not  something  to  wish  for  either.  Some  of  that  growth  was  driven  by  unsustainable 
borrowing. 
Several conditions suggest that the traditional advanced economies are facing more deep-
rooted challenges. Productivity growth has declined since the 1970s (see Chart 10). Through 
several  decades  to  the  end  of  the  20th  century,  an  expanding  labour  force  and  higher 
education attainment contributed to driving the economy forward. Growth was accompanied 
by solid returns and considerably higher real interest rates than observed in recent years. 
These growth impulses are fading away. The labour force is expanding at a slower pace in 
many  countries.  If  productivity  and  labour  force  participation  do  not  increase  by  a 
considerable margin, the return on fixed investment will fall. Low growth and low real interest 
rates may be the new norm. 
The Government Pension Fund Global (GPFG) – further growth depends on future 
returns 
Over  the  past  20  years,  Norway  has  accumulated  considerable  foreign  financial  assets. 
Today, the Government Pension Fund Global (GPFG) is one of the world’s largest sovereign 
wealth  funds.  The  GPFG  represents  our  collective  savings  and  is  to  be  managed  to  the 
benefit  of  both  current  and  future  generations.  As  an  investor,  the  GPFG  makes  capital 
available for economic activity in other countries. The return on that capital will thereby be a 
result of the value added in those countries. 
The GPFG is a long-term, responsible investor. The objective of investment management is 
to  achieve  the  highest  possible  return  at  acceptable  risk  levels.  Norges  Bank’s  work  on 
responsible  investing  underpins  that  objective.  As  a  long-term  investor,  a  healthy  and 
sustainable development of investee companies and markets is in our interest. 
The work on responsible investing has evolved in pace with the increasing size of the GPFG. 
As from this year, Norges Bank is charged with the task of issuing decisions on observation 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  or exclusion of companies on the recommendation of the Council on Ethics. In such matters, 
Norges Bank can also consider using other ownership instruments. The aim is to establish a 
chain of instruments that can be used in the work on responsible investing. 
So far, our nation has earned a solid return on its financial assets. The cumulative return on 
the GPFG since its inception amounts to over NOK 2 000 billion. This is equivalent to about a 
third of total GPFG capital at the end of 2014. 
Our  return  measure  includes  both  capital  gains  and  direct  cash  flows,  which  comprise 
dividend and interest income. Equity prices are volatile. Dividend and interest income is more 
reliable.  Given  the  large  size  of  the  GPFG,  this  cash  flow  has  become  substantial  and  is 
higher than the revenues from major exports such as fish and metals (see Chart 11). 
Over  a  third  of  the  GPFG  is  invested  in  bonds.  The  real  interest  rate  on  high-grade 
government  bonds  is  the  starting  point  for  calculating  the  rate  of  return.  In  recent  years, 
those yields have been close to zero (see Chart 12). 
Low  bond  yields  reflect  global  economic  conditions:  Governments,  businesses  and 
households  are  seeking  to  save  more,  while  demand  for  safe  investments  has  increased. 
Central  banks’  substantial  asset  purchases  are  pushing  in  the  same  direction.  Low  yields 
may also reflect modest expectations of economic growth further ahead. 
There  is  no  return  without  risk.  The  GPFG  features  a  very  long  investment  horizon  and  a 
sizeable  capacity  to  bear  short-term  risk.  This  is  why  the  chosen  allocation  to  equities  is 
relatively  high.  It  is  also  the  reason  why  the  GPFG  has  moved  into  real  estate.  Looking 
ahead, we should also consider whether the allocation to real assets should be increased at 
the expense of bonds. 
Historically, equities have yielded higher returns than bonds. We also expect that to be the 
case ahead. But it is doubtful that equity prices will continue to rise at the same pace as in 
recent years. Weak or moderate growth in the real economy will feed through to the return on 
equities. 
So far, the GPFG has earned an annual real return of 3.8 percent. We must be prepared for 
the possibility that it will be lower, perhaps below 3 percent. 
Since the turn of the millennium, the government has received substantial revenues from the 
petroleum sector (see Chart 13). A large share has been saved and transferred to the GPFG. 
At the same time, the spending of petroleum revenues over the fiscal budget has increased. 
The  revenue  stream  from  the  continental  shelf  is  now  declining.  We  are  approaching  the 
point where government spending of petroleum revenues will exceed the revenues deriving 
from the petroleum sector. 
Over the past ten years, substantial amounts, about NOK 250 billion a year on average, have 
been  transferred  to  the  GPFG.  At  today’s  oil  price,  transfers  to  the  GPFG  will  quickly  fall 
towards zero, soon leading to a situation where its current income is limited to interest and 
dividend income (see Chart 14). Next year, it may be necessary to spend some of the return 
to cover the non-oil budget deficit. 
The GPFG is nearing the peak 
The decline in oil revenues ahead gives rise to new challenges for the Norwegian economy. 
But we must not forget that we have a good starting point. During a period of high oil prices, 
we have transformed oil in the ground into financial wealth. We have avoided making public 
sector budgets dependent on volatile income. The GPFG and the fiscal rule have been the 
main elements of the policy pursued. Let me recall the background for the fiscal rule. 
The  fiscal  rule  emerged  from  the  economic  discussion  around  the  turn  of  the  millennium. 
During the  time  before the  rule  was  established  in  2001,  inflows  into  the  GPFG  increased 
sharply  thanks  to  high  oil  prices  and  there  were  expectations  of  considerable  future 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  revenues.  It  was  demanding  to  restrain  spending,  while  it  was  clear  that  future  pension 
obligations would be substantial. 
The fiscal rule provided us with a long-term strategy for spending petroleum revenues. Even 
though  most  of  the  income  was  to  be  saved,  the  rule  provided  for  increased  spending  of 
petroleum wealth. 
The phasing-in of petroleum revenues was to be adapted to the economic cycle and be in 
line with the expected real return over time. The capital was to be preserved so that it would 
also benefit future generations. 
Fiscal policy was not set on autopilot. The rule was simple, but flexible. This has been one of 
its strong points. 
In the initial years under the fiscal rule, petroleum revenue spending rose approximately in 
pace with the GPFG’s capital. The fiscal rule, based on a real return of 4 percent, thereby 
provided  an  effective  constraint  on  petroleum  revenue  spending  over  the  fiscal  budget.  In 
recent years, high oil prices and solid returns have resulted in strong growth in the value of 
the  GPFG.  This  has  provided  scope  for  substantial  increases  in  petroleum  revenue 
spending,  although  spending  has  been  around  3  percent  of  the  GPFG’s  value  in  recent 
years. In a period of low unemployment and solid economic growth, it has been appropriate 
to set aside a greater share of the revenues. 
Recent  years  have  been  characterised  by  wide  fluctuations  in  returns,  with  extreme 
variability during the financial crisis. Volatility on the world’s stock exchanges and in financial 
markets  impacts  the  market  value  of  the  GPFG  and  thereby  the  anchor  for  fiscal  policy. 
Although  the  depreciation  of  the  krone  has  increased  the  GPFG’s  current  value  in  krone 
terms, this veils the fact that its international purchasing power is unaffected by changes in 
the  krone’s  value.  Such  volatility  has  become  more  difficult  to  manage  as  the  GPFG  has 
grown in size. 
Oil  prices  have  fallen  sharply  over  the  past  six  months.  Even  if  prices  edge  up  again,  we 
have  been  reminded  of  the  uncertainty  associated  with  future  revenues.  Lower  oil  prices 
imply slower growth in the GPFG than previously estimated. In the longer term, this means 
less money in the national coffer, with an attendant reduction in Norway’s fiscal space. 
At  an  oil  price  of  around  USD  60  per  barrel,  transfers  to  the  GPFG  may  come  to  a  halt. 
Rather,  it  seems  that  at  today’s  level  of  petroleum  revenue  spending  there  will  soon  be  a 
need to make transfers from the GPFG to the fiscal budget. Measured as a share of GDP, 
the GPFG may have already reached the peak. 
Calculations in the National Budget for 2015 illustrate this point (see Chart 15). The broken 
red  line  shows  the  trajectory  for  fiscal  space  assuming  a  real  return  of  4  percent.  The 
estimation is based on the oil price level prevailing late last summer. 
If the return is closer to 3 percent, there will be little room for increasing petroleum revenue 
spending over the fiscal budget. On the contrary, in the course of a few decades, petroleum 
revenue spending as a share of GDP will have to be reduced, that is to say fiscal policy will 
have to be tightened. 
If,  in  addition,  the  oil  price  settles more  permanently  around  the  level  observed  so far this 
year, fiscal policy must be adjusted earlier. If petroleum revenue spending follows the real 
return, we will be heading for a period of sizeable fiscal retrenchment each year. In addition, 
pension obligations will show a pronounced rise further ahead. 
The  fall  in  oil  prices  has  been  a  reminder  of  the  uncertainty  surrounding  future  petroleum 
revenues.  The  same  applies  to  the  return  on  GPFG  capital.  The  three  paths  illustrate  the 
uncertainty we are facing, but they also illustrate another important point. 
Spending the return will ultimately lead to a flattening of the GPFG, which will then decline as 
a  percentage  of  GDP.  It  has  always  been  clear  that  this  will  happen  at  some  point  in  the 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  future. What is new is that this may be the case here and now. At today’s oil price, the GPFG 
may have reached the peak. In that case, petroleum revenue spending as a percentage of 
GDP must be reduced to avoid using more than the return on the GPFG. 
Even if the oil price and the rate of return follow a path that allows the GPFG to grow for a 
period ahead, petroleum revenue spending should be restrained. By keeping spending well 
below the upper bound, the need for fiscal retrenchment further ahead can be reduced. 
The fiscal rule has functioned as a long-term guideline for fiscal policy for nearly 15 years. It 
has served its purpose. The time has now come to show restraint. A sensible risk adjustment 
is now to refrain from increasing petroleum revenue spending further from today’s level. The 
era of rising petroleum revenue spending may be behind us. 
Conclusion 
The more than forty-year-old white paper on the role of the petroleum industry in Norwegian 
society was far-sighted and proved to be on the mark. The structural changes described in it 
have  come  to  pass.  The  resulting  growth  in  prosperity  was  more  difficult  to  predict.  The 
development of an advanced oil service industry is an industrial adventure in its own right. 
We  have  extracted  large  quantities  of  oil  and  gas  at  very  favourable  prices,  and  have  set 
aside a sizeable portion of the revenues – to the benefit of future generations. 
The  oil  age  is  far  from  over.  But  activity  in  the  petroleum  sector  has  passed  the  peak.  In 
addition, we must be prepared for lower returns in the oil industry. 
The white paper also provides a glimpse into a time when belief in government intervention 
in  the  economy  was  far  greater  than  today.  That  regulatory  optimism  has  diminished 
significantly. We are left with an important recognition: The key to economic progress is the 
ability to restructure. 
We cannot rely solely on the sea to carry us forward: Let me again quote Kielland: 
“It is not true that the sea is faithless, for it has never promised anything...” 
Where our journey takes us is our own responsibility. Come what may. 
Thank you for your attention. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  9 
     10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
     BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
     12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  13 
     14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
     BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 15 
     16 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
