  Karnit Flug: Productivity in Israel – the key to increasing the standard of 
living: overview and a look ahead 
Speech by Dr Karnit Flug, Governor of the Bank of Israel, at the Israel Economic Association 
Conference “Productivity in Israel – the key to increasing the standard of living: overview and 
a look ahead”, Tel Aviv, 1 June 2015. 
 Highlights: 
• 
Macroeconomic  policy  aims  to  achieve  the  potential  growth  in  the  short  term. 
Potential output is determined on the basis of investment in growth drivers that we 
first  made  many  years  earlier.  We  need  to  focus  long  term  policy  on  an  effort  to 
break the productivity barrier, in order to ensure sustainable and inclusive growth, 
prosperity, and a suitable standard of living. 
Despite  the  growth  in  labor  input,  the  output  gap  between  us  and  advanced 
economies  isn’t  closing.  This  is  a  result  of  low  capital  stock  and  investment,  poor 
infrastructures,  inadequate  government  investment  in  research  and  development, 
and an inefficient business environment. 
Expected  trends  in  world  trade,  global  growth,  demographics,  and  human  capital 
development,  will  reduce  the  growth  of  Israel’s  economy  in  the  coming  decades. 
The convergence of employment rates among the Arab and ultra-Orthodox sectors, 
and of the relevant educational patterns among the ultra-Orthodox, to those of the 
overall  population  will  be  able  to  reduce  the  extent  of  the  negative  impact  on  per 
capita GDP and support a broadening of export industries and destinations. 
The economy’s relatively good macro situation enables us to focus on dealing with 
the  longer  term  economic  challenges.  There  are  many,  complex,  challenges,  but 
dealing with them is critical to our success, and to the benefit of the entire population 
in the coming years. 
In order to ensure our economic and social future, we must courageously look at the 
current situation, and begin even now to work to ensure an increase in productivity 
that  will  allow  an  extended  increase  in  the  standard  of  living  of  all  citizens  of  the 
country. 
    Israel’s  economy,  as  is  known,  made  it  through  the  global  crisis  better  than  most  other 
advanced  economies,  and  we  benefit  from  a  relatively  good  macroeconomic  situation, 
among  other  things  due  to  proper  macroeconomic  management  in  the  years  prior  to  the 
crisis,  and  determined  management  of  policy  during  and  after  the  crisis.  Correct 
macroeconomic  policy  is  obviously  a  very  important  component  in  ensuring  growth  and 
prosperity. However, it must be remembered that at any given time, macroeconomic policy 
acts  within  a  framework  of  long  term  economic  variables.  Macroeconomic  policy,  and 
monetary policy in particular, leads to full utilization of potential output in the short term – but 
that same potential output is determined, at the end of the day, on the basis of investments in 
education, infrastructures, and other growth drivers that were made more than two decades 
earlier. 
In my remarks, I will focus on the issue of productivity, which has challenged us for years, 
and as we will see, is expected to continue to challenge us in the future in view of the global 
environment, as well as in light of long term processes occurring in Israel. The analysis I will 
present indicates that continuing the present conduct will ultimately lead us backward. We 
must focus policy on efforts to break the productivity barrier, in order to ensure inclusive and 
sustainable  growth,  prosperity,  and  a  suitable  standard  of  living,  and  at  the  same  time  to 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  continue  to  maintain  macroeconomic  stability  and  strengthen  the  economy’s  resilience  to 
shocks. 
GDP per capita in Israel is around $32,500 in purchasing power parity dollars, compared with 
close to $38,000, on average, in OECD countries, or $53,000 in the US. This is a significant 
gap, and it can be seen that while the labor input has increased relatively rapidly since 1995, 
and has made a marked contribution to per capita GDP growth, GDP per hour of work, or 
labor  productivity,  nonetheless  grew  at  a  very  moderate  rate. The relatively  rapid  increase 
that we saw in labor input was reflected in a relatively rapid increase in the employment rate, 
even  compared  with  the  growth  rate  of  employment  in  OECD  countries,  and  despite  our 
having  two  population  groups  with  especially  low  employment  rates,  we  have  reached  an 
employment rate that is high compared with other countries. In contrast, labor productivity is 
especially poor, and is about 13 percent lower than the OECD average, and more than 40 
percent lower than the productivity level in the US. This is the source of the gap in GDP per 
capita, and thus in the standard of living, between us and other advanced economies. 
The  fact  that  there  is  a  gap  would  trouble  us  less  if  we  would  be  seeing  that  the  gap  is 
closing. We would have expected a process of convergence – that is, a situation in which a 
country with relatively low productivity sees a higher rate of productivity growth. However, the 
rate of productivity growth in Israel is markedly lower than that derived from the low level of 
productivity.  Clearly,  that  is  an  aggregate  view,  and  at  high  resolution  differences  can  be 
seen  in  the  productivity  level  of  different  industries.  In  industries  in  which  a  large  part  of 
output is export oriented, and that are exposed to competition from abroad, there is a positive 
productivity  gap  –  that  is,  their  level  of  productivity  is  greater  than  the  OECD  average.  In 
contrast,  in  industries  that  are  oriented  to  the  domestic  market  and  are  less  exposed  to 
competition from abroad, or to any competition, such as construction, electricity, water, and 
food, the level of productivity is lower than the OECD average. As such, I will focus on an 
attempt to answer the question of what has caused the output per hour of labor in Israel to 
grow relatively slowly and to be lower in Israel than in other advanced economies. 
I’ll present now a schematic diagram of the factors impacting on productivity and on GDP. 
GDP is affected first by factors of production – capital, human capital, and labor. These enter 
the production function – technology – and are affected as well by frictional factors, such as 
regulation, the business environment, etc. All these ultimately impact on output per hour of 
labor, which is the main factor in determining wages. Likewise, each one of the components 
in the production function is likely to be affected by policy. Thus, for example, the quantity of 
production factors available to the economy is impacted on by the level of investments, the 
labor  input  is  impacted  on  by  the  government’s  labor  market  policy  and  by  the  quality  of 
education, and policy can also influence the production function itself – on the adoption of 
technology, and of course on the business cycle as well. 
Capital stock per employee in Israel is markedly lower than in advanced economies – and 
not only is there a gap in the stock of capital, but the gap is not closing because the rate of 
investment is lower than in advanced economies. The level of investment in infrastructures is 
also  low,  and  in  most  years  is  around  2.5–3  percent  of  GDP.  Extensive  government 
investment in infrastructure is a complementary factor to investment by the business sector 
in  productive  capital.  In  a  recent  report,  the  International  Monetary  Fund  found  that 
investment in infrastructure makes a marked contribution to GDP growth. As such, the low 
level  of  investment  adversely  impacts  labor  productivity  in  Israel.  The  relatively  poor 
investment in infrastructure is also reflected in the poor level of quite a few infrastructures in 
Israel, particularly in the areas of transport and shipping, and perhaps surprisingly, even the 
share of Internet users in Israel is low in comparison with other countries. As noted, the labor 
input is relatively high, and the number of work hours per employed person in Israel is also 
relatively  high.  Employees  thus  contribute  their  share  to  production;  however,  taking  into 
account that at a given level of capital stock and infrastructures, the marginal product of labor 
eventually declines, the high number of work hours contributes to relatively  low output per 
hour of labor. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  One of the factors impacting on productivity – technology – is the expenditure on research 
and development. In this parameter, Israel is among the leaders since the share of R&D in 
output is relatively high, as a consequence of the high share of ICT industries in Israel. Some 
of  the  knowledge  acquired  within  the  framework  of  these  industries’  R&D  eventually  is 
expressed  in  production  abroad,  but  there  is  no  doubt  that  the  fact  that  the  development 
centers of major international companies are located in Israel has positive external effects. In 
any case, this is mainly private R&D. Government expenditure on R&D is relatively modest, 
at  only  one-half  a  percentage  point  of  GDP,  compared  to  0.7  percent,  on  average,  in  the 
OECD, or 0.9 percent in the US. The importance of government expenditure on R&D can be 
important  particularly  for  the  low  technology  industries  that  are  not  at  the  forefront  of 
technology, and for whom assistance with R&D can contribute to increasing innovation and 
improving competitiveness vis-à-vis foreign competitors. 
Policy  also  impacts  on  the  environment  in  which  the  business  sector  works,  and  in  this 
regard I will again note Israel’s not-respectable rank – 40th place – in the World Bank’s Doing 
Business index, which measures the bureaucratic burden in the economy. To my regret, this 
is a marked decline in the ranking relative to our place 7 years ago – 26th place – not because 
we are moving backward, but because the improvement, if any, in the bureaucratic burden 
for us is slower than in other countries. In view of the fact that the business sector competes 
with manufacturers in other countries, it is of course another disquieting finding. There are 
areas  such  as  registering  property,  dealing  with construction  permits,  and  others,  in  which 
there are more than 100 countries that are in a better situation, in this regard, than Israel, 
which obviously has an impact on economic activity. 
Until  now  we  have  discussed  the  supply  side,  but  growth  in  Israel  is  very  affected  by  the 
demand abroad for Israeli products, and thus is aligned with global growth. In recent years, 
the connection has become even tighter, as the share of exports in GDP is increasing, and 
there is a high correlation between Israeli exports and world trade. Accordingly, the forecast 
for world trade is another factor that we need to take into account when we think about the 
future of Israel’s economy. 
Let us now examine which factors are expected to continue and affect productivity and 
growth in the coming years. The first factor is the development of the global economy, 
and it is not heartening – in recent years there has been a marked slowdown in growth of 
advanced economies and some slowdown in emerging markets, and the forecast is for the 
growth  rate  to  increase  slowly  in  advanced  economies,  and  to  continue  to  decline  in 
emerging  markets.  There  is  broad  agreement  on  the  assessment  that  the  rate  of  global 
growth over the next 5 years will be markedly lower than that of the decade before the crisis. 
Different  economists  use  different  terms  in  order  to  describe  this  –  Summers  speaks  of 
“secular  stagnation”  and  forecasts  a  marked  moderation  for  a  considerable  time,  while 
Rogoff is slightly more optimistic and speaks of a “super debt cycle”, a process in which high 
levels  of  debt  are  what  lead  to,  at  least  in  the  medium  term,  expected  moderate  global 
growth. In any case, the moderate expected global growth will impact on Israel’s growth as 
well. Moreover, the assessment based on the IMF’s analysis is that the connection between 
global growth and world trade has weakened in recent years, and is expected to be weaker 
than in the past. Some countries whose past contribution to growth of world trade was very 
high  are  going  through  a  growth  reorientation  process  toward  domestic  market  oriented 
growth, and therefore for given global growth we will see a more moderate increase in world 
trade. Due to the fact that global growth is translated into demand for Israeli output through 
world trade, this development is expected to be significant for the Israeli economy. It should 
be emphasized that this is a slowdown in the long term component of world trade, beyond 
the short term cyclical slowdown. We have thus surveyed two global trends that are expected 
to act adversely on growth in Israel – a slowdown in global growth, and a slowdown in world 
trade for a given level of growth. The estimated combined impact of both these trends is that 
they will reduce growth in Israel by 0.4–0.8 percentage points, relative to the growth seen in 
the decade prior to the crisis. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  
 
A second factor, which is also behind some of the trends in the slowdown of global growth, 
is the demographic factor. In Israel, based on Central Bureau of Statistics projections, two 
intertwined trends are expected. The first is a change in the composition of the population: 
within 50 years, the share of non-ultra-Orthodox Jews will decline from 70 percent to around 
50 percent, the share of the Arab population will increase slightly, and the share of the ultra-
Orthodox population will increase from 10 percent to around 27 percent. The second trend is 
of course the aging of the population – the share of the population over the age of 65 will 
increase from around 10 percent to around 17 percent. The significance is that there will be a 
slowdown in the rate of growth of the working age population. In addition, if there will be no 
change in the employment rate of the Arab and ultra-Orthodox sectors, aside from the trend 
of slow improvement seen in recent years, the increase in the share of these groups in the 
population will also lead to a decline in the participation rate and the overall employment rate. 
These  demographic  changes,  which  are  seen  already  today,  are  also  expected  to  impact 
markedly  on  future  growth.  Thus,  if  there  won’t  be  a  continuation  of  the  process  of  rising 
participation  rates  of  the  Arab  and  ultra-Orthodox  populations,  the  combined  demographic 
changes are expected to reduce future annual growth by around 0.6 percentage points. In 
contrast,  if  the  process  that  has  begun  –  of  an  increase  in  the  participation  rates  of  these 
groups – will persist, the negative impact on growth can be reduced by about a third, to 0.4 
percentage points per year. 
The third factor that impacts on growth here and worldwide is the rate of increase of the 
population’s  human  capital,  as  measured  by  years  of  education.  After  an  extended 
process of notable increase in the population’s education level, a marked slowdown in this 
process  is  expected,  because  the  increase  in  higher  education  attainment  by  most  of  the 
population is expected to reach exhaustion. Based on research by Eyal Argov of the Bank of 
Israel Research Department, if there is no change in the ultra-Orthodox population’s patterns 
of  attaining  education  that  is  relevant  to  the  labor  market,  the  trend  of  slowdown  in  the 
human-capital  growth  rate  is  expected  to  reduce  per  capita  GDP  growth  by  around 
0.2 percentage points per year in the coming years. If there is a change in the patterns of 
educational attainment among this population, so that the education attained is relevant to 
the labor market to an extent that is similar to the rest of the population, the change may be 
reduced to about half, meaning 0.1 percentage points per year. 
What is the significance of these trends? 
If  we  won’t  affect  the  underlying  factors  that  lead  to  our  productivity  being  low  and  slow-
growing,  not  only  will  we  not  reach  GDP  per  capita  levels  that  are  similar  to  the  most 
advanced  economies,  but  the  demographic  trends  and  the  process  of  exhausting  the 
increase  in  the  educational  attainment  that  we  have  described  so  far  are  expected  to  act 
toward  a  notable  slowdown  in  the  future  rate  of  GDP  per  capita  growth.  A  scenario  of 
convergence – of both employment rates and the relevance of education – to the patterns of 
the  general  population  will  reduce  part  of  the  negative  impact  on  GDP  per  capita.  Global 
economic trends are also, as noted, a headwind to growth. These all sharpen the need to 
use all the instruments available to us in order to encourage the growth of productivity in the 
economy, in a manner that allows the continued rapid growth of standard of living, at a rate 
we have seen until now, and maybe even higher. 
So what needs to be done? 
Populations should be integrated into employment – including active labor market 
policy 
The  expenditure  on  services  supporting  employment  in  Israel  is  low  relative  to  levels 
generally  seen  in  advanced  economies,  and thus  it  is  even  more  important  to formulate  a 
policy that is effective, consistent, and focused on providing an incentive for employment. In 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  this regard, it is important to maintain the link between the provision of services supporting 
employment  and  actual  employment.  For  example,  linking  the  subsidy  for  daycare 
centers  to  the  employment  of  both  parents  is  an  important  device  for  encouraging 
integration into the labor market; it is a mistake to abandon it. In addition, the earned income 
tax credit (negative income tax) – a mechanism that deals with the problem of the working 
poor and does not adversely impact the incentive to work – should be increased. At times, in 
the first stages of entering the labor market, there is actually a decline in output per worker, 
since  usually  it  involves  unskilled  workers,  and  it  is  likely  that  the  improvement  in  the 
economic situation is not large, or is even minimal, in view of the fact that going out to the 
labor  market  involves  costs,  such  as  childcare,  etc.  With  time,  the  workers  acquire  the 
required skills, which improves their output and wages, and as a direct result, overall welfare 
in the economy. Furthermore, joining the labor supply has an impact on the next generation, 
including values, education, and more. 
There  is  further  potential  for  increasing  employment  rates,  among  older  workers.  It  is 
important to implement policy measures that support the ability of such workers to reach their 
full potential, and in this regard I again note the need to increase the retirement age. 
Human capital should be increased, with an emphasis on education and professional 
training 
• 
• 
Improve the education system and the schooling infrastructure 
Furnish the skills that are critical to successful integration into the labor market, such 
as math, science, and English, to the ultra-Orthodox population as well 
Reduce the high-school drop out rate, strengthen science and technology abilities, 
and improve Hebrew language skills in schools in the Arab sector 
There is room to markedly expand the technological professional education. At the 
high  school  level,  general  scientific  and  technological  content  should  be  provided, 
which will allow a choice between a professional track and an academic track at a 
later  stage,  and  to  concentrate  the  professional  education  primarily  on  focused 
training after military service (and not by placing students in specific tracks). In the 
dynamic modern labor market, professional training in school is likely to be obsolete 
by the end of youths’ military service. 
  Factors supporting growth and productivity should be dealt with: 
• 
• 
• 
Infrastructure 
Improve the business environment and reduce regulation 
Competition  –  in  those  industries  that  are  not  exposed  to  domestic  or  foreign 
competition 
Promote reforms (ports, electricity, and the energy and gas industry) 
Improve and increase efficiency of public services systems – education, health (with 
a view to the aging population), welfare (by improving employment tests that allow 
increased focus of support) 
 Expand export industries and destinations. We have seen that in export industries, the 
need to compete vis-à-vis abroad leads to higher productivity. 
• 
New  markets:  Israel’s  exporting  has  gone  a  long  way  to  gain  access  to  new 
markets,  and  we  should  continue  to  work  to  expand  the  range,  especially  against 
the background of the low potential growth of our traditional export destinations. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
   New  exporters:  We  should  provide  assistance  to  small/medium  manufacturers  to 
deal  with  difficulty  of  breaking  into  global  markets,  through  already  existing 
government mechanisms as well. 
Encourage R&D not only for high technology industries, but also for low and medium 
technology industries in which innovation can make the difference between success 
or failure, and to improve the ability to export and compete abroad. 
 Against  the  background  of  Israel’s  relatively  good  macroeconomic  situation,  low 
unemployment,  and  moderate  (but  positive)  growth,  we  are  not  required,  as  many 
other countries are, to deal with an immediate crisis. Therefore, we have the ability, 
but the obligation as well, to focus on dealing with the longer term challenges to the 
economy.  As  I  have  shown,  they  are  many  and  complex,  but  dealing  with  them  is 
critical to the success of the economy and to the welfare of the general population in 
the coming years. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
