  Philip Lowe: National wealth, land values and monetary policy 
Address  by  Mr  Philip  Lowe,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Australia,  to  the 
54th Shann Memorial Lecture, Perth, 12 August 2015. 
 Accompanying charts can be found at the end of the speech. 
I would like to thank Gianni La Cava and Christian Gillitzer for assistance in the preparation of this talk.  
It is a great honour for me to have been invited to deliver the Shann Memorial Lecture for 
2015. I would like to thank the University of Western Australia very much for this privilege 
and I am delighted to be in Perth once again. 
Edward  Shann  stands  tall  in  the  list  of  Australia’s  distinguished  economists.  His  work 
emphasised the importance of looking back to history to understand what the future might 
hold for us. He was a tireless advocate for market-based policies, including in commodity, 
labour and foreign exchange markets. He was a strong and prominent voice against the tariff 
wall  that  had  been  built  around  Australian  industry.  And  his  writings  emphasised  the 
importance  of  spending  public  money  wisely  and  the  dangers  of  excessive  and  poorly 
designed regulation. 
I suspect that if Shann was among us this evening, he would see much that he liked in the 
Australian economy of 2015. While we still have work to do, in many respects we are closer 
to the world that he advocated than we were in the 1920s when he was doing much of his 
work. Most of us, I think, would agree that the general move to a fairly liberalised market-
based economy has served Australia and its people well. 
Reading  through  Shann’s  work  in  preparation  for  this  evening’s  talk,  I  was  struck  by  his 
fascination with two other very modern Australian interests: balance sheets and land prices. 
While  I  didn’t  come  across  him  using  the  exact  term  “balance  sheets”,  Shann’s  writings 
display  a  deep  interest  in  the  evolution  of  the  liabilities  and  assets  of  both  the  public  and 
private  sectors.  He  understood  the  dangers  of  excess  leverage.  He  understood  the 
importance of making sure that assets generated a return to cover their financing costs. And 
he  understood  the  difference  between  current  economic  activity  and  the  accumulation  of 
wealth. 
But it is Shann’s discussion of land prices that really makes his writings come to life. He talks 
of “bubbles”, of “log-rollers” pushing projects that increased the value of their own land and of 
the antics of the “land-jobbers”. And, when talking of the land boom of the 1880s, he cites 
with, I think, some disquiet, TA Goghlan’s observation that “Free conveyances carried people 
to the sales, champagne lunches gave them courage to bid, and extraordinary terms of credit 
reconciled them to their purchases.”1 
Today,  people  mostly  find  their  own  way  to  property  sales  and  I  hope  that  champagne  is 
consumed  only  after  the  bidding  process  has  stopped.  But,  our  fascination  with  land,  its 
value, and its financing has endured. In a way, it has become part of our national culture. 
It is this interest of Shann’s in balance sheets and land that serves as the motivation for my 
remarks this evening. 
Most of the time, economic commentary focuses on changes in income and spending: things 
such as changes in GDP, consumption, retail trade, exports, etc. Most of the time, much less 
attention is paid to the developments in our national balance sheet. And when attention does 
turn to the balance sheet, the focus is often on the liability side, not on the asset side. So, 
                                                
1   See Shann (1927), (1930, ch XVII, p312). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  this  evening,  I  would  like  to  take  this  opportunity  to  talk  a  little  about  Australia’s  national 
balance sheet, and particularly the asset side. 
My remarks are in three parts. In the first part, I will look at what we know about our balance 
sheet  and  how  it  has  changed  over  time,  including  the  relative  importance  of  land  and 
physical capital. In the second part, I will discuss the increased value of our land and how we 
might interpret the changes that have taken place. And then, finally, I will discuss how some 
of these issues have a bearing on monetary policy. 
Australia’s national balance sheet 
So, first to our national balance sheet and what we know about Australia’s net wealth. 
Constructing  a  national  balance  sheet  is  a  challenging  task,  with  measurement  problems 
almost everywhere one looks. While the value of physical assets can be estimated with some 
precision,  estimating  the  value  of  other  assets  can  be  extremely  complicated.  One  of 
Australia’s  most  important  national  assets  is  our  institutional  arrangements:  things  like  the 
rule of law, our strong and credible institutions, and our stable political system. But putting a 
monetary value on these particular assets is nigh impossible.2 There are also challenges in 
measuring the value of other important national assets, including our cultural heritage, our 
human capital and our rich and varied natural environment. There are various efforts around 
the world trying to make progress on how to measure these types of assets, but most of this 
work remains experimental.3 
This  means  that  inevitably,  the  construction  of  a  national  balance  sheet  is  only  partial, 
covering  the  elements  that  we  can  measure  with  some  confidence.  Notwithstanding  this, 
since the late 1980s, the Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS) has been producing an annual 
balance sheet for Australia, including an annual estimate of Australia’s net wealth, that is, the 
difference in the value of our assets and our liabilities. 
There are two “technical” issues that are worth pointing out before talking about this balance 
sheet in some detail. 
The  first  is  that  while  the  balance  sheet  includes  a  wide  range  of  assets,  it  does  not 
incorporate the assets that I was just talking about.4 The assets that are included are man-
made physical assets – such as buildings, infrastructure, and plant and equipment – as well 
as land, weapons systems, livestock and timber, inventories and known mineral resources. A 
number of intangible assets are also included, such as computer software, some intellectual 
property,  and  research  and  development  assets.  So  it  is  a  broad  list  of  both  private  and 
public assets, but not a universal list. 
The second technical point is that the balance sheet does not include financing transactions 
that are “internal” to Australia; that is, it does not record when one Australian entity provides 
finance to another. This reflects the fact that while financial transactions between Australians 
do  affect  the  risk  profile  of  individual  balance  sheets  within  the  economy,  they  do  not,  by 
themselves, change our national net wealth. It is what is done with this internal finance that 
matters for wealth. 
                                                
2   To some extent the value of these institutional arrangements is capitalised into our land prices. 
3   Some  years ago  the  ABS  (Wei  2004,  2008)  produced  experimental  estimates of  human  capital  stocks  and 
flows  for  Australia.  Boarini  et  al  (2012)  provide  a  cross-country  review  of  practices  to  measuring  human 
capital.  The  United  Nations  Statistical  Commission’s  ‘System  of  Environmental-Economic  Accounting’ 
provides a framework to unify statistical information on the environment and its relationship with the economy. 
The ABS has been producing a Water Account since the early 2000s, providing information on the physical 
and monetary supply and use of water in the Australian economy. 
4   Australian Bureau of Statistics (2014). 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  In contrast to domestic financing transactions, when we draw on funding from the rest of the 
world, or buy assets overseas, our net asset position as a country does change. This means 
that  financial  transactions  with  the  rest  of  the  world  are  included  in  the  national  balance 
sheet. 
So, to the data. 
There are four broad observations to which I would like to draw your attention. 
The first is that according to the ABS’ latest estimates, the total value of Australia’s assets as 
at  end  June  2014  was  around  $12½  trillion,  or  around  $500,000  for  each  person  living  in 
Australia. After an adjustment is made for net foreign liabilities, the net asset position, or net 
wealth, was around $10 trillion, which is the equivalent to around six times Australia’s annual 
GDP. 
The second observation is that, over recent decades, net wealth has increased at a faster 
rate  than  has  GDP  (Graph  1).  Between  1989  and  2014,  the  nominal  value  of  net  wealth 
increased  at  an  average  pace  of  around  7  per  cent  per  year,  compared  with  an  average 
increase in nominal GDP of around 6 per cent. While net wealth grew more slowly than GDP 
in the first half of the 1990s, for most of the time since it has grown more quickly than GDP. 
The third observation relates to the composition of our national assets (Graph 2). Land is the 
asset class with the highest value. As at June 2014, it accounted for 34 per cent of the value 
of  our  national  assets.  This  is  followed  by  non-dwelling  construction  –  offices,  factories, 
infrastructure,  etc.  –  which  accounts  for  a  further  18  per  cent  of  total  assets.  And  then 
overseas financial assets and the value of our dwellings each account for a little under 15 per 
cent of the national balance sheet. Intellectual property assets account for only around 2 per 
cent of the total. 
The final and perhaps most interesting set of observations relate to how the structure of the 
balance sheet has changed through time. 
One  very  clear  trend  has  been  a  substantial  increase  in  the  value  of  our  foreign  financial 
assets and liabilities; both have increased much faster than net wealth (Graph 3). In effect, 
as we have become more globally integrated as a nation, there has been a grossing-up of 
our  balance  sheet  with  the  rest  of  the  world.  Australians  now  hold  many  more  overseas 
assets  than  they  once  did.  And,  conversely,  overseas  residents  now  hold  many  more 
Australian assets than they once did. 
In net terms, Australia still has a net liability position with the rest of the world, having been a 
drawer  on  overseas  savings  for  more  than  200  years.  Interestingly  though,  while  our  net 
liability position, relative to our national income, has been relatively steady in recent decades, 
relative to the value of our national assets it has declined and is currently at the lowest level 
in around 25 years (Graph 4). 
In  terms  of  the  non-financial  assets,  there  have  also  been  significant  changes  over  time 
(Graph  5).  The  most  striking  of  these  is  the  increase  in  the  relative  importance  of  land. 
Indeed, almost three-quarters of the increase in the ratio of net wealth to GDP since the late 
1980s is explained by higher land prices. 
Given  the  significance  of  this  change,  I  want  to  explore  why  it  has  occurred  and  its 
implications a little later in this talk. But before I do so, it is worth talking about other changes 
in the national balance sheet. 
One of these is the noticeable increase in the value of our mineral and energy resources.5 In 
1989, these assets accounted for just 3 per cent of net wealth. Today, the figure is 12 per 
                                                
5   The value of these resources is estimated as the current value of economically exploitable resources given 
current technology and prices. Price estimates are based on a 5-year lagged moving average. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  cent.  This  rise  reflects  both  the  discovery  of  new  resources  and  higher  commodity  prices. 
These  higher  prices  have  increased  the  present  discounted  value  of  expected  future 
production,  as  well  as  the  share  of  the  existing  known  reserves  that  can  be  extracted 
economically at some point in the future. 
One aspect of the balance sheet that has shown relatively little net change over time is the 
value  of  non-dwelling  construction  assets,  relative  to  GDP.  The  relative  valuation  of  these 
assets did decline over the 1990s, but this trend reversed in the 2000s with the investment 
boom in the resources sector. In contrast, the value of machinery and equipment, relative to 
GDP, has fallen steadily since at least the late 1980s, although this is largely explained by 
the fall in the relative price of machinery and equipment. 
Looking  to  the  future,  it  is  important  that  Australia  continues  to  invest  in  our  asset  base. 
While  growth  in  the  overall  capital  stock  has  been  strong  in  recent  years  because  of 
developments  in  the  resources  sector,  growth  in  the  non-mining  capital  stock  has  been 
noticeably  weaker.  This  weak  growth  is  partly  cyclical,  although  it  is  proving  to  be  more 
protracted than earlier expected. There may also be a structural element, and it is possible 
that,  over  time,  we  might  return  to  the  earlier  general  downward  trend  in  the  value  of  our 
physical capital stock relative to GDP. One contributing factor here is that a number of the 
strongly  growing  services  industries  are  more  intensive  in  human  capital  than  in  physical 
capital.  Given  this,  our  focus  needs  to  be  not  just  on  creating  an  environment  that  is 
conducive to the accumulation of physical assets but, perhaps even more importantly over 
the medium term, on the accumulation of human capital. 
One other aspect of the current debates about investment that I am sure Shann would have 
found  very  interesting  is  that  surrounding  infrastructure  investment.  His  writings  drew 
attention to the important role that such investment can play in a growing economy. But they 
also emphasised the importance of making sure that investments in infrastructure generate 
an appropriate rate of return. In his short book about the 1890s and the 1920s, Shann writes 
“Public  works  are  excellent  things,  but  only  so  long  as  the  balance  is  preserved  between 
capital and earning power”. In this context, he writes approvingly of the appointment by Sir 
Henry Parkes in 1888 of Edward Eddy as the Chief Commissioner of Railways in New South 
Wales, stating that: “Eddy raised the return on the capital invested in the New South Wales 
railways from 2.85 per cent to 3.58 per cent, and in tramways from 1.98 per cent to 5.28 per 
cent”. He contrasts this with the outcomes in Victoria where he writes with strong disapproval 
that  the  Victorian  railways  commissioner,  Richard  Speight,  “caught  the  feverish  spirit  of 
speculation”.6 
Shann’s general observations in the area transcend time. 
If we fast forward to the Australia of 2015, there is a reasonable case that there are a number 
of investments in new infrastructure assets that would satisfy Shann’s test that “the balance 
is preserved between capital and earning power”. This is especially so when funding costs 
today are lower than at the time when Shann was writing, and indeed, in many cases, the 
lowest since Federation. 
But, as he often pointed out, money spent on infrastructure can be wasted easily. The key 
here  is  to  ensure  that  the  right  projects  are  selected,  the  construction  costs  are  well 
controlled and that the risk-sharing between the public and private sectors serves the public 
interest.  Getting  these  “governance  issues”  right  is  far  from  straightforward,  but  it  is  not 
impossible. Making progress on this front would help us build the infrastructure assets that 
would strengthen our national balance sheet and lift our productive capacity. 
                                                
6   The quotes here come from Shann (1927), pp 30, 33 and 12, respectively. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  The final aspect of this balance sheet to which I want to draw your attention before returning 
to the issue of land prices is the gradual, albeit relatively small, increase in the value of our 
dwellings (excluding the land component) relative to our incomes. 
There are a number of factors that have contributed to this increase. One is that, since the 
late 1980s the average number of people living in each dwelling has fallen a little, so that the 
number of dwellings has increased a bit more quickly than the population. Another is that, 
over  time,  the  average  quality  of  our  dwellings  has  improved  and  the  average  size  of  the 
dwellings has increased; for example, since the late 1980s, the average floorspace of newly 
constructed houses has risen by around 45 per cent (Graph 6). Interestingly, both of these 
trends – that is, towards smaller households but bigger dwellings – seem to have reversed in 
recent times. 
These data put into some perspective the claims that are sometimes made that Australians 
are investing too much in housing. In a sense, the upward drift in the value of the constructed 
housing stock, relative to our incomes, looks neither surprising, nor remarkable. Right around 
the  world,  as  people’s  incomes rise,  they  tend  to  use  the  extra  income to  purchase  better 
dwellings. 
Instead, what is perhaps more remarkable is the extra resources that Australian households 
have  used  to  purchase,  from  one  another,  the  land  on  which  these  bigger  and  better 
dwellings sit. Indeed, most of the extra money that has gone into residential property has not 
gone  not  into  the  physical  stock  of  housing,  but  rather  into  land.  So  our  fascination  with 
housing is really, mostly, a fascination with land. 
Land values and wealth 
I would now like to explore this rise in the value of our land, and its implications, in a bit more 
detail. 
Taken literally, the figures that I have presented invite the conclusion that our national wealth 
has risen largely because of higher land prices. But is such a conclusion really warranted? 
Have  we  really  become  wealthier  as  a  nation  simply  because  the  value  of  our  land  has 
increased? 
The answer would clearly be yes if this increase was because we had discovered more land. 
To my knowledge, though, this has not happened.7 
It would also be yes if the main factor driving the increase in land prices was a large leap in 
productivity  of  our  agricultural  land.  Over  time,  crop  yields  have  indeed  increased 
substantially, but the resulting higher value of rural land accounts for only 5 per cent of the 
increase in the total value of land in Australia since the late 1980s.8 Instead, almost all the 
increase has come from the higher value of the land upon which our dwellings are built in the 
towns and cities across Australia (Graph 7). 
So, how do we explain this increase in the value of our residential land over recent decades? 
There are two main structural factors. 
                                                
7   While the physical land area of Australia has not changed, the ABS volume estimates for land have increased 
over time, reflecting improvements in land quality. The ABS assumes that the volume of urban land increases 
at half the rate of growth in the volume of overlying non-dwelling construction and one-third the rate of growth 
in  the  volume  of  overlying  dwelling  construction.  There  is  no  change  in  rural  land  volume  over  time,  with 
rezoning of rural land to urban use assumed to be offset by rural land improvements. 
8   Currently,  rural  land  accounts  for  just  6  per  cent  of  the  value  of  land in  Australia.  In  contrast,  Scott  (1969) 
estimates that in 1930 rural land accounted for 57 per cent of the total value of private land on an unimproved 
basis and 43 per cent on an improved basis. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  The  first  is  the  combination  of  financial  liberalisation  and  low  inflation.  In  the  1970s  and 
1980s, regulation of the financial system and high inflation served to hold down land prices 
artificially. They did this by limiting the amount that people could borrow. When the financial 
system  was  liberalised  and  low  inflation  became  the  norm,  people’s  borrowing  capacity 
increased. Many Australians took advantage of this and borrowed more in an effort to buy a 
better property than they previously could have done. But, of course, collectively we can’t all 
move  to  better  properties.  And  so  the  main  effect  of  increased  borrowing  capacity  was  to 
push up housing prices, and that means land prices. 
The  second  factor  is  the  combination  of  strong  population  growth  and  the  structural 
difficulties  of  increasing  the  effective  supply  of  residential  land.  Since  1989,  the  Australian 
population has increased by more than 40 per cent, or around 7 million people, one of the 
fastest rates of increase among the advanced economies. The difficulties of responding to 
this on the supply side of the housing market have been well documented.9 They include the 
challenges of developing land on the urban fringe and of rezoning land close to city centres 
for  urban  infill.  They  also  include,  in  some  areas,  underinvestment  in  transportation 
infrastructure. This underinvestment has effectively constrained the growth in the supply of 
“well-located” land at a time when demand for this type of land has grown very strongly. The 
result has been a higher average price of land in our major cities. 
Another  possible  structural  explanation  is  that  the  higher  land  prices  reflect  an  upward 
revision  to  people’s  expectations  of  future  income  growth  and  thus  the  amount  they  are 
prepared to pay for housing services. One possible reason for this is that the growth of our 
cities  generates  a  positive  externality  –  by  bringing  more  people  together  competition  is 
improved and productivity is higher. While this might be part of the story, I think it is unlikely 
to be a central part. Real income growth per capita did pick up markedly from around the mid 
1990s, but it has subsequently slowed substantially, with apparently little effect on the price 
of land relative to income. 
So the story is really one of increased borrowing capacity, strong population growth and a 
slow supply response. 
One might ask why it matters why land prices have risen. After all, regardless of the reason, 
higher  land  prices  have  delivered  large  capital  gains  to  many  Australians  and  have  made 
them better off. 
The  complication  here  comes  from  the  fact  that  Australians  are  both  owners  of  housing 
assets and consumers of housing services. We don’t just own housing and the land on which 
it  is  built,  but  we  also  live  in  that  housing,  and  on  that  land.  And  that  housing  and  land 
provide us with valuable services. 
If  housing  is  fairly  valued  –  in  the  sense  that  the  price  of  housing  is  equal  to  the  present 
discounted  value  of  the  future  rents  –  then  the  rise  in  prices  implies  an  increase  in  the 
expected future cost of housing services. 
So, from the perspective of society as a whole, much of what is gained on the one hand is 
lost  on  the  other:  there are  windfall  gains  from higher  land  prices  but  then  everyone  pays 
more for housing services.10 
How any one individual is affected by all of this depends upon their own circumstances. 
                                                
9   Productivity Commission (2011) discusses the role of planning, zoning and development assessments. Kulish 
et al (2012) use a calibrated model to study the effect of supply constraints on density and the price of land in 
an  Australian  context,  while  Gitelman  and  Otto  (2012)  provide  supply  elasticity  estimates  for  residential 
property in Sydney. 
10   For a theoretical treatment of this point, see Buiter (2008). 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  For an older person who owns their own home and has no children, the capital gain from the 
higher  land  prices  more  than  offsets  the  expected  higher  future  housing  costs.  Such  a 
household is better off. The same is true for owners of investment properties, since they own 
multiple dwellings on which they earn a capital gain. In contrast, for young homeowners with 
multiple children, the calculation can look quite different. If they care about the future housing 
costs  of  their  children,  then,  in  some  circumstances,  it  is  possible  that  the  higher  future 
expected housing costs could exceed the capital gain on their dwelling. In a welfare sense, 
the  increase  in  land  prices  could  make  them  worse  off,  even  though  they  own  land.  The 
same is obviously true for renters as they do not have any capital gain to offset the higher 
future housing costs. 
One might think that only an economist would argue in these terms: to worry that a capital 
gain on an asset that you own could actually make you worse off because of some vague 
notion of higher future housing costs, especially for your children. And you might be right. But 
I think many Australians have an innate understanding of the concept and share the concern. 
Many parents around the country look at the high housing (really land) prices and worry that 
their children will not be able to afford the type of property that they themselves have been 
able to live in, even if their children were to have the same life-time income profile as they 
have  had.  In  effect,  these  parents  are  doing  the  present  discounted  value  calculation  and 
they see the potential problem. 
So  it  is  arguable  that  the  main  impact  of  higher  land  prices  is  not  really  to  increase  our 
national wealth, but to change the distribution of that wealth. 
The distributional effects are in two dimensions. The first is cross-sectional, with the existing 
owners  of  dwellings  receiving  capital  gains  when  land  prices  increase.  The  second  is  the 
distribution of wealth across generations, with the current owners of dwellings earning capital 
gains but future generations paying higher housing costs. Both of these aspects of changing 
wealth distribution have economic and social consequences, neither of which, I suspect, are 
yet fully understood. 
How  the  intergenerational  distribution  ultimately  plays  out  will  depend  critically  upon  the 
extent to which the gains that have accrued to the current generation are passed on to the 
next  generation.  In  general,  we  know  relatively  little  about  intergenerational  transfers,  but 
what we do know suggests that things may be changing gradually. One illustration of this can 
be seen in the Household, Income and Labour Dynamics in Australia (HILDA) Survey, which 
suggests that, over time, there has been some increase in the share of first-home buyers that 
are  receiving  loans  from  family  and  friends  (Graph  8).  There  is  also  some  evidence  of 
younger  generations  receiving  increased  assistance  with  household  expenses  from  older 
generations, including by continuing to live in the family home. 
It  is  quite  likely  that  these  trends  will  continue  with  it  becoming  more  commonplace  for 
parents  to  help  their  children  in  the  property  market.  This  has  both  economic  and  social 
consequences.  Of  course,  if  this  type  of  intergenerational  assistance  does  become  more 
common, then fewer parents will be able to use the capital gains that they have benefited 
from to boost their own consumption. Instead, in effect, they will be using those capital gains 
to support the following generations with their higher housing costs. Alternatively, if it turns 
out that today’s generations use their capital gains to increase their own spending, then they 
will have less ability to help their children. If this were to happen, I suspect that, over time 
there  would  be  some  downward  pressure  on  the  price  of  housing,  relative  to  incomes,  as 
future generations deal with the high cost of housing. 
Implications for monetary policy 
In the remaining time I would like to touch on three issues relevant to monetary policy that 
are closely related to the issues I have been talking about. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  Higher land prices and spending 
The first of these is the link between higher housing prices and household spending. 
There is a well-established research literature empirically demonstrating that higher housing 
wealth  boosts  household  consumption.  For  example,  work  done  by  my  colleagues  at  the 
Reserve Bank of Australia (RBA) has estimated that a rise in wealth of $100 leads to a rise in 
non-housing spending of between $2 and $4 per year.11 
There are two commonly accepted channels that explain this relationship. 
The first is a pure wealth channel. To the extent that higher dwelling prices are perceived to 
increase wealth, households should spend a little of that extra wealth each year over their 
lifetime. 
The second is the collateral channel, as higher land prices increase the value of collateral 
that can be posted by potential borrowers. The increased collateral makes it easier for credit-
constrained households to borrow to increase their spending. Similarly, businesses can find it 
easier to finance projects that previously might have struggled to get finance.12 
Over  recent  years,  there  has,  however,  been  some  reinterpretation  of the  role  of the  pure 
wealth channel. 
In part, this reflects the issues that I was speaking about a few moments ago; that is, that 
higher housing prices not only deliver capital gains to the existing owners but also imply a 
higher price of future housing services. The reinterpretation of the evidence is that the link 
between housing wealth and spending arises not so much through the traditional pure wealth 
channel, but rather because higher housing prices are sometimes a proxy for faster expected 
income growth into the future. And it is this lift in expected income growth that spending is 
really responding to. 
Interestingly,  other  colleagues  at  the  RBA  have  recently  been  examining  this  idea,  again 
using household level data from the HILDA Survey.13 They find clear evidence in favour of a 
collateral  channel,  especially  for  younger  households  who  are  more  likely  to  be  credit 
constrained. In contrast, they find no evidence in favour of the traditional pure wealth effect. 
Instead, their evidence is consistent with the alternative expected-income idea. Perhaps, the 
most  intriguing  aspect  of  their  results  is  that  when  housing  prices  in  a  particular  area 
increase, renters in that area increase their consumption. The increase is not as large as for 
owner occupiers, but it is an increase. The conclusion that my colleagues reach is that it is a 
common third factor such as higher expected future income, or less income uncertainty, that 
is,  at  least  partly,  responsible  for  the  observed  association  between  housing  wealth  and 
spending. 
If  this  conclusion  is  correct,  then  I  think  it  helps  partly  explain  what  is  going  on  in  the 
economy  at  the  moment.  In  the  early  2000s,  when  housing  prices  and  real  incomes  were 
rising quickly,  many  households  used  the  higher  value  of  their  housing  assets  to  increase 
their spending. Nowadays, this is not happening on the same scale that it once was. With 
slower expected future income growth and increased concerns about future housing costs, 
the response to higher housing prices looks to be smaller than it was previously. And this 
smaller response is affecting overall spending in the economy. 
                                                
11   See, for example, Dvornak and Kohler (2007). 
12   Recent  work  at  the  RBA  also  suggest  that  higher  housing  wealth  provides  collateral  for  small-business 
borrowing and is associated with higher levels of business formation (see Connolly, La Cava and Read 2015). 
13   See Windsor, Jääskelä and Finlay (2015). 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Liabilities and risk 
The second issue that I wanted to touch on is the increase in debt that has accompanied the 
increase in land prices. 
Throughout this talk I have barely touched on the liability side of the balance sheet. This is 
largely for the reason that I spoke about at the start, namely that financing transactions that 
are internal to the country do not change Australia’s net wealth. However, these transactions 
can have a material impact on the profile and riskiness of the individual balance sheets within 
the economy. 
The rise in land prices that I have spoken about is inextricably linked to the rise in household 
borrowing.  Together,  these  two  developments  have  grossed  up  the  household  sector’s 
balance sheet (Graph 9). This means that, on the assets side of the balance sheet, a given 
percentage  change  in  housing  prices  has  a  bigger  effect  than  it  once  did.  And  on  the 
liabilities side, movements in interest rates also have a bigger effect. 
We  are  still  trying  to  understand  fully  the  implications  of  all  of  this.  However,  I  think  it  is 
difficult  to  escape  the  conclusion  that  household  balance  sheets  are,  on  average,  a  little 
more risky than they once were. Many Australian households also seem to have reached a 
similar  conclusion.  This  is  reflected  in  the  decision  by  many  Australians  to  take  a  more 
prudent approach to their spending over recent years. 
I suspect that it is unlikely to be in our national interest for this more prudent approach to give 
way  to  household  consumption  once  again  growing  consistently  much  faster  than  our 
incomes. This is something we continue to be cognisant of in the setting of monetary policy. 
Some  decline  in  the  rate  of  household  saving  is  probably  appropriate  as  the  economy 
rebalances after the terms of trade and mining investment booms. But, given the position of 
household  balance  sheets,  it  is  unlikely  to  be  in  our  long-term  interest  for  a  consumption 
boom to be financed by a pick-up in household borrowing. 
Generating growth 
That  brings  me  to  my  final  issue:  that  is  the  need  to  generate  sustainable  growth  in  the 
economy. 
Monetary  policy  can  play  some  role  here,  including  by  helping  reduce  uncertainty  by 
maintaining low and stable inflation and overall stability in the economy. But monetary policy 
is, ultimately, not a driver of medium-term economic growth. Indeed, while low interest rates 
are currently helping the economy through a period of transition, an extended period of low 
interest  rates  implies  ongoing  low  returns  to  savers  and  low  underlying  returns  on  assets. 
This is not a world to which we should aspire. 
One  of  the  challenges  we  face  as  a  country  is  to  lift  the  expected  risk-adjusted  return  on 
investment in new assets, whether they be physical assets or human capital. If we can do 
this,  then  we  will  see  the  investment  in  new  assets  that  is  crucial  to  the  sustainable 
expansion in the economy. 
There is no single lever that can be pulled here. But neither is there a shortage of sensible 
ideas that, if implemented, could improve the environment for the creation of new assets in 
Australia. 
These ideas include: a strengthening of the culture of innovation; the removal of unnecessary 
and  overly  complicated  regulation;  and  making  competition  work  effectively  in  markets 
across  the  country.  Increased  investment  in  infrastructure,  including  in  transport,  probably 
also  has  a  role  to  play  here.  Done  properly,  it  could  help  lift  the  return  to  other  forms  of 
investment in a wide range of industries across the economy. Better transportation can also 
increase the effective supply of well-located land, making housing more affordable for many 
Australians. None of this is easy, but neither is it impossible. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
  Concluding Remarks 
Let  me  conclude  by  trying  to  bring  these  remarks  together  with  three  brief  closing 
observations. 
The  first  is  that  rising  land  and  housing  prices  have  made  many,  but  not  all,  Australians 
better off. They have also changed the distribution of wealth within our society and between 
generations. And we are still coming to grips with the implications of this. Ever-rising housing 
prices, relative to our incomes, do increase risks in the economy and are unlikely to make us 
better off as a nation. Rising housing prices are best matched by rising incomes. 
The second observation is that real wealth generation for the society as a whole comes from 
asset  accumulation  and  lifting  our  productivity.  While  the  rise  in  the  value  of  our  resource 
base over the past decade has improved our national balance sheet substantially, we cannot 
rely on this occurring again. Further improvement in our national balance sheet requires us to 
invest in both physical and human capital. And it requires us to come with new  ideas and 
better ways of doing things. 
And the third, and related observation, is that balance sheets have two sides. They have a 
liabilities side and they have an assets side. Both sides need to be managed carefully. We 
need to make sure that our liabilities are sustainable and that they are managed prudently. 
Shann’s  writings remind us of what can happen if we do not do this. But we also need to 
make sure that we continue to invest in the assets that form the base of sustainable growth 
in national income over the years ahead. 
Thank  you  very  much  for  listening  this  evening.  I  would  be  very  happy  to  answer  any 
questions. 
References 
Australian  Bureau  of  Statistics  (2015),  Australian  System  of  National  Accounts:  Concepts, 
Sources and Methods, 2014, ABS Cat No 5216.0, Chapter 17. 
Boarini R, M Mira d’Ercole and G Liu (2012), “Approaches to Measuring the Stock of Human 
Capital: A Review of Country Practices”, OECD Statistics Working Papers, 2012/04, OECD 
Publishing. Also available <http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/5k8zlm5bc3ns-en>. 
Buiter Willem H (2008), “Housing Wealth Isn’t Wealth”, NBER Working Paper No 14204. Also 
available <http://www.nber.org/papers/w14204>. 
Connolly E, G La Cava and M Read (2015), “Small Business & Finance” in J Simon and A 
Moore  (eds),  Housing  Prices  and  Entrepreneurship:  Evidence  for  the  Housing  Collateral 
Channel in Australia, Proceedings of a Conference, Reserve Bank of Australia, Sydney. 
Dvornak N and M Kohler (2007), “Housing Wealth, Stock Market Wealth and Consumption: A 
Panel Analysis for Australia”, Economic Record, 83(261), pp 117–130. 
Gitelman E and G Otto (2012), “Supply Elasticity Estimates for the Sydney Housing Market”, 
Australian Economic Review, 45(2) pp 176–190. 
Kulish  M,  A  Richards  and  C  Gillitzer  (2012),  “Urban  Structure  and  Housing  Prices:  Some 
Evidence from Australian Cities”, Economic Record, 88(282) pp 303–322. 
Productivity  Commission  (2011),  Performance  Benchmarking  of  Australian  Business 
Regulation: Planning, Zoning and Development Assessments, Volume 1, Research Report, 
Canberra. 
Scott RH (1969), “The Value of Land in Australia”, Paper delivered to the 1969 meeting of 
the  Australian  and  New  Zealand  Association  for  the  Advancement  of  Science  (ANZAAS) 
Congress, Adelaide. 
Shann EOG (1927), The Boom of 1890 – And Now, Cornstalk Publishing Company, Sydney. 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Shann EOG (1930), An Economic History of Australia, in particular Chapter XVII, “The Land 
Boom”, pp 298–315, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. 
Wei, H (2004), “Measuring the Stock of Human Capital for Australia”, Methodology Research 
Papers, ABS Cat No 1351.0.55.001. 
Wei,  H  (2008),  “Measuring  Human  Capital  Flows  for  Australia”,  Working  Paper,  cat.  no. 
1351.0.55.023, Australian Bureau of Statistics, Canberra. 
Windsor  C,  J  Jääskelä  and  R  Finlay  (2015),  “Housing  Wealth  Effects:  Evidence  from  an 
Australian Panel”, Economica, 82(327), pp 552–577. 
 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
 Graph 1 
 
Graph 2 
   12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 Graph 3 
 
 
Graph 4 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13 
 Graph 5 
 
 
Graph 6 
   14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 Graph 7 
 
 
Graph 8 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 15 
 Graph 9 
  16 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
