Mark Carney: One Bank Research Agenda – Launch Conference 
Opening remarks by Mr Mark Carney, Governor of the Bank of England and Chairman of the 
Financial  Stability  Board,  at  the  Launch  Conference  for  the  Bank  of  England’s  One  Bank 
Research Agenda, London, 25 February 2015. 
 I  am  delighted  to  open  the  Launch  Conference  for  the  Bank  of  England’s  One  Bank 
Research Agenda – an ambitious and wide-ranging framework to transform the way research 
is done at the Bank. 
The  Agenda  aims  to  improve  the  coordination  of  our  research  across  all  policy  areas,  to 
make the best use of our data, and to cultivate an extensive research community that spans 
the Bank and beyond. 
The Bank of England has a single timeless mission: to promote the good of the people of the 
United Kingdom by maintaining monetary and financial stability. 
To borrow from Keynes, to deliver that mission we must study the present in the light of the 
past for the purposes of the future. And we must do more. Our default cannot be Keynes’ 
“madmen in authority… distilling their frenzy from some academic scribbler of a few  years 
back”.1  We  need  contemporaneous  and  open  collaboration  between  researchers  and 
policymakers. 
This  will  require  both  changes  to  our  research  focus  such  as  developing  a  deeper 
understanding  of  the  interrelationships  between  microprudential,  macroprudential  and 
monetary  policies  as  well  as  changes  to  the  way  that  we  perform  research  at  the  Bank, 
including the development of a more open, permeable and policy-driven approach. 
In short, we are aiming to transform research at the Bank to the same extent as the Bank’s 
responsibilities have transformed in the wake of the financial crisis. 
Transformation of the Bank of England 
The central challenge of macroeconomic policymaking in the late 1970s and 1980s was the 
fight  against  inflation.  In  no  small  part  due  to  my  predecessors,  particularly  Lord  King,  we 
have today a regime for maintaining monetary stability that is both democratically legitimate 
and  highly  effective.  It  rests  on  clear  remits,  delegated  by  Parliament,  sound  governance 
arrangements to support independence, and effective transparency of policymaking. And it 
provides valuable lessons for the conduct of other policy functions. 
Despite these successes, in both theory and practice, a healthy focus on price stability had 
become  a  dangerous  distraction.  The  financial  crisis  was  a  powerful  reminder  that  price 
stability  is  not  sufficient  for  macroeconomic  stability.  It  exposed  the  convenient  fiction  that 
finance is a veil. And we were taught that the dynamics of lending markets are as important 
as those of labour markets for our shared prosperity. 
In  response  to  these  painful  lessons,  the  Bank  of  England  has  been  bestowed  with 
enormous  new 
responsibilities  by  Parliament.  They  now  span  monetary  policy, 
macroprudential policy,  and microprudential supervision. They include responsibility for the 
United  Kingdom’s  bank  notes;  its  payments  systems;  oversight  of  financial  markets 
infrastructure  and  resolving  failed  institutions.  To  help  fulfil  its  mission  the  Bank  has  core 
roles in Europe, at the G20 and at the Financial Stability Board. 
                                                
1 
In  Ch.  24  of  Keynes,  J  M  (1936),  The  General  Theory  of  Employment,  Interest  and  Money,  Macmillan 
Cambridge University Press. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Having monetary, macroprudential, and microprudential policy under one roof makes gains 
from trade possible. It is our duty to exploit complementarities, synergies and economies of 
scope  to  maximise  our  impact  by  working  together.  To  do  so,  we  need  research.  And  to 
some extent, research needs us. 
The need for research 
The  way  central  banks  have  sought  to  achieve  their  objectives  –  the  practice  of  central 
banking – has frequently moved ahead of the theory of central banking. 
Theory, in turn, subsequently catches up, and enriches and refines practice. 
The  history  of  central  banking  is  replete  with  examples.  Tacit  knowledge  has  often  been 
more  instrumental  in  determining  policy  outcomes  than  insights  from  formal  research. 
Sometimes this works, as in Bagehot’s “dictum” (to lend freely at a penalty rate against good 
Montague Norman’s “never explain, never excuse”.2 
Research has meant that some modes of operation, like Norman’s, have rightly fallen by the 
wayside. It has helped nuance others, like Bagehot’s. And it guides us as to which practices 
to retain, reinforce and enhance, and which should be discarded. 
The  practice  of  monetary  policy  in  the  Great  Moderation  is  another  example.  It  informed 
theorising  and  research  on  Inflation  Targeting.  And,  in  turn,  through  trial,  error  and 
refinement, research has helped inform policy with empirical insights and workhorse models. 
In  the  theoretical  space,  this  process  led  to  Woodford’s  dictum  that  in  modern  central 
banking very little else matters beyond expectations.3 
In contrast, the practice of central banking in a messy real world where people use various 
heuristics, including rational inattention, has shown the limitations of such logical extremes. 
Research  showed  how  central  bank  transparency  and  accountability  make  essential 
contributions  to  policy  effectiveness,  in  a  way  that  is  complementary  to  ensuring  central 
banks have democratic legitimacy. That remains an important insight in the era of enlarged 
and empowered central banking. 
Practice  moved  ahead  of  theory;  theory  caught  up  and  refined  practice.  And  the 
effectiveness of policy improved as a result. 
The crisis has meant practice has once again leapt ahead of theory. During its depths, the 
lessons of history and insights from psychology were arguably more valuable than precisions 
of  dynamic  programming.  Our  workhorse  models  didn’t  have  financial  sectors;  meaning 
questions  of  financial  stability  were  not  even  asked,  let  alone  answered.  A  great  deal  of 
improvisation was required to avoid a second Great Depression. 
It is vital that we draw on the experience from the crisis to rethink the way we understand the 
economy, the financial system, and the institutions we supervise. 
To  do  so,  we  need  not  only  to  study  recent  history  more  deeply  but  also  to  apply  formal 
methods to refine our depictions of economic dynamics, as well as the policy tools we have 
to shape those dynamics in socially desirable ways. 
We  need  to  catalyse  thinking  on  new  approaches  towards  policies  that  have  assumed 
greater importance since the crisis from macroprudential policy to bank resolution. 
                                                
2  See Bagehot, W (1873), Lombard Street: A Description of the Money Market; and Boyle, A (1976), Montagu 
Norman: A Biography, London: Cassell. 
3  See  Woodford,  M  (2005),  “Central  bank  communication  and  policy  effectiveness”,  NBER  Working  Paper 
No. 11898, December. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
At the Bank of England, our enhanced research function, including a new Research Hub, will 
bring together staff and thinking from across the institution creating a two-way flow between 
research  and  policy.  It  will  seek  to  foster  a  shared  understanding  of  the  frontier  of  policy 
possibilities amongst colleagues and ensure that the insights gained in one policy arena can 
benefit others. 
But these efforts will not succeed if they are confined to the corridors of Threadneedle and 
Moorgate. 
The Bank recognises that we need to do more to reach out to the wider research community. 
Policymaking can benefit tremendously from advances in all fields of economics and finance; 
from psychology to epidemiology; from computer science to law. That is why I am pleased to 
see such a diverse range of discussants and attendees at the conference today. 
In order to focus the conversations we are being clear about the key questions that interest 
us, as policymakers, the most. 
Let me now turn to those. Our One Bank Research Agenda is structured around five themes 
which span all aspects of central banking. 
The  themes  are  broad.  That  reflects  the  diversity  of  our  agenda.  They  focus  on  the 
interactions  and  intersections  between  policy  areas.  They  emphasise  new  challenges  and 
new directions, while recognising that familiar questions facing central banks remain no less 
important. Today’s conference is organised around them. 
The first theme covers “policy frameworks and interactions” 
The  re-emergence  of  macroprudential  instruments  as  part  of  the  policy  armoury  raises 
fundamental questions about the interaction of monetary policy, macroprudential policy, and 
microprudential policy. 
It  is  essential  to  improve  our  understanding  of  the  relationship  between  credit  cycles  and 
systemic risks. Since credit market developments both affect and reflect potential growth in 
the  broader  economy,  they  –  and  macroprudential  measures  to  influence  them  –  require 
careful study by financial and monetary policymakers alike. 
The advent of a new, enhanced policy toolkit raises vital questions about the effectiveness of 
individual  policy  tools;  their  joint  operation;  and  how  they  interact  domestically  and  across 
borders. 
The second theme covers “evaluating regulation, resolution, and market structures” 
The  financial  crisis  precipitated  a  radical  overhaul  of  the  approach  towards  regulation, 
supervision and resolution. Regulatory policies have shifted from a near-exclusive focus on 
microprudential resilience to a more balanced emphasis on minimising systemic risk. 
In the whirlwind of essential change, there has been, however, relatively little assessment of 
the overall effect of reform on the financial system as a whole. Moreover, our understanding 
of  the  “system”  must  extend  well  beyond  the  banking  sector  to  encompass  the  whole  of 
market-based finance. 
The interplay between the reform process and the changing nature of financial intermediation 
also raises fundamental questions about how incentives and market structures might evolve 
and what policy might need to do to keep up. 
The third theme covers “Policy operationalization and implementation” 
The  practice  of  central  banking  constantly  underscores 
communication of policy can be as important as its design. 
During the crisis central banks around the world made extensive and imaginative use of their 
balance sheets in pursuit of their objectives. 
implementation  and 
that 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
This  extraordinary  range  of  policy  responses  provides  an  unparalleled  opportunity  to  take 
stock of what worked, and why. As Ben Bernanke observed “the trouble with QE is it works in 
practice, but it doesn’t work in theory.” Understanding better the transmission mechanisms of 
QE, and the extent to which they are state dependent, can provide enormous insights to its 
effectiveness  as  a  policy  tool  specifically,  as  well  as  the  formation  of  agents’  expectations 
and the functioning of financial markets more generally. 
Recent  innovations  have  not  been  confined  to  new  tools.  As  I  noted  previously,  better 
communication and greater transparency has also made policy more effective. 
Transparency  has  taken  centre  stage  as  policymakers  sought  to restore  confidence  in  the 
financial  system,  as  they  conducted  and  published  stress  test  results  to  create  more 
transparently  resilient  banks;  and  as  they  gave  guidance  to  clarify  their  reaction functions. 
Recently, research informed the recommendations of the Warsh Review into what we could 
do to enhance monetary policy transparency here at the Bank of England. 
This research theme continues in that vein by asking what more might be done to enhance 
effective transparency in all areas of policy. 
The fourth research theme covers “New data, methodologies and approaches” 
Increasing  amounts  of  data  –  structured  and  unstructured,  current  and  historical  –  are 
available on almost every aspect of the economy and the financial system. That holds great 
promise. Computing power has transformed our economies; it needs now to be harnessed to 
transform our understanding of them. 
Theoretical  and  methodological  techniques  continue  to  advance.  In  some  cases  that  will 
mean measurement ahead of theory. That is one way to advance. In the short term, a black 
box could be better than none, and with time the patterns it reveals could prompt a greater 
understanding of the underlying forces. Recall that Kepler needed to uncover the empirics of 
planetary motion before Newton could conjure the theory of celestial mechanics. 
It is important to exploit developments in advanced analytics of large data sets to formulate 
better policy. They’ll improve our understanding of household and corporate behaviour, the 
macroeconomy and risks to the financial system. They need to be harnessed to enhance our 
forecasting and stress testing capabilities. 
To complement this theme, we will release historical data sets including detailed breakdowns 
of the Bank’s inflation expectations survey, our Agents’ company visit scores, and very long 
back-runs of key economic and financial variables. This is one of the ways  we  will look to 
increase the permeability of our research. We are seeking also new ways to visualise and 
analyse the increasingly rich information sets that are available. 
The fifth and final research theme covers the “Response to fundamental changes” 
Fundamental technological and structural trends will have a significant bearing on economic 
dynamics. 
Although they are likely to play out over a period that is longer than the Bank’s typical policy 
horizon, these trends will have profound implications for central banks. 
They  include  changing  demography,  increasing  longevity,  inequality,  climate  change,  the 
increasing importance of emerging economies and the development of digital currencies. 
By affecting a range of phenomena – from the evolution of real interest rates to risks to the 
financial  sector  to  the  future  of  money  and  banking  itself  –  all  of  these  trends  have  the 
potential to re-shape our policy challenges. We need research to set us on the front foot to 
face them. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Competitions 
Before concluding, to catalyse interest in the One Bank Research Agenda, I am delighted to 
announce that today the Bank of England is launching two competitions. 
The first is on Data Visualisation. To coincide with the release of the new Bank data sets, we 
want to see what novel insights they can yield. 
The visualisation could be a static description of an interesting pattern or relationship in the 
data or the creation of an interactive app. Entrants are free to focus on whatever they like, as 
long as it employs some of the newly available data in some way. 
The  second  competition  is  for  the  best  research  paper  –  the  “One  Bank  research” 
competition.  We  are  particularly  keen  to  engage  early  career  researchers  across  the 
academic world. For our inaugural competition, the paper should be on some aspect of “The 
interaction between microprudential, macroprudential, and/or monetary policy”. 
The  winners  of  each  competition  will  be  decided  by  separate  judging  panels  of  Bank  staff 
and external academics. The prize for both competitions will be £5,000. 
Further details on how to apply are now live on our website.  
Conclusion 
Economies  are  complex,  dynamic  and  constantly  evolving  systems,  underpinned  by  social 
interactions  and  behavioural  change;  shaped  by  fundamental  forces  like  technology  and 
globalisation; and supported – or at times disrupted – by finance. 
Policymakers  need  research  to  help  understand  these  phenomena  and  to  craft  our 
responses  to  them.  And  research  can  make  some  of  its  most  effective  contributions  by 
addressing the priorities of policymakers. 
By  focussing  on  a  clear  set  of  research  priorities,  by  opening  up  our  datasets,  and  by 
creating  tighter  links  between  policymakers  and  researchers,  both  within  the  Bank  and 
across  the  broader  research  community,  we  can  all  help  advance  the  Bank’s  mission  – 
promoting the good of the people of the United Kingdom. 
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
