  Patrick Honohan: Reconciling diverse interests in an international 
stabilisation programme – some thoughts about the EU-IMF Programme 
for Ireland, November 2010 
Remarks by Mr Patrick Honohan, Governor of the Central Bank of Ireland, prepared for the 
session  “Politics  by  Other  Means?  Eurozone  Institutions  and  National  Sovereignty  in  the 
Bank Bailout Negotiations” at the INET Annual Conference “Liberté, égalité, fragilité”, Paris, 
9 April 2015. 
 The charts can be found at the Central Bank of Ireland’s website (http://www.centralbank.ie/press-area/speeches/ 
Pages/RemarksbyGovernorPatrickHonohanfortheINETAnnualConferenceLiberteegalitefragilite.aspx). 
Introduction 
The EU-IMF Programme of Financial Assistance for Ireland, negotiated in November 2010 
and  involving  a  three-year  disbursement  schedule  subject  to  policy  conditionality  of 
€67.5 billion in funds from the IMF and European partners – a sum just shy of 50% of that 
year’s Irish GNP – has attracted much comment, some of which is spot on, some mythical. 
In  line  with  the  topic  of  the  session  I  will  address  the  role  of  European  institutions  in  the 
stabilisation programme and the impact on national sovereignty, but I will start by identifying 
some neglected or disputed truths – and exposing a few myths – about the crisis in Ireland 
that led to the need for the bailout, before turning to the role of the lending institutions. Of 
course the issues are complex and nuanced. Much of what is often said about all of this can 
be regarded as “partly true”, and I will mention some of these propositions also. 
Background to the bailout 
Fact  1:  “It  was  the  unrestrained  and  reckless  and  behaviour  of  the  Irish  banks  that 
destabilised  the  Irish  economy  and  public  finances.”  Of  course  there  are  many  ways  of 
allocating blame, but in my view the first line of defence against what has happened must be 
the  directors  and  managers  of  the  banks.  Over  just  a  few  years,  this  credit-fuelled  bubble 
created  a  pattern  of  over-indebtedness  and  mispricing  (profits,  wages,  house  prices)  that 
made Ireland’s economic performance during the “Great Recession” period among the worst 
in  Europe.  With  greater  prudence  by  management  and  boards  of  the  lending  banks,  this 
bubble could not have happened. It is also worth emphasising that international lenders too 
were an essential part of the process: they were surely lucky to recover all of the funds they 
complacently advanced to fuel the boom. (Figure 1 shows the build-up and unwind of foreign 
liabilities of the banks.) 
Partly  true  1:  “It  is  lax  supervision  that  was  to  blame  in  Ireland.”  Only  partly  because,  as 
mentioned, any attempt to assign responsibility must start with the banks. Still, we must not 
neglect  the  ineffectual  supervision  which  failed  to  inhibit  this  banking  behaviour.  These 
supervisory flaws were similar in character to what happened in half a dozen other countries, 
reliant  on  un-intrusive  supervision  that  presumed  a  well-managed  bank  would  not  create 
systemic  failure.  But  in  Ireland  the  scale  of  the  bank  credit  expansion  and  the  associated 
construction and housing price boom was of a different life-threatening order of magnitude. 
Credit  expansion  on  such  a  scale  should  have  rung  alarm  bells  triggering  much  more 
intrusive  examination  of  the  vulnerabilities  and  corrective  measures  should  have  been 
introduced.  (Also,  not  to  be  neglected  are  the  inappropriate  pro-cyclical  fiscal  policies 
including  specific  subsidies  and  tax  expenditures  for  the  construction  sector  as  they  were 
important factors in incentivising and supporting the credit-led boom – these policies also hint 
at  the  political  climate  in  which  the  supervisors  were  operating.  And  of  course  every  loan 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  needs  a  borrower;  the  borrowers  –  especially  the  property  developers  –  also  played  an 
important part). 
Myth 1: “No banker has been convicted”. For the most part, unwise behaviour of bankers in 
the run-up to the Irish crisis appears to have been unwise rather than criminal. Nevertheless, 
there have been convictions of some senior Irish bankers found to have committed a criminal 
offence in the latter phases of the crisis (though no prison sentences), and a number of other 
cases, criminal and civil, are still in preparation. But the Irish legislative framework deserves 
to  be  strengthened  to  take  account  of  egregious  recklessness  in  risk-taking  by  those  who 
were in charge of failed financial firms. Recently the UK enacted legislation of this type which 
I believe could be usefully mirrored in Ireland. 
Myth 2: “It is chiefly the bank guarantee that brought about the need for fiscal austerity and 
generally crippled the Irish economy.” Certainly it was the market alarm at the scale of the 
funds that had to be injected into the banks in 2010 – and which were recorded promptly in 
the General Government deficit prepared in the Autumn of that year – that was the wake-up 
call focusing global attention on the fragile fiscal situation and brought forward the need for 
action  urgently.  But  redressing  the  emergent  deficit  in  day-to-day  spending  was  actually 
going to require a much larger adjustment in government revenue and spending (not least 
because of the degree to which boom-time tax revenue fell off). By 2013, the spending and 
revenue measures that had been adopted totalled almost €30 billion per annum, whereas the 
total outlay on bank recapitalisation came to a one-off €64 billion, of which at least a third 
should be recoverable as the banks are sold off again (Figures 2 and 3 shows the relative 
size of fiscal policy tightening since 2007 and the fiscal cost of bailing out bank creditors). 
Myth  3:  “The  bailout  caused  the  Irish  recession.”  There  is  a  danger  that  some  such 
proposition – preposterous though it would have seemed to any contemporary observer at 
the time of the bailout – has gained some traction among latecomers to the Ireland case. A 
glance at charts of output or employment confirms that the economy had already pretty much 
hit bottom by the time of the bailout. At most it could be discussed whether the terms of the 
bailout  and  indeed  wider  euro  area  policies  at  the  time  might  have  delayed  the  recovery 
relative to some other set of policies. The same charts also show that the Irish downturn – 
led by an exceptional construction crunch – was well under way by the time of the notorious 
bank  guarantee  (which  was  granted  just  a  couple  of  weeks  after  the  Lehman  bankruptcy) 
(Figures 4–7 show the time-line on relevant macro indicators). 
The institutions and sovereignty 
Fact  2:  “The  IMF  agreed  to  endorse  a  programme  which  risked  debt  unsustainability, 
justifying this by the need to avoid spillover effects on other countries.” The Irish authorities 
agreed  to  the  EU-IMF  programme  despite  sharing  doubts  as  to  its  sustainability  on  the 
grounds that it represented the best short-term course of action for Ireland1 and left open the 
possibility  of  later  relief,  which  in  due  course  came,  not  least  through  the  reduction  in  EU 
interest  rates  (from  an  initial  level  of  5.8  per cent  per  annum)  and  lengthening  of  the  loan 
maturities, and subsequently through the financial arrangements around the liquidation of the 
failed bank IBRC (successor to the notorious Anglo Irish Bank). The national authorities also 
felt  that  it  would  not  be  necessary  to  use  all  of  the  €35  billion  pencilled-in  to  the  loan 
agreement for bank recapitalisation. The capital required as a result of the aggressive PCAR 
2011 stress test of March 2011 was met with about a half of that, thanks in part to the bail-in 
of subordinated debt holders. 
                                                
1   Without access to the private financial markets, the Irish Government would have had to constrain spending 
suddenly and drastically. In addition, without support from the ECB it would not have been able to continue in 
the euro. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Fact 3: “The EU and IMF insisted that the Programme would not contain a bail-in of senior 
bank creditors.” Many involved IMF staff had envisaged a partial haircut on senior debt, but 
they were not supported when a majority of finance ministers of the G7 decided that bail-ins 
of senior bank bonds was a bad idea. (Attitudes subsequently changed: bail-in later became 
an emphasis of EU resolution policy). Irish officials had already been exploring whether and 
how  it  might  be  possible,  post-guarantee,  to  bail-in  remaining  unguaranteed  senior 
bondholders of Anglo and INBS. They could have continued to plan for this and – who knows 
– might possibly have been able to do so during 2011 had the matter not already been raised 
abortively  at  the  time  of  the  bailout  negotiations  in  November  2010,  thereby  pre-emptively 
sensitising some of the lenders to the issue. (Admittedly, though, “Fact 4 below suggests that 
this notion may be somewhat fanciful.) 
Fact  4:  “The  lenders  again  refused  in  March  2011  to  countenance  bail-in  of  senior 
bondholders  of  the  failed  banks  Anglo  and  INBS.”  While  bail-in  was  not  part  of  the 
Programme, the Irish Authorities had not undertaken that the old unguaranteed debt of the 
failed banks would be repaid, but was strongly discouraged from keeping the bail-in option 
publicly  on  the  table  at  the  time  of  the  announcement  of  the  stress  test  results  of  March 
2011. Although the amounts involved here at that stage were less than €5 billion (or about 
3% of GDP), this widely known episode is the one hardest to rationalise, even taking account 
of the persistent stress in European banking market conditions at the time. 
Myth 4: “The EU partner countries used the crisis to leverage Irish policy changes in other 
areas damaging to the Irish economy.” Unfair issue linkage was certainly a danger for the 
Irish side in the negotiations. In the end, though, the danger was headed off, and the lenders 
did not attempt to force beggar-thy-neighbour policy changes in unrelated areas. With debt 
restructuring  clearly  off  the  table,  the  needed  path  of  fiscal  adjustment  was  pretty  much  a 
arithmetical calculation. Getting the debt path back into clearly sustainable territory left little 
scope for discretion. The size of the Government’s remaining cash balances at the outset of 
the programme helped ensure that the speed of fiscal adjustment was not excessively fast – 
given  the  accumulation  of  debt.  Interestingly,  the  fiscal  multipliers  used  in  the  Programme 
design  held  up  quite  well:  Ireland’s  growth  evolution  relative  to  projection  did  not 
underperform that of the rest of the EU even in the first couple of years. And by mid-2012 a 
growth dynamic had reasserted itself. 
Myth 5: “It was the euro that did in for Ireland.” To be sure, the euro contributed some fuel to 
the  fire  in  the  form  of  low  interest  rates  (that  encouraged  borrowing)  and  the  removal  of 
exchange risk on cross-border borrowing by Irish banks. But the euro was not an essential 
ingredient  in  the  bubble:  several  other  non-euro  countries  also  relied  on  the  period  of 
financial liberalisation and global savings glut to finance bubbles (Iceland and Latvia the most 
conspicuous).  Nothing  in  the  euro  regime  prevented  Irish  regulatory  and  fiscal  policy  from 
moderating this boom. When the crash came, the decision to guarantee the banks (flawed 
though  it  was  in  its  design  –  blanket  coverage  and  in  the  lack  of  prior  consultation  with 
partners)  was  underpinned  by  ECB  liquidity  support  which  prevented  the  chaotic  currency 
depreciation  which  would  surely  have  been  the  inevitable  consequence  had  Ireland  been 
outside  the  euro  area.  (Of  course,  some  depreciation  of  a  domestic  currency  could  have 
helped boost the country’s international competitiveness more quickly.) 
Partly  true  2:  “The  European  Institutions  pushed  Ireland  into  the  EU-IMF  programme.”  An 
unequivocal public indication by Europe that it would continue to underpin the liquidity needs 
of the Irish banking system might well have avoided the need for a programme – but it would 
not  have  avoided  the  need  for  austerity.  Such  an  assurance  was  not  forthcoming  in  the 
period  September-November  2010.  Indeed,  as  is  now  well  known,  the  ECB  indicated 
privately in November 2010, albeit not fully credibly, to the Irish Government that it could pull 
the plug on Irish bank liquidity if Ireland did not apply for a programme. That said, already by 
the end of September 2010, Ireland actually stood to gain more from a programme than from 
trying to struggle along borrowing at the very high rates available to it by that stage. Indeed, it 
was recognition of the unaffordability of such high spreads that induced the Irish Government 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  to announce at the end of September its decision to stop borrowing for a period of months 
until rates improved (Figures 8 and 9 show the evolution of Irish and German Government 
10–year bond yields). 
Myth 6: “Ireland would have been better off with an IMF-only loan.” The experience and hard-
headedness of the IMF staff certainly helped keep the initial and subsequent negotiations on 
track and may have helped avoid false steps. But if the European Union means what I think it 
means, it also embraces a degree and extent of collegiality that make European institutions 
natural  partners  in  financial  assistance  for  a  member  state  that  has  come  under  pressure 
from distrustful markets. For Europe to decline such a role would be a great step backwards. 
The member states of the European Union are bound together too closely for that. Even if 
there have been missteps in the handling by European institutions of the Irish crisis – as for 
some others – I prefer to see this as teething problems. While the terms and conditions of the 
overall European financial arrangements surrounding the Irish Programme at its outset can 
readily  be  criticised,  they  ended  up  in  a  different  space,  and  justified  the  persistence  of 
Ireland in staying with the Programme. 
Partly true 3: “Ireland did not lose its sovereignty in the bailout process.” As for sovereignty, 
the  loss  of  its  ability  to  finance  the  pre-existing  level  of  public  spending  (along  with  the 
repaying  the  creditors  of  the  banks)  came  as  a  result  of  the  emerging  fiscal  and  debt 
imbalance,  not  from  the  bailout.  Availability  of  bail-out  funds  enabled  a  slower  fiscal 
adjustment  than  would  have  been  possible  without  the  bail-out  and  resulted  in  a  smaller 
overall amount of “austerity”. The steps taken by the EU and IMF to protect their interests in 
recoverability of the sums lent in terms of policy conditionality were – as always – robust, but 
they  in  the  end,  as  mentioned,  did  not  include  linkages  to  unrelated  matters  of  divergent 
interest.  Aside  from  the  issue  of  the  bail-in  of  bank  debt,  the  ingredients  of  the  fiscal 
adjustment  actually  adopted  were  already  in  the  priority  list  prepared  by  Irish  officials  and 
part  of  the  national  economic  debate  long  before  the  arrival  of  the  Troika;  as  such  they 
cannot be thought of as wholly external impositions. Emblematic here is the rapid reversal of 
the  Troika’s  proposal  for  a  cut  in  the  minimum  wage:  although  actually  included  in  the 
Government’s  four  year  plan  announced  pre-Programme,  this  cut  had  not  really  been  an 
accepted  national  policy  priority  and  did  not  stick.  So  yes,  a  tight  budget  constraint  was 
suddenly imposed by the crisis and national politicians had much less room for manoeuvre 
during the programme’s disbursement period, but in Ireland this did not result in a violation of 
the  political  system’s  capacity  to  choose  between  viable  alternatives  within  the  available 
budgetary resources. 
Conclusion 
What has struck me about the Irish bailout and others is not so much the loss of national 
sovereignty  as  the  extent  to  which  the  shared sovereignty  of the  European  Union  and  the 
eurosystem was strained by the scale of the financial commitments involved and the loss of 
trust that was generated by the rapid emergence of these commitments. 
Yes  the  ECB  extended sums totalling  well  over  100  per cent  of  Ireland’s  GDP to the Irish 
banking  system  – the  bulk  of  which  has  now  already  been  repaid  –  but  having  done  so  it 
seemed  to  suffer  a  transitory  lack  of  confidence  that,  despite  early  fiscal  and  regulatory 
action, the national authorities would bring things under control. 
In addition, some steps were taken for the sake of avoiding spillovers, and not specifically in 
the interest of Ireland. 
On the whole, though, it is now beyond doubt that the interest and maturity terms that were 
ultimately arrived at for covering the financial commitments are such as to have made the 
whole operation a very good net success for the Irish people – and for Europe. 
But I also think that the experience highlights remaining gaps in the institutional structure of 
Europe  (even  after  creation  of  the  Banking  Union  which  takes  bank  supervision  and 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  resolution out of domestic hands): less than a fiscal union, more than a currency union, it has 
survived  a  severe  and  divisive  asymmetric  shock  which  has  highlighted  the  importance  of 
further institutional development. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
