  Stanley Fischer: Conducting monetary policy with a large balance sheet 
Speech by Mr Stanley Fischer, Vice Chair of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve 
System,  at  the  2015  US  Monetary  Policy  Forum,  sponsored  by  the  University  of  Chicago 
Booth School of Business, New York City, 27 February 2015. 
 Accompanying charts can be found at the end of the speech. 
Thank you. It is a great pleasure to be here to discuss some of the important issues facing 
the  Federal  Reserve  and  other  central  banks  in  conducting  monetary  policy  with  a  large 
balance  sheet.  I  will  focus  on  two  main  sets  of  issues  that  the  Fed  has  faced  and  will 
continue to face for some time. The first involves our ongoing assessment of the effects of 
the  asset  purchases.  The  second  concerns  policy  normalization  in  the  presence  of  a  very 
large balance sheet. 
To set the stage, consider the size of the Fed’s balance sheet over the past several years. 
Assets have risen from about $900 billion in 2006 to about $4.5 trillion today, or – as seen in 
figure 1 – from 6 percent of nominal gross domestic product (GDP) to about 26 percent of 
nominal  GDP.  The  net  expansion  over  this  period  reflects  primarily  our  large-scale  asset 
purchase programs. 
Of course, many other central banks have expanded their balance sheets substantially over 
recent years as well. For example, assets of the Bank of Japan have increased from about 
20 percent of nominal GDP to more than 60 percent of nominal GDP over this period, and 
assets of the Swiss National Bank have increased from 20 percent of nominal GDP to more 
than 80 percent of nominal GDP. The net increase in assets of the European Central Bank 
has so far been more modest, with assets increasing from less than 10 percent of nominal 
GDP to more than 20 percent of nominal GDP – but their quantitative easing (QE) program is 
not yet under way. 
For the remainder of my remarks, I will focus on the Fed, beginning with some remarks about 
the asset purchase programs. 
The Federal Reserve asset purchase programs 
The nature of our purchase programs has changed over time. In the early programs – that is 
to  say,  QE1,  QE2,  and  the  program  we  call  the  MEP,  or  the  maturity  extension  program, 
otherwise  known  as  “Operation  Twist”  –  the  Federal  Open  Market  Committee  (FOMC) 
specified the expected quantities of assets to be acquired over a defined period. Early in the 
crisis, this strategy seemed to help bolster confidence that the Fed was acting aggressively 
to offset the tightening in credit conditions and the steep downturn in economic activity. 
The communication of asset purchases changed with QE3. In September 2012, the FOMC 
launched an open-ended asset purchase program in which it directed the New York Fed’s 
Open  Market  Desk  to  conduct  purchases  at  an  announced  monthly  pace  until  there  was 
“significant improvement” in the outlook for the labor market. Later, the FOMC noted that the 
monthly pace of purchases was data dependent, allowing the pace to be revised up or down 
based on its assessment of progress toward its long-run objectives. 
Both of these types of asset purchase programs were aimed at putting downward pressure 
on  long-term  yields.1  Table  1  provides  a  summary  of  various  studies’  estimated  effects  of 
                                                
1   The Fed staff analysis has focused mostly on the so-called stock effects of the purchase programs – that is, 
persistent shifts in asset prices observed as the result of a QE program. While these stock effects are well 
documented in the literature, there have been relatively fewer studies of “flow effects” that may occur at the 
time  of  QE  transactions  (for example,  see  Stefania  D’Amico  and  Thomas  B.  King  (2013),  “Flow  and  Stock 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  these  programs  on  the  term  premium  on  10-year  Treasury  securities.  For  example,  the 
decline in 10-year Treasury yields associated with the first purchase program is estimated to 
have been as large as 100 basis points. The documented effects associated with subsequent 
programs  are  generally  smaller.  These  results  raise  the  question  of  whether  the  marginal 
effect  of  asset  purchases  has  declined  over  time.  While  that  question  is  a  valid  one,  our 
conclusion  is  that  asset  purchases  over  more  recent  years  have  provided  meaningful 
stimulus to the economy, and continue to do so. 
Figure 2 provides a current estimate, based on Fed staff calculations, of the effect on the 
term premium on 10-year Treasury securities from the combination of all asset programs.2 
The results suggest that the Fed’s balance sheet programs are currently depressing 10-year 
Treasury  yields  by  about  110  basis  points.  And,  with  the  Fed  continuing  to  hold  these 
securities, they should apply downward pressure on rates for some time. 
The declines in long-term yields have led to an associated drop in long-term borrowing costs 
for  households  and  firms  and  higher  equity  valuations.  Thus,  the  asset  purchases  have 
helped make financial conditions overall more accommodative and have provided significant 
stimulus for the broader economy. As shown in figure 3, a recent study estimates that the 
QE  programs  along  with 
the 
unemployment  rate  by  1-1/4  percentage  points  and  increased  the  inflation  rate  by 
1/2 percentage point relative to what would have occurred in the absence of these policies.3 
Moreover, the estimates imply that these macroeconomic effects are only now manifesting 
themselves in full, reflecting the inherent lags in the monetary transmission mechanism. Of 
course, such estimates have a wide band of uncertainty around them. 
As is  well known, a number of potential costs might be associated with QE and the Fed’s 
elevated balance sheet. Among these are the possibility that elevated securities holdings and 
low interest rates could pose risks to financial stability, possible effects on the Fed’s income 
and  remittances  to  the  U.S.  Treasury,  and  possible  difficulties  in  conducting  policy 
normalization.4 Such potential difficulties arise because the level of reserve balances will be 
very  high  when  the  FOMC  begins  to  raise  the  federal  funds  rate,  and,  consequently,  the 
Federal  Reserve  will  employ  new  tools,  which  have  their  own  benefits  and  costs,  to 
implement monetary policy. 
Despite these potential costs, we think that asset purchases have had a meaningful effect in 
promoting economic recovery and helping to keep inflation closer to the FOMC’s 2 percent 
goal than would otherwise have been the case. 
forward  guidance  have  reduced 
increasingly  explicit 
                                                                                                                                                   
Effects of Large-Scale Treasury Purchases: Evidence on the Importance of Local Supply,” Journal of Financial 
Economics,  vol.  108  (May),  pp.  425–48;  and  John  Kandrac  and  Bernd  Schlusche  (2013),  “Flow  Effects  of 
Large-Scale Asset Purchases,” Economics Letters, vol. 121 (November), pp. 330–35). 
2   The estimates shown in figure 2 are based on an extension of the work done in Ihrig, Klee, Li, Schulte, and 
Wei (2012). Because the term premium effect depends on both the Fed’s current and expected future asset 
holdings, most of this effect – without further unexpected policy actions – will likely wane over the next few 
years as the balance sheet begins to normalize. See Jane Ihrig, Elizabeth Klee, Canlin Li, Brett Schulte, and 
Min Wei (2012), “Expectations about the Federal Reserve’s Balance Sheet and the Term Structure of Interest 
Rates (PDF),” Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2012–57 (Washington: Board of Governors of the 
Federal Reserve System, July). 
3   See  Eric  Engen,  Thomas  Laubach,  and  David  Reifschneider  (2015),  “The  Macroeconomic  Effects  of  the 
Federal Reserve’s Unconventional Monetary Policies (PDF),” Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2015 
005 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, January). 
4   Reflecting securities holdings from the asset purchases, the Federal Reserve has remitted about $500 billion 
to the U.S. Treasury from 2008 to 2014 and is expected to have cumulative net income from 2008 to 2025 that 
is far higher than would have been the case in the absence of these asset purchases. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Policy normalization 
Turning to policy normalization, the FOMC and market participants anticipate that the federal 
funds rate will be raised sometime this year. We have for some years been considering ways 
to operate monetary policy with an elevated balance sheet. 
Prior  to  the  financial  crisis,  because  reserve  balances  outstanding  averaged  only  around 
$25 billion, relatively minor variations in the total amount of reserves supplied by the Desk 
could move the equilibrium federal funds rate up or down. With the nearly $3 trillion in excess 
reserves today, the traditional mechanism of adjustments in the quantity of reserve balances 
to  achieve  the  desired  level  of  the  effective federal funds rate may  well  not  be feasible  or 
sufficiently predictable. 
As  discussed  in  the  FOMC’s  statement  on  its  Policy  Normalization  Principles  and  Plans, 
which was published following the September 2014 FOMC meeting, we will use the rate of 
interest paid on excess reserves (IOER) as our primary tool to move the federal funds rate 
into  the  target  range.5  This  action  should  encourage  banks  not  to  lend  to  any  private 
counterparty at a rate lower than the rate they can earn on balances maintained at the Fed, 
which should put upward pressure on a range of short-term interest rates. 
Because  not  all  institutions  have  access  to  the  IOER  rate,  we  will  also  use  an  overnight 
reverse  repurchase  agreement  (ON  RRP)  facility,  as  needed.  In  an  ON  RRP  operation, 
eligible counterparties may invest funds with the Fed overnight at a given rate. The ON RRP 
counterparties 
funds,  22  broker-dealers,  24  depository 
institutions,  and  12  government-sponsored  enterprises,  including  several  Federal  Home 
Loan  Banks,  Fannie  Mae,  Freddie  Mac,  and  Farmer  Mac.  This  facility  should  encourage 
these institutions to be unwilling to lend to private counterparties in money markets at a rate 
below that offered on overnight reverse repos by the Fed. Indeed, testing to date suggests 
that  ON  RRP  operations  have  generally  been  successful  in  establishing  a  soft  floor  for 
money market interest rates.6 
The  Fed  could  also  employ  other  tools,  such  as  term  deposits  issued  through  the  Term 
Deposit Facility and term RRPs, to help drain reserves and put additional upward pressure 
on short-term interest rates. We have been testing these tools and believe they would help 
support money market rates, if needed. 
Finally, with regard to balance sheet normalization, the FOMC has indicated that it does not 
anticipate sales of agency mortgage-backed securities, and that it plans to normalize the size 
of the balance sheet primarily by ceasing reinvestment of principal payments on its existing 
securities holdings when the time comes. As illustrated in figure 4, cumulative repayments of 
principal on our existing securities holdings from now through the end of 2025 are projected 
to be about $3.2 trillion. As a result, when the FOMC chooses to cease reinvestments, the 
size  of  the  balance  sheet  will  naturally  decline,  with  a  corresponding  reduction  in  reserve 
balances. 
include  106  money  market 
                                                
5   See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2014), “Federal Reserve Issues Statement on Policy 
Normalization Principles and Plans,” press release, September 17. 
6   Policymakers have discussed benefits and costs of an ON RRP facility. For further discussion on this topic, 
see, for example, the FOMC minutes for June 2014, July 2014, and January 2015 available on the Board’s 
webpage “Federal Open Market Committee: Meeting Calendars, Statements, and Minutes (2009–2015)“; and 
Josh  Frost,  Lorie  Logan,  Antoine  Martin,  Patrick  McCabe,  Fabio  Natalucci,  and  Julie  Remache  (2015), 
“Overnight  RRP  Operations  as  a  Monetary  Policy  Tool:  Some  Design  Considerations  (PDF),”  Finance  and 
Economics Discussion Series 2015–010 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, 
February). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  Conclusion 
I  will  close  by  highlighting  that  the  Fed’s  asset  purchases  have  been  a  critical  means  by 
which  the  FOMC  has  provided  policy  accommodation  at  the  zero  lower  bound  on  nominal 
interest  rates.  In  other  words,  the  Fed  –  and  other  central  banks  –  can  implement  an 
expansionary monetary policy even when the policy interest rate is at the zero lower bound. 
The  current  high  level  of  securities  holdings  will  present  some  challenges  for  policy 
normalization,  but  we  are  confident  that  we  have  the  tools  necessary  to  remove 
accommodation at the appropriate time and at the appropriate pace. 
 
 4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   5 
   6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   7 
    8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    9 
