Raghuram Rajan: Democracy, inclusion, and prosperity 
Speech by Dr Raghuram Rajan, Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the D D Kosambi 
Ideas Festival, Goa, 20 February 2015. 
 Thank you for inviting me to this Festival of Ideas. Since this festival is about ideas, I am not 
going to tax you with the Reserve Bank’s views on monetary policy, which are, by now, well 
known.  Instead,  I  want  to  talk  about  something  I  have  been  studying  for  many  years,  the 
development of a liberal market democracy. In doing this, I will wear my hat as a professor in 
the field known as political economy, and discard my RBI hat for the time being. If you came 
here expecting more insights on the path of interest rates, as I expect many of you did, let 
me apologize for disappointing you. 
My starting point is the truism that people want to live in a safe prosperous country where 
they  enjoy  freedom  of  thought  and  action,  and  where  they  can  exercise  their  democratic 
rights  to  choose  their  government.  But  how  do  countries  ensure  political  freedom  and 
economic  prosperity?  Why  do  the  two  seem  to  go  together?  And  what  more,  if  anything, 
does  India  have  to  do  to  ensure  it  has  these  necessary  underpinnings  for  prosperity  and 
continued  political  freedom?  These  are  enormously  important  questions,  but  given  their 
nature,  they  will  not  be  settled  in  one  speech.  Think  of  my  talk  today,  therefore,  as  a 
contribution to the debate.  
Fukuyama’s three pillars of a liberal democratic state 
In  his  magisterial  two-volume  analysis  of  the  emergence  of  political  systems  around  the 
world,  political  scientist  Francis  Fukuyama  builds  on  the  work  of  his  mentor,  Samuel 
Huntington,  to  argue  that  liberal  democracies,  which  seem  to  be  best  at  fostering  political 
freedoms and economic success, tend to have three important pillars: a strong government, 
rule of law, and democratic accountability.1 I propose in this talk to start by summarizing my 
(necessarily  imprecise)  reading  of  Fukuyama’s  ideas  to  you.  I  would  urge  you  to  read  the 
books to get their full richness. I will then go on to argue that he leaves out a fourth pillar, free 
markets, which are essential to make the liberal democracy prosperous. I will warn that these 
pillars are weakening in industrial countries because of rising inequality of opportunity, and 
end with lessons for India.  
Consider Fukuyama’s three pillars in greater detail. Strong government does not mean one 
that is only militarily powerful or uses its intelligence apparatus to sniff out enemies of the 
state.  Instead,  a  strong  government  is  also  one  that  provides  an  effective  and  fair 
administration through clean, motivated, and competent administrators who can deliver good 
governance.  
Rule of law means that government’s actions are constrained by what we Indians would term 
dharma  –  by  a  historical  and  widely  understood  code  of  moral  and  righteous  behaviour, 
enforced by religious, cultural, or judicial authority.  
And democratic accountability means that government has to be popularly accepted, with the 
people having the right to throw unpopular, corrupt, or incompetent rulers out. 
                                                
1  The Origins of Political Order: From Pre-Human Times to the French Revolution by Francis Fukuyama, 2011, 
Farrar Straus and Giroux, New York, Political Order and Political Decay: From the Industrial Revolution to the 
Globalization  of  Democracy  by  Francis  Fukuyama,  2014,  Farrar  Straus  and  Giroux,  and  Political  Order  in 
Changing Societies by Samuel Huntington, 1968, Yale University Press, New Haven. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Fukuyama makes a more insightful point than simply that all three traditional aspects of the 
state – executive, judiciary, and legislature – are needed to balance one another. In sharp 
contrast  to  the  radical  libertarian  view  that  the  best  government  is  the  minimal  “night 
watchman”, which primarily protects life and property rights while enforcing contracts, or the 
radical  Marxist  view  that  the  need  for  the  government  disappears  as  class  conflict  ends, 
Fukuyama, as did Huntington, emphasizes the importance of a strong government in even a 
developed country.  
No matter how thuggish or arbitrary the government in a tin-pot dictatorship, these are weak 
governments, not strong ones. Their military or police can terrorize the unarmed citizenry but 
cannot provide decent law and order or stand up to a determined armed opposition. Their 
administration  cannot  provide  sensible  economic  policy,  good  schools  or  clean  drinking 
water.  Strong  governments  need  to  be  peopled  by  those  who  can  provide  needed  public 
goods  –  it  requires  expertise,  motivation,  and  integrity.  Realizing  the  importance  of  strong 
government,  developing  countries  constantly  request  multilateral  institutions  for  help  in 
enhancing their governance capacity. 
Strong governments may not, however, move in the right direction. Hitler provided Germany 
with extremely effective administration – the trains ran on time, as did the trains during our 
own  Emergency  in  1975–77.  His  was  a  strong  government,  but  Hitler  took  Germany 
efficiently and determinedly on a path to ruin, overriding the rule of law and dispensing with 
elections. It is not sufficient that the trains run on time, they have to go in the right direction at 
the  desired  time.  The  physical  rail  network  guiding  the  trains  could  be  thought  of  as 
analogous  to  rule  of  law,  while  the  process  by  which  consensus  is  built  around  the  train 
schedule could be thought of as democratic accountability. 
But  why  do  we  need  both  rule  of  law  and  democratic  accountability  to  keep  strong 
government on the right path? Would democratic accountability not be enough to constrain a 
dictatorial government? Perhaps not! Hitler was elected to power, and until Germany started 
suffering shortages and reversals in World War II, enjoyed the support of the majority of the 
people. The rule of law is needed to prevent the tyranny of the majority that can arise in a 
democracy, as well as to ensure that basic “rules of the game” are preserved over time so 
that  the  environment  is  predictable,  no  matter  which  government  comes  to  power.  By 
ensuring that all citizens have inalienable rights and protections, the rule of law constrains 
the majority’s behaviour towards the minorities. And by maintaining a predictable economic 
environment  against  populist  democratic  instincts,  the  rule  of  law  ensures  that  businesses 
can invest securely today for the future. 
What about asking the question the other way? Would rule of law not be enough? Probably 
not, especially in a vibrant developing society! Rule of law provides a basic slow-changing 
code of conduct that cannot be violated by either government or the citizenry. But that, by 
itself, may not be sufficient to accommodate the aspirations of new emerging groups or the 
consequences  of  new  technologies  or  ideas.  Democratic  accountability  ensures  the 
government responds to the wishes of the mass of the citizenry, allowing emerging groups to 
gain  influence  through  political  negotiation  and  competition  with  others.  Even  if  groups 
cannot see their programs translated into policy, democracy allows them to blow off steam 
non-violently.  So  both  rule  of  law  and  democratic  accountability  check and  balance  strong 
government in complementary ways. 
Where do these three pillars come from? 
Much of Fukuyama’s work is focused on tracing the development of each pillar in different 
societies. He suggests that what the nature of states we see today is largely explained by 
history. For instance, China had long periods of chaos, most recently before the Communists 
came  to  power;  groups  engaged  in  total  war  against  one  another.  Such  unbridled  military 
competition  meant  groups  had  to  organize  themselves  as  hierarchical  military  units,  with 
rulers having unlimited powers. When eventually a group was victorious over the others, it 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
was natural for it to impose centralized autocratic rule to ensure that chaos did not remerge. 
To rule over the large geographic area of the country, China needed a well-developed elite 
bureaucracy – hence the mandarins, chosen by exam based on their learning. So China had 
strong unconstrained effective government whenever it was united, and Fukuyama argues, 
unlike Western Europe or India, did not have strong alternative sources of power founded in 
religion or culture to impose rule of law. 
In Western Europe, by contrast, the Christian church imposed constraints on what the ruler 
could  do.  So  military  competition,  coupled  with  constraints  on  the  ruler  imposed  by  canon 
law, led to the emergence of both strong government and rule of law.  
In  India,  he  argues,  the  caste  system  led  to  division  of  labour,  which  ensured  that  entire 
populations could never be devoted totally to the war effort. So through much of history, war 
was never as harsh, or military competition between states as fierce, as in China. As a result, 
the  historical  pressure  for  Indian  states  to  develop  strong  governments  that  intruded  into 
every facet of society was muted. At the same time, however, the codes of just behaviour for 
rulers emanating from ancient Indian scriptures served to constrain any arbitrary exercise of 
power by Indian rulers. India, therefore, had weaker government, constrained further by rule 
of  law.  And,  according  to  Fukuyama,  these  differing  histories  explain  why  government  in 
China today is seen as effective but unrestrained, while government capacity in India is seen 
as weak, but Indian governments are rarely autocratic.  
Any of these grand generalizations can, and should, be debated. Fukuyama does not claim 
history is destiny, but does suggest a very strong influence. Of course, the long influence of 
history and culture is less perceptible when it comes to democracy where some countries like 
India have taken to it like a duck to water. A vibrant accountable democracy does not only 
imply that people cast their vote freely every five years. It requires the full mix of a raucous 
investigative press, public debate uninhibited by political correctness, many political parties 
representing  varied  constituencies,  and  a  variety  of  non-governmental  organizations 
organizing and representing interests. It will continue to be a source of academic debate why 
a  country  like  India  has  taken  to  democracy,  while  some  of  its  neighbours  with  similar 
historical and cultural pasts have not.  
I will not dwell on this. Instead, I turn to a different question that Fukuyama does not address. 
Clearly,  strong  governments  are  needed  for  countries  to  have  the  governance  to  prosper. 
Equally, free markets underpin prosperity. But why is it that every rich country is also a liberal 
democracy subject to rule of law?  
I  will  make  two  points  in  what  follows:  First,  free  enterprise  and  the  political  freedom 
emanating from democratic accountability and rule of law can be mutually reinforcing so a 
free enterprise system should be thought of as the fourth pillar underpinning liberal market 
democracies.  Second,  the  bedrock  on  which  all  four  pillars  stand  is  a  broadly  equitable 
distribution  of  economic  capabilities  among  the  citizenry.  That  bedrock  is  fissuring  in 
industrial countries, while it has to be strengthened in emerging markets like India.  
Free enterprise and political freedom  
Why  are  political  freedoms  in  a  country,  of  which  representative  democracy  is  a  central 
component, and free enterprise mutually supportive?  
There is, of course, one key similarity: Both a vibrant democracy and a vibrant free enterprise 
system  seek  to  create  a  level  playing field  which  enhances  competition.  In the  democratic 
arena, the political entrepreneur competes with other politicians for the citizen’s vote, based 
on his past record and future policy agenda. In the economic sphere, the promoter competes 
with other entrepreneurs for the consumer’s rupee, based on the quality of the product he 
sells.  
But there is also at least one key difference. Democracy treats individuals equally, with every 
adult getting one vote. The free enterprise system, by contrast, empowers consumers based 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
on how much income they get and property they own. What then prevents the median voter 
in a democracy from voting to dispossess the rich and successful? And why do the latter not 
erode the political rights of the ordinary voter. This fundamental tension between democracy 
and free enterprise appeared to be accentuated in the recent U.S. Presidential elections as 
President  Barack  Obama  appealed  to  middle-class  anger  about  its  stagnant  economic 
prospects, while former Massachusetts governor Mitt Romney appealed to business people, 
disgruntled about higher taxes and expanding healthcare subsidies. 
One reason that the median voter rationally agrees to protect the property of the rich and to 
tax  them  moderately  may  be  that  she  sees  the  rich  as  more  efficient  managers  of  that 
property, and therefore as creators of jobs and prosperity that everyone will benefit from. So, 
to the extent that the rich are self-made, and have come out winners in a competitive, fair, 
and transparent market, society may be better off allowing them to own and manage their 
wealth,  settling  in  return  for  a  reasonable  share  of  their  produce  as  taxes.  The  more, 
however, that the rich are seen as idle or crooked – as having simply inherited or, worse, 
gained  their  wealth  nefariously  –  the  more  the  median  voter  should  be  willing  to  vote  for 
tough regulations and punitive taxes on them. 
In  some  emerging  markets  today,  for  example,  property  rights  of  the  rich  do  not  enjoy 
widespread popular support because so many of a country’s fabulously wealthy oligarchs are 
seen as having acquired their wealth through dubious means. They grew rich because they 
managed  the  system,  not  because  they  managed  their  businesses  well.  When  the 
government goes after rich tycoons, few voices are raised in protest. And, as the rich kowtow 
to the authorities to protect their wealth, a strong check on official arbitrariness disappears. 
Government is free to become more autocratic. 
Consider, in contrast, a competitive free-enterprise system with a level  playing field for all. 
Such a system generally tends to permit the most efficient to acquire wealth. The fairness of 
the  competition  improves  perceptions  of  legitimacy.  Moreover,  under  conditions  of  fair 
competition, the process of creative destruction tends to pull down badly managed inherited 
wealth, replacing it with new and dynamic wealth. Great inequality, built up over generations, 
does not become a source of great popular resentment.  
On the contrary, everyone can dream that they, too, will become a Bill Gates or a Nandan 
Nilekani.  When  such  universal  aspirations  seem  plausible,  the  system  gains  added 
democratic  support.  The  rich,  confidant  of  popular 
the 
independence that accompanies wealth to limit arbitrary government, support rule of law, and 
protect democratic rights. Free enterprise and democracy sustain each other. 
There  are,  therefore,  deeper  reasons  for  why  democratic  systems  support  property  rights 
and free enterprise than the cynical argument that votes and legislators can be bought, and 
the  capitalists  have  the  money.  The  cynics  can  only  be  right  for  a  while.  Without  popular 
support,  wealth  is  protected  only  by  increasingly  coercive  measures.  Ultimately,  such  a 
system loses any vestige of either democracy or free enterprise. 
legitimacy,  can 
then  use 
The bedrock: equitable distribution of economic capabilities 
There is, however, a growing concern across the industrial world. The free enterprise system 
works well when participants enter the competitive arena with fundamentally equal chances 
of success. Given the subsequent level playing field, the winner’s road to riches depends on 
greater effort, innovation, and occasionally luck. But success is not pre-determined because 
no  class  of  participants has  had  a fundamentally  different  and  superior preparation for the 
competition. If, however, some group’s economic capabilities are sufficiently differentiated by 
preparation,  the  level  playing  field  is  no  longer  sufficient  to  equalize  a  priori  chances  of 
success. Instead, the free enterprise system will be seen as disproportionately favouring the 
better prepared. Democracy is unlikely to support it, nor are the rich and successful as likely 
to support democracy.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Such a scenario is no longer unthinkable in a number of Western democracies. Prosperity 
seems  increasingly  unreachable  for  many,  because  a  good  education, which  seems  to  be 
today’s  passport  to  riches,  is  unaffordable  for  many  in  the  middle  class.  Quality  higher 
educational  institutions  are  dominated  by  the  children  of  the  rich,  not  because  they  have 
unfairly bought their way in, but because they simply have been taught and supported better 
by  expensive  schools  and  private  tutors.  Because  middle  class  parents  do  not  have  the 
ability to give their children similar capabilities, they do not see the system as fair. Support for 
the free enterprise system is eroding, as witnessed by the popularity of books like Thomas 
Pikkety’s Capital in the 21st Century while the influence of illiberal parties on both the Left 
and Right who promise to suppress competition, finance, and trade is increasing. The mutual 
support between free enterprise and democracy is giving way to antagonism. 
the  public, 
Moreover,  as  class  differences  create  differentiated  capabilities  among 
governments can either continue choosing the most capable applicants for positions but risk 
becoming  unrepresentative  of  the  classes,  or  they  can  choose  representativeness  over 
ability,  and  risk  eroding  effectiveness.  Neither  biased  nor  ineffective  government  can 
administer well. So government capacity may also be threatened.  
Thus, as the bedrock of equitable distribution of capabilities has started developing cracks in 
industrial  countries,  all  four  pillars  supporting  the  liberal  free  market  democracy  have  also 
started  swaying.  This  is,  to  my  mind,  an  enormously  important  concern  that  will  occupy 
states across the world in the years to come. 
Lessons for India 
Let me conclude with lessons for India. India inherited a kind of democracy during British rule 
and  has  made  it  thoroughly  and  vibrantly  her  own.  Of  the  three  pillars  that  Fukuyama 
emphasizes, the strongest in India is therefore democratic accountability. India also adheres 
broadly to the rule of law. Where arguably we may have a long way to go, as Fukuyama has 
emphasized, is in the capacity of the government (and by this I mean regulators like the RBI 
also) to deliver governance and public services.  
This  is  not  to  say  that  we  do  not  have  areas  of  excellence  strewn  throughout  central  and 
state governments – whether it is the building of the New Delhi Metro, the reach of the public 
distribution  system  in  Tamil  Nadu,  or  the  speed  of  the  roll-out  of  the  Pradhan  Mantri  Jan 
Dhan  Yojana  –  but  that  such  capabilities  have  to  permeate  every  tehsil  in  every  state. 
Moreover, in many areas of government and regulation, as the economy develops, we need 
more  specialists,  with  the  domain  knowledge  and  experience.  For  instance,  well-trained 
economists are at a premium throughout the government, and there are far too few Indian 
Economic Service officers to go around. 
An  important  difference  from  the  historical  experience  of  other  countries  is  that  elsewhere 
typically strong government has emerged there first, and it is then restrained by rule of law 
and  democratic  accountability.  In  India,  we  have  the  opposite  situation  today,  with  strong 
institutions like the judiciary, opposition parties, the free press, and NGOs, whose aim is to 
check government excess. However, necessary government function is sometimes hard to 
distinguish from excess. We will have to strengthen government (and regulatory) capability 
resisting  the  temptation  to  implant  layers  and  layers  of  checks  and  balances  even  before 
capacity has taken root. We must choose a happy medium between giving the administration 
unchecked power and creating complete paralysis, recognizing that our task is different from 
the one that confronted the West when it developed, or even the task faced by other Asian 
economies. 
For instance, a business approval process that mandates numerous government surveys in 
remote areas should also consider our administrative capacity to do those surveys well and 
on time. If it does not provide for that capacity, it ensures there will be no movement forward. 
Similarly, if we create a multiple appellate process against government or regulatory action 
that  is  slow  and  undiscriminating,  we  contain  government  excess  but  also  risk  halting 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
necessary government actions. If the government or regulator is less effective in preparing its 
case than private parties, we ensure that the appellate process largely biases justice towards 
those who have the resources to use it, rather than rectifying a miscarriage of justice. So in 
thinking through reforms, we may want to move from the theoretical ideal of how a system 
might work in a country with enormous administrative capacity, to how it would work in the 
actual  Indian  situation.  Let  me  emphasize,  we  need  “checks  and  balance”,  but  we  should 
ensure a balance of checks. We cannot have escaped from the License Permit Raj only to 
end up in the Appellate Raj!  
Finally,  a  heartening  recent  development  is  that  more  people  across  the  country  are 
becoming well-educated and equipped to compete. One of the most enjoyable experiences 
at the RBI is meeting the children of our Class IV employees, many of whom hold jobs as 
business  executives  in  private  sector  firms.  As,  across  the  country,  education  makes  our 
youth  economically  mobile,  public  support  for  free  enterprise  has  expanded.  Increasingly, 
therefore, the political dialogue has also moved, from giving hand outs to creating jobs. So 
long as we modulate the pace of liberalization to the pace at which we broaden economic 
capabilities, it is likely that the public will be supportive of reform. This also means that if we 
are to embed the four pillars supporting prosperity and political freedom firmly in our society, 
we  have  to  continue  to  nurture  the  broadly  equitable  distribution  of  economic  capabilities 
among our people. Economic inclusion, by which I mean easing access to quality education, 
nutrition,  healthcare,  finance,  and  markets  to  all  our  citizens,  is  therefore  a  necessity  for 
sustainable growth. It is also, obviously, a moral imperative.  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
