  James McAndrews: Mortgage contract design – implications for 
households, monetary policy, and financial stability 
Opening  remarks  by  Mr  James  McAndrews,  Executive  Vice  President  and  Director  of 
Research  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York,  at  the  “Mortgage  Contract  Design: 
Implications for Households, Monetary Policy, and Financial Stability” Conference, Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York, New York City, 21 May 2015. 
 The views expressed in this speech are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York or of the Federal Reserve System. 
Accompanying charts can be found at the end of the speech. 
Good morning, and welcome to the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. 
Today is the second and final day of our conference on mortgage contract design. We are 
hosting this conference, in association with the NYU Stern Center for Real Estate Finance 
Research, because we view mortgage design as an important policy issue, with implications 
for monetary policy, household finance and risk management, as well as for the structure and 
stability of the financial system. 
Mortgage debt is, by far, the largest household financial liability. According to New York Fed 
data1,  mortgages  and  home  equity  lines  of  credit  make  up  73  percent  of  U.S.  household 
debt,  amounting  to  $8.7  trillion  in  liabilities  outstanding.  Mortgage  design  also  varies  in 
striking ways through time and across countries and even regions; for example, in terms of 
the sensitivity of mortgage rates to market rates, borrowers’ ability to pay down or increase 
the  loan  balance, the  ease  with  which  loans  can  be  modified,  and the rights  of  junior  lien 
holders. Reflecting this international diversity, we are very happy to have panelists from the 
United  Kingdom,  Sweden  and  Denmark  speaking  today,  as  well  as  representatives  from 
many foreign central banks and other international organizations in the audience. 
This is also a particularly opportune time to think about mortgage contract design given the 
ongoing debate about housing finance reform in the U.S., and the future of the government 
sponsored enterprises Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac. 
But debates about mortgage design are definitely not new! In fact, 40 years ago the Federal 
Reserve  Bank  of  Boston  hosted  a  well-known  conference  on  “new  mortgage  designs”2, 
which included Franco Modigliani, later awarded the Nobel prize in economics, and current 
Federal Reserve vice chair Stanley Fischer. An interesting contrast to today – the main focus 
of  the  Boston  conference  was  the  design  of  mortgages  to  deal  with  a  high  and  volatile 
inflation environment. 
The financial crisis and its aftermath have brought mortgage contract design back into sharp 
focus. In my remarks today I will focus on one aspect of mortgage design; namely how the 
prevalence  of  adjustable  rate  mortgages,  or  ARMs,  may  affect  a  number  of  aspects  of 
economic performance, including the pass-through of monetary policy, the sharing of interest 
rate risk, and the use of resources spent on refinancing. 
The federal funds rate dropped from 5-1/4 percent in August 2007 to the current 0–25 basis 
point  range  starting  in  December  2008.  Longer-term  interest  rates  such  as  the  yield  on 
10-year Treasury bonds also declined significantly, from about 5 percent in mid-2007 to a 
range between 2–3 percent in recent years. As illustrated in the chart, however, the average 
                                                
1   See the Federal Reserve Bank of New York Quarterly Report on Household Debt and Credit. 
2   See New Mortgage Designs for an Inflationary Environment for the agenda and proceedings. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
interest rate paid on the total stock of outstanding mortgages in the U.S. decreased relatively 
slowly and by a smaller amount over this period. 
The source of the stickiness in mortgage interest rates is that the vast majority of outstanding 
mortgages in the U.S. are long-term fixed-rate mortgages, whose pricing is tied to long-term 
interest rates, and which require borrowers to refinance to benefit from a decrease in market 
rates. This refinancing process in earlier episodes has worked quite smoothly in transmitting 
lower market interest rates to the mortgage market – in particular during the large refinancing 
wave in 2002–2003. But during the crisis, many borrowers were unable to refinance either 
because their property was worth less than the outstanding mortgage balance, or because 
they didn’t otherwise fulfill underwriting criteria that had  also become much more stringent 
than during the boom. 
These  features  surely  limited  the  transmission  of  accommodative  monetary  policy  through 
households’ balance sheets. Furthermore, borrowers that were able to refinance and benefit 
from lower interest rates were mostly those with high credit scores and relatively lower debt 
balances. The Administration responded to this limited pass-through by introducing programs 
such  as  the  Home  Affordable  Refinance  Program,  or  HARP,  to  enable  refinancing  for 
borrowers  with  high-LTV  loans  backed  by  Fannie  Mae  or  Freddie  Mac,  or  facilitating 
streamline  refinances  of  FHA  loans.  While  these  programs  eventually  reached  a  large 
number of borrowers, their implementation was complex. 
As  a  simple  mortgage  design  counterfactual,  had  more  borrowers  had  adjustable-rate 
mortgages,  which  are  generally  indexed  to  short-term  interest  rates,  the  pass-through  of 
lower  market  interest  rates  would  have  been  more  direct.  As  the  Chart  illustrates,  the 
average  interest  rate  on  outstanding  ARMs  declined  more  rapidly  than  the  rate  on  FRMs, 
even though in the U.S. most ARMs only adjust after a rather long fixed-rate period (often 
5 or more years) and then only do so infrequently (generally once or twice a year). 
Crucially,  ARM  interest  rate  resets  reduced  mortgage  payments  without  requiring  the 
borrower to refinance, thereby benefiting a broad range of borrowers, including those with 
little or no home equity and/or low credit scores. Research conducted here at the New York 
Fed  has  shown  that  these  lower  interest  payments  resulted  in  large  declines  in  these 
borrowers’  default  probabilities3.  And  two  papers  presented  in  our  academic  sessions 
yesterday found evidence that these borrowers responded by increasing their consumption 
of durable goods4. 
All this implies that a higher share of ARMs at the start of the financial crisis would likely have 
enhanced the effectiveness of monetary easing in reducing foreclosures and stimulating the 
macroeconomy. More generally, the pass-through of monetary policy is likely to be stronger if 
a high share of mortgage debt has an adjustable interest rate, both in easing and tightening 
phases of the economic cycle.5 As a result, the amplitude of interest rate adjustments by the 
central bank may not need to be quite as large to have the same economic effect. This may 
be a particularly important consideration when the economy is at or close to the zero-lower 
bound on interest rates, as the U.S. and many other economies are today. 
                                                
3   See Tracy and Wright, 2012, Payment Changed and Default Risk: The Impact of Refinancing on Expected 
Credit  Losses,  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York  Staff  Report  No. 562;  and  Fuster  and  Willen,  2012, 
Payment  Size,  Negative  Equity,  and  Mortgage  Default  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York  Staff  Report 
No. 582. 
4   See  Keys,  Piskorski,  Seru  and  Yao,  2015,  Mortgage  Rates,  Household  Balance  Sheets,  and  the  Real 
Economy, and Di Maggio, Kermani and Ramcharan, 2015, Monetary Pass-Through: Household Consumption 
and Voluntary Deleveraging. 
5   This is also an implication of the model presented in Auclert, 2015, Monetary Policy and the Redistribution 
Channel. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
A  related  consideration  is  that  refinancing  to  a  lower  interest  rate  requires  significant 
resource  costs,  which  would  not  be  incurred  if  the  borrower’s  interest  rate  adjusts 
automatically when market interest rates decline. One estimate of the cost of refinancing a 
mortgage, which includes costs such as those on a property appraisal or title insurance, is 
$2,000  plus  one  percent  of  the  loan  amount.6  Under  this  estimate,  total  refinancing 
transaction costs over 2008–2013 exceeded $100 billion.7 Furthermore, the re-underwriting 
of  existing  loans  leads  to  resource  constraints  in  the  mortgage  origination  industry  during 
refinancing waves, frequently followed by lay-offs when the refinancing boom is complete.8 
Timing a mortgage refinancing optimally also requires time and attention from the borrower, 
and  can  lead  to  refinancing  mistakes,  particularly  by  less  financially  sophisticated 
households.9 
But do these considerations make ARMs preferable to FRMs, either from the point of view of 
monetary policymakers, or public policy more generally? Not necessarily. FRMs have many 
advantages;  for  example  they  are  simple  for  borrowers  to  understand,  and  clearly  limit 
household  exposure  to  interest  rate  volatility.  Consider  too  the  incidence  of  interest  rate 
adjustments:  widespread 
reliance  on  ARMs  may  have  unattractive  distributional 
consequences  for  monetary  policy,  since  it  implies  that  a  larger  component  of  monetary 
transmission  falls  on  a  subset  of  highly  indebted  mortgage  borrowers.  A  risk-sharing 
argument  may  call  for  the  effects  of  monetary  policy  to  be  more  evenly  spread  across 
households.  On  the  other  hand,  monetary  policy  might  have  to  adjust  interest  rates  more 
dramatically in a world of widespread FRMs, which would affect some potential borrowers a 
great deal. Furthermore, FRMs require an extensive financial-sector risk transfer system10, 
which may be costly, and may concentrate risks in systemically risky ways. Thus, there are 
clearly many tradeoffs that need to be carefully considered. Moreover, as academic research 
has  emphasized,  optimal  mortgage  choice  depends  on  a  borrower’s  characteristics  and 
financial  circumstances.  It  therefore  seems  desirable  that  the  mortgage  finance  system 
makes  a  range  of  different  contracts  available  to  borrowers,  and  be  open  to  sensible 
innovations in contract design.11 
Although I have focused on ARMs, interest rate adjustability is only one of many important 
aspects  of  mortgage  design  that  will  be  considered  in  the  discussions  today.  Another 
important  issue,  for  example,  is  how  home  price  movements  are  shared  between  the 
borrower  and  lender.  Home  price  risk  is  already  partially  borne  by  lenders  and  other 
mortgage  investors,  since  a  fall  in  home  prices  increases  mortgage  defaults  and 
                                                
6   See Agarwal, Driscoll and Laibson, 2013, “Optimal Mortgage Refinancing: A Closed-Form Solution”, Journal 
of Money, Credit and Banking, Vol. 45, No. 4, pp. 591–622. 
7   According to data from the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act, there were 31.8 million refinancings of first-lien 
single-family mortgages over 2008–2013, with an average (median) loan amount of $212,000 ($174,000). 
8   For  evidence  on  the  importance  of  capacity  constraints  for  time-varying  margins  in  mortgage  pricing,  see 
Fuster, Goodman, Lucca, Madar, Molloy and Willen, 2012, The Rising Gap between Primary and Secondary 
Mortgage Rates, Federal Reserve Bank of New York Economic Policy Review, 19(2), pp. 17–39. 
9   This  is  documented  for  instance  in  another  paper  presented  yesterday,  by  Andersen,  Campbell,  Meisner, 
Nielsen  and  Ramadorai  (2015),  “Inattention  and  Inertia  in  Household  Finance:  Evidence  from  the  Danish 
Mortgage Market”. 
10   For evidence that lenders are less willing to originate FRMs if mortgage securitization markets are illiquid or 
frozen,  see  Fuster  and  Vickery  (2015),  “Securitization  and  the  Fixed-Rate  Mortgage”,  Review  of  Financial 
Studies, 28(1), pp. 176-211. Research presented in yesterday’s academic sessions finds that a bank’s access 
to external bond finance influences the composition of mortgages it originates: see Foá, Gambacorta, Guiso 
and Mistrulli (2015), The Supply Side of Mortgage Finance. 
11   One proposal for such innovation that would have increased pass-through during the crisis is the “automatic 
stabilizer  mortgage”  of  Eberly  and  Krishnamurthy,  2014;  see  http://www.newyorkfed.org/research-
/conference/2015/mortgage_design/Eberly_Janice_052015.pdf. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  
 
foreclosures,  and  associated  credit  losses.  But  a  number  of  proposals  have  argued  that 
mortgage balances should be explicitly indexed to movements in home prices in some way.12 
I hope I have whetted your appetite for today’s events. 
 
                                                  
12   Kung,  2015,  discusses 
“shared  appreciation  mortgages”: 
http://www.newyorkfed.org/research/conference/2015/mortgage_design/Kung_Edward_housingstructural_052
015.pdf. 
implications  of  such 
the  equilibrium 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   5 
