  Mario Draghi: Opening remarks at the T2S Launch Celebration 
Opening  remarks  by  Mr  Mario  Draghi,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the 
T2S Launch Celebration, Milan, 2 July 2015. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
I am very happy to be here today to celebrate the official launch of the TARGET2-Securities 
platform with you. The occasion is made all the more special by this beautiful venue. Since 
settling here in 2013, MUBA – the Milan Children’s Museum – has turned this location into a 
place where children can unleash their inspiration, their artistic talents. 
Drawing  on  the  creativity  around  me  and  given  this  evening’s  theme  of  winning  stories,  I 
hope you will indulge me as I tell one of our own winning stories – the tale of how the shared 
vision of TARGET2-Securities became a successful European reality. 
Let  me  start  by  setting  the  scene.  T2S  is  a  central  part  of  the  broader  story  of  European 
integration. In describing this process, Robert Schuman said in 1950 that “Europe will not be 
made  all  at  once,  or  according  to  a  single  plan.  It  will  be  built  through  concrete 
achievements.”  The  path  has  indeed  been  dotted  with  many  of  these  achievements.  For 
instance, when the euro was introduced in 1999, there was an urgent need for a payment 
system that would be able to process large-value euro payments related to monetary policy 
operations as well as interbank payments in the new currency. 
TARGET was created as a way of linking the existing systems in Europe – the first of our 
achievements in this realm. Yet it quickly became clear that a more connected system would 
be  needed,  and  in  May  2008,  TARGET  was  completely  replaced  by  TARGET2,  a  fully 
integrated  settlement  platform.  TARGET2  has  since  become  one  of  the  largest  payment 
systems in the world, and the market’s first choice for large-value payments in euro, with a 
turnover of €492 trillion last year. 
While these were important accomplishments which resulted in a high level of integration on 
the  cash  side,  the  infrastructure  supporting  capital  markets  continued  to  be  highly 
fragmented. Europe had over 30 different systems for settling securities. The overwhelming 
number of rules and approaches meant that the whole payments and settlements process 
remained convoluted and costly. 
As  a  result,  T2S  was  developed.  Fragmentation  was  replaced  with  a  simplified,  universal 
platform  which  could  be  used  to  settle  securities  transactions  in  central  bank  money.  The 
Eurosystem,  the  market,  and  the  more  than  100  institutions  making  up  the  governance 
structure  collaborated  from  the  very  start,  seeking  to  deliver  a  solution  that  would  make 
Europe a better place to invest and help European businesses reach a larger investor base. 
We actively sought and responded to the views of all stakeholders, which greatly enriched 
the whole process and led to a better final outcome than we could ever have achieved alone. 
There is a saying that “teamwork divides the task and multiplies the success” – and this was 
certainly the case for T2S. I would like to take this opportunity now to thank all involved for 
years of constructive input and enthusiasm throughout the project. 
Yet much like any story is incomplete without twists and turns, the construction of TARGET2-
Securities has not been a universally smooth or completely steady process. 
For instance, not everyone anticipated the momentum that our harmonisation agenda would 
gain. When we originally set out to build T2S, there was a fear that we were putting the cart 
before  the  horse.  It  was  said  that  we  could  not,  and  should  not,  develop  an  integrated 
securities settlement platform until we had a fully harmonised rulebook for post-trading. While 
our  approach  may  have  seemed  counterintuitive  at  the  time,  it  has  proven  to  be  highly 
effective.  T2S  provided  the  concrete  incentive  needed  to  drive  the  harmonisation  process 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
forward. The market could see that aligning their rules and practices would help them get the 
most  out  of  T2S,  and  so  they  began  to  harmonise  out  of  choice  and  not  out  of  legal 
obligation. 
The  project  took  another  turn  on  17  September  of  last  year,  when  the  Central  Securities 
Depositories  (CSD) regulation  came  into force.  This  was  in  many  ways  an  admission that 
while  market  initiative  can  be  a  tremendous  driving  force,  sometimes,  legislative  action  is 
needed to give the market the space it requires to achieve its full potential. Until the adoption 
of  these rules,  securities  depositories  had  been  somewhat  constrained  in  what  they  could 
achieve by the fact that they were subject to differing national laws and requirements. The 
CSD Regulation streamlined some of these guidelines, thereby providing the legal framework 
for T2S’ technical operations. This gave further momentum to the post-trade harmonisation 
efforts. 
These  unexpected  occurrences  in  the  story  underline  the  resilience  of  the  T2S  team 
throughout this endeavour, and enrich the eventual completion of the project.  
Where have these events taken us? Thanks to T2S, Europe now has an integrated platform 
for  settling  securities  transactions  in  central  bank  money  in  real  time.  Cross-border 
settlement of both debt securities and equities is now treated in the same way as domestic 
settlement, with harmonised conditions, making it easier and more cost-effective for investors 
and companies to buy and sell shares in other countries, for example. With T2S, issuances – 
which  have  so  far  been  largely  restricted  to  the  national  level  –  are  now  available  on  a 
European  scale,  making  it  easier  to  attract  foreign  investors.  Securities  depositories  can 
provide safer and more efficient services to their clients, at a lower cost. It also allows market 
participants to manage their collateral and liquidity needs more effectively, as it is now much 
easier to move collateral from where it is to where it needs to be, anywhere in Europe.  
While  this  short  list  of  advantages  does  mark  a  “concrete  achievement,”  as  described  by 
Schuman, the end of the T2S story remains unwritten. Last minute adjustments are still being 
made – as you know, Monte Titoli was due to migrate along with the four other markets in 
wave 1. However, following the request from the Italian market for sufficient testing time, the 
CSD community and the Eurosystem jointly supported adjustments to the migration plan for 
Monte Titoli and its clients. We are looking forward to them joining the platform on 31 August.  
Moreover,  alongside  these  continuous  adjustments,  there  are  still  some  areas  where  we 
need  to  achieve  greater  harmonisation  if  we  want  to  reach  our  goal  of  a  fully  integrated 
financial sector in Europe. This is why the ECB and the Eurosystem fully support the ongoing 
development of a European Capital Markets Union (CMU).  
In  my  view,  two  main  pillars  support  the  establishment  of the  CMU:  the  twin  prospects  of 
greater risk-sharing and more diverse sources of financing.  
First, more integrated capital markets will allow Europe to better smooth any future economic 
shocks. A recent study from the IMF finds that Euro area capital markets only absorb a very 
small share of shocks, compared with almost 50% in the United States. Shock absorption is 
particularly  weak  during  crisis  periods.1  A  capital  markets  union,  and  the  corresponding 
increase in cross-border holdings of debt and equity, will allow for greater diversification in 
risk-sharing,  helping  businesses  and  households  cushion  economic  downturns.  A  capital 
markets union, and the corresponding increase in cross-border holdings of debt and equity, 
will  allow  for  greater  diversification  in  risk-sharing,  helping  businesses  and  households 
cushion economic downturns.  
Second, the establishment of CMU will allow businesses to enjoy a greater range of funding 
choices and help reduce the link between a firm’s location and its cost of funding. In Europe, 
                                                
1  
IMF (2013), “Towards a Fiscal Union for the euro area: technical background notes”, September 2013. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
the share of financing obtained in capital markets stands at 25%, whereas this figure is 80% 
in the United States. Cross-border frictions also impede the ability of firms to gain access to 
financing  from  across  the  Union.  By  removing  fragmentation  in  capital  markets,  CMU  will 
allow businesses and households to access a larger variety of funds, and stimulate growth. 
TARGET2-Securities will form the foundation for these two pillars, and for the establishment 
of the Capital Markets Union. If we consider the fact that settling a cross-border transaction 
in Europe used to cost up to ten times as much in Europe as it does in the United States, the 
importance  of  our  new  settlement  platform  to  the  deeper  integration  of  capital  markets 
becomes evident. Indeed, T2S will facilitate cross-border bonds and equities trading, which 
means that we are already making progress towards completing the CMU. Moreover, as part 
of its harmonisation agenda, T2S has taken steps towards many of the goals in the CMU 
agenda, such as harmonising withholding tax  procedures and resolving conflicts of law. In 
this sense, T2S is a demonstration of the market’s willingness to achieve deeper integration 
on a European scale.  
But legislative and regulatory action will also be required if the remaining barriers in the field 
of market infrastructure are to be removed. This is because financial markets in Europe are 
subject to a vast network of legal rules, which sometimes conflict on issues such as taxation 
requirements, insolvency procedures and corporate governance. For full integration, we need 
to have a single rulebook for capital markets, and all market participants must have equal 
access to markets.  
It is particularly important to emphasise the rule-based nature and legal side of this system 
when considering the greater risk of contagion which may accompany the development of 
the Capital Markets Union. The further integration of Europe’s financial sectors may enhance 
systemic  risk  across  the  continent,  meaning  that  ultimately,  a  single  regulatory  supervisor 
and macroprudential toolkit for capital markets should be established. This is mostly a long-
term consideration; yet we must remember that legal tools will be necessary to bring out the 
full benefits of deeper integration.  
Let me conclude. 
If well designed and thoroughly implemented, a genuine capital markets union will deepen 
the Single Market and contribute to the development of a more prosperous union. And T2S – 
a  tremendous  achievement  –  will  serve  as  the  basis  for  these  further  achievements,  in 
accordance with the process envisioned by Schumann 65 years ago.  
Thank you.
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
