  Glenn Stevens: The changing landscape of central banking 
Address  by  Mr  Glenn  Stevens,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Australia,  to  the  Official 
Monetary and Financial Institutions Forum (OMFIF) City Lecture, London, 30 June 2015. 
 The landscape of central banking has changed a great deal in the three decades I have been 
involved  in  it,  and  especially  since  the  financial  crisis  beginning  in  2007.  Some  of  the 
changes  were  made  as  a  result  of  careful  system  design,  in  the  light  of  long  experience. 
Others,  and  arguably  the  more  prominent  ones,  have  come  as  a  response  to  exceptional 
circumstances. These have been necessary, yet unsettling. And we don’t really know where 
they will ultimately lead. 
In this talk I will reflect on some of these changes. Let me preface these reflections by saying 
that I am not casting criticisms towards other central banks or their policies. Indeed, my main 
point, to repeat, is that some central banks have found themselves doing extraordinary things 
because of the extraordinary circumstances to which they were required, by their mandates, 
to respond as best they could. Even among central banks that haven’t quite had to do the 
extraordinary,  many  are  operating  outside  their  previous  comfort  zones  and  for  the  same 
reason. 
Where were we? 
Ten years ago, it seemed that monetary policy debates had largely been settled. Had one 
asked  about  the  goals  of  the  central  bank,  the  answer  “price  stability”  very  quickly  would 
have  been  given.  In  some  countries,  including  my  own,  objectives  about  real  economic 
activity and/or employment remained in legislation, and still do. In others, especially  in the 
continental European tradition, price stability was the sole objective in law. But even in those 
countries  where  a  “dual  mandate”  was,  and  is,  in  operation,  policymakers  overwhelmingly 
would have acknowledged that real activity goals are about managing, to the extent possible, 
cyclical  fluctuations  around  a  potential  output  path.  Monetary  policy  was  not  thought  able, 
itself, directly to affect that potential path. 
This  represented  nothing  more  than  the  absorption  of  the  fundamental  insight  of  two 
centuries of monetary theory and experience: that monetary policy is, in the long run, about 
nominal magnitudes. To the extent that a monetary regime can reduce uncertainty about the 
general level of prices, and that that assists in resource allocation and in encouraging saving 
and investment, that will be monetary policy’s contribution to average growth rates. By the 
mid to late 1980s, just about everyone accepted that, while the Phillips Curve might have a 
negative short-run slope, in the long run it was vertical. 
That  consensus  accepted  that  expectations  about  inflation  matter  for  actual  inflation  over 
relevant  time  horizons.  That  meant  that  nominating  some  sort  of  numerical  objective  for 
inflation came to make sense. This was especially so after targeting measures of the stock of 
money, as an intermediate goal on the way to price stability, delivered less success than had 
been hoped. 
Explicit inflation targets also helped in another way. It had become widely accepted that the 
day-to-day  conduct  of  monetary  policy  needed  to  be  independent  of  the  influence  of 
governments. This was to avoid the temptation to seek a short-term stimulus to growth for 
political reasons, at the cost of a persistent rise in inflation. But in democracies, where central 
banks are creations of legislatures, there have to be limits to central banks’ autonomy and 
devices  for  accountability.  Correctly  specified,  an  explicit  inflation  target  with  operational 
independence  seemed  to  solve  this  problem.  It  would  allow  the  central  bank  to  give 
appropriate  weight  to  output  and  employment,  but  would  still  anchor  the  price  level  in  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  long  run  and  provide  a  metric  to  evaluate  how  well  the  central  bank  had  used  its 
independence. 
By the mid 1990s, then, the consensus seemed to be that the right regime was some sort of 
inflation  target  agreed  between  a  government  and  the  central  bank  (if  not  set  out  in 
legislation),  operational  independence  for  the  central  bank  in  pursuing  the  target,  and  a 
system  of  communication  and  accountability.1  Through  the  1990s  and  the  early  2000s,  an 
increasing number of countries adopted some version of this approach.2 Even the Federal 
Reserve, for which the dual mandate is most strongly set down and defended, articulates a 
numerical description of price stability and describes it as a goal. 
There were still, of course, the financial stability goals that were the original raison d’être of 
most  central  banks.  It  was  generally  accepted  that  the  appropriate  response  in  a  liquidity 
panic would be to provide funds to solvent financial institutions, against collateral, at a rate 
related  to  but  above  the  prevailing  market  rate.  System-wide  increases  in  demand  for 
liquidity  would  be  handled  almost  automatically  via  operations  designed  to  keep  the 
overnight rate at the target. Only in extraordinary cases would something more be required, 
and such events were expected to be very rare. 
For  some  years,  then,  the  modus  operandi  of  a  developed  country  central  bank  involved 
setting  a  short-term  interest  rate  and  adjusting  it  incrementally  in  response  to  forecast 
deviations  of  inflation  and/or  output  from  the  desired  path.  Occasionally,  the  central  bank 
would move the policy rate more quickly in response to shocks thought likely to affect the 
outlook in a major way. Observed changes in asset values would be assessed in terms of 
their  implications  for  the  growth  forecast.  Rapid  declines  in  asset  values  might  evoke  a 
monetary policy response if they were thought likely to have a significant economic effect. 
The  results  of  this  framework  seemed  to  be  good  –  we  were  living  through  the  “great 
moderation” after all. The actions were (relatively) uncontroversial and there was generally 
reasonable political support for the system. 
What happened? 
But  then,  unfortunately,  things  got  more  complicated.  As  we  know,  the  materialisation  of 
some of the risks that had built up in the financial system, followed by a financial crisis, deep 
recessions and slow recoveries, has meant that much more has been demanded of central 
banks in recent years, especially those in the major jurisdictions. 
This  started  when  unusually  large  interventions  were  required  to  keep  money  markets 
functioning in Europe during the second half of 2007. Then, truly extraordinary actions were 
required in a number of jurisdictions following the failure of Lehman Brothers in September 
2008. The complete breakdown of funding between intermediaries, the closure of important 
segments  of  the  capital  markets  and  the  loss  of  public  confidence  in  major  financial 
institutions  were  more  severe  than  any  previous  event  over  a  number  of  decades.  This 
required very forceful interventions by central banks, and by governments. A potential debt-
default  spiral  had  to  be  averted.  Assets  had  to  be  liquefied.  Private  funding  that  had 
disappeared had to be replaced, in key instances, by central bank funding. And, not least, 
public confidence in deposit-taking institutions had to be restored, using guarantees and in 
some cases public injections of capital. This was not an idiosyncratic event; it was systemic. 
While the most acute problems were in the North Atlantic countries, the ramifications were 
global. 
                                                
1  Flexible exchange rates are usually also a prerequisite for a successful prosecution of an inflation target. 
2  See  Bernanke  BS,  T  Laubach,  FS  Mishkin  and  AS  Posen  (1999),  Inflation  Targeting:  Lessons  from  the 
International Experience, Princeton University Press, Princeton and Truman EM (2003), Inflation Targeting in 
the World Economy, Institute for International Economics, Washington DC. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Such actions, controversial as they were (and still are), were really the only course available 
to the decision-makers at the time. Lengthy retrospective critical evaluations, carried out in 
the  (relatively)  calm  years  afterwards,  are  the  prerogative  of  historians,  academics, 
journalists and legislatures. There is of course a lot of hindsight judgement in there, and in 
some  cases  not  a  little  unfairness.  The  fact  that  they  occur,  though,  marks  the  unusual 
territory that central banks and governments were forced to traverse. 
For this was more than just the injection of liquidity as a response to a brief panic. The threat 
to real economic activity was so dire that the stance of monetary policy had to be changed 
aggressively. Economic activity turned down very sharply, all around the world, in the closing 
months  of  2008.  Interest  rates  were  slashed  and  in  the  major  jurisdictions  they  quickly 
reached  very  low  levels  or,  effectively,  zero.  This  wasn’t  enough  either  to  prevent  many 
countries  entering  deep  recessions  or,  subsequently,  to  generate  reasonable  recoveries. 
Hence,  “unconventional”  measures  were  rolled  out  to  try  to  provide  additional  stimulus. 
Central bank balance sheets, pre-crisis, were typically about 5–10 per cent of national GDP 
in size. (The Bank of Japan’s was already larger than that, as a result of the use of balance 
sheet  measures  over  the  preceding  decade.)  They  have  since  increased  to  around  
25–30 per cent of GDP, with the Bank of Japan on a path that will take it to around 90 per 
cent. 
Balance  sheet  measures  may  have  begun  as  direct  interventions  to  stabilise  the  financial 
system, but are now long-running measures aimed at monetary policy goals. Monetary policy 
is  being  asked  to  return  output  to  potential  by  boosting  demand,  after  a  severe  demand 
downturn  resulting  in  part  from  over-leverage.  The  problem  here  is  that  if  leverage  is  too 
high,  and  needs  to  be  reduced,  monetary  policy  (by  itself)  may  not  be  as  effective  at 
generating demand as people might wish. Twenty years ago, with a latent demand for more 
leverage-led spending, it wasn’t hard to stimulate growth in demand with lower interest rates, 
at least not in the Anglosphere or the Nordic countries. It seems harder now. 
It is worth remembering that monetary policy doesn’t directly create spending. What it does is 
alter a relative price. That has two significant effects. The first is that it redistributes income 
between  savers  and  borrowers.  In  the  wake  of  a  financial  crisis  associated  with  over-
leverage, monetary policy can, by lowering interest rates, lessen the burden on the indebted 
sectors by shifting the burden in part to the net holders of interest-earning assets. This will 
lessen  the  negative  feedback  from  debt  to  spending,  which,  in  turn,  stops  aggregate 
spending falling as much as it otherwise might do (even though the net asset holders will at 
some point start to reduce their spending if interest income continues to fall). 
The  second  effect  is  to  alter  the  incentives  faced  by  the  private  (and  public)  sectors  in 
deciding whether to spend today or on some future day. But if people are less responsive to 
that  because  they  are  still  highly  leveraged,  monetary  policy  is  less  powerful  in  the  short 
term. Of course, this might just be temporary. Once the “balance sheet repair” channel has 
been  working  for  long  enough  for  the  repair  to  be  largely  complete,  maybe  people  will 
respond with additional spending in the same way as they used to. In that case policy would 
still be effective, just with longer lags. On the other hand, if there has been a persistent shift 
in attitudes to debt, spending and saving, then monetary policy’s weaker ability to generate 
short-term growth might just be part of the “new normal”. 
So while it is beyond argument that central bank actions in the crisis headed off what could 
have been a catastrophe, it’s another thing to think that monetary policy can easily restore 
enough  demand  to  fully  employ  the  economy’s  labour  and  capital  doing  what  they  were 
doing  before  the  crisis.  The  evidence  for  effectiveness  of  such  policies  is  strongest  in  the 
United States, but even there it has taken a long time for the recovery to gain momentum. If 
ultra-low interest rates and quantitative measures were powerful, they should have produced 
a lot more demand and presumably more inflation by now. 
Some critics of these policies thought, of course, that high inflation would, in fact, occur. They 
were wrong about that. If anything, inflation looks a bit too low globally despite the extent of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  monetary  easing.  Other  critics  would  say  that  if  the  desired  effects  have  been  slow  to 
emerge, that is only because the dosage was too small. Perhaps that’s right. Or perhaps the 
evidence is telling us that, at whatever dosage, monetary policy can do only so much and 
that other tools have to be used as well. That is not to say that monetary authorities were 
wrong to implement such policies, only that they were perhaps bound to find their efforts of 
only relatively limited power. 
At any rate, it is still proving hard to generate demand. Financial risk-taking has increased, 
driven  by  the  “search  for  yield”,  but  “real  economy”  risk-taking  is  more  difficult  to  find. 
Corporations sit on stockpiles of cash, in many cases apparently reluctant to accept lower 
returns on investment projects in spite of the lowest cost of debt funding ever seen. Capital is 
returned to shareholders, who are frequently faced with alternative options earning even less 
than the money would have earned in the corporation. At the same time, it is increasingly 
apparent that the ultra-low returns on offer on financial instruments are making it exceedingly 
difficult for the provision of retirement incomes. 
Although it now seems that the “zero lower bound” for nominal interest rates wasn’t actually 
zero, it is not clear that the recent negative rates implemented by a handful of central banks 
in Europe offer some new vista of policy effectiveness. The incidence of negative rates that 
society  will  accept  may  be  somewhat  narrow.  Moreover,  a  recent  speech  by  Jamie 
McAndrews outlines a number of respects in which negative interest rates, if attempted on a 
widespread basis over a long period, could in fact be very disruptive, and in ways not likely to 
be expansionary for growth.3 
It hasn’t helped matters that many governments feel they have insufficient scope for stimulus 
from the budgetary side. In the contemporary jargon, they lack “fiscal space”. In some cases 
this is a result of poor fiscal discipline over a long period. In others it is more the result of the 
size of the debt build-up caused by the depth of the crisis itself. Whatever the backdrop, if the 
perceived limits to debt sustainability are close, then governments will tend to feel that fiscal 
stimulus  today  must  be  accompanied  by  a  credible  promise  to  reverse  it  tomorrow.  This 
promise, if kept, would keep the debt trajectory largely as it was. But it also may negate the 
power of the policy to generate growth beyond a very short horizon. One has to have a lot of 
faith in the notion of temporary “pump priming” to think otherwise.4 On the other hand, many 
would  argue  that  since  the  track  record  in  so  many  cases  suggests  that,  once  pubic 
borrowing starts, governments find it very hard to stop, perhaps that conservatism is for the 
best. 
Financial stability and monetary policy 
Meanwhile,  central  banks’  longstanding general  concern for  safeguarding financial  stability 
has  taken  on  more  of  an  edge  and  is  now  less  easily  dissociated  from  monetary  policy. 
There is still a tendency, as there was prior to the crisis, for financial stability and monetary 
policy work in central banks to be organised in separate silos. The monetary policy people 
think  about  output  gaps  and  inflation,  and  the  financial  stability  people  think  about  asset 
prices and leverage and how to strengthen resilience. The current thinking is that regulatory 
tools should be deployed in response to concerns here. 
It certainly seems logical enough to ensure stronger capital standards and even to lean into 
the credit cycle with counter-cyclical tools where regulators have them. 
                                                
3  McAndrews J (2015), “Negative Nominal Central Bank Policy Rates: Where is the Lower Bound?”, Remarks at 
the University of Wisconsin, Madison, 8 May. Available at <http://www.ny.frb.org/newsevents/speeches/2015/ 
mca150508.html>. 
4  There was temporary fiscal stimulus at the height of the crisis in 2009, called for by the IMF among others. In 
the  circumstances  of  the  time,  that  was  probably  a  reasonable  response.  The  “payback”  for  that  has  been 
fiscal contraction and slower growth in a number of countries in subsequent years. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  financial  stability  and 
this  neat  separation  between 
Yet 
the  central  bank’s  other 
macroeconomic goals might just be a little too neat. I wonder whether it shouldn’t leave us a 
little uneasy. 
For a start, experience of an earlier era of regulation counsels against putting a lot of faith in 
such measures. Not only that, but it is surely a lesson of the crisis that monetary policy and 
financial  stability  interact.  Monetary  policy  works,  after  all,  by  altering  financial  prices  and 
asset values. Lowering interest rates doesn’t just conjure up demand through some process 
of immaculate conception. It works, when it works, at least partly by affecting risk-taking: by 
affecting borrowing and saving decisions.5 The central bank, by setting the rate of interest, is 
effectively  setting  the  price  of  leverage.  It’s  abundantly  clear  that  leverage  matters  for 
financial stability. Few things matter more, actually. 
People have stopped short of saying that the goal of y monetary policy should be changed 
from price stability to financial stability alone (though it is not impossible that a decade from 
now that will have changed). But they have more misgivings than they once might have had 
about  attempts  to  meet  inflation  and/or  unemployment  mandates  that  ignore  the  financial 
implications of the interest rate settings thought necessary to reach those goals. 
Suppose  a  country  faces  an  insufficiency  of  aggregate  demand  and  below-target  inflation, 
but can generate the demand needed to close the gap and push inflation up to target only by 
fostering a rise in private sector leverage. How aggressively should the central bank seek to 
increase demand and return inflation to target? 
The answer presumably depends on several considerations. Among them might be how well 
anchored  inflation  expectations  are.  The  better  anchored  they  are,  the  less  risk  of  a 
damaging  decline 
low  or  deflationary  expectations.  Surely  another  key 
consideration would be whether leverage has previously been low or high. If it is low, then 
some increase need not be particularly risky. On the other hand, if leverage is already high, 
perhaps as a result of an earlier run-up, and if the weakness of demand is in part a result of 
the private sector being cautious about further extensions of leverage, or even attempting to 
reduce its leverage, the central bank may face an unenviable set of choices. 
There is an intersection between the Phillips Curve world of output gaps and inflation targets, 
and  the  Irving  Fisher/Hyman  Minsky  world  of  low  frequency  cycles  in  risk  appetite  and 
leverage.  The  financial  sector  isn’t  just  an  appendage  to  the  “real  economy”,  passively 
responding to the course of output and prices. It is through the financial sector that monetary 
policy works to affect the economy. Sometimes, problems that have built up in the financial 
sector can have powerful effects on real economic outcomes that monetary policy might find 
impossible  to  offset.  A  sense  of  when  and  how  that  can  happen  is  very  important  for 
monetary policy. 
into  very 
Where are we now? 
So where does that leave us? 
The  role  of  central  banks  has  become  much  more  prominent,  and  at  the  same  time 
considerably more complex and potentially more controversial, than it was in the calmer days 
of  the  great  moderation.  More  has  been  asked  of  central  banks,  under  circumstances  in 
which  monetary  policy  might  reach  the  limits  of  effectiveness,  and  yet  at  a  time  when  it 
seems the ability of other macroeconomic policies to contribute to growth has lessened. A 
previous  generation  of  central  bankers,  who  fought  lengthy  battles  to  rid  their  respective 
countries of high inflation, are surely looking on in disbelief. 
                                                
5  Of course, there is the exchange rate channel for an open economy with a flexible exchange rate. But in a 
world of insufficient global demand, all countries can’t rely on depreciating their exchange rates for growth. 
The bulk of the effect is going to have to come through domestic channels. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  Central  banks’  balance  sheet  actions  have  become  dominant  forces  in  a  wider  range  of 
financial  markets.  Some  would  argue  that  the  market’s  normal  functions  of  pricing  for  risk 
have been distorted or overwhelmed by central bank actions. To those critics, the “search for 
yield”  is  an  artificial  and  dangerous  phenomenon  caused  by  central  bank  interventions. 
Central banks would counter that they had little choice but to pursue these actions and that, 
in any event, there are likely to have been some real factors at work in holding down real 
interest rates. Either way, some central banks seem likely to be large players in markets for 
quite  some  years.  The  manner  and  pace  of  eventual  normalisation  of  balance  sheets  will 
surely, at some point, become a major challenge for private participants. 
Nor is it just in their transactions that central banks have become very conspicuous. In their 
efforts to add power to their easy monetary policy stances, central banks have sought to offer 
“guidance”  on  their  future  behaviour.  They  have  taken  pains  to  spell  out  the  sorts  of 
conditions  under  which  they  would  adjust  policy  and  even  given  some  sense  of  the  likely 
pace. The forthcoming “lift-off” by the Federal Reserve, when it happens, will surely be the 
most telegraphed monetary policy adjustment in history. 
That  is  all  very  sensible. Words matter  as much  as  actions. The  problem  is  that  a  central 
bank cannot realistically state how it will respond to all possible future states of the world. 
And in any event, many market participants, commentators, journalists and so on are not that 
interested  in  the  nuance  and  conditionality  that  usually  surround  central  bankers’  careful 
utterances.  They  simply  want  to  know  what  will  happen  and  when.  They  will  distil  things 
down into a simple story, fitting the central bank into one pigeonhole or another. 
Allow me an analogy. In a remote part of Western Australia, construction of the Australian 
and New Zealand part of the Square Kilometre Array project is to take place. It is part of an 
international  project,  headquartered  in  Manchester.  As  the  name  suggests,  the  idea  is  to 
have multiple radio telescopes over a large area, increasing the effective size of the receiver 
antennae.  This  array  will,  it  is  said,  be  able  to  detect  the  faintest  energy  emanating  from 
distant stars – billions of light years from the earth.6 
Reading about that, one can’t help but think of the financial markets. Countless market and 
media  antennae  are  trained  on  the  sound  of  the  central  bank  voice,  trying  to  discern  and 
amplify signals out of all the static around, even when the central bank has no new signal to 
send, and static is all there is.7 
Where to from here? 
The  lesson  that  recovery  from  a  downturn  associated  with  a  period  of  financial  excesses 
almost always proves to be a slow one has been learned once again. Central banks have to 
do what they can to speed up that process. Together with governments, they can and did 
avert a catastrophic contraction. They can and have run an extended period of easy money, 
including  by  being  innovative  with  their  own  balance  sheets.  In  all  likelihood,  very 
accommodative policies will continue for quite a while. During that period, central banks will 
have  little  choice  but  to  rely  in  part  on  regulatory  tools  to  try  to  contain  potential  financial 
excesses, without convincing evidence of the power of such tools. But they will also have to 
learn  to  live,  I  suspect,  without  the  earlier  neat  distinction  between  monetary  policy  and 
financial stability policy. 
                                                
6  See <http://australia.skatelescope.org/welcome/> for more on the Square Kilometre Array project. 
7  See Stein JC (2014), “Challenges for Monetary Policy Communication”, Remarks to the Money Marketeers of 
New  York  University,  New  York,  6  May.  Available  at  <http://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/ 
stein20140506a.htm>. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  In  the  end,  of  course,  central  bank  policies  can’t  restore  the  situation  ex  ante.  Whatever 
adjustments economies needed to make, and may still need to make, in respect of financial 
and/or economic structure from their pre-crisis situation, cannot be avoided. 
Those adjustments are ongoing. I am optimistic enough to think that, in due course, they will 
have advanced sufficiently such that stronger growth, accompanied by less extreme central 
bank policy settings, could be anticipated. Needless to say, the more other policies, outside 
of the central bank’s ambit, can contribute to that, the better. That was the point of the pro-
growth commitments the G20 Leaders made in Brisbane in November 2014. 
It may be quite some time, though, before the central banking modus operandi that we had 
prior to the crisis is seen again. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
