  Seppo Honkapohja: 1st hundred years of the Bank of Finland 
Speech  by  Mr  Seppo  Honkapohja,  Member  of  the  Board  of  the  Bank  of  Finland,  at  the 
Finnish Economic Association XXXVII Annual Meeting, Helsinki, 12 February 2015. 
 The Bank of Finland was established in 1811, by an Imperial Decree of Emperor Alexander I. 
We are the fourth oldest central bank operating today. Only the Swedish Riksbank, the Bank 
of  England,  and  Banque  de  France  are  older.  The  Bank  of  Finland  is  also  more  than 
100 years older than Finland’s political independence, which was achieved only in 1917. 
In this speech I will tell you about the first hundred years of the Bank, including its old main 
building where we have this reception. 
The  first  task  of  the  Bank  of  Finland  was  to  separate  the  Finnish  financial  system  from 
Sweden  by  issuing  (rouble-  and  kopeck–denominated)  notes,  and  by  granting  credits  to 
Finnish landowners and merchants. The Bank of Finland was originally established in the city 
of Turku, in the south-west of Finland, and moved to Helsinki, the new capital of the country, 
in  1819.  Initially  the  Bank  operated  out  of  a  house  owned  by  Commercial  Counselor 
Sederholm, and then moved to the Senate House. A purpose-built building was completed 
on Tallinmaki, Nikolai Street, in 1883. I will shortly tell you more about the main building. 
Despite the efforts of the Bank of Finland, Swedish money remained widely used in Finland 
until 1840, when Finland went on the silver standard (following Russia), and the remaining 
Swedish paper money was withdrawn from circulation. After this milestone, the notes issued 
by  the  Bank  of  Finland  became  the  dominant  means  of  payment  in  the  country  and  the 
circulation was effectively controlled by the Bank of Finland. 
Finland  obtained  its  own  currency  unit,  the  markka  in  1860  –  i.e.  well  before  the  country 
became  independent.  This  happened  in  the  aftermath  of  the  Crimean  war  and  the 
international financial crisis of 1857–58, when the rouble was seriously destabilized and went 
off the silver standard. In 1865, the head of the financial department of the Finnish senate, 
J.V. Snellman, obtained from Tsar Alexander II the permission to link the markka to the silver 
standard  independently  of  the  rouble  and  Finland’s  monetary  system  was  thus  effectively 
separated from Russia’s. 
Most European countries moved to the gold standard in the 1870s, and Finland followed suit 
in  1878.  At  that  point,  the  gold  content  of  the  Finnish  markka  was  defined  so  that  it  was 
exactly equivalent to the French franc. The exchange rate of the markka vis-à-vis the French 
franc was kept constant for 36 years, from the start in 1878 until the outbreak of the First 
World  War. At  the  end of  this  war Finland  declared  her  independence  in  December  1917, 
following the October revolution in Russia. 
This was a very short version of the Bank’s first century. Let me now tell you about the main 
building. 
The Renaissance-style building was designed by German architect Ludwig Bohnstedt, who 
had  also  worked  as  Professor  at  the  Russian  Academy  of  Arts  in  St  Petersburg.  He  was 
chosen  as  architect  for  the  Bank’s  Head  Office  in  Finland’s  first  ever  architectural 
competition, in 1876. 
The cornerstone was laid in 1879. In accordance with tradition, a tin box was hidden beside 
the cornerstone, containing 10 and 20 markka gold coins, 1 and 2 markka silver coins as well 
as the history of the founding of the Bank of Finland, written on parchment. 
The building was designed with a spacious upper hall, meeting rooms for the directors and 
other work amenities. Below ground, the bedrock was quarried to provide space for vaults 
and safety deposit boxes for secure storage. As a detail I may mention that the water closets 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
  installed by the Bank in its Head Office were the first of their kind in Helsinki and aroused a 
great deal of attention. 
In the great Helsinki bombing of February 1944, the Bank’s building suffered a direct hit. The 
bomb destroyed a beautiful arched glass roof that was replaced with a solid one. 
The next major renovation was undertaken in the 1960s. In connection with this renovation, a 
new extension was built onto the main building, design by the architect Harry W. Schreck. 
The extension itself has been renovated several times, most recently in the early 2000s. 
Complete refurbishment of the Main Building was completed in the spring of 2006. The Old 
Banking Rooms, on the first floor, were refitted with meeting and entertainment facilities. The 
ground floor and elsewhere were equipped with modern plan offices. 
 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
