  Már Guðmundsson: Cross-border banking – where do we stand? 
Speech by Mr Már Guðmundsson, Governor of the Central Bank of Iceland, at the Eleventh 
Asia-Pacific High Level Meeting on Banking Supervision, Manila, 11 February 2015. 
 that 
to  remind  ourselves 
fractional  banking,  with 
Chairmen and distinguished participants, 
I  would  like  to  begin  by  thanking  the  organisers  for  inviting  me  to  address  this  impressive 
meeting. I spoke in this forum in Tokyo in 2009. The title of my presentation then was The 
collapse  of  Iceland’s  cross-border  banks:  lessons  for  regulation,  supervision  and  crisis 
management. The experience of the financial crisis in Iceland was then fresh in our minds, 
and it was considered to be both an extreme and an interesting case. But now, after other 
cases have been better analysed and after the banking and sovereign debt crisis in the euro 
area, it is clearer that although there was a significant domestic element in the financial and 
economic crisis in Iceland, the cross-border banking crisis aspect was to a significant degree 
an extreme manifestation of a global problem. That is partly why I want to take a more global 
perspective here today than I did in 2009 and ask where we stand with cross-border banking. 
To gain a clearer perspective on the big risks in recent forms of cross-border banking, it is 
useful 
the  associated  maturity 
transformation, is inherently very risky. In national settings we learnt through trial and error 
over long periods how to design a safety net around the banking system in order to mitigate 
it´s inherent instability. The Bank of England was at the forefront in learning how bank runs 
could  be  contained  through  lending  against  collateral  to  banks  that  were  presumed  to  be 
solvent.1  Deposit  insurance  was  introduced  later,  both  as  an  additional  mitigating  device 
against runs and as a consumer protection device. 
In  order  to  operate  this  system,  it  was  necessary  to  have  an  assessment  of  the  state  of 
health  of  the  banks. It was  also  necessary  to  mitigate the  moral  hazard  introduced  by  the 
safety  net.  Thus  banking  supervision  initially  emerged  mostly  as  part  of  central  banking, 
although the legal powers were initially often on a weak foundation.2 Finally, bank resolution 
schemes were needed to efficiently clean up any mess that might occasionally be made and 
limit contagion from individual bank failures to the system as whole. 
In many advanced countries, this system worked so well that the memory of bank runs had 
faded. Perhaps this is why, when I last saw the musical about Mary Poppins in a theatre, the 
scene  with  the  bank  run  was  omitted!  Banks  could  still  fail,  of  course,  because  of  capital 
erosion, and even entire banking systems could do so, as in the Nordic banking crises in the 
late 1980s and early 1990s. But the liquidity risks inherent in fractional banking were mostly 
contained. 
It was an important causal element of the financial crisis that part of the financial sector had 
escaped this safety net. This applied in particular to cross-border banking. Let me take two 
examples to illustrate this. 
                                                
1   Thornton and Bagehot are the classical references: Henry Thornton (1802). “An Enquiry into the Nature and 
Effects of the Paper Credit of Great Britain”. London: George Allen & Unwin . Bagehot, Walter. 1866. “What a 
Panic Is and How It Might be Mitigated”. Republished in Collins, Michael. 1993. Central Banking in History. 
Vol.  7.  Aldershot,  England.  Edward  Elgar,  Walter  Bagehot  (1873).  “Lombard  Street:  A  Description  of  the 
Money Market”. 
2   Goodhart  and  Dimitrios  give  a  recently  published  summary  of  the  historical  development  of  the  financial 
stability  role  of  central  banks:  Charles  Goodhart  and  Dimitrios  P.  Tsomocos  (2012).  Analysis  of  financial 
stability. In “The Challenge of Financial Stability: A new model and its applications”, eds. Charles Goodhart 
and Dimitrios P. Tsomocos. Edward Elgar. Cheltenham, UK. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  First, the euro area as a whole had a more or less balanced current account position during 
the build-up to the financial crisis. A fact that drew less attention at the time, however, was 
that  European  banks  had  built  up  huge  USD-denominated  balance  sheets  that  had 
mismatches, especially in terms of maturity. This became a major problem when there was a 
run on the dollar-denominated bank liabilities of non-US international banks post-Lehman.3 
Second, the Icelandic banking system expanded very rapidly prior to the crisis, growing in 
just five years from a combined balance sheet of less than 2 times GDP (at the end of 2003) 
to  almost  10  times  GDP  (in  mid-2008).  Most  of  this  expansion  was  cross-border,  and  a 
significant  part  of  it  was  really  off-border,  having  very  little  to  do  with  Iceland,  as  both 
financing and investment took place abroad. 
This  was  facilitated  by  two  factors:  first,  Iceland’s  membership  in  the  European  Economic 
Area (EU + Iceland, Lichtenstein, and Norway), which gave banks headquartered anywhere 
in  the  region  the  right  to  operate  throughout  the  region,  and  second,  the  prevailing  global 
conditions of abundant, cheap credit.  
Just before their failure, the Icelandic banks had foreign currency balance sheets amounting 
to almost 7.5 times Iceland’s GDP, with a significant maturity mismatch between assets and 
liabilities. In comparison, the Central Bank of Iceland’s foreign reserves amounted to 21% of 
GDP.4 
These and other examples I could mention were accidents waiting to happen. And happen 
they  did  in  the  autumn  of  2008,  when,  during  the  panic  that  gripped  markets  after  the 
collapse  of  Lehman  Brothers,  there  was  a  full-scale  run  on  cross-border  banks’  foreign 
currency liabilities. What prevented the ensuing international dollar shortage from triggering a 
widespread failure of internationally active non-US banks to deliver on their foreign currency 
payments  were  major  LOLR  operations  in foreign  currency,  using  countries’  reserves  and, 
more importantly, US dollar swap lines granted to central banks around the globe on a large 
scale. 
Strictly speaking, a currency swap between two central banks is a symmetric agreement. In 
most cases, however, it is the central bank providing the reserve currency in excess demand 
at the time that is the party putting real money on the table. When the swap is used to lend to 
banks in the receiving country, that country’s central bank bears the counterparty risk. But 
from  a  liquidity  standpoint,  the  foreign  central  banks  were  intermediaries  of  the  Federal 
Reserve’s  global  liquidity  operations.  And  so  the  LOLR  function  at  the  national  level  was 
replicated at the global level.5 
Does this mean that we have a solution to the problem of mitigating the extra risks in cross-
border banking compared to national banking? Unfortunately not. First of all, there are big 
question  marks  over  central  bank  swaps  as  permanent  and  widespread  tools  of  crisis 
prevention and management, as I will come back to later in my speech. Second, the failures 
                                                
3   This case is described in Ingo Fender and Patrick McGuire, “European banks’ U.S. dollar funding pressures”. 
BIS Quarterly Review (June 2010): 57–64. 
4   Guðmundsson and Thorgeirsson describe the case of the Icelandic banks and draw lessons for cross-border 
banking:  Már  Guðmundsson  and  Thorsteinn  Thorgeirsson.  “The  Fault  Lines  in  Cross-Border  Banking: 
Lessons  from  the  Icelandic  Case”.  SUERF  Studies  05/2010,  European  Money  and  Finance  Forum  (2010). 
Baldursson  and  Portes  give  a  recent  assessment  of  the  rise  and  fall  of  the  Icelandic  banks:  Friðrik  M 
Baldursson and Richard Portes (2013), “Gambling for resurrection in Iceland: the rise and fall of the banks”, 
CEPR Discussion Paper 9664, September. 
5   Fleming and Klagge describe the Federal Reserve’s foreign exchange swap lines: Michael J. Fleming, and 
Nicholas J. Klagges. “The Federal Reserve’s Foreign Exchange Swap Lines. Federal Reserve Bank of New 
York: Current Issues in Economics and Finance”, 16, 4 (2010). Allen and Moessner analyse the important role 
of the US Dollar surplus in the policy response to the crisis and compare it to the policy response during the 
Great  Depression:  William  A  Allen  and  Richard  Moessner  (2010),  “Options  for  meeting  the  demand  for 
international liquidity during financial crises”, BIS Quarterly Review, September 2010, http://www.bis.org/. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  of  the  safety  net  and  the  associated  moral  hazard-mitigating  mechanism  in  cross-border 
banking applied across the board to regulation, supervision, LOLR, deposit insurance, and 
crisis management and resolution. 
The  adjustment  that  needs  to  take  place  after  the  crisis  in  order  to  make  cross-border 
banking safer is clear in principle: the market action and the public framework in the form of 
the safety net and other arrangements has to be better aligned. Again, in principle, this can 
take  place  through  two  channels:  through  retrenchment  of  cross-border  banking  so  that 
national safety nets of big countries are more sufficient, or through international expansion of 
safety nets. There was significant retrenchment during and immediately after the crisis, and it 
was unavoidable and necessary at that point in time.6 
There  are  significant  benefits  to  be  derived  from  financial  globalisation,  including  cross-
border  banking,  so  we  will  have  to  hope  that  extending  public  frameworks  through 
international and regional co-operation will be an important part of the story. Here progress is 
uneven and occurs on three tracks: national, regional, and global. 
Policy initiatives taken at the national level after the crisis have partly made banking safer by 
contributing  to  the  retrenchment  of  cross-border  banking.  In  the  absence  of  credible 
multilateral safety nets, countries will have to take unilateral action to reduce the risks they 
face.  In  my  country,  we  have  taken  action  to  limit  the  FX  liquidity  risk  of  our  banks  by 
imposing  limits  on  the  size  and  composition  of  their  FX  balance  sheets.  Thus  we  have  a 
specific liquidity coverage ratio in FX, as does Sweden. We have also introduced a specific 
net stable funding ration in FX, which at present goes one year out but might be extended 
further as we make the system safer in anticipation of lifting capital controls.7 
There  has  been  major  progress  within  the  EU  through  the  implementation  of  a  banking 
union. Again, the biggest strides have been taken in the realm of supervision, but a greatly 
improved resolution framework is also in the process of being introduced. A common deposit 
insurance system is not yet on the agenda, however. That might be an impediment to further 
banking integration and potentially a source of vulnerability. EU members outside the euro 
area can opt into banking union. This introduces the possibility of deep banking integration 
without a LOLR, which is a risky combination, as we have seen. That risk could of course be 
mitigated through uncapped central bank swaps and mutual acceptance of collateral, but as 
far as I can see, there is as yet no formal framework for this. 
In  this  connection,  I  note  with  interest  the  plans  in  this  region  to  progress  with  regional 
banking  integration  by,  for  instance,  the  ASEAN.  The  benefits  will  be  substantial,  but  we 
need to be mindful of the risks and learn from the European experience. As I see it, banking 
integration without a monetary union or alternative arrangements for FX liquidity provision is 
potentially very risky. That said, recent events have shown that a monetary union without a 
banking union is also risky. 
At the global level, there has been some progress on the framework for supervision, cross-
border  crisis  management,  and  resolution  of  cross-border  banks  through  the  work  of  the 
Financial  Stability  Board  (FSB).  The  progress  on  resolution  through  aligning  national 
resolution regimes to the FSB Key Attributes of Effective Resolution Regimes is still limited, 
however, and the risk of non-cooperative and disorderly resolution is still high if the system 
should experience significant stress. This is a complex area and in many ways more difficult 
                                                
6   The development of cross-border banking during and after the crisis has been described in numerous papers. 
See for instance CGFS Study Group (2010), “Long-term issues in international banking”, CGFS Papers No 41, 
July 2010, http://www.bis.org/ and McGuire, Patrick and Götz von Peter (2009), “The US dollar shortage in 
global  banking  and  the  international  policy  response”,  BIS  Working  Papers  No  291,  October  2009, 
http://www.bis.org/. 
7   Central  Bank  of  Iceland  (2012)  “Special  Publication  No.  6:  Prudential  Rules  following  Capital  Controls  – 
Report to the Minister of Economic Affairs”. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  
 
than cross-border cooperation of supervisors.8 To illustrate the issued involved, let us briefly 
review the resolution of the Icelandic cross-border banks.9 
Given the lack of international cooperation, the Icelandic authorities were forced to consider 
radical  solutions  in  order  to  preserve  the  domestic  payment  system  and  basic  banking 
services.  In  doing  so,  it  had  to  take  into  account  that  these  were  private  banks  and 
socialising their losses carried the risk of bankrupting the government. 
In essence, the adopted solution saved the domestic operations of the banking system by 
creating  new  banks,  which  was  done  by  carving  a  big  part  of  the  domestic  assets  and 
liabilities out of the old, failing banks. The new banking system amounted to 1.7 times GDP. 
The rest – and much bigger part – went into a resolution process, where it largely remains, 
pending a solution that would make it possible for Iceland to lift its comprehensive controls 
on capital outflows, but that is another story. 
In order to reverse the ongoing run on domestic deposits, a declaration was made that all 
deposits in Iceland were safe and all deposits in Icelandic-headquartered banks were given 
priority over other unsecured claims. This distinction made between domestic deposits and 
foreign  currency  deposits  in  the  banks’  foreign  branches  added  fuel  to  the  fire  of  the  so-
called Icesave dispute about the settlement of deposit guarantees in the Dutch and British 
branches  of  one  of  the  banks.  But  guaranteeing  those  deposits  would  never  have  been 
credible and might have bankrupted the Government had it been attempted. The deposits in 
question  were  in  foreign  currencies  and  amounted  to  11½  billion  euros  –  far  in  excess  of 
Iceland’s  FX  reserves,  which  amounted  to  2½  billion  euros.  And  the  sovereign  was 
completely  closed  off  from  foreign  capital  markets  at  that  point.  Furthermore,  in  economic 
terms, given that these deposits were used to a significant degree to finance illiquid assets in 
outside  Iceland,  such  a  payment,  if  it  had  been  possible,  would  have  amounted  to  a  net 
transfer of resources from Iceland to other countries – where the United Kingdom would have 
been  prominent  –  at  a  time  when  Iceland  was  going  through  its  deepest  financial  and 
economic crisis in the post-war period! That made no sense. Finally, it should be noted that 
the  deposit  preference  introduced  before  the  banks  failed  is  securing  full  recovery  to  all 
deposits if we discount the time value of money, which so far has been low during the post-
crisis period. 
This case clearly highlights the link that must exist between the LOLR function and deposit 
insurance,  which,  in  the  absence  of  clear  prior  arrangements  for  currency  swaps  or  other 
such  mechanisms,  must  be  predominantly  in  the  same  currency  in  order  to  work. The  EU 
framework for this was therefore deeply flawed, as has been recognised in the discussions 
about a banking union. 
You can see from this that the key characteristics of crisis management and bank resolution 
in  Iceland  during  the  crisis  were  that  share-holders  lost  all  their  equity,  unsecured  bond 
holders  were  bailed  in,  vital  infrastructure  elements  of  the  domestic  banking  system  were 
preserved and deposit were given preference over other unsecured claims. It seems in many 
ways a standard approach today, but it was not always well received at the time. 
Finally, I would like to briefly discuss an important unresolved part of the story: the future of 
central bank swaps of the type initiated between the US Fed and several other central banks 
                                                
8   See IMF discussion paper on “Cross-Border Bank Resolution: Recent Developments”. June 2014. 
9  
I  have  described  this  case  in  more  detail  in  other  publications  and  speeches.  See  in  particular: 
Már Guðmundsson and Thorsteinn Thorgeirsson (2010) op. cit. Már Guðmundsson (2011) “The Fault lines in 
cross-border banking: Lessons from the Icelandic case”. OECD Financial Market Trends. Vol. 2011, Issue 2. 
Paris;  and  keynote  address  at  the  “Eighth  High-Level  Meetings  for  the  Middle  East  &  North  Africa  Region: 
Recent  Policy  Developments  for  Strengthening  the  Resilience  of  the  Financial  sector”,  Abu  Dhabi, 
28 November 2012. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
around the globe during the crisis10. It should be noted, however, that there are several other 
arrangements  around  the  globe  which,  with  time  and  modifications,  could  become  partial 
substitutes for  these  swaps.  Examples  of  this  are  the multilateralisation  of  the  Chiang  Mai 
Initiative in this part of the world, swap lines among BRIC countries, and the bilateral swap 
network of the People’s Bank of China. But as they are currently constructed, these are not 
well suited to large-scale and speedy provision of liquidity in reserve currencies more or less 
directly to internationally active banks. 
In  the  absence  of  almost  total  retrenchment  in  international  banking  –  except  in  cases 
involving countries issuing reserve currencies and with strong fiscal capacity – the problem 
these  swap  lines  were  meant to  address  will  not go  away.  The  past few  years  have  seen 
lively discussion of whether it is desirable and feasible to anchor the swaps more firmly in the 
international monetary system, through clearer and more transparent access criteria and a 
multilateral governance mechanism. 
Clearly,  there  are  arguments  for  such  institutionalisation,  but  I  sense  that  this  might  be 
premature  and  that  we  should  allow  the  discussion  to  evolve  further.  Those  who  oppose 
constraining  central  bank  discretion  in  this  area  present  important  arguments.  The  most 
compelling are those based on the analogy with liquidity provision and LOLR in a national 
setting, where flexibility, speed, and large scale can be essential. This argues in favour of 
giving central banks a major role in the arrangements. Less compelling are arguments based 
on moral hazard, which would apply equally to domestic arrangements. 
What seems clear is that even greatly enhanced IMF facilities are not close substitutes for 
swap  lines  among  central  banks.  First,  the  swap  lines  are  there  to  provide  short-term 
collateralised  FX  liquidity  to  banks,  whereas  IMF  facilities  are  uncollateralised  longer-term 
lending to sovereigns and are intended primarily to mitigate balance of payments problems. 
Norway  and  the  euro  area  were  offered  USD  swaps  without  prior  balance  of  payments 
disequilibrium and the euro area, at least, badly needed it. Second, IMF facilities generally 
cannot match the swap lines in terms of speed of delivery, as the decision processes at the 
IMF are unavoidably more cumbersome. At present, the IMF’s maximum lending capacity is 
just  over  a  trillion  US  dollars.  At  their  peak  in  early  December  2008,  the  USD  swaps 
amounted to over USD 580 billion, after having increased very rapidly to that level in a matter 
of a few weeks11. If needed, the total could have risen much higher because the swaps had 
been  uncapped  vis-à-vis  key  central  banks,  which  also  mattered  greatly  in  terms  of 
signalling. If the IMF or any other international organisation is to be able to provide a credible 
alternative to the swaps, it must be able to expand its balance sheet speedily and on a large 
scale when the need arises. In short, it would have to function like a global central bank. This 
is not likely to be in the cards in the near future.  
So where do we stand regarding cross-border banking? In some sense, we are in the middle 
of a strong river. Some want to go back, as they do not find it safe to continue – perhaps 
because they are not offered a helping hand – and given the choices currently available, it 
could be better for them to stay on the other side. Others are banding together to hold hands 
and wade across. And still others are strong enough to go it on their own. It will be interesting 
to see how this story plays out in coming years. 
Thank you very much! 
                                                
10   I  have  discussed  the  potential  implications  of  the  foreign  currency  surplus  for  the  international  monetary 
system  in:  “The  implications  of  cross-border  banking  and  foreign  currency  swap  lines  for  the  international 
monetary  system”,  in  O.  Blanchard,  D.  Romer,  M.  Spence  and  J.  Stiglitz  (eds),  In  the  Wake  of  the  Crisis, 
MIT Press, 2012. 
11   See Flemming and Klagges (2010), op. cit. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
