  John Mourmouras: Divergent monetary policies and global capital 
markets 
Speech  by  Professor  John  Mourmouras,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Greece,  at  the 
session  “The  role  of  central  banks  today”  of  the  XXIV  International  Banking  Congress,  
St. Petersburg, 4 June 2015. 
 Governors, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It  is  a  great  pleasure  for  me  to  be  here  in  St.  Petersburg  and  I  would  like  to  thank  the 
Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Russia,  Elvira  Nabiullina,  for  inviting  me  to  this  international 
congress  attended  by  distinguished representatives  of the finance  industry  and  the  central 
banking sector. I would like to make a few remarks on the potential financial consequences 
of  divergent  monetary  policies,  which  remain  a  dominant  theme  in  the  global  financial 
environment. Afterwards, I will be happy to answer any questions posed by the panel or the 
floor. 
Introduction 
1. 
Global growth and inflation prospects, while not as dire as a few months ago, are far from 
robust. Notwithstanding the slow steps by the Federal Reserve (Fed) towards normalisation 
of monetary policy in the US, the central bank community today remains ultra-loose, with the 
certainty of further stimulus in Europe and Japan in the months ahead and the likelihood of 
monetary  easing  in  China  and  elsewhere. The Greek  debt  crisis still  remains  pending  and 
there are also downside risks on the geopolitical front, even in this region (e.g. the events in 
Ukraine,  particularly  with  the  Minsk  II  ceasefire  under  increasing  strain).  Several  central 
banks (including all four major, i.e. the US Federal Reserve, the ECB, the Bank of England 
and the Bank of Japan) have engaged in unconventional monetary policies, including large-
scale asset purchase programmes, and forward guidance about the future path of monetary 
policy. We have also lately witnessed discretionary policy actions by an increasing number of 
central banks with direct effects on the foreign exchange value of their currencies, naturally 
raising  concerns  about  a  recourse  to  beggar-thy-neighbour  policies  and  competitive 
devaluations. The consensus among analysts is that a period of divergent monetary policies 
among  central  banks  will  last  for  quite  some  time,  giving  rise  to  a  number  of  important 
questions to be addressed, to mention but two: (a) what are the effects and the channels of 
the international transmission of monetary policy today, (b) what are the spillovers from the 
policies of major central banks to the rest of the world, including emerging markets, in terms 
of  capital  flows,  bond  markets  and  exchange  rates,  and  if  there  is  any  scope  for  global 
monetary policy coordination. 
I propose to focus on the following three remarks. Firstly, I will discuss the ECB’s ongoing 
expanded  asset  purchase  programme  (QE)  and  its  impact  on  the  euro  area  economy. 
Secondly, I will discuss how divergent monetary policies among the world’s leading central 
banks  may  trigger  excessive  volatility  in  global  financial  markets.  Last  but  not  least,  I  will 
examine  if  there  is  any  scope  for  global  monetary  policy  coordination  that  can  effectively 
address the risks that lie behind “asymmetric” monetary policies. 
Draghi’s qe: an early evaluation 
2. 
First of all, I will explain why it is that we talk about low inflation, rather than deflation, in the 
euro area. Inflation is expected to remain very low or slightly negative in the coming months, 
with an average inflation projection of 0.3% for the year 2015, against a yearly average of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  0.4% in 2014. In advanced economies, the inflation rate will stand at 0.4% on a yearly basis 
in 2015, according to the latest IMF forecasts, which is the lowest level in the last 30 years, 
and in EMEs at 5.4%, one of the lowest in the last 20 years. Although in the euro area, there 
is more than a 50% risk of the inflation rate hovering below one percent in the short-run, the 
risk of deflation is quite low at less than 10% in the short term (in the next one to two years) 
and  effectively  zero  (1%  risk)  in  the  longer  term  (in  the  next  five  years).  Despite  recent 
monthly  inflation  “dips”  to  negative  levels  there  is  no  deflationary  bias  embedded  in  wage 
contracts and consumer behaviour in the euro area, as opposed to the inflationary bias we 
have  experienced  over  the  past  three  decades  (1980s-1990s-2000s).  Ultimately,  the  ECB 
should fulfil its mandate, as the Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices (HICP) is expected to 
reach  1.8%  in  2017,  which  is  consistent  with  the  primary  goal  of  price  stability,  i.e. 
maintaining the euro area inflation rate below, but close to, 2% over the medium term. 
Let me now quickly refer to the key features of the ECB’s recent asset purchase programme 
and  focus  mainly  on  the  impact  of  QE,  which  judging  from  preliminary  evidence,  is  really 
encouraging.  The  key  elements  of  the  programme  are  the  following:  (a)  Monthly  asset 
purchases  will  amount  to  €60  billion  of  private  and  sovereign  debt.  The  programme  will 
amount  to  a  total  of  €1.1  trillion  in  asset  purchases  carried  out  from  March  2015  until 
September 2016. (b) Loss-sharing is reserved for those purchases that are carried out by the 
ECB, accounting for 20% of the total purchases. The remaining 80% of all purchases – i.e. 
purchases made by NCBs – will not be subject to loss-sharing. 
Since the announcement of the ECB’s QE on 22 January, projections for real GDP growth in 
2015 and 2016 have been revised upwards (to 1.5% and 1.9%, respectively) compared with 
December 2014. Furthermore, model-based estimates indicate that market-based measures 
of inflation expectations have reacted positively to the progressive expansion of the ECB’s 
balance sheet over the last few months and have been revised upwards, as well. As far as 
financial markets are concerned, the impact of the asset purchase programme accounts for 
most of the fall in euro area long-term sovereign bond yields since last December, as market 
participants anticipated the ECB’s QE programme. Government bonds across a wide range 
of euro area countries traded at historically low, and often negative, yields. The decline was 
most pronounced in the longest maturities, with yields on French and German 10-year bonds 
falling by around 60 basis points, while those on Italian and Portuguese bonds of the same 
maturity shrank by 70 and 90 basis points, respectively. The major European stock markets 
have risen since end-2014 by about 17%. Furthermore, the euro depreciated by 11% since 
last December, hitting a 12-year low against the dollar (for a more detailed assessment of the 
ECB’s QE, see my earlier speech at the 33rd Meeting of Central Bank Governors’ Club in 
Shanghai  on  15  May  2015,  available  at:  http://www.bankofgreece.gr/Pages/en/Bank/News/ 
Speeches/DispItem.aspx?Item_ID=317&List_ID=b2e9402e-db05–4166-9f09-e1b26a1c6f1b). 
Following  the  ECB’s  accommodative  monetary  policy  (with  standard  and  non-standard 
measures) other central banks adopted similar policies. For instance, in Europe, the Central 
Bank of Denmark cut its key policy rate, taking it to the negative territory of –0.75%, while the 
Central  Bank  of  Sweden  (Riksbank),  with  a  base  rate  of  –0.25%,  has  announced  it  will 
expand  its  quantitative  easing  programme  (the  Riksbank  pledged  to  buy  between  SKr40 
billion  and  SKr50  billion  (US  $4.8–6  billion)  of government  bonds, taking the total  stock of 
Swedish sovereign debt held by the central bank to between SKr80 billion and SKr90 billion 
and its share of all Swedish government debt to 15%) in an effort to stimulate the economy. 
In total, from the start of the year, 22 central banks lowered their official rates (including the 
Bank of Russia, which, since last December’s drastic rise to 17%, lowered its interest rates 
three consecutive times, the last time being in April, when rates were cut by 1.5 percentage 
points to 12.5%). In light of all this, one can speak of a period of truly global monetary easing! 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3. 
Divergent monetary policies and capital markets 
 Some theory 
Many analysts believe that purchases by central banks are the dominant cause of low bond 
yields today. Apparently, this has to be a factor since a QE programme, by its very nature, is 
an extension of the intervention horizon of monetary policy and as such it has a direct impact 
on long-term interest rates (the average maturity of the securities bought by the ECB under 
its  QE  programme  is  8.1  years).  However,  a  far  more  important  determinant  of  low  bond 
yields  today  is  the  expectation  that  short-term  rates  will  stay  low,  which  in  turn  reflects 
expectations of low and persistent inflation and of a weak and uncertain recovery. Perhaps 
theory  is  useful  here.  Theory  suggests  that  long-term  interest  rates  should  be  a  weighted 
average  of  expected  short-term  interest  rates  plus  a  term  premium.  The  premium  should 
normally be positive, even in the absence of default risk. Longer-term securities are riskier 
than  short-term  ones,  because  their  prices  are  volatile.  Expected  short-term  nominal  rates 
should be determined by expected real interest rates and expected inflation, and expected 
changes  in  real  interest  rates  should,  in  turn,  be  determined  by  the  expected  balance  of 
savings and investment. Finally, other factors, such as risk aversion also affect the prices of 
long-term bonds. What do all the above suggest about the future path of yields? The sharp 
rises in expected short-term interest rates and hence in long-term yields (the term structure 
of  interest  rates  in  theoretical  terms)  are  only  likely  to  follow  a  strong  recovery  and 
subsequently a sharp rise in inflation expectations (in empirical terms, historically, sovereign 
bond yields and, to a lesser extent, exchange rates track nominal GDP growth rates). We are 
not there yet: only with a robust recovery in Europe and a monetary policy normalisation in 
the US can markets start pricing risk in a traditional manner. 
The recent bond sell-off 
It is true, though, that the last days of April saw the beginning of a sharp sell-off in sovereign 
bonds  across  the  euro  area  bond  markets,  leading  to  soaring  volatility  in  European  bond 
markets, a sharp steepening in the yield curve and an appreciation of the euro. The figures 
are  quite  spectacular  as  is  often  the  case  with  the  markets:  in  just  17  working  days,  the 
global  sovereign  bond  index  lost  more  than  €0.5  trillion  of  its  value!  This  is  an  upward 
correction in bond yields from an early overshooting of bond prices (early undershooting of 
the  exchange  rate),  which  marked  the  first  significant  adjustment  in  European  sovereign 
bond markets since mid-2013 (triggered in turn by the Federal Reserve’s tapering of its asset 
purchases). The 10-year Bund yield increased from a historical low of 7.5 bps on 20 April to 
over 80 bps by early June. As for the other euro area countries, yields in France and other 
core  countries  increased  in  a  similar  way,  while  the  spreads  of  peripheral  bonds  over  the 
Bund have narrowed. Turning to the US government bond market, and given the strong co-
movement  of  10-year  German  and  US  government  bond  yields  (with  a  high  correlation 
coefficient of .80), the 10-year US Treasury yields rose substantially to  reach their highest 
closing levels this year in the region of 2.30%, as the contagion from the European bond sell-
off was the main driver of their recent rise. Given the fact that recent US macro data were 
mixed  and  the  uncertainty  surrounding  the  Fed’s  rate  hike  timing,  there  was  additional 
volatility in US yields spilling over to Bunds and other euro area countries, with the interest 
rate differential set to remain in the region of 1.50%. In addition, the widening gap between 
US  and  euro  area  interest  rates  is  also  driving  US  companies  to  issue  more  euro-
denominated debt as it seems cheaper in interest rate differential terms. 
In  short,  apart  from  some  technical  conditions  (e.g.  shorter-dated  German  Bunds  which 
became eligible, while they were previously not, because of their negative yields, and hence 
there  was  less  need  to  buy  longer-dated  bonds  and/or  volatility  clustering  in  global  bond 
markets,  namely  that  volatility  in  itself  generates  further  volatility),  this  recent  bond  sell-off 
reveals  vulnerabilities  in  the  current  low-yield/low-inflation  environment  and  can  also  be 
regarded as an evident financial implication of divergent monetary policies. One should not 
forget that there is still another trillion left from Draghi’s QE programme to be paid. Finally, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  some  analysts  claim that  an  issue  of  macroprudential  policy  arises  here  which,  as  is  well-
known,  addresses  risks  to  the  financial  system  as  a  whole.  More  precisely,  the  ECB’s 
implementation  of  the  expanded  asset  purchase  programme  in  the  current  juncture  might 
necessitate the use of existing macroprudential tools to oversee any fallout from the credit 
expansion preventing or at least moderating asset market bubbles, or even the creation of 
new tools, for instance to address pressures in the insurance sector as a result of the low-
yield environment in which they operate today. 
Capital flows 
The  repercussions  on  the  world  economy  of  the  redirection  of  a  major  central  bank’s 
monetary  policy  and/or  of  divergent  global  monetary  policies  which  sharply  alter  global 
exchange rates, is one of the oldest questions in international monetary economics and was 
posed again recently,  when the Fed launched its Quantitative Easing (QE) programme. At 
the  time,  the  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Brazil  expressed  his  strong  dismay  at  the 
loosening of the Fed’s monetary policy and its impact on emerging countries, in the form of 
large  capital  inflows  triggering  a  sharp  appreciation  of  their  currencies  and  a  decline  in 
exports.  It  is  indeed  quite  difficult  to  predict  the  precise  form  of  (sometimes  conflicting) 
spillover effects stemming from such a change in the monetary policy stance. For instance, 
the  Fed’s  Quantitative  Easing  1  (QΕ1)  programme  was  followed  by  capital  flows  out  of 
emerging  economies  (EMEs)  into  US  Treasuries,  while  the  second  round  of  Quantitative 
Easing (QΕ2) had the exact opposite effect. Since then, the Fed’s change of tack has once 
again  spurred  intense  reactions  in  EMEs  (see  recent  statements  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of 
India  Governor):  the  tapering  of  the  Fed’s  asset  purchase  programme  has  resulted  in 
massive capital flows into advanced economies and a subsequent sharp rise in interest rates 
in emerging economies to prevent a sharp devaluation of their currencies (the currencies of 
Brazil,  South  Africa  and  Turkey  were  particularly  hard-hit).  Their  large  current  account 
deficits  are  typically  financed  with  short-term  portfolio  flows  and  in  the  case  of  Brazil  and 
South Africa, falling commodity prices added further pressure. Up to now, there are no clear 
indications of international portfolio rebalances due to the upcoming interest rate hike by the 
Fed and/or the QE programme currently implemented by the ECB. 
Monetary policy coordination? 
4. 
We have just looked into the negative spillover effects from divergent monetary policies. Of 
course,  a  central  bank’s  mandate  is  domestic,  but  its  policy  may  have  global  implications. 
Furthermore, in an international macroeconomic environment of subdued and uneven growth 
and  high  unemployment,  zero  lower-bound  interest  rates  and  a  tight  fiscal  policy  stance, 
certain  nations  may  attempt  to  use  their  monetary  policies  –  through  standard  or  non-
standard measures – in order to influence their exchange rate to bolster their economy and 
boost  employment.  The  question  thus  arises  whether  monetary  authorities  should  act  in  a 
coordinated  manner  during  this  final  stage  in  the  exit  from  the  global  crisis  and  at  a  time 
when  foreign  exchange  rates  are  not  an  official  monetary  policy  objective  in  advanced 
economies.  ECB  President  Mario  Draghi,  answering  a  relevant  question  in  an  ECB 
Governing  Council  press  conference  on  6  February  2014,  stressed  that  international 
monetary cooperation cannot be ruled out. 
Examples  of  international  monetary  policy  coordination  are  not  rare,  but  Olivier  Blanchard 
captured reality with the caveat: “it is like the Loch Ness monster that is much discussed, but 
rarely seen” (15 December 2013). As a matter of fact, a recent notable example of monetary 
policy coordination among major central banks took place at the onset of the global crisis of 
2008, when the world’s four leading central banks (the Federal Reserve, the ECB, the Bank 
of England and the Bank of Japan) took coordinated action, affirming the need to go beyond 
traditional ways of conducting monetary policy in order to continue to provide liquidity to the 
financial  system  and  prevent  a  collapse  of  transactions  and  a  global  crash.  Hence  they 
established liquidity swap arrangements with the intention to provide foreign currency funding 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  to  the  banking  systems  in  their  jurisdictions.  The  US  Federal  Reserve  provided  US  $500 
billion to other major central banks over the 2008–2010 period, while the others used liquidity 
swap  lines  to  a  lesser  extent.  While  international  cooperation  between  central  banks  has 
been quite common in the field of foreign exchange markets, this occasion marked the first 
multilateral  central  bank  cooperation  in  the  money  markets  field,  which  is  central  to  the 
implementation  of  a  central  bank’s  monetary  policy.  It  is  worth  reminding  that  in  the  past, 
serious  initiatives  for  coordinated  monetary  policy  have  been  taken  under  the  1985  Plaza 
Accord and the 1987 Louvre Accord in order to stabilise the dollar exchange rate. 
If  things  move  towards  such  a  policy  coordination,  it  should  in  my  view  take  the  following 
form: i) the Fed could perhaps extend a new swap line to the central banks of EMEs, like the 
swap  lines  it  offered  at  the  start  of  the  global  crisis  (a  kind  of  formal  policy  coordination), 
and/or  ii)  a  commitment  on  the  part  of  the  four  major  central  banks  to  communicate  their 
monetary policies in a clear and timely manner within the context of their forward guidance 
policies,  as  was  agreed  in  a  G20  Meeting  in  2014,  (a kind  of  informal  policy  coordination, 
whereby  major  CBs  are  mindful  of  the  consequences  of  their  actions).  Such  forward 
guidance will enable emerging economies to promptly protect themselves against sharp and 
significant capital flows and develop policies to avoid exclusive dependence on speculative 
capital flows which render them vulnerable to excessive volatility in the financial markets. At 
the  current  juncture,  major  central  banks  should  signal  future  interest  rate  changes  in  a 
timely  manner,  without  any  concerns  about  causing  market  panic,  otherwise  investors  will 
continue to overborrow and this would potentially be destabilising. 
All  in  all,  in  the  era  of  globalisation  and  especially  against  the  background  of  low  and 
persistent  inflation  today,  some  form  of  coordinated  action  between  major  central  banks 
should perhaps be put on the table, particularly given the fact that governments are unable to 
protect themselves against central bank decisions, which trigger significant capital flows, and 
the available tools to limit such capital flows are not efficient. 
Thank you very much for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
