  Haruhiko Kuroda: Two years under QQE 
Speech by Mr Haruhiko Kuroda, Governor of the Bank of Japan, to the Yomiuri International 
Economic Society, Tokyo, 15 May 2015. 
 Introduction 
It is a great honor to be invited to this meeting hosted by the Yomiuri International Economic 
Society today. 
The  last  time  I  addressed  this  meeting,  in  April  2013,  was  immediately  after  the  Bank  of 
Japan’s introduction of Quantitative and Qualitative Monetary Easing (QQE). Two years have 
passed since then, and the economic and price situation has improved substantially under 
QQE.  Although  the  year-on-year  rate  of  increase  in  the  consumer  price  index  (CPI)  had 
declined,  due  mainly  to  the  effects  of  the  substantial  decline  in  crude  oil  prices  since  last 
summer, and recently has been about 0 percent, the underlying trend in inflation has steadily 
been improving, as I will explain later in more detail. 
Today, I will review the developments in Japan’s economic activity and prices during the past 
two years and explain the effects QQE has been exerting. On this basis, I will touch on the 
outlook  and  the  Bank’s  monetary  policy,  referring  to  the  April  2015  Outlook  for  Economic 
Activity and Prices (hereafter the Outlook Report). 
I.  
Effects of QQE 
through 
to  underpin 
large-scale  monetary  easing 
Transmission mechanism of QQE 
The  Bank,  in  introducing  QQE  two  years  ago,  envisioned  the  following  transmission 
mechanism of QQE as a main channel (Chart 1). Namely, (1) inflation expectations will be 
raised  through  a  strong  and  clear  commitment  to  achieving  the  price  stability  target  of 
2 percent  and 
the  commitment, 
(2) downward  pressure  will  be  put  on  nominal  interest  rates  across  the  entire  yield  curve 
through massive purchases of Japanese government bonds (JGBs), thereby (3) decreasing 
real interest rates. The decline in real interest rates will stimulate private demand, which will 
lead to an upturn in the economy, improving the output gap. Then, the improvement in the 
output  gap,  together  with  a  rise  in  inflation  expectations,  will  increase  inflation  rates.  As 
people  experience  actual  price  increases,  their  inflation  expectations  will  rise  further. 
Meanwhile, on the financial front, asset prices – such as stock prices and foreign exchange 
rates – reflect these developments in economic activity and prices or else incorporate future 
developments.  Moreover,  due  to  the  decline  in  JGB  yields,  coupled  with  the  Bank’s 
purchases  of  exchange-traded  funds  (ETFs)  and  Japan  real  estate  investment  trusts 
(J-REITs), investors will increase their risk-taking, thereby exerting positive effects on prices 
of risk assets, and an increase in lending is also expected. These improvements in finance 
will support economic activity. QQE aims at giving rise to such a virtuous cycle of finance, 
economic  activity,  and  prices,  which  in  turn  raises  inflation  rates  toward  2  percent 
accompanied by a positive turnaround in the economy. 
The downward effects on real interest rates 
Let me assess the outcome of QQE. First, I will review to what extent real interest rates have 
declined, which is the starting point of the transmission mechanism. 
Long-term interest rates, which had already been at historical low levels at the time of the 
introduction  of  QQE,  have  declined  further  with  the  Bank’s  massive  purchases  of  JGBs. 
Yields on 10-year JGBs have declined by about 0.3 percentage point. Meanwhile, inflation 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
  
 
expectations  have  increased.  When  asked  “to  what  degree  do  you  think  prices  will  rise,”  I 
believe that you would feel differently now versus two years ago, and that your answer also 
would be different. The word “deflation” – or defure in Japanese – has not been heard so 
much  except  in  the  context  of  “overcoming  of  deflation.”  Firms’  price-  and  wage-setting 
behavior has been changing and rises in base pay, which had not been seen for more than a 
decade,  have  taken  place  in  two  consecutive  years  starting  from  last  year.  Given  these 
changes, there is no doubt that inflation expectations have increased. That said, when trying 
to  express  such  expectations  in  terms  of  numeric  figures,  a  single  figure  cannot  be  easily 
found  because  expectations  are  what  exist  in  people’s  minds.  The  results  of  surveys 
conducted  of  various  economic  entities  including  households,  firms,  and  economists,  in 
addition  to  figures  implied  by  inflation-indexed  bonds  that  are  traded  in  markets,  are  wide 
ranging.  With  this  in  mind,  medium-  to  long-term  inflation  expectations  of  economists  and 
market  participants,  for  which  the  results  can  be  obtained  in  a  numerical  form,  have 
increased by about 0.5 percentage point. Based on these figures, the degree of decline in 
real interest rates seems to have been slightly less than 1 percentage point, as calculated by 
adding the degree of decline in nominal long-term yields mentioned earlier (Chart 2). There 
are  various  methods  for  estimating  the  degree  of  decline  in  real  interest  rates,  such  as 
calculating the degree of downward effects on real interest rates brought about by the Bank’s 
cumulative  JGB  purchases  thus  far;  interestingly,  regardless  of  the  method  employed,  the 
results have been mostly the same. The fact that similar results are obtained from different 
methods  means  that  it  is  reasonable  to  judge  that,  numerically,  real  interest  rates  have 
declined by less than 1 percentage point; medium- to long-term inflation expectations have 
increased  by  about  0.5  percentage  point  and  nominal  long-term  interest  rates  have 
decreased  by  about  0.3  percentage  point.  According  to  research  conducted  in  the  United 
States  and  Europe,  a  decline  in  long-term  interest  rates  has  policy  effects  on  economic 
activity and prices that are approximately a couple of times larger than those of a decline in 
short-term interest rates. Moreover, our empirical analysis of downward pressure from QQE 
on nominal interest rates across the entire yield curve showed that, if the same effect were to 
be gained exclusively through the decline in short-term interest rates, it would be necessary 
to  decrease  the  rate  by  about  2  percent.  While  these  analyses  are  subject  to  a  margin  of 
error due to the situation for each country and to the relevant premises, the policy effects of 
QQE are such that they are roughly equivalent to those that would arise from making almost 
ten 0.25 percent cuts in short-term interest rates in one shot under conventional monetary 
policy. 
Financial  markets  responded  to  QQE  relatively  swiftly.  Stock  prices  have  increased 
substantially and the appreciation of the yen was corrected in the foreign exchange markets. 
Lending, including that to small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs), has been increasing 
moderately, at a pace of 2.5–3.0 percent on a year-on-year basis recently. In addition to the 
decline in real interest rates, such developments have made financial conditions even more 
accommodative. 
Economic activity and prices under QQE 
With QQE producing effects, a virtuous cycle from income to spending has been operating in 
both  the  corporate  and  household  sectors,  and  the  economy  has  seen  a  significant 
turnaround. 
In  the  corporate  sector,  profits  have  improved  to  their  highest  level  historically  and  fixed 
investment has been on a moderate increasing trend (Chart 3). Meanwhile, exports, which 
had  been  lacking  momentum  despite  the  correction  of  the  appreciation  of  the  yen,  have 
finally been picking up clearly, as seen in their increase for three consecutive quarters since 
the July-September quarter of 2014 (Chart 4). 
Turning to the household sector, labor market conditions have tightened and the employment 
situation has improved, as seen in the unemployment rate declining to around 3.5 percent. 
Consequently, in fiscal 2013 – during the year after the implementation of QQE – the number 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  
 
of  employees  increased  in  particular.  In  fiscal  2014  –  the  second  year  after  the 
implementation  –  wages  also  turned  to  an  increase.  Employee  income  –  that  is,  nominal 
wages  multiplied  by  the  number  of  employees  –  has  been  rising  moderately  (Chart  5). 
Against the background of an improvement in the employment and income situation, private 
consumption  as  a  whole  has  been  resilient.  The  effects  of  the  consumption  tax  hike  had 
been protracted during fiscal 2014, but they have been dissipating recently. 
Reflecting this turnaround in the economy, the underlying trend in inflation has also steadily 
increased.  As  seen  in  the  decline  in  the  unemployment  rate,  labor  and  capital  have  been 
heavily utilized, and the output gap has already improved to about 0 percent, which is the 
level of the past long-term average. As mentioned earlier, inflation expectations have also 
increased.  As  a  result,  the  year-on-year  rate  of  change  in  the  CPI  (all  items  less  fresh 
food) – about minus 0.5 percent before the introduction of QQE – improved to 1.5 percent 
last April excluding the direct effects of the consumption tax hike. 
Thereafter, the rate of increase in the CPI has slowed against the background of somewhat 
weak  developments  in  demand  following  the  consumption  tax  hike  and  the  substantial 
decline in crude oil prices since summer 2014. While the decline in crude oil prices exerts 
positive  effects  on  Japan’s  economy,  there  is  a  risk  that  the  mechanism  I  have  explained 
thus far will not operate if it were to affect firms’ price- and wage-setting behavior through 
changes  in  inflation  expectations.  In  order  to  preempt  the  manifestation  of  such  risk,  the 
Bank expanded QQE in October 2014 to pursue a stronger monetary easing measure. 
Looking  at  developments  in  inflation  expectations  thereafter,  market-based  indicators  and 
various survey results have not declined despite the fall in crude oil prices. Moreover, in the 
annual  labor-management  wage  negotiations  this  year,  many  firms  will  increase  wages, 
including base pay, which was raised to a larger extent than last year. More firms have been 
shifting their price-setting behavior toward a strategy of raising sales prices while increasing 
value-added. Inflation expectations can be judged as rising on the whole from a somewhat 
longer-term perspective. 
The financial, economic, and price developments I have outlined are mostly in line with the 
mechanism anticipated by QQE. The developments are qualitatively described as a decline 
in  real  interest  rates,  a  rise  in  stock  prices  and  depreciation  of  the  yen,  improvement  in 
corporate profits, tightening in the labor market, an increase in employee income, and a rise 
in the CPI. Let me now explain these developments by referring to our quantitative analysis. 
During  the  two  years  since  the  introduction  of  QQE  –  more  precisely,  up  to  end-2014,  for 
which  quarterly  data  are  available  –  actual  changes  in  economic  activity  and  prices 
amounted  to  improvement  of  2  percentage  points  in  the  output  gap,  which  represents 
improvement of about 10 trillion yen, and a 1.0 percentage point improvement in the year-on-
year rate of increase in the CPI. Simulating the effects of the less than 1 percentage point 
decline in real interest rates that I have mentioned by using our macroeconometric model, 
the results are as follows: the output gap improved by 1–3 percentage points and the year-
on-year  rate  of  increase  in  the  CPI  rose  by  0.6–1.0  percentage  point.  While  these  results 
vary depending on the assumption about how much stock prices and foreign exchange rates 
are affected by QQE, the results obtained by using the model are generally in line with the 
actual changes in economic activity and prices. During the past two years, there were both 
positive and negative effects on economic activity and prices in addition to QQE – such as 
measures  by  the  government  including  large-scale  public  investment,  the  consumption  tax 
hike, a surge in stock prices, foreign exchange rate movements, and a significant decline in 
crude  oil  prices.  In  reality,  however,  economic  activity  and  prices  as  a  whole  could  be 
assessed  –  even  on  a  quantitative  basis  –  as  being  mostly  in  line  with  the  mechanism 
anticipated by QQE. 
Having said this, the year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI has slowed to about 0 percent 
due to the effects of the decline in energy prices. In order to achieve the price stability target 
of  2  percent  in  a  stable  manner,  it  is  necessary  that  the  CPI  inflation  rise  as  inflation 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
  
 
expectations increase further. As mentioned earlier, inflation expectations are rising on the 
whole from a somewhat longer-term perspective, due partly to the effects of the expansion of 
QQE last October despite the decline in crude oil prices. We will examine whether the trend 
rise in inflation expectations will continue in a situation where CPI inflation has declined. In 
the following, I will touch on the outlook for economic activity and prices. 
II.  
Outlook for economic activity and prices 
Outlook for economic activity 
Looking ahead, Japan’s economy is expected to continue its recovery trend with a virtuous 
cycle from income to spending maintained in both the household and corporate sectors and 
with  a  favorable  environment  of  inexpensive  crude  oil  prices.  Exports  are  expected  to 
increase moderately against the background of the recovery in overseas economies – mainly 
in  advanced  economies  –  and  support  from  the  correction  of  the  appreciation  of  the  yen. 
Turning  to  domestic  demand,  with  an  improvement  in  corporate  profits  and  monetary 
accommodation both continuing to provide a boost, business fixed investment is projected to 
increase  steadily,  additionally  supported  by  recently  emerging  developments  toward  the 
enhancement  of  domestic  production  capacity.  Private  consumption  is  projected  to 
accelerate its pace of increase due to a steady improvement in the employment and income 
situation, given that consumer sentiment has been improving recently and that the effects of 
the  decline  in  demand  following  the  consumption  tax  hike  in  April  2014  have  been 
dissipating. 
Against this background, with regard to the outlook over the next three years, the economy is 
projected  to  continue  growing  at  a pace  above  its  potential  from  fiscal  2015  through  fiscal 
2016.  Under  these  circumstances,  the  output  gap  is  likely  to  turn  positive  and  thereafter 
move further into excess demand territory. Expressing the outlook in terms of the median of 
the Policy Board members’ forecasts of the real GDP growth rate, this was 2.0 percent for 
fiscal 2015 and 1.5 percent for fiscal 2016 (Chart 6). Subsequently, through fiscal 2017, the 
economy is projected to maintain its positive growth, although with a slowing in its pace to 
around  a  level  somewhat  below  the  potential  growth  rate.  The  slowdown  is  due  mainly  to 
(1) the effects of a front-loaded increase and subsequent decline in demand prior to and after 
the consumption tax hike planned in April 2017 and (2) cyclical deceleration. In terms of the 
median  of  the  Policy  Board  members’  forecasts  of  the  real  GDP  growth  rate,  this  was 
0.2 percent for fiscal 2017. 
Outlook for prices 
Next, I will discuss the outlook for prices. The improvement in the output gap and an increase 
in  inflation  expectations  are  likely  to  continue,  and  thus  the  underlying  trend  in  inflation  is 
expected to steadily rise. In addition, downward pressure from the decline in energy prices 
will gradually dissipate. Therefore, the year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI (all items less 
fresh food) is likely to be about 0 percent for the time being but accelerate toward 2 percent 
as the negative contribution of energy prices on a year-on-year basis narrows in the second 
half  of  fiscal  2015.  Although  the  timing  of  the  year-on-year  rate  of  increase  in  the  CPI 
reaching around 2 percent depends on developments in crude oil prices, this is projected to 
happen around the first half of fiscal 2016, when the negative contribution of energy prices 
will become almost zero, assuming that crude oil prices will rise moderately from the recent 
level.  Thereafter,  the  year-on-year  rate  of  increase  in  the  CPI  is  expected  to  be  around 
2 percent on average, although it will be affected by various factors each month. In the April 
2015 Outlook Report, the median of the Policy Board members’ forecasts of the year-on-year 
rate  of  increase  in  the  CPI  (all  items  less  fresh  food)  was  0.8  percent  for  fiscal  2015, 
2.0 percent  for  fiscal  2016,  and  1.9  percent  for  fiscal  2017  (Chart  6).  Comparing  the 
projections  in  the  Outlook  Report  with  those  in  the  January  2015  interim  assessment,  the 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  
 
projected  rate  of  increase  in  the  CPI  is  somewhat  lower.  The  timing  of  reaching  around 
2 percent is delayed, albeit slightly, from the former projection of “in or around fiscal 2015.” 
The Bank’s monetary policy 
III.  
As I have explained, QQE has exerted its intended effects. The improvement in economic 
activity and prices is likely to continue, and the CPI inflation is projected to reach the price 
stability target of about 2 percent around the first half of fiscal 2016. The Bank will keep its 
stance of continuing with QQE, aiming to achieve the price stability of 2 percent, as long as it 
is necessary for maintaining that target in a stable manner. 
The  timing  of  achieving  the  2  percent  target  has  been  delayed  compared  to  the  previous 
forecast.  Some  have  raised  the  question  of  how  the  delay  should  be  reconciled  with  the 
Bank’s commitment to achieving the price stability target at the earliest possible time, with a 
time horizon of about two years. 
Changing  people’s  deflationary  mindset  and  raising  inflation  expectations  through  its 
commitment to achieving the price stability target of 2 percent at the earliest possible time is 
by itself an aim of overcoming deflation, and at the same time the starting point of QQE’s 
effects. As I have explained, the perception of inflation by firms and households started to 
change markedly. This is because the Bank presented a time frame of achieving the price 
stability target at the earliest possible time with a time horizon of about two years, and made 
a clear commitment to doing whatever is necessary to achieve that target. 
In  reality,  prices  change  due  to  various  factors.  A  slowdown  in  the  inflation  rate  in  Japan 
since last summer is mainly attributable to the decline in crude oil prices, and it is common to 
many countries. The rate of decline in crude oil prices since last summer was very large – 
about 60 percent within about six months. It has been taken for granted among major central 
banks that the inflation rate would deviate for some time from the price stability target as a 
result  of  changes  in  commodity  prices,  such  as  crude  oil  prices.  In  fact,  the  year-on-year 
rates  of  change  in  the  headline  consumer  price  index  have  become  zero  or  even  slightly 
negative in economies such as of the United States, the United Kingdom, and the euro area, 
and the timing of reverting to 2 percent inflation is projected to be two or three years from 
now in these economies. In Japan, as I have described, the underlying trend in inflation has 
improved steadily, and as the effects of the decline in crude oil prices dissipate, the year-on-
year rate of increase in the CPI is projected to accelerate toward the price stability target of 
2 percent. We believe that this forecast is consistent with the commitment to achieving the 
price stability target at the earliest possible time, with a time horizon of about two years. That 
said, if there are changes in the underlying trend in inflation and it is deemed necessary to 
take  action  in  order  to  achieve  2  percent  inflation,  the  Bank  will  make  adjustments  as 
appropriate without hesitation. 
Concluding remarks 
So far, I have reflected on the progress made in the two years since the introduction of QQE, 
and with this in mind, I also have discussed the developments in economic activity and prices 
and  the  Bank’s  monetary  policy.  Lastly,  I  will  conclude  today’s  speech  by  sharing  my 
thoughts. 
In  implementing  economic  policies,  many  things  can  happen,  expected  or  unexpected. 
Looking  back  at  the  two  years  since  the  introduction  of  QQE,  there  have  been  expected 
developments  and  unexpected  events.  During  the  first  year  –  in  fiscal  2013  –  most  of  the 
developments  were  judged  as  expected  or  as  better  than  expected,  as  the  economy 
experienced  a  positive  turnaround  and  the  inflation  rates  increased  steadily.  Exports, 
however, had been lacking momentum, and this was below my expectations. The effects of 
firms’  relocation  of  production  overseas,  which  had  taken  place  amid  the  excessive 
appreciation of the yen, were more significant than I had expected. Because of these effects, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
  
 
it  is  only  recently  that  exports  have  picked  up.  During  the  second  year  –  in  fiscal  2014  – 
private  consumption  was  weaker  than  expected.  This  was  attributed  to  the  effects  of  the 
decline in demand following the consumption tax hike being somewhat prolonged, as well as 
to  other  factors,  such  as  the  effects  of  the  bad  weather  last  summer.  From  consumers’ 
perspective,  it  was  natural  that  they  perceived  the  consumption  tax  hike  as  being  part  of 
price  increases.  Given  that  the  rate  of  wage  increases  did  not  catch  up  with  that  of  price 
increases  including  the  tax  hike,  private  consumption  weakened.  Such  effects  on  private 
consumption have been anticipated since tax hikes place a burden on consumers, but they 
have been somewhat larger than our expectations. On top of this, I would note the decline in 
crude  oil  prices,  which  amounted  to  a  60  percent  drop  within  about  six  months,  as  the 
most unexpected event. As a result, the CPI inflation rate has declined to about 0 percent 
from  1.5 percent.  This  decline  in  the  inflation  rate  created  a  risk  for  the  mechanism  of 
QQE – namely, the formation of inflation expectations in particular – and this was why the 
Bank decided to expand QQE. 
Despite these unexpected events, the mechanism of QQE has been operating as intended. 
During the past two years, QQE – in tandem with the government’s policy measures – has 
markedly  changed  people’s  negative  mindset,  which  had  taken  root  under  deflation.  If  the 
economy continues its turnaround and deflation is to be overcome, Japan will provide a rare 
example of a regime shift through macroeconomic policy. Despite some unexpected events, I 
feel encouraged by the fact that the big picture of economic development for these two years 
is in line with what we  envisioned at the outset. The Bank will continue to steadily pursue 
QQE to achieve the price stability target of 2 percent at the earliest possible time. 
Thank you. 
 
 6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    7
  8 
    BIS central bankers’ speeches
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    9
