  William C Dudley: The US monetary policy outlook and its global 
implications 
Remarks  by  Mr  William  C  Dudley,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York, at the Bloomberg Americas Monetary Summit, New York City, 
20 April 2015. 
 Matthew Higgins, Richard Peach, Paolo Pesenti and Joseph Tracy assisted in preparing these remarks. 
It is a pleasure to have the opportunity to speak with you here today. In my remarks, I will 
assess  the  outlook  for  the  U.S.  economy  and  the  progress  that  the  Federal  Reserve  has 
made  toward  its  dual  mandate  objectives  of  maximum  employment  in  the  context  of  price 
stability. 
Over  the  past  few  years,  the  U.S.  economy  has  made  considerable  progress  toward 
achieving these goals. Yet we still have further to go – the unemployment rate is still too high 
and  the  inflation  rate  too  low.  Because  the  economic  outlook  is  uncertain,  I  can’t  tell  you 
when  normalization  will  occur.  The  timing  is  data  dependent.  We  will  have  to  see  what 
unfolds. Whenever such a shift in policy occurs, we need to be mindful that it most likely will 
be  accompanied  by  some  degree  of  market  stress  and  turbulence.  Moreover,  the 
normalization of U.S. monetary policy could create significant challenges for those emerging 
market  economies  (EMEs)  that  have  been  the  recipients  of  large  capital  inflows  in  recent 
years.  This  leads  to  an  important  question:  What  can  the  Federal  Reserve  do  to  address 
these risks? 
While  tightening  cycles  by  the  Fed  can  pose  challenges  for  EMEs,  these  need  not  be 
disruptive.  The  combination  of  stronger  U.S.  growth,  improved  EME  fundamentals  and 
effective Fed communications can limit the stresses caused by the onset of tightening. The 
experience will vary across EMEs, but EMEs as a group are better equipped today to handle 
the challenge than they were in the past. 
As always, what I have to say today reflects my own views and not necessarily those of the 
Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) or the Federal Reserve System.  
The U.S. economic outlook 
Since  the  end  of  the  Great  Recession  more  than  five  years  ago,  the  U.S.  economy  has 
grown  at  a  disappointing  2.3  percent  annualized  rate.  Several  times  over  that  period,  it 
appeared  that  growth  was  strengthening,  but  each  time  such  hopes  were  subsequently 
unfulfilled. We appear again to be at a similar junction. Real GDP growth accelerated over 
the last two years, rising at a 2.7 percent annual rate. However, the first quarter of 2015 is 
expected to be quite weak with growth only at around a 1½ percent annualized rate. What 
does this portend for growth going forward? 
Despite the weak performance of the first quarter, I believe that the growth prospects for the 
U.S.  economy  over  the  remainder  of  2015  will  improve.  I  expect  that  the  first  quarter 
weakness  will  prove  to  be  largely  temporary.  The  winter  weather  was  quite  severe  in  the 
eastern  two-thirds  of  the  United  States  and  bottlenecks  at  the West  Coast  ports  disrupted 
both sales and production. 
More  important  in  assessing  the  growth  potential  of  the  U.S.  are  the  improved  underlying 
fundamentals.  The  firming  of  growth  in  2013  and  2014  reflected  several  important 
developments that, in my view, are likely to continue to support growth over the remainder of 
this  year  and  into  2016.  Those  developments  include  the  fact  that  the  household 
deleveraging process has largely run its course and the imbalances in the housing market 
have been largely worked off. In addition, federal fiscal consolidation appears to be over for 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  now, and employment and spending are again increasing at the state and local government 
level. 
My outlook for 2015 as a whole is that economic growth will be close to the pace of the past 
two  years,  supported  by  continued  solid  fundamentals  and  accommodative  financial 
conditions. If I am correct, then this would lead to a further reduction of labor market slack, 
with the unemployment rate approaching 5 percent by the end of the year. 
An  important  underpinning  of this  outlook  is  that,  after  a  lull  in  the first quarter,  household 
spending will move back toward the kind of growth path it was on over the second half of 
2014, when real PCE grew at about a 3¾ percent annual rate. I expect stronger consumer 
spending  to  be  supported  by  three  factors:  healthier  household  balance  sheets,  improved 
household  income  prospects  and  the  benefit  to  purchasing  power  caused  by  the  earlier 
declines in energy prices. The fact that the personal saving rate is somewhat above what its 
longer-term  relationship  with  household  net  worth  also  suggests  that  consumer  spending 
could grow a bit quicker than income growth in the year ahead. 
Let me elaborate on each of these three factors supporting household spending. 
We have documented the steady improvement in household balance sheets in our Quarterly 
Report on Household Debt and Credit. Aggregate household credit declined from the fourth 
quarter of 2008 to the second quarter of 2013. Since then it has increased by 6 percent. The 
strongest and most broad based growth of consumer credit has been for purchases of motor 
vehicles. In contrast, growth of mortgage debt remains relatively sluggish and is confined to 
those  borrowers  with  relatively  high  credit  scores.  However,  as  typically  occurs  as  an 
economic expansion progresses, there are signs that credit standards are easing a bit, which 
should promote stronger growth of household borrowing going forward. 
Another  plus  for  consumer  spending  has  been  strong  gains  in  nominal  income.  Over  the 
second  half  of  2014,  hours  worked  in  the  nonfarm  business  sector  rose  at  a  3.6  percent 
annual rate. While wage growth has not yet picked up appreciably, this gain in hours worked 
resulted in a 4.7 percent annualized growth rate of labor compensation. 
The pace of improvement in the labor market slowed somewhat in the first quarter of 2015 
from that of the second half of last year. Nonfarm payroll employment increased in the first 
quarter  by  about  200,000  per  month,  but  a  gain  of  only  126,000  in  March.  This  was  well 
below the pace of the fourth quarter. Growth in hours worked also slowed, but because wage 
gains picked up somewhat, the growth rate of compensation in the first quarter looks to have 
been about as strong as it was during the second half of last year. 
Moreover, the level of slack in the labor market has diminished sufficiently so that one might 
expect firmer wage gains going forward. The unemployment rate in March of 5.5 percent, for 
example, is at a level where, historically, we have seen a pickup in the pace of real wage 
gains. If this happens again and unemployment continues to decline as I expect, then these 
wage gains will help support continued solid income growth even if the pace of employment 
growth remains slower than last year. However, it will be important to determine whether the 
softness  in  the  March  labor  market  report  was  temporary,  or  if  it  foreshadows  a  more 
substantial slowing in the labor market than I currently anticipate. 
The final factor supporting household spending is the decline in energy prices. Recently, the 
benchmark West Texas Intermediate (WTI) oil price has been fluctuating in the neighborhood 
of $50 per barrel, about half the price in June of last year. Since the U.S. is still a net importer 
of petroleum, this development has provided substantial benefits, with our oil import bill down 
by about a ½ percentage point of GDP. That represents a significant boost to real disposable 
income  for  households.  The  degree  to  which  this  energy  dividend  supports  household 
spending will depend, though, on how much is spent versus saved. 
While I am relatively optimistic about the growth outlook for 2015, I also must acknowledge 
that  there  are  some  significant  downside  risks.  In  particular,  the  roughly  15  percent 
appreciation of the exchange value of the dollar since mid-2014 is making U.S. exports more 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  expensive and imports more competitive. My staff’s analysis concludes that an appreciation 
of this magnitude would, all else equal, reduce growth of real GDP by about 0.6 percentage 
point  over  this  year.  Some  of  the  recent  softness  in  indicators  of  manufacturing  activity  is 
likely a reflection of this development. 
Additionally, the decline in energy prices, while helping to support household spending, will 
adversely  impact  business  investment.  The  support  to  growth  from  rapidly  rising  U.S.  oil 
production  almost  certainly  will  fade  due  to  the  oil  price  decline.  Now,  with  prices  sharply 
lower,  U.S.  oil  exploration  and  drilling  activity  is  falling  off  very  sharply,  and  this  will 
undoubtedly exert a meaningful drag on economic activity. 
Turning to the inflation outlook, the data continue to come in below the FOMC’s objective of a 
2  percent  annualized  rate  for  the  personal  consumption  expenditures  (PCE)  deflator.  The 
twelve-month change of the total PCE deflator was just 0.3 percent in February, with the core 
PCE deflator at just 1.4 percent. Despite these low readings, my expectation is that inflation 
will begin to firm later this year. Importantly, most of the impact from the decline in energy 
prices that has weighed down overall inflation is likely over. Although the appreciation of the 
dollar may cause some further softness in import prices, the continued decline in resource 
slack as the economy expands should push in the opposite direction. We are already seeing 
some firming  in  rent  inflation  as  rental  vacancy  rates  have  returned  to more  normal  levels 
and  employment  and  income  growth  have  strengthened.  Longer-term  household  inflation 
expectations have been well maintained through this period of very low inflation as shown in 
our Survey of Consumer Expectations. This should reinforce the effect of a higher level of 
overall  resource  utilization  in  slowly  pushing  inflation  back  towards  the  FOMC’s  2  percent 
objective. 
Monetary policy 
As  the  FOMC  has  consistently  communicated,  decisions  on  monetary  policy,  such  as  the 
timing of lift-off will, depend on how the economic outlook evolves – in particular with respect 
to  the  labor  market  and  inflation.  As  I  have  discussed,  the  labor  market  has  improved 
substantially over the past few years and I expect to see inflation begin to firm later this year. 
If  this  labor  market  improvement  continues  and  the  FOMC  is  reasonably  confident  that 
inflation will move back to our 2 percent objective over the medium term, then it would be 
appropriate to begin to normalize interest rates. At their March meeting, the FOMC removed 
language from the statement that indicated that we would be patient in beginning the process 
of  normalizing  monetary  policy.  But,  as  Chair  Yellen  remarked  in  her  most  recent  press 
conference, removal of the word “patient” from the statement does not indicate that we will 
now be “impatient” to begin to normalize monetary policy. Rather, the timing of normalization 
remains uncertain because how the economy evolves is also uncertain. 
When, hopefully, the data support a decision to lift off later this year, it does not mean that 
U.S.  monetary  policy  will  be  tight.  Rather,  we  will  simply  be  moving  from  an  extremely 
accommodative  monetary  policy  to  one that  is  only  slightly  less  so. I  would  view  this  as  a 
positive signal about the progress we have made in restoring the U.S. economy to health. It 
is important to remember that near zero short-term interest rates and the large expansion of 
the  Federal  Reserve’s  balance  sheet  were  designed  to  be  a  temporary  extraordinary 
treatment to help the economy regain its vitality, and not a permanent palliative. 
I remain confident that when the FOMC decides to begin to remove policy accommodation 
that  we  have  the  requisite  tools  to  support  this  decision.  We  have  tested  numerous  tools 
including overnight reverse repurchase operations, term reverse repurchase operations and 
term deposit facilities to ensure that, when the time comes, lift-off can be managed smoothly. 
As  the  FOMC  has  communicated,  the  primary  tool  will  be  interest  on  excess  reserves 
(IOER), with overnight reverse repurchases as a supplemental tool to be used as needed to 
help ensure a firm floor under short-term interest rates. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  Once normalization has begun, two important questions will be: How fast will it proceed? And 
how high will short-term rates ultimately need to go? 
How  fast  the  normalization  process  will  proceed  depends  mainly  on  two  factors:  how  the 
economy evolves and how financial market conditions respond to movements in the federal 
funds  rate  target.  If  financial  market  conditions  do  not  tighten  much  in  response  to  higher 
short-term  interest  rates,  we  might  have  to  move  more  quickly  to  achieve  the  appropriate 
restraint on financial market conditions. In contrast, if financial conditions tighten unduly, then 
this will likely prompt us to go much more slowly or even to pause for a while. Our intention 
will be to move short-term interest rates in a manner to generate the set of financial market 
conditions that we deem to be most consistent with achieving our employment and inflation 
objectives. 
The question of how high short-term rates will ultimately need to go before we approach a 
neutral  monetary  stance  is  a  difficult  question,  which  is  hard  to  pre-judge  for  a  couple  of 
reasons.  First,  it  depends  on  how  financial  market  conditions  evolve  in  response  to  our 
monetary  policy  adjustments.  Second,  it  depends  on  other  factors,  such  as  real  potential 
GDP  growth,  which,  in  turn,  depends  on  the  growth  rates  of  the  labor  force  and  of 
productivity.  My  current  thinking  is  that  the  long-run  nominal  federal  funds  rate  consistent 
with 2 percent inflation is somewhat lower than in the past. My point estimate is 3½ percent, 
but I place considerable uncertainty on this estimate. 
Global implications of U.S. monetary policy normalization 
Let me now turn to the implication of U.S. policy normalization for foreign economies. While 
our monetary policy mandate has a domestic focus, our monetary policy actions have global 
implications  that  feed  back  into  the  U.S.  economy  and  financial  markets.  In  some  cases, 
these feedback effects can be disruptive. An example is the market volatility that we saw in 
the spring and summer of 2013 during the so-called “taper tantrum.” EME financial markets 
were hit the hardest, with declines in equity prices, a widening in sovereign debt spreads and 
a sharp increase in foreign exchange rate volatility. In the U.S., we saw a spike in Treasury 
yields,  with  the  10-year  rate  rising  by  more  than  100  basis  points  from  early  May  before 
peaking in early September. 
Despite  the  domestic  focus  of  our  policy  mandate,  we  at  the  Fed  take  the  potential 
international implications of our policies seriously. In part, this is out of simple self-interest, 
since  the  international  effects  of  Fed  policies  can  spill  back  onto  the  U.S.  economy  and 
financial markets. In part, too, it reflects a sense of special responsibility we have given the 
dollar’s role as the international reserve currency. We are and will remain attentive to the risk 
that the onset of Fed policy normalization could bring a new round of market pressures on 
EMEs. Yet I think there are good reasons to think that this adjustment will prove manageable 
and not be very disruptive. 
First, many EMEs appear to be better equipped today to handle the Fed’s prospective exit 
from its exceptional policy accommodation than they were during past tightening cycles. This 
reflects the fundamental reforms that EMEs have put in place over the past 15 years, as well 
as the hard lessons learned from past periods of market stress. Among the positives are: 
• 
The  absence  of  pegged  exchange  rate  regimes  that  often  came  undone  violently 
during periods of acute stress; 
Improved debt service ratios and generally moderate external debt levels; 
Larger foreign exchange reserve cushions; 
Clearer and more coherent monetary policy frameworks, supporting what are now 
generally low to moderate inflation rates; 
Generally improved fiscal discipline; and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  4 
   Better  capitalized  banking  systems,  supported  by  strengthened  regulatory  and 
supervisory frameworks. 
 To be sure, progress has not been uniform across EMEs, and more work remains in some 
countries  to  further  strengthen  institutional  structures.  Vulnerabilities  remain  in  several 
important EMEs, and some have been hit by a sharp adverse turn in their terms of trade due 
to the recent fall in global commodity prices. Still, the fundamental improvements I’ve cited 
leave many EMEs better positioned than in the past to weather those times in the cycle when 
the external environment turns more challenging. 
Second,  during  previous  Fed  tightening  cycles  EME  economic  performance  has  generally 
been  good.  During  the  last  three  U.S.  tightening  cycles,  EME  industrial  production  growth 
has been between 7½ and 10 percent over the 12-months from the start of Fed tightening, 
while  EME  export  volumes  have  risen  10  to  15  percent.  The  likely  explanation  for  this 
favorable  record  is  that  Fed  tightening  generally  occurs  during  periods  of  strong  U.S. 
economic performance. Recent research from the IMF bears out this hypothesis, finding that 
higher U.S. interest rates associated with stronger U.S. growth represent a net positive for 
EMEs.1  
Financial  performance  of  EMEs  has  been  more  diverse  across  Fed  policy  cycles.  The 
strongest contrast is between the tightening cycle that began in 2004, and the one beginning 
a  decade  earlier,  in  1994.  EME  asset  prices  strengthened  considerably  during  the  2004 
cycle,  but  weakened  considerably  during  the  earlier  cycle.  Notably,  the  1994  cycle  was 
associated with a large increase in U.S. long-term bond yields, and appears to represent a 
case in which there was a considerable gap between what the Fed did in terms of monetary 
policy tightening relative to initial market expectations. 
A similar gap was apparent during the taper tantrum in the spring of 2013, when our attempts 
to  provide  guidance  about  the  potential  tapering  of  asset  purchases  ended  up  confusing 
market  participants,  causing  many  to  anticipate  an  earlier  start  and  more  rapid  rollout  of 
actual  policy  rate  hikes.  These  episodes  are  reminders  of  the  importance  of  transparency 
and clear messaging in how the Fed is evaluating the evolving economic landscape, a point 
I’ll return to shortly. 
Third,  the  stance  of  Fed  policy  will  be  far  from  the  only  factor  affecting  external  financial 
conditions  for  EMEs.  Even  as  the  FOMC  considers  the  appropriate  timing  and  pace  of 
moving  to  a  less  accommodative  policy  stance,  the  ECB  and  the  Bank  of  Japan  are 
implementing additional easing measures. As a result, external conditions will remain more 
supportive than would be indicated by a narrow focus on Fed policy alone. 
Finally,  EME  fundamentals  are  likely  to  be  the  most  important  determinant  of  how  their 
financial conditions respond to Fed policy normalization. This was one of the key lessons of 
the taper tantrum. At first, market pressure was somewhat indiscriminant across countries. 
Relatively quickly, however, market pressures turned more focused, tightening more severely 
for  countries  with  clear  fundamental  vulnerabilities:  large  current  account  deficits,  a  heavy 
reliance  on  portfolio  inflows  and  high  inflation  rates.  Markets  then  responded  favorably  as 
EME  authorities  shifted  toward  clearer,  more  consistent  policies  focused  on  inflation 
objectives and external sustainability, and away from policies with conflicting and sometimes 
competing objectives. A smooth adjustment to Fed normalization this cycle will be more likely 
if market participants retain this discriminating perspective. 
None  of  this  is  to  suggest  that  the  road  ahead  will  necessarily  be  an  easy  one.  Market 
participants  may  focus  on  vulnerabilities  that  they  might  have  ignored  prior  to  the  taper 
                                                
1  See  “Spillovers  from  Unwinding  Monetary  Support  in  Advanced  Economies,”  2014  Spillover  Report, 
Chapter 2.  See  also,  “On  the  Receiving  End:  External  Financial  Conditions  and  Emerging  Market  Growth 
Before, During and After the Global Financial Crisis,” World Economic Outlook, April 2013, Chapter 4. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  tantrum in 2013, placing an added premium on strong fundamentals, policy coherence and 
predictability. There will likely be no one right answer for EMEs in managing the trade-offs 
that come with the changed environment, and the adjustment could sometimes be difficult. 
With  respect  to  these  risks,  central  banks  in  general,  and  the  Fed  in  particular,  play  an 
important role. We seek to be good global stewards. As you know, we’ve taken a number of 
steps  to  increase  transparency  and  to  improve  the  clarity  of  our  communications.  This 
includes  regular  press  conferences  by  the  Fed  chair  following  FOMC  meetings;  the 
publishing  of  growth,  inflation  and  short-term  rate  forecasts  of  FOMC  participants;  and  a 
concerted attempt to lay out the guideposts that the FOMC will look at to assess progress 
toward  our  mandate.  We  are,  though,  still  learning  how  to  more  effectively  communicate, 
especially given our new and expanded set of policy instruments. 
A  second  area  in  which  we  can  and  must  collectively  do  better  is  safeguarding  global 
financial  stability.  Simply  put,  we  failed  to  act  both  early  enough  and  decisively  enough  to 
stem the credit excesses that spawned the financial crisis and the Great Recession. While 
the U.S. was not alone in this shortcoming, given our position in the global financial system 
we  especially  should  have  done  a  better  job.  We’ve  taken  important  steps  through  new 
legislative  mandates  and  a  broader  effort  to  rethink  our  regulatory  and  supervisory 
framework. In particular, systemically important banking organizations must now hold higher 
amounts of capital and liquidity that are better aligned with their risk profiles and the official 
sector is making progress in ensuring no financial firm will be too-big-to-fail. 
Although this remains very much a work in progress, these efforts should help us to avoid 
repeating the mistakes of the recent past, and enable us to be more proactive in mitigating 
potential future vulnerabilities. Of course, we at the Fed are not alone here. Since the recent 
financial crisis, central banks worldwide have been engaged in a broad rethinking of how to 
better fulfill their mandates. 
Let me close with a final thought. The largest problems that countries create for others often 
emanate from getting policy wrong domestically. Economic recession or financial instability at 
home is often quickly exported abroad. Equally important, growth and stability abroad makes 
all  our  jobs  at  home  easier.  This  illustrates  the  externalities  in  the  work  we  do,  with  more 
effective  fulfillment  of  our  domestic  mandates  helping  to  bring  us  collectively  to  a  better 
place. 
Thank you for your kind attention. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
