  Mario Draghi: Speech by the President at SZ Finance Day 2015 
Speech by Mr Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank, at SZ (Süddeutsche 
Zeitung) Finance Day 2015, Frankfurt am Main, 16 March 2015. 
 Summary 
Europe  needs  to  accelerate  on  its  way  to  economic  and  institutional  convergence.  Due  to 
falling oil prices, accommodative monetary policy and successful structural reforms, we can 
be optimistic about the economic outlook. The nascent recovery should be used as a window 
of opportunity to go ahead with reforms that make the euro area less fragile and vulnerable 
to shocks. Economic convergence should be reached through structural reforms that lead to 
an alignment of productivity levels. On the institutional side, we need to move from a system 
of rules and guidelines for national economic policy making to a system of further sovereignty 
sharing  within  common  institutions.  As  part  of  this  process,  we  need  to  strengthen  the 
democratic accountability of Europe towards its citizens. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
It is a pleasure to be here this evening and to be able to address this conference. 
We are meeting against the backdrop of a steadily recovering economic situation in the euro 
area. Most indicators suggest a sustained recovery is taking hold. Confidence among firms 
and consumers is rising. Growth forecasts have been revised upwards. And bank lending is 
improving on both the demand and supply sides. 
These improvements reflect the coming together of several external and internal factors. 
First, the terms of trade gains for firms and households arising from falling oil prices. Second, 
the monetary policy measures taken by the ECB since the middle of last year, which have 
led to a significant easing of financing conditions and protected the euro area from second 
round effects from this oil price drop, thus amplifying its benefits. And third, the successful 
structural  reforms  that  have  been  implemented  in  several  countries  in  recent  years,  which 
are now starting to produce results. 
These effects look set to persist for some time, meaning we can rightly be optimistic about 
the outlook. But this does not mean we should rest on our laurels. On the contrary, a nascent 
recovery provides us with a window of opportunity – with the conditions to press ahead with 
the reforms that will make the euro area less fragile and vulnerable to shocks. 
These vulnerabilities will not disappear just because the cycle is turning. They stem from the 
fact that our union remains incomplete along two dimensions. Neither our economies nor our 
institutions have converged enough. This is why whenever there is a serious shock in any 
part of the euro area, questions about the sustainability of the union still arise. 
So the current upturn in economic conditions, which the ECB has helped to generate, must 
be used. It provides a favourable environment to address once-and-for-all these sources of 
fragility at the root – and in doing so to ensure that the cyclical recovery turns into a structural 
one. 
To achieve this, we need now to press ahead with two streams of policy. First, we need to 
move from integration to convergence through structural reforms. And second, we need to 
move from rules to institutions through governance reforms. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  integration  as 
From integration to convergence 
1. 
In the euro area structural reforms are not a policy choice. They are a necessity that follows 
from the special way in which our monetary union is constructed. Let me explain why. 
trade 
Monetary  union  automatically  creates  economic 
financial  and 
connections deepen. But integration does not automatically lead to economic convergence, 
by which I mean the gradual alignment of productivity levels. 
This does not necessarily matter if the monetary union is of a sort where fiscal transfers are 
foreseen. Then, growth can cluster in certain regions, and the cohesion of the union can be 
maintained by transfers from those richer regions to the poorer ones. In the US, for example, 
a $1 decrease in per capita income in a state/region is associated with a roughly 20–40 cent 
net  transfer  from  the  federal  government  to  its  residents,  with  the  bulk  of  the  adjustment 
occurring through the tax system. 
But  lack  of  convergence  does  matter  if  fiscal  transfers  are  not  foreseen.  In  this  case, 
cohesion depends on every state producing enough growth to support its citizens’ welfare. 
Otherwise, citizens in poorer regions will start to question whether they might be better off 
outside  the  union.  And  that  creates  self-fulfilling  fragmentation,  which  has  repercussions 
across the union from which all countries ultimately suffer. 
The euro area falls squarely into this second category of monetary unions. It was not created 
to have permanent creditors and debtors. It was created with the expectation that countries 
would be able to stand on their own two feet, without continuous help from others. Therefore, 
there has to be convergence for the union to be sustainable – every economy needs to be 
able to meet the highest standards in terms of competitiveness, employment and growth. 
This  imperative  has  always  been  understood  in  principle  in  the  euro  area.  But  it  has  not 
always  been  followed  through  in  practice,  as  we  see  with  the  divergence  in  the  euro  area 
today. 
This  creates  an  uncertain  half-way  position.  We  have  now  integrated  too  much  to  even 
entertain reversing the process – our economies are far too intertwined. But we have not yet 
converged enough to dispel doubts about the cohesion of our union and guarantee its long-
term stability. 
So there is only one answer: we have to make our economies more convergent than they are 
today. And it is in this context that structural reforms are so important. 
Only  with  those  reforms  can  we  create  the  conditions  where  every  country  can  allocate 
resources efficiently, exploit comparative advantages and grow. And I do not say this from 
theory, but from our own experience. 
We  have  already  seen  in  the  euro  area  that  convergence  cannot  be  sustained  if  it  is  not 
structurally anchored. We had rapid convergence in nominal GDP levels before the crisis, but 
driven by demand and without an underlying alignment in productivity levels. When the cycle 
turned, those nominal gains largely reversed. 
Moreover,  we  are  seeing  now  how  convergence  can  gradually  restart  when  the  right 
structural policies are in place. Those countries that undertook reforms in recent years are 
starting to see the positive effects come through. 
For example, the OECD estimates that the 2012 labour market reform – and in particular the 
decentralisation of wage bargaining – was responsible for a 3.2% decline in labour costs in 
the business sector up to the second quarter of 2013, a period where Spain was also able to 
gain large export market shares. In Portugal, well targeted and efficient active labour market 
policies have been able to explain about one-third of the employment recovery. 
And the fact we now have an extremely accommodative monetary policy is not a disincentive 
for countries to continue with these reforms. For example, Italy has introduced a major labour 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  market reform since the ECB announced its most recent measures. In fact, monetary policy 
creates an incentive for reform. 
Any  country  that  does  structural  reforms  today  will  see  the  benefits  materialise  faster,  as 
those  reforms  will  strengthen  the  impact  of monetary  policy  in  their  economy,  in  particular 
where  there  is  pent-up  investment  demand.  And  this  in  turn  will  make  further  structural 
reforms  easier,  as  in  a  stronger  economy  the  short-term  costs  of  reform  are  lower  –  for 
instance  because  transitions  between  jobs  are  faster  and  there  is  less  risk  of  hysteresis 
effects. 
From rules to institutions 
2. 
Still,  what  adds  fragility  to  our  union  is  the  fact  that,  despite  the  crucial  importance  of 
structural  reforms,  they  remain  almost  entirely  a  national  responsibility.  From  the  moment 
countries enter monetary union there is no way to guarantee that they will stay fit enough to 
thrive within it. In my view this has to change. 
Because the cohesion of the euro area depends on all countries prospering, what happens 
within each one is not just a national interest, it is a collective interest. Every member of the 
euro  area  has  a  vital  interest  in  ensuring  that  its  partners  are  meeting  the  membership 
requirements – and not just at the point of entry, but continuously. 
Indeed, it is sometimes asked what differentiates the euro area from a fixed exchange rate 
regime,  and  the  answer  is  precisely  this  point.  In  a  fixed  exchange  rate  regime  issues  of 
economic integration are dealt with as foreign affairs. In a monetary union, they are domestic 
issues  for  all.  And  it  follows  from  this  that  we  need  a  higher  degree  of  institutional 
convergence in the structural domain as well. 
So what does this mean in practice? 
Up to now, we have employed two different methods of economic governance in the EU. 
In some areas, we have given European institutions executive power. This includes the ECB 
for monetary policy, the SSM (within the ECB) for financial policy, and the Commission for 
competition policy. In other areas, executive power has remained at the national level, with 
policies  being  aligned  through  a  system  of  rules  enforced  by  the  Commission.  This  is  the 
case for fiscal and economic policies. 
There are of course good reasons why those different methods have been applied. But if we 
reflect honestly, which would we say has been most successful? 
I think few would deny that where European institutions have been invested with executive 
power,  they  have  used  it  well.  Competition  policy  has  been  effective  with  both  large 
companies  and  large  countries.  Monetary  policy  has  achieved  a  high  degree  of  policy 
credibility. And for the SSM it is perhaps too early to judge, though I am certain we would not 
have had such a rigorous clean-up of our banking sector without it. 
If  we  look  at  the  rules-based  approach,  however,  it  is  difficult  to  reach  such  a  positive 
conclusion. The fiscal rules have repeatedly been broken and trust between countries has 
been  strained.  And  for  economic  policies  we  have  tried  to  introduce  a  new  rules-based 
approach – the Macroeconomic Imbalances Procedure – but it has so far not gained much 
traction in national decision-making processes. 
The  discrepancy  between  these  two  methods  does  not  arise  because  of  any  inherent 
difference  in  the  quality  of  European  and  national  authorities.  It  arises  because  of  the 
inherent  difference  between  rules  and  institutions  in  a  monetary  union.  And  there  are  two 
reasons why I think, going forward, an institution-based approach would work better for the 
governance of structural reforms. 
First, institutions facilitate both more credible and more flexible policymaking. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  Rules can only really be credible if they are applied with very little discretion. Otherwise as 
soon  as  they  actually  bind,  countries  will  find  reasons  not  to  follow  them.  But  having  no 
discretion  is  also  not  optimal,  as  circumstances  will  always  arise  that  the  rules  did  not 
foresee. There is thus an inevitable trade-off between credibility and flexibility. 
Indeed, this is why we often end up in a difficult balancing act in Europe – trying at once to 
be flexible  with the rules in the short-term to reflect circumstances, but rigid with the rules 
over  the  medium-term  to  build  credibility.  And  ultimately  we  run  the  risk  that  this  creates 
inconsistency between countries, which in turn weakens trust. 
By  contrast,  for  European  institutions  the  trade-offs  are  less.  Their  policies  are  credible 
because they are bound by a mandate. But at the same time they can use discretion over 
how  they  meet  that  mandate,  allowing  flexibility  to  respond  to  events.  This  “constrained 
discretion” describes exactly the ECB’s response to unprecedented low inflation: we did not 
have discretion over whether to meet our mandate, but we exercised it over how to do so. 
I  recognise  that  for  structural  reforms  the  analogy  with  monetary  policy  is  not  perfect. 
Preferences are not as aligned across countries and it would not be possible to have such a 
complete delegation of powers. 
But I am confident that a European institution could help on two fronts. Making it easier to 
agree  on  the  aims  of  structural  reforms  by  aligning  best  practice.  And  making  it  easier  to 
implement them by using European law to bypass vested interests. 
It  is  clear,  however,  that  the  more  European  governance  extends  into  areas  such  as 
economic  policies,  the more  we  need  strong  democratic  participation  and  accountability  at 
the  European  level.  There  are fundamental  distributional  questions  at  stake  with  structural 
reforms that cannot simply be delegated to technocratic bodies. 
And this is where the second reason for an institutional approach comes in – institutions with 
executive power create clearer and more direct accountability. 
In  the  euro  area  both  governments  and  the  Commission  are  in  principle  accountable  for 
implementing  the  rules.  But  in  practice  it  is  often  the  case  that  governments  claim  little 
ownership over this process, diverting responsibility for the outcome to the Commission. Yet 
at the same time the Commission has limited powers in this domain. 
With  effective  European  institutions,  however,  it  is  possible  to  make  a  more  direct  link 
between decisions and responsibility. Precisely because those institutions are invested with 
defined powers, citizens can hold them accountable against their mandate. 
And in fact, strengthening these channels of democratic participation is vital for the euro area 
today. It is exactly the impression that there is too little accountability in Europe that populist 
parties often exploit. 
In sum, my conclusion is that there must be a quantum leap in institutional convergence. We 
need to move from a system of rules and guidelines for national economic policy making, to 
a  system  of  further  sovereignty  sharing  within  common  institutions.  And  as  part  of  this 
process we need to strengthen the democratic accountability of Europe towards its citizens, 
which would automatically deepen our political union. 
Let  me  however  be  clear:  in  the  absence  of  institutions,  rules  act  as  a  crucial  anchor  for 
confidence. So there is no question that the rules can be ignored because institutions would 
be  better.  On  the  contrary,  they  have  to  be  fully  respected  so  that  we  can  make  such  a 
transition in the future. We have to build trust today by showing that what we agree to, we 
honour. And then we take the next steps forward as credible partners for each other. 
Conclusion 
Let me conclude. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  The  euro  area  has  advanced  a  long  way  as  a  monetary  union.  We  began  with  a  single 
market,  a  single  currency  and  a  single  monetary  policy. We  now  have  a  single  supervisor 
and resolution authority. And soon we will have a single capital market. 
But we have not yet advanced far enough to put all questions about our future to bed. We 
need to remove those lingering doubts that resurface whenever a shock hits. And to do so 
we have to accelerate both our economic and institutional convergence. 
Our  monetary  policy  is  helping  to  make  this  possible  by  creating  an  improving  cyclical 
environment. But it is now up to governments to seize on this opportunity and make those 
improvements permanent. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
