  Thomas Jordan: The Swiss National Bank’s monetary policy after the 
discontinuation of the minimum exchange rate 
Speech  by  Mr  Thomas  Jordan,  Chairman  of  the  Governing  Board  of  the  Swiss  National 
Bank, at the 107th Ordinary General Meeting of Shareholders of the Swiss National Bank, 
Berne, 24 April 2015. 
 implications 
far-reaching 
the  euro  has 
Mr President of the Bank Council 
Dear Shareholders 
Dear Guests, dear School Students 
Since 15 January, the Swiss National Bank (SNB) has once again been coming to terms with 
a whole new set of challenges. On that day, the Governing Board decided to discontinue the 
minimum  exchange  rate  because  the  international  environment  for  the  SNB’s  monetary 
policy  had  changed  dramatically.  The  end  of  the  minimum  exchange  rate  of  CHF 1.20 
against 
therefore 
understandable  that  our  decision  triggered  strong  reactions.  Yet  had  we  continued  to 
maintain the minimum exchange rate for a certain period, the consequences for our country 
would have been much more severe. 
In  my  talk  today,  I  would  like  to  explain  to  you  in  detail  our  reasons  for  discontinuing  the 
minimum exchange rate. The SNB attaches great importance to clarifying its monetary policy 
decisions. This is, on the one hand, an important part of our statutory duty of accountability to 
parliament.  On  the  other,  it  is  a  prime  concern  of  ours  that  the  general  public  and,  in 
particular, you, our shareholders, should understand our monetary policy. 
I  will  begin  by  talking  about  the  prominent  issues  related  to  the  discontinuation  of  the 
minimum  exchange  rate.  This  will  be  followed  by  our  present  assessment  of  the  Swiss 
economy  and  price  developments  and  an  explanation  of  our  current  monetary  policy. 
Alongside  our  willingness  to  intervene  on  the  foreign  exchange  market  as  necessary, 
negative interest on SNB sight deposits plays an important role in monetary policy. I would 
therefore like to look at this subject in greater detail today. 
for  our  economy. 
is 
It 
Rationale for discontinuing the minimum exchange rate 
Let us begin with the reasons for discontinuing the minimum exchange rate. In the course of 
2014, there were growing signs that a US exit from a highly expansionary monetary policy 
was  drawing  closer.  In  the  euro  area,  by  contrast,  there  was  increasing  evidence  that 
monetary  policy  would  be  eased  further.  Against  this  backdrop,  the  euro  depreciated 
considerably  against  the  US  dollar.  These  diverging  monetary  policy  stances  in  the  major 
currency areas affected the Swiss franc in two different ways. Like the euro, the Swiss franc 
weakened  against  the  US  dollar.  Against  the  euro,  however,  it  gradually  approached  the 
minimum  exchange rate  of  CHF 1.20.  At  that time,  the  weakening  of the  euro  had  not  yet 
cast  doubt  on  the  sustainability  of  the  minimum  exchange  rate.  Consequently,  at  the 
monetary policy decision in mid-December, we made the decision to leave monetary policy 
unchanged. 
Shortly  after  our  monetary  policy  decision,  the  economic  crisis  in  Russia  escalated. 
Subsequently, the SNB had to make very substantial interventions in the foreign exchange 
market to enforce the minimum exchange rate. In order to support the minimum exchange 
rate, we introduced negative interest on sight deposit account balances at the SNB. 
At  first,  the  situation  quietened  down  again.  However,  this  proved  to  have  been  the  calm 
before  the  storm.  Due  to  growing  expectations  that  there  would  be  a  further  substantial 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  relaxation of monetary policy in the euro area, the euro weakened again significantly in the 
first half of January 2015. In the wake of this downturn, pressure on the minimum exchange 
rate increased enormously. Unlike the situation in 2012, when the monetary policy stance in 
the  US  and  the  euro  area  remained  unchanged,  it  became  evident  that  this  time  the 
minimum exchange rate could only be enforced through permanent currency interventions of 
rapidly increasing magnitude. In other words, the minimum exchange rate of CHF 1.20 per 
euro was no longer sustainable. 
Adhering to the minimum exchange rate would have led to an uncontrollable expansion of 
our foreign currency holdings and, thus, of our balance sheet, potentially to a level several 
times Swiss GDP. The risks associated with a balance sheet expansion of this scale would 
have been out of all proportion to the benefits of the minimum exchange rate for the Swiss 
economy. In particular, an expansion of the balance sheet would have severely impaired the 
SNB’s  ability  to  conduct  monetary  policy  in  future.  Such  a  long  balance sheet  would  have 
made  further  monetary  policy  measures  substantially  harder.  At  the  same  time,  we  would 
have jeopardised the fulfilment of our mandate in the long term, since reabsorbing such a 
huge  volume  of  liquidity  once  monetary  policy  began  to  normalise  would  have  been  very 
difficult. 
At  its  monetary  policy  assessments,  the  SNB  had  analysed  the  costs  and  benefits  of 
adhering to the minimum exchange rate. On the basis of this kind of analysis, the Governing 
Board concluded, on 15 January, that a minimum exchange rate of CHF 1.20 per euro was 
no  longer  sustainable,  and  thus  justified,  from  a  monetary  policy  point  of  view.  If  it  had 
ignored the changes  in the  international  environment, the  SNB  would  have  jeopardised  its 
credibility.  It  would  have  been  irresponsible  to  maintain  the  minimum  exchange  rate  even 
longer  and  thoughtlessly  accept  the  high  costs  of  this  policy,  without  considering  its 
sustainability. 
Once  we  had  reached  this  conclusion,  swift  action  was  necessary.  Holding  off  any  longer 
would  have  increased  pressure  on  the  minimum  exchange  rate  because  of  mounting 
speculation. Had we delayed the discontinuation, the turmoil on the financial markets would 
have  been  no  less  severe.  However,  the  impact  on  the  Swiss  economy  would  have  been 
stronger and the losses on the SNB’s balance sheet would have been greater. 
Ladies and gentlemen, the decision of 15 January has far-reaching consequences and was 
anything but easy for me and my colleagues on the Governing Board. We were aware that 
discontinuing the minimum exchange rate would have significant effects on the outlook for 
the economy and inflation. However, as the Governing Board, we must be prepared to make 
decisions that may have negative effects in the short term. We are convinced that postponing 
a decision which was ultimately unavoidable would have caused far higher costs in the long 
term. 
Review and appraisal of the minimum exchange rate 
As mentioned before, the minimum exchange rate of CHF 1.20 per euro was the SNB’s key 
monetary policy instrument for almost three and a half years. I will therefore begin my brief 
appraisal  of  this  instrument  in  the  summer  of  2011,  shortly  before  it  was  introduced.  That 
summer saw a renewed deterioration in the outlook for the global economy, which was only 
hesitantly recovering from the worst recession since the 1930s. In addition, at that time, the 
European  debt  crisis  was  escalating  again.  In  the  US  Congress,  a  protracted  battle  about 
raising  the  debt  ceiling  was  under  way.  Given  these  developments,  uncertainty  on  the 
financial  markets  was  increasing  very  rapidly,  and  demand  for  Swiss  francs  soared.  The 
Swiss franc appreciated very sharply against all major currencies, including the US dollar. In 
August 2011, the Swiss franc was, by any measure, massively overvalued. The SNB began 
by expanding liquidity on the money market to an extent that was historically unprecedented. 
However,  the  effect  of  this  liquidity  expansion  on  the  exchange  rate  was  only  temporary. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Subsequently, on 6 September 2011, we decided to introduce the minimum exchange rate 
as an exceptional and temporary measure. 
Through  the  minimum  exchange  rate,  the  massive  overvaluation  of  the  Swiss  franc  was 
partially corrected. In this way, the SNB countered the acute threat to the Swiss economy 
and the risk of a deflationary development. The minimum exchange rate served the Swiss 
economy well. It helped to see it through the turmoil of that period and bought some time so 
that the economy could adjust to the new conditions, at least to some extent. Production and 
employment recovered faster than in many other countries. Over the past two years, GDP 
has grown by approximately 2% on average. The Swiss economy is now better placed than it 
was in 2011. 
New parameters for the economy: assessment and outlook 
What  is  our  current  assessment  of  the  economic  outlook,  given  the  changed  situation? 
Before discontinuing the minimum exchange rate, the SNB was expecting growth of some 
2% for this year as well. We now anticipate GDP growth of just under 1%. With the end of the 
minimum  exchange  rate,  Switzerland  faces  more  difficult  times  ahead.  Overall,  the  Swiss 
franc is once again significantly overvalued. The sharp, and above all abrupt, appreciation of 
the  Swiss  franc  represents  a  major  challenge.  Our  economy  has  time  and  again 
demonstrated how adaptable and innovative it is, and it can certainly handle a gradual, long-
term appreciation in the real exchange rate. However, the potential effects of the latest sharp 
Swiss franc appreciation should certainly not be underestimated. We have great respect for 
the businesses and their staff who are now having to make challenging adjustments. At this 
time, the Swiss economy must – more than ever before – build on its structural strengths and 
flexibility. Doing so will enable it to preserve its international competitiveness and, with it, the 
prosperity of our country. 
Apart from the exchange rate, future economic growth will depend on further developments 
in the global economy. In this respect, the outlook appears more favourable than in 2011. 
The US economy is in better shape. In the euro area, the latest economic figures also give 
cause for more optimism. Nevertheless, considerable risks also exist now, with the Ukraine 
conflict and the debt problems in Greece. 
Due to the new exchange rate parameters, the SNB’s conditional inflation forecast has also 
moved down significantly. For 2015, we anticipate inflation of –1.1% in Switzerland. As the 
stronger Swiss franc leads to a decrease in import prices. In addition, the very substantial fall 
in oil prices  will move energy inflation deep into negative territory. However, both of these 
effects are temporary. According to our inflation forecast, the negative inflation phase will be 
short-lived.  Sustained  negative  inflation  or,  indeed,  a  deflationary  spiral,  are  not  to  be 
expected. 
Nevertheless, neither inflationary nor economic developments are optimal. We would prefer 
slightly  positive  inflation  and  more  economic  growth.  Due  to  the  changed  international 
environment, however, which we are unable to influence, we have no choice but to adjust to 
a leaner period, whether we like it or not. 
Monetary policy of the SNB 
With  the  end  of  the  minimum  exchange  rate,  the  SNB  has  now  returned  to  interest  rate 
management. However, this does not mean that we have reverted to business as usual for 
monetary policy. In December last year, the SNB introduced an interest rate of –0.25%, to be 
charged  on  sight  deposit  account  balances  held  by  banks  and  other  financial  market 
participants  at  the  SNB.  On  15 January  –  concurrently  with  the  discontinuation  of  the 
minimum exchange rate – we lowered this interest rate again, to –0.75%. This lowering of 
the  interest  rate  makes  it  substantially  more  expensive  to  hold  Swiss  francs  compared  to 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  other currencies. Over time it is intended to cushion the impact of the discontinuation of the 
minimum exchange rate and counter a tightening of monetary conditions. 
Discontinuing  the  minimum  exchange  rate  does  not  mean  that  the  SNB  will  stop  paying 
attention to foreign exchange market developments. We will continue to take account of the 
exchange rate situation in formulating our monetary policy in future. 
Following  the  discontinuation  of  the  minimum  exchange  rate,  the  Swiss  franc  initially 
appreciated  sharply  against  all  currencies.  The  appreciation  diminished  somewhat  in  the 
following weeks. However, as recent developments show, the Swiss franc may strengthen 
temporarily in response to the current phase of increased uncertainty surrounding the Greek 
debt problem. We are monitoring this development and its potential impact on Switzerland 
very closely. We will remain active in the foreign exchange market as necessary in order to 
influence  monetary  conditions.  The  Swiss  franc  is  significantly  overvalued  overall.  A 
correction of this overvaluation is to be expected over time. 
Low interest rates worldwide and the difficulties they cause Switzerland 
Not just in Switzerland, but in other countries, too, central banks are facing major challenges. 
After the beginning of the financial crisis, monetary policy was eased substantially across the 
board. As a result, interest rates worldwide are now very low or even, in the recent period, 
negative. Consequently, low or negative interest rates are not a purely Swiss phenomenon. 
They  are  a  worldwide  trend  which  Switzerland  cannot  escape.  As  a  small  open  economy, 
Switzerland is closely linked to other countries through international trading and capital flows. 
The SNB has to take this into account when formulating its monetary policy. 
Traditionally, interest rates in Switzerland are lower than in other countries, since Switzerland 
has  long  had  low  inflation  and  is  also  politically  very  stable.  The  Swiss  economy  benefits 
from  this  interest  rate  advantage  in  the  form  of  low  capital  costs.  This  is  expressed  in  a 
number of ways, including the high quality of infrastructure and high labour productivity. 
During  the  financial  crisis,  interest  rates  abroad  fell  more  sharply,  overall,  than  in 
Switzerland.  Consequently,  the  interest  rate  differential  between  investments  in  foreign 
currencies  and  those  in  Swiss  francs  had  declined  to  almost  zero  towards  the  end  of  last 
year.  This  made  the  Swiss  franc  even  more  attractive  for  investors.  The  Swiss  franc  is 
equally attractive to both domestic and foreign investors. The upward pressure on the Swiss 
franc  is  not  only  due  to the fact  that foreigners want  to  invest  in  the  Swiss franc,  but  also 
because Swiss residents invest less abroad or repatriate their international investments. 
Allow  me  to  explain  this  in  more  detail.  For  a  long  time,  Switzerland  has  had  a  current 
account  surplus,  in  other  words,  it  exports  more  goods  and  services  than  it  imports.  In 
addition, the high level of international investments earns significant investment income. Due 
to the current account surpluses, Switzerland has built up considerable foreign assets over 
time.  These  asset  holdings  abroad  were  largely  invested  in  foreign  currencies,  partly 
because  of  the  more  attractive  returns.1  The  net  revenue  earned  with  the  current  account 
surpluses has to be “re-exported” in the form of foreign securities purchases or investments 
abroad.  In  the  years  before  the  financial  crisis,  inflows  attributable  to  the  current  account 
surplus were more or less balanced by outflows in the form of private capital exports. 
Following the financial crisis, the situation changed completely. Risk appetite in Switzerland 
reduced sharply. Investment of the proceeds from the current account surplus abroad by the 
domestic private sector has become increasingly restrained. Moreover, a portion of existing 
international investments is even being repatriated to Switzerland. This has very substantially 
increased  private  demand  for  Swiss  francs,  resulting  in  upward  pressure  on  the  currency. 
                                                
1  At the end of 2012, Switzerland’s foreign assets amounted to some CHF 3.5 trillion, of which approximately 
85% were invested in foreign currencies. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Some of this was absorbed by the high levels of foreign currency purchases by the SNB in 
recent years. 
Thus, responsibility for upward pressure on the Swiss franc cannot be attributed to foreign 
investors  alone.  Swiss  franc  investment  must  therefore  be  made  less  attractive  for  all 
investors. As I have just explained, it is inappropriate to differentiate between domestic and 
foreign investors from a monetary policy point of view. Since foreign interest rates are close 
to  zero  or  negative,  Swiss  interest  rates  cannot  remain  at  zero.  They  have  to  move  into 
negative territory in order to restore the traditional interest rate differential. 
Criticism of negative interest 
Let me now discuss negative interest in more detail. As I have explained, negative interest 
helps to make investment in Swiss francs less attractive and thereby limit net inflows into our 
currency. This reduces upward pressure on the Swiss franc and eases monetary conditions. 
We  are  aware  that  the  current  low  interest  environment  is  very  challenging  for  investors, 
especially pension funds. Acceptable investment options are limited. For institutions that are 
legally  or  contractually  obliged  to  attain  specific  returns  it  is  difficult  to  comply  with  these 
requirements  at  the  moment.  The  current  low  interest  rate  environment  is  a  temporary 
phenomenon  attributable  to  the severe  economic  turmoil  resulting from the financial  crisis. 
We expect that the economy will continue to recover, and that interest rates worldwide will 
increase  again.  The  first  signs  of  this  are  evident  in  the  US.  However,  looking  at  the 
international situation, it is also clear that the interest rate in Switzerland cannot be higher 
than in the rest of the world, because otherwise we would be threatened with major inflows 
into the Swiss franc. 
Some claim that negative interest goes against human nature and deprives the economy of 
an  important  yardstick.  However,  that  is  not  the  case.  The  interest  rate  is  the  reward  for 
forgoing  consumption.  The  resources  saved  in  this  manner  are  basically  available  for 
investment. Investment, in turn, must generate a return that allows the interest to be paid. 
When uncertainty is high, savings increase, on the one hand. On the other hand, however, 
the increased uncertainty or the lower potential for returns causes businesses to postpone 
investment.  Under 
in  extreme 
circumstances, it may even move into negative territory. Low or negative interest rates are an 
expression  of  the  fact  that,  in  the  current  situation,  there  is  a  very  high  supply  of  savings 
capital  worldwide  and  a  relatively  low  demand  for  investment.  As  soon  as  the  global 
economy has recovered sufficiently, interest rates will rise again. 
With all the concern about negative interest it is important to remember that when inflation is 
negative,  real  interest  rates  are  higher  than  nominal  interest  rates.  This  is  the  case  in 
Switzerland at the moment. If inflation is lower than the nominal interest rate, the end result is 
still an increase in purchasing power, even if an investment is not earning a nominal return. 
In the past, the rate of inflation has often been higher than the nominal rate of interest. In 
other words, in terms of real returns, there have certainly been times when saving was even 
less worthwhile than it is now; times, in fact, when savings lost value in real terms. 
these  conditions, 
interest  rate 
therefore, 
falls; 
the 
Concluding remarks 
Ladies and gentlemen, I come to my concluding remarks. As you will have gathered from my 
comments today, the international environment remains extremely challenging for the Swiss 
economy and the SNB’s monetary policy. Interest rates worldwide have been very low for a 
long time. The after-effects of the financial crisis persist and are hampering global economic 
developments.  At  the  same  time,  the  Swiss  franc  is  significantly  overvalued  and  presents 
major difficulties for our economy. 
Nevertheless,  I  will  venture  to  make  two  forecasts.  First,  that  our  economy  will  overcome 
these  challenges  successfully.  Second,  that  negative  interest  will  not  become  the  “new 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  normal”. If the global economy recovers further and growth in the euro area increases again 
more robustly, this unsatisfactory situation will change as well. Until then, negative interest in 
Switzerland will fulfil a very important role – that of reducing upward pressure on the Swiss 
franc, thereby supporting the Swiss economy. 
Thus,  eight  years  after  the  beginning  of  the  financial  crisis,  the  SNB  is  still  facing 
considerable challenges. In order to do our job well, we still require the full commitment of 
our  staff,  whom  I  would  like  to  thank  –  also  in  the  name  of  my  colleagues,  Jean-Pierre 
Danthine and Fritz Zurbrügg – for their hard work and support. We thank our shareholders 
for  their  solidarity  with  the  SNB.  And  I  thank  everyone,  including  in  particular  our  young 
guests, for taking such a great interest in the activities of the SNB. 
Thank you for your attention. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
