  Emmanuel Tumusiime-Mutebile: Overview of Uganda’s growth and 
stability in 2013/2014 
Statement by  Mr Emmanuel Tumusiime-Mutebile, Governor of the Bank of Uganda, at the 
Ministry  of  Finance  Planning  and  Economic  Development  Press  Conference,  Kampala, 
15 January 2015. 
 I would like to say something about the significance of fiscal discipline in the country’s growth 
and  stability.  Prudent  management  of  public  financing  is  very  critical  to  macroeconomic 
stability. The Government has a medium term fiscal program which sets out clearly the path 
of  revenues,  expenditures  and  government  borrowing  for  the  next  five  years.  The  fiscal 
program is absolutely consistent with ensuring that public debt remains sustainable and that 
domestic  borrowing  will  remain  within  levels  which  will  not  threaten  to  crowd  out  private 
sector  borrowing.  We  will  ensure  that  all  Government  borrowing  is  fully  funded  from  the 
market by issuance of Government Securities through primary auctions. Therefore I want to 
state  clearly  that  the  Bank  of  Uganda  fully  endorses  the  Government’s  fiscal  stance  and 
absolutely has no problem with fiscal management. 
Central bank rate 
As you all know the Central Bank raised its Central Bank Rate (CBR) in September 2013 to 
12%  to  avert  the  second  effects  of  food  prices  but  also  to  counter  any  rise  in  inflation 
expectations.  Consequent  upon  the  threat  of  high  inflation  being  reduced,  BoU  reduced 
CBR 11.5  in  December  2013  and  further  to  11  percent  in  June  2014.  The  annual  core 
inflation  rate  has  fallen  in  2014  but  is  forecast  to  edge  over  5  percent  over  the  next 
12 months  due  to  exchange  rate  depreciation  which  has  occurred  in  2014  and  early  2015 
due to domestic demand. As a result of this, we have retained the CBR at 11 percent and we 
will watch carefully the next few weeks to see where things move. 
Developments in the foreign exchange market 
The  shilling  has  been  depreciating  against  the  US  dollar  over  the  last  few  weeks.  Since 
February 2014, the shilling has depreciated by about 14 percent against the US dollar. This 
followed sustained appreciation during 2013 and the first months of 2014. The depreciation 
of  the  exchange rate since  February  2014 reflects  several factors.  First,  there  has  been  a 
correction of the exchange rate which had become over valued in 2013. Secondly there has 
been strong demand for foreign exchange from the real sectors of the economy especially 
manufacturing  and  oil  sectors.  Thirdly,  there  has  been  weakening  of  global  sentiment 
towards  emerging  markets  with  the  currencies  of  these  markets  coming  under  persistent 
depreciation. Finally, recently, the dollar has strengthened against the major currencies as a 
result of expectations that America will be the first among the industrialized countries to raise 
interest rates. 
Financial sector 
The latest quarterly data available is for September 2014 and this indicates that the banking 
system is financially very sound and well capitalized. Asset quality has improved. The Non-
Performing loan ratio has declined from 6.2 percent of the loans in March 2014 to 5.3 percent 
of  the  loans  in  September  2014.  Banks’  profitability  has  reduced  partly  as  a  result  of  loan 
provisioning and a slight drop in the net interest margin. The banks’ total regulatory capital 
position remains very strong at 22.5 percent of risk weighted assets as at end of September 
2014  which  is  almost  double  the  statutory  minimum  of  12  percent.  The  banking  systems’ 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  average return on assets and equity declined to 2.2 percent and 13.1 percent respectively in 
the year to September 2014 from 3.1 percent and 18.8 percent in the previous 12 months. 
Private sector credit 
With regard to private sector credit growth, since the start of 2014, Private Sector credit has 
recovered with annual growth increasing to 13 percent as of end of September 2014. The 
building and construction sector, trade and household loans continued to account for the bulk 
of  the  PS  credit.  The  three  sectors  together  (building  and  construction  sector,  trade  and 
household)  accounted  for  over  55%  of  banking  systems’  outstanding  credit  to  the  Private 
Sector  since  February  2014.  Annual  growth  of  PS  credit  during  2014/15  is  projected  at 
15 percent. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
