  Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Renminbi and China’s global future 
Keynote  address  by  Dr  Zeti  Akhtar  Aziz,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Malaysia  (Bank 
Negara  Malaysia),  at  the  HSBC  Reminbi  Forum  “Renminbi  and  China’s  Global  Future”, 
Kuala Lumpur, 17 August 2015. 
 The increasing role of the renminbi in the global financial system from a trade currency to an 
investment  currency  and  now  its  potential  role  as  a  global  reserve  currency  will  have 
significant  global  implications.  I  am  delighted  to  be  here  this  morning  to  speak  at  this 
Renminbi  Forum.  The  renminbi  sphere  has  indeed  extended  beyond  the  Asian  region, 
extending to other continents, to Europe, Latin America and the Middle East. The renminbi is 
no longer an Asian story, but it has now become a global story. It reflects China’s importance 
and influence in the changing contour of the global economic and financial landscape, and 
the steps that have been taken to enhance its international role. 
My remarks today will focus on the increasing trend of the internationalisation of the renminbi 
despite the recent challenges faced in the Chinese economy; the implications of this trend to 
the region and finally on the steps that Malaysia has taken as the region transitions into this 
environment. 
Long-term prospects for the Chinese economy and the renminbi 
After decades of rapid growth, the Chinese economy is now transitioning to a growth path 
that  is  more  sustainable.  It  is  important  to  recognise  that  the  moderation  in  the  Chinese 
economy  has  been  in  part,  policy-driven,  through  conscious  reforms  to  restructure  the 
economy to become more balanced and domestic demand-centric. These economic reforms 
have  been  accompanied  by  financial  and  exchange  rate  reforms,  geared  towards 
modernising the economy and financial system that is increasingly more integrated with the 
global  economy.  These  reforms  are  mutually  reinforcing  as  the  transformation  of  the 
structure  of  the  Chinese  economy  is  necessary  to  support  its  integration  with  the  world 
economy and the international financial system. 
The commitment to these reforms is crucial in securing the long-term growth prospects for 
China, even as the Chinese economy faces short-term challenges in the recent period. The 
recent  one-off  adjustment  of  the  renminbi  reflects  a  conscious  effort  by  China  to  align  the 
renminbi to a market-driven mechanism as a part of a crucial reform to allow the renminbi to 
reflect  financial  market  developments  and  economic  fundamentals.  In  an  environment  of 
continued  weakness  in  global  trade,  these  short-term  challenges  include  managing  the 
ongoing  corrections  in  the  real  estate  sector,  leverage  in  the  financial  system  and  more 
recently, the volatility in the stock market. While these uncertainties may generate concerns 
over  the  renminbi  in  the  near  term,  it  needs  to  be  recognised  that  the  long-term  growth 
prospects for China remain intact, and that this will continue to strengthen the foundations 
that will support the transition of the renminbi as an international reserve currency. China has 
a high rate of savings, healthy external position, an inherent competitive mass manufacturing 
advantage  and  a  large  educated  workforce  to  sustain  its  long-term  potential  economic 
growth. 
Importantly, the narrative of the global future of China cannot be explained in isolation – it is 
part of a broader account of the growing importance and greater integration of Asia, and the 
stronger  interlinkages  with  other  emerging  economies  in  the  global  economic  landscape. 
China and the region are becoming more than just global exporters. The increased efforts 
are  seen  in  the  steps  to  develop  more  extensive  investment  and  financial  linkages  in  the 
region as well as the rest of the world through key strategic initiatives such as the One Belt 
One  Road  initiative,  the  Asian  Infrastructure  Investment  Bank  and  the  New  Development 
Bank.  Reflecting  its  expanding  role  in  the  global  economy  and  the  international  financial 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  system, the renminbi will assume greater strategic importance in facilitating the development 
of  these  new  investment  and  financial  linkages,  including  meeting  the  greater  demand  for 
infrastructure  spending.  This  is  also  reinforced  by  the  transition  of  Asia  from  a  global 
producer  to  a  global  consumer  thus  becoming  an  important  driver  of  growth  in  the  world 
economy. 
The  rise  of  the  renminbi  is  often  associated  with  expectations  of  rapid  capital  account 
liberalisation. In this regard, the historical experience of the major currencies over the recent 
fifty years holds important lessons for the renminbi. Many advanced economies continued to 
retain  significant  capital  account 
the 
internationalisation process of their currencies that began in earlier decades. Such evidence 
suggests that the transition of the renminbi as an international currency can commence with 
the  gradual  and  sequential  liberalisation  of  the  capital  account.  China’s  position  on  a 
‘managed  convertibility’  approach  instead  of  the  traditional  ‘fully  or  freely  convertible’  can 
therefore  be  appreciated  given  the  lessons  from  the  Global  Financial  Crisis  and  the  risks 
associated with volatile capital flows even for such a large emerging economy like China. It is 
important  to  note  that  China  has  made  significant  progress  in  this  area.  This  is  even 
acknowledged by the IMF in its recent reports as they note that China has already achieved 
full or partial convertibility in 35 out of 40 items under the capital account. 
restrictions  until  early  1980s, 
later 
than 
The rise of the renminbi and its implications 
While the path for the renminbi to be a fully international currency will remain gradual, the 
renminbi  has  already  achieved  significant  milestones.  It  is  now  the  second  most  used 
currency  globally  for  trade  finance  and  the  fifth  most  used  currency  for  global  payments. 
One‐quarter of China’s total trade is now invoiced in renminbi, and this is expected to double 
within the next five years. By some accounts, more than sixty central banks around the world 
already hold renminbi in their official reserves. 
The rise of the renminbi as an international currency would facilitate trade, investment and 
financial activities that are commensurate with the continued growing importance of China in 
the  global  landscape.  Of  significance  to  the  Asian  region,  the  rising  importance  of  the 
renminbi will reinforce the trend towards greater regional financial and economic integration. 
China is already the main trading partner for most economies in the region. The increased 
usage  of  the  renminbi  and  the more  developed  regional financial  markets for the renminbi 
provides an opportunity to recycle savings within the region and thus support the increased 
intra-regional  investment  activities.  More  renminbi-based  trade  within  the  region  will  create 
pools of renminbi liquidity which would create a demand for instruments which would in turn 
spur the development of more efficient and integrated renminbi capital markets in the region 
that can contribute towards better intermediation between the surplus and deficit units in the 
region. 
In  addition,  the  renminbi  can  be  a  source  of  stability  for  the  global  monetary  system.  The 
increasing  use  and  recognition  of  the  renminbi  as  an  international  reserve  asset  will 
strengthen the foundations of the current global monetary system that is currently reliant on 
too few major currencies. With the increased economic and financial interconnectivity in the 
world  today  and  the  greater  potential  for  international  policy  spillovers,  a  more  multipolar 
global  monetary  system  with  more  diverse  sources  of  global  liquidity  would  contribute 
towards a more stable international financial system. 
Looking ahead, these developments present tremendous opportunities for the private sector. 
Indeed,  trade  invoicing  in  renminbi  has  already  begun  to  spread  beyond  predominantly 
Chinese enterprises to multinational companies (MNCs) turning to China as a key market for 
their  products  and  services.  Notably,  despite  the  initial  difficulties  in  operationalising  the 
renminbi-based system, some MNCs have successfully upgraded their global invoicing and 
payment  systems  to  settle  trade  and  working  capital  in  renminbi  with  their  Chinese 
counterparts.  This  allows  for  significant  cost-savings  on  foreign  exchange  transactions  in 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  addition  to  efficiency  gains  from  matching  trade  receipts  to  funding  working  capital 
requirements.  The  increased  use  of  the  renminbi  for  their  investment  activities  in  China  is 
supported by the flexibility provided in China for movements of global funds in and out of the 
country. The  potential  longer-term  benefits from using  the  renminbi-based  system  for  their 
trade,  working  capital  requirements  and  FDI  in  China  is  thus  seen  to  clearly  outweigh  the 
implementation costs. 
In the more recent decade, financial investments have also gathered momentum as foreign 
investors commenced investment activities in Chinese financial markets since 2003 through 
the Qualified Foreign Institutional Investor (QFII) program. Wide-ranging measures, including 
the introduction of China Interbank Bond Market (CIBM) foreign quota in 2009, the Renminbi 
Qualified Foreign Institutional Investor (RQFII) in 2011 and the operationalisation of the Hong 
Kong-Shanghai Stock Connect in 2014, are all aimed at encouraging greater participation of 
foreign investors in China’s mainland financial markets. At the same time, China is improving 
the  global  renminbi  settlement  and  clearing  system  through  a  wider  network  of  renminbi 
clearing banks and the upcoming Cross-Border Interbank Payment System (CIPS) to lower 
the transaction costs for the renminbi relative to other major currencies. 
Currently,  there  are  at  least  five  hundred  global  investors,  including  sixty  or  more  foreign 
central banks and sovereign wealth funds, that have gained direct access to China’s financial 
markets.  Many  more  have  access  through  the  Hong  Kong-Shanghai  Stock  Connect. 
Malaysian  institutional  investors  seeking  to  internationally  diversify  their investments  would 
need  to  intensify  the  learning curve  process  in  the  Chinese financial  markets  to realise  its 
benefits. 
Malaysia: A pioneer in the cross-border use of the renminbi 
Malaysia was one of the earliest countries to recognize the potential role of the greater cross-
border use of renminbi. Given China’s significance as Malaysia’s largest trading partner, the 
settlement  of  trade  and  investment  in  renminbi  significantly  lowers  costs  and  promotes 
greater  cross-border  trade  and  investment  activity.  In  turn, fund-raising activity  in  renminbi 
has  become  a  means  for  Malaysia  to  utilise  the  renminbi  liquidity  obtained  through  trade 
settlements.  Malaysia  has  a  comparative  advantage  in  this  area,  as  the  largest  debt 
securities market in Southeast Asia and as a leading centre for sukuk issuance. 
As  an  early  pioneer  of  renminbi  initiatives,  Bank  Negara  Malaysia  (BNM)  was  the  first 
ASEAN  central  bank  to sign  a  currency  swap  agreement  with  the  People’s  Bank  of  China 
(PBC)  in  February  2009.  In  the  same  year,  BNM  was  also  the  first  Asian  central  bank  to 
become a QFII investor and among the first wave of foreign investors in CIBM. In 2010, the 
Malaysian ringgit became the first emerging currency to be directly traded with the renminbi 
in  the  China  Foreign  Exchange  Trading  System  (CFETS).  In  2013,  BNM  signed  a  Cross-
Border  Collateral  Arrangement  (CBCA)  with  PBC  to  enable  the  use  of  home  currency 
collateral to obtain domestic liquidity in the host country. In November 2014, BNM signed an 
MOU on a renminbi clearing bank arrangement. The Bank of China Malaysia was appointed 
as the renminbi clearing bank in January 2015. Going forward, BNM will work towards further 
enhancing  financial  co-operation  with  PBC  in  the  area  of  Renminbi  Qualified  Foreign 
Institutional  Investor  (RQFII)  to  provide  an  alternative  avenue  for  Malaysian  investors  to 
invest in onshore Chinese financial markets. 
BNM  has  also  worked  to  integrate  the  renminbi  into  the  domestic  financial  system  by 
incorporating the renminbi in Malaysia’s Real Time Gross Settlement System (RENTAS). In 
November 2013, BNM introduced the Renminbi Liquidity Facility (RLF) to licensed onshore 
banks  to  facilitate  more  effective  renminbi  liquidity  management  in  Malaysia.  Today,  the 
usage  of  renminbi  in  Malaysia  has  grown  rapidly,  with  the  daily  size  of  renminbi  foreign 
exchange  volume  at  RMB6.7  billion.  Malaysian  institutions  and  corporations  such  as 
Khazanah,  Cagamas,  Axiata  and  Maybank  have  issued  renminbi  bonds.  With  the  various 
renminbi financial infrastructure that has been put in place to support trade, investment and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  financial flows  between  Malaysia  and  China,  this  trend  is  expected  to  increase.  Malaysian 
entities  with  large  regional  network  should  consider  using  Malaysia  as  the  centre  for  their 
regional renminbi transactions and thus contribute towards greater economies of scale over 
time. This  would  in  turn  enable  the  transactions  to  be  conducted  in  the  most  efficient  and 
cost effective way. 
Conclusion 
Let me conclude my remarks. In a short time span of six years since 2009, the renminbi has 
accomplished much of its goals but there is still a long journey ahead as most international 
currencies have evolved over several decades. The impact of the Chinese economy on Asia 
has been significant with many countries now counting China as their largest trading partner, 
and  in  some  cases,  among  the  largest  foreign  investors.  Reflective  of  the  underlying 
fundamental economic changes, the rise of the renminbi, although gradual, is inevitable with 
important implications not only to Asia but to the rest of the world. Undoubtedly, the renminbi 
is more important to Asia than anywhere else. Given this, Asia including Malaysia must be 
ready for this transition of the increased internationalisation of the renminbi and its potential 
role with Asia’s integration path and thus contributing towards further unlocking the potential 
of the region. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
