 Sam Woods: Adapting to Solvency 
 Speech  by  Mr  Sam  Woods,  Executive  Director  of  Insurance  Supervision  of  the  Bank  of 
England, to the Association of British Insurers, London, 9 July 2015. 
 It is a great pleasure to speak to you today. 
I  plan  to give  another speech  in  a few  months’  time, focussed  on the history  of  insurance 
regulation and supervision here in the UK. But today I will talk about my immediate priority, 
which is getting Solvency II over the line for go-live on 1 January 2016. 
The  industry  has  made  a  tremendous  effort  to  make  the  transition  a  successful  one.  The 
circumstances have been difficult, with a delay to political agreement on important aspects of 
the new regime compressing the time that the industry has had to prepare. The delay has 
also added to the costs of implementation. However, the time has not been wasted and firms 
have used it to make important improvements to their Own Risk and Solvency Assessments, 
as well as their internal model applications. 
Today I want to make sure that investors and insurance firms understand the approach the 
Bank of England will take to capital under Solvency II. 
First, I would like to bust two myths: 
• 
the  idea  that  there  is  some  kind  of  plan  within  the  Bank  to  use  Solvency  II  to 
increase required capital across the insurance sector; and 
a  suspicion  that  we  will  somehow  keep  the  current  ‘ICAS’  regime  alive  after  1 
January 2016, rather than embracing the new regime. 
 Second, I want to make it absolutely clear that we will give firms plenty of time to adjust to 
the new regime, and that those firms who wish to make use of transitional measures will be 
given the freedom to do so. 
Myth-busting 
I  have  heard  from  some  a  concern  that  we  will  use  Solvency  II  to  increase  levels  of 
capitalisation across the sector, or that we are seeking to load the sector with more capital 
now so that it is baked into the new regime once operational. 
Let me state very simply: there is no such plan within the Bank of England. The reason for 
this  is  also  simple:  we  think  that  our  current  regime  secures  an  appropriate  level  of 
capitalisation  for  the  insurance  sector  and  puts  us  in  a  good  position  to  make  the  shift  to 
Solvency II. The ICAS regime was introduced in 2004 as a response to the stock market falls 
and subsequent problems faced by UK firms in the early part of the decade. It is based on 
sound  principles,  such  as  market-consistent  valuation  of  the  balance  sheet  and  a  risk-
sensitive approach to determining capital – many of which are embedded within Solvency II. 
The  success  of  these  principles  was  demonstrated  by  the  resilience  of  the  sector  during 
2008  But  Solvency  II  moves  beyond  our  current  regime.  So  although  there  has  been  no 
change in our view of the type of risks that firms are exposed to, and we do not intend to use 
Solvency II to increase the aggregate level of required capital across the industry, this is not 
the same as saying that the surplus capital positions of individual firms will not change with 
the arrival of Solvency II. It is a different regime, with a different shape to ICAS. Firms will 
therefore see movements in their regulatory capital positions. For some firms these positions 
will be tighter, for others looser. 
This brings me to the second myth: that we intend to re-create the ICAS regime under the 
guise of Solvency II. Let me be clear: Solvency II will be the foundation of our supervisory 
approach  and  we  will  fully  embrace  the  change  that  accompanies  it.  Although  Solvency  II 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  incorporates many of the features of ICAS, the shape of the new regime is different. The EU 
is moving to a harmonised, risk-based, transparent, and “going concern” regime. This means 
some significant changes to the shape of the balance sheet and our assessment of financial 
resources.  For  the  UK  in  particular,  the  move  to  a  going  concern  regime  represents  a 
fundamental  departure  from  the  current  set-up,  in  which  a  firm  is  required  to  calculate 
financial  requirements  under  the  assumption  that,  following  a  stress,  it  writes  no  new 
business  and  instead  “runs  off”  its  existing  business  over  time.  Solvency  II  looks  at  the 
insurance industry through a different lens and views insurers as “going concerns”, such that 
it is assumed that insurers will continue to operate after a stress. To achieve this, Solvency II 
introduces  the  concept  of  the  “risk  margin”  which  is  intended  to  capture  the  cost  of 
transferring a set of liabilities from one insurer to another. The risk margin is a fundamentally 
new component of our regulatory framework and we will ensure that firms meet it.1. 
This is a source of some tension at the moment, because the construction of the risk margin 
is such that, in particular for life business, it becomes much larger when risk-free rates fall. 
So the current environment of low rates means that the risk margin is large – and when and if 
rates rise, it will become smaller. Reasonable people can debate whether or not it is sensible 
for this element of provisions to be so sensitive to risk-free rates, and it may be that once we 
are into a Solvency II world some firms will choose to hedge this exposure. However, that 
debate is for another day: the risk margin and its calculation are part of the law and our job is 
to implement it. More specifically, the directive is clear that the Solvency Capital Requirement 
(SCR) and the risk margin are separate concepts: put simply, firms have to survive a 1-in-
200 stress, using the capital held to meet their SCR, and then have the risk margin available 
to provide for the costs incurred in an orderly transfer of liabilities. It is obvious that in this 
respect Solvency II is more demanding than the ICAS regime, even if other elements of the 
regime are not. 
A related source of tension is our use of the Quantitative Indicator (QI) framework as part of 
our  assessment  of  internal  model  applications.  This  framework  describes  a  set  of 
judgements,  based  on  evidence  and  analysis  that  provide  an  assessment  of  the  most 
common risks faced  by  UK  insurers,  such  as  longevity  risk for  life  insurers,  and  how  they 
relate  to  each  other.  Many  of  the  areas  covered  by  the  framework  involve  a  significant 
degree  of  judgement,  and  accordingly  we  are  flexible  in  how  we  use  the  framework  and 
consider it just one input into our consideration of whether firms’ models meet the tests and 
standards for approval under Solvency II. The way we use the QI framework has also been, 
and continues to be, informed by evidence and practices presented to us by firms. However, 
it would be odd indeed if a regulator (or a firm for that matter) were to change their view of 
conditions in the real world because of a change in regulatory regime. Clearly, despite the 
lofty  ambitions  of  European  legislators,  the  move  from  Solvency  I  to  Solvency  II  doesn’t 
change how long people will live for, or the probability of a North American windstorm. So our 
beliefs about the nature of the risks to which insurance companies are exposed will persist 
as  we  move  into  the  new  regime.  But  the  regime  requirements  are  different,  and  we  will 
embrace that change. People should not confuse these two things. 
Adapting to the new regime 
Solvency  II  introduces  some  important  reforms  to  modernise  the  regulatory  regime  for 
insurers in the UK. But a sudden implementation of these changes by firms, and particularly 
on the life side given the introduction of the risk margin, is unlikely to promote either of the 
PRA’s  objectives  of  safety  and  soundness  and  policyholder  protection.  We  believe  the 
opposite  –  that  an  orderly  transition  should  support  those  objectives,  because  much  life 
insurance  business  (and  particularly  those  lines  of  business  most  impacted  by  the  risk 
                                                
1 Fuller explanation of the new Solvency II regime  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  margin)  is  long-term  in  nature.  This  business  will  continue  to  exist  –  and  will  therefore  be 
regulated  –  under  the  new  regime,  despite  having  been  priced  on  a  set  of  assumptions 
derived  under  the  existing  regulatory  regime.  Further,  the  long-term  nature  of  much  life 
insurance  business  should  reduce  some  of  the  risks  associated  with  resolving  financial 
institutions, and therefore elements of a going concern regime can be phased in more slowly 
than would otherwise be the case. 
At the same time, an orderly transition will promote financial stability. Recent changes in the 
microstructure  of  some  financial  markets  have  reduced  liquidity  and  made  them  more 
susceptible  to  disorderly  trading  even  in  response  to  small  shocks.  It  is  not  yet  clear  how 
much impact Solvency II will have on the asset side of insurers’ balance sheets, but given 
that UK insurance firms manage in the region of £2 trillion in assets, it would seem wise to 
implement the new regime carefully. In my view there is only one serious argument which 
could  push  us  in  the  other  direction.  If  the  sector  was  undercapitalised  under  the  current 
regime, then allowing a gradual transition to the new standard would present a risk. This was 
exactly  the  position  we  found  ourselves  in  with  the  banking  sector  when  implementing 
CRDIV, the European vehicle for Basel III. The financial crisis had made it abundantly clear 
that our capital regime for banks was wholly inadequate. So we decided to move quickly, to 
promote  safety  and  soundness  and  financial  stability.  We  are  in  a  different  place  with 
insurance: we consider that the levels of capitalisation secured under the current regime are 
consistent with our objectives, and therefore, unlike in the banking case, we see a low risk to 
those objectives in allowing firms plenty of time to adapt to the new standard. 
European legislators foresaw this and therefore (very sensibly in my view) included within the 
Directive transitional measures which allow firms significant breathing space as they adapt to 
the  new  regime.  As  a  safeguard, the  benefit from the transitional  deduction from  technical 
provisions  (TDTP)  is  capped  to  make  sure  financial  resources  cannot  drop  below  those 
required  under  the  current  UK  regime  as  a  result  of  using  the  transitional.  The  practical 
expression of the stance I have just described is therefore that the Bank will allow full use of 
transitional measures by those firms that qualify to use them, and that the transitional asset 
created by the TDTP will qualify as Tier 1 capital. This is consistent with the approach being 
taken across Europe, and I was glad to see Gabriel Bernardino’s recent comments on this 
topic. He said: 
‘‘It  is  also  fundamental  that  market  analysts  and  investors  understand  that  Solvency  II 
adjustments  and  transitional  measures  are  a  legitimate  part  of  the  regime.  Transitional 
measures do not distort the solvency reality: they are designed to ensure a smooth transition 
to  the  new  regime,  avoiding  disruptions  in  the  market  and  allowing  a  certain  period  for 
companies  to  fully  recognise  the  impact  on  old  books  of  contracts  that  have  been 
underwritten in a different regulatory framework’’.2  
I agree. 
For the benefit of investors, let me be crystal clear: when we consider whether or not firms 
are  in  a  position  to  pay  dividends,  one  of  the  main  quantitative  yardsticks  we  will  use  is 
capital levels after the benefit of transitionals. Now, investors taking a close interest may be 
concerned about the capital strain firms using the TDTP may face as the transitional benefit 
unwinds over 16 years. They are right to have an eye to that, but I would like to point out that 
there will be some off-setting benefit in the form of the release of the risk margin as the back 
book rolls off – it will be up to firms to set out this picture for analysts and investors, but it is 
the  net  adjustment  we  should  be  focussed  on.  For  transitional  measures  to  achieve  their 
purpose there needs to be a shared understanding on some of the important practical details 
about how they will operate. We will be working with firms to make sure these expectations 
are clear, and will also ensure that the way in which the transitionals apply is transparent to 
                                                
2 Full version of the speech "Milestones of preparation for Solvency II" 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  all  market  participants.  This  includes  how  transitional  measures  might  apply  to  books  of 
business that are subject to a Part VII transfer, and the frequency with  which some of the 
transitional  measures  need  to  be  re-calculated.  The  cap  on  the  level  of  benefit  firms  can 
derive from the technical provisions transitional presents a practical challenge, given that it 
will require firms to be able to produce estimates of their solvency position on an ICAS basis 
for a period after the end of that regime. Clearly it would be unreasonable and unrealistic to 
expect  ICAS  models  to  be  maintained  and  run  once  Solvency  II  has  been  implemented. 
Therefore  we  will  be  exploring  with  firms  ways  in  which  they  might  be  able  to  satisfy  the 
requirement to approximate ICAS solvency positions in a cost-effective and efficient way. 
Conclusion 
I will add a very quick word on the process of internal model approvals before summing up. I 
consider  it  vital  that  our  approval  process  is  entirely  consistent  across  firms,  and  that  the 
timing and communication of our decisions is consistent with orderly markets. It is therefore 
my intention that, following a thorough and consistent review of firms’ applications, we make 
final  decisions  on  all  models  for  firms  for  which  we  are  the  home  supervisor  in  early 
December, and communicate those decisions to firms simultaneously at that point. Firms that 
do not have an internal model will, of course, enter the regime on the standard formula. 
In  conclusion,  we  will  faithfully  implement  Solvency  II  here  in  the  UK.  We  will  be 
proportionate, and we will be robust in the pursuit of our objectives. And in doing this: 
• 
we  will  not  use  Solvency  II  to  increase  capital  requirements  across  the  insurance 
sector; 
we will not keep the ICAS regime alive; and 
we will give firms plenty of time to adapt to the new regime. 
• 
• 
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
