  Manuel Sánchez: Productivity, growth, and the law 
Remarks  by  Mr  Manuel  Sánchez,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Mexico,  at  the  Annual 
Bank Conference on Development Economics, organized jointly by the World Bank and the 
Bank of Mexico, Mexico City, 16 June 2015. 
 It  is  an  honor  to  have  the  opportunity  to  deliver  the  closing  remarks  at  this  international 
conference, organized jointly by the World Bank and the Bank of Mexico, on the relationship 
between productivity, growth, and the law. On behalf of the Bank of Mexico, I would like to 
extend my gratitude to all the participants for their valuable contributions. 
The  discussions  here  have  been  highly  enlightening,  and  the  wide  variety  of  papers 
presented  has  helped  us  deepen  our  understanding  of  the  vital  role  of  productivity  in  any 
economy. Identification of the sources and effects of productivity is critical to explaining why 
income levels differ so much among nations, and more importantly, may give us a guide as 
to how to foster higher living standards. 
I  would  like  to  begin  my  remarks  by  reflecting  on  a  few  salient  issues  in  the  literature  on 
productivity and the rule of law. Then, I will briefly explore some struggles that policy makers 
face  in  the  aim  of  promoting  efficiency  and  economic  expansion.  Finally,  I  would  like  to 
address challenges to higher long-term economic growth in Mexico. As usual, my remarks 
are  entirely  my  own  and  do  not  necessarily  reflect  those  of  the  Bank  of  Mexico  or  its 
Governing Board. 
A few salient productivity issues 
Two basic observations arise from international data on economic development. The first is 
the  persistent  divergence  of  income  per  capita  across  countries  over  a  sufficiently  long 
period  of  time.  This  well-known  tendency  is  striking,  as  developing  economies  typically 
exhibit  unexploited  business  opportunities  that  would  otherwise  allow  them  to  grow  faster 
than  industrial  nations,  thereby  catching  up  with  the  leaders.  We  know  that,  as  a  general 
trend, absolute convergence has not occurred. 
A  second  observation  is  that  a  large  part  of  economic  growth  can  be  attributed  to  the 
efficiency with  which production inputs are applied, in addition to the intensity of their use. 
Economists  refer  to  the  first  as  total  factor  productivity  (TFP),  estimated  on  the  basis  of 
measures of output and inputs, as well as certain production function assumptions. 
The  success  of  a  few  countries  which  have  managed  to  multiply  their  income  levels  quite 
rapidly has largely resulted from booming TFP. Furthermore, productivity differences at the 
firm  level  within  an  industry  is  a  puzzle  that  prevails  even  in  advanced  countries.  Firm 
survival is frequently linked to higher levels of efficiency. 
These observations make the study of productivity a central object of inquiry. On the other 
hand, the fact that TFP is estimated as a residual implies that it summarizes our ignorance 
regarding what makes one economy or firm more efficient than others. 
At the aggregate level, research on the possible sources of productivity and economic growth 
has  been  extensive.  In  particular,  empirical  studies  during  the  last  few  years  have  largely 
focused  on  the  search  for  a  dominant  driver  of  economic  progress,  through  the  test  of 
competing hypotheses. A central premise examined has been the role played by political and 
legal institutions.1 
                                                
1  The pioneer work of Douglass North sets the basis for the discussion on the role of institutions in economic 
development. See North, D.C. (1981), Structure and Change in Economic History. New York: W.W. Norton; 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Institutions  can  be  interpreted  as  a  set  of  permanent  rules  that  limit  the  behavior  of 
individuals  and  the  government,  providing  a  stable  framework  of certainty.  The  rule  of  law 
represents  a  central  piece  of  the  group,  encompassing  factors  such  as  the  protection  of 
property  rights  and  the  administration  of  justice.  The  explanatory  power  of  institutions  has 
been placed empirically against factors such as geography, international trade, and human 
capital.2 
Results  from  ongoing  investigation  have  not  been  conclusive.  Although  most  research  in 
economics evolves through ideas that may later be refuted, in this case, the prolonged lack 
of conclusiveness seems to reflect two difficulties. The first has to do with technical issues 
associated  with  measurement  problems  and  the  choice  of  instruments  to  correct  for  the 
possible endogenous nature of the proposed determinants. 
For  instance,  significant  debate  has  centered  on  what  might  be  an  adequate  institutions 
indicator, given the fact that the concept is vague, and some of the variables commonly used 
come from opinion surveys that do not necessarily reflect the permanent rules of the game. 
Similarly,  instruments  have  been  criticized  for  not  exhibiting  exclusive  correlation  with  the 
variables  being  tested.  Yet,  in  spite  of  the  complications,  these  technical  problems  should 
eventually be settled.3 
A second, perhaps deeper reason as to why empirical confirmation of the prominent role of 
institutions has remained contested is the fact that the search for a single key driver could be 
misplaced.  It  is  likely  that,  given  the  complexity  of  the  process  of  economic  development, 
several factors might come into play, in changeable mixes, and some of them may not fit the 
notion of an institution. 
For  example,  the  interaction  among  different  realms  of  economic  policy  that  conform  a 
favorable business environment has gained ground in empirical research as a possible set of 
leading  engines  of  growth.  The  stellar  economic  performance  of  China  and  South  Korea 
during  the  last  few  decades  provides  some  support  to  the  idea  that  good  policies  may 
precede preeminence for strong institutions.4 
Additionally, research done with micro data sheds light on the role of internal elements at the 
firm level, such as managerial ability and practices, as well as the impact of industry structure 
on  productivity.  For  example,  the  reallocation  of  resources  toward  more  productive  firms 
within an industry can be described as a result of competition and different skill distributions 
among heterogeneous firms.5 
In short, the literature and the ample scope of papers presented in this seminar bear witness 
to the need for multifaceted explanations of productivity. 
                                                                                                                                                   
and North, D.C. (1990), Institutions, Institutional Change and Economic Performance. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.  
2  See, for example, Rodrik, D., et al. (2004), “Institutions Rule: The Primacy of Institutions over Geography and 
Integration  in  Economic  Development,”  Journal  of  Economic  Growth,  9(2);  Glaeser,  E.L.,  et  al.  (2004),  “Do 
Institutions Cause Growth?” Journal of Economic Growth, 9(3); and Luo, J. and Y. Wen (2015), “Institutions 
Do  Not  Rule:  Reassessing  the  Driving  Forces  of  Economic  Development”,  Working  Paper  2015–001A, 
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis. 
3  For  a discussion of  conceptual  and  measurement  problems  related  to institutions, see,  for  example,  Davis, 
K.E. (2010), “Institutions and Economic Performance: An Introduction to the Literature,” in: Davis, K.E. (2010) 
(ed.), Institutions and Economic Performance. Cheltenham. UK: Edward Elgar; and Haggard, S.M. and L.B. 
Tiede (2011), “The Rule of Law and Economic Growth: Where are We?” World Development, 39(5). 
4  See,  for  example,  Gillanders,  R.  and  K.  Whelan  (2014),  “Open  for  Business?  Institutions,  Business 
Environment and Economic Development,” Kyklos, 67(4), November. 
5  For  a  survey  of  empirical  research  on  productivity  based  on  micro  data,  see  Syverson,  C.  (2011),  “What 
Determines Productivity?” Journal of Economic Literature, 49(2). 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Policy struggles for promoting productivity 
Given that productivity expansion is crucial for economic growth, its promotion constitutes a 
natural target for policy making. Countries vary in terms of geography, cultural heritage, and 
other  conditions  that  may  affect  economic  efficiency  differently.  At  the  same  time,  in  any 
nation, room for enhancing productivity growth can almost always be claimed. 
The pursuit of this objective faces significant challenges. While some are common to other 
policy decisions, the difficulties encountered here may be greater due to the following four 
reasons, at the least. First, there is no silver bullet for resolving the problem of productivity. 
The economic literature referred to and the discussions held in this conference make it clear 
that a number of elements may interact. 
Second, there is no well-defined list of factors that could ensure high productivity growth in all 
cases. For example, economists know that reliable institutions, fully operating markets, and 
competition  may  provide  incentives  for  investment,  human  capital  accumulation,  and 
productivity growth. However, many other policy decisions may also contribute to the same 
end, and their combination may vary. 
There is no recipe, let us say, based on some composite indicator, with which policy makers 
should try to maximize results. The best policy mix and the need for concrete institutions may 
depend on history and the initial conditions of specific countries. 
Third,  even  if  we  had  a  clear-cut  list  of  elements  for  productivity  expansion,  the  relative 
importance of their components would hardly be undisputed. The consequence of this is that 
there is no roadmap that is obviously superior to alternative paths for economic reform. 
Fourth, though a trajectory did exist that would dictate a preferable sequence of measures, 
democratic  societies  require  some  of  these  changes  to  be  legislated.  International 
experience demonstrates that political feasibility does not necessarily coincide with economic 
desirability. 
These  four  difficulties  illustrate  the  fact  that  our  understanding  of  productivity  and  our 
capacity to prescribe changes are necessarily limited, pointing towards the need for caution. 
Perhaps  in  no  other  area,  given  its  breadth,  should  economic  advisers  and  policy  makers 
exert a greater deal of judgment while, at the same time remaining humble. 
In  any  case,  policy  makers  are  expected  to  use  all  the  information  on  hand,  including  the 
best  estimates  of  theoretical  models,  to  foment  a  favorable  setting  for  productivity. 
Sometimes,  this  may  simply  mean  incrementally  removing  obstacles,  thereby  allowing 
private participants to strengthen the existing institutions that facilitate economic activity.6 
Additionally,  implementation  of  measures  to  fuel  efficiency  must  not  be  considered  in 
isolation. The absence or presence of other policies or institutions that could be necessary 
should be taken into account. A leading example is that of privatization, in which the lack of 
an  appropriate  regulatory  framework  or governance  rules  in  some  countries  has  produced 
unintended consequences, including the stripping of privatized company assets.7 
Finally, it goes without saying that expectations for the potential of economic measures ought 
to remain realistic. Reasonable expectations are required for social support to continue for 
the never-ending process of economic modernization. 
                                                
6  Easterly,  W.  (2008),  “Institutions:  Top  Down  or  Bottom  Up,”  American  Economic  Review:  Papers  and 
Proceedings, 98(2) argues in favor of a “bottom-up” approach in institutional development. 
7  For a discussion of this problem in the case of transition economies, see Hoff K. and J.E. Stiglitz (2005), “The 
Creation of the Rule of Law and the Legitimacy of Property Rights: The Political and Economic Consequences 
of a Corrupt Privatization,” NBER Working Paper No. 11772, November.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  Mexico’s productivity challenges 
In  the  last  few  decades,  Mexico’s  economic  performance  has  been  far  from  impressive. 
Examination of the data reveals that the main problem has not been either employment or 
investment, but productivity. 
In particular, during the thirty-five years beginning in 1980, GDP per capita grew at an annual 
average  rate  of  0.9  percent.  Growth  accounting  reveals  that  both  labor  and  investment 
contributed,  respectively,  1.1  and  0.6  percent  to  this  moderate  expansion,  with  higher 
contribution from labor largely reflecting a diminishing dependency ratio during these years. 
TFP contracted, on average, 0.7 percent per year.8 
To  gain  some  insight  into  Mexico’s  productivity  problem,  it  is  useful  to  examine  sectorial 
productivity performance. Due to a lack of reliable data on capital by sector, we need to focus 
on  labor  productivity.  For  this  exercise,  I  divide  GDP  in  four  sectors:  agriculture,  the 
manufacturing industry, the nonmanufacturing industry, and services. 
For the period under consideration, on average, total labor productivity dropped 0.3 percent 
per  year,  with  rises  in  the  first  two  segments  of  the  economy  and  falls  in  the  latter  two. 
Without an attempt to provide a formal explanation of the contrasting sectorial development, 
the following conjectures are relatively safe.9 
The fastest-growing sector in terms of productivity was agriculture, with an average annual 
rate  of  1.2  percent, mainly  reflecting  a  sharp  reduction  of  the  labor force  dedicated to this 
activity. 
Average  productivity  growth  in  manufacturing  was  0.2  percent  per  year,  surprisingly  low 
given  the  undeniable  efficiency  levels  of  some  subsectors  such  as  automobiles  and 
electronics exposed to competition in international markets. 
Nonmanufacturing exhibited the sharpest contraction in productivity, at negative 1.7 percent. 
This  dismal  result  is  driven  mainly  by  utilities  in  the  hands  of  state  monopolies,  and 
construction,  of  which  a  large  fraction  is  self-construction  suffering  from  low  scale  and 
lagging technology. 
Labor  productivity  in  services  also  declined,  at  1.1  percent,  explained,  to  some  extent,  by 
absorption of low-skilled labor from rural areas and widespread levels of informality in some 
branches of economic activity. 
Finally, during the last two years, Mexico has undertaken a program of structural reforms of 
various  areas  of  the  economy.  The  aim  is  to  tackle  some  of  the  evident  problems  of  low 
efficiency  briefly  described,  by  allowing  or  increasing  competition  as  well  as  facilitating 
investment  and  market  operations.  Results  from  these  measures  depend  on  the  depth  of 
their actual implementation and, in any case, should be viewed as steps along a road that 
needs to be paved with further changes. 
Concluding remarks 
Productivity is a central subject for researchers and policy makers, as it bears on the core 
issues of the potential for sustained economic improvement. This conference has contributed 
                                                
8  Own  calculations  of  growth  decomposition  based  on  Kehoe,  T.J.  and  F.  Meza,  (2011),  “Catch-up  Growth 
Followed  by  Stagnation:  Mexico,  1950–2010,”  Latin  American  Journal  of  Economics,  48(2);  and  data  from 
World  Development  Indicators,  International  Financial  Statistics  and  Conference  Board  Total  Economy 
Database. 
9  Own  calculations  of  average  annual  changes  based  on  data  from  INEGI  and  the  Groningen  Growth  and 
Development Centre 10-Sector Database, July 2014. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  greatly to the efforts of both scholars and practitioners in putting pieces of the productivity 
puzzle together. 
Many  factors  impinge  on  a  country’s  productivity  dynamics,  making  it  necessary  for  any 
explanation  to  consider  the  issue  in  a  multifaceted  way.  The  pursuit  of  higher  productivity 
growth is challenging. Policy makers should avoid looking for a nonexistent panacea, while at 
the same time recognizing the need for continuous progress. 
In  Mexico,  the  bar  is  also  high.  Productivity  performance  has  been  underwhelming,  but  a 
recent  program  of  structural  change  could  yield  benefits  along  the  path  to  greater 
modernization,  if  essential  building  blocks  such  as  the  rule  of  law  are  reinforced  and  the 
reforms are implemented adequately and deeply. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
