  Jean-Pierre Danthine: Swiss monetary policy facts… and fiction 
Speech  by  Mr  Jean-Pierre  Danthine,  Vice  Chairman  of  the  Governing  Board  of  the  Swiss 
National Bank, at the Swiss Finance Institute Evening Seminar, Geneva, 19 May 2015. 
 The  speaker  would  like  to  thank  Till  Ebner  and  Claudia  Strub  for  their  outstanding  support  in  preparing  this 
speech. He also thanks the SNB Language Services for their assistance. 
Introduction 
I am very pleased to return to the Swiss Finance Institute almost six years after my departure 
for  a  final  speech  in  my  capacity  as  Vice  Chairman  of  the  Governing  Board  of  the  Swiss 
National Bank (SNB). 
My soon-to-end tenure at the SNB has been marked by significant deviations from textbook 
monetary  policy  orthodoxies,  both  on  conceptual  and  on  operational  levels.  In  many 
respects, it was a time that was anything but conventional: Central banks around the world 
stepped up their efforts and made use of increasingly expansionary measures, many of them 
new,  to  fight  off the  risk  of  a  second  Great  Depression  in  the  wake  of  the  global  financial 
crisis, and then to try and reanimate their economies in the troubled times that immediately 
followed. 
The  SNB,  for  its  part,  has  taken  exceptional  measures  as  well,  notably  the  minimum 
exchange rate of CHF 1.20 per euro in place from 6 September 2011 until 15 January 2015. 
At  the  same  time,  central  banks  and  financial  regulators  became  increasingly  vocal  in 
stressing the overwhelming importance of a stable financial system, and took a more active 
role in strengthening their regulatory frameworks, both nationally and globally. 
Inevitably, these substantial, unprecedented shifts in the design and operation of a key field 
in economic policy have raised fundamental questions and cast doubt on deeply entrenched 
beliefs. 
Based on practical experience of making monetary policy in the last few years, I will try today 
to  dispel  four  Swiss  monetary  policy  “fictions”  by  contrasting  them  with  established  facts 
about Swiss monetary policy. These facts are not necessarily new, but  rather took a back 
seat  in  more  benign  times;  it  took  the  crisis  to  amply  demonstrate  their  considerable 
relevance. 
Fiction I: Negative interest rates can’t happen 
First,  I  would  like  to  address  the  belief  that,  because  of  the  so-called  “zero  lower  bound”, 
nominal interest rates cannot become negative. 
This belief has clearly been proved a fiction by current developments, with the SNB lowering 
its policy target rate into negative territory.1 
Unsurprisingly,  the  measure  has  sparked  intense  debate  in  the  public  domain.  This  is 
partially due to fears that the costs incurred by banks holding sight deposits with the SNB 
will, at some point, be passed on to their clients. But there is a more fundamental issue here. 
At  first  glance,  negative  rates  violate  the  intuition  that  savings  must  be  remunerated. 
However,  this  intuition  is  misleading.  The  interest  rate  reflects  the  price  of  today’s 
                                                
1   Negative interest rates have been implemented not just in Switzerland, but also in an increasing number of 
other advanced economies, such as Denmark and Sweden. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  consumption  in  terms  of  consumption  in  the  future.  It  is  a  relative  price.  There  is  nothing 
untenable in tomorrow’s consumption being more valuable than today’s. 
Of  course,  while  not  untenable,  negative  nominal  rates  are  not  representative  of  a  normal 
state  of  affairs.  Rather,  they  mirror  the  current  exceptional  circumstances  of  the  global 
economy and of Switzerland. 
To  understand  why  Switzerland  is  experiencing  a  period  of  negative  interest  rates,  it  is 
necessary  to  step  back  and  recall  three  structural  features  that  characterise  the  highly 
integrated Swiss economy: its “traditional” current account surplus, its globally traded, freely 
floating  currency,  which  is  commonly  perceived  as  a  “safe  haven”,  and  –  as  a  result  –  its 
persistently lower interest rates, especially relative to the euro area.2 
In “normal” times, Switzerland’s traditional current account surplus is compatible with a stable 
currency, as it is compensated by net capital outflows of similar magnitude, with the negative 
interest rate differential providing the proper incentive for capital exports. 
This “benign” equilibrium has been severely tested by recent financial market developments. 
The financial crisis has exacerbated the global appetite for Swiss franc investments because 
of their safe haven status. In addition, global interest rates have fallen to near zero levels, 
virtually eliminating any interest rate differential, and thus further reducing the incentives for 
Swiss investors to re-export their excess savings abroad. 
Together, these developments largely explain the observed net inflows of private capital to 
Switzerland since the crisis, and, despite them being compensated by public sector capital 
exports  through  foreign  exchange  interventions  by  the  SNB,  the  persistent  strength  of  the 
Swiss franc. 
These developments also highlight a first key fact of Swiss monetary policy: At any point in 
time,  the  attractiveness  of  the  Swiss  franc  for  both  domestic  and  foreign  investors  is 
predominantly  determined  by  the  size  of  the  interest  rate  differential  and  the  safe  haven 
status, with the latter being particularly important in times of heightened uncertainty. 
In the current global environment of low interest rates, imposing negative rates is therefore a 
monetary policy necessity in order to re-establish a material interest rate differential vis-à-vis 
the  major  economies.  The  negative  rate  thus  contributes  to  restoring  the  relative 
attractiveness  of  foreign  currency  investments  for  Swiss  investors  and  corporates.  At  the 
same time, it reduces the incentive for foreign investors to invest in Swiss franc-denominated 
assets.  Over  time,  this  fundamental  mechanism  will  contribute  to  reducing  the  current 
overvaluation of the Swiss franc. 
The SNB is fully aware that, despite its established necessity, a negative interest rate policy 
does not come without detrimental side effects, notably for financial stability and the efficient 
use of capital, to name just two areas of concern. It therefore remains a policy instrument to 
be used with caution. 
Fiction II: A central bank can expand its balance sheet without risks 
The significant upward pressure on the Swiss franc due to its status as a safe haven and the 
collapsed interest rate differential could, arguably, be addressed differently, namely through 
foreign exchange interventions over a prolonged period. 
As  you  all  know,  for  the  better  part  of  my  tenure  at  the  SNB,  Swiss  monetary  policy  was 
focused  on  enforcing  a  minimum  exchange  rate  of  CHF  1.20  per  euro.  This  exceptional 
policy  measure  was  implemented  as  a  temporary  course  of  action  to  provide  the  foreign 
                                                
2   There are various further explanations for Switzerland’s lower nominal interest rates, including, in particular, its 
track record of low and stable inflation. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  exchange  market  with  clear  guidance.  It  aimed  at,  and  succeeded  in,  counteracting 
excessive upward pressure on the Swiss franc in the aftermath of the financial crisis, which 
carried  with  it  the  risk  of  deflationary  developments  and  severe  disruptions  to  the  Swiss 
economy. 
The SNB enforced the minimum exchange rate for more than three years. The success of 
this  measure  was  primarily  founded  on  the  credibility  of  the  SNB,  but  also  on  outright 
interventions in the foreign exchange market. In consequence, the SNB’s foreign exchange 
holdings surged from about CHF 220 billion in August 2011 to CHF 490 billion by the end of 
2014, which corresponds to approximately 75% of Swiss GDP. 
Why not persevere with the minimum exchange rate, instead of exposing the Swiss economy 
to the downsides of negative interest rates and the challenge of a stronger currency? 
With this question in mind, let me turn straight to a second fiction regarding Swiss monetary 
policy,  namely,  that  an  unlimited  lengthening  of  the  SNB  balance  sheet  would  be  riskless. 
This fiction flies against common sense and is mostly prevalent in academic circles. 
I will try and clarify some misunderstandings with respect to central bank balance sheets by 
stressing three important facts that apply both generally and to the current Swiss monetary 
policy situation in particular. 
First,  a  central  bank  balance  sheet  is  never  a  target  per  se,  but  rather,  its  size  and 
composition simply mirror monetary policy decisions. 
Second,  massive  balance  sheet  expansions  carry  financial  and  economic  risks.3  This  is 
clearly the case when the policies underlying the balance sheet expansion comprise outright 
purchases  of  foreign  exchange.  This  puts  foreign  exchange  risk  on  the  central  bank’s 
balance sheet. 
Third, policy measures involving a significant balance sheet expansion should be taken only 
as long as the benefits in terms of the broader policy objective clearly justify the risks and 
cover the costs associated with the balance sheet expansion. It is important to note that the 
costs and benefits of a given policy measure may change over time, and must therefore be 
reassessed repeatedly. 
A  case  in  point  is  the  SNB’s  decision  to  introduce  the  minimum  exchange  rate  of 
CHF 1.20 per  euro  in  September  2011,  and  then  discontinue  it  earlier  this  year.  As 
mentioned,  in  enforcing  the  minimum  exchange  rate,  the  SNB  intervened  heavily  in  the 
foreign exchange markets, and did not refrain from taking on significant balance sheet risks, 
particularly in 2012. At the time, interventions were necessary to counteract upward pressure 
on  the  Swiss  franc  resulting  from  substantial  capital  inflows  and  a  lack  of  outflows  due  to 
flare-ups in the European debt crisis. 
Towards the end of 2014, the minimum exchange rate again came under increasing market 
pressure, requiring renewed interventions by the SNB. This time, however, the international 
environment  was  very  different.  While  expectations  of  an  interest  rate  rise  in  the  United 
States  were  mounting  and  the  dollar  was  appreciating, from mid-year  onwards  there  were 
signs  in  the  euro  area  of  further  monetary  policy  easing,  and  the  euro  started  to  weaken 
across the board, pushing the EUR/CHF exchange rate close to the CHF 1.20 per euro floor. 
On the back of these developments – also reflecting the collapsing interest rate differential – 
Swiss franc investments again became relatively more attractive. 
Given  these  circumstances,  and  in  view  of  quantitative  easing  in  the  euro  area,  the 
continuation  of  the  minimum  exchange  rate  policy  would  have  meant  a  permanent, 
potentially uncontrollable expansion of the SNB balance sheet. For at least the following two 
                                                
3  
In fact, removing tail risks from markets was a key objective of putting central banks’ balance sheets to use 
during the crisis. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  reasons,  the  risks  associated  with  such  a  policy  would  have  increased  substantially,  and 
were no longer justifiable. 
The first reason is that the policy risks linked to monetary policy normalisation further down 
the road would have been substantial. 
Policy  normalisation  at  some  point  in  the  future  will  inevitably  require  reabsorbing  excess 
liquidity  in order to contain potential inflation risks. In this context, it is worth remembering 
that at more than 90% of GDP, the SNB already has the largest balance sheet of all major 
central banks in relative terms. The challenges and the risks involved would have increased 
disproportionately in the event of a further massive expansion of the balance sheet. While 
the technical means to reabsorb even massive amounts of liquidity are at our disposal, such 
an  expansion  would  have  had  put  us  in  completely  uncharted  territory.  Attempting  policy 
normalisation  with  a  balance  sheet  several  times  larger  than  GDP  has  never  been  done 
before, and is certainly not for the faint-hearted. A less than perfectly controlled exit carries 
very  significant  risks  for  price  stability,  as  well  as  the  potential  for  policy  reversals  which 
could be very costly for the economy. 
Given these considerations, it is a fact that any significant balance sheet expansion amounts 
to what is called “exercising an option” in finance. Doing so at any point in time reduces the 
SNB’s room for manoeuvre in the future, precisely because it sets the bar even higher for the 
next time it wants to use the balance sheet for monetary policy purposes. 
All  in  all,  it  is  clear  that  an  uncontrollable  expansion  of  the  balance  sheet  would  have 
severely impaired the SNB’s ability to effectively conduct monetary policy and to fulfil its price 
stability mandate in the long term. 
The  second  reason  why  the  risks  associated  with  continuing  the  minimum  exchange  rate 
would have increased substantially is because the larger the balance sheet, the larger the 
corresponding financial risks for the SNB and for the country. 
Even  at  the  current  size  of  the  balance  sheet,  situations  of  annual  losses  exceeding  the 
SNB’s  capital  are  already  possible.  An  even  larger  stock  of foreign  reserves  would  further 
increase both the volatility of the income statement and the absolute size of potential losses. 
While  in  principle  it  is  feasible  for  the  SNB  or  any  central  bank  to  operate  with  negative 
equity,  scenarios  whereby  expenses  exceed  income  for  a  prolonged  period  of  time  are 
conceivable.  Such  extreme  scenarios  not  only  preclude  any  profit  distribution  to  the 
Confederation and the cantons, but can also raise even more fundamental issues about the 
ability of a central bank to pursue a monetary policy oriented towards price stability. 
To  summarise,  large-scale  central  bank  balance  sheet  expansions  are  associated  with 
increasing  risks.  At  the  current  juncture,  the  longer-term  risks  associated  with  a  massive, 
uncontrollable expansion of the SNB balance sheet would have been out of proportion to the 
benefits of continuing to enforce the minimum exchange rate. This does not mean that the 
SNB will refrain from expanding its balance sheet further, should it prove necessary. Rather, 
it clarifies that this policy option should be used only when the benefits clearly outweigh the 
costs. 
Fiction III: The SNB has unlimited power 
The  drastic  actions  taken  by  central  banks  since  the  financial  crisis  –  flooding  financial 
markets with liquidity on an unprecedented scale, injecting billions to save banks from failing, 
or, in the case of Switzerland, intervening heavily in the foreign exchange markets – have led 
to the widespread perception that central banks have unlimited power. 
On the one hand, this perception is based on the fact that central banks are entrusted with 
the note-issuing privilege, i.e. they can “print money”. In view of the current difficult debates 
about  austerity  and  deleveraging,  the  tendency  to  overrate  the  power  associated  with  this 
privilege is probably natural. Yet this view overestimates its actual power, for printing money 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  can only resolve short-term liquidity issues. In the long term, it creates no value and merely 
generates nominal price increases. 
On the other hand, the perception that central banks are all-powerful is also based on the 
fiction that their independence renders them immune to democratic controls. 
It is a fact that today, most central banks are granted significant independence. This holds 
also for the SNB, which, by law, is functionally, institutionally and financially independent, as 
well as with regard to personnel issues, from the Federal Council, the Federal Assembly and 
any other body.4 
There are compelling reasons for this delegation of monetary policy power to an independent 
central bank: It is a fact both in theory and practice that an independent central bank better 
fulfils  its  mandate,  namely,  ensuring  price  stability  and  thereby  contributing  to  sustained 
economic developments, than a central bank that is under the influence of political interest 
groups. 
However, a further important fact in this regard is that the SNB’s independence is far from 
unlimited. 
First,  our  independence  is  not  an  end  in  itself.  It  applies  only  to  the  pursuit  of  a  clearly 
specified mandate. This mandate is defined in the political realm. It is stipulated in article 99 
of the Federal Constitution and set out in detail in the National Bank Act.5 
Second, independence goes hand in hand with accountability. With the privilege and duty of 
conducting an independent monetary policy comes a particular responsibility. As bearer of 
this responsibility, the SNB is accountable to the Federal Council, the Federal Assembly and 
the public for the decisions it takes, the means it chooses and the results it achieves. The 
precise scope of this accountability is also clearly defined in the National Bank Act.6 
Yet having a sound legal framework in place is clearly not enough. Just as important is how 
these rules are put into practice. 
In normal circumstances, such as those before the crisis, this is a rather easy task, since the 
public  and  politicians  understand “conventional” monetary  policy  quite  well.  People  have  a 
clear picture of how central banks act and communicate. In such times, the requirements of 
accountability and transparency are satisfied without undue controversy through a number of 
measures,  namely,  the  annual  accountability  report  submitted  to  parliament,  regular 
                                                
4   Cf. the National Bank Act (NBA) and Message concerning the revision of the National Bank Act. 
 
Functional independence means, in particular, that the SNB fulfils its mandate without seeking or accepting instruction from 
any of these bodies. 
Financial independence includes both the budgetary autonomy of the SNB and the prohibition against granting loans to the 
Confederation, thereby barring the state from using the banknote press. 
The  SNB’s  independence  in  personnel  issues,  finally,  is  ensured  by  the  fact  that  Governing  Board  members  and  their 
deputies can only be dismissed during their term of office if they no longer fulfil the requirements for exercising that office or 
if they have committed a grave offence. 
  5   Specifically, art. 99 of the Federal Constitution states that “as an independent central bank, the Swiss National 
Bank shall follow monetary policy which serves the general interest of the country; it shall be administered with 
the cooperation and under the supervision of the Confederation.” 
  Art. 5 of the NBA sets out in detail the SNB’s constitutional mandate. 
6   Accountability  duties  are  specified  as  follows  (art.  7  NBA):  The  SNB  regularly  discusses  with  the  Federal 
Council the economic situation, monetary policy and topical issues of federal economic policy. 
The SNB submits a written accountability report annually on the fulfilment of its tasks, and elaborates on its 
monetary policy to the respective committees of the Federal Assembly. 
The public is informed through quarterly reports on the development of the real economy and of the monetary 
situation. At the same time, the SNB is obliged to publicly announce its monetary policy intentions. 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  meetings  with  the  Federal  Council  and  representatives  of  the  relevant  committees  of  the 
Federal Assembly as well as with representatives from different economic sectors, and the 
half-yearly media news conferences covering the current conduct of Swiss monetary policy. 
This  has  changed  with  the  crisis.  Given  today’s  circumstances  and  the  SNB’s  monetary 
policy  decisions  over  the  last  couple  of  years,  public  authorities,  the  general  public  and 
financial markets all require substantially more information and transparency from the SNB. 
We are very aware of the legitimacy of these requests, and have responded in various ways. 
The  SNB  has  strengthened  its  communication  by  significantly  enlarging  the  scope  of 
information  available  on  its  website.7  Furthermore,  Governing  Board  members  have 
appeared on numerous occasions before parliament committees, on public panels, as well 
as in print and electronic media, to explain significant monetary policy measures, such as the 
UBS bail-out, as well as the introduction and discontinuation of the minimum exchange rate. 
However, transparency is not a goal in itself, but rather a means to achieve accountability, 
and it has its limits. It cannot be allowed to hamper the implementation or the effectiveness of 
monetary policy. An obvious example here is the discontinuation of the minimum exchange 
rate,  when  it  was  impossible  for  the  SNB  to  give  any  kind  of  advanced  warning  of  this 
decision without triggering speculative attacks on the EUR/CHF exchange rate. 
In short, it is a fiction that the SNB has unlimited power. It is a fact that Switzerland has a 
well-developed system of checks and balances obliging the SNB to transparently account for 
its decisions. 
Fiction IV: Financial stability is an impossible dream 
With this, let me turn to another field in which the SNB has taken on a more prominent role 
recently,  namely,  financial  stability.  Substantial  efforts  are  underway  to  improve  the 
regulation of the financial system, both globally and nationally. Sometimes, these efforts are 
greeted  with  scepticism,  based  on  the  view  –  or  the  fiction  –  that  financial  stability  is  an 
“impossible dream”. 
While I accept that there are conceptual and practical difficulties in fostering the stability of 
the financial system, I do not share this pessimism. 
We have only to consider the substantial cost of the recent financial crisis to realise that we 
can and should do better! 
In  my  view,  two  main  prerequisites  have  to  be  fulfilled  in  tandem  in  order  to  sustainably 
achieve a higher level of financial stability. 
The  first  is  to  continuously  strive  to  improve  our  knowledge  about  the  sources  of  financial 
instability. Clearly, the complex, continuously evolving financial system will never allow us to 
prevent all crises for all times. But, in general, the more information we have on the structure 
and dynamics of the system, the more accurately we can design its regulation, and the less 
uncertainty there will be about the “optimal” mix of regulatory instruments. 
The second prerequisite for improving financial stability is to recognise that financial stability 
is  a  question  of  will,  or  more  precisely,  of  political  will.  In  other  words,  even  perfect 
information on the sources of financial instability might prove insufficient if the collective will 
needed to translate this information into practical measures is not present. Conversely, even 
with  imperfect  knowledge,  financial  stability  is  attainable  if  we  are  willing  to  take 
precautionary measures commensurate to the extent of our ignorance. 
                                                
7  For  instance,  a  regularly  updated  Q&A  section  covering  relevant  topics  around  SNB  and  Swiss  monetary 
policy. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  My optimism that financial stability is achievable rests partly on the fact that, in the case of 
Switzerland,  identifying  the  main  sources  of  potential  financial  instabilities  is  rather 
straightforward. A first source is the “too big to fail” (TBTF) problem – that the Swiss banking 
sector has several banks with balance sheets that are large in relation to GDP. A second key 
source of risk resides in the substantial imbalances that have been building up in Swiss real 
estate and mortgage markets and the high exposure of domestically focused banks to these 
markets. 
Let me mention here that other possible system-wide sources of risk discussed on the global 
level, in particular those in the “shadow banking” sector, are considered less of an issue in 
Switzerland. One reason is that shadow banking assets in Switzerland carry low to moderate 
bank-like systemic risks. Another reason lies in the fact that bond funds and other investment 
funds,  which  make  up  60%  of  shadow  banking  assets  in  Switzerland,  are  supervised  by 
FINMA.8 
Switzerland has made considerable progress in addressing its two main sources of risk to 
financial stability. 
With  respect  to  the  risks  stemming  from  the  real  estate  and  mortgage  markets,  a 
countercyclical  capital  buffer  (CCB)  has  been  introduced.  The  CCB  was  activated  on  a 
sectoral level in early 2013 and increased in 2014, as a complement to further administrative 
and self-regulatory measures aimed at increasing the resilience of the banking system and 
preventing excessive credit growth. 
Experience  with  this  policy  mix  has  so  far  been  encouraging,  and  has  flowed  into  the 
preliminary  assessment  indicating  that  these  measures  have  contributed  to  a  recent 
dampening of corresponding market dynamics. 
Despite this, it is still too early to give the all-clear. Imbalances in the housing markets have 
stabilised at high levels only, and the risks of a further build-up remain substantial, not least 
given the current environment of negative interest rates. 
Should there be renewed signs of a further build-up, I am confident that we could contain the 
problem. 
With respect to the TBTF issue, the knowledge and awareness of the risks stemming from 
our  systemically  important  banks  have  improved  significantly.  As  early  as  in  2011, 
Switzerland adopted a package of measures to address the core problems in this area.9 
On  behalf  of  the  Federal  Council,  the  effectiveness  of  the  Swiss  TBTF  framework  was 
assessed by a group of experts in 2014. Overall, the assessment indicated that the chosen 
approach  was  appropriate  to  address  the  TBTF  problem.  At  the  same  time,  the  experts 
concluded  –  rightly  in  the  view  of  the  SNB  –  that  even  the  full  implementation  of  the 
framework  in  its  current  specification  would  not  solve  the  Swiss  TBTF  problem  entirely. 
Therefore, supplementary measures have been proposed.10 
                                                
8   FSB (2014). This FSB report states furthermore that “compared to the country’s banking sector, the size of 
Swiss shadow banking is considerably smaller – by more than five times.” 
9   The package consists of four complementary measures, namely, significantly more capital of better quality, 
larger liquidity buffers, rules imposing sufficient diversification to reduce counterparty risk, and organisational 
measures. The package aims to reduce both the likelihood of crisis occurring at a systemically important bank 
and the costs to the economy in the event of such a crisis. 
10   Group  of  experts  on  the  further  development  of  the  financial  market  strategy  (2014).  The  proposed 
supplementary  measures  include  a  quantitative  and  qualitative  recalibration  of  the  capital  requirements,  a 
review  of  the  method  for  calculating  risk-weighted  assets  (RWA),  a  timetable  for  the  implementation  of 
workable  recovery  and  resolution  plans,  and  the  introduction  of  binding  Total  Loss  Absorbency  Capacity 
(TLAC) requirements. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  Uncertainties regarding optimal regulation are likely more important here than in the case of 
the  real  estate  and  mortgage  markets,  as  the  probability  of  a  big  bank  failing  and  the 
macroeconomic  cost  of  such  a  tail-risk  event  may  be  less  clear  or  not  “objectively” 
measurable  ex  ante.  Such  fundamental  uncertainties  imply  more  substantial  tensions  with 
respect to the choice and design – size and scope – of further measures to contain the TBTF 
issue.  Going  too  far  could  theoretically  entail  a  cost  to  society  that  may  not  be  warranted 
from a cost-benefit perspective. Not going far enough, however, creates the risk of ending up 
in a very costly crisis. 
Let me conclude: Sustainably improving the stability of the financial system is a difficult task. 
But it’s not an impossible dream. It is a fact that improving the regulatory framework entails a 
delicate trade-off between knowledge and prudence. There will always be risks about which 
knowledge will be lacking; even worse, there may be risks we don’t know about ex ante. This 
speaks for the willingness, collectively, to accept the price of precaution. However, it is also a 
fact  that  we  will  be  able  to  make  tangible  progress  towards  a  sustainably  more  stable 
financial system only if this view is widely shared in society! The last couple of years of work 
in Switzerland leads me to be cautiously optimistic. But this must not be misread as a reason 
to be complacent or give up midway. 
References 
Group  of  experts  on the further  development  of the financial  market  strategy  (2014).  Final 
report. www.news.admin.ch/NSBSubscriber/message/attachments/37610.pdf 
Federal  Constitution,  article  99.  www.snb.ch/en/mmr/reference/Bundesverfassung_Art_99/ 
source 
FSB 
www.financialstabilityboard.org/2014/11/global-shadow-banking-monitoring-report-2014/ 
Message concerning the revision of the National Bank Act (in German). www.snb.ch/de/mmr/ 
reference/snb_legal_docum_brbotschaft/source 
National Bank Act. www.admin.ch/opc/en/classified-compilation/20021117/index.html 
Monitoring 
Banking 
Shadow 
(2014): 
Report 
Global 
2014. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
