  Stefan Ingves: The central bank’s objectives and means throughout 
history – a perspective on today’s monetary policy 
Speech by Mr Stefan Ingves, Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank and Chairman of the Basel 
Committee  on  Banking  Supervision,  to  the  Swedish  Economic  Association,  Stockholm 
School of Economics, Stockholm, 6 May 2015. 
 I would like to thank Hanna Armelius and Björn Lagerwall who helped me with this speech. 
As you know, we are experiencing very unusual – not to say unique – times with regard to 
monetary  policy.  The  mind  boggles  –  in  September  1992  the  policy  rate  in  Sweden  was 
500 per  cent,  and  now  it  is  below  zero.  How  could  this  happen?  To  understand  the 
background, we must go even further back in time. 
The  purpose  of  my  speech  today  is  to  describe  current  monetary  policy  in  an  historical 
perspective. The objectives and means of central banks have changed over time, usually as 
a result of economic crises. During all periods, monetary policy has rested on some form of 
nominal anchor. But regardless of how the anchor has been designed, it is a clear lesson 
from history that when confidence in the anchor has been undermined, major problems have 
arisen. The Riksbank is no exception in this respect. I hope that by accompanying me on a 
journey through history you will gain a deeper understanding of current monetary policy. Let’s 
set off on our journey! 
The Riksbank’s objectives and means have been influenced by developments in 
society 
Figure  1  illustrates  inflation  in  Sweden  over  the  past  140  years  and  the  exchange  rate 
regimes we have had during this period. Something that becomes clear is that even if we 
have  now  become  used  to  a  flexible  exchange  rate,  over  a  long  period  of  time  a  fixed 
exchange  rate  has  been  much  more  common. However, from time to time  socioeconomic 
developments  in  general  have  led  to  the  prevailing  monetary  policy  regime  being 
reconsidered.1 
As you know, Sweden has not introduced the euro as currency, but on the other hand we 
were part of a Scandinavian currency union between 1873 and 1924.2 This began a period 
with different varieties of fixed exchange rate, which – with the exception of the First World 
War  and  a  brief  period  in  the  1930s  –  came  to  last  until  1992.  During  1931–1937  the 
Riksbank worked with a price stability target, for some years this was also combined with a 
fixed exchange rate. It would take another 50 years until we introduced a price stability target 
again. 
                                                
1   This  also  applies  to  the  central  bank’s  mandate  in  a  broader  sense.  See  Georgsson,  M,  Vredin,  A.  and 
Åsberg-Sommar,  P.,  “The  modern central  bank’s mandate and  the  discussion  following  the  financial  crisis” 
Economic Review 2015:1, Sveriges Riksbank. 
2   This  cooperation  largely  came  to  a  halt  in  connection  with  the  outbreak  of  the  First  World  War  ten  years 
earlier. For an in-depth description of the Scandinavian currency union, see Jonung, L., “Den skandinaviska 
myntunionen – vad säger den om EMU?” (The Scandinavian currency union – what does it say about the 
EMU?) Ekonomisk Debatt, no. 4, 2003. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
    The  Bretton  Woods  regime,  which  came  into  force  in  1951,  saw  the  introduction  of  a 
stabilisation policy regime where monetary policy, in addition to focusing on a fixed exchange 
rate,  was  also  marked by  detailed  regulation  of  both  the  volume  and  allocation  of  credits: 
Liquidity ratios, loan caps and ceilings for lending rates were all weapons in the Riksbank’s 
arsenal, at the same time as there was an aim to allocate loans towards the housing sector.3 
During the Bretton Woods era 1951–1973, the Swedish economy developed strongly at the 
same time as inflation was also relatively low (see Figure 1). 
But when the Bretton Woods regime collapsed in 1973, a period of more unstable economic 
development  began.  Sweden  entered  a  number  of  fixed  exchange  rate  regimes  (see 
Figure 1).  One  condition  for  these  arrangements  to  work  was  that  economic  policy  would 
largely be conducted in a way that was in harmony with international developments. The oil 
price shocks of the 1970s were met with the so-called bridging policy, which involved using 
expansionary fiscal policy to try to bridge over economic downturns. However, the oil price 
shocks  entailed  what  are  usually  known  as  negative  supply  shocks,  which  generate  a 
combination of low growth and high inflation. As these shocks were met with expansionary 
fiscal policy, inflation in Sweden became higher and higher (see Figure 1). 
With a fixed exchange rate and an inflation rate higher than that in other countries, Swedish 
competitiveness  deteriorated,  which  was  dealt  with  by  devaluation  of  the  krona.  Between 
1976  and  1982  the  krona  was  devalued  five  times.  In  this  way,  competitiveness  was 
temporarily restored, but inflationary impulses were boosted further. It became clear that the 
                                                
3   Another  important  element  of  the  regulations  was  the  restrictions  to  international  capital  flows  through  the 
currency regulation. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
fixed  exchange  rate  was  beginning  to  function  poorly  as  nominal  anchor.  Credibility  was 
gradually undermined. 
During the 1980s, the credit regulations were increasingly questioned and the large capital 
flows meant that the effectiveness of the regulations was in doubt. As Englund (1999) writes: 
“The stage was set for deregulation”.4 For this reason, the deregulation of the credit markets 
began in the first half of the 1980s, with an important stage being the phasing out of the loan 
cap in 1985. This had the consequence that lending to companies and households increased 
rapidly. However, this development was not met with tighter fiscal policy. In that monetary 
policy  was  aimed  at  maintaining  the fixed  exchange  rate,  economic  policy  became  on the 
whole too expansionary. 
We  are  now  at  the  beginning  of  the  1990s.  Following  reunification  in  1990,  the  German 
economy grew strongly, which pushed up interest rates there. To defend the fixed exchange 
rate,  the  Riksbank  raised  the  repo  rate.  During  1990–1991  the  major  tax  reform  was 
implemented,  which  meant  that  tax  deductions  declined  significantly.  All  in  all,  the  real 
interest rate after tax rose very substantially over a short period of time, which subdued the 
demand for credit substantially, and property prices took a sharp downturn. The end result of 
this process was a banking crisis. The banking crisis also led to a dramatic deterioration in 
public finances. 
At  the  same time, there  was  a  currency  crisis  in  Europe.  Sweden  had abolished  currency 
regulation  in  1989  and  in  1991  pegged  the  krona  to  the  ecu,  the  euro’s  predecessor. 
However, partly as a result of the higher interest rates in Germany, an increasing number of 
countries  in  the  European  Exchange  Rate  Mechanism,  ERM,  experienced  a  depreciation 
pressure on their currencies. The previous history of devaluations also meant that there was 
even  greater  pressure for  another  Swedish  devaluation.  In  an  attempt  to  defend  the fixed 
exchange  rate,  the  Riksbank  raised  its  policy  rate  to  a  massive  500  per  cent.  Finally,  the 
situation became untenable and the fixed exchange rate was abandoned on 19 November 
1992.  The  route  to  the  500-per  cent  interest  rate  was  thus  part  of  a  longer  sequence  of 
events, with several interacting circumstances. It also provides a clear illustration of what can 
happen when the confidence in the nominal anchor is lost. 
1990s crisis: “Things abroad were quite OK, but Sweden was not OK” 
I hope that it is clear from what I have described so far that the 1990s crisis was in many 
ways domestically generated. Inflation was far too high in relation to other countries, and the 
deregulation  of  the  credit  market  and  the  too  expansionary  economic  policy  created  an 
overheating  that  ended  in  disaster:  the  banking  crisis,  a  currency  crisis  and  also  a  public 
finances crisis. In somewhat simplified terms, I usually describe the crisis of the 1990s like 
this: “things were quite OK abroad, but Sweden was not OK”. There were thus many lessons 
to be learned with regard to domestic economic policy and not least monetary policy. 
Important lesson – increased elements of “norm-based thinking” give credibility to the 
nominal anchor 
Perhaps the most important individual lesson learnt from the 1990s crisis was the importance 
of “norm-based thinking” and long-term game rules for economic policy.5 This came to mark 
the thinking behind the new monetary policy regime. 
                                                
4   See  Englund,  P.,  “The  Swedish  Banking  Crisis:  Roots  and  Consequences”,  Oxford  Review  of  Economic 
Policy, no. 3, 1999. 
5   This way of thinking had been brought up earlier in the debate in Sweden, particularly by the Swedish Centre 
for  Business  and  Policy  Studies’  Economic  Policy  Group,  but  did  not  have  a  broad  impact  on  practical 
economic policy until the 1990s. See, for instance, “Vägen till ett stabilare Sverige” (the road to a more stable 
Sweden), Economic Policy Group report 1985, Center for Business and Policy Studies (SNS). A retrospective 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  
 
Almost at once, the question arose of what would guide monetary policy in Sweden, now that 
the  fixed  exchange  rate  had  been  abandoned.6  By  this  time,  some  countries  had  already 
introduced inflation targets: New Zealand was the first in 1990, followed by Canada in 1991 
and  the  United  Kingdom  in  1992.  In  January  1993  the  Riksbank  decided  to  introduce  the 
inflation target we have now: The annual rate of increase in consumer prices shall be 2 per 
cent a year.7 
As we saw earlier, it is extremely important that the nominal anchor is credible. The results of 
academic  research  indicated  that  the  conditions for  attaining  low  inflation  increased  if  one 
delegated  monetary  policy  to  an  independent  central  bank,  which  focused  on  a  clearly 
quantified  target.  This  increased  the  element  of  “norm-based  thinking”  in  monetary  policy. 
The motives for short-term deviations from the inflation target declined, for instance, by trying 
to stimulate demand to gain political sympathies prior to an election. This also reduced the 
so-called  time  inconsistency  problem  in  monetary  policy,  where  the  long-term  objective  of 
low  inflation  is  not  compatible  with  the  short-term  motives  for  high  inflation.8  The  new 
Sveriges Riksbank Act meant that we have had an Executive Board with six members and 
greater independence from the political system since 1999.9 
Fiscal policy also became much more norm-based than before. There was a need to tighten 
regulatory  frameworks  with  regard  to  decisions  on  state  income  and  expenditure.  Several 
important steps were taken, where the surplus target – the target of a 1 per cent surplus in 
public finances over a business cycle – is the most well-known. 
The  increased  element  of  “norm-based  thinking”  in  monetary  policy  has  also  had  clear 
consequences  for  the  way  it  is  conducted  in  practice  –  moving  away  from  detailed 
regulations and credit allocation to a more “minimalistic” system, where the Riksbank steers 
the repo rate to attain the inflation target. 
Long period of economic stability following introduction of inflation target – but loss 
of focus on financial stability 
In many respects, the Swedish economy has developed better from the 1990s and onwards. 
Productivity  growth  increased  substantially  during  the  second  half  of  the  1990s.  Possible 
reasons  for  this  include  structural  reforms,  such  as  deregulation  on  several  markets  and 
increased use of IT. This development continued until the mid-2000s and the Riksbank was 
one of several analysts who were surprised by the strength – and resilience – of the growth 
in productivity. The result was strong GDP growth with low inflationary pressures. 
The reformed framework for public finances led to a declining trend in the national debt as 
percentage of GDP. From being regarded as a heavy burden 20 years ago, public finances 
rapidly developed into one of the Swedish economy’s major strengths. 
It is also clear in a long time series like the one in Figure 1 that a sharp slowdown in the rate 
of inflation took place when the inflation target was introduced. The average rate of inflation 
                                                                                                                                                   
is  provided  by  Jonung,  L.,  “Thirty  years  on  the  road  to  a  more  stable  Sweden”,  Knut  Wicksell  Centre  for 
Financial Studies Policy Paper 2015:1.  
6   See “Monetary policy under a floating exchange rate”, Sveriges Riksbank, 1992. 
7   The target would formally apply with effect from 1995. 
8   See Kydland, F. and E. Prescott, “Rules Rather Than Discretion: The Inconsistency of Optimal Plans”, Journal 
of Political Economy 85, 1977, Barro, R.J. and Gordon, D., “A Positive Theory of Monetary Policy in a Natural 
Rate Model”, Journal of Political Economy, 91, 1983 and Rogoff, K., “The Optimal Degree of Commitment to 
an Intermediate Monetary Target”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1985.  
9   This was also emphasised in the Commission of Enquiry on the Riksbank 1993, see “The Riksbank and price 
stability”, SOU 1993:20. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
has  been  fairly  close  to  the  target  of  2  per  cent.10  Although  several  factors  in  addition  to 
monetary  policy  have  contributed  to  the  low  inflation,  such  as  productivity  development, 
stable public finances and improved wage formation, I would certainly claim firmly that the 
inflation target has functioned largely as intended. 
In  several  respects,  developments  in  Sweden  prior  to  the  financial  crisis  reflect  the 
international trend that has come to be called the great moderation – that is, a long period of 
stable  growth  combined  with  low  inflation.  The  stable  macroeconomic  development  – 
combined with the insight that the long-run development of the economy is determined by 
real  factors  –  also  affected  the  framework  for  monetary  policy  analysis.  The  models  that 
came  to  be  used  by  many  central  banks,  including  the  Riksbank,  were  not  primarily 
developed  to  capture  long-run  trends,  but  focused  on  cyclical  fluctuations.  Moreover, 
financial markets and credits played a subordinate role in the analysis framework at this time. 
An overall consequence of this was that monetary policy to a large degree had moved away 
from “norm-based thinking” towards “fine tuning”. One might say that there was also a kind of 
blind  faith  in  the  ability  of  monetary  policy  to  govern  the  macroeconomy  in  detail:  During 
which quarter would inflation exactly meet the target? 
But history repeated itself – economic crises put the current monetary policy framework to 
the test. 
The financial crisis: “Things abroad were not OK, but Sweden was OK” 
The global financial crisis that broke out in connection with the collapse of Lehman Brothers 
in September 2008 was in some ways the direct opposite of the Swedish financial crisis at 
the  beginning  of  the  1990s.  The  crisis  originated  in  the  US  housing  market,  and  in  other 
areas, such as Ireland and Spain, collapsing housing markets also played a major role in the 
course of events. As you know, the financial crisis was followed by a debt crisis in Europe. 
Thanks to the lessons learned from the 1990s crisis, the Swedish economy was in a better 
state than many others to manage the weak economic developments after the financial and 
debt  crises.  For  instance,  Sweden’s  public  finances  were  in  good  shape  before  the  crisis 
broke out. Unlike the 1990s crisis, here one can say that “things were not OK abroad, but 
Sweden was OK”. 
This does not mean that the Swedish economy has been spared the repercussions of the 
financial and debt crises – far from it. Sweden is a small, open economy. We are strongly 
affected  by  developments  abroad.  The  euro  area  is  our  largest  export  market,  and  the 
problems there consequently have a very negative effect on demand for Swedish exports. 
The developments in inflation reflect in many ways the repercussions from the weak global 
demand in the wake of the financial and debt crises, something I will return to later. 
Nor were the Swedish banks spared problems during the most recent global financial crisis. 
But  in  some  ways,  this  was  also  an  entirely  different  course  of  events  compared  with  the 
1990s crisis. At that time, loan losses among the Swedish banks were very large, as I clearly 
remember from my position as head of the Swedish Bank Support Authority then. The banks’ 
loan losses were from the commercial property sector, which was devastating for profitability; 
it was a solvency crisis rather than a liquidity crisis. During the most recent global financial 
crisis, loan losses on the domestic market were very limited; most losses arose on loans to 
the Baltic region. This time, the solvency of the banks was not threatened; instead, an acute 
                                                
10   The  average  rate  of inflation since  1995 has been  1.2  per  cent,  when  measured  in  terms  of  the  CPI.  The 
interest rate situation was rather different when the inflation target was introduced than it is now. As household 
mortgage interest expenditure is included in the CPI, the large decline in interest rates has contributed to a 
lower consumer price index. Average inflation measured as the CPI with a fixed mortgage rate (CPIF) has 
been 1.6 per cent since 1995. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  
 
shortage  of  liquidity  in  the  banks  arose  when  the  functioning  of  the  capital  markets 
deteriorated. This was managed by means of extensive loans from the Riksbank. 
Important lesson – financial stability and price stability are interlinked 
One major question after the financial crisis was whether monetary policy should give greater 
consideration  to  financial  stability.  The  prevailing  international  view  during  the  great 
moderation was that financial crises could best be managed by monetary policy when they 
arose – this view has been described as the “Jackson-Hole consensus”. Another description 
of this view is that crises are managed by “mopping up afterwards”. This did not mean that 
there were no differing opinions, but as you know the advocates of these different views were 
talking to deaf ears.11 However, the most recent financial crisis illustrates with great clarity the 
size of the costs of “mopping up afterwards”. 
In this context, it should be pointed out that the Riksbank warned about developments in the 
Swedish housing market long before the financial crisis.12 This was in turn connected to the 
fact that we in Sweden had not in every aspect learnt our lessons from the 1990s crisis. One 
can say that the new stabilisation policy framework had given us control over public debt and 
inflation, but that there was no natural limit for indebtedness in the private sector. This led to 
the substantial increase in housing prices and household indebtedness we have seen – with 
a few brief intermissions – since the middle of the 1990s. 
The  experiences  of  the  global  financial  crisis  have  also  led  to  extensive  international 
regulatory  work  and  to  many  countries  now  establishing  new  organisational  structure  and 
tools  within  what  is  known  as  macroprudential  policy.  Unlike  the  traditional  financial 
supervision – microprudential policy – which focuses on the risks in individual institutions, the 
focus of macroprudential policy is on risks in the financial system as a whole. 
The European Systemic Risk Board, ESRB, began its operations in 2011, with the task of 
identifying  threats  to  the  financial  stability  of  the  EU.  However,  the  ESRB  has  no  binding 
instruments  at  its  disposal;  it  can  instead  issue  warnings  and  recommendations.  For 
instance, in January 2012 the ESRB published a recommendation to EU countries regarding 
national  mandates 
for 
macroprudential  policy  should  rest  with  an  institution  or  council  and  that  this  body  should 
have control over appropriate tools to attain its objectives. 
The way the framework for macroprudential policy has been set up differs somewhat from 
country to country. As you know, we have had such a framework in Sweden now for a year, 
with  Finansinspektionen  (the  Swedish  Financial  Supervisory  Authority)  having  the  main 
responsibility  for  the  macroprudential  policy  tools.  The  new  framework  also  entailed 
establishing  a  forum  for  representatives  of  the  Government,  Finansinspektionen,  the 
Swedish National Debt Office and the Riksbank to meet and discuss questions of financial 
stability, what is known as the Financial Stability Council. 
To some extent, macroprudential policy involves taking a backward step towards a greater 
element of regulation in the credit market. As we see here, history has a tendency to repeat 
itself. Some say that macroprudential policy is a “blend of old and new” policy area, and even 
mention  the  Swedish  credit  regulations  from  the  1950s-1980s  as  an  early  example  of 
macroprudential policy measures.13 The “blend of old and new” also applies to the challenges 
for  macroprudential  policy.  This  stated 
responsibility 
that 
                                                
11   See, for instance, Borio, C. and White, W.R., “Whither monetary and financial stability? The implications of 
evolving policy regimes”, BIS Working Paper 147, 2004. 
12   See,  for  instance,  the  speeches  by  Lars  Nyberg  “The  mortgage  market  from  a  Riksbank  perspective”, 
published  on  11  November  2004,  and  “House  price  developments  and  monetary  policy  “,  published  on 
19 December 2005, and my own speech “Introduction on monetary policy”, published on 26 October 2006. 
13   See,  for  instance,  Galati,  G.  and  Moessner,  R.,  “What  do  we  know  about  the  effects  of  macroprudential 
policy?”, DNB Working Paper no. 440, 2014. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
connected with the regulations. As I mentioned earlier, one reason for the deregulation of the 
Swedish  credit  market  in  the  1980s  was  that  the  effectiveness  of  the  regulations  was 
questioned.  This  was  in  turn  because  they  were  easy  to  circumvent.  For  example,  the 
combination  of  a  loan  cap  and  negative  real  interest  rates  created  large  incentives  for 
regulatory arbitrage, which led to the emergence of a “grey” credit market. 
A  major  challenge  for  today’s  macroprudential  policy  is  how  one  prevents  “leakage”  from 
regulations in a particular sector to other sectors not covered by the regulations.14 One can 
see macroprudential policy measures as a “shadow interest rate” for a particular sector of the 
economy, which can be related to the policy rate set in monetary policy. The tendency to leak 
will of course become higher the greater the tension between the policy rate and the “shadow 
interest rate” that ensues from the regulations. I think that a proper discussion of this is often 
missing in the Swedish debate.15 
Personally, I think it is obvious that financial stability and price stability are closely interlinked. 
There  are  two  main  reasons  for  this.  Firstly,  financial  crises  unavoidably  lead  to  weak 
economic  development  and  major  difficulties  in  controlling  inflation.  Secondly,  it  becomes 
much more difficult to influence the economy via monetary policy, what we usually call the 
transmission  mechanism,  if  a  financial  crisis  occurs.  A  characteristic  element  of  the  most 
recent financial crisis was that the difference between the interest rates paid by households 
and companies and the central banks’ policy rates increased substantially. 
I also think that a central bank can never “renounce” the responsibility for financial stability, 
as we have many of the tools required to manage banks in distress, for instance, supplying 
credit to banks with liquidity problems. This is indicated not least by developments during the 
acute financial crisis 2008–2009. Moreover, the policy rate influences housing prices, credit 
granting  and  general  financial  risk-taking  in  the  economy  –  and  thereby  also  financial 
stability.16 
We  must  continue  to  safeguard  the  inflation  target,  and  learn  the  major  lesson  from 
developments  in  the  1970s  and  1980s,  namely  to  ensure  to  retain  the  credibility  of  the 
nominal anchor. And we must also learn the major lesson from the financial crisis, namely 
that  financial  stability  is  a  condition  for  low  and  stable  inflation  and  good  economic 
developments in general. 
The global dimensions of the financial and debt crises affect the conditions for 
Swedish monetary policy 
As  I  mentioned  earlier,  the  Swedish  economy,  despite  good  conditions,  has  been  greatly 
affected by the financial and debt crises. One question that has arisen once again is how 
much  monetary  policy  in  a  small,  open  economy  like  Sweden’s  can  deviate  from  that 
conducted  in  other  countries.17  The  correlations  between  Swedish  and  international 
(KIX-weighted)  GDP  growth  and  inflation  since  the  1980s  are  both  above  0.8,  which 
indicates that a very large part of the variation in economic activity in Sweden stems from 
                                                
14   See, for instance, Aiyar, S. Calomiris, C. W. and Wieladek, T. “Does Macro-Pru Leak? Evidence from a UK 
Policy Experiment”, NBER Working Paper no. 17822, 2012. 
15   In  my  speech  here  last  year  I  gave  a  detailed  description  of  my  thoughts  on  monetary  policy  and 
macroprudential policy. 
16   See also Billi, R. and Vredin, A., “Monetary policy and financial stability – a simple story”, Economic Review 
2014:2, for a description of monetary policy and financial stability that reflects this opinion. 
17   In my speech last year I described how this has been debated by, for instance, Rey (2013). See Rey, H., 
“Dilemma not Trilemma: The Global Financial Cycle and Monetary Policy Independence”, 25th Jackson Hole 
Symposium, Federal Reserve, Bank of Kansas City, 2013. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  
 
abroad.18 Since 1993 the correlation between the policy rate in Sweden and the policy rate in 
the euro area has been above 0.9. 
One can capture this phenomenon using a model that hardly needs any detailed introduction 
in  this  assembly:  the  Mundell-Fleming  model,  also  known  as  the  IS-LM  model  for  a  small 
open economy.19 This model is greatly simplified, but nevertheless puts its finger on some 
essential mechanisms. The model is intended to illustrate short-term cyclical variations, for 
instance, prices are assumed to remain constant, which is more or less reasonable in the 
short  term.  As  the  analysis  refers  to  a  small,  open  economy,  it  is  also  assumed  that  the 
interest  rate  abroad  is  exogenous.  Another  central  assumption  is  perfect  capital  mobility, 
which can be assumed to have become increasingly reasonable in line with the ever more 
globalised financial markets. 
In a small, open economy with a floating exchange rate like Sweden’s, tightening monetary 
policy means that the exchange rate strengthens, as the interest rate in Sweden becomes 
higher  than  that  abroad.20  The  appreciation  of  the  currency  continues  until  the  domestic 
interest  rate  is  the  same  as  that  abroad.  The  stronger  exchange  rate  pushes  down  net 
exports and thus general demand and GDP. If the international interest rate falls instead, and 
monetary  policy  in  Sweden  is  held  unchanged,  the  exchange  rate  will  also  strengthen, 
because  the  Swedish  interest  rate  is  higher  than  the  international  rate.  The  currency  will 
appreciate until the domestic interest rate is the same as the international interest rate, and 
the  stronger  exchange  rate  will  lead  to  reduced  net  export  and  GDP.  We thus  see  that  a 
lower  international  interest  rate  has  a  restraining  effect  on  the  economy  through  the 
exchange rate in roughly the same way as a tightening of monetary policy in Sweden. 
As I mentioned earlier, this model is a very simplified picture of reality. In practice, the results 
will of course depend on why the interest rates are changing and also on other factors not 
included in the simple model. But the conclusion, that a lower international interest rate has a 
restraining effect on the economy through the exchange rate in roughly the same way as a 
tightening of monetary policy  in Sweden, is valid even in many more complicated models. 
The  effect  of  lower  international  interest  rates  on  the  Swedish  exchange  rate  and  the 
Swedish  economy  has  been  discussed  a  lot  at  monetary  policy  meetings  in  recent  years, 
although the discussion has revolved around the effects on inflation in Sweden and not the 
real economy.21 
One  can  see  that  international  interest  rates  are  very  important  to  Sweden  if  one  studies 
longer  time  series  of  international  real  rates.  Figure  2  shows  long  real  interest  rates for  a 
number  of  developed  countries.  It  is  clear  that  large  movements  in  real  interest  rates  are 
common  to  most  developed  countries,  even  if  the  smaller  cyclical  fluctuations  can  vary  in 
different countries. One also sees that the degree of covariation has increased over time, as 
the  financial  markets  have  become  increasingly  integrated  and  globalised.  This  is  also 
something confirmed by more formal analysis.22.It is also striking that real interest rates have 
shown a declining trend in recent decades and are currently around zero.23 At the end of the 
                                                
18   This is also confirmed by more formal studies, see for instance Lindé, J., “Swedish Postwar Business Cycles: 
Generated Abroad or at Home?” Scandinavian Journal of Economics no. 4, 2004. 
19   Robert Mundell was awarded the economics prize in 1999 for this analysis and theory on optimal currency 
areas. Marcus Fleming, who also contributed to developing a similar intellectual framework for stabilisation 
policy in open economies, died in 1976 and was therefore not available to receive a prize. 
20   This also leads to a strengthening of the real exchange rate, as price levels are assumed to be constant. 
21   See,  for  instance,  “Account  of  monetary  policy  in  2014”,  page  37,  the  section  “Policy  rate  differences,  the 
exchange rate and inflation”, Sveriges Riksbank. 
22   See, for instance, the IMF, WEO October 2014. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
1970s, real interest rates were also close to zero or negative in many countries, but at that 
time inflation was high. 
A  practical  example  that  is  close  to  hand  of  how  the  conditions  for  monetary  policy  in 
Sweden are affected by international developments is that the ECB has chosen to conduct a 
very expansionary monetary policy in the euro area. In the slightly longer term, it is good for 
the Swedish economy that the ECB’s policy stimulates growth and inflation in the euro area, 
as  this  contributes to  higher  exports  and  higher  imported  inflation  in  Sweden.  In  the  short 
term,  however,  problems  may  arise  if  the  krona  strengthens  so  that  inflationary  pressures 
risk being lower in a situation where inflation is already too low and has been so over a long 
period of time. As I demonstrated earlier in the simple model, a lower international interest 
rate risks having a restraining effect on Sweden in the short term via the exchange rate, if we 
keep our interest rate at a relatively higher level. 
 Current monetary policy reflects earlier lessons 
This brings me to current monetary policy. As I have argued, monetary policy has changed 
over time and has been adapted to the new situations that have arisen. And that’s how it’s 
been this time too. I would say that current monetary policy has learnt many lessons from 
earlier episodes. 
Negative repo rate and bond purchases – to safeguard the credibility of the inflation 
target 
The  fact  that  we  now  have  introduced  a  negative  interest  rate  and  begun  purchasing 
government  bonds  in  Sweden  is  basically  because  we  want  to  safeguard  the  role  of  the 
inflation  target  as  nominal  anchor.  I  mentioned  earlier  that  monetary  policy  should  give 
consideration  to  financial  stability.  But  this  is  because  financial  stability  is  a  necessary 
condition  for  attaining  stable  inflation  in  the  long  run.  Conditions  for  being  able  to  give 
                                                                                                                                                   
23   For further information, see “Low global interest rates”, article in the Monetary Policy Report, October 2014, 
Sveriges Riksbank. See also Hamilton, D., Harris, E. S., Hatzius, J. and West, K.D., “The Equilibrium Real 
Funds Rate: Past, Present, and Future”, University of California at San Diego Working Paper, 2015. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
  
 
consideration to financial stability in monetary policy decisions are that inflation expectations 
are  firmly  anchored  around  the  target  and  that  inflation  is  fairly  close  to  the  target.  With 
hindsight,  we  can  see  that  inflation  has  been  lower  than  the  Riksbank  and  most  other 
forecasters had expected. And this doesn’t only apply to Sweden; inflation is very low in most 
developed countries. 
What happened in Sweden last year, when inflation continued to be lower than expected at 
the  same  time  as  inflation  expectations  continued  to  fall,  has  thus  rather  dramatically 
changed the conditions for monetary policy. Although inflation has not been falling recently, 
but has remained at a low level, and inflation expectations are fairly close to 2 per cent, it is 
very  important  to  ensure  they  do  not  fall  further  –  especially  given  the  coming  wage 
bargaining rounds. 
As I mentioned earlier, the global dimensions of the fiscal and debt crises, combined with the 
fact that Sweden is a small, open economy, have brought to the fore the question of how 
much  our  monetary  policy  can  deviate  from  that  conducted  abroad. When  several  central 
banks  abroad  are  conducting  a  very  expansionary  monetary  policy,  the  conditions  for 
monetary policy in Sweden are affected. If the policy rate is higher in Sweden than abroad, 
the krona exchange rate will tend to strengthen, contributing to lower inflation through lower 
import prices. All other things being equal, the lower policy rates abroad thus argue for lower 
policy rates in Sweden too. 
It was in the light of all this that we began a series of repo-rate cuts, which resulted in the 
repo rate coming down to zero per cent in October last year. When the repo rate approaches 
its  lower  limit  further  complementary  measures  are  required  if  monetary  policy  needs  to 
become  more  expansionary.24  The  Riksbank  has  therefore  cut  the  repo  rate  to  –0.25  per 
cent and has begun purchases of government bonds to a total value of SEK 80–90 billion. If 
monetary  policy  were  to  need  to  be  more  expansionary  we  can  extend  the  purchases  of 
government bonds, or cut the repo rate further and lower the repo-rate path. We also have 
the possibility of introducing a programme of loans aimed at companies similar to the ECB’s 
TLTRO or the Bank of England’s “Funding for Lending Scheme”. Moreover, we can intervene 
on the foreign exchange market. 
How do complementary monetary policy measures work? 
Regardless of which measure one chooses, the effects of complementary monetary policy 
can be divided into two main lines; one is that they contribute to reducing interest rates in 
general  and  the  other  that  they  increase  the  amount  of  money  in  the  economy.  The 
purchases of government bonds reduce the supply available in the market, which leads to an 
increase  in  the  price  and  a  decrease  in  the  yield.  When  government  bond  yields  fall, 
investors find it more attractive to seek higher-risk assets, which pushes down interest rates 
and raises prices there, too. This is usually called the portfolio balance channel. When the 
price  of  the  assets  rises,  the  wealth  of  those  who  own  the  assets  also  increases,  which 
contributes to stimulating consumption and investment. More liquidity among the banks may 
also lead to increased lending. 
All in all, complementary monetary policy thus functions in roughly the same way as normal 
repo-rate  cuts.25  The  supply  of  credit  increases,  at  the  same  time  as  interest  rates  are 
                                                
24   For an overview of how complementary monetary policy functions, see De Graeve, F. and Lindé, J., “Effects of 
unconventional monetary policy: theory and evidence”, Economic Review 2015:1, Sveriges Riksbank or the 
article “The Riksbank’s complementary monetary policy measures”, Monetary Policy Report, February 2015, 
Sveriges Riksbank. 
25   Some studies of the effects of complementary monetary policy in other countries include, for instance, Weale, 
M. and Wieladek, T. “What are the macroeconomic effects of asset Purchases”, External MPC Unit Discussion 
Paper No. 42, 2014, Bank of England, Gertler, M. and Karadi, P. “QE 1 vs. 2 vs. 3. . . : A Framework for 
Analyzing Large-Scale Asset Purchases as a Monetary Policy Tool”, International Journal of Central Banking, 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
pushed  down  and  the  exchange  rate  weakens  –  aggregate  demand  in  the  economy 
increases.  When  the  economy  is  stimulated,  inflation  gradually  rises,  as  companies  can 
charge higher prices and the lower unemployment pushes up wages. A weaker exchange 
rate also leads directly to higher inflation, as prices of imported consumer goods rise faster. 
Let me give an example of how the increase in the Riksbank’s balance sheet in the form of 
government bond purchases can spread throughout the economy. When we buy government 
bonds, those who sell them receive liquid funds in the form of their bank account balance 
instead of the bonds they previously held. To improve the return on the portfolio, they must 
invest  the  liquid  funds  in  some  other  assets,  and  the  price  of  these  assets  will  then  be 
pushed up. This could be, for instance, corporate bonds or foreign government bonds. In the 
first case, companies could issue new bonds at more favourable rates. In the latter case, the 
exchange rate could weaken, which could lead to higher import prices and inflation and also 
benefit export companies. 
regard 
further  macroprudential  policy  measures.  With 
Household indebtedness must be managed 
However, these measures are no “free lunch”. There are risks and costs linked to the very 
expansionary monetary policy. Housing prices and household debts are now showing signs 
of increasing faster again. I have on several previous occasions emphasised how important it 
is that other policy areas ensure that these risks are managed. Measures are needed to deal 
with the driving forces behind household indebtedness, such as reforms to increase housing 
construction,  but  also 
to 
macroprudential  policy  measures,  it  is  worrying  that  Finansinspektionen’s  amortisation 
requirement could not be implemented as planned. It is important, not least with regard to the 
recommendation  from  the  ESRB  I  mentioned  earlier,  that  the  responsible  authority  has 
control over the appropriate tools to attain its objectives. I therefore consider it very important 
that  Finansinspektionen’s  mandate  should  be  clarified  and  that  the  conditions  for  an 
amortisation requirement are investigated as quickly as possible. 
When  it  comes to  the  costs  of the  expansionary  monetary  policy,  there  is  also  a  risk  that 
losses will arise on the Riksbank’s balance sheet as a result of the bond purchases. In pure 
accounting  terms,  the  bond  portfolio  will  be  booked  at  market  value.  This  means  that  the 
value of the portfolio will vary as interest rates change. The cost of funding the holdings will 
therefore  increase  when  short-term  interest  rates  eventually  rise.  If  the  Riksbank  were  to 
suffer  a  loss,  however,  it  would  not  entail  any  particular  problem,  but  it  would  lead  to  the 
surplus  we  pay  to  the  state  every  year  declining.  There  will  thus  be  less  money  for  the 
Swedish Treasury. 
We  have  nevertheless  chosen  to  take  these  measures  to  emphasise  that  we  want  to 
safeguard  the  role  of  the  inflation  target  as  nominal  anchor  for  price-setting  and  wage 
formation. Moreover, we have said that if more is required to get inflation to rise towards the 
target, we will do more. And we are prepared to do so with force. 
                                                                                                                                                   
2012 and Christensen, J. H. E. and Krogstrup, S. “Swiss Unconventional Monetary Policy: Lessons for the 
Transmission of Quantitative Easing”, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Working Paper 2014–18. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
  Concluding reflections 
In  my  speech  today  I  have  tried  to  describe  current  monetary  policy  from  an  historical 
perspective. I hope that you have gained a deeper understanding of current monetary policy. 
The objectives and means of central banks have changed over time, usually as a result of 
economic  crises.  This  has  led  to  rethinking  of  the  prevailing  consensus  view  of  monetary 
policy. 
Experiences  from  the  1990s  crisis  showed  the  importance  of  having  a  credible  nominal 
anchor, which led to an increased element of “norm-based thinking” in monetary policy. For 
the Riksbank, this resulted in the inflation-targeting regime we have now. With regard to the 
experiences  of  the  most  recent  global  financial  crisis,  we  are  to  some  extent  still  on  a 
learning curve. But personally, I think that one important lesson is that financial stability is a 
necessary  condition  for  macroeconomic  stability  and  price  stability.  Developments  in  the 
wake  of  the  financial  crisis  have  also  shown  how  dependent  Sweden’s  economy  is  on 
developments abroad. 
I think that current monetary policy reflects all of these lessons. We are conducting a very 
expansionary monetary policy to preserve confidence in the nominal anchor provided by the 
inflation target for more than 20 years. At the same time, we are emphasising the importance 
of managing the risks linked to household indebtedness, as financial stability is a necessary 
condition for attaining the inflation target in the longer run. 
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
