  R Gandhi: Disruptive innovation and inclusive growth – some random 
thoughts 
Valedictory speech by Mr R Gandhi, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the 
FIBAC 2015 “Inclusive growth with disruptive innovations”, Mumbai, 25 August 2015. 
Friends, 
 Disruptive innovation 
2. 
By this time, I am sure, you all have heard any number of times through these two 
days what a disruptive innovation is. Let me make you hear that one more time that it is an 
innovation  that  helps  create  a  new  market  and  value  network  and  eventually  disrupts  an 
existing market and value network over a few years, displacing an earlier technology. 
3. 
The theory of disruptive innovation was invented by Clayton Christensen, of Harvard 
Business School, in his book “The Innovator’s Dilemma”. Mr Christensen used the term to 
describe innovations that create new markets by discovering new categories of customers. 
Inclusive growth & disruptive innovation 
4. 
The  main  theme  of  this  FIBAC  2015  is  “Inclusive  Growth  with  Disruptive 
innovations”.  I  am  sure  that  you  all  had  very  good  discussion  on  such  innovations  in  the 
banking arena, both of international and domestic. Let me share with you my own thoughts 
on the subject. 
5. 
To  start  with,  I  find  a  natural  coherence  and  congruence  between  disruptive 
innovation and inclusive growth. Both the concepts, by definition, aim at impacting people at 
the  bottom  of  the  pyramid.  Disruptive  innovations  usually  find  their  first  customers  at  the 
bottom of the market: as unproved, often unpolished, products, they cannot command a high 
price. Likewise, inclusive growth targets the hitherto excluded segments of the population. It 
allows  a  whole  new  population  at  the  bottom,  access  to  a  product  or  service  that  was 
historically only accessible to a few with a lot of money or a lot of skill. 
Financial inclusion and disruptive innovation 
6. 
A key element of the inclusive growth is financial inclusion. Here is where we have 
been  observing  the  power  of  disruptive  innovations.  This  is  partly  by  harnessing  new 
technologies, primarily the information and communication technology, more specifically the 
mobile  technology;  and  also  by  developing  new  business  models  like  the  Business 
Correspondent  (BC)  model  and  exploiting  old  technologies  and  procedures  like  lending  in 
new ways like the micro finance. 
The  new  business  model  also  included  new  type  of  accounts,  called  the  Basic 
7. 
Savings Bank Deposit Accounts (BSBD), besides the issuance of RuPay Cards. The results 
are encouraging. As at the end of March 2015, the Banking Outlets in Villages in Branchless 
mode, which is primarily through BCs were 5,04,139 and the urban BCs were 96,847. The 
BSBD  accounts  were  398  million  and  the  balance  in  them  was  ₹  438.3  billion.  The  Prime 
minister’s Jan Dhan Yojana has given a special fillip to these. 
8. 
A  parallel  development  relates  to  the  issuance  of  Aadhaar  cards  and  ceding  the 
cards  to  bank  accounts.  It  is  reported  that  more  than  817.8  Aadhaar  numbers  have  been 
issued by April 2015 and the number is still increasing. Of course, it is another matter that the 
recent Supreme Court interim judgment has put the scheme in a tight corner and we hope 
that it will soon be resolved. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  9. 
Next  element  is  the  use  of  mobile  technology.  The  great  expanse  of  mobile 
coverage,  the  number  of  people  having  the  handsets,  the  mobile  banking  products  and 
services  are  all  at  a  critical  point  for  high  leveraging  to  usher  in  financial  inclusion  and 
inclusive growth. 
Financial inclusion and disruptive innovations in regulation 
10. 
Now,  let  me  present  before  you  some  of  the  disruptive  innovations  through 
regulation with the ultimate goal of furthering inclusive growth. These innovative  initiatives, 
under the caption of differentiated banks, are primarily to further financial inclusion, which is 
an integral part of inclusive growth strategies. 
Differentiated banks 
11. 
The concept of differentiated banks was first discussed in 2007; but it was felt that 
the  time  was  not  yet  opportune  for  such  banks.  Thereafter,  the  concept  was  once  again 
discussed in a Paper “Banking Structure in India – The Way Forward”, brought out by the 
Reserve  Bank  in  August  2013.  The  Paper  looked  into  various  aspects  of  the  banking 
structure,  licensing  of  banks,  banking  models  and  suggested  a  transition  path  for  some 
banks. 
12. 
In that Paper, we had noted that despite significant progress, one aspect of banking 
in India that required deeper analysis was the still inadequate coverage of the banking and 
financial sectors. We observed that even with the then 157 domestic banks operating in the 
country  [comprising  26  Public  Sector  Banks,  7  New  Private  Sector  Banks,  13  Old  Private 
Sector  Banks,  43  Foreign  Banks,  4  Local  Area  Banks  (LABs),  and  64  RRBs],  just  about 
40 per  cent  of  the  adults  had formal  bank  accounts.  Deepening  the  engagement  of formal 
banking  for  low  income  households  and  providing  access  to  the  unbanked  would  require 
increasingly innovative approaches (including channels, products, interface, etc.). 
13. 
Part of the improved engagement was to ensure enhanced access to credit for small 
and medium enterprises (SMEs), which were expected to be the major contributors to future 
growth and employment creation. Credit to SMEs would require an innovative combination of 
banks, private equity. 
14. 
We  said  that  with  the  broadening  and  deepening  of  financial  sector,  some  banks 
may choose to operate in niche areas so as to reap certain obvious advantages in terms of 
managing business and risk management. Some countries, as we noted, have differentiated 
bank  licensing  regimes  where  differentiated  licenses  are  issued,  specifically  outlining  the 
activities  that  the  licensed  entity  can  undertake.  With  the  broadening  and  deepening  of 
financial sector in India, we saw a need that banks move from the situation where all banks 
provide  all  the  services,  to  a  situation  where  banks  find  their  specific  realm  and  mainly 
provide services in their chosen areas. 
15. 
In  September  2013,  we  set  up  a  Committee  headed  by  Shri  Nachiket  Mor,  on 
Comprehensive  Financial  Services  for  Small  Businesses  and  Low-Income  Households  to 
look  into  the  issues relating to financial  inclusion.  The  committee  came  up  with  two  broad 
designs  for  the  banking  system  in  the  country  –  the  Horizontally  Differentiated  Banking 
System  (HDBS)  and  the  Vertically  Differentiated  Banking  System  (VDBS)  based  on  the 
functional building blocks of payments, deposits and credit. 
16. 
In  a  HDBS  design,  the  basic  design  element  remains  a  full-service  bank  that 
combines  all  three  building  blocks  of  payments,  deposits,  and  credit  but  is  differentiated 
primarily on the dimension of size or geography or sectoral focus. In a VDBS design, the full-
service  bank  is replaced  by  banks that  specialise  in  one  or  more  of  the  building  blocks of 
payments,  deposits,  and  credit.  Among  others,  the  Committee  suggested  licensing  of 
Payments Bank and wholesale banks as differentiated banks. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  17. 
The Nachiket Mor committee opined that in the Indian context it would be important 
to  have  the  regulatory  flexibility  to  approach  payments,  savings,  and  credit  independently 
(the Vertically Differentiated Banking Design) and to bring them together when the efficiency 
gains are high and the other costs are low. 
18. 
Taking into account all these recommendations and the feedback to the Discussion 
paper, we concluded that differentiated licensing would be a desirable step and accordingly 
in November 2014 we announced our intention to grant licenses to two types of differentiated 
banks viz., the Payment Banks and the Small Finance Banks. 
Payment banks 
19. 
Payment system has been proving to be the arena where new ideas, products and 
services have been successfully introduced. Starting from the Real Time Gross Settlement 
System (RTGS), the National Electronic Funds  Transfer (NEFT) system, the Pre and Post 
Paid Instruments, the card present and absent transactions, the different types of e-wallets 
and to the mobile banking products, we have been experiencing a payment revolution in our 
country. 
20. 
The next biggest contributor to this is going to be the payment banks. Just the other 
day,  we,  the  Reserve  Bank,  have  granted  in  principle  approval  to  eleven  entities  to  form 
payment banks. Payment Banks are a part of the disruptively innovative regulatory initiatives 
of the Reserve Bank for financial inclusion, which will lead to inclusive growth. These banks 
have  been  structured  with  the  specific  mandate  to  further  financial  inclusion.  As  we  said 
clearly  in  the  Guidelines  for  Licensing  of  Payment  Banks,  the  objective  of  setting  up  of 
payments  banks  will  be  to  further  financial  inclusion;  the  strategies  will  be  by  providing  (i) 
small savings accounts and (ii) payments / remittance services to migrant labour workforce, 
low income households, small businesses, other unorganised sector entities and other users. 
The scope of the activities permitted for the Payment Banks included: 
a) 
Acceptance of demand deposits. Payments bank will initially be restricted to holding 
a maximum balance of ₹ 100,000 per individual customer 
Issuance of ATM / debit cards 
Payments and remittance services through various channels 
BC of another bank and 
Distribution of non-risk sharing simple financial products like mutual fund units and 
insurance products, etc. 
21. 
As  you  can  see,  the  scope  has  been  carefully  crafted  to  sub-serve  the  primary 
objective  of  furthering  financial  inclusion.  We  have  also  insisted  that  the  Payment  Bank 
should  be  a  fully  networked  and  technology  driven  institution.  You  will  appreciate  the 
relevance  of  this,  if  you  will  recall  that  when  we  had  announced  the  policy  guidelines  for 
licensing new banks way back in 1993, one of the requirements was that they should be ab-
initio technologically driven banks and the resultant new era of information technology based 
banking  that  the  country  could  enjoy  in  these  twenty  odd  years.  In  the  same  way,  we  are 
confident that the Payment Banks will further revolutionise the payment arena. 
22. 
The other day, someone compared emergence of payment banks to the emergence 
of telecom towers. He said in the telecom industry, every telco initially created its own tower 
system and it made it a high cost venture and the growth was limited to the affluent segment. 
Then  came  the  trend  of  separating  the  tower  infrastructure  from  the  telco,  and  the  tower 
became a market infrastructure where all telcos could ride on. What followed is the amazing 
and exponential expansion of mobile services, covering almost the entire population and at 
low and affordable cost, all the while continuously improving the quality and latest offerings 
as well. Similarly, we may be seeing with the advent of payment banks, the universal banks 
may  shed  of costly  payment  infrastructure  which  includes  high  cost  physical  locations  and 
b) 
c) 
d) 
e) 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  assets and ride on the common, technology based, low-cost payment infrastructure that will 
be  ushered  by  the  payment  banks,  and  this  can  bring forth  exponential  growth  in  banking 
services  to  the  hitherto  excluded  population.  The  result  will  be  financial  inclusion  and 
inclusive growth. 
Small finance banks 
23. 
A parallel major disruptive innovative change for inclusive growth will be the advent 
of Small Finance Banks. As we observed in our 2013 Discussion paper on Banking Structure 
mentioned earlier, country‐level studies show that small banks may perform very differently 
from  large  banks.  Greater  access  to  local  information,  greater  commitment  to  local 
prosperity, differences in costs and risk management, and competition policy could explain 
the specific influence of such type of banks on local economic development. In developing 
countries where economic development is hampered by insufficient and inadequate access 
to financial services in rural areas, small banks could improve financing opportunities to small 
and medium size enterprises and encourage entrepreneurship. 
24. 
Consequently,  we  announced  in  November  2014  that  we  would  grant  licenses  to 
Small Finance Banks, a new set of differentiated bank. The objective of setting up of small 
finance  banks,  like  the  payment  banks,  is  also  to  further  financial  inclusion;  however,  it  is 
sought  to  be  achieved  through  a  different  set  of  strategies  viz.,  (i)  provision  of  savings 
vehicles primarily to unserved and underserved sections of the population, and (ii) supply of 
credit to small business units; small and marginal farmers; micro and small industries; and 
other unorganised sector entities, through high technology-low cost operations. 
25. 
One may say that the Small Finance Banks, or the Payment Banks are not the first 
set  of  differentiated  banks;  the  country  had  tried  and  tested,  with  differing  degrees  of 
success, the concept of differentiated banks and in particular the small banks, though they 
were not called so then, in the form of Regional Rural Banks, way back in 1974 and the Local 
Area  Banks  in  1996.  However,  while  these  small  banks  had  the  potential  for  financial 
inclusion,  performance  of  the  RRBS  and  LABs  had  been  unsatisfactory.  There  were 
fundamental  weaknesses  inherent  in  the  business  model  of  such  small  banks,  like  the 
narrow  capital  base,  restrictive  geographical  jurisdiction,  lack  of  diversification  in  source of 
funds and the concentration risk. 
26. 
Therefore, as you will see that we have carefully crafted the scope of Small Finance 
Banks to sub-serve the primary objective of furthering financial inclusion, thereby inclusive 
growth. The small finance bank, in furtherance of the objectives for which it will be set up, 
shall  primarily  undertake  basic  banking  activities  of  acceptance  of  deposits  and  lending  to 
unserved  and  underserved  sections  including  small  business  units,  small  and  marginal 
farmers,  micro  and  small  industries  and  unorganised  sector  entities.  It  can  also  undertake 
other  non-risk  sharing  simple  financial  services  activities,  not  requiring any  commitment  of 
own  fund,  such  as  distribution  of mutual fund  units,  insurance  products,  pension  products, 
etc. with the prior approval of the Reserve Bank and after complying with the requirements of 
the sectoral regulator for such products. The small finance bank can also become a Category 
II Authorised Dealer in foreign exchange business for its clients’ requirements. There will not 
be  any  restriction  in  the  area  of  operations  of  small  finance  banks.  It  is  expected  that  the 
small finance bank should primarily be responsive to local needs. 
27. 
It will be required to extend 75 per cent of its Adjusted Net Bank Credit (ANBC) to 
the sectors eligible for classification as priority sector lending (PSL). While 40 per cent of its 
ANBC  should  be  allocated  to  different  sub-sectors  under  PSL  as  per  the  extant  PSL 
prescriptions, the bank can allocate the balance 35 per cent to any one or more sub-sectors 
under the PSL where it has competitive advantage. 
28. 
The maximum loan size and investment limit exposure to a single and group obligor 
would be restricted to 10 per cent and 15 per cent of its capital funds, respectively. Further, 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  in order to ensure that the bank extends loans primarily to small borrowers, at least 50 per 
cent of its loan portfolio should constitute loans and advances of upto ₹ 2.5 million. 
29. 
How are these Small Finance Banks going to be game changers? Let me explain 
our  thought  process.  First,  whom  are  we  targeting  to form  the  Small  Finance  Banks? The 
Guidelines  for  Licensing  Small  Finance  Banks  indicated  that  resident  individuals  / 
professionals  with  10  years  of  experience  in  banking  and  finance  and  Companies  and 
Societies  owned  and  controlled  by  residents  will  be  eligible  as  promoters  to  set  up  Small 
Finance  Banks.  The  Guidelines  also  said  that  existing  Non-Banking  Finance  Companies 
(NBFCs),  Micro  Finance  Institutions  (MFIs),  and  LABs  that  are  owned  and  controlled  by 
residents can also opt for conversion into small finance banks. We received 72 applications 
and as you would have noted, 41 among them are existing NBFCs, MFIs and LABs and 12 
are individuals / professionals. The MFI-NBFCs registered with us are 65 and their resources 
are limited to their own equity, borrowing from banks and market borrowings. They are not 
permitted to access low cost or why, even any deposit. Despite such constraints, they have 
serviced 25.5 million accounts / customers and had a credit portfolio of ₹ 277.34 billion as at 
end  March  2015.  Likewise,  the  NBFCs  also  typically  depend  on  their  own  equity,  bank 
funding and market borrowings for their resources. Out of the 11,842 registered NBFCs as at 
end  March 2015, as many as 11,622 cannot accept deposits. The credit portfolio of these 
NBFCs  stood  at  ₹  11,169.24  billion  as  at  the  end  of  March  2015.  The  LABS,  as  of  now, 
cannot  expand  their  services  beyond  the  few  districts  permitted  for  them.  Their  credit 
portfolio amounted to ₹ 13.18 billion as at the end of March 2015. These entities are in the 
financial  inclusion  arena  –  MFIs  by  definition  and  the  NBFCs  and  LABs  by  serving  the 
unserved or underserved segments of population and economy. If these MFIs, NBFCs and 
LABs could achieve this level of penetration with such constraints as they operate today, if 
such  established  entities  would  become  Small  Finance  Banks,  with  access  to  low  cost 
deposits, all-India operations and the discipline of banks can cater to much wider unserved, 
underserved and excluded segments. With their USP of service at door step, flexible times, 
cash-flow based credit assessment, minimum documentation, continuous monitoring, hand-
held  manual  ATMs,  these  Small  Finance  Banks  can  totally  alter  the  face  and  definition  of 
banking.  Post  their  success,  I  am  sure,  text  books  will  redefine  the  concept  of  banking, 
reflecting these entities functioning, than the brick and mortar universal banks. 
Undesirable and questionable disruptive innovations 
30. 
While so far we have discussed certain disruptive innovations which we support, we 
also need to discuss certain other innovative developments which have the potential to be 
disruptive  of  course,  but  not  of  so  desirable,  or  of  questionable,  relevance,  or  at  least  we 
need  to  be  carefully  monitoring  and  be  vigilant.  In  particular,  I  want  to  discuss  two 
developments – digital money or crypto currency and crowd funding. 
31. 
What is crypto currency? Crypto currency is a digital currency in which encryption 
techniques are used to regulate the generation of units of currency and verify the transfer of 
funds, operating independently of a central bank. 
What is crowdfunding? Crowdfunding is the practice of funding a project or venture 
32. 
by raising monetary contributions from a large number of people, typically  via the internet. 
Crowdfunding is a form of alternative finance, which has emerged outside of the traditional 
financial system. 
33. 
Are these disruptive innovations for inclusive growth? Both these developments are 
based on leveraging technology in unusual way, so they are innovative; both have the great 
potential  to  be  disturbing  the  standard  ways  in  which  currency  and  credit  systems  are 
operated,  and  so  are  disruptive.  Do  these  developments  have  potential  implications  for 
financial  inclusion?  Yes,  of  course;  they  both  can  assist  financial  inclusion  and  therefore 
inclusive  growth.  Crypto  currency  can  support  activities  which  do  find  difficulties  in  settling 
such transactions in the normal ways. The crowdfunding can help some funds needy person 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  or entity, in searching and locating those who have the particular aptitude and willingness to 
help that person or entity, as only such people / entities respond to the crowdfunding call. 
This way both can support financial inclusion. 
34. 
Then, why do I say that they may not be desirable? Why do I say that they may be 
questionable? For one thing, they both hope to operate in a regulator free environment. In 
matters financial, it is a quintessential received wisdom of several centuries that unregulated 
financial system has immense scope for depriving ordinary public of their hard earned money 
and  therefore  highly  risky  to  be  permitted  to  grow.  It  doesn’t  stop  there;  there  will  be  no 
enforcer  as  well.  This  is  extremely  risky,  especially  when  such  a  system  operates 
internationally. It is true that in crowdfunding there will be a platform which does have the role 
of an enforcer. However, its effectiveness is questionable and mostly one-sided. Secondly, 
both  have  the  potential  to  support  criminal,  anti-social  activities  like  money  laundering, 
terrorist  funding  and  tax  evasion.  While  we  do  not  have  any  reported  instances  of 
crowdfunding  in  this  respect,  crypto  currencies  have  been  widely  suspected  to  finance 
criminal activities. We have to be carefully and critically watching these developments. That 
is why I said these innovative developments which have the potential to be disruptive, may 
not be of so desirable, or may be of questionable, relevance and merit. 
Conclusion 
35. 
To conclude, we find that several disruptive innovations in the financial sector have 
immense  demonstrated  potential  to  further  inclusive  growth  through  financial  inclusion. 
Country is getting fruits of such labour. Financial regulations also are supportive of disruptive 
innovation and they also employ the same. However, we need to be cautious about certain 
other disruptive innovations which have potential to be highly risky and can be destabilising. 
36. 
 
Thank you all for patient listening! 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
