  Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Keeping the economy on the right track – key 
challenges for monetary policy 
Speech by Mr Amando M Tetangco, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the 
central  bank  of  the  Philippines),  at  the  induction  ceremony  for  the  new  officers  of  the 
Economic Journalists Association of the Philippines (EJAP), Makati City, 20 February 2015. 
 Let  me  begin  by  congratulating  the  new  set  of  officers  of  EJAP,  led  by  its  new  president, 
Mr. Paolo Montecillo, who is a member of the BSP press corps. I wish to reaffirm the BSP’s 
belief in the essential role of EJAP in promoting high quality economic news reporting in the 
country. Rest assured that your organization will continue to have the support of the BSP in 
your  activities  that  help  achieve  the  “responsible  and  thorough”  coverage  of  economic 
events. 
In the days leading up to the celebration of the Chinese New Year yesterday, we have been 
reading and hearing many and varied predictions concerning the Year of the Sheep or the 
Goat or the Ram. 
Tonight,  I  will  contribute  my  share  –  from  the  perspective  of  emerging  market  economy 
central banks, in general, and the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas, in particular. 
The  issues  that  confront  EME  central  banks  these  days  include  the  following:  Whether 
disinflation pressures could lead to breaches in official inflation target bands. Whether there 
is  a  risk  of  domestic  deflation  or  whether  some  collateral  damage  could  be  imported  from 
deflation elsewhere. Whether there will be further monetary easing (in the AEs in one part of 
the  globe)  or  whether  there  will  be  a  shift  in  the  perception  of  the  timing  of  monetary 
tightening (at the Fed, across the other side of the globe). Whether huge dips in oil prices are 
a positive or a negative. Whether we will see currency wars or we will see currency peace. 
Whether new tools would need to emerge to ensure financial stability during this period of 
divergence in economic trends and monetary policy. 
There are no absolutes in dealing with these issues. There are many ifs and buts. And, a 
number  of  factors  and  variables,  including  concerns  related  to  technology  and  geopolitics, 
would need to be considered. 
Friends, there is no crystal ball for these things. So, as we continue to navigate a challenging 
economic landscape this year, it is imperative that the intent of policies from central banks 
and other authorities is clearly understood by the public. Statements by the central bank and 
other  authorities  can  influence  people’s  expectations  and,  ultimately,  their  economic 
decisions. Sound and accurate reporting by the media therefore is necessary to help bring 
our message across to financial markets and the general public. 
We understand that covering the economic beat is quite challenging. Unfortunately, it is also 
at times, thankless. Rarely would you go home to your families and see them jumping up and 
down  to  ask  “so  what  happened  in  the  world  of  economics  today?”  Economic  news  isn’t 
riveting, unlike political news or news about crime. But what you do requires just as much 
vigilance, patience, and diligence, if not more. 
Economic  numbers  rarely  tell  the  complete  story  when  taken  at  face  value.  Therefore,  a 
responsible journalist who seeks to offer readers a fuller appreciation of the information will 
examine the figures within a broader context or against an array of other relevant indicators. 
Given the facts on hand, a good reporter will know which leads to chase, and which to set 
aside,  perhaps  for  another  day,  for  another  story.  The  objective  is  to  understand  what  is 
happening – and why – so that the facts can be pieced together into a sensible and useful 
news report for their publics. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
  Indeed, we thank the media and, more specifically, EJAP member for playing a crucial role in 
helping the public understand and stay abreast of current economic issues. 
With  this  in  mind,  let  me  briefly  share  two  key  issues  in  current  discussions  of  monetary 
policy stance. 
Disinflation 
The first is disinflation pressures. The overall impact of the significant decline in international 
oil prices will vary in direction and scope across the globe. While there were recent upticks, 
oil prices remain well below their levels in mid-2014. 
In general, low oil prices represent disinflation pressures for oil importing countries like the 
Philippines. We have already seen this in the slower inflation outturns in recent months. 
Many have wondered why, given it has already lowered its own inflation forecasts for 2015 
and 2016, the BSP stood pat on its policy rates and didn’t follow the other central banks that 
had earlier eased their policy settings. 
Two  reasons.  First,  unlike  in  some  economies,  the  risk  of  inflation  falling  below  zero  or  to 
negative levels in the Philippines appears to be minimal. In fact, while our latest forecasts 
show a lower inflation path, we expect inflation to stay within the government’s target range 
over the policy horizon. 
This  outlook  is  supported  by  firm  domestic  demand  conditions.  Our  latest  expectations 
surveys show that market sentiment remains broadly favorable, which should in turn drive up 
spending and investment. Wage levels, potential increases in utility rates and possible power 
shortages also lead us to expect that inflation is likely to remain positive, rather than reach or 
fall below zero. 
Second,  consistent  with  our  symmetric  approach  to  inflation  targeting  framework,  we  have 
room to wait for additional data to see if the lower end of our target range will be breached for 
a  persistent  period.  We  are  mindful  of  the  uncertainty  over  the  path  of  oil  prices  moving 
forward. As the recent hike in fuel pump prices shows, oil prices can rise just as quickly as 
they  have  fallen.  Keeping  an  eye  on  possible  turning  points,  therefore,  will  help  us  see  if 
there is any need to recalibrate monetary policy. As always, the key is to make the necessary 
adjustments in a timely and calibrated manner. 
Divergence 
This  ties  in  closely  with  our  second  key  issue:  divergence  in  economic  prospects  across 
economies, and consequently, divergence in monetary policies. We have been talking about 
this topic since early last year, and it has retained its relevance to the present. In fact, the 
disinflationary effect of the steep decline in oil prices has served to complicate our own views 
of  the  outlook  for  2015,  especially  with  regard  to  overseas  monetary  policies  and  their 
potential implications for financial stability. 
More  specifically,  a  robust  recovery  is  underway  in  the  US.  As  a  consequence,  financial 
markets largely expect the Federal Reserve Bank to raise its policy rates sometime in 2015 
as it moves to normalize its monetary policy settings. However, if inflation in the US softens 
considerably, then the increase in interest rates may come later than anticipated, keeping in 
mind the Fed’s forward guidance on its inflation objective. 
By contrast, low oil prices increase the risk of deflation in the Euro area and Japan, which 
could further stall their economic recovery. At the moment, even with substantial monetary 
easing measures already in place, economic activity in these two jurisdictions continues to 
struggle  for  traction.  This  raises  the  likelihood  of  an  extended  period  of  monetary 
accommodation by their respective central banks. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  There is a benefit to this, as this could provide some counterbalance to the potential decline 
in global liquidity and increase in interest rates resulting from tighter monetary policy in the 
US moving forward. 
On  balance,  these  contrasting  prospects  underpin  the  risk  of  capital  flow  volatility  and 
financial market turbulence. Market volatility could be fuelled by a prolonged period of low 
interest rates and liquidity enhancement measures, as investors continue to search for higher 
yield. 
Fortunately,  even  amid  the  volatility,  investors  tend  to  go  back  to  assessing  the  merits  of 
individual economies. For the Philippines, these merits include ample fiscal policy space, a 
sound  and  responsive  banking  system,  an  increasingly  inclusive  financial  system,  and  a 
healthy external position, all of which contribute to a solid outlook for growth. 
Indeed,  the  country’s  solid  macroeconomic  fundamentals  continue  to  give  confidence  to 
investors  and  creditors.  Moving  forward,  we  will  continue  to  invest  in  sound  and  prudent 
policies to ensure both price and financial stability. With our wide menu of policy tools and 
options, we stand ready to deploy appropriate measures as needed to ensure that liquidity 
stays  adequate  and  that  our  financial  system  remains  resilient  against  volatility  in  capital 
flows. 
For instance, will continue to pursue reforms in the banking sector. Our objective is to enable 
our banks to better withstand stresses of external origin and to compete in a more integrated 
regional arena. To this end, we have already adopted several measures – including raising 
the minimum capital requirements for banks and implementing a comprehensive credit risk 
management  framework.  Other  measures  in  the  pipeline  include  those  related  to  Basel  3 
reforms. 
The  BSP  will  also  remain  alert  to  possible  threats  to  financial  stability,  including  those 
associated  with  the  build-up  of  leverage  among  households  and  firms,  as  well  as  banks’ 
exposure to the real estate sector. To mitigate these risks, the BSP will continue to its mix of 
micro-  and  macro-prudential 
in 
consideration their potential impact on liquidity and overall financial conditions. 
tools  as  well  as  surveillance  mechanisms, 
taking 
Concluding remarks 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  disinflationary  pressures  and  divergence  are  just  two  of  the  key 
economic  issues  that  are  likely  to  pose  challenges  for  central  bank  like  the  BSP.  I  have 
discussed some of the main factors that we have considered and will continue to look into in 
the  formulation  of  our  monetary  policy  stance.  I  hope  this  provides  additional  guidance  as 
you continue your coverage of Philippine economic developments. 
In  closing,  I  wish  to  reiterate  that  while  other  emerging  markets  have  begun  to  ease  their 
monetary  policy  settings  in  view  of  their  own  domestic  considerations, we  believe  that  our 
prevailing monetary policy stance remains appropriate. 
Supported  by  robust  credit  growth  and  ample  liquidity,  current  inflation  and  output  growth 
dynamics in our country do not at this time warrant a reversal of the preemptive tightening 
measures we did in 2014. Moreover, there is still some measure of uncertainty hanging over 
global  markets,  the  implications  of  which  have  to  be  continuously  monitored  closely. 
Nevertheless,  should  the  need  arise,  we  have  ample  fiscal  headroom  to  provide  further 
stimulus to the economy. 
In  other  words,  ladies  and  gentlemen,  while  2015  is  likely  to  bring  continued  economic 
challenges for the Philippines, our country appears to be well-placed to deal with them. The 
economy’s  manageable 
firm  growth  momentum  provide 
policymakers  ample  space  to  respond  appropriately  to  evolving  domestic  and  global 
conditions. 
inflation  environment  and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
  in  all 
its  undertakings,  particularly 
Once again, I congratulate EJAP and its new set of officers under the leadership of President 
Paolo  Montecillo.  On  behalf  of  the  Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas,  I  wish  EJAP  continuing 
success 
its  programs  concerning  professional 
development, sports, cultural activities, and health protection. 
We  have  seen  how  EJAP  has  evolved  as  a  professional  organization  in  its  first  29  years. 
Many of its members have moved on to assume greater responsibilities as senior journalists 
and  editors,  here  and  overseas.  Indeed,  EJAP  has  set  the  bar  for  covering  the  economic 
beat with depth, discipline, fairness and responsibility. Congratulations and thank you EJAP! 
On our part, you can be assured that the BSP will continue to engage economic journalists 
with professionalism and respect. 
Mabuhay ang EJAP! Mabuhay ang ating mahal na bansang Pilipinas! Maraming salamat sa 
inyong lahat! 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
