  Fabio Panetta: The transition towards a more stable financial system 
Address by Mr Fabio Panetta, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Italy, at the Conference on 
“Strategic  choices  for  the  Italian  banking  industry”,  organized  by  the  Associazione  per  lo 
Sviluppo degli Studi di Banca e Borsa in collaboration with the Università Cattolica del Sacro 
Cuore of Milan, Perugia, 21 March 2015. 
 Introduction 
1.  
The powerful stimulus of monetary policy, the depreciation of the currency, and the fall in oil 
prices are fueling economic recovery in the euro area. There are still risks in connection with 
the  crisis  in  Greece,  geopolitical  tensions  and  the  cyclical  slowdown  in  the  emerging 
economies. One of the factors that are impeding investment is the uncertainties surrounding 
economic agents’expectations. 
The signs are favourable in Italy too, but the strength of the recovery will depend to a great 
extent on the proper working of the credit market and the availability of a sufficient volume of 
finance for the real economy. 
The latest data show an improvement in credit availability. Banks report that they have eased 
their lending conditions, the share of firms complaining of lack of finance has diminished, and 
the decline in lending to firms has moderated. A decisive contribution to the improvement has 
come  from  the  monetary  policy  action  of  the  Eurosystem,  in  particular  the  programme  of 
quantitative easing. 
The  normalization  of  the  credit  market  is  not  complete,  however.  The  terms  of  access  to 
loans are still uneven. The flow of business credit has increased above all for the least risky 
borrowers,  i.e.  the  largest  and  most  strongly  capitalized  corporations.  Smaller  firms, 
especially  those  whose  economic  and  financial  balance  is  more  fragile,  continue  to  have 
problems obtaining outside finance. 
The performance of the credit market is conditioned by national and international regulatory 
changes, which are transforming the market’s size, structure and operating model. Moreover, 
banks are burdened with a very substantial volume of non-performing loans accumulated in 
the  course  of  the  protracted  recession.  The  effects  in  both  the  short  and  the  longer  term 
warrant thorough analysis. 
The financial system and the impact of regulatory reform 
2.  
The recent regulatory reforms in the financial sector are designed to reduce the probability of 
systemic and solo banking crises and to limit their possible repercussions on the economy. 
The principal force for change comes from the new capital adequacy provisions. The Basel 
III  rules  raise  capital  requirements,  set  a  minimum  leverage  ratio  (of  capital  to  assets  not 
weighted  for  risk),  and  establish  minimum  liquidity  requirements.  An  additional  increase  in 
capitalization  has  been 
for 
macroprudential purposes, for the entire system.1 The regulatory revision is still under way; 
rules  on  total  loss  absorbing  capacity  are  being  finalized,  to  require  global  systemically 
important”  banks  and, 
“systemically 
introduced 
for 
                                                
1   For  global  systemically  important  banks  (G-SIBs)  there  is  an  additional  requirement  for  core  tier  1  capital, 
variable between 1 and 3.5 per cent of risk-weighted assets depending on the bank’s systemic importance. 
Specific requirements can also be introduced for national systemically important banks. Among the measures 
applicable to the entire system, the provisions for a countercyclical capital buffer can be activated at times of 
excessively rapid growth of the credit aggregates. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  important banks to maintain an adequate amount of devaluable or convertible instruments in 
case of failure. 
Another  major  innovation  is  the  Bank  Recovery  and  Resolution  Directive  (BRRD).  The 
Directive, which is being transposed into Italian law, shifts the burden of bank crises from the 
public sector to the banks’ creditors (shareholders and holders of other liabilities). This marks 
the  switch  from  a  regime  in  which  big  banks  were  salvaged  with  public  money  (bail  outs) 
from one that involves investors in banks’ losses (bail ins). 
Some  countries  have  instituted  explicit  rules  to  separate  credit  business  from  the  banks’ 
proprietary  financial  and  trading  activity.  The  purpose  is  to  eliminate  indirect  subsidies  for 
these riskier activities, setting them apart from such socially valuable activities as provision of 
credit and payment services.2 
The effects on credit – First of all, these reforms produce a force for the contraction of banks’ 
balance sheets. The tougher capital and liquidity requirements, the higher funding costs that 
will stem from the BRRD (which increases the risk of liabilities other than deposits covered 
by protection schemes), and any direct limits to operations will decrease the supply of credit. 
Market forces are pushing in the same direction: the increase in credit and sovereign risks 
has  made medium-  and  long-term  wholesale  funding  more  onerous for banks,  constituting 
one more factor reducing the profitability of credit intermediation. 
The banking system forged by these reforms, then, will be characterized by a greater “safety 
margin” in terms of both capital and liquidity, but at the same time by lower profitability and a 
smaller  role  in  financing  the  economy.  What  are  the  likely  consequences  of  this 
transformation, for the Italian economy in particular? 
A substantial empirical literature indicates that in equilibrium (that is, once the transition to 
the new regime is completed), stronger capitalization of banks will have a positive impact on 
the  supply  of  credit.3  During  the  transition,  however,  the  capital  increases  required  by  the 
stronger  capital  adequacy  rules  tend  to  adversely  affect  lending  growth.  And  the  same 
applies to increased liquidity requirements. Evaluations conducted before the new rules were 
introduced  support  this  thesis,  even  while  indicating  that  the  adjustment  costs  will  be 
moderate, not so great as to compromise the net long-run benefits.4 
On  the  whole,  internationally  the  adjustment  to  the  new  standards  is  being  achieved 
essentially  through  increases  in  capital  and  liquidity,  with  no  substantial  impact  on  the 
provision of finance to the economy.5 However, the effects of banks’ deleveraging differ from 
country  to  country  depending  on  both  structural  characteristics  –  such  as  the  degree  of 
development of the capital markets – and on cyclical factors, such as the stance of monetary 
and fiscal policies, the cyclical state of the economy and the financial conditions of firms. 
                                                
2   “Separation” rules have been enacted in the United States, where the Dodd-Frank Act introduced the “Volcker 
rule”; in Britain, where the Banking Act made the proposals of the Vickers Commission into law; in France, 
with  the  Loi  de  Séparation  des  Activités  Bancaires; and in Germany  with  the  Gesetz  zur  Abschirmung  von 
Risiken. Within the European Union discussion on the need for similar measures was initiated by the Liikanen 
Report,  which  was  followed  by  a  Commission  proposal  for  a  regulation,  presented  in  January  2014  (the 
Barnier  proposal).  The  forms of  separation  differ  from country  to  country.  The  Volcker  rule  and  the  Barnier 
proposal  prohibit  banking  groups  from  engaging  in  certain  types  of  business  (such  as  proprietary  trading), 
while the French, German and British laws only require that they be done by separate units within the group. 
3   For the United States, see J. Peek and E.S. Rosengren (1995), “The Capital Crunch: neither a Borrower nor a 
Lender Be”, Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, Vol. 27, No. 3; for Italy, U. Albertazzi and D.J. Marchetti 
(2010), “Credit supply, flight to quality and evergreening: an analysis of bank-firm relationships after Lehman”, 
Bank of Italy Working Papers, No. 756, April. 
4   Bank for International Settlements, Assessing the macroeconomic impact of the transition to stronger capital 
and liquidity requirements (Final Report), December 2010; An assessment of the long-term economic impact 
of stronger capital and liquidity requirements, August 2010. 
5   S. G. Cecchetti (2014), “The jury is in”, CEPR Policy Insight, No. 76, December. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
The  leverage  of  the  main  US  banks  has  been  reduced  by  50  per  cent  since  2007.6  The 
possible repercussions of a credit restriction were moderated by firms’ recourse to the capital 
market and the shadow banking system, as well as by large-scale corporate self-financing. 
The transition was facilitated by the increase in the public debt and the exceptional monetary 
expansion, which increased the amount of resources available to the private sector. 
The banks’ deleveraging was significant in Europe as well. At a sample of 43 large banks in 
eleven countries, the leverage ratio came down from 26.0 in 2011 to 21.2 in 2014. Two thirds 
of the reduction stemmed from capital increases, the other third from a decrease in assets. 
However, the context of the balance-sheet adjustment was different from that of the United 
States. In Europe the capital market is a less important source of finance for businesses; the 
economy  consists  largely  of  smaller  firms  that  depend  on  bank  credit.  In  addition,  the 
capacity  of  the  public  sector  to  sustain  the  economy  and  the  banks  is  limited  by  ongoing 
fiscal consolidation in many countries and by the European budget rules. 
In  Italy,  the  difficulty  of  adapting  banks’  balance  sheets  to  the  new  regulatory  and  market 
environment  is  more  acute  than  in  the  rest  of the  euro  area,  despite  lower  initial  leverage 
ratios. Firms’ direct recourse to the capital market accounts for an almost negligible share – 
around 5 per cent – of total finance to the productive economy. The drawn-out recession has 
undercut  firms’  self-financing,  especially  for  smaller  businesses.  And  the  margin  for 
intervention by the public sector is narrow indeed, notwithstanding the recent measures to 
stimulate a rebalancing of firms’ financial structure. 
Now that signs of economic recovery are emerging in the euro area and in Italy, it is essential 
to learn the lessons of the crisis and to avoid pro-cyclical policies. The transition to the new 
equilibrium marked by more strongly capitalized banks with greater liquidity must be gradual 
and perspicacious. The risks of sudden adjustment must be carefully assessed. 
The  return  to  growth  and  the  easing  of  the  interest  burden  will  help  to  increase  firms’ 
profitability  and  improve  credit  quality.  Banks  need  to  accommodate  rising  loan  demand 
while maintaining strict control of risk, and of credit risk in particular. In this phase a further 
stiffening of capital and liquidity requirements could impede the supply of credit, delaying the 
economic upturn. Such a course would not only heighten macroeconomic risk but would also 
actually  increase  the  risks  for  the  financial  system,  the  exact  opposite  of  the  desired 
outcome. 
Microprudential supervision must engage with macroprudential necessities. The targets must 
be set in such a way as to endow the financial system with more than ephemeral strength, 
combining the need for bank stability with the need for a recovery in economic activity. 
At the same time, we must recognize that European integration, which has been revitalized 
by  the  project  for  Banking  Union,  necessarily  entails  major  changes  and  constraints  on 
economic agents. The pressure for higher levels of capitalization, which in the current phase 
has required a considerable effort on the part of Italian banks, derives largely from market 
forces, from a comparison with other European banks. 
The  impact  on  crisis  management  –  The  BRRD  will  bring  in  a  new  paradigm  for  the 
management of banking crises. The Directive requires the formation of a national Resolution 
Authority,  which,  in  collaboration  with  the  European  Single  Resolution  Board  (ESRB)  in 
Brussels, will deal with resolution of “less significant” banks and implement the steps in the 
resolution of “significant” banks as decided by the SRB. 
                                                
6   For  a  sample  of  ten large  banks, financial leverage,  calculated  as  the  ratio  of  total assets  to shareholders’ 
equity, was lowered from 25.2 in December 2007 to 11.8 in June 2014; see P. Bologna, M. Caccavaio and 
A. Miglietta  (2014),  EU  Bank  Deleveraging,  Bank  of  Italy  Occasional  Papers,  No.  235.  For  an  analysis  of 
deleveraging  in  the  US,  see  L.  Buttiglione,  P.  R.  Lane,  L.  Reichlin  and  V.  Reinhart  (2014),  “Deleveraging? 
What Deleveraging?” Geneva Report on the World Economy, No. 16, September. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  Even at times of ordinary bank activity, the so-called “going concern” phase, the new rules on 
resolution require completely new activities. The Resolution Authority will simulate the effects 
of crises, prepare resolution plans, identify solutions to guarantee the continued performance 
of critical functions. The Authority can intervene – observing the principle of proportionality – 
to  impose  changes  to  banks’  operational,  legal  and  organizational  structure,  in  order  to 
reduce  their  complexity  or  to  isolate  the  critical  functions  with  a  view  to  maintaining  their 
operability. In the case of failure, the Authority will determine how costs are shared and how 
the corporate units without systemic importance will be liquidated. 
Last year the Bank of Italy provided technical advice to the Government and the Parliament 
concerning the transposition of the Directive. This transposition must now be completed with 
the designation of Italy’s national Resolution Authority. 
The effects on bank-customer relations – As I observed earlier, the main effect of the BRRD 
will  be  to  limit  public  intervention  in  banking  crises  by  requiring  creditors  to  contribute  to 
resolving  the  banks’  difficulties  through  devaluation  of  their  assets  or  conversion  of  their 
financial instruments into shares. 
This change will require banks to pay drastically increased attention to correct relations with 
customers. Savers must be made fully aware of the risks they run in the event of the bank’s 
failure. The investments that banks propose to their customers must be perfectly consistent 
with  the  investors’  propensity  for  risk  and  their  financial  sophistication.  Banks  must  make 
sure that their customer relations officers apply the rules on transparency in substantial and 
not merely formal terms. 
Substantial efforts have been made in the past to improve the quality and transparency of 
communication between banks and customers. The Bank of Italy has laid down forceful rules 
and checked compliance in special on-site inspections. Progress has unquestionably been 
made.  But  there  is  still  a  great  deal  of  room  for  improvement,  not  only  in  the  process  of 
adaptation to the broad, detailed provisions of the regulations but also in truly partaking in the 
spirit of the transparency and correctness regulations. 
Even these actions could prove insufficient, however, in the light of the changes introduced 
by the BRRD. We shall need to consider requiring that retail customers be directed mainly or 
exclusively to the least risky products – that is, those that under the BRRD will benefit from 
“depositor  reference”  in  the  “pecking  order”7  –  and  reserving  other  forms  of  funding  to 
professional investors. 
The role of the banks and supervision during the transition 
3.  
In recent years the Italian banking system has strengthened its capital position. Since 2007 
core tier 1 capital has been increased from 7.1 to 11.8 per cent of risk-weighted assets, and 
financial leverage has been considerably reduced. The ECB’s comprehensive assessment of 
bank  balance  sheets  confirms  the  resilience  of  the  system  as  a  whole  in  the  face  of  the 
exceptionally severe recession afflicting the Italian economy. Nevertheless, changing over to 
the new rules will require banks to intensify their efforts. In particular, three issues need to be 
addressed by consistent policies on the part of banks and authorities alike. These concern 
banks’  efficiency,  the  management  of  nonperforming  loans,  and  the  adaptation  of  banking 
governance to European competition. 
                                                
7   Bail-ins exempt certain liabilities, such as deposits up to €100,000, bonds backed by the bank’s assets, and 
short-term interbank debt. In special cases the Resolution Authority can also exempt other liabilities for the 
purpose of safeguarding systemic stability. The allocation of the losses must follow the  preferential ranking 
laid  down  by  the  Directive,  which  provides  among  other  things  that  deposits  above  €100,000  held  by 
individuals and SMEs are not to be drawn on until after other uncollateralized credits. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  the  demand 
increasing 
to 
for  relatively  higher  returns, 
firms’  recourse 
Efficiency – Raising the level of efficiency is necessary to increase profitability, which is now 
too low to remunerate the capital invested. For a good part of the banking system, efficiency 
gains can be attained via mergers. The potential benefits of such operations are substantial, 
on both the cost and the revenue side. But they are not automatic: realizing them requires 
decisive  organizational  measures  in  the  rationalization  of  distribution  systems,  in  risk 
management, in the exploitation of technology. 
Mergers  may  require  banks  to  adapt  their  level  of  capitalization  to  their  new  mode  of 
operation. Recent experience has shown that international investors are willing to take part in 
ambitious,  credible  plans  that  can  transform  today’s  regional  banks  into  more  competitive, 
better diversified intermediaries operating on a larger scale and serving the financial needs of 
their customers.  
The  bigger,  more  efficient  banks  that  will  result  from  mergers  can  make  the  inevitable 
expansion  of  the  capital  market  an  opportunity  to  increase  their  revenues.  First  of  all,  the 
prolonged  period  of  low  interest  rates  that  looms  for  the  European  economy  will  spur 
households’  search 
for  asset 
management  services.  Moreover, 
the  market  offers  substantial 
opportunities  to  provide  high-value-added  services  that  absorb  relatively  little  capital  and 
liquidity. 
Banks  can  meet  these  needs  by  capitalizing  on  their  relations  with  customers  and  their 
knowledge of the economic fabric. This will necessitate the reinforcement of the safeguards 
against the conflicts of interest stemming from their joint roles as lender, promoter of market 
access, and asset manager. 
Non-performing loans – Within the next few years the banks will have to procure from savers 
and  from  the  international  markets  the  resources  they  need  to  repay  the  very  substantial 
loans they have had from the ECB. At the same time they will be called on to sustain the real 
economy: lack of a sufficient volume of credit would throttle the recovery. 
The attainment of these objectives is impeded by the large volume of non-performing loans 
accumulated during the long phase of recession. The dead weight of these impaired assets 
reduces  the  transparency  of  balance  sheets  and  hinders  banks’  recourse  to  international 
markets for funding. It also heightens the risk aversion of banks and reduces their willingness 
to lend. 
The development of a market in non-performing loans is blocked by several factors. First, the 
slowness  and  uncertainty  of  credit  recovery  in  Italy  swells  the  risk  premium that  economic 
agents  demand  for  investing  in  these  assets,  driving  their  price  down  below  their 
“fundamental” value. And Italian banks, which as a group are now well capitalized, are loath 
to  sell  off  these  non-performing  assets  at  the  fire  sale  prices  imposed  by  this  time  of 
exceptional  economic  weakness. The  situation of  our  banks,  in fact,  is quite  different from 
that of banks in other countries that have been obliged to resort to systemic solutions for the 
disposal of non-performing assets. What is more, the simultaneous sale of large volumes of 
impaired assets by the entire banking system (or a good part of it) would provoke a collapse 
in prices and thereby, as a practical matter, prevent the conclusion of the sales. 
If  left  to  market  forces  alone,  the  disposal  of  non-performing  loans  threatens  to  be  a  very 
long-drawn-out  affair.  In  this  kind  of  scenario,  intervention  by  the  authorities  can  resolve 
problems of coordination between banks and speed up the disposal process, preventing a 
“market  failure”  from  ultimately  blocking  the  recovery  of  the  economy.  International 
experience  suggests  that  reducing  the  weight  of  non-performing  loans  on  banks’  balance 
sheets sustains lending growth and helps to create a virtuous circle of economic growth and 
improving credit quality. 
The transfer of bad debts would benefit households and firms by increasing the availability of 
credit and spurring the economic upswing. It would benefit the banking system by reducing 
the balance-sheet incidence of impaired asset items, thus lowering operating costs and the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  cost of funding. And it would benefit the public sector, with expanded tax revenues thanks to 
the cyclical upturn. 
The  measures  for  the  transfer  of  bad  credits  now  under  study  centre  on  market-based 
solutions. Their  precise features  will  be  determined  within  the  next few  weeks,  in  dialogue 
with specialized operators and with the banks. The intensity of government involvement may 
be of varying degree, and it is the subject of talks with the European institutions to assess the 
measures’  compliance  with  the  Commission’s  rules  on  state  aid.  The  European  legal 
framework has changed in the last two years, and measures such as those taken in the past 
in  other  countries  are  no  longer  practicable.  For  one  thing,  those  solutions  entailed  the 
massive use of public resources, which in our case would also raise questions of budgetary 
propriety. 
Significant benefits would also accrue from measures, these too under study, to shorten the 
duration  of  credit  recovery  proceedings,  which  is  much  longer  in  Italy  than  on  average  in 
Europe  and  constitutes  one  of  the  main  causes  for  the  build-up  of  non-performing  assets 
carried on banks’ balance sheets. 
Last year’s amendments to the Civil Code have removed some of the structural causes of 
this problem. Hopefully, additional reforms in the near future can shorten or eliminate some 
of the terms for foreclosure procedures and streamline asset sale procedures, possibly via 
electronic instruments. 
Governance  –  The  Bank  of  Italy  has  long  seen  and  signalled  the  need  for  substantial 
progress in banks’ governance. Within the limits of our powers, we have acted to strengthen 
the  cooperative  banks  and  induce  them  to  make  changes  considered  indispensable.  We 
have  asked  them,  like  all  the  other  banks,  to  upgrade  the  membership  and  improve  the 
functioning of their boards of directors, so as to improve their capacity for governance. We 
have introduced rules on executive compensation, based on European regulations. We have 
also asked the cooperative banks to encourage shareholders’ participation at meetings. 
Notwithstanding  the  new  rules,  the  improvements  achieved  have  not  been  decisive.  Nor 
could  they  have  been,  given  the  legislative  framework.  Our  rules  could  not  alter  the  legal 
limits  to  share  ownership,  the  one-person-one-vote  provision,  or  the  constraints  on  the 
voluntary transformation of cooperatives into other corporate forms. 
The recent government provisions on cooperative banks permit more thorough monitoring of 
directors and administrators; they make the banks more attractive to investors, strengthening 
their  ability  to  raise  capital  on  the  market.  The  most  capable  managers  will  succeed  in 
exploiting these opportunities to improve efficiency, move into new markets, and support the 
best firms.  
Now the need is to reduce the fragmentation that prevails in the system of cooperative and 
mutual  banks,  allowing  for  forms  of  integration  that  preserve  these  institutions’  local  roots 
and  capitalize  on  individual  banks’  membership  of  banking  groups.  The  solutions  must  be 
guided by the essential aim of enabling these banks too to turn readily to the market in order 
to raise capital, as well as by the purpose of improving the quality of their management. 
The  cooperative  banking  systems  of  other  European  countries  are  much  less  fragmented 
than the Italian system. The prevailing models centre on banking groups, in which the parent 
company  exercises  functions  of  direction  and  oversight  over  the  banks  in  the  group  and, 
where necessary, can recapitalize them by recourse to the capital market. This model does 
not denature the cooperative form of the individual banks but allows them to maintain their 
characteristic mutuality and their community roots. 
Integration  of  the  system  of  cooperative  credit  is  in  the  interest  of  the  cooperative  banks 
themselves,  to  ensure  that  cooperative  and  mutual  banks  can  continue  to  operate 
independently in an environment requiring rapid provision for the needs for recapitalization 
and  efficient  management,  and  in  the  light  of  the  narrower  margins  for  intervention  at 
troubled intermediaries. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Conclusion 
4.  
In  recent  months  the  European  Central  Bank,  in  keeping  with  its  mandate,  has  dealt 
effectively and flexibly with the pressures towards the fragmentation of the European markets 
and with the emerging threat of deflation, preserving the stability of the euro area. Now this 
kind of flexibility, without prejudice to the rules we have instituted, is necessary at national 
and at European level in order to wed the objective of soundness of banks with the needs of 
economic recovery. Where market failures occur, public intervention cannot be ruled out a 
priori. 
In their own interest the banks, despite the transition to the new set of European and global 
regulations  and  the  likely  gradual  diminution  of  their  role  to  the  advantage  of  the  capital 
markets, must enhance their capacity to provide financial support to the real economy. I have 
mentioned the priorities of the current phase: regaining efficiency, managing credit risk and 
strengthening governance. Mergers can help in attaining these objectives. 
The  financial  system  cannot  solve  such  problems  of 
the  real  economy  as  poor 
competitiveness and low productivity, on which I have not dwelt today. But it does have an 
indirect role to play in facilitating the transformation and growth of firms. Banks can play this 
role  while  accompanying  the  development  of  the  capital  market  and  drawing  significant 
advantages from  it.  It  is  up  to firms  to  continue  their  action for  a  better  balanced  financial 
structure, all to the benefit of their ability to stay in the market. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
