  Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Sustaining economic growth 
Speech by Mr Amando M Tetangco, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the 
central bank of the Philippines), at the MAP Gen Membership Meeting (GMM) and First MAP 
Economic Briefing for 2015 with the theme “Innovative Leadership for Sustained Growth?”, 
Makati City, 24 February 2015. 
 “Innovative Leadership for Sustained Growth”. 
Strong, Simple, Spirited. It’s a confident statement and direct to the point, quite like what we 
have come to expect from MAP President, Popoy Del Rosario. 
This theme, which MAP, has chosen for 2015 reminds me of that management principle – 
Innovate or Stagnate. 
“Innovate or stagnate” is direct and simple to remember, and has a nice ring to it. But when 
you put “innovation” in the context of the broader concept of “leadership” (as MAP has done 
here),  the resonance  of that ring  becomes  deeper  and  applying  it  within  our  organizations 
becomes more challenging. 
While it is difficult to put into practice, “Innovate or stagnate” is not impossible to do so. Think 
of a company like Google. Our local telcos, our local conglomerates, even our banks. They 
constantly reinvent themselves to gain a bigger share of the pie or create new markets where 
there previously were none. All these, while taking care of their people. 
I have spent about two-thirds of my life as a central banker, with the last 10 years of that as 
the BSP governor. And I can tell you for a fact that, that mantra of innovation has never been 
more relevant in central banking than it has in the last eight years. 
Why do I say that? Simple. The 2007/08 Global Financial Crisis (or the GFC) happened. The 
GFC  led  us  to  uncharted  territory  as  it  was  a  crisis  unlike  any  in  the  recent  past.  Let  me 
illustrate. 
Unlike in 1997/98, when the financial crisis originated from the emerging markets in Asia, the 
GFC was a crisis that started from the advanced economy world. In 1997/98, central banks 
and economies had to fix exchange rate valuations and develop capital markets. Painful. But 
nothing  extraordinary  because  contagion  was  localized  to  the  region.  During  the  GFC 
recession was deep in the advanced economy world. And because of highly interconnected 
markets, that economic weakness spread to the rest of the globe. There also was no clear 
way  out  of  the  room  for  the  debt  crisis  in  Europe.  Market  confidence  (and  in  some 
jurisdictions, even political confidence) was very low, if not non-existent. 
During  the  GFC,  major  central  banks  had  reached  the  zero  bound  of  the  policy  curve. 
Interest rates had gone so low, there was hardly any wiggle room to use interest rates for 
stimulating  the  economy.  We  could  therefore  no  longer  rely  on  the  familiar  channels  of 
transmission of monetary policy. At the time, new transmission channels emerged such as 
the  “expectations  channel”  and  the  “risk-taking  channel”.  So,  advanced  economy  central 
banks  needed  to  employ  non-conventional  monetary  tools.  Even  central  banks  in  some 
emerging market economies had to deploy non-traditional tools because of contagion. 
As a result – Asset Purchase Programs in all letters of the alphabet some of which you would 
normally  throw  away  in  a  game  of  Scrabble  came  into  vogue. Q-E-1, QE2  (with  operation 
twist) in the US, OMT [or Outright Monetary Transactions] and TLTRO [or Targetted Long-
Term Refinancing Operations] in Europe, and Q-Q-E (Quantitative and Qualitative Easing – 
the three arrows) in Japan. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Furthermore, central banks needed to be sharper and more pointed in their communication 
of policy intent. As you now know, “forward guidance” has come to be a specific central bank 
technique for managing market expectations. 
In addition, financial stability and the systemic nature of risks became the driving forces for 
the global financial reform agenda. “Too big to fail” was no longer going to be the bottom line. 
Even  as  we  speak,  ladies  and  gentlemen, financial  reforms  are  being  put  in  place  so  that 
those defined to be “systemically important institutions” would not have to be bailed out by 
taxpayer money. These SIFIs would instead be mandated to meet a higher capital standard. 
SIFIs have to have more “skin in the game”, so to speak. 
And the game, ladies and gentlemen, has changed. 
Micro prudential regulations, while necessary, are no longer sufficient. It may be recalled that 
micro  prudential  measures  are  meant  to  improve  individual  institutions’  resilience  to  risks. 
Central  banks  must  now  also  have  macroprudential  measures  in  place.  Macroprudential 
measures look to address the interconnected nature of the system and help ensure safety at 
the system level. 
In truth, some have said that at the height of the GFC, Central Banking was the “only game 
in town”. Monetary policy was made to bear the brunt of the heavy lifting in responding to the 
effects of the crisis because there was very little fiscal policy space, particularly in the AEs. 
You may ask, eight years from the GFC, how do we see the operating environment? What is 
the global outlook now? How does that translate to the Philippines? 
With these in mind, let me structure the rest of my presentation as follows: Since I began with 
the GFC, let me continue with our global outlook and the risks and challenges we see from 
global impulses. Then I’ll move to our own domestic market dynamics, and conclude with the 
policy thrusts of the BSP to address these concerns. 
The consensus at the moment is that global growth will continue to be uneven. If you look at 
the slide closely, you could see, global growth is MULTI-SPEED. In the most recent forecast 
of  the  IMF,  the  US  was  the  only  major  economy  for  which  the  Fund  raised  its  growth 
projections. The growth forecasts for EU and Japan, as well as for Emerging and Developing 
Asia (which includes India and China) were downgraded. 
An  offshoot  of  the  growing  relative  strength  of  the  US  economy  has  been  the  parallel 
strength in the US dollar, based on the US dollar Currency Index as of 23 February 2015. 
Further,  due  to this  weak  and  uneven  global  economic  growth,  central  banks  are  seen  as 
adopting differing paths in their monetary policy stances. On one end of the spectrum, the 
Fed Reserve (central bank of the US) is widely expected to begin to raise its interest rates 
(“lift-off”)  this  year,  while  on  the  other  end,  the  ECB  has  announced  its  own  version  of 
quantitative easing last month and Japan had earlier further increased its monetary base. 
The upshot of this divergence is that one end of the spectrum provides a counterbalance to 
the other, giving the market the confidence that global liquidity will not just dry up with policy 
normalization  in  the  US.  However,  some  market  participants  have  recently  begun  to 
reassess the strength of the divergence among central bank policies, with the steep drop in 
oil prices. 
The drop in oil prices has: 
1)  
2)  
heightened deflation pressures in the EU and Japan, 
led  to  reduction  in  capital  expenditures  in  the  US  that  now  threatens  to  soften 
economic growth and inflation in the US, and, 
caused  some  emerging  markets  to  also  be  leery  of  the  adverse  growth  effects  if 
deflation becomes more pervasive. 
3)  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  With these, the Fed may not tighten as previously expected, and even other central banks 
may ease further. 
If we add to these factors the unquenchable thirst for yield by investors, we can expect some 
capital flow volatility as market participants rebalance their portfolios. 
In  sum,  ladies  and  gentlemen,  we  see  three  major  trends  in  the  global  operating 
environment. 
1)  
2)  
3)  
Multi-speed global growth, 
Policy divergence among advanced economies, and 
Bouts of financial market volatility as global markets rebalance positions in the face 
of US dollar strength and volatility in commodity markets. 
Notwithstanding  this  fluid  external  backdrop,  the  resilience  of  our  economy  is  expected  to 
continue. 
In the aftermath of the GFC, the Philippines has been tagged as “the” bright spot in Asia. For 
64 successive quarters, the Philippines has been marking positive growth. In 2014, the full 
year growth of 6.1 put the Philippines second to China among select Asian economies. This 
growth  performance  is  being  underpinned  by  the  sustained  contributions  of  the  services 
sector, the recent rebound in manufacturing, and favorable improvements in labor dynamics 
as we stand at the cusp of what the United Nations calls the “demographic sweet spot”. 
Indeed, the numbers reflect resiliency. 
It bears noting that this sustained output growth of the Philippine economy was attained in a 
stable inflation environment. The 2014 full year inflation averaged 4.1 percent, marking it as 
the 6th consecutive year that inflation is within the target range of the Government. The latest 
headline inflation was posted at 2.4 percent in January 2015, well within the target range for 
2015 of 2–4 percent. 
Meanwhile,  money  supply  continues  to  be  sufficient  to  support  the  sustained  demand  for 
credit,  the  bulk  of  which  continues  to  be  channeled  to  the  key  production  sectors. 
Intermediation  of  these  funds  has  been  safe  and  efficient  owing  to  our  sound  and  stable 
banking system. 
It’s  worth  noting  that  of  the  69  jurisdictions  rated  by  Moody’s,  it  was  only  the  Philippine 
banking system which Moody’s gave a “positive outlook” rating to. 
Indeed,  our  banks  have  strong  balance  sheets.  Banking  system  CAR  is  above  both  the 
national and Basel standards. The quality of banks’ loan portfolios (UKBs) also continues to 
be healthy with NPL ratio at 1.98 percent as of November 2014. 
On the external front, we have been able to sustain current account surpluses since 2003, 
due to strong structural flows from remittances, BPO receipts and tourism. This has allowed 
us to build up our GIR to $80 billion, which is more than 10 months’ worth of imports of goods 
and payment for services. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  with  these  macroeconomic  indicators,  it  would  seem  that  the 
Philippines was not severely affected by the GFC. 
This is true. We believe this was because we have “kept our own house in order”. Keeping 
one’s own house in order entails putting together policies that are responsive. However, what 
can be considered responsive today, may not necessarily be what is responsive in the future. 
Keeping one’s house in order, therefore, requires creativity and innovativeness. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  in  the  areas  that  are  under  the  purview  of  the  BSP,  keeping  our 
house in order has meant: 
1.  
Being focused on our primary goal of keeping prices stable. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  Being deliberate in adopting the global financial reform agenda. 
We  have  done  this  by  ensuring  that  our  monetary  policy  framework  is  well  calibrated  and 
appropriately  flexible.  We  constantly  improve  our  surveillance  capabilities,  fine-tune  our 
econometric  models,  perform  scenario  building,  and  engage  the  market  and  our  regional 
counterparts to make sure the inputs to policy are always fresh. 
To illustrate, during our last policy meeting, we kept our policy rates steady, even as some in 
the  region  have  lowered  their  policy  rates.  Our  assessment  then  was  that  inflation  would 
remain within the government’s target range of 2 to 4 percent over the policy horizon and that 
the risks to this forecast are balanced. 
FOR NOW, therefore, we deem the stance of monetary policy to be APPROPRIATE. 
2.  
While we agree with the goals of the global reforms, our adoption of these has been based 
on our unique domestic market conditions. 
For instance, we adopted the capital requirements of Basel 3 in January 2014 because our 
banks were already above the new requirements anyway. Meanwhile,  we have decided to 
phase in the adoption of the other components of Basel 3, including those related to liquidity 
and leverage. 
Our approach to reform has always been pragmatic. But we do not subscribe to the view of 
others that “if it ain’t broke why fix it”. There is always a better way of doing things, but one 
needs to have a macro view in adopting change. 
There  will  always  be  those  who  would  be  negatively  affected  by  change.  So,  we  are 
consultative in adopting reforms. This way, the market could understand that the short-term 
pain of reforms will be balanced by long-term safety for the whole system. 
3.  
Being open to liberalizing the FX environment and keeping a flexible exchange rate 
system. 
Being creative in our surveillance and monitoring 
We  have  found  that  transparency  and  flexibility  in  FX  transactions  helps  the  market  plan 
better. We are on our 7th wave of FX liberalization measures. 
We  have  also  allowed  the  exchange  rate  to  be  determined  by  market  forces.  From 
experience, these policies have helped us to better manage external vulnerabilities. 
4.  
An example here is our adoption of stress testing. 
We stress the bank balance sheets for extreme but plausible scenarios. One specific form of 
stress test is the Real Estate Stress Test (REST). Based on the results of these stress tests, 
our banks are seen to be able to withstand plausible stresses. 
5.  
Finally, being strong advocates of financial inclusion. 
We  are firm  believers  that  policy  must  translate to  an  improvement  in  the  quality  of  life of 
every  Filipino.  I  find  this  consistent  with  INNOVATIVE  LEADERSHIP.  As  Cardinal  Tagle 
reminded as during the last induction of MAP officers and directors, we must always consider 
the  interest  of  others  (our  people  and  others  who  may  need  assistance)  in  our  entities’ 
corporate strategy. 
While keeping inflation stable already helps the Filipino maintain his purchasing power, we 
believe  that  more  can  be  done.  Our  approach  to  financial  inclusion  is  three-pronged. 
1) Access 
regulation; 
2) Financial  education  that  is  targeted;  and  3)  Financial  consumer  protection  that  is 
institutionalized. 
There is so much ground to cover in financial inclusion and what we do in the BSP is but part 
of it. This is why we have spearheaded the drafting of a National Financial Inclusion Strategy, 
to bring together the financial inclusion work in other government agencies, interested NGOs 
through  proportionate 
financial  services 
reasonably-priced 
to 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  and the private sector into a comprehensive, holistic plan. We hope to be able to launch this 
year. 
As  a  result  of  these  initiatives,  the  Philippines  has  been  recognized  as  having  one  of  the 
most conducive regulatory environments for financial inclusion. 
I  hope  that  in  the  last  25  minutes  or  so,  I  have  been  able  to  paint  a  fair  picture  of  the 
economy as we move forward in the context of the global environment we operate in. The 
Philippines is expected to remain resilient and grow above trend (Govt target of 7–8 pct), in a 
low inflation environment (Govt target of 2–4 pct), supported by a sound banking system, and 
able to withstand reasonable external shocks. 
I also hope that you now have a better appreciation of what to expect from the BSP. The 
BSP can lead in the initiatives I mentioned, but we cannot do it alone. You, in the corporate 
world, are the ones who bring to life the policies we espouse. As you can see from the slide, 
the goal is to have everyone rowing in synch and towards the same goal. 
In the areas under our purview, the BSP has tried to be an innovative leader. 
1.  
2.  
3.  
We try to be unconstrained by the past, even as we learn from it 
We always ask the relevant questions and try to find the appropriate answers, and 
We  continue  to  believe  that,  in  partnership  with  the  market  and  corporate  world, 
there is always a better way of doing things. 
As  we  push  forward  in  2015,  I  hope  that  the  MAP  and  the  BSP  can  work  more  closely 
together  towards  our  shared  goal  of  a  stable  macroeconomy  and  sustained  economic 
growth. 
Thank you and again, good afternoon to everyone. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
