  Mohammed Laksaci: Banking sector reform and financial stability in 
Algeria 
Communication  by  Mr  Mohammed  Laksaci,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Algeria,  for  the 
38th meeting  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  Arab  Central  Banks  and  Monetary  Agencies, 
Alger, September 2014. 
 Introduction 
After  being  strongly  involved  since  2008  in  addressing  the  liquidity  crisis  through  massive 
liquidity support and expansion of their balance sheets, central banks in advanced countries 
must now pay more attention to monitoring systemic risk, in a context of interaction between 
banking and sovereign risks. Seven years after the burst of the international economic and 
financial crisis, the global financial sector reform agenda remains incomplete, while it is now 
important  to  also  face  the  issues  related  to  the  difficult  situation  of  the  global  economy 
transition. 
This calls for strong efforts to accelerate the repair of banks’ balance sheets in the euro zone 
and the early establishment of a unique and independent mechanism of crisis resolution. The 
prospects  of  monetary  policies  normalization  (in  particular  in  the  United  States)  and  its 
negative effects on emerging economies through capital flows require sustained attention. 
Like other central banks, the Bank of Algeria had to face the need of further strengthening 
systemic risk monitoring. This requires the deepening of the banking system reforms. 
1.  
Banking sector reform: efforts made prior to the strengthening of the legal 
framework in 2010 
Within the broad framework of the economic reforms undertaken in the late 1980s (overall 
reform of the economic regulation, including that of price systems), the banking reform has 
been  implemented  since  1990,  following  the  enactment  of  the  law  on  money  and  credit 
(1990) establishing a two-tier banking system. This major monetary reform reemphasized the 
role  of  money  and  monetary  policy-  through  indirect  tools-  in  macro-financial  regulation, 
thereby enabling a gradual shift from the “financial repression” paradigm. 
Since  the  year  1990,  and  after assessing the  vulnerabilities  of  the  Algerian  public  banking 
system,  a  number  of  reforms  have  been  undertaken  to  improve  the  functioning  of  public 
banks, reinforce the banking activity operating framework- especially through the opening of 
the  sector  to  private  investors-  and  promote  the  development  of  non-bank  financial 
institutions. 
Based on institutional audits, action plans aiming at improving public banks functions have 
been launched during the first half of the 1990s and pursued during the 2000s. In order to 
improve their governance, performance contracts between the public banks’ managers and 
the State as the owner, took effect in the beginning of 2007. 
At  the  same  time,  and  on  the  basis  of  their  financial  statements  audits  undertaken  by 
international firms, cleaning up operations of the public banks’ balance sheet started in the 
beginning  of  1991  with  the  repurchase  of  non-  performing  loans  (NPLs)  and  capital 
increases. The public banks restructuring cost, in terms of non-performing loans repurchased 
by  the  Treasury  (excluding  interests  owed  by  the  Treasury,  materialized  in  bonds), 
accounted  for  2.38%  of  GDP  for  the  decade  1991–2000.  For  the  same  period,  when 
including  the  amount  of  foreign  exchange  losses  and  interest  rate  spreads  paid  by  the 
Treasury  on  account  of  public  banks  earlier  external  borrowing  to  support  the  balance  of 
payments, the overall cost reached 3.26% of GDP. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Improvement  in  public  finances  during  the  2000s  enabled  further  restructuring  of  public 
banks’ balance sheets, with part of the NPLs consisting this time of bad loans to the private 
sector.  For  the  period  2001–2010,  repurchases  by  the  Treasury  through  issuance  of 
securities,  essentially  with  regard  NPLs  to  public  enterprises,  reached  about  1.30%  of  the 
decade’s  GDP.  Finally,  in  2011–2012,  repurchase  by  the  Treasury  of  loans  to  public  and 
private enterprises accounted for 235.7 billion dinars, representing 0.77% of GDP. 
Along  with  NPLs  repurchase  operations,  public  banks  received  financial  support  from  the 
Treasury  to  increase  their  equity  capital.  The  overall  amount  in  this  regard  reached 
238.8 billion  dinars,  of  which  107.7  billion  dinars  in  cash  and  131.1  billion  dinars  in  equity 
securities. Part of these securities was subsequently repurchased by the Treasury, bringing 
their outstanding amount to 56.2 billion dinars by end 2010. It is worth noting that, during the 
2000s, public banks provisioned significantly and benefitted from additional financial support 
from  the Treasury  to further  increase  their  equity  capital.  This  important  and  costly  bailout 
program  enabled  public  banks  to  meet  the  prudential  regulation  requirements  in  terms  of 
solvency ratios and risk-distribution, in line with international standards. 
With the sustained implementation of the new banking regulatory framework for banks and 
financial institutions during the 1990s, especially with regard the rules and conditions for the 
establishment of new banks and financial institutions, the second half of the 1990s recorded 
the  first  phase  of  effective  opening  of  the  banking  activity  to  the  private  sector.  However, 
violations  and  breaches  in  some  private  banks  led  the  Banking  Commission  –  the 
supervisory authority – to withdraw the licenses of seven banks and two financial institutions 
between 2003 and 2009, a number of which being in bankruptcy conditions between 2003 
and 2006 and having risks concentrated on entities of their group. Against this background, 
the  deposit  guarantee  scheme  was  activated  in  2003  in  accordance  with  the  prevailing 
regulatory framework. 
In August 2003 and in light of these failures, the 1990 banking law was revised to strengthen 
the licensing conditions, increase the minimum capital requirement, which also became fully 
due  in  cash,  and  strengthen  the  Banking  Commission  missions.  In  particular,  the 
Commission  was  given  exclusive  competence  to  exceptionally  extend  the  deadline  for  the 
publication of banks and financial institutions’ financial statements. 
In  parallel,  the  supervisory  capacities  of  the  Bank  of  Algeria  have  been  significantly 
reinforced  since  the  beginning  of  the  2000s;  Bank  of  Algeria’s  corps  of  inspectors  being 
legally  in  charge  of  implementing  the  supervisory  program  set  up  by  the  Banking 
Commission. The financial sector assessment program jointly carried out by the IMF and the 
World Bank in 2003 and updated in 2007, together with the associated technical assistance, 
contributed to strengthening Bank of Algeria’s supervisory tools. 
As of 2002, the supervisory framework also benefited from the adoption of a regulation on 
internal  control  of  banks  and  financial  institutions,  which  requires  them  to  establish  an 
internal  control  system  for  their  activities  and  associated  risks  in  order  to  improve  risk 
assessment,  management,  and  control.  The  emergence  of  excess  liquidity  in  the  money 
market since 2002 led to the introduction of new monetary policy tools in order to mop it up 
effectively. 
Based on a comprehensive regulation adopted by the Council on Money and Credit in 2005, 
important progress was achieved in 2006 in modernizing the payment systems, including the 
real-time  gross  settlement  system  for  large  value  and  urgent  payments  and  the  clearing 
system for retail payments. The efficiency and safety of transactions occurring through these 
systems have been strengthened since then, in line with international standards. 
To improve bank financing of private enterprises, especially SMEs, the government initiated 
reforms regarding loan guarantees in the 2000s. These include an increase in the level of 
guarantee  (from  50  to  250  million  dinars)  provided  by  the  Guarantee  Fund  for  Investment 
Credits  (CGCI),  the  creation  of  the  national  investment  fund  and  regional  investment 
agencies,  and  the  introduction  of  an  interest  rate  subsidy  on  investment  loans.  These 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  measures have substantially contributed to increasing the share of credit to the private sector 
in  total  credit,  which  rose  by  24  percentage  points  (from  31.3%  to  55.3%)  over  the  last 
decade. 
As  a  non-bank  source  of  investment  financing,  financial  market  financing-  mainly  bond 
issuance – has significantly increased since 2002 in response to new financing needs related 
to private and public enterprises investment programs. As a percentage of nonhydrocarbon 
GDP, the financing of public and private enterprises through bond issuance reached 3.5% in 
2006, up from 1.5% in 2004. 
2.  
Macroeconomic stability and recent strengthening of the financial stability 
framework 
The  return  to  macroeconomic  stability  in  2000  and  the  financial  performance  achieved 
between 2001 and 2008, allowed the domestic economy to weather the global crisis well. In 
particular,  sustained  accumulation  of  foreign  reserves  between  2000  and  2008  and  early 
repayment of the external public debt in the mid-2000s put Algeria in a position of net creditor 
vis-à-vis the rest of the world. Its net external position reached 91% of GDP in 2013, in a 
context of continued prudent management of foreign reserves by the Bank of Algeria. 
This  external  financial  stability  is  supported  by  Bank  of  Algeria’s  active  exchange  rate 
management  through  its  interventions  in  the  interbank  foreign  exchange  market  aiming  at 
stabilizing the real effective exchange rate of the dinar close to its medium term equilibrium 
level. In the first half of 2014, real effective exchange rate slightly appreciated, in a context of 
disinflation. The inflation performance over the last twelve years, except for the year 2012, is 
an  anchor  to  monetary  stability  in  Algeria,  despite  structural  excess  liquidity  in  the  money 
market.  After  a  surge  in  2012,  the  disinflation  process  started  in  February  2013  and 
continued through 2014, with inflation declining to an annual average of 1.49% in July. The 
contribution  of  monetary  policy  to  preserving  financial  stability  in  Algeria  remains  crucial, 
given  the  predominance  of  the  banking  sector  in  the  Algerian financial  system  and  banks’ 
potentially important role in the development of financial intermediation. 
At  the  same  time,  the  financial  capacity  built  during  the  period  2000–2008  enabled  the 
Budget to mitigate the impact of the 2009 external shock, while avoiding any crowding out 
effect. This financing capacity remains significant and accounts for 34% of GDP at the end of 
2013,  in  a  situation  of  very  low  domestic  public  debt  (8%  of  GDP  in  2013)  and 
implementation of fiscal consolidation. 
In contrast with the case of several emerging and developing countries, credit expansion in 
Algeria  continued  at  the  pre-global  financial  crisis  pace,  and  even  at  a  higher  rate  since 
2010, in particular as regards credit to the private sector. The strong growth of credit to the 
economy in 2013 (20.3% against 15.1% in 2012 and 14% in 2011), driven by medium and 
long term credit dynamics (27.6%), was a key determinant of monetary expansion in 2013. 
As  regards  the  private  sector,  the  credit  growth  rate  over  the  last  thirteen  years  averaged 
19.4%. 
The revision of the 2003 banking law through the Ordinance on Money and Credit of August 
2010 extended the missions of the central bank to include an explicit objective of financial 
stability in addition to the price stability mandate. 
The  2010  banking  law  emphasized  the  role  of  the  Bank  of  Algeria  in  ensuring  banking 
system  stability,  safety  and  soundness.  In  this  regard,  it  has  been  endowed  with  larger 
prerogatives  to  carry  out  any  investigation  at  the  level  of  banks  or  financial  institutions, 
thereby  enabling  greater  capacity  for  early  detection  of  vulnerabilities  in  the  system. 
Accordingly, the  Bank  of  Algeria  intensified micro-prudential  controls,  including  with  regard 
banks’ anti money laundering and financing of terrorism mechanisms. Improved efficiency of 
these controls enables an orderly development of the banking system. For a comprehensive 
monitoring  of  the  banking  sector  stability,  the  Bank  of  Algeria  periodically  assesses  its 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  soundness, based on stress tests which have been developed since 2007 and strengthened 
in 2013–2014. 
In addition, existing micro-prudential regulation tools – such as loan to value ratios, minimum 
reserve  requirement  (also  a  monetary  policy  instrument),  and  the  ratio  of  debt  service  to 
revenue – have been revisited and could be adjusted as needed to face potential systemic 
risks. Furthermore, a strengthening of macro-prudential tools is underway since early 2013, 
especially through the introduction of new tools enabling horizontal analysis of risks and the 
introduction of resilience tests. 
To  further  develop  the  operational  framework  for  financial  stability,  and  following  the 
implementation in 2010 of the new accounting rules, in line with international standards, as 
well as those related to the assessment of the risks associated with new financial products, a 
regulation on the identification, measurement, and management and control of the liquidity 
risk  was  enacted  by  the  Council  on  Money  and  Credit  in  May  2011.  This  regulation 
introduces  a  minimum  short-term  liquidity  ratio  which  must  be  met  by  banks  and  financial 
institutions at all times. In the same vein, the Council on Money and Credit has also enacted 
in May 2011 a second regulation establishing an internal surveillance system and a ceiling by 
counterpart  regarding  interbank  outstanding  lending  and  borrowing,  especially  those 
occurring  in  the  money  market.  The  assessment  made  by  the  Bank  of  Algeria  for  2013 
suggests that all banks meet the liquidity ratio requirements (169.87% at the end of 2013), 
despite the relative stabilization of banking liquidity over the past year. 
In  terms  of  banking  sector  depth,  it  is  worth  noting  that  the  ratio  of  collected  resources 
(demand  and  term  deposits  excluding  hydrocarbon  deposits)  to  nonhydrocarbon  GDP 
increased in 2012 and 2013 (62.73%) after a stabilization at 61.44% in 2011. The upward 
trend between 2008 and 2013 of the credit to the private sector as a proportion of private 
sector deposits in local currency, in a context of increased financial transformation, is another 
relevant  indicator  of  the  banking  system  depth.  Moreover,  the  ratio  of  total  credit  to 
nonhydrocarbon GDP remained stable, whereas credit to the private sector/nonhydrocarbon 
GDP increased somewhat in 2013 to reach 23.45% (21.35% in 2011). 
In  2013,  while  pursuing  their  provisioning  efforts,  banks  consolidated  their  financial 
soundness  indicators.  Solvency  ratios  remain  high,  much  higher  than  required  under  the 
prevailing  regulation  and  in  line  with  the  recommended  level  under  Basel  III.  The  banking 
sector  soundness  is  anchored  to  high  capital  adequacy  ratios  and  high  profitability  and 
liquidity.  The  solvency  ratios  are  in  line  with  those  of  comparable  emerging  market 
economies. 
In 2013, an assessment of the banking sector carried out by the International Monetary Fund 
and the World Bank has helped define further directions in deepening banking sector reforms 
and strengthening banking system stability in Algeria. Effective implementation has started in 
the  first  quarter  of  2014  with  the  enactment  by  the  Council  on  Money  and  Credit  of  three 
regulations  related  to  the  solvency  ratios,  large  exposures  and  participations,  and  loans 
classification and provisioning. The minimum Tier 1 capital ratio has now been set at 9.5%, 
higher than recommended by the Basel Committee, and the regulatory capital ratio has been 
set at 12%. Moreover, as regards the strengthening of the capacity in assessing the banking 
sector risk, Bank of Algeria will rely, as of the beginning of 2015, on the effective use of the 
new stress test model, and on the generalization of the bank rating system. 
Furthermore, within the larger prerogatives scope provided by the 2010 law, encompassing 
the  functioning,  surveillance,  and  security  of  the  payment  systems,  the  Bank  of  Algeria  is 
currently updating the payment systems infrastructure (real-time gross settlement system for 
large value payments and urgent payments and clearing system) established in 2006, in line 
with international standards. 
The  completion  in  2014  of  the  modernization  of  the  existing  credit  bureau  and  the 
establishment  of  a  new  infrastructure  for  the  development  of  a  broader  credit  bureau  will 
provide an important tool to monitor credit risk as of the second half of 2015. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  The  new  risk-based,  forward-looking  supervision  approach  will  be  focusing  on  the  banks’ 
credit  allocation  process  in  order  to  avoid  the  reemergence  of  credit  risk  concentration. 
Anchored within a framework of strengthened stability, the deepening of the financial sector 
reform  as  of  2014  will  form  the  basis  for  a  better  allocation  of  national  savings  to  foster 
productive investments and financing of nonhydrocarbon inclusive and job-creating growth, 
that is less dependent on the budget and is driven by SMEs development. In this regard, a 
series  of  recommendations  has  been  formulated  at  the  end  of  2012  by  a  working  group 
chaired by the Bank of Algeria, with a view of improving the financing of SMEs development, 
especially  through  better  access  to  credit  and  banking  services.  These  efforts  should  be 
sustained. For their part, banks are expected to diversify their SMEs financing tools, while 
continuing to improve the assessment, analysis, and management of credit risks. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
