  Lynn Patterson: Fine-tuning the framework for the Bank’s market 
operations 
Remarks  by  Ms  Lynn  Patterson,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  to  the  CFA 
Society Vancouver, Vancouver, British Columbia, 14 May 2015. 
 Introduction 
Good afternoon. Thank you, Geoff, for that kind introduction. And I want to thank as well the 
CFA Society for the invitation to speak here. It’s great to be among fellow charter holders. 
Like you, I made it through the three-year grind to achieve this designation. In fact, my topic 
today – the Bank’s market operations – may be an opportunity for some of you to revisit the 
fixed-income basics that we all studied. 
Many  of  you  invest,  raise  funds  or  analyze  markets,  so  I’m  sure  you  follow  the  Bank  of 
Canada’s monetary policy rate announcements. I spent many years during my career in a 
trading room and witnessed first-hand how quickly markets react and adjust to changes in 
the policy stance or target rate. As they do so, they help the Bank of Canada fulfill its two 
main responsibilities: the implementation of monetary policy and the promotion of the stability 
and efficiency of the Canadian financial system. 
Today,  as  a  deputy  governor  at  the  Bank,  observing  how  quickly  and  smoothly  markets 
adjust confirms for me that the framework guiding the Bank’s operations is working well. 
But  markets  are  dynamic  and  the  financial  ecosystem  is  always  in  flux.  Like  living 
ecosystems, it is constantly evolving and adapting to change. It’s important for us to be alert 
to shifts in its structure in order to help support its smooth and effective functioning. We aim 
to be proactive and respond to its evolution in a considered and calibrated fashion. 
In my remarks, I’ll discuss some of the shifts we are seeing in financial markets and highlight 
the changes we are proposing to fine-tune our operations. 
We recently posted on our website a consultation paper that discusses in greater detail the 
proposed  adjustments  that  I  will  outline  today.  We  are  consulting  market  participants  to 
ensure that the changes meet our intended objectives and are implemented seamlessly. A 
second  consultation  paper  on  modifications  that  we  are  proposing  to  support  financial 
stability has also been posted.1 Both were discussed in a speech by my colleague, Senior 
Deputy Governor Carolyn Wilkins, last week in Montréal.2 
I should also say here, just to be clear, that no inferences should be drawn from this speech 
and the proposals in the consultation papers about the current or future stance of monetary 
policy. 
Shifts in the financial system 
As  I  briefly  touched  on,  the  behaviour  of  market  participants  and  the  financial  system  are 
evolving. This is the result, in part, of lessons learned during the global crisis. Those lessons 
prompted  regulatory  changes to  address the  weaknesses that  were  identified.  As a  result, 
                                                
1   The  consultation  papers  are  available  at  www.bankofcanada.ca/2015/05/public-consultations-bank-canada-
framework-financial-market-operations/. 
2   C.  Wilkins,  “Liquid  Markets  for  a  Solid  Economy”  (speech  to  the  Chambre  de  commerce  du  Montréal 
métropolitain, Montréal, 5 May 2015). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  financial institutions have adjusted their operations, including how they manage their liquidity 
needs. 
In Canada, liquidity across the system has typically been distributed by the major banks and 
dealers.  At  present, there  are  15  participating financial  institutions  in  Canada’s  large-value 
payment system. These firms have accounts at the Bank of Canada and execute payments 
with each other throughout the day. But primary dealers are the main counterparties to the 
Bank in its market operations. They can access and redistribute central bank liquidity more 
broadly over the normal course of business. 
Over the past few years, we have observed that financial institutionshave become somewhat 
less  willing  to  borrow  extra  liquidity  through  our  operations  and  redistribute  it  to  others.  It 
appears that they have become more focused on meeting their own liquidity needs. 
In addition, with the new Basel III regulations requiring institutions to hold high-quality liquid 
assets to better withstand liquidity shocks, demand for these assets has also increased. And 
many  banks  are  rationalizing  the  use  of  their  balance  sheets,  moving  away  from  balance-
sheet-intensive and low-margin business lines. 
Given  these  changes,  we  have  been  reviewing  our  operating  framework  to  assess  its 
effectiveness. Let me describe how it works. 
The Bank’s Framework for market operations 
The  Bank  undertakes  a  range  of  financial  market  operations  in  the  course  of  fulfilling  our 
monetary policy and financial system responsibilities. Our operations include transactions to 
reinforce  the  target  for  the  overnight  rate,  provide  liquidity  to  financial  system  participants, 
acquire and manage assets on the Bank’s balance sheet, and lend a portion of the securities 
we  hold.3  Overall,  our  market  operations  framework  is  intended  to  achieve  our  policy 
objectives while minimizing our “footprint” in markets. 
As you may know, we announce our policy rate decisions on fixed dates, eight times a year.4 
The  policy  rate,  in  combination  with  expectations  about  our future  policy  stance  and  other 
factors,  influences  pricing  along  the  entire  yield  curve,  as  well  as  a  range  of  other  asset 
prices. These, in turn, have a material impact on the economic decisions of households and 
businesses.5  
Ideally, we prefer the overnight market to clear on its own at close to the target rate through 
market forces  rather  than  through  our  operations. We  encourage  this  with  an  interest  rate 
corridor,  which  is  reinforced  by  standing  deposit  and  lending  facilities  available  to  the 
participants in the payment system.6 The corridor helps drive them to clear at the midpoint, 
which is the target rate. 
That’s the theory, and it works well in practice. However, there can be frictions. 
                                                
3   The Bank of Canada Act and the Payment Clearing and Settlement Act (PCSA) together give the Bank the 
power to make secured loans or advances to members of the Canadian Payments Association and operators 
of financial market infrastructures designated for oversight under the PCSA. The Bank can also purchase debt 
securities from any counterparty for the purposes of conducting monetary policy or promoting the stability of 
the financial system, subject to the policies established by the Bank. 
4   The  Bank  also  retains  the  option  of  taking  action  between  fixed  announcement  dates,  although  it  would 
exercise this option only in extraordinary circumstances. 
5   Setting  the  overnight  rate  is  the  first  stage  of  a  long  transmission  mechanism  by  which  monetary  policy 
decisions ultimately affect inflation. 
6   The corridor is one-half of a percentage point wide and has the target for the overnight rate at its centre. See 
“A  Primer  on  Canada’s  Large  Value  Transfer  System”  and  “A  Primer  on  the  Implementation  of  Monetary 
Policy in the LVTS Environment”. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  For example, sometimes the interest rate that is transacted in the overnight market starts to 
move off target during the day. The Bank typically intervenes if it judges that the deviation is 
the result of generalized pressures on liquidity in the overnight market, rather than because 
of firm-specific reasons. 
For such intraday frictions, the Bank can use repurchase or repo transactions called special 
purchase  and  resale  agreements  (SPRAs)  or  sale  and  repurchase  agreements  (SRAs)  to 
add or withdraw intraday liquidity to or from the system to offset these pressures. 
So how we can we reduce the frictions and help enhance the flow of liquidity? 
Proposals for the overnight market 
We are  proposing  to  adjust  the format  of  these SPRA  (and  SRA)  operations from  offering 
primary dealers a fixed amount at the target rate, to a competitive and discriminatory price 
auction at market rates. We will also increase both the aggregate amount of each SPRA and 
SRA operation and the limit for each counterparty. These changes will allow firms that need 
liquidity to bid for a higher amount in any given round. We expect that this will help distribute 
liquidity more efficiently to those that need it most. 
At the same time, we may accept larger deviations from the target rate before we step in. 
Doing  so  will  give  the  market  more  room  to  manoeuvre  and  clear  itself  without  our 
intervention. 
These  are  the  main  proposed  changes  to  our  operations  to  reinforce  the  target  for  the 
overnight rate. 
Now,  I’m  going  to  turn  to  the  enhancements  we  are  proposing  to  support  well-functioning 
markets. An important part of how we participate in markets is through the management of 
our balance sheet. Let me give you some details on that. 
The Bank’s balance sheet 
Like any company, central banks have balance sheets that need to be managed. At the Bank 
of Canada, our largest liabilities are bank notes in circulation and deposits from the federal 
government, which are mainly backed by the assets in our investment portfolio. Almost all of 
the $94-billion in assets held on our balance sheet consist of Government of Canada bonds 
and treasury bills. These are acquired on a regular basis through primary-market purchases 
on a non-competitive basis.7  
We follow three principles in acquiring these assets: prudence, transparency and neutrality. 
Prudence is exercised primarily by selecting assets that have a low credit risk. We achieve 
transparency  by  communicating  our  balance-sheet  activities  to  the  public.  And  to  attain 
neutrality,  we  act  as  broadly  and  neutrally  as  possible  to  limit  market  distortions  from  our 
investment activities. 
At  present,  the  composition  of  the  Bank’s  portfolio  broadly  reflects  the  composition  of  the 
federal government’s domestic debt. 
Going forward, we expect that the volume of bank notes in circulation will continue to grow 
roughly  in  line  with  the  growth  of  nominal  GDP.  This  will  increase  the  Bank’s  asset 
requirements. At the same time, the market demand for Government of Canada securities is 
also increasing. For example, the proportion of the federal government’s debt held by non-
residents has increased steadily. It has risen from almost 15 per cent in 2006 to just over 
                                                
7   The results of the Bank’s purchases, including the value of securities purchased and the price. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  
 
25 per cent in 2014.8 One of the factors underlying this increase is that the Canadian dollar 
has become a more commonly held reserve currency in other countries.9  
Another factor  is  the  Basel  III regulations  that  I mentioned  earlier  which  requires  banks  to 
hold more high-quality assets. Since government securities are among the safest and most 
liquid assets available, they have become more desirable. This is why, in Canada, federal 
government securities account for the majority of the collateral used in the repo market. 
Given these pressures and the expected future growth of the Bank’s balance sheet, absent 
any changes, we would have to buy a growing share of the outstanding stock of government 
securities. This would reduce the tradable float. 
Taken together, all of these factors could intensify liquidity pressures in the Government of 
Canada repo and cash markets. Indeed, we have already seen signs of this. The Bank has 
had to lend securities from its balance sheet to alleviate short-term imbalances in demand 
and supply more frequently over the past couple of years. 
Recognizing this shifting dynamic, we are proposing several enhancements to help support 
well-functioning markets. 
Proposals to support market functioning 
Term repos 
The  first  enhancement  is  the  introduction  of  regular  term  repo  operations  as  part  of  the 
routine management of the Bank’s balance sheet. We anticipate that the conduct of money 
market  operations  at  longer  maturities  will  not  detract  from  our  ability  to  influence  the 
overnight rate.10  
Term  repos  will  be  useful  to  us  from  a  policy  perspective.  They  will  help  the  Bank  gather 
intelligence  and  analyze  changes  in  liquidity  conditions  in  short-term  funding  markets.  In 
addition, they may encourage further development of the longer-term repo market in Canada. 
And conducting term repos on a routine basis will facilitate a quick response to future market-
wide liquidity shocks. 
Term repos will also serve as a source of assets for the Bank’s balance sheet, allowing us to 
decrease our presence in the primary market for Government of Canada securities. 
We  propose  to  commence  these  term  repo  operations  in  the  autumn  of  2015,  with  a  six-
month  phase-in  strategy  to  reach  a  steady  state  portfolio  of  $7  billion  to  $10  billion.  This 
would amount to roughly 10 per cent of the Bank’s balance sheet. 
Purchasing Government of Canada securities in the secondary market 
Enhancement  number  two  is  a  shift  to  the  secondary  market  for  some  of  the  Bank’s 
purchases of Government of Canada securities, primarily non-benchmark bonds. Currently, 
our  primary-market  purchases  of  bonds  amount  to  20  per  cent  of  every  nominal  bond 
auction. 
                                                
8   Figure  for  2014  updated  from  J.  Cruz  Lopez,  R.  Mendes  and  H.  Vikstedt,  “The  Market  for  Collateral:  The 
Potential Impact of Financial Regulation,” Bank of Canada Financial System Review (June 2013): 45–53. 
9   According to the International Monetary Fund, in 2012 the Canadian dollar accounted for about 1.4 per cent or 
$87 billion of the foreign reserves held by other countries. Those numbers have since risen to 2 per cent or 
close to $120 billion (http://data.imf.org/?sk=E6A5F467-C14B-4AA8-9F6D-5A09EC4E62A4). 
10   A number of other central banks routinely conduct term repo operations. The Bank of Canada also undertakes 
them, but thus far only on an occasional basis. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  The introduction of term repos and secondary-market purchases will enable us to reduce our 
purchases  at  primary  bond  auctions  to  what  we  expect  will  be  around  10  per  cent.  Using 
2014 issuance figures, this would amount to an increase of about $9 billion in tradable float 
available across benchmarks. Our intent is to enhance liquidity in these benchmark securities 
and  hold  fewer  of  them,  leaving  more  available  to  other  buyers.  These  securities  play  a 
unique role in financial markets because they are used to price and hedge a variety of cash 
and derivative instruments. The Bank will maintain the maturity structure of the securities it 
purchases roughly in line with the profile of government debt outstanding. 
Securities lending 
The  third  enhancement  is  a  change  to  some  of  the  parameters  of  our  existing  securities-
lending activities. 
Since  2002,  the  Bank  has  operated  a  program  to  lend  a  portion  of  its  holdings  when  a 
specific bond or treasury bill is in high demand and is otherwise unavailable or trading below 
a certain threshold in the repo market. Lending our holdings provides a secondary source of 
liquidity, which helps maintain a well-functioning market. The program is designed to support 
efficient clearing and price discovery. 
Since 2013, a growing number of Government of Canada bonds have been trading at repo 
rates persistently below the overnight general collateral rate. As a result, the frequency of the 
Bank’s securities-lending has increased considerably. 
Repo tightness typically reflects an imbalance between the demand for, and availability of, 
certain securities in the repo market. Protracted repo tightness can affect the cash prices of 
these bonds and contribute to a reduction in market liquidity. It can also lead to an increase 
in  settlement  fails,  where  one  party  is  unable  to  deliver  the  securities  promised  to  its 
counterparty. 
To help support market liquidity, the Bank is proposing changes to the intervention threshold 
for  its  securities  lending.  At  the  moment,  it  appears  that  the  Bank’s  existing  threshold  is 
setting a de facto floor for market repo rates. In some circumstances the rate does not seem 
to  be  low  enough  to  induce  sufficient  lending  from  private  sector  bondholders  to  meet 
demand.  A  lower  threshold  could  help  clear  the  market,  while  the  Bank’s  program  would 
remain available to primary dealers as a backstop. 
The goal is to encourage Government of Canada securities holders, which may include not 
only domestic investors but also central banks and sovereign wealth funds, to lend out their 
securities before the Bank has to intervene. We act as custodian for 30 central banks and 
are currently implementing a number of measures that will allow them to more actively trade 
their holdings of Government of Canada securities, including in the repo market. 
Another  element  we  are  proposing  is  the  introduction  of  a  market-wide  fail  fee.  Our  own 
securities-lending  program  already  includes  such  a  fee.  We  are  seeking  feedback  on 
whether the market should impose this kind of levy on trades in securities that fail to settle on 
time, as they do in the U.S. The main purpose for adopting it would be to reduce the risk of 
settlement  fails  and  provide  investors  with  additional  financial  incentives  to  lend  securities 
that are in short supply. 
Contingent term repo facility 
Finally, after reviewing some of the ways that we dealt with short term funding needs during 
the crisis, we are proposing to develop a Contingent Term Repo Facility (CTRF).11 This will 
                                                
11   During the global financial crisis, the Bank used a number of facilities that remain available should they ever 
be required again. The CTRF is an additional tool that would complement the Bank’s arsenal. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  enhance our ability to respond to future episodes of intense market-wide stress. The facility 
would be activated at the Bank’s discretion only when conditions warrant. 
Establishing  the  CTRF  will  ensure  that  the  Bank  has  a  permanent  and  flexible  range  of 
extraordinary  liquidity  facilities  in  place  that  could  be  activated  to  respond  to  and  alleviate 
system-wide liquidity pressures. 
The CTRF would offer liquidity on a bilateral basis for customized variable terms of up to one 
month and be available to a range of counterparties, against a broad set of securities, at a 
fixed price. The specific parameters would be confirmed upon activation. We expect that if 
the  CTRF  were  activated,  the  counterparties  eligible  would  be  primary  dealers  and  their 
affiliates.However,  the  number  of  counterparties  could  be  extended  to  include  other 
institutions  –  subject  to  certain  criteria  –  should  the  Bank  consider  it  necessary  for  the 
stability of the financial system. 
Conclusion 
Let  me  wrap  up  by  reiterating  that  the  Bank’s  operating  framework  is  working  well.  We 
monitor our market operations closely to ensure that they are contributing to the maintenance 
and  diversity  of  the  financial  ecosystem.  Bearing  in  mind  that  a  healthy  system  will  feed 
economic growth, we have identified important areas for improvement. 
We think carefully about making changes to our framework because we recognize that doing 
so will affect markets. We want to make sure that any changes we propose are well thought 
out and include feedback gathered from market participants like you. 
The  adjustments  I  have  outlined  are  in  response  to  the  changes  we  are  witnessing  in 
financial markets. In addition to helping us achieve our framework objectives, they will benefit 
all market participants. 
I would like to thank Meyer Aaron, Stéphane Lavoie and Mark De Guzman for their help in 
preparing this speech. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
