  S S Mundra: Unintended consequences of new international supervisory 
framework – an emerging market perspective 
Keynote address by Mr S S Mundra, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the 
Bank of France-Reserve Bank of India Joint Conference, Paris, 20 July 2015. 
 of 
the 
the 
new 
upon 
unintended 
consequences 
Assistance  provided  by  Dr.  Mridul  Saggar,  Shri  Ayyappan  Nair  and  Shri  Sanjeev  Prakash  is  gratefully 
acknowledged. 
Bonjour! 
1. Thank you Ms. Anne Le Lorier for your thoughts. It is my pleasure to deliver the key note 
address at this RBI-BdF joint Conference being hosted by Banque de France. Let me begin 
by thanking you and the BdF for your warmth, friendliness and cordiality. Banque de France 
is  one  of  the  oldest  central  banks  in  the  world,  set  up  in  January  1800  by  Napoléon 
Bonaparte with the objective of fostering renewed economic growth in the wake of the deep 
recession of the Revolutionary period. As we sit down to deliberate upon the consequences 
of  new  international  supervisory  framework  today,  the  milieu  is  strikingly  similar  to  what 
existed more than two centuries ago. Even today, the global economy continues its struggle 
out  of  retrenchment  in  output  suffered  during  the  financial  crisis,  proving  right  the  adage 
“more the things change, more they remain the same”. Even as the standard setting bodies 
(SSBs) have embarked upon various regulatory reforms to nurture the financial system out of 
quagmire that it had gone into before the outbreak of the crisis, we feel it is worthwhile to 
deliberate 
international 
regulatory/supervisory measures and chart out ways to counter the potential adverse fallouts. 
In my address today, I would like to present the views from the perspective of the emerging 
markets.  I  will  begin  by  briefly  tracing  the  genesis  and  context  of  the  new  supervisory 
framework  and  then,  I  will  argue  that  there  are  limitations  around  how  much  can  the 
regulatory regime be tightened, considering its cost on the economy. I would then close by 
offering my perspectives on the way ahead for limiting the unintended consequences of the 
new regulatory framework. But before I get to the subject proper, let me spend a couple of 
minutes  in  underlining  the  contrasting  realties  that  the  advanced  and  the  emerging 
economies like India are faced with, in an otherwise “interconnected” world. 
2. Let us face it – it’s a multi-paced world. The ground realties in advanced economies (AEs) 
and  in  the  emerging  and  developing  market  economies  (EMDEs)  are  essentially  different. 
While,  many  of  the  AEs,  especially  in  Europe  continue  to  grapple  with  the  problem  of 
deflation and stagnant or declining growth, most of the EMDEs are busy fighting inflation and 
are  registering  growth  albeit,  a  bit  moderate.  The  EMDEs  like  India  continue  to  need  big 
investment in the infrastructure sector with an underlying potential to earn real rate of return 
unlike in many other parts of the globe. Another feature that distinguishes India from the AEs 
is  the  dominance  of  the  banking  sector  in  the  financial  system.  Notwithstanding  the  rapid 
developments  in  the  Indian  capital  markets,  the  share  of  banking  credit  to  firms  and 
households taken together as a percentage to total credit at above 90% continues to remain 
high  in  comparison  to  that  in  advanced  economies  like  France  (around  50%)  and  USA 
(around 30%).1 Bank finance for households has picked up significantly over the last decade, 
but household balance sheet still remain less leveraged compared to advanced economies. 
Banks also continue to be the most predominant source for funding the government deficits 
and  their  investment  in  government  securities  constitutes  over  half  of  the  total  market 
borrowing. Thus, given the bank-domination in India’s financial system, an examination of the 
                                                
1   Economic Survey 2014–15: Credit, Structure and Double Financial Repression: A Diagnosis of the Banking 
Sector : http://indiabudget.nic.in/es2014–15/echapvol1-05.pdf. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  unintended consequences of the reform measures that have been launched in wake of the 
Global Financial Crisis is of a vital importance in determining the ability of the banks to fund 
growth in a sustainable way. 
Genesis of reforms 
3. The New Framework was necessitated due to the chinks exposed by the global financial 
crisis in the then existing regulatory framework. It was generally recognised that the extant 
regulatory  regime  (i)  did  not  consider  the  pitfalls  of  unrestrained  financial  innovations, 
(ii) could not handle pro-cyclicality of the financial system, (iii) paid scant attention to “too big 
to  fail  (TBTF)”  syndrome,  (iv)  failed  to  restrain  the  rapid  growth  of  shadow  banking  and 
(v) allowed build-up of asset prices and credit booms and busts. 
4. Thus, a series of global initiatives followed supported by several multilateral frameworks 
that include the G-20, the Bank of International Settlements (BIS) and the Financial Stability 
Board  (FSB).  National  legislative  changes  and  regulatory  reforms  have  simultaneously 
proceeded in several nations. The Dodd-Frank Act that incorporated the Volcker rule in the 
United  States,  Vickers  proposals  that  have  led  to  the  Banking  Reforms  Act  in  the  United 
Kingdom,  the  Liikanen  Report  that  has  helped  shape  the  Banking  Union  in  the  European 
Union  and  France’s  initiative  that  culminated  in  ring  fencing  propriety  trading  activities 
through separation of lending activities and retail financial services have changed the face of 
international banking. The initiatives I just mentioned are aimed at building a global financial 
system that not only acts as a catalyst for growth but also stays crisis-resistant. 
Consequences of regulatory stringency: some intended, some unintended 
5. A safer financial system is an objective that hardly anyone will question. Sadly however, 
safety measures come with their own cost. There is a trade-off to be achieved and what is 
crucial  to  know  is  the  point  of  that  optimal  trade-off.  Unfortunately,  we  do  not  have  clear 
guidance from theory that can be applied in practice. 
Intended consequences of reforms 
6. The major elements of the new regulatory and supervisory framework for banks are the 
Basel-III  capital  prescriptions,  Liquidity  Coverage  Ratio  (LCR),  Net  Stable  Funding  Ratio 
(NSFR)  to  which  we  will  soon  be  adding  the  Total  Loss  Absorbing  Capacity  (TLAC). 
Currently, work is also going on to improve the standardized, non-modeled approaches for 
calculating regulatory capital so that the problem of excessive variability in banks’ regulatory 
capital  ratios  could  be  resolved.  Discussions  on  countering  the  effects  of  shadow  banking 
sector on the financial system and establishing a better resolution regime backed by a clear 
legal  framework  are  at  an  advanced  stage.  There  are  other  aspects  of  market  regulation 
such as improving the risk management practices of CCPs and ensuring adequacy of their 
credit  and  liquidity  resources  and  recovery  procedures;  regulation  of  OTC  derivatives  etc. 
The intended consequences of all these is to reduce liquidity and funding constraints that the 
banks might face in episodes of tight liquidity and low growth. These measures also reduce 
the dependence on taxpayers’ money to bailout financial institutions in the event of stress. 
7.  Basel  III  is  intended  to  not  only  improve  the  resilience  of  individual  banking  institutions 
during  periods  of  stress  but  to  also  improve  the  banking  sector’s  ability  to  absorb  shocks 
arising  from  system  wide  risks  as  well  as  the  procyclical  amplification  of  these  risks  over 
time.  The  package  aims  at  inter  alia,  improving  banks’  risk  management,  governance, 
transparency  and  disclosure  standards 
investors  and 
counterparties  to  take  a  more  informed  decision.  The  intended  consequences  of  the 
regulatory  reform  measures  are  all  too  well  known  to  need  repetition  before  this 
knowledgeable audience. 
thereby  enabling  depositors, 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Unintended consequences of reforms 
8.  It  is  obvious  that  the  new  regulatory  and  supervisory  framework  that  we  are  putting  in 
place now have some unintended consequences that are likely to entail additional economic 
costs.  An  underlying  tension  around  the  trade-off  between  financial  stability  and  economic 
growth persists despite impact assessment studies showing results to the contrary. I would 
like to touch upon some of these issues with a particular focus on the impact on emerging 
markets. 
Impact on GDP growth 
i)  
Although,  an  ex-ante  assessment  of  the  economic  impact  of regulatory  reforms  is  difficult; 
studies conducted by various international agencies indicate different magnitudes of impact. 
The BCBS (2010) estimated that the Basel III capital and liquidity charges would reduce the 
steady  state  level  of  economic  activity  by  0.6  per  cent  in  total  or  0.08 per  cent  annually  if 
spread over the eight year transition period. MAG of BIS in 2010 covered 17 industrialized 
countries to conclude that the lending spread would increase by 15 bps by 2015 in response 
to a 1% increase in capital over 4 years. IIF which took a view (2010) of Europe, US & Japan 
concluded that a 2% increase by way of capital and liquidity would translate into increase in 
the lending spread by 132 basis points. Another study (2012–19) by IIF indicates a negative 
impact  of  0.40%,  0.30%  and  0.10%  on  the  annual  growth  for  Europe,  Japan  and  the  US 
respectively.  While  the  differences  in  outcomes  could  be  attributed  to  the  differences  in 
methodology, the direction of impact is nonetheless clear. The economies need to brace up 
to the fact that the new regulations would have an adverse impact on the economic growth. 
The  combination  of  (a)  increased  capital  requirements,  particularly  in  the  common  equity 
element of Tier 1 capital and capital buffers and (b) minimum liquidity requirements, are likely 
to reduce the return on equity for banks. It is unclear how different banks will address the 
situation  but  the  options  include:  reduction  of  rates  on  retail  deposits;  reduced  staff 
compensation;  and  increased  margins  on  products.  Reduction  in  retail  deposits  rates  can 
have two consequences. First, it can result in increased disintermediation. Second, they can 
even  affect  the  overall  saving  rate  of  the  households  in  bank-dominated  economies  like 
India.  At  a  time,  when  the  rate  of  gross  saving  to  gross  national  disposable  income  has 
already  fallen  to  30%  in  2013–14  from  around  34  %  in  2009–10,  this  could  have  adverse 
impact on growth and current account gap. Also, the increased cost of lending or reduced 
quantum of lending resulting from more stringent capital requirements on banks would lead 
to deleterious impact on the economic growth. 
Impact on infrastructure financing 
ii)  
India  has  a  growing  population  and  has  just  crossed  the  tipping  point when  it  can  sustain 
high  growth  rate  in  the  global  economy,  serving  as  one  of  engines  for  world  growth. 
However,  to facilitate this  it  needs  to  make massive  infrastructure  investments.  As  per  the 
“report  of  the  Confederation  of  Indian  Industry  (CII),  ‘Investment  Requirements  in  India: 
2014–15 to 2018–19” a total investment of Rs.64 trillion (US$ 1071 billion) at current market 
prices  requirement  is  needed  in  the  next  5  years  in  the  infrastructure  sector.  Further,  for 
achieving  an  average  growth  of  7  per  cent  per  annum  during  the  next  five  years  ,  the 
investment requirements have been estimated at Rs.280 trillion (US$ 4667 billion) at current 
market  prices.  These  are  colossal  numbers  that  cannot  be  realized  if  bank  financing  gets 
restricted  in  the  quest  for  reinforcing  buffers  for  the  banks.  So  clearly  there  are  limits  to 
regulatory  stringency,  especially  as  emerging  markets  strive  towards  convergence  in  per 
capita incomes. 
Impact on finance to MSMEs 
iii)  
The  Micro,  Small  and  Medium  Enterprises  (MSME)  sector  plays  a  very  important  role  in 
emerging  markets  and  especially  in  India.  The  MSMEs  contribute  nearly  8  percent  of  the 
country’s  GDP,  45  percent  of  the  manufacturing  output  and  40  percent  of  the  exports. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  Currently,  there  are  approximately  47  mn  enterprises  in  the  MSME  Sector  providing 
employment opportunities to 106 mn people across the country. These small enterprises rely 
very heavily on the bank finance for their credit needs. 
As the SMEs neither have sufficiently long credit history nor any external credit rating, they 
typically languish at the highest level of risk spectrum requiring banks to hold more capital 
against these exposures. In the event of banks being forced to conserve capital or to reduce 
their  RWAs,  the  MSME  borrowers  are  likely  be  the  first  to  be  jettisoned.  This  may  be 
catastrophic  for  the  MSME  sector  as  they  have  virtually  no  access  to  the  alternate  formal 
sources of finance. 
Impact of liquidity prescriptions 
iv)  
A key learning from the crisis was that liquidity is also important as with dynamic equilibria, 
liquidity  problems  can  soon  turn  into  solvency  problems.  Therefore,  SSBs  have  focused 
closely  on  improving  the  liquidity  risk  profile  of  the  individual  firms.  But  even  these 
regulations have not been without their share of unintended consequences of varying degree 
across jurisdictions. On a broader level, in order to meet the LCR norms, the banks would 
need to hold more long terms liabilities and short term assets. Also, the NSFR norms would 
lead  to  curtailment  of  the  market  making  abilities  of  the  banks.  Both  of  these  would  have 
adverse implications for the banks’ margins. 
In  India,  the  banks  are  statutorily  required  to  hold  a  certain  percentage  of  their  liabilities 
(SLR) in Government securities, State Government securities and other approved securities. 
The SLR securities meet all the characteristics of the Level 1 “High Quality Liquid Assets” 
(HQLAs)  and  hence,  the  current  insistence  on  separately  holding  additional  HQLA  would 
mean a very high cost for the banks operating in India. Similarly, due recognition also needs 
to be given to high level of public deposits and a very low run-off rates for these deposits in 
the EMDE banks, including in India as compared to other jurisdictions. Thus, on the whole 
there  is  a  strong  case  for  according  a  fair  extent  of  national  discretion  to  the  regulatory 
authorities for implementing the liquidity risk framework in their respective jurisdictions. 
Impact of TLAC 
v)  
The TLAC has added an additional dimension for emerging markets like India, even while the 
proposal essentially is aimed at G-SIBs that have acquired TBTF dimension in the advanced 
economies. Let me briefly describe the likely impact. 
As  I  mentioned  earlier,  the  characteristics  of  the  banking  system  in  the  EMDEs  is  vastly 
different than in the AEs. These economies have potential to grow and hence supply of credit 
is needed to support growth. These economies play host to several G-SIBs and hence they 
compete  with  non-  G-SIBs  in  the  same  market.  There  is  potential  for  spillover  impact  and 
non- G-SIBs could be forced by market to hold higher level of capital on similar levels as the 
G-SIBs.  There  is  also  a  likelihood  of  the  G-SIBs  present  in  the  EMDEs,  curtailing  their 
operations.  Either  of  these  developments  would  impact  the  supply  of  credit  and  would  be 
negative for the growth prospects in these economies. 
On the demand side, there is hardly any market for TLAC compliant instruments. Our banks 
have  experienced  challenges  in raising fund for the  Basel  III  compliant  capital  instruments 
like Additional Tier1. If the banks venture abroad for raising such capital, the cost would be 
still  higher  due  to  comparatively  lower  sovereign  rating  and  competing  demands  from 
G-SIBs. 
Regulations in the making: risk weights on sovereign bonds 
9.  Regulatory  reforms  agenda  set  in  motion  following  the  GFC  has  not  reached  its 
culmination.  Every  now  and  then  a  new  vulnerability  appears  and  steps  are  initiated  to 
mitigate  the  risks.  Possibility  of  assigning  a  risk  weight  to  sovereign  bond  holdings  is  one 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  such event. While it is difficult to defend such a proposition especially after the events of the 
immediate  past,  it  needs  to  be  acknowledged  that  the  situation  is  not  similar  across  the 
globe. Countries like India have been a pocket of stability and there is no reason to believe 
that the sovereign can default. Under the circumstances, assigning a risk weight to sovereign 
bond in countries like India would mean consumption of scarce capital with adverse impact 
on growth. Such possibilities only strengthen the case for a greater national discretion. 
Case for national discretion 
10.  In  my  view,  a  very  important  facet  that  needs  to  be  considered  is  the  state  of 
development of the financial markets in various economies. Banks in India have a relatively 
simple business model with plain vanilla product offerings. The regulatory capital regime in 
India has always been more stringent than the global standards. Not only is the CAR level 
set at a higher level even the risk weights assigned to several asset classes are higher. This 
is even while the Indian banks are still following the standardized approach. A “back of the 
envelop”  calculation  shows  that  the  impact  of  higher  risk  weights  on  Indian  banks  when 
compared to BCBS prescriptions is of the order of 200 basis points. 
Necessary macroprudential measures 
11. While I have argued in favour of a differentiated, cautious and gradual approach while 
calibrating  introducing  regulatory  reforms  for  the  EMDEs  like  India,  there  are  pressing 
challenges that the banking system faces. We are conscious of the need to bring in the right 
macro prudential regulations to overcome them. Early resolution of problem assets, lowering 
the  levels  of  single/group  borrower  limits,  strengthening  of  the  asset  qualification  norms, 
improving corporate governance standards especially in public sector banks, ushering in a 
bankruptcy framework, deleveraging of corporate balance sheets and reducing the level of 
unhedged foreign exposure are some of the tasks at hand that need to be quickly completed. 
Towards limiting the unintended consequences 
12.  Having  seen  the  impact  of  new  regulatory  reform  agenda,  it  is  important  to  consider 
means to limit their unintended consequences without throwing away the baby with the bath 
water. The elements of this new framework are needed for the global banking system. If we 
have  learnt  our  lessons  from  the  global  financial  crisis  and  the  feedback  loops  between 
banking and sovereign debt in the euro area, we cannot but move ahead in ushering the new 
regime. Yet, we have to be sensitive to the need to push growth and financial inclusion. We 
cannot chop the wings with which the banking can fly, but we need to clip its speed so that it 
does  not  crash  and  hurt  itself.  I  would  also  like  to  mention  here  that  lingering  doubt  still 
persist about the regulatory capture of the reforms process and efforts must also be made 
towards dispelling these doubts. 
13.  We  need  to  prepare  more  fully  for  changes;  and  this  applies  to  banks  as  well  as 
regulators.  For  example,  if  bank’s  return  on  equity  (RoE)  falls,  banks  must  engage  more 
proactively on bringing in cost efficiencies and in restricting excessive bonuses for short-term 
risk behavior. If weaker banks can get crowded out, both the regulators and the banks should 
move to provide an enabling framework for mergers and acquisitions. 
Conclusion 
14.  In  conclusion,  I  would  like  to  emphasize  a  three-pronged  approach  for  the  new 
international regulatory reform process. 
a)  
Focus  on  closer  supervision:  Anatomy  of  the  crisis  revealed  lack  of  effective 
supervision as a common theme across jurisdictions. More intense and effective supervision 
has  to  remain  a  central  element  of  the  supervisory  and  regulatory  agenda.  Closer 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  supervision of institutions allows promotion of best practices and enables early identification 
of risks before they assume alarming proportions. Also, while regulation has to be specific to 
the jurisdiction, the supervisory tools can be universal. Supervisors need to continuously look 
at  the  banks’  risk  management  architecture  and  the  risk  governance  frameworks  and 
conduct rigorous forward looking risk analysis to detect early weaknesses. They also need to 
have an ongoing engagement with the boards and senior management and closely supervise 
control  functions  such  as  compliance  and  internal  audit  together  with  the  Corporate 
Governance practices. 
b)  
Greater National Discretion: Although, we are conscious of the need for a universal 
regulatory framework for eliminating arbitrage, it is essential that greater national discretion is 
allowed  to  supervisory  authorities.  The  FSB’s  November  2014  report  on  “Monitoring  the 
effects  of  agreed  regulatory  reforms  on  EMDEs”  mentioned  inter  alia  that  EMDEs  would 
need  to  continue  to  make  appropriate  use  of  the  flexibility  available  in  international  policy 
frameworks 
(e.g.  using  observation  and  phase-in  periods,  calibrating  parameters, 
undertaking  impact  assessments,  and  applying  national  discretions  and  proportionality). 
However, the concept of national discretion as available under the international regulations is 
very narrow. 
The  international  standards  setting  bodies  need  to  recognize  that  the  political  mandates 
given to respective regulatory and supervisory bodies are sometimes not in alignment with 
the internationally agreed reform measures. A case in point is the European Commission’s 
statement on the Basel Regulatory Consistency Assessment of Basel III implementation. The 
Commission  stated  that  the  diversity  of  banks  in  terms  of  size,  complexity  and  legal  form 
necessitates a degree of additional flexibility for supervisors to reflect local specificities. This 
was in response to findings of the BCBS as regards use of concessionary risk weights to the 
small and medium-sized enterprise (SME) exposures for customers located in both the EU 
and abroad. 
Hence, as I have argued earlier, since each jurisdiction is at different stage of economic and 
political  development,  the  supervisory  authorities  must  be  accorded  a  greater  degree  of 
freedom to fine-tune the regulations in keeping with the jurisdictional needs. 
c)  
Calibration  over  a  longer  time  horizon:  Besides  granting  greater  flexibility  and 
discretion,  in  keeping  with  the  requirements  of  the  EMDEs,  it  is  important  that  the 
implementation of the reform agenda is stretched out over a longer time horizon. This would 
allow the regulators to prepare the financial system and particularly the banking system for 
the stringent measures. 
With  above  submissions,  I  would  like  to  close  my  address  and  leave  the  field  for  a  frank 
discussion amongst the regulators from two jurisdictions that have a great banking tradition. 
I wish the conference all success. 
Merci! 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
