  Ravi Menon: MAS’ Annual Report 2014/15 
Remarks by Mr Ravi Menon, Managing Director of the Monetary Authority of Singapore, at 
MAS’ Annual Report 2014/15 Media Conference, Singapore, 21 July 2015. 
 1. 
• 
• 
• 
• 
 Highlight six areas. 
Economic growth – weaker than expected but not likely to deteriorate further 
Inflation – coming in at lower half of forecast range 
Monetary policy – considerations driving recent decisions 
MAS’  financial  performance  –  stable  investment  gains  amidst  volatile  currency 
translation effects 
Consumer initiatives – helping Singaporeans manage their finances 
Financial centre development – broad-based growth across all segments 
Economic growth 
Economy clearly lost some momentum in Q2 
2. 
• 
Real GDP contracted by 4.6% in Q2 on QoQ SAA basis 
Trade-related industries declined, dragged down by weakness in pharmaceuticals, 
marine & offshore engineering, and electronics. 
Domestic-oriented industries pulled back after strong performance in Q1. 
 But growth momentum not expected to deteriorate further in H2 
3. 
Contraction in Q1 largely weather-induced. 
PMI readings show manufacturing and services sectors expanding. 
Consumer spending should be buttressed by strengthening labour market. 
First,  global  and  regional  economic  recovery  remains  broadly  intact  –  should 
provide support for Singapore’s outward-oriented sectors. 
US economy has regained momentum. 
o 
o 
o 
In China, picture is mixed. 
o 
o 
Excess capacity has been weighing on production. 
But  monetary  stimulus  and  steady  pipeline  of  infrastructure  projects  will 
support growth in H2. 
Latest  indicators,  including  services  and  manufacturing  PMIs,  suggest 
economy is stabilising 
o 
pick-up in infrastructure spending should support domestic demand 
strengthening US economy should provide gradual uplift to exports 
In ASEAN, 
o 
o 
Second, domestic non-tradable sectors should remain resilient. 
Construction  industry  will  be  supported  by  further  capacity  expansion  in  transport 
infrastructure. 
   4. 
• 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
 • 
5. 
• 
Demand for services such as education and healthcare expected to stay firm. 
Third, financial services should continue to pull up overall growth. 
Underpinned  by  bank  intermediation,  fund  management  and  risk  management 
activities, reflecting demand from both domestic and regional markets. 
 So, growth was weak in H1 but is not expected to weaken further. 
6. 
7. 
On YoY basis, GDP growth came in at 2.3% in H1 2015. 
MAS and  MTI are reviewing growth forecast for 2015, taking into account weaker 
outturn in H1 as well as support factors in H2. 
But risks on global macro front have increased. 
8. 
• 
MAS closely monitoring three key risks in external environment. 
First, Greece. Situation remains highly fluid and uncertain. 
o 
to 
Failure  by  Greek  government 
international creditors could spark renewed market jitters. 
Could  dampen  confidence  and  recovery  in  wider  Euro  area,  with  spillover 
effects on rest of world. 
implement  measures  agreed  with 
Second, China. Downside risks have increased. 
o 
Excess capacity in some heavy industries could reduce growth in investment 
spending more than expected. 
Further  volatility  in  stock  market  could  undermine  consumer  confidence  and 
spending. 
o 
Third, the region. 
o 
Financial conditions could tighten more than expected, as US Fed begins to 
hike interest rates. 
This could raise borrowing costs and constrain private spending. 
  o 
o 
Inflation 
9. 
Singapore experienced negative headline inflation for seven months now. 
But not facing deflation – price decline neither persistent nor pervasive. 
Temporary factors keeping inflation muted but underlying cost pressures persist. 
10. 
Look at headline and core inflation separately. 
Headline or CPI All-items inflation averaged –0.4% y-o-y in first five months of 2015 
Headline inflation at lower half of forecast range in 2015 but should pick up in 2016 
11. 
compared to 1.0% for whole of 2014. 
12 
• 
CPI All-items inflation likely to continue to be negative for rest of 2015. 
For  year  as  whole,  CPI-All  items  inflation  expected  to  come  in  at  lower  half  of 
forecast range of –0.5 to 0.5%. 
Drag on headline inflation from COE premiums and accommodation costs. 
Car COE premiums currently about $62,000, compared to about $68,000 in H2 last 
year. 
13. 
• 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  14. 
• 
• 
Imputed rentals on owner-occupied accommodation are 3% lower compared to year 
ago. 
But headline inflation to pick up in 2016. 
Effects of lower car prices and housing rentals could start to wear off on YoY basis. 
Core inflation also expected to rise. 
 MAS  Core  Inflation  –  which  excludes  accommodation  costs  and  private  road 
Core Inflation should stay around current level before rising from Q4 
15. 
transport costs – remains positive. 
• 
• 
16. 
average in H2 2016. 
• 
• 
However, it eased to 0.8% in first five months from 1.9% last year. 
For 2015, core inflation is expected to be in lower half of 0.5–1.5% forecast range. 
Core Inflation should rise gradually from Q4 onwards and reach close to its historical 
Impact of lower global oil prices will wear off going into 2016. 
Effect  of  budget  measures  to  help  households  cope  with  costs  of  healthcare  and 
education will also wear off 
And some recovery in food prices. 
More fundamentally for inflation, our labour market remains tight. 
While wage pressures and pass-through from wage cost to prices have both been 
modest this year, there is every possibility they could pick up in 2016. 
Resident unemployment rate is near 17-year low 
Job vacancy rate at its highest level over same period 
As long as economy grows close to its potential rate, wage pressures can build up 
quickly. 
• 
17. 
• 
 Slightly more than half of CPI-All Items basket and three quarters of Core CPI are 
Second reason why we cannot be said to be in deflation is that most items in CPI 
basket continue to experience price increases 
18. 
experiencing moderate price increases. 
• 
• 
This includes prices of everyday items like food. 
Cost of restaurant food is up 2.5% while hawker food price is up 2.2% compared to 
year ago. 
In  other  words,  man-in-the-street  (or  aunty-in-the-food-court)  is  not  experiencing 
19. 
negative inflation on a broad scale. 
Monetary policy 
20. 
• 
• 
21. 
• 
MAS’ monetary policy decisions in H1 this year attracted fair amount of interest. 
Our monetary policy statements in Jan and Apr have explained rationale. 
But let me take opportunity to elaborate on context of our decisions. 
In Jan, MAS reduced slope of S$NEER policy band. 
Came  as  surprise  to  market  because  it  was  outside  our  usual  cycle  of  policy 
announcements in Apr and Oct. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  Many wondered why MAS could not have waited till scheduled policy review in Apr. 
Some even wondered if there were going to be more such off-cycle moves in future 
given greater uncertainty and volatility in macroeconomic numbers. 
 We did not take decision lightly. Considered two factors carefully. 
Was decline in inflation likely to persist through 2015? 
Was there a downside to waiting till Apr to adjust policy? 
MAS had to adjust policy off-cycle in Jan because of significant change in inflation 
outlook for 2015 
22. 
• 
• 
Answer to both questions – yes. 
23. 
Both CPI-All Items inflation and MAS Core Inflation forecasts for 2015 were sharply 
down in Jan this year, compared to Oct 2014 when we last reaffirmed our monetary policy 
stance 
• 
Oil prices had fallen sharply – from US$84 in Oct 2014 to US$47 in Jan 2015 – and 
assessment was that prices were likely to stay low for at least a year. 
Against backdrop of modest economic growth in 2014 continuing into 2015, wage 
growth was weaker than anticipated and so was pass-through into prices. 
Waiting to adjust policy in Apr would have put MAS considerably behind curve and 
 24. 
led to excessive speculation about a policy move. 
• 
We  decided  to  adjust  both  inflation  forecast  and  policy  stance  in  a  timely  and 
consistent manner. 
In Apr, MAS affirmed monetary policy stance. 
This  decision  surprised  some  market  observers,  who  had  anticipated  a  further 
easing of S$NEER policy. 
25. 
• 
We made no change to policy stance in Apr because there was no change to forecasts 
26. 
• 
There was no ground for another shift in policy. 
No reason to reduce slope of S$NEER policy band further, given that core inflation 
was  projected  to  pick  up  from  Q4  onwards  and  economy  remained  close  to 
potential. 
No  reason  to  shift  level  of  policy  band,  as  we  did  not  envisage  deflation  or 
recession. 
No reason to adjust width of policy band, which remained sufficient to accommodate 
volatility in foreign exchange markets. 
  In effect, MAS front-loaded policy adjustment in Jan so that further adjustment was 
not necessary in Apr 
27. 
band on gradual and modest appreciation path to ensure price stability over medium term. 
Shift in monetary policy stance in Jan was measured: continuing to keep S$NEER 
Important to keep a medium-term orientation with regard to setting monetary policy 
28. 
introducing even more volatility to markets and economy. This is because: 
• 
External shocks that could hit small open economy like ours can be very frequent 
If  MAS  reacted  to  every  short-term  fluctuation  in  output  and  prices,  it  would  risk 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  • 
There are considerable lags in monetary policy transmission. 
Off-cycle policy shift therefore highly atypical and only sparingly used. 
29. 
• 
• 
• 
Current policy stance remains appropriate for ensuring medium-term price stability 
Economy estimated to be close to its potential for 2015. 
Labour market expected to remain at full employment 
Core  inflation,  most  relevant  indicator  for  MAS’  monetary  policy,  expected  to 
strengthen. 
Next monetary policy review is as scheduled in Oct. 
MAS’  P/L  was  almost  in  balance  in  FY2014/15,  recording  a  small  profit  of 
MAS’ financial performance 
30. 
$0.3 billion. 
In FY2013/14, we recorded a profit of $15.8 billion. 
• 
Prior to that in FY2012/2013, recorded a loss of $10.6 billion. 
• 
Why  so  volatile?  Fluctuations  in  MAS’  profit  figures  from  year  to  year  is  almost 
31. 
entirely due to currency translation effects, i.e. exchange rate fluctuations between S$ and 
major currencies. 
• 
When S$ appreciates against major currencies, there is translation loss when assets 
are reported in S$ 
Likewise, when S$ depreciates, there is translation gain 
But these gains and losses mean little for international purchasing power of our OFR 
which is denominated in foreign currencies. 
Focusing on overall profit figure therefore misses larger point about MAS’ underlying 
 32. 
investment performance. 
33. 
last five financial years. 
• 
Investment gains on MAS’ foreign assets have in fact remained relatively stable for 
Holding S$ exchange rate constant to strip out translation effects, foreign investment 
gains amounted to S$10.4 billion  in FY2014/15, comparable to foreign investment 
gains of S$10.6 billion in FY 2013/14. 
A key area of focus for MAS in last two years has been to help Singaporeans better 
Helping Singaporeans manage their finances 
34. 
manage their finances. A multi-pronged effort: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Let me elaborate on each. 
Encourage prudent borrowing 
Facilitate retail access to simple, low-cost investment products 
Spur competitive pricing for life insurance products 
Educate consumers on financial matters 
First, MAS has put in place various measures to encourage prudent borrowing 
35. 
Many safeguards already exist. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
   • 
36. 
• 
 37. 
• 
• 
 Amount  of  unsecured  credit  that  FI  can  extend  is  limited  to  four  times  monthly 
income of borrower. 
Limits  on  both  loan-to-value  and  loan  tenure  for  both  housing  and  motor  vehicle 
loans extended by FIs. 
Individuals purchasing property are constrained on their total debt service ratio. 
MAS announced new unsecured credit rules two years ago. 
FIs  will  not  be  allowed  to  grant  further  unsecured  credit  to  borrower  whose 
aggregate unsecured debt exceeds borrowing limit for 3 consecutive months. 
This limit has been set at 24 times borrower’s monthly income, and will be lowered 
to 18 times from 1 Jun 2017 and 12 times from 1 Jun 2019. 
Vast majority of Singaporeans manage their debt well. 
Less than 2% of unsecured credit users affected by industry-wide borrowing limit. 
Nonetheless, this is about 22,000 borrowers who need help to manage down their 
debt. 
There are measures to help unsecured borrowers pay down their debts 
38. 
Repayment Assistance Scheme (RAS). 
• 
Banks  have  worked  with  Credit  Counselling  Singapore  (CCS)  to  develop  a  new 
Convenient  one-stop  solution  for  borrower  to  work  out  centralised  repayment 
solution with creditors. 
Lower interest rate of 5% p.a. over repayment period of 8 years for debt in excess of 
12 times a borrower’s monthly income. 
 Last year I spoke about how MAS was working to improve savings and investment 
Second consumer initiative: facilitate retail access to simple, low cost investment 
products 
39. 
options for retail consumers. Made progress on three fronts. 
• 
• 
• 
40. 
in the market. 
• 
introduced Savings Bonds for flexible risk-free returns 
facilitated access to S$ corporate bonds for stable, long-term returns 
expanded ETF options for diversified equity returns 
Savings Bonds, corporate bonds, and ETFs complement existing investment options 
Individual  investors now better able to form a diversified and balanced portfolio at 
low cost. 
Introducing Savings Bonds 
41. 
(SGS) for the individual investor. 
• 
• 
Singapore  Savings  Bonds  are  a  special  type  of  Singapore Government  Securities 
Like regular SGS, Savings Bonds offer same long-term risk-free returns. 
Unlike regular SGS, holders of Saving Bonds not exposed to price risks when they 
redeem them early. 
Savings  Bonds  provide  flexibility  for  investors  to  get  their  money  back  to  meet 
unexpected needs for cash. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 6 
   Pleased  to  announce  that  first  Savings  Bond  will  be  issued  on  1  Oct  2015. 
42. 
Interested investors will be able to apply for this issue from 1 Sep. 
• 
Details of first issue such as amount of bonds available and bond’s interest rates will 
be released when applications open. 
A new Savings Bond will be issued every month for at least next 5 years, so there is 
no need to rush for first issuance. 
To help investors understand features of Savings Bonds and learn how to apply for 
43. 
them, MAS has set up dedicated Savings Bonds website and Savings Bonds hotline. Details 
will be made available later today. 
 Bonds are relatively easy to understand, offer stable returns that are typically higher 
Facilitating retail access to S$ corporate bonds 
44. 
than fixed deposit rates, and are less susceptible to extreme price movements. 
• 
45. 
• 
• 
46. 
retail investors to buy corporate bonds listed on SGX. 
• 
Many blue chip companies as well as government agencies have issued bonds. 
But retail participation in corporate bond market has been low. 
It is costly for bond issuers to tap retail market. 
Minimum lot sizes are at least $200,000. 
MAS  and  SGX  are  reducing  cost  of retail  bond  issuance  and  making  it easier for 
Bond Seasoning Framework and Exempt Bond Issuer Framework will allow eligible 
corporate  issuers  to  issue  bonds  to  retail  investors  at  lower  cost  in  minimum 
denominations of $1,000, while ensuring sufficient safeguards for investors. 
Proposals for both initiatives have been put out for public consultation and response 
has been positive. 
MAS will finalise and announce rules soon. 
  Expanding ETF options 
47. 
Equity  investment  offers  potential  for  higher  returns  compared  to  regular  savings 
and  fixed  income  products.  But  investing  in  individual  stocks  entails  higher  risks  and 
exposure to market volatility. 
48. 
Exchange-traded funds (ETFs) can be low-cost way for investors to gain exposure 
to basket of underlying equities to build a well-diversified investment portfolio. ETFs also give 
investors exposure to various asset classes including bonds and commodities. 
49. 
• 
MAS has made it easier for retail investors to access more ETFs. 
Previously,  all  ETFs  using  derivatives  were  classified  as  complex  or  Specified 
Investment  Products  (SIP)  –  they  could  only  be  sold  to  retail  investors  with 
enhanced safeguards. 
Have  refined  our  rules  to  allow  less  complex  ETFs  which  make  limited  use  of 
derivatives to be reclassified as Excluded Investment Products (EIP) – these can be 
sold more easily to retail investors. 
80% of AUM of SGX-listed ETFs are now classified as EIP ETFs that investors can 
50. 
purchase as easily as they buy individual stocks. 
 Third consumer initiative: spur competitive pricing for life insurance products 
51. 
MAS worked with industry and CASE to create a new online portal, compareFIRST. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
 Will  enable  retail  consumers  to  easily  compare  key  features  of  life  insurance 
products offered by various insurance companies 
Since  its  launch  in  Apr,  compareFIRST  has  registered  healthy  interest,  with  over 
180,000 visits to portal and more than 110,000 product summaries downloaded. 
Consumers and industry have provided positive feedback on convenience and ease 
of use of compareFIRST. 
MAS  has  also  worked  with  industry  to  make  available  Direct  Purchase  Insurance 
DPI offers consumers access to selected term life and whole life insurance products 
sold without commissions or financial advice 
More than 200 DPI policies have been sold in first three months of launch, with a 
further 100 applications pending approval by insurers. 
compareFIRST  and  DPI  have  spurred  more  competitive  pricing  for  life  insurance 
    52. 
(DPI). 
• 
 53. 
products. 
• 
Some  insurers  have  lowered  prices  of  both  their  DPI  and  non-DPI  insurance 
products, since introduction of these initiatives. 
MAS is stepping up efforts to promote greater public awareness of simple, low cost 
Fourth consumer initiative: enhance financial education 
54. 
financial products as well as compareFIRST and DPI. 
MoneySENSE, national financial education programme, is centrepiece of this effort. 
55. 
56. 
MAS will continue to work with industry, schools, and other government agencies to 
enhance  financial  literacy  among  Singaporeans  so  that  they  can  take  sound  financial 
decisions. 
• 
Institute  for  Financial  Literacy  (IFL),  a  collaboration  between  MoneySENSE  and 
Singapore Polytechnic, delivered over 1,500 talks and workshops to almost 50,000 
working adults since its launch in 2012. 
MoneySENSE  will  partner  schools  in  use  of  “gamification”  to  reach  primary  and 
secondary school students in fun and engaging way. 
Last year, I asked for media’s help in our financial literacy effort. 
Heartened by media’s support, working with us, with industry, and on your own, to 
carry messages on financial education. 
We look to media’s continued support for MoneySENSE initiatives. 
 57. 
• 
 Financial centre development 
Financial sector growth: broad-based and higher than overall economy 
58. 
• 
• 
Financial services grew by 7.7% last year, compared to overall GDP growth of 2.9%. 
Since recovery from GFC, financial sector growth has outpaced overall economy. 
Sector  grew  by  average  8.2%  during  2011–2014,  nearly  twice  overall  economic 
growth of 4.2%. 
Growth has also been broad-based: across most business segments. 
Essentially an Asian growth story: 
• 
59. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   60. 
• 
    Rise of Asian middle class and growing affluence has generated demand for variety 
of financial services, including wealth management and insurance 
Growth  of  Asian  corporates  has  driven  demand  for  offshore  lending,  foreign 
exchange trading, capital market activities, and risk management. 
Some highlights in past year: 
Assets under management (AUM) rose by 30% from S$1.8 trillion in 2013 to over 
S$2.3 trillion in 2014. 
Foreign exchange trading, measured by average daily turnover volume, increased 
by 40% from a year ago to reach US$480 billion in October 2014. 
Offshore non-life insurance, measured by gross written premiums, grew 8.8% year-
on-year to S$8 billion in 2014. 
Corporate  debt  issuance  grew  13%  in  2014  as  outstanding  debt  reached  S$300 
billion. 
Infrastructure financing space becoming more active. 
61. 
financing transactions in ASEAN led by project finance teams based in Singapore. 
• 
Singapore  already  serves  as  important  infra  financing  hub,  with  60%  of  infra 
enhance bankability of infra projects; and 
facilitate subsequent capital market refinancing 
MAS working closely with industry to develop toolkit for standardised public-private 
partnership contractual clauses. This will: 
o 
o 
Aim in coming years is to enhance infra financing ecosystem: 
o  Work with MDBs to increase supply of bankable projects 
o 
Facilitate greater institutional investor participation in infra assets. 
 RMB market has taken off well. 
62 
• 
• 
Singapore currently second largest offshore RMB hub in world. 
RMB deposits grew more than 20% year-on year. 
Average daily RMB FX turnover grew more than two times in 2014. RMB is now one 
of top 5 most actively traded currencies in Singapore. 
Aim in coming years is to: 
o 
Grow  RMB  capital  market  activities,  including  through  promoting  RMB  bond 
issuance; 
Enhance RMB asset management capabilities, leveraging on RQFII; and 
Promote  cross-border  RMB  financing,  building  on  RMB  pilot  for  Suzhou 
Industrial Park and Tianjin Eco-city. 
o 
o 
 Making concerted efforts in two areas that cut across asset classes: skills and 
technology. 
63. 
• 
First, SkillsFuture. 
We want to be a financial centre that is among leaders globally in workforce skills 
and expertise, with a strong core of Singaporeans at every level. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
  64. 
• 
  learn continuously, 
develop expertise, and 
make strong contributions throughout their professional careers. 
MAS  in  partnership  with  industry  and  educational  and  training  institutes,  will 
undertake initiatives to strengthen support for finance professionals to: 
o 
o 
o 
Second, Smart Financial Centre. 
We want to be a financial centre where innovation is pervasive and technology is 
used effectively to: 
o 
o 
o 
o 
MAS in partnership with industry will drive initiatives to create a vibrant ecosystem 
for innovation and adoption of new technologies while fostering safety and security. 
increase efficiency, 
create new opportunities, 
manage risks better, and 
improve people’s lives. 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
