  Hiroshi Nakaso: Japan’s economy and monetary policy 
Speech  by  Mr  Hiroshi  Nakaso,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  at  a  meeting  with 
business leaders, Kumamoto, 27 July 2015. 
 Accompanying charts can be found at the end of the speech or on the Bank of Japan’s website. 
Introduction 
It  is  my  pleasure  to  have  the  opportunity  today  to  exchange  views  with  administrative, 
financial, and business leaders in Kumamoto Prefecture. I would like to take this opportunity 
to  express  my  sincerest  gratitude  for  your  cooperation  with  the  activities  of  the  Bank  of 
Japan’s Kumamoto Branch. 
The Bank introduced quantitative and qualitative monetary easing (QQE) in April 2013 with 
the  aim  of  overcoming  deflation  that  has  lasted  for  about  15  years.  Thereafter,  QQE  has 
been exerting its intended effects, and Japan’s economic activity and prices have improved 
markedly.  The  underlying  trend  in  inflation,  as  I  will  explain  later,  has  continued  to  be  of 
improvement, although the year-on-year rate of increase in the consumer price index (CPI) 
has  declined,  due  in  particular  to  the  effects  of  the  substantial  decline  in  crude  oil  prices 
since last summer, and recently has been about 0 percent. 
Today,  before  exchanging  views  with  you,  I  would  like  to  explain  the  Bank’s  view  on  the 
current situation of and outlook for economic activity at home and abroad. I will then touch on 
the  mechanism  and  effects  of  QQE  and  move  on  to  Japan’s  price  developments  and  the 
Bank’s monetary policy. 
Current situation of and outlook for economic activity at home and abroad 
I. 
To  start  with,  let  me  talk  about  economic  developments  at  home  and  abroad.  Japan’s 
economy has continued to recover moderately, and a virtuous cycle from income to spending 
is  becoming  more  evident  in  both  the  corporate  and  household  sectors.  That  is,  in  the 
corporate  sector,  profits  marked  a  record  high,  and  an  increase  in  fixed  investment  is 
becoming clear. In the household sector, wages have been growing, as seen in the raise in 
base pay for two consecutive years, and private consumption has been resilient. 
In contrast, exports – which had been increasing since last autumn – have recently shown 
some  weakness  in  their  momentum.  However,  this  is  due  to  a  temporary  slowdown  in 
overseas  economies.  Exports  are  expected  to  increase  moderately,  albeit  with  some 
fluctuations, against the background of the recovery in overseas economies and supported 
by past developments in foreign exchange rates. 
Overseas economies and Japan’s exports 
First, I would like to touch on overseas economies. Overseas economies – mainly advanced 
economies – have been recovering, albeit with a lackluster performance still seen in part of 
emerging  economies.  Overseas  economies  weakened  rather  substantially  in  the  January-
March quarter of 2015, particularly in the United States and China, but they are expected to 
continue recovering moderately, mainly in the advanced economies, and the positive effects 
of this are likely to gradually spread to the emerging economies. This view is shared among 
international organizations such as the International Monetary Fund (IMF). According to the 
World  Economic  Outlook  (WEO)  Update  published  in  July  by  the  IMF,  global  economic 
growth  in  2015  has  been  revised  downward  to  3.3  percent,  due  to  its  weakening  in  the 
January-March quarter, but is projected to accelerate moderately and register 3.8 percent in 
2016 (Chart 1). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Looking  closely  at  the  developments  in  overseas  economies  by  region,  the  U.S.  economy 
has  continued  to  recover  solidly,  assisted  by  household  spending,  although  adjustments 
have been seen in the industrial production sector, mainly on the back of the decline in crude 
oil prices and the appreciation of the U.S. dollar. In the January-March quarter of 2015, the 
economy exhibited slightly negative growth due to transitory factors such as the effects of the 
severe  winter  weather  and  the  strikes  at  West  Coast  ports  (Chart  2).  Nevertheless,  the 
growth momentum of the economy has recently recovered from the temporary stall in winter 
against  the  backdrop  of  the  continued  favorable  employment  and  income  situation.  From 
spring, private consumption clearly has rebounded, as seen mainly in improvements in retail 
and automobile sales. Going forward, there will be sectors that are affected by the decline in 
crude  oil  prices  and  the  appreciation  of  the  U.S.  dollar,  but  the  U.S.  economy  is  likely  to 
continue  to  see  growth  led  mainly  by  private  demand,  with  robust  household  spending 
assisted by the favorable employment and income situation. 
Regarding monetary policy, the next step toward normalization will come into sight; namely, 
raising  the  target  range  for  the  federal  funds  rate.  This  seems  to  suggest  that  the  U.S. 
economy has recovered to a considerable level. However, it is necessary to monitor with due 
attention  whether  markets,  especially  those  in  emerging  economies,  will  be  affected 
unexpectedly through a reversal of the global flow of funds as the federal funds rate – which 
has been at the zero lower bound after the global financial crisis – will be raised. 
Next, I will move on to the European economy. The euro area economy has continued to see 
moderate  recovery,  as  can  be  observed  in  positive  growth  in  the  real  GDP  for  eight 
consecutive  quarters  (Chart  3).  The  European  economy  has  recently  been  seeing  a  clear 
increase in private consumption given the improvement in labor market conditions, as well as 
reflecting the effects of the decline in crude oil prices and of a rise in stock prices. It also has 
been seeing a recovery trend in business sentiment and industrial production resulting from 
an improvement in exports and corporate profits due to the depreciation of the euro. As for 
prices, the year-on-year rate of change in the Harmonized Index of Consumer Prices (HICP) 
for all items, which had once been negative, has recently recovered to a slight positive, and 
concerns  about  deflation  have  been  alleviating.  Going  forward,  the  European  economy  is 
expected to continue to see moderate recovery as depreciation of the euro and the monetary 
easing measures by the European Central Bank (ECB) are taking effect. 
Currently, the largest uncertainty over Europe is the sovereign debt problem in Greece. At 
the  Euro  Summit  this  month,  leaders  agreed  in  principle  that  they  were  ready  to  start 
negotiations  on  a  European  Stability  Mechanism  (ESM)  program  on  the  condition  that 
various requirements would be met by Greek authorities. The scenario in which Greece will 
exit  from  the  eurozone  was  avoided,  and  global  financial  markets  have  reacted  positively. 
That said, Greece is still confronted with large problems; namely, reorganizing its economy 
and financial system, as well as fiscal consolidation. In particular, I believe that it is essential 
for  the  reconstruction  of  the  Greek  economy  to  restore  its  financial  intermediary  function 
through  swift  recapitalization  and  liquidity  assistance  to  financial  institutions.  The  Bank 
strongly expects that there will be steady progress toward resolution of the sovereign debt 
problem in Greece with support by the institutions and European countries. 
Now, turning to emerging economies, the growth momentum of the Chinese economy has 
been  slowing  against  the  backdrop  of  the  deceleration  in  fixed  asset  investment  –  under 
excess  production  capacity  –  and  of  continued  adjustments  in  the  real  estate  market 
(Chart 4). In this situation, the Chinese authorities have been taking both fiscal and monetary 
measures toward underpinning the economy in a more proactive manner since spring. Going 
forward, due attention needs to be paid to the possibility that excess production capacity and 
adjustments in the real estate market will be prolonged, but the economy is likely to follow a 
generally  stable  growth  path,  although  the  pace  of  growth  is  expected  to  be  somewhat 
reduced.  That  said,  even  if  the  Chinese  economy  maintained  its  growth  rate,  the  main 
contribution would likely be public investment, so the degree of effects on Asian economies’ 
and Japan’s exports continues to warrant due attention. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  In sum, overseas economies as a whole temporarily slowed their pace of growth due to the 
slowdown  in  the  U.S.  and  Chinese  economies,  but  are  expected  to  continue  to  recover 
moderately,  mainly  in  advanced  economies.  There  are  various  uncertainties  concerning 
overseas economies, such as effects of normalization of monetary policy in the United States 
on the global financial markets, the sovereign debt problem in Greece, and developments of 
emerging economies including China, and close attention will continue to be paid to these 
issues. 
In  light  of  the  developments  in  overseas  economies,  Japan’s  exports  and  production  had 
been increasing but are slightly lacking momentum recently (Chart 5). The lack of momentum 
in  exports  is  temporary  due  to  the  effects  of  the  slowdown  in  overseas  economies for the 
January-March  quarter  appearing  with  a  time  lag;  as  for  production,  it  is  due  to  inventory 
adjustments of compact cars (with engine sizes of 660cc or less) as well as of iron and steel, 
in addition to the slowing in exports. Looking ahead, as overseas economies are expected to 
maintain  their  moderate  recovery,  mainly  in  advanced  economies,  and  as  it  seems  that 
inventory  adjustments  will  be  completed  sooner  or  later  with  an  improvement  in  domestic 
demand,  exports  and  production  are  expected  to  increase  moderately,  albeit  with  some 
fluctuations. 
Corporate sector: high profits and positive investment stance 
Turning to Japan’s economy, in the corporate sector, profits increased to a record high owing 
in part to the decline in crude oil prices and to effects of the correction of the appreciation of 
the  yen  (Chart  6).  They  are  expected  to  continue  on  their  solid  increasing  trend  as  sales 
grow accompanied by an increase in domestic and external demand. 
With  corporate  profits  increasing  to  their  highest  level,  firms’  positive  investment  stance  is 
maintained.  Real  business  fixed  investment  in  the  GDP  statistics  for  the  January-March 
quarter  has  increased  markedly.  According  to  the  June  Tankan  (Short-Term  Economic 
Survey  of  Enterprises  in  Japan),  firms  seem  to  have  increased  their  fixed  investment  this 
fiscal year, as they did last fiscal year. The plans of large manufacturing firms in particular 
marked a high level at this time of the year, the highest since fiscal 2004, reflecting in part an 
increase  in  domestic  investment  as  it  appears  that  the  situation  of  a  weaker  yen  will  be 
prolonged. The continued positive investment stance appears to suggest that firms consider 
the current weakness in exports and production as temporary. Business fixed investment is 
projected  to keep rising  moderately  as  the  improvement  in  corporate  profits  and  monetary 
easing effects continue to exert upward pressure, and as firms will continue increasing their 
domestic investment. 
Household sector: continued improvement in the employment and income situation 
and resilient private consumption 
Next, I will turn to the household sector. Positive developments in the corporate sector have 
led to a tightening in labor market conditions and to an improvement in the employment and 
income situation in accordance with that tightening. The unemployment rate was 3.3 percent, 
a low level last seen in 1997 (Chart 7). Judging from firms’ view on employment, the labor 
shortage  is  growing  further.  Tight  labor  market  conditions  have  been  creating  upward 
pressure on wages. Nominal wages have increased moderately, albeit with fluctuations, due 
partly to the fact that many firms increased wages, including base pay, which was raised to a 
larger extent than last year in the annual labor-management wage negotiations this spring. 
Consequently, since the number of employees has been increasing and nominal wages per 
employee have risen, overall employee income has been increasing moderately (Chart 8). 
Private  consumption  for  fiscal  2014  was  relatively  weak.  This  is  due  to  the  effects  of  the 
consumption tax hike having been larger than expected and of the bad weather during the 
summer, both creating a strong headwind to private consumption. However, this wind grew 
calm this fiscal year, and a tailwind has started to blow. Nominal wages have continued to 
increase, as they did last year, and the increase has been seen in small and medium-sized 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  enterprises (SMEs) as well. Moreover, reflecting in part the past decline in crude oil prices, 
real wages are projected to increase in a sustainable manner. Consumer sentiment, which 
fell  considerably  towards  last  year-end,  has  evidently  been  picking  up.  In  this  situation, 
private  consumption  has  become  more  resilient,  and  with  steady  improvement  in  the 
employment and income situation continuing going forward, supported in part by the wealth 
effects resulting from the rise in stock prices, private consumption is expected to maintain its 
resilience. 
Interim assessment of the outlook for economic activity and prices 
Regarding  Japan’s  economy,  with  a  virtuous  cycle  from  income  to  spending  in  both  the 
corporate and household sectors expected to continue operating, domestic private demand 
is  likely  to  be  firm,  and  exports  are  expected  to  increase  moderately,  albeit  with  some 
fluctuations. The Bank released its interim assessment in July of the April 2015 Outlook for 
Economic Activity and Prices (the Outlook Report). In fiscal 2015, the growth rate is likely to 
deviate  somewhat  downward  compared  to  the  projection  made  in  April,  due  to  the  recent 
weakness in exports and production, but the economy is projected to continue growing at a 
pace above its potential – estimated to be around 0.5 percent or lower – in both fiscal 2015 
and 2016. In fiscal 2017, the economy is projected to maintain its positive growth, although 
with a slowing in the pace to around a level somewhat below the potential growth rate due 
mainly  to  the  effects  of  the  consumption  tax  hike  planned  in  April  2017.  According  to  the 
Bank’s interim assessment, the median of the Policy Board members’ forecasts of the real 
GDP growth rate was 1.7 percent for fiscal 2015, 1.5 percent for fiscal 2016, and 0.2 percent 
for fiscal 2017 (Chart 9). 
Japan’s price developments and monetary policy 
II. 
I will next talk about the price situation in Japan and the Bank’s monetary policy. 
Transmission mechanism of QQE 
First, let me review the transmission mechanism of QQE that the Bank is currently pursuing. 
Under QQE, the decline in real interest rates, adjusted by the inflation rate, is envisioned as 
a  main  transmission  channel  (Chart  10).  Namely,  (1)  inflation  expectations  will  be  raised 
through a strong and clear commitment to achieving the price stability target of 2 percent and 
through  large-scale  monetary  easing  to  underpin  the  commitment,  (2)  downward  pressure 
will be put on nominal interest rates across the entire yield curve through massive purchases 
of Japanese government bonds (JGBs), and thereby (3) real interest rates will decline, and 
this will be the starting point of QQE’s effects. The decline in real interest rates will stimulate 
private demand, which will lead to an upturn in the economy, improving the output gap. The 
improvement  in  the  output  gap  will  increase  inflation  rates.  As  people  experience  actual 
inflation, their inflation expectations will rise further. 
Effects of QQE 
QQE has been producing its intended effects through the policy transmission mechanism I 
have just described. Nominal long-term interest rates have declined with the Bank’s massive 
purchases of JGBs. Yields on 10-year JGBs have declined by about 0.3 percentage point. 
While there are wide-ranging indicators for medium- to long-term inflation expectations such 
as various surveys and figures implied by inflation-indexed bonds that are traded in markets, 
inflation  expectations  seem  to  have  increased  by  about  0.5  percentage point  compared to 
the  period  before  QQE.  The  degree  of  decline  in  real  interest  rates  seems  to  have  been 
slightly  less  than  1  percentage  point,  as  calculated  by  adding  the  degree  of the  decline  in 
nominal long-term yields and that of the increase in inflation expectations. 
The changes in financial markets, economic activity, and prices after the introduction of QQE 
are  broadly  consistent  with  the  roughly  1  percentage  point  decline  in  real  interest  rates. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Financial markets responded to the introduction of QQE relatively swiftly. Stock prices have 
increased substantially and the excessive appreciation of the yen before the introduction has 
been  corrected.  The  pace  of  increase  in  lending  has  been  moderately  accelerating  and 
recently  reached  around  2.5  percent  on  a  year-on-year  basis.  In  addition  to  the  decline  in 
real  interest  rates,  such  developments  have  made  financial  conditions  even  more 
accommodative. With such accommodative financial conditions, a virtuous cycle from income 
to spending has been operating in both the corporate and household sectors, and Japan’s 
economy has seen a significant turnaround. I am aware that some firms have had difficulties 
in passing increased costs, including wages, on to sales prices smoothly; thus, some may 
not  share  the  sentiment  that  the  economic  condition  has  improved.  However,  the  positive 
feedback between higher profits/wages and higher inflation – where higher corporate profits 
feed through into higher wages, leading to higher sales prices, which in turn results in even 
higher profits/wages – is now in place. This is the opposite of the negative feedback that was 
observed in the deflationary period. To this end, the temperature of the economy is gradually 
rising. 
Outlook for prices and the bank’s monetary policy going forward 
Reflecting this turnaround in the economy, the underlying trend in inflation has also steadily 
improved. The year-on-year rate of change in the CPI (all items less fresh food), which was 
about minus 0.5 percent before the introduction of QQE, improved to 1.5 percent last April 
excluding  the  direct  effects  of the  consumption  tax  hike  (Chart  11). Thereafter,  the  rate of 
increase in the CPI has slowed, recently to about 0 percent, against the background of the 
substantial  decline  in  crude  oil  prices  since  summer  2014  and  somewhat  weak  demand 
following the consumption tax hike. 
Looking forward, due to the effects of the decline in energy prices, the year-on-year rate of 
increase  in  the  CPI  is  likely  to  be  about  0  percent  during this  summer.  But  thereafter  it  is 
projected to increase at an accelerated pace and reach around 2 percent – the price stability 
target – around the first half of fiscal 2016. Some may wonder how the rate of increase in the 
CPI can really reach 2 percent around the first half of fiscal 2016, given that the current level 
is about 0 percent. In response to this question, it may help you understand if we decompose 
the  changes  in  consumer  prices  into  two  parts:  the  contribution  of  energy  prices  and  the 
underlying trend in inflation. 
First, I will describe the contribution of energy prices. Crude oil prices were over 100 dollars 
per  barrel  up  until  mid-2014  but  then  declined  substantially,  temporarily  falling  to  about 
40 dollars per barrel, which accounts for the decline in prices of more than 60 percent. The 
decline in crude oil prices will lead to pushing down various energy prices, including gasoline 
and  electricity  charges,  with  some  time  lag.  The  negative  contribution  to  the  CPI  will  be 
largest  this  summer,  pushing  down  the  year-on-year  rate  of  increase  in  the  CPI  by  about 
1 percentage point. In other words, if crude oil prices had not declined, the year-on-year rate 
of increase in the CPI this summer would be higher by about 1 percentage point than what is 
observed. Furthermore, unless crude oil prices continue to decline, the negative contribution 
to the year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI will eventually dissipate. Although it is difficult 
to precisely forecast future crude oil prices, if we assume that they will rise very moderately 
from the current level – and there are many who predict such a rise, as prices in the futures 
markets  suggest  –  the  negative  contribution  is  expected  to  dissipate  gradually  from  the 
second half of fiscal 2015 and be around 0 percentage point in the first half of fiscal 2016. In 
other words, as the negative contribution of energy prices dissipates, this alone will push up 
the  year-on-year  rate  of  increase  in  the  CPI  for  the  first  half  of  next  fiscal  year  by  about 
1 percentage point, compared with that for this summer. 
In addition to these changes, the underlying trend in inflation is expected to improve further. 
The underlying trend in inflation is determined by the output gap of the economy as a whole 
and by inflation expectations. First, when it comes to the output gap, this was about minus 
2 percent  just  before  the  introduction  of  QQE,  but  with  the  tightening  in  labor  market 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  conditions  and  heightening  utilization  of  production  capacity,  it  has  improved  to  around 
0 percent, which is the past long-term average. Going forward, as the economy continues to 
grow at a pace above its potential, the output gap is expected to improve further into positive 
territory. 
Next,  as  I  described  earlier,  inflation  expectations  appear  to  be  rising  on  the  whole.  In 
particular, the recent changes in firms’ wage- and price-setting behavior are drawing specific 
attention. As for wage setting, many firms have increased their base pay for two consecutive 
years. Moreover, their price-setting has also been shifting from a low-price strategy to raising 
sales prices while increasing value-added. Under deflation, firms could not raise sales prices 
against weak demand, and thus focused on lowering costs as much as possible – including 
personnel expenses – in order to secure profits. However, as economic activity continues to 
improve, an increasing number of firms seem to be able to pass increased costs, including 
the rise in input prices and personnel expenses, on to sales prices. In particular, since the 
turn of the fiscal year in April, upward price revisions have been more widespread, which is 
something that has not been observed in recent years. At the meeting of general managers 
of the Bank’s branches held recently, many reported in this context. 
These changes also can be observed in hard data (Chart 12). The index calculated as the 
number of items for which prices rose minus that of items for which prices declined – among 
524 items that CPI (all items less fresh food) consists of – has recently risen further, and the 
most  recent  index  for  May  2015  is  the  highest  since  2003.  Furthermore,  the  University  of 
Tokyo Daily Price Index and SRI-Hitotsubashi Consumer Purchase Indices, which promptly 
report prices of daily use items and food, turned clearly positive on a year-on-year basis in 
April  this  year,  and  have  continued  to  rise  to  the  present.  Compared  with  last  year,  when 
prices  of  many  items  rose  in  April  with  the  consumption  tax  hike,  quickly  followed  by  the 
decline in prices due to weak sales, price movements this year present a clear contrast. 
As I have explained, QQE has been exerting its intended effects and a mechanism has been 
operating in which the year-on-year rate of increase in prices rises moderately, accompanied 
by an improvement in corporate profits and increases in employment and wages. The year-
on-year rate of increase in the CPI is likely to be about 0 percent for the time being, but as 
the underlying trend in inflation steadily rises and as the effects of the decline in crude oil 
prices dissipate, it is projected to accelerate toward 2 percent – the price stability target. The 
timing of reaching around 2 percent, as I described earlier, is projected to be around the first 
half of fiscal 2016, assuming that crude oil prices will rise moderately from the recent level 
(Chart 9). 
The Bank will continue with QQE, aiming to achieve the price stability of 2 percent, as long 
as it is necessary for maintaining that target in a stable manner. The Bank will continue to 
examine  both  upside  and  downside  risks  to  economic  activity  and  prices,  and  make 
adjustments as appropriate. 
Strengthening growth potential of Japan’s economy 
So  far, I  have  described  the  developments  in  economic  activity  and  prices,  as  well  as  the 
Bank’s  monetary  policy.  Let  me  now  touch  on  the  challenges  Japan’s  economy  faces; 
namely, strengthening its growth potential. 
Japan’s  potential  growth  rate  has  been  on  a  declining  trend  since  the  1990s  (Chart  13). 
Raising  the  growth  potential  is  an  important  challenge  for  Japan’s  economy,  and  the 
government is currently undertaking various structural reforms. Under the initiatives by the 
government,  it  is  very  encouraging  that  various  regulatory  and  institutional  reforms  have 
steadily been implemented. That said, I would like to note two points. 
First,  the  current  situation  where  the  economic  condition  has  been  improving  presents  a 
good opportunity to push ahead with structural reforms. As the economy improves, the need 
for  structural  reforms  and  challenges  to  overcome  is  now  clearer.  For  instance, many  can 
easily  understand  that,  in  order  to  strengthen  Japan’s  economic  growth,  it  is  important  to 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  shore up the labor participation of women and the elderly in view of the declining birthrate 
and aging population. However, this has not been recognized as a critical challenge under a 
high unemployment rate. As the economy improved and the labor market became tight, firms 
and people have started to recognize the supply constraint of the labor force, and measures 
have been taken to enhance the labor participation of women and the elderly. Also, in the 
context  of  regulatory  reforms,  with  firms  and  households  becoming  more  proactive  in 
economic  activity,  it  will  become  clear  which  regulatory  and  institutional  aspects  have 
hampered economic activity. Actual needs will become a powerful driving force in promoting 
regulatory reforms. 
Second, I will describe the impact of structural reforms on the economy. Structural reforms, 
in principle, are needed to raise the long-term growth of the economy and its sustainability. In 
some countries, and in Europe in particular, it is often discussed whether, in the short run, 
structural reforms entail pain and thus impede economic activity. However, there are various 
types of structural reforms that raise growth expectations and thereby enhance consumption 
and  investment  in  the  short  run,  resulting  in  stimulated  demand.  For  example,  regulatory 
reforms,  which  broaden  the  frontier  of  corporate  activities  and  free  up  firms  to  conduct 
activities  in  which  they  have  wanted  to  engage  or  ignite  their  animal  spirits,  will  produce 
expectations that the productivity and profits of firms will be raised in the future. Such a rise 
in growth expectations would stimulate investment even in the short run. If people are more 
confident  in  the  sustainability  of  social  welfare,  households  will  be  able  to  spend  money 
without worry. 
In  order  to  achieve  sustainable  growth  for  Japan’s  economy,  it  is  necessary  to  overcome 
deflation as well as to raise the potential growth through strenuous efforts both of the public 
and private sectors. The Bank will contribute to strengthening the growth potential of Japan’s 
economy by dispelling the deflationary mindset that persisted among people. Such change 
will encourage firms and households to be more proactive with their economic activities. With 
this  in  mind,  the  Bank  will  steadily  pursue  QQE  and  achieve  the  price  stability  target  of 
2 percent at the earliest possible time. 
Conclusion 
In concluding, let me touch on the economy of Kumamoto Prefecture. 
The  economy  has  generally  continued  to  see  moderate  recovery.  A  virtuous  cycle  from 
income to spending has been operating in both the corporate and household sectors, as in 
Japan’s economy as a whole. In the corporate sector, manufacturers in particular, including 
of  electronic  parts  and  devices  and  production  machinery  –  both  of  which  are  the  driving 
force of the region – have kept production at a high level while incorporating domestic and 
external demand, and in this situation, business fixed investment has been on an increasing 
trend.  Even  in  the  Kumamoto  Branch’s  June  Tankan,  business  fixed  investment  plans  for 
fiscal 2015 registered a double-digit increase, particularly in manufacturers. In the household 
sector,  the  pick-up  in  private  consumption  after  the  consumption  tax  hike  is  still  sluggish 
compared  to  that  in  metropolitan  areas.  Nevertheless,  labor  market  conditions  have 
tightened,  as  observed  in  the  active  job  openings-to-applicants  ratio  for  May  marking 
1.11 times  –  the  highest  level  since  these  statistics  started  to  be  kept.  Against  the 
background of the tight labor market conditions, there has been a spread of initiatives among 
firms in the prefecture to increase wages, including raising base pay, with the aim of mooring 
human resources. In line with the improvement in the employment and income situation, the 
recovery trend in private consumption is expected to gradually become evident. 
About  40  years  ago,  when  I  worked  at  the  Bank’s  Fukuoka  Branch,  I  remember  that 
Kumamoto  Prefecture  had  a  plan  of 
into 
accumulating  advanced  technology.  The  prefecture  continued  to  vigorously  invite  firms 
thereafter, and through the accumulation of firms related to electronic parts and devices, as 
well  as  machinery,  those  firms  currently  contribute  largely  to  the  industry  in  the  region. 
technopolis  construction,  putting  efforts 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  Kumamoto Prefecture is endowed with tourist attractions such as Kumamoto Castle, Mount 
Aso, and Amakusa. The Manda Coal Mine and Misumi West Port have been approved for 
inscriptions  on  UNESCO’s  World  Heritage  List  as  “Sites  of  Japan’s  Meiji  Industrial 
Revolution.”  An  increase  in  international  charter  flights  and  the  establishment  of  regular 
flights to and from Kumamoto Airport, as well as an increase in the number of cruise ships 
visiting  Yatsushiro  Port,  are  being  planned.  Other  than  reinforcing  the  tourism  industry, 
Kumamoto Prefecture is intensifying its efforts to vitalize the region with cooperation among 
industry,  the  government,  academia,  and  local  financial  institutions.  An  issue  worth 
considering in strengthening regional growth is to fully and effectively utilize the tangible and 
intangible  resources  each  region  possesses.  Kumamoto  Prefecture  enjoys  various 
advantages including (1) industrial clusters such as of electronic parts and devices, as well 
as machinery, (2) tourist attractions composed of abundant nature and landscapes, as well 
as  of  history  and  culture,  (3) a  competitive  agricultural,  forestry,  and  fishing  industry,  and 
(4) geographical proximity to other Asian economies that are growing considerably. The fact 
that  Kumamoto  Prefecture  is  making  various  efforts  utilizing  these  advantages  is  quite 
propitious. 
The Bank hopes, centering on its Kumamoto Branch, to contribute as much as possible to 
the  initiatives  in  the  prefecture  to  vitalize  the  region.  In  closing,  I  wish  all  the  best  for  the 
further development of the economy of Kumamoto Prefecture. 
Thank you. 
 
 
 8 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    9 
     10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    11 
     12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    13 
     14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
