  Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Asia School of Business – meeting Asia’s increasing 
demand for talent 
Remarks  by  Dr  Zeti  Akhtar  Aziz,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Malaysia  (Bank  Negara 
Malaysia), at the Signing Ceremony of the Collaboration between Asia School of Business 
and Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA, 8 April 2015. 
 President Rafael Reif, 
Dean David Schmittlein, 
And dear colleagues from MIT and the Asia School of Business 
It  is  my  very  great  pleasure  to  be  here  in  Cambridge  at  this  ceremony  today,  for  the 
formalisation  of  the  collaboration  between  Bank  Negara  Malaysia  and  MIT  for  the 
establishment of the Asia School of Business in Kuala Lumpur. 
Bank  Negara  Malaysia  has  for  more  than  a  decade  now,  been  involved  in  extensive 
investment in education – not only for the financial sector, but for the broader economy. Our 
reach has also not only been for the development of talent from our own country, but it has 
also extended to the Asian region and beyond. This is based on our conviction that the next 
generation  of  talent  –  whether  in  the  private  or  public  sectors  –  needs  to  recognise  and 
understand  the  dynamics  and  interconnectivities  of  the  new  regional  and  international 
environment.  In  particular,  as  the  pace  of  economic  and  financial  integration  that  is  now 
taking  place  in  Asia  intensifies,  the  talent  needs  to  appreciate  the  implications  of  the  new 
inter-linkages and its implications. Our aspiration is to contribute to the development of future 
leaders that are able to effectively operate in this new environment. The establishment of the 
Asia  School  of  Business  is,  therefore,  a  complementary  initiative  to  meet  the  increasing 
demand for talent with such leadership and management capabilities. 
Bank  Negara  Malaysia  is  most  honoured  to  partner  with  the  MIT  Sloan  School  of 
Management in the establishment of the Asia School of Business. The Bank is very much 
drawn to the education philosophy of MIT Sloan that emphasises on both analytical rigour 
and practical application to real-world challenges through project-based, action learning, and 
the  focus  of  its  relevance  to  the  different  economic  sectors.  The  Bank  also  shares  MIT 
Sloan’s dedication to encouraging innovation and entrepreneurship. 
The  increasing  importance  and  influence  of  Asia  in  the  global  economy  has  increased 
international interest to better understand Asia – the economies, businesses and people that 
comprise  the  region.  Being  home  to  a  significantly  diverse  group  of  businesses  –  from 
multinational  corporations  to  large  home-grown  conglomerates  and  vibrant  small  and 
medium-sized  enterprises,  Asia  provides  unique  educational  and  research  opportunities  to 
advance thought leadership in a wide range of activities. The Asia School of Business will 
offer two key differentiating value propositions: the emphasis on the practical application of 
business  management  education,  to  apply  theories  of  the  classroom  in  a  broad  range  of 
organisational  and  institutional  settings;  and  to  be  a  global  knowledge  and  learning  centre 
that focuses on insights, perspectives and expertise from the emerging world, especially the 
Asian region. 
The ultimate vision is for the Asia School of Business to be a premier business school that 
develops transformative and principled leaders who will contribute to the advancement of the 
emerging  world,  particularly 
this 
collaboration  is  not  only  in  providing  the  20-acre  land  that  is  in  the  green  lung  of  Kuala 
Lumpur for the campus and in building state-of-the-art facilities for the School, but being very 
much  part  of  the  Asian  region,  we  hope  that  Malaysia,  and  more  specifically,  the  Central 
Bank, will also be leveraged upon for our knowledge and experience in the region. 
in  Asia.  Bank  Negara  Malaysia’s  commitment 
to 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
  
 
Located  in  the  heart  of  Asia,  Malaysia  offers  an  eclectic  mix  of  cultures  and  ethnic 
backgrounds that reflects the heterogeneity of Asia. As a highly open economy, Malaysia has 
strong  economic  and  financial  inter-linkages  with  the  world,  from  Asia  to  the  advanced 
economies  and  other  emerging  economies,  including  Latin  America,  the  Middle  East  and 
Central Asia. The School will, therefore, draw extensively from the network of businesses in 
the  emerging  world  to  provide  a  platform  for  learning  and  research,  and  thus  offer  an 
extensive experience of the diversity that exists, in particular, in Asia. 
With the strength founded in the collaboration, I am confident of our potential to develop the 
Asia School of Business on solid foundations. The Bank looks forward to working with MIT 
Sloan in making this collaboration a success. 
I am pleased to now introduce the first President and Dean of the Asia School of Business, 
Professor  Charles  Fine.  Professor  Fine  is  the  Chrysler  Leaders  for  Global  Operations 
Professor  of  Management,  and  a  Professor  of  Operations  Management  and  Engineering 
Systems, at MIT Sloan. He has served as a Professor at MIT Sloan for over 30 years, and 
has teaching experience as a visiting faculty at the Stanford Business School, the Harvard 
Business  School  and  the  Indian  Business  School.  His  research  focuses  mainly  on  supply 
chain  strategy  and  value  chain  roadmapping.  His  work  has  supported  the  design  and 
improvement  of  supply  chain  relationships  for  companies  in  the  electronics,  automotive, 
aerospace, communications, and consumer products industries. 
Kindly join me in welcoming Professor Fine. 
 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
