  Ryuzo Miyao: Challenges in shaping modern monetary policy 
Speech by Mr Ryuzo Miyao, Member of the Policy Board of the Bank of Japan, at the Daiwa 
Investment Conference Tokyo 2015, Tokyo, 4 March 2015. 
Accompanying charts can be found at the end of the speech. 
 Introduction 
My  five-year  term  of  office  as  a  Policy  Board  member  of  the  Bank  of  Japan  will  end  on 
March 25.  During  this  period,  various  events  took  place  both  in  terms  of  financial  and 
economic developments at home and abroad as well as the conduct of monetary policy. It 
truly has been a turbulent five years. Today, drawing on the events and experiences gained 
during those years, I would like to focus on some of the challenges regarding the conduct of 
monetary policy. 
Specifically, I have three issues to address: (1) the effects of large-scale purchases of assets 
such as government bonds; (2) communication on monetary policy; and (3) the path toward 
achieving the 2 percent price stability target. After discussing these issues, I will share my 
views on central bank accountability. 
Effects of large-scale asset purchases 
I.  
One of the crucial issues of discussion on the recent unconventional monetary policy is how 
to assess the effects of large-scale purchases of assets such as government bonds. Some 
progress has been made in the research of such policy effects both on the theoretical and 
empirical sides, but there continues to be vigorous debate over the effects and costs, as well 
as over whether this policy should be implemented in the first place. 
In  practice,  large-scale  asset  purchases  by  central  banks  seem  to  have  become  common 
measures  adopted  in  major  advanced  economies  including  the  United  States,  Japan,  and 
Europe.  The  Bank  of  Japan  adopted  quantitative  easing  from  2001  through  2006:  at  that 
time, this was regarded as a pioneering policy framework. Later, in response to the global 
financial crisis, various countries adopted quantitative easing and asset purchasing policies 
that have been advanced in terms of both the scale of purchases and the variety of assets. 
Details of the asset purchase measures adopted by the Federal Reserve, the Bank of Japan, 
and the European Central Bank (ECB) varied, but the common feature was that these banks 
all performed large-scale asset purchases and continued their operations in an open-ended 
manner. They have made a commitment to linking the time frame of such asset purchases 
with their policy targets. The Federal Reserve announced that it would continue its purchases 
of  assets  “until  the  outlook for  the  labor  market has  improved  substantially  in  a  context  of 
price stability”; the ECB announced that it would do so “until we see a sustained adjustment 
in the path of inflation which is consistent with our aim of achieving inflation rates below, but 
close to, 2 percent over the medium term”; and the Bank of Japan announced that it would 
continue  such  purchases  “as  long  as  it  is  necessary  for  maintaining  the  2  percent  price 
stability  target  in  a  stable  manner.”  Such  open-ended  asset  purchases  are  very  effective 
measures  compared  with  those  having  specified  periods,  and  they  can  produce  stronger 
easing effects in terms of the following three points. 
First, by linking the duration of asset purchases with the policy target and not specifying the 
time  frame  in  advance,  an  open-ended  approach  indicates  central  banks’  strong  will  and 
determination  to  achieve  the  target.  In  the  case  of  the  Bank  of  Japan’s  conduct  of 
quantitative  and  qualitative  monetary  easing  (QQE),  its  strong  and  clear  commitment  to 
achieving  the  price  stability  target  of  2  percent  affects  expected  inflation  rates,  and  at  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  same  time,  the  large-scale  purchases  of  Japanese  government  bonds  (JGBs)  exert 
downward  pressure  on  the  entire  yield  curve,  bringing  about  lower  real  interest  rates,  and 
thereby stimulate private demand. In general, the open-ended approach clarifies the stance 
of maintaining the unconventional and large-scale policy measures for a considerable time. 
This would further ease financial conditions by exerting strong effects on long-term rates and 
asset  prices,  and  accordingly  improve  corporate  profits  as  well  as  employment  and  wage 
conditions. 
Second, by committing to conducting stronger easing for a longer period of time, an open-
ended  approach  can  exert  positive  effects  on  the  supply  side  of  the  economy,  through 
encouraging the private sector’s productive risk taking and entrepreneurship. For example, if 
such  commitment  supports  changes  in  business  structures  and  tapping  new  demand,  and 
promotes business fixed investment that embodies new technology as well as research and 
development  investment,  it  will  be  able  to  increase  capital  stock  and  heighten  total  factor 
productivity. Improvements on the supply side of the economy, and thus in the outlook for 
permanent income, can be expected to result in a sustainable increase in demand.1 
Third,  since  it  is  open-ended,  markets’  expected  duration  of  asset  purchases  can  vary 
depending  on  a  change  in  the  economic  outlook.  Therefore,  it  contains  a  “stabilizing 
mechanism”;  that  is,  even  if  market  participants  anticipate  that  the  economic  outlook  will 
weaken  compared  to  the  baseline  scenario,  they  also  can  expect  an  extension  of  the 
duration,  which  strengthens  the  easing  effect  and  consequently  helps  the  target  to  be 
achieved earlier. 
Next, let me compare the large-scale, open-ended purchases with forward guidance about 
policy rates, which is another unconventional measure that commits to maintaining a zero or 
extremely low interest rate for a longer period of time. 
Here, I would like to focus on my two main perspectives. 
The first perspective concerns effects on the financial environment such as long-term interest 
rates  and  asset  prices.  The  large-scale  government  bond  purchases  not  only  can  exert 
downward pressure on the term premium but also can influence the expected path of short-
term  interest  rates.  When  the  purchases  are  conducted  for  a  longer  period,  market 
participants  are  likely  to  interpret  this  as  meaning  that  exceptional  easing  measures  and, 
accordingly, a zero or extremely low interest rate policy also will be continued for a longer 
period, which could exert downward pressure on the expected short-term interest rates. This 
is the so-called signaling effect. 
On the other hand, forward guidance under the zero interest rate policy commits in advance 
to maintaining the zero interest rate into the future even when it seems appropriate to raise 
the policy interest rate, thereby lowering the expected path of short-term interest rates and 
exerting  downward  pressure  on  longer-term  interest  rates.  However,  there  is  a  problem  of 
time inconsistency with this commitment, because when an increase in interest rates does 
become appropriate, the commitment may be compromised in the end since it is appropriate 
to do so on an ex post basis. The signaling effect brought about by the large-scale, open-
ended purchases is likely to work as a commitment device to restrain an inducement of time 
inconsistency. In this regard, this approach can exert a greater effect than forward guidance 
in creating accommodative financial conditions. 
                                                
1   U.S. policymakers also take notice of the following similar discussion: aggressive monetary easing improves 
firms’ fixed investment and research and development investment, as well as long-term unemployment, and 
this affects the aggregate supply of the economy as well as the medium- to long-term growth trend. Therefore, 
the economy can avoid a deterioration in the aggregate supply and growth trend after financial crises through 
such  measures.  See,  for  example,  the  following  analysis  by  Federal  Reserve  Board  economists:  Dave 
Reifschneider,  William  L.  Washer,  and  David  Wilcox,  “Aggregate  Supply  in  the  United  States:  Recent 
Developments  and  Implications  for  the  Conduct  of  Monetary  Policy,”  Paper  presented  at  the  14th  Jacques 
Polak Annual Research Conference, International Monetary Fund, November 2013. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  My  second  perspective  as  regards  the  comparison  between  the  two  unconventional  policy 
measures  is  the  implication  of  the  expansion  of  the  monetary  base.  The  open-ended 
purchases  of  government  bonds  imply  that,  on  the  liability  side,  the  monetary  base  – 
especially reserve balances – will expand on a larger scale and for a longer period of time, 
whereas forward guidance does not have such a quantitative aspect. 
A theoretical analysis of such implication has been progressing recently among academics. 
From  such  a  perspective,  the  economic  effect  of  this  can  be  explained  as  follows.  As  the 
government’s long-term liabilities are replaced by the central bank’s short-term liabilities, for 
the policy sector overall, comprising the central government and the central bank, the interest 
payment will be reduced. As a result, at least in this case, revenue from banknote issuance, 
or  seigniorage,  will  be  generated.  On  the  assumption  that  the  government’s  fiscal 
expenditure  plan  will  be  unchanged,  fiscal  space  equivalent  to  this  seigniorage  will  be 
created in the government budget constraint. If such additional fiscal space then results in an 
increase in fiscal expenditure or in a tax cut, or make people expect that this will happen, it 
can stimulate the economy.2 
Such  potential  economic  stimulus  effects,  due  to  an  exchange  of  long-term  government 
bonds  and  reserve  balances,  cannot  be  seen  in  forward  guidance  under  the  zero  interest 
rate  policy  but  are  unique  to  large-scale,  long-term  balance-sheet  policy  that  entails  asset 
purchases. However, it should be noted that in the actual conduct of monetary policy, market 
participants might doubt that the use of additional fiscal space indicates a retreat from the 
government’s efforts to achieve fiscal soundness. In fact, the theoretical analysis is based on 
the preconditions that the government’s intertemporal budget constraint is satisfied and that 
its solvency will be achieved. I would like to emphasize that the Japanese government’s clear 
commitment  to  mid-  to  long-term  fiscal  reconstruction  is  critical  and  consistent  with  these 
preconditions in such theoretical analysis. 
As  we  have  seen  so  far,  the  large-scale,  open-ended  asset  purchases  produce  positive 
effects  via  the  traditional  transmission  channels  through  which  real  interest  rates  affect 
economic  activity,  and  also  strengthen  the  effects  produced  by  the  improvements  on  the 
supply side of the economy. In addition, they are expected to restrain the time inconsistency 
brought about by forward guidance about policy rates. Furthermore, they theoretically might 
produce potential economic stimulus effects through seigniorage. 
The issue of how much this policy approach generates easing effects is also closely related 
to the timing and scale of the policy adjustment in the phase of normalization or tightening. 
Given that the policy to expand the monetary base has produced various economic stimulus 
effects  through  the  aforementioned  several  mechanisms,  adjusting  or  shifting  from  this 
policy,  or  providing  policy  guidance  about  such  a  move,  should  produce  the  opposite, 
tightening effects. When a central bank starts to discuss normalization of monetary policy, at 
which time it becomes very possible that the price stability target will soon be achieved, it will 
pursue  appropriate  adjustments  including  a  combination  of  some  measures  such  as 
adjusting policy rates and/or policy guidance. 
Monetary policy communication 
II.  
In implementing unconventional monetary policy, communication with the public has become 
increasingly  important  recently.  Central  banks  have  been  making  efforts  to  enhance 
                                                
2   The potential economic stimulus effects have been widely discussed in the recent theoretical research. See, 
for  example,  Willem  H.  Buiter,  “The  Simple  Analytics  of  Helicopter  Money:  Why  It  Works  –  Always,” 
Economics  8,  1–53,  2014;  and  Jordi  Gali,  “The  Effects  of  a  Money-Financed  Fiscal  Stimulus,”  CEPR 
Discussion  Paper  10165,  September  2014.  Note  that  such  theoretical  analysis  assumes  the  intertemporal 
budget  constraint  of  the  government  and  does  not  discuss  the  fiscal  theory  of  the  price  level  or  the  fiscal 
dominance. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  transparency  and  accountability  by,  for  example,  introducing  policy  targets  with  numerical 
values,  clarifying  their  own  policy  approaches,  and/or  releasing  their  assessments  of  the 
outlook for economy activity. For modern central banks that have gained independence, it is 
essential to enhance transparency and accountability in order to maintain public confidence. 
Meanwhile,  there  are  many  challenges  central  banks  face  with  regard  to  monetary  policy 
communication. 
The first is the difficulty of policy communication when the economy is likely to be undergoing 
fundamental  structural  changes.  For  example,  since  the  global  financial  crisis,  the  global 
economy has been burdened with debt reduction and balance sheet adjustment. The pace of 
economic  recovery  has  been  slower  than  had  been  expected,  and  forecasts  for  global 
economic  growth,  released  by  various  organizations,  have  been  revised  downward 
repeatedly. One recent example was the International Monetary Fund, which reasoned that 
its  downward  revisions  were  due  to  weak  business  investment,  notably  in  emerging 
economies.3  As  for  Japan,  the  recent  economic  recovery  has  been  driven  by  domestic 
demand,  consumption  in  particular,  rather  than  by  exports,  which  may  suggest  that  the 
country’s  economic  structure  has  been  changing  against  the  background  of  increasing 
globalization.  These  developments  in  the  economy  worldwide  imply  sustained  structural 
changes, and considerable uncertainty regarding the outlook for economic activity. Moreover, 
there are many unpredictable risk factors, such as geopolitical risks, the political situation in 
Europe,  and  developments  in  crude  oil  prices.  In  communicating  with  the  public  about  the 
outlook for the economy amid a situation of structural changes and various risk factors, it is 
more important to see whether the intended mechanism functions smoothly than to focus on 
specific numerical values. 
The  second  challenge  is  the  balance  between  transparency  and  flexibility  of  the  policy 
approach. Clarifying the future policy approach enhances the transparency and predictability 
of monetary policy. Such clarification may also  strengthen the policy effects, just as in the 
case  of  forward  guidance  under  the  zero  interest  rate  policy.  However,  if  the  information 
provided  by  a  central  bank  is  too  specific,  the  public  may,  contrary  to  the  central  bank’s 
intention, focus solely on the specifics, which could lead to fluctuations in the market. This 
may  impair  the  flexibility  and  credibility  of  the  policy  response.  Such  specifics  include  the 
announcement of particular economic indicators, numerical values, or time spans on which it 
bases its assessment. 
Indeed, central banks need to provide information about future policy responses based on a 
comprehensive assessment of a wide range of indicators and the basic mechanism of the 
economy, rather than on specifics – that is, specific economic indicators or specific numerical 
values.  This  is  particularly  true  when  the  economy  is  undergoing  fundamental  structural 
changes or when there is heightened uncertainty regarding the outlook. In fact, as for forward 
guidance under QQE in Japan, the Bank adopts the following broad approach: “the Bank will 
continue with QQE, aiming to achieve the price stability target of 2 percent, as long as it is 
necessary  for  maintaining  that  target  in  a  stable  manner.  It  will  examine  both  upside  and 
downside risks to economic activity and prices, and make adjustments as appropriate.” This 
policy approach of making a comprehensive assessment under the constraint of the policy 
target  is  in  itself  the  essence  of  a  flexible  inflation  targeting  framework  within  which 
“constrained  discretion”  can  be  exercised.  Major  countries  including  Japan  currently  adopt 
this  policy  approach  based  on  the  framework  of  flexible  inflation  targeting,  and  the 
significance of relying on a comprehensive assessment is likely to increase. 
                                                
3   See Chapter 1 in the World Economic Outlook released by the International Monetary Fund in October 2014. 
There has been vigorous debate over the deceleration in the pace of recovery in the global economy. It also 
has led to discussions about low productivity and continued shortages in demand – a situation referred to as 
“secular stagnation.” 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  The  third  is  the  challenge  specific  to  Japan  regarding  the  policy  target.  The  Bank  aims  to 
achieve the price stability target of 2 percent, while at the same time raising and re-anchoring 
the inflation rate that the general public perceives as representing price stability to the new 
policy target of 2 percent. Among advanced economies, only Japan faces this challenge, and 
the  Bank  should  continue  to  make  efforts  to  provide  a  thorough  explanation  about  the 
feasibility. 
In January 2013, the Bank set the price stability target of 2 percent and jointly committed with 
the government to achieve this goal. Prior to this, the Bank had judged that the price stability 
goal was in a positive range of 2 percent or lower and had set a goal at 1 percent for the time 
being. The Bank now aims to achieve a higher target – to be precise, the upper limit of the 
previous  goal  –  based  on  the  recognition  that  efforts  by  a  wide  range  of  entities  toward 
strengthening  the  competitiveness  and  growth  potential  of  Japan’s  economy  will  make 
progress. I will elaborate on this point later, but the fundamentals of Japan’s economy have 
been improving steadily and these developments are in line with the Bank’s recognition. It is 
very likely that the Bank will achieve the price stability target of 2 percent and, by maintaining 
that target in a stable manner, re-anchor the inflation rate that the general public perceives 
as  representing  price  stability  at  around  2  percent.  According to the  Bank’s  projections for 
economic activity and prices made in January 2015, the year-on-year rate of increase in the 
consumer price index is likely to reach around 2 percent in or around fiscal 2015. I personally 
hold the view that, although the precise timing for reaching 2 percent can be either earlier or 
later  to  some  extent,  the  rate  will  likely  rise  close  to  2  percent  as  a  trend  as  downward 
pressure exerted by the decline in crude oil prices eventually will dissipate on a year-on-year 
basis. 
Path toward achieving the price stability target of 2 percent 
III.  
Let me explain once again the path toward achieving the price stability target that the Bank 
has in mind. The key question is whether the inflation rate will trend upward toward 2 percent 
together with a sustainable economic recovery. 
Let me discuss the sustainability of Japan’s economic recovery from a few perspectives. 
First,  economic  fundamentals  have  improved  over  the  past  two  years  or  so  –  that  is,  the 
period during which the Bank has further enhanced monetary easing. This can be confirmed 
by the improvement, for example, in firms’ ratios of profits to sales, employee  income, the 
quality of employment, and the labor force participation rate (Charts 1 through 3). Moreover, 
Japan’s net external assets have increased steadily, and its net income from the rest of the 
world has been on an increasing trend as a result of further global expansion by Japanese 
firms  (Chart  4).  In  addition,  the  recent  substantial  fall  in  crude  oil  prices  will  considerably 
improve trading gains. All of these developments point to a rise in the economy’s capacity to 
generate income on a sustained basis. 
This  sustained  improvement  in  the  capacity  has  been  the  source  of  recovery  in  Japan’s 
domestic expenditure. The increasing trend in business fixed investment is becoming clear 
against the background of favorable corporate profits (Chart 5). Household sentiment, which 
worsened  due  to  the  consumption  tax  hike,  has  stopped  deteriorating,  and  consumption 
expenditure has been resilient (Chart 6). The economy’s capacity to generate income seems 
to be firm and the momentum of consumption maintained. 
An  improving  trend  in  domestic  demand  leads  to  sustainable  improvements  in  the  output 
gap,  and  labor  supply  and  demand  conditions  continue  to  tighten  as  a  trend.  As  a  result, 
upward  pressure  on  price  and  wage  inflation  rates  as  a  trend  is  likely  to  increase.  If  the 
uptrend in prices is taken into account at the time of the wage negotiations in spring 2015, 
the cyclical mechanism observed in 2014 – in which wages and prices rise spirally – will be 
maintained. That is to say, in 2015, we will be experiencing the second round of a virtuous 
cycle among income, spending, prices, and wages. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  If  positive  initiatives  –  such  as  replacement  investment  that  embodies  new  technology  for 
business  facilities,  research  and  development  investment,  creating  new  value-added 
services, and tapping new demand – are further taken, total factor productivity (TFP) will rise 
and the increasing trend in income and spending will accelerate and be more sustainable. 
Under  the  expanded  QQE,  extremely  accommodative  financial  conditions  will  continue  to 
strongly support the virtuous cycle from the financial side. We expect that QQE will produce 
larger effects as Japan’s economic fundamentals improve. 
If the virtuous cycle of economic activity is sustained, a view that “around 2 percent inflation 
will  continue  with  improvements  in  corporate  profits,  employment,  and  wages”  will  spread 
widely throughout the country, and a new inflation rate that the general public perceives as 
representing price stability will take hold. In the latter half of 2014, the price rise that includes 
the consumption tax hike might have been perceived only as an increase in costs, or incited 
concern over inflation amid the delay in economic recovery, thereby leading to deterioration 
in sentiment. What Japan needs to achieve, however, is a sustainable, mild inflation with the 
virtuous  cycle  of  economic  activity  operating.  It  is  vital  that  the  virtuous  cycle  continue  to 
operate in order for the conversion of the prolonged deflationary mindset to take place, and 
for people’s medium- to long-term inflation expectations to rise to around 2 percent and take 
root. 
In order to maintain the virtuous cycle of economic activity and dispel deflationary sentiment, 
the risk of a spreading of “the Keynes’ fallacy of composition” should be kept to a minimum. 
The fallacy of composition arises when an action taken by a firm or household that seems 
rational to the individual firm or household results in an undesirable outcome if all firms or 
households collectively take the same action. Individual firms may be reluctant to implement 
wage  increases,  including  a raise  in  the  level  of  base  pay,  that  will  lead  to  an  increase  in 
fixed costs, taking into account the competition among rival firms and the need to increase 
savings for future use. However, if many firms feel the same way and do not implement wage 
increases, household income will not increase and household sentiment will remain cautious, 
leading to sluggish spending. As a result, firms’ sales as a whole will be stagnant. If many 
households  hold  back  their  consumption  to  increase  savings  for  future  use,  the  overall 
income of the economy will be sluggish since the amount a person spends will be somebody 
else’s  income.  If  many  firms  postpone  the  fixed  investment  that  is  necessary  for  their 
business  or  continue  lowering  their  transaction  prices  in  order  to  prepare  for  unexpected 
events and other uncertainties, the same problem will occur. Consequently, individual firms’ 
sales  and  individual  households’  income  will  be  sluggish,  hindering  the  economy  from 
becoming buoyant. 
In  order  to  minimize  the  risk  of  the  fallacy  of  composition  spreading,  aggressive  policy 
measures already have been taken. Measures such as flexible fiscal policy, expansion of the 
monetary  easing,  and  joint  initiatives  toward  raising  wages  led  by  the  government,  the 
business  community,  and  labor  unions  are  all  considered  to  avoid  materialization  of  such 
risk. With economic fundamentals improving steadily, it is crucial that people spend, invest, 
and distribute money, keeping the economy moving by circulating money, rather than keep 
money in reserve. I believe it is necessary that more people become aware of the importance 
of  preventing  the  fallacy  of  composition  from  materializing,  and  that  firms  and  households 
must change their mindset to a further degree. 
Concluding remarks 
In  shaping  modern  monetary  policy,  central  banks  face  the  considerable  challenge  of 
adopting new measures when the economy is likely to be undergoing fundamental structural 
changes.  Communication  with  the  public  and  the  market  will  definitely  be  more  difficult. 
However, central banks need to promote communication by providing a thorough explanation 
on their conduct of monetary policy, including the issues I have discussed, and by sharing 
the challenges we face. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Financial  markets  pay  extremely  close  attention  to  each  and  every  word  central  banks 
release. They tend to show a strong reaction to the release of detailed information such as 
specifics in a numerical form. In any financial market, the Keynesian beauty contest, in which 
anticipation  of  others’  reactions  will  be  taken  more  seriously  than  fundamentals,  is 
sometimes  in  evidence.  Therefore,  overreaction  in  markets  cannot  always  be  avoided.  In 
addition,  central  banks  are  directly  intervening  to  a  considerable  scale  in  asset  markets, 
where they had not heavily intervened in the past. Thus, markets’ behavior of always being 
looking-forward and trying to be one step ahead of others might become strengthened. 
All things considered, it is certain that central banks’ communication with the market and the 
public  increasingly  will  have  to  be  based  more  on  the  economic  mechanism  and  the 
comprehensive  assessment. The  market  will  demand  more  clear  and  concrete  information 
from central banks. Continuing to meet this demand, however, does not necessarily lead to 
enhancing economic welfare because it is difficult in practice to define the systematic policy 
reaction function. I believe that the desirable degree of central bank accountability is to offer 
judgment  based  more  on  a  discretional  comprehensive  assessment  while  providing  basic 
transparency. I hope this idea will be shared widely among the public and the market. 
 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  8 
    BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    9 
   10 
    BIS central bankers’ speeches 
