  Stephen S Poloz: Release of the Monetary Policy Report 
Opening statement by Mr Stephen S Poloz, Governor of the Bank of Canada, at the press 
conference following the release of the Monetary Policy Report, Ottawa, Ontario, 21 January 
2015. 
 Good  morning.  Carolyn  and  I  are  delighted  to  be  here  to  answer  your  questions  about 
today’s  interest  rate  announcement  and  our  latest  Monetary  Policy  Report  (MPR).  Let  me 
begin with a few preliminary remarks. 
The  recent  drop  in  oil  prices  of  course  dominates  this  MPR,  and  dominated  our  policy 
discussions.  There  is  considerable  uncertainty  around  the  outlook  for  oil  prices  and  the 
implications  for  the  economy.  However,  every  credible  scenario  for  oil  left  us  with  a 
significant issue for monetary policy. We have based our analysis on an assumption for oil 
prices of about US$60 per barrel for the next two years. Although this is above current levels, 
prices seem likely to move back above $60 in the medium term. 
The  drop  in  oil  prices  is  unambiguously  negative  for  the  Canadian  economy.  Canada’s 
income  from  oil  exports  will  be  reduced,  and  investment  and  employment  in  the  energy 
sector are already being cut. 
There  will  be  some  offsets,  but  they  are  both  partial  and  of  uncertain  timing:  Canadian 
consumers will spend less on energy, but they could save some of the windfall rather than 
spend it; U.S. economic growth will be stronger, which – along with a lower Canadian dollar – 
should boost Canadian exports, but the speed of the export response is uncertain given the 
export capacity losses of the last decade. 
The  Bank  has  been  projecting  a  natural  sequence  of  higher  non-energy  exports,  higher 
investment  and  higher  employment,  which  is  needed  to  restore  balance  to  the  Canadian 
economy  and  reduce  financial  stability  risks.  This  sequence  is  gaining  traction  and  will  be 
strengthened  by  the  combination  of  lower  oil  prices,  stronger  U.S.  growth  and  a  lower 
Canadian dollar. 
However, these encouraging developments will be masked during the first half of 2015 by the 
impact of lower oil prices on the energy sector. Later in the year, growth in Canada’s non-
energy  economy  should  re-emerge  as  our  dominant  trend.  But  the  first-half  slowdown 
represents  a  material  setback  in  the  Bank’s  projected  return  to  full  employment  and 
sustainable 2 per cent inflation. 
Let  me  now  give  you  some  additional  insight  into  our  policy  deliberations.  Based  on  our 
assumption of oil prices at $60 a barrel, our first projection implied that it would take until late 
2017 for the economy to use up its excess capacity. This would mean significant downside 
risk to our underlying inflation profile, which is already below target because of the expected 
dissipation of one-time inflation effects from meat, communications and dollar depreciation. 
Obviously,  these  risks  would  be  even  more  material  if  oil  were  to  average  $50  a  barrel. 
Adding at least another year onto the period during which the economy would be operating 
below capacity and accepting more downside risk on inflation was considered unreasonable. 
Accordingly,  we  decided  that  it  was  appropriate  to  take  out  some  insurance  against  that 
downside risk in the form of a lower interest rate profile. 
Policy  insurance  is  a  logical  part  of  our  risk  management  framework.  Today’s  action  is 
intended to reduce the risk that our inflation path might move materially to the downside, as 
well  as  cushion  the  impact  of  lower  oil  prices  and  facilitate  the  economy’s  sectoral 
adjustment to  its  new  circumstances. The  Bank  has  room  to  maneuver  should  its forecast 
prove to be either too pessimistic or too optimistic. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  We  also  considered  carefully  the  matter  of  financial  stability  risks.  For  the  past  couple  of 
years,  we  have  seen  periods  of  downside  risk  to  the  inflation  profile,  but  the  horizon  over 
which we believed inflation would return sustainably to target remained reasonable, around 
two  years.  Financial  stability  risks  have  been  elevated  throughout,  sometimes  evolving 
constructively, sometimes edging higher. But they did not pose sufficient concern to make it 
necessary  to  alter  policy  and  delay  further  the  economy’s  progress  toward  sustainable 
2 per cent inflation. 
The  drop  in  oil  prices,  however,  has  two  separate  effects  relevant  to  policy.  As  already 
discussed,  it  materially  increases  the  downside  risk  to  underlying  inflation,  but  it  also 
increases the household debt-to-income ratio significantly. 
While it is true that a lower profile for interest rates may exacerbate household imbalances at 
the margin by encouraging more borrowing, the far more important effect will be to mitigate 
those imbalances by cushioning the decline in income and employment caused by lower oil 
prices. Ultimately, we believe the most reliable way to reduce financial stability risks is to do 
what we can to get the economy back to full capacity and sustainable inflation. 
Finally, we discussed the risk that by moving today we would surprise financial markets. We 
generally prefer that markets not be surprised by what we do, and believe that transparency 
around our analysis of the economy will minimize the scope for surprises. In that respect, we 
took comfort from the observation that the consequences of the drop in oil prices appear to 
be well understood, and that the possibility of a rate cut had begun to enter markets in the 
last  couple  of  weeks.  Moreover, given  the  magnitude  of  the  shock,  we  concluded  that  the 
benefits of acting now rather than waiting would outweigh the costs of any short-term market 
volatility that might arise. 
With that, Carolyn and I would be happy to take your questions 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
