  Mario Draghi: President’s address at the 16th ECB and its Watchers 
Conference 
Speech by Mr Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank, at the conference “The 
ECB and Its Watchers XVI”, Frankfurt am Main, 11 March 2015. 
 Summary 
In  January,  the  ECB  decided  to  expand  its  asset  purchase  programme  to  include 
government bonds after it became clear that there was a need for more monetary stimulus. 
Asset  purchases  are  unconventional,  but  not  unorthodox,  and  they  have  been  part  of  the 
ECB’s  toolkit  from  the  start.  By  deploying  this  tool,  the  ECB  underlined  its  ability  and 
determination to stabilise euro area inflation in line with its objective. 
The impact of the programme and the ECB’s previous monetary policy measures is visible: 
Bank lending rates to companies started to decline in the third quarter of last year, market-
based measures of inflation expectations have reacted positively to the ECB’s balance sheet 
expansion  over  recent  months,  and  euro  area  long-term  sovereign  yields  have  fallen  –  in 
spite of the renewed crisis in Greece. This suggests that the asset purchase programme may 
be shielding other euro area countries from contagion, which also helps the ECB achieve its 
monetary policy goals across the euro area. 
The euro area economy grew more than expected in the fourth quarter and unemployment 
fell  to  its  lowest  level  since  August  2012  in  January.  While  this  cannot  exclusively  be 
attributed  to  the  ECB’s  monetary  policy,  it  certainly  supports  the  recovery.  Even  though 
inflation is expected to remain very low or negative in the months ahead mainly due to the 
sharp drop in oil prices, it is expected to move closer the ECB’s policy target over the coming 
years  to  reach  1.8  per  cent  in  2017  –  conditional  on  the  full  implementation  of  all  policy 
measures. 
The beneficial impact of the ECB’s asset purchases on financing conditions will increase the 
benefits  of  governments’  structural  reforms,  rather  than  reducing  incentives  for  reforms. 
Firms will be encouraged to increase investment, bringing forward the economic recovery. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Since  the  last  Watchers’  conference  in  March  2014,  we  have  reached  deeper  in  our 
monetary  policy  tool  box.  The  means  have  changed  quite  substantially,  as  dictated  by 
circumstances, but the end has not. To be able to deliver on our medium term price stability 
mandate, we needed to adapt and expand our monetary policy tools. 
I  would  like  to  open  this  conference  by  elaborating  on  what  has  changed,  how  it  has 
changed, and how this helps us to fulfil our mandate. 
Reaching deeper into the monetary policy toolbox 
At the time of the last Watchers’ conference policy rates were already moving towards zero 
and  we  had  reached  a  point  where  there  was  little  room for manoeuvre  with  the  standard 
instrument of monetary policy. We did eventually reach the effective lower bound later in the 
year by lowering incrementally the corridor of policy rates in June and September. 
When a central bank’s ability to steer the overnight rate is limited, it can still alter its monetary 
stance by means of directly influencing expectations. This is the context in which the ECB 
introduced  forward  guidance  in  2013.  Our  forward  guidance  was  effective  in  flattening  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  money  market  curve  and  decoupling  it  from  the  curve  in  the  United  States.  But  its  power 
becomes  more  limited,  as  the  horizon  over  which  the  policy  rate  is  intended  to  be  at  the 
effective lower bound extends beyond the forecast horizon. Moreover, forward guidance by 
the  ECB  was  not  and  could  not,  in  Paul  Krugman’s  words,  “credibly  promise  to  be 
irresponsible”. 
What  this  means  is  that  when  the  need  for  additional  monetary  stimulus  arose,  the  ECB 
could no longer rely solely on acting in the money market, counting on transmission from the 
money market to other market segments, and from those to the real economy. 
Like other major central banks, we therefore had to intervene directly in markets beyond the 
money  market  to  have  a  more  direct  impact  on  the  various  channels  of  monetary  policy 
transmission. And the way to do that was to purchase assets in those other markets. 
Unconstrained monetary policy is key 
Asset purchases are nothing new. They have been available and have been routinely used 
by central banks ever since these institutions came into existence, and that was long before 
the crisis started. Incidentally, asset purchases have formed part of the ECB’s toolkit from the 
start:  outright  purchases  of  marketable  instruments  –  which  include  government  bonds  – 
have  always  been  listed  in  our  statute  as  part  of  our  monetary  policy  toolbox.  And  the 
legitimacy of using public sector bond purchases in the pursuit of medium-term price stability 
was unanimously confirmed by the Governing Council on 22 January. 
Asset purchases are unconventional, but they are not unorthodox. They are in fact eminently 
orthodox. And they are in a central bank’s toolbox for a reason. Independence is essential for 
the central bank’s credibility. But equally essential is that the central bank has the means, i.e. 
the  policy  instruments,  to  achieve  its  mandate.  Together  they  allow  the  central  bank  to 
achieve price stability, which in turn boosts its credibility. 
Our decision in September to make use of asset purchases had significant effects. But still, 
when  we  announced  the  purchase  of  asset-backed  securities  (ABSs)  and  covered  bonds, 
there were some in the market place who doubted our commitment and the effectiveness of 
our  monetary  policy.  They  thought  we  might  be  hampered  either  by  there  being  a  limited 
availability of assets that we could purchase in the market or by legal or political obstacles to 
our  ability  to  expand  the  range  of  assets,  should  it  become  necessary.  If  we  were  so 
constrained, that would affect our credibility because our ability to anchor expectations relies 
in part on the fact that we are free to set the appropriate monetary stance. 
In this context, the decisions we took in January to expand the range of our asset purchases 
must  have  assuaged  those  concerns. We  can deploy  –  and  we  are  deploying  – monetary 
policy in a way that can – and will – stabilise inflation in line with our objective. 
How the expanded asset purchase programme is working its way into the real 
economy 
As its name indicates – the expanded asset purchase programme is just an extension of the 
programme  that  we  announced  in  September  as  part  of  a  more  comprehensive  easing 
package.  This  package  has  been  effective  in  improving  the  pass-through  from  liquidity 
injections into private sector borrowing costs: bank lending rates to non-financial corporations 
started to decline in the third quarter of last year, coinciding with the first targeted long-term 
refinancing  operation  (TLTRO)  and  our  announcement  to  purchase  ABSs  and  covered 
bonds,  and  also  following  the  repair  of  banks’  balance  sheets  during  the  comprehensive 
assessment. 
Furthermore,  model-based  estimates  indicate  that  –  controlling  for  other  developments  – 
market-based measures of inflation expectations have reacted positively to the progressive 
expansion  of  our  balance  sheet  over  the  last  few  months.  There  is  thus  good  reason  to 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  believe  that  as  our  balance  sheet  grows  more  substantially  under  the  expanded  asset 
purchase programme, it will support a rebound of these measures. 
Second,  our  policy  announcement  was  largely  anticipated.  On  1  January  2015,  60%  of 
surveyed  experts  attached  a  65%  or  higher  probability  that  we  would  announce  a  public 
sector  securities  purchase  programme  at  our  January  meeting.  And,  according  to  various 
surveys, expectations were already quite high in autumn last year. 
These anticipation effects show up in the financial data. According to estimates, the impact of 
the  asset  purchase  programme  has  accounted  for  most  of  the  fall  in  euro  area  long-term 
sovereign yields since August last year. The same applies for movements in other financial 
markets  metrics,  such  as  the  fall  in  long-term  corporate  bond  yields  of  non-financial 
corporations. 
Beyond  anticipation  effects,  the  announcement  of  the  expanded  programme  of  asset 
purchases  itself  also  led  to  substantial  further  falls  in  longer-term  sovereign  yields.  For 
instance, from just before our announcement on 22 January to the close of business the day 
after,  German  20-year  maturity  yields  fell  by  almost  25  basis  points  and  Italian  20-year 
maturity yields fell by almost 35 basis points. 
We also saw a further fall in the sovereign yields of Portugal and other formerly distressed 
countries  –  in  spite  of  the  renewed  Greek  crisis.  This  suggests  that  the  asset  purchase 
programme may be shielding other euro area countries from contagion, which also helps us 
achieve our monetary policy goals across the euro area. 
The  reductions  in  sovereign  yields  seem  to  have  passed  through  into  other  fixed-income 
assets, as well as to equities and the exchange rate. Yields on covered bonds and corporate 
bonds declined in tandem with longer-term sovereign yields – even though corporate bonds 
are not included in our purchase programme. 
Such spillover effects are associated with portfolio rebalancing, which is one of the channels 
through  which  the  asset  purchase  programme  reaches  the  real  economy:  our  purchases 
reduce returns on safer assets. This encourages investors to shift to riskier, higher yielding 
assets. Pension funds, banks and other market participants that we buy securities from are 
likely  to  substitute  these  for  other  long-term  assets,  thereby  eventually  pushing  up  prices 
more broadly. 
We are aware that our measures may entail some financial stability risks. But currently these 
risks  are  contained.  And  should  they  emerge,  macroprudential  policy  is  best  suited  to 
address them. 
Experience with large-scale asset purchase programmes in other jurisdictions shows that the 
portfolio  balance  channel  works.  For  instance,  model-based  estimates  show  that  as  a 
consequence of the Bank of England’s quantitative easing programme, insurance companies 
and  pension  funds  invested  less  in  gilts  and  more  in  corporate  bonds,1  leading  to  price 
increases of both investment grade and non-investment grade corporate bonds. 
Drawing inferences from the experience in other jurisdictions is certainly helpful to gauge the 
potential impact of our own programme. 
Much  has  been  said  about  the  different  conditions  –  meaning  much  lower  bond  yields  – 
under  which  we  are  starting  our  expanded  asset  purchase  programme  from  those  under 
which other central banks did so. It is claimed that this reduces the impact on bond yields. 
But, in fact if one standardises the size of the various programmes and takes into account 
                                                
1  Cf.  Michael A S Joyce, Zhuoshi Liu, Ian Tonks (2014): Institutional investor portfolio allocation, quantitative 
510, 
easing 
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/research/Documents/workingpapers/2014/wp510.pdf. 
of  England  Working  Paper  No. 
crisis,  Bank 
financial 
global 
and 
the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  anticipation effects, the overall impact of our programme on bond yields was comparable in 
size to that observed in other jurisdictions such as the US and the UK. 
Conditions  also  differ  because  financial  structures  differ.  In  the  euro  area,  corporate  debt 
financing mainly takes place via banks, as opposed to capital markets in the United States. 
There is, however, no reason, once the transmission channel is not impaired by banks’ poor 
balance sheets, why this difference should impede the effectiveness of a broad-based asset 
purchase programme that works through a multitude of channels. The programmes of both 
the Bank of England and the Bank of Japan were effective and the respective economies are 
almost as bank-based as the euro area. 
One  criticism  is  that  we  should  have  implemented  our  asset  purchase  programme  much 
earlier. But it is not that we have not been acting last year. In a speech in Amsterdam in April 
last year I laid out three contingencies that would warrant a monetary policy reaction. These 
were, first, an unwarranted tightening of monetary policy stance (e.g. from developments in 
short-term  money  markets)  that  could  be  tackled  through  more  conventional  measures. 
Second,  a  further  impairment  in  the  transmission  of  our  stance,  in  particular  via  the  bank 
lending channel, for which a targeted LTRO or an ABS purchase programme might be the 
right response. And third, a worsening of the medium-term outlook for inflation, which would 
warrant a more broad-based asset purchase programme. 
As  these  contingencies  materialised  we  acted,  first  in  June  with  the  announcement  of  the 
TLTRO and ABS purchase programme. Then, as medium to long-term inflation expectations 
started  to  drift  downward  in  the  summer  and  the  risks  of  a  too  prolonged  period  of  low 
inflation  were  rising,  we  broadened  our  asset  purchase  programme  with  covered  bonds  in 
September and public sector securities last January. 
Summing  up,  market  reactions  both  before  and  after  our  announcement,  as  well  as 
experience in other jurisdictions show that the asset purchase programme can work. What is 
the  evidence  that  the  easing  of  financial  conditions  is  finally  starting  to  affect  the  real 
economy? 
The expanded asset purchase programme and the outlook for growth and inflation 
Developments are pointing in the right direction. The so-called surprise index that compares 
actual  macroeconomic  data  with  consensus  estimates  of  market  analysts  shows  that  on 
average the latest news is positive. 
The slowdown in growth has reversed. Euro area real GDP rose by 0.3% quarter on quarter 
in  the  last  quarter  of  2014,  which  is  somewhat  higher  than  previously  expected.  Survey 
evidence points to further improvements in economic activity at the beginning of this year so 
that the  economic recovery  should  gradually  broaden  and  strengthen.  And  in  January, the 
euro area unemployment rate dropped to the lowest level observed since August 2012. 
Of course, these improvements cannot and should not solely be attributed to our monetary 
easing. But our monetary policy is certainly supporting the recovery. 
This  is  also  reflected  in  the  ECB  staff  macroeconomic  projections  that  we  published  last 
week. In those projections, expectations for real GDP have been revised upwards, both for 
2015 and 2016, relative to the previous exercise. These upward revisions are mainly driven 
by the favourable impact of lower oil prices, the weaker effective exchange rate of the euro – 
and  the  impact  of  our  recent  monetary  policy  measures.  The  latter  have  had  a  very 
substantial impact on what we call “market-based technical financial assumptions”, such as 
interest rates, exchange rates and stock prices, with the effect being especially large on long-
term interest rates. 
Annual  HICP  inflation,  in  turn,  is  expected  to  remain  very  low  or  negative  in  the  months 
ahead and to start increasing gradually later this year. The ECB staff projections for inflation 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  this year have been revised downwards to 0.0%. This mainly reflects the sharp drop in oil 
prices at the end of last year. 
But there is good reason to believe that the effect of this shock will not extend beyond 2015, 
in  part  because  our  monetary  policy  decisions  have  significantly  decreased  the  risk  of 
second-round effects. 
Accordingly, the inflation projection for 2016 has been revised slightly upwards to 1.5%; and 
for 2017 inflation is expected to be 1.8%. This expected pick-up in inflation is supported by 
the  favourable  impact  of  our  recent  monetary  policy  measures  on  aggregate  demand,  the 
impact of the lower euro exchange rate and the assumption of somewhat higher oil prices in 
the years ahead. 
The  ECB  staff  projections  fully  incorporate  the  estimated  impact  of  our  policy  measures. 
They are thus conditional on the full implementation of all the announced measures. And this 
is indeed what we have started doing last Monday. 
Conclusion 
Let me conclude. Our recent monetary policy measures are a valid and effective tool to bring 
inflation closer to our policy goal. They can support a faster and more sustained recovery. 
This will especially be the case if they fall on fertile ground. Governments can create a more 
investment-friendly  environment  by  swiftly,  credibly  and  effectively  implementing  structural 
reforms. The  beneficial  impact  of  our  asset  purchases  on financing  conditions,  rather  than 
reducing  the  incentives  for  reforms,  will  actually  increase  the  benefits  of  such  reforms,  as 
firms  will  be  encouraged  to  increase  investment,  bringing  forward  the  economic  recovery. 
Effective, price-stability oriented monetary policy and structural reforms work hand in hand. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
