   
Fernando Restoy: The financial sector and the banking union 
Speech  by  Mr  Fernando  Restoy,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Spain,  at  the  Círculo 
Financiero, organised by La Caixa, Barcelona, 18 May 2015. 
 Introduction 
1. 
Good  evening.  It  is  a  pleasure  to  visit  Barcelona  again  and  an  honour  to  stand  on  this 
rostrum  at  the  Círculo  Financiero,  which  has  borne  witness  to  the  key  debates  affecting 
Catalonian, Spanish and European society over the past forty years. 
Allow  me  to  thank  the  organisers  and,  in  particular,  Isidro  Fainé,  for  the  opportunity  to 
participate  in  this  forum.  Following  Isidro’s  suggestion,  I  have  decided  to  share  with  this 
eminent audience tonight some thoughts on the transformation the Spanish banking system 
has undergone. 
I think the current juncture is a most timely one for addressing the subject: in July three years 
will  have  elapsed  since  the  signing  of  the  Memorandum  of  Understanding  (MoU),  which 
marked  the  start  of  the  financial  assistance  programme,  approved  by  the  European 
authorities,  under  which  a  most  substantial  portion  of  the  reforms  to  the  Spanish  banking 
system  were  undertaken.  Six  months  have  likewise  gone  by  since  the  Single  Supervisory 
Mechanism commenced operating in the euro area, and the Single Resolution Mechanism 
has now been set up. These landmarks make for an appropriate setting both for reviewing 
the scope of what has been achieved and, naturally, for discussing the challenges ahead for 
Spanish banks in the new economic and institutional environment of which the banking union 
is a key part. 
I shall structure my address around four simple questions. What were the problems of the 
Spanish  banking  system?  What  was  done  to  try  to  resolve  them?  What  results  were 
achieved? And, finally, what is left to be done and what challenges lie ahead? 
The problems 
2. 
Looking back, the crisis can be seen to have had an enormous impact – one not yet fully 
absorbed – on levels of employment and well-being. Likewise apparent are the significance 
of the banking sector in the development of the crisis and the efforts taxpayers have had to 
make  to  restore  financial  stability.  And  in  this  light,  it  is  difficult  to  avoid  having  a  very 
negative perception of the functioning of the banking system in the run-up to the crisis. 
That  said,  the  Spanish  banking  industry  has,  traditionally,  been  a  rather  profitable  one, 
capable of successfully pursuing a very effective commercial banking model, of developing 
valuable  franchises built  on  a  highly  stable  customer  base  and,  in  the case  of  the biggest 
banks, of significantly expanding their business beyond our borders. 
Moreover, thanks to the business model then prevailing and to the supervisory action, the 
industry remained immune to destabilising practices common to other banking systems, such 
as  investment  in  complex  products  that  were  short  on  liquidity  and  inadequately  valued, 
which triggered the global financial crisis in 2007. 
Undoubtedly,  however,  Spanish  banks  had  particular  shortcomings  which,  along  with  the 
turbulence on European debt markets, account for a relevant part of the crisis in the sector 
from 2010. 
In my opinion, there were essentially four such shortcomings: i) the markedly excessive size 
of the financial sector, which took the form of an accelerated expansion in lending in a low 
interest  rate  setting,  ii)  excessive  exposure  to  the  real  estate  sector,  which  underwent  an 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
1
   
unsustainable  boom,  iii)  an  insufficient  own  funds  base  to  meet  the  risks  assumed,  and 
iv), lastly,  appreciable  weaknesses  in  corporate  governance,  management  and  risk  control 
systems in a relevant segment of the sector. 
The reforms since undertaken should indeed be understood as a set of actions whose aim 
was to redress these singular weaknesses of our financial system. 
The measures taken 
3. 
What  was  done  to  combat  these  shortcomings?  I  believe  the  measures  taken  may  be 
grouped into four central issues. 
Balance sheet clean-up 
i) 
Firstly, it was necessary to facilitate the clean-up of bank balance sheets and, in particular, to 
reduce exposure to the real estate sector, which was weighing on banks’ solvency. This was 
mainly achieved through two types of measures. On one hand, further to two decree-laws 
and  various  supervisory  initiatives,  the  already-demanding  provisioning  requirements  were 
increased, particularly for the most sensitive exposures. And on the other, Sareb (the asset 
management company for assets arising from bank restructuring) was created, and all banks 
that  received  public  assistance  were  obliged  to  transfer  their  real  estate  assets,  whether 
impaired or not, to this company. As a result, by end-2014, Spanish deposit institutions’ level 
of exposure to real estate development, net of provisions, had fallen by around €140 billion 
since 2011, almost 60% of the exposure then existing. 
Consolidation 
ii) 
A second package of measures involved driving greater consolidation in the sector and thus 
redressing  its  excessive  size.  This  was  achieved  through  corporate  integration  operations, 
the  acceptance  by  most  banks  of  business  restructuring  strategies  and  the  elimination  of 
non-viable banks, through resolution processes. 
Overall, since 2007, the number of banking groups has diminished by 40% (or 40 banks). 
Likewise,  the  number  of  offices  in  the  banking  sector  has  declined  by  30%  relative  to  the 
2008  peak,  and  staffing  numbers  have  fallen  by  25%.  That  makes  for  a  notable  capacity-
adjustment drive which has been decisive in improving operating efficiency in the industry. 
Recapitalisation 
iii) 
Thirdly, the measures aimed at promoting the recapitalisation of banks should be highlighted. 
As  I  said,  while  the  Spanish  banking  sector  was  generally  able  to  meet  comfortably  the 
regulatory requirements in force before the crisis, overall it had insufficient leeway in terms of 
capital to withstand such adverse scenarios as those arising from the far-reaching downturn 
in  the  macroeconomic  situation  as  from  2010,  and  the  acute  correction  of  the  real  estate 
market. 
The  recognition  of  losses  caused  by  the  adverse  turn  in  macroeconomic  conditions 
weakened the financial situation of the sector as a whole. In the case of the most vulnerable 
banks  –  which  accounted  for  little  more  than  20%  of  the  system  –  these  developments 
ultimately  threatened  their  viability,  generating  appreciable  risks  to  continuing  financial 
stability.  As  you  all  know,  this  situation  could  only  be  resolved  through  the  contribution  of 
significant  public  funds,  most  of  which  under  the  financial  assistance  programme  and 
financed, therefore, with European funds. 
Thus, through the Fund for the Orderly Restructuring of the Banking Sector (FROB) the State 
has since 2009 contributed a total of €53,553 million in various forms of capital. The industry 
has  also  contributed  to  the  recapitalisation  of  vulnerable  banks  by  providing,  through  the 
Deposit  Guarantee  Fund  (FGDEC),  a  total  of  €7,942  million,  on  top  of  the  €2,250  million 
2 
  
BIS central bankers’ speeches
   
provided to the FROB in 2009. Also to be added here is the value of the various guarantees 
granted on the different sale processes involving State stakes, discounting the consideration 
obtained  thereon.  All  these  calculations  are  detailed  in  the  related  information  regularly 
published by the Banco de España.1 
Clearly, then, the public effort for the recapitalisation of the system has been considerable. In 
comparative  terms,  the  assistance  granted  in  the  form  of  capital  in  Spain  (FROB  and 
FGDEC),  amounting  to  6%  of  GDP,  is  similar  to  that  provided  in  Belgium  and  the  United 
Kingdom,  somewhat  higher  than  that  furnished  in  Germany  and  the  Netherlands,  where  it 
stands between 2% and 4% of GDP, and clearly below that made available in other countries 
such as Cyprus, Greece and Ireland, where it accounts for between 11% and 38% of GDP, 
according to European Commission figures. 
This most sizeable contribution of taxpayer funds can be justified by the need to mitigate the 
harm caused by banking crises to the economic system as a whole via the effects on the 
confidence  of  bank  customers  and  the  proper  functioning  of  financing  flows  in  the  real 
economy.  That  said,  in  view  of  the  enormous  impact  the  crisis  has  had  on  numerous 
countries’ public coffers, the international regulatory community is developing new resolution 
regulations – largely already incorporated into our legal system – which should in future allow 
for the management of banking crises with much less involvement of public funds. 
In  any  event,  the  clean-up  and  recapitalisation  of  the  Spanish  banking  system  goes  far 
beyond the measures taken by the public sector. The strengthening of balance sheets has 
been  across  the  board  in  the  entire  industry,  which  has  resolutely  set  about  raising 
provisioning substantially and increasing its own funds. 
Hence, since 2008, the sector has set aside provisions for outstanding loans or foreclosures 
for  more  than  €280  billion.  After  absorbing  this  substantial  balance  sheet  clean-up  into 
results  or  reserves,  banks  have  managed  to  increase  their  own  funds  by  more  than 
€60 billion over the same period. This massive effort is unprecedented in Spanish financial 
history. 
Regulatory reform 
iv) 
As regards the fourth and final ingredient of the reform process undertaken, I should like to 
highlight  the  initiatives  aimed  at  improving  the  regulatory  framework  for  credit  institutions. 
These include most notably the reform of the savings bank sector in Law 26/2013. 
I believe that, irrespective of the sound trajectory of some savings banks, it is currently an 
indisputable  fact  that  their  particular  legal  form  often  hindered  the  rigorous  professional 
management  of  banking  business,  in  a  setting  in  which  savings  banks  had  become  more 
complex and bigger, increasingly moving away from their foundational goals. Above all, the 
nature  of  savings  banks  frequently  prevented  a  reaction  to  adverse  developments  that 
seriously impaired their solvency. To a greater or lesser degree, these factors contributed to 
the crisis at various savings banks, which appreciably damaged the stability of the banking 
system as a whole, and whose rectification, as earlier stated, entailed sizeable costs for the 
public at large. 
The reform firstly seeks to confine the application of the traditional status of savings banks to 
those that retain a limited size and scope, thereby ensuring the link between the institution’s 
welfare function and its operating region. 
The  former  savings  banks  that  exceeded  a  specific  size  have  had  to  convert  into 
foundations, whose main function is the management of their welfare projects drawing on the 
                                                 
1   See  “Background  note  on  public  financial  assistance  in  the  restructuring  of  the  Spanish  banking  sector  
(2009–2015)”. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
3
   
return  on  their  assets.  Likewise,  the  Law  provides  for  various  mechanisms  –  such  as  the 
requirement, where appropriate, for a management protocol, a financial plan and the setting-
up of a reserve fund in foundations – to safeguard the independence and professionalism of 
bank management and to generate incentives for the orderly reduction of the stake of these 
foundations in banks, to levels compatible with the absence of control. 
I believe the new regulations – soon to be complemented by a Banco de España circular – 
point the way for a new organisational model for the sector more in keeping with the current 
demands  which  include  ever-stricter  prudential  and  corporate  governance  requirements. 
Under this model, and after a suitable transition period where necessary, significant banks 
would generally adopt the form of a listed public limited company, so that they are able to 
compete in the market to raise the capital and funding required for the orderly pursuit of their 
activity  in  the  new  regulatory  environment.  I  believe  that  in  this  forum  –  sponsored  by  La 
Caixa  –  I  need  not  insist  on  the  viability  and  reasonableness  of  this  model  for  the  former 
savings banks. 
With the social need to ensure general access by the population to financial services having 
largely been met, an area in which the savings banks have undoubtedly made a historical 
contribution, the endowment and management of the welfare project fund – which should be 
maintained given its great public usefulness as the distinguishing mark of the foundations – 
can be perfectly fulfilled, and indeed strengthened, on the basis of the return on diversified 
assets that do not necessarily comprise a controlling position in a specific bank. 
What results have been achieved? 
4. 
I consider that the effort made has essentially enabled the objectives set to be achieved. This 
has  been  corroborated  by  the  assessments  made  both  domestically  and  by  international 
organisations. In particular, the ECB’s comprehensive assessment of banks at the end of last 
year, as part of the groundwork for the start-up of the Single Supervisory Mechanism, was 
illustrative  in  this  respect.  As  you  will  recall,  the  comprehensive  assessment  exercise 
comprised two legs: an asset quality review and a stress test. 
The  asset  quality  review  revealed  that  Spanish  bank  balance  sheets  broadly  reflected  the 
risks  derived  from  their  investment  with  greater  rigour  than  that  observed  in  other 
jurisdictions,  with  fewer  shortcomings  having  been  detected  in  respect  of  valuation  or 
provisioning  for  the  exposures  analysed.  Hence,  the  incidents  encountered  in  this  review 
subtracted,  on  average,  14 bp  from  Spanish  banks’  common  equity  tier  1  (CET1)  ratio, 
compared with an average impact three times greater at the participating European banks. 
The stress test in the face of an adverse macroeconomic scenario also showed satisfactory 
results  for  the  Spanish  banking  sector.  On  average,  the  adverse  scenario  would  have 
involved  a  reduction  of  144 pp  in  Spanish  banks’  CET1  ratio,  without  the  minimum 
established capital ratio having failed to be met in any case. In the case of European banks, 
this average impact would have amounted to 300 bp. 
These  results  confirm  that  the  financial  reform  undertaken  in  Spain  has  managed  to 
satisfactorily correct the shortcomings in our banking system, thus placing it in a favourable 
starting position as the SSM has commenced operating. 
The latest profitability figures confirm the ongoing normalisation of the sector. Following the 
losses posted in 2012, against the background of the strong increase in provisions for asset 
impairment, deposit institutions, which had restored positive results in 2013, recorded profits 
after tax of almost €17 billion in 2014. Profitability in terms of equity, ROE, stood at 6.6% at 
December 2014, having increased by almost 1.5 pp on the previous year (5.2%). 
That said, profits in the industry, which are still modest in historical terms, are largely based 
on lower provisioning as a result of the cyclical improvement in the economy and also on the 
gains and losses on financial assets and liabilities. Thus, as is the case in other developed 
4 
  
BIS central bankers’ speeches
   
countries,  commercial  banking  business  margins  remain  at  low  levels  in  what  is  a  still-
unfavourable setting marked by the contraction in lending and the low level of interest rates. I 
shall make some brief comments later on the challenge of profitability. 
What are the challenges that lie ahead? 
5. 
In  recent  years  the  environment  in  which  the  banks  operate  has  undergone  a  significant 
transformation,  owing  to  the  changes  in  economic  conditions  and  to  the  shift  in  attitudes 
provoked  by  the  crisis,  among  investors,  consumers  of  banking  services  and  also  the 
financial  authorities  themselves.  As  a  result,  banks  are  being  required  to  make  significant 
strategic adjustments. 
From among the numerous challenges facing the industry in the short term, I would like to 
highlight  three:  i)  those  resulting  from  the  far-reaching  changes  in  the  regulatory  and 
supervisory  framework;  ii)  those  arising  from  the  lower  business  profitability;  iii)  and  lastly, 
those associated with restoring banking customer confidence in the wake of the reputational 
damage suffered during the crisis. 
Regulation 
i) 
The first main challenge facing banks is the need to adapt to the new European regulatory 
and supervisory framework. 
As I have said, Spanish banks have successfully adapted to the new capital requirements, 
comfortably  meeting  the  new  limits  established  in  the  prudential  regulations  deriving  from 
Basel III which have now been incorporated into Spanish law and are to be gradually phased 
in. In addition, bearing in mind the present composition of Spanish banks’ balance sheets, no 
major  adverse  impact  is  to  be  expected  from  the  upcoming  introduction  into  European 
legislation of the new limits on liquidity and leverage. 
It is true, however, that certain requirements could become somewhat more demanding, as a 
consequence  of  the  harmonisation  of  the  different  national  applications  of  the  European 
legislation  being  undertaken  by  the  SSM  and  which  could  affect,  among  other  things,  the 
implementation schedules for the Basel Accord. 
In  any  event,  even  assuming  immediate  and  comprehensive  application  of  Basel  III,  the 
capital  ratios  of  Spain’s  significant  institutions  would  generally  remain  at  relatively 
comfortable levels, although they would decline by more than the average for the institutions 
supervised by the SSM. 
It should also be noted that the work on the harmonisation of solvency ratios is not confined 
to the calculation of regulatory capital, but also includes measuring the total risks assumed 
(the  so-called  risk-weighted  assets)  on  which  the  capital  requirements  are  based.  In  this 
respect,  Spanish  banks  are  somewhat  better  prepared  than  other  euro  area  peers  for  an 
increase in supervisory demands. Thus, according to the figures recently published by the 
Banco de España,2 Spain’s banks are among the group of institutions that apply the strictest 
criteria – owing to the lesser use of internal models and their higher conservative nature – to 
measure the risk-weighted assets used to calculate the solvency ratios. 
A  key  development  that  could  play  a  significant  part  in  shaping  banks’  balance  sheet 
management policies is the forthcoming introduction of the minimum requirements for loss-
absorbing capacity in the event of resolution of banks. These requirements, which are being 
analysed at a global level by the Financial Stability Board and, at the European level, by the 
                                                 
2   See the Financial Stability Report, May 2015. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
5
   
European Banking Authority, aim to make it possible to handle the failure of credit institutions 
while minimising the need for public support. 
This  legislation  will  foreseeably  prompt  important  changes  in  the  composition  of  banks’ 
liabilities which, in addition to a minimum volume of instruments eligible as regulatory capital, 
will  have  to  include  other  instruments  that  may  be  converted  into  capital  in  the  event  of 
failure. These requirements could be especially demanding for institutions with lower levels 
of  own  funds  and  greater  objective  difficulties  for  issuing  debt  instruments  on  the  markets 
that meet the new convertibility requirements. 
Accordingly,  despite  their  indisputable  achievements,  Spanish  banks  as  well  as  other 
European  peers  must  continue  to  strengthen  their  own  funds  and,  where  appropriate,  to 
make the transformations necessary to allow them to raise on the market the funds needed 
to  comply  with  the  new  regulatory  conditions,  both  in  the  prudential  sphere  and  in  that  of 
resolution. 
Profitability 
ii) 
The second key challenge for credit institutions is to restore acceptable profitability levels. 
It is true, as I indicated earlier, that in recent years most European bank income statements 
have reflected sluggish growth. This is largely a result of cyclical factors such as persistent 
macroeconomic weakness (despite the recent improvement), subdued credit demand amidst 
deleveraging by households and firms alike and low interest rates which exert considerable 
pressure on financial margins. 
Nevertheless, there would also appear to be structural factors that could keep banks’ returns 
on capital permanently below their pre-crisis levels. In particular, it is reasonable to assume 
that stricter prudential regulations will moderate banks’ profits, if for no other reason than the 
higher regulatory cost they impose on high-risk exposures which are usually also those that 
generate higher expected returns. More generally, as I mentioned earlier, one of the aims of 
the new legislation is to increase the participation of banks’ shareholders and creditors in the 
absorption of losses in the event of bank failure. This means reducing to a minimum the idea 
of an implicit state guarantee for banks’ liabilities, which will naturally have an impact on the 
industry’s financing costs and, therefore, on bank profitability. 
In  addition,  it  should  also  be  noted  that  medium-term  trends  in  advanced  economies  –
characterised  by  the  need  for  deleveraging,  moderate  productivity  growth  and  population 
ageing  –  exert  downward  pressure  on  potential  growth  and  prompt  excessive  structural 
saving which will tend to keep interest rates low. 
As a result, we may see marked changes in the banking business. Given the limited scope 
for cutting deposit rates, low interest rates tend to depress net interest income. Thus, it will 
become  increasingly  difficult  to  maintain  the  cross-product  subsidy  whereby  banks  often 
exploit the loan-deposit spread to cover the cost of providing services to customers. Indeed it 
seems reasonable to expect that the zero fees policy will gradually fade into the background 
and that competition for deposits will shift in part to the business of providing transactional 
services. 
In any event, Spanish banks must adapt their business strategies to the new environment 
and must, in particular, take measures to continue to improve their operational efficiency. It is 
true to say that operational efficiency is, in general, already high in the Spanish industry in 
comparison with the rest of Europe, as Spanish banks on average have lower cost indicators 
than  their  euro  area  peers,  but  there  are  considerable  differences  from  one  institution  to 
another and there is, therefore, room for improvement. 
It  seems  particularly  appropriate  to  reflect  on  the  need  to  adjust  the  commercial  model  of 
Spanish  banks  which  is  characterised,  despite  the  industry  consolidation,  by  a  number  of 
offices  per  capita  which  is  much  higher  than  the  European  average.  In  my  view,  both 
6 
  
BIS central bankers’ speeches
   
technological  progress,  which  allows  banks  to  increasingly  interact  with  customers  beyond 
physical points of sale, and the need to restore bank profitability on a sustainable basis, are 
sufficient arguments to support this reflection. 
institutions 
Reputation 
followed  by 
irregular  practices 
former  executives  at 
further  measures  could  be  envisaged, 
iii) 
Lastly, a third challenge that I consider particularly important in the present environment is to 
rebuild the industry’s reputation with investors and customers, restoring to full health what is 
the  banking  industry’s  main  asset  and  one  which,  although  it  does  not  figure  on  banks’ 
balance sheets, is of vital importance to ensure their viability. 
An unwanted legacy, worldwide, of the banking crisis has been the erosion of general public 
trust  in  financial  institutions  which  have  all  too  frequently  breached  current  standards  of 
conduct and, in some cases, have been involved in unlawful practices. 
In  Spain,  the  reputational  damage  suffered  by  the  industry  is  associated  in  part  with  the 
allegations  of 
that 
subsequently  received  large  amounts  of  public  money  and  which  are  currently  being 
investigated  by  the  courts.  Moreover,  a  number  of  banks  have  been  ordered,  through 
administrative  proceedings  or  through  the  courts,  to  pay  costs  arising  from  breach  of 
standards of conduct, especially relating to mis-selling of financial instruments and banking 
products. 
Fortunately, Spain’s banks have responded well, increasing the attention they pay and the 
resources  they  allocate  to  complying  with  legislation  and  honing  their  selling  practices. 
Nevertheless, 
the 
arrangements in place for settlement of bank customers’ complaints and claims. 
Under the existing two-tier complaints system, in the event of a dispute bank customers must 
first  contact  the  bank  concerned,  which  must  necessarily  have  a  customer  service 
department or unit. If they are not satisfied with the response received, they may then apply 
to the claims departments of the financial supervisors – the Banco de España, the National 
Securities Market Commission (CNMV) or the Directorate General of Insurance and Pension 
Funds (DGSFP), according to the subject-matter of the claim – which will issue a non-binding 
opinion. 
This system has several problems. On the one hand, it is not sufficiently flexible to provide 
customers improperly treated with due satisfaction in a reasonable period of time. And on the 
other, there is no arrangement in place for a third party to issue an opinion that is binding on 
banks  if  they  are  unable  to  reach  an  agreement  with  their  customers.  Accordingly, 
consumers are all too often obliged to go to the courts to obtain due reparation. 
Certain regulations recently passed in Spain, such as Law 10/2014 of 26 June 2014 on the 
regulation, supervision and solvency of credit institutions, and Law 5/2015 of 27 April 2015 
on the promotion of business financing, include provisions designed to foment improvements 
in the existing institutional arrangements for customer protection. 
In any event, irrespective of any present or future legislative changes in this respect, I believe 
that banks have the capacity to drive improvements in the short term. For the moment, they 
appear  to  be  readier  to  comply  with  the  non-binding  opinions  issued  by  the  Banco  de 
España’s  claims  system.  In  addition,  it  would  be  appropriate  to  consider  the  possibility  of 
developing centralised and binding dispute settlement arrangements, such as those in place 
in  other  European  countries,  possibly  with  the  participation  of  the  industry,  to  correct  the 
shortcomings of the present system. 
for  example  relating 
to 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
7
  Final thoughts 
 
6. 
Let  me  finish  by  saying  that  in  mid-2010,  at  the  height  of  the  financial  crisis,  Alexandre 
Lamfalussy, one of the architects of European monetary and financial integration, with whom 
I was fortunate enough to work with in the mid-1990s and who passed away just a few days 
ago, ended one of his last public speeches as follows: 
All  the  actors  –  central  banks,  governments,  international  organisations  and,  naturally, 
market  participants  –  are  navigating  in  waters  uncharted  by  reliable  historical  experience. 
The complexity of the current situation is without precedent. But there is no way of “opting 
out” of this complex world. Wishing that we could go back to the professional and intellectual 
comfort of the pre-crisis years is a pipe dream. This does not make me a pessimist.3 
I believe that when one looks back at the work done to overcome the problems that beset the 
Spanish financial sector, Lamfalussy’s words are fully applicable. Thanks to the efforts made 
by  all  the  agents  concerned  the  most  serious  shortcomings  of  the  banking  industry  have 
been  remedied,  allowing  it  to  resume,  gradually,  full  exercise  of  its  role  in  the  economic 
system and which is vital for our prosperity as a nation. 
However, as the former president of the European Monetary Institute suggests, the crisis has 
changed the world for ever, bringing about significant changes in the economic, regulatory 
and institutional environment in which the banking industry operates. 
In particular, Spanish banks, similarly to their European peers, now face challenges that will 
require  them  to  adapt  their  business  models  in  a  new  environment  characterised  by  a 
structural  decline  in  profitability,  a  significant  increase  in  regulatory  requirements,  the 
harmonisation of supervisory rules and practices in the framework of the banking union and 
the introduction of new demands by the resolution authorities. As Lamfalussy said, there are 
no grounds for pessimism, but this view is based essentially on the expectation that banks 
will  be  able  to  successfully  complete  the  work  they  have  started  to  fully  restore  investor, 
customer and general public confidence. 
Thank you very much. 
 
                                                 
3   Taken from the keynote speech made at the Ninth BIS Annual Conference on “The future of central banking 
under post-crisis mandates”, 24–25 June 2010. 
8 
  
BIS central bankers’ speeches
