  Andrew Gracie: LAC and MREL – from design to implementation 
Speech by Mr Andrew Gracie, Executive Director of Resolution of the Bank of England, at 
the BBA loss absorbing capacity forum, London, 23 July 2015. 
 Thanks for the opportunity to speak. 
In many ways, resolution is the last major piece of the financial reform agenda and ensuring 
banks have sufficient loss-absorbing capacity is central to that. 
Rules  in  this  area  remain  to  be  finalised,  but  the  components  are  coming  into  place.  The 
binding  requirement  for  European  resolution  authorities  is,  from  early  next  year,  to  begin 
setting a minimum requirement of own funds and eligible liabilities (MREL) for all EU banks in 
line with the Bank Recovery and Resolution Directive (BRRD) requirements and European 
Banking Authority (EBA) Regulatory Technical Standards (RTS). You will have seen that the 
RTS  have  recently  been  published  in  an  “EBA  final”  version.  This  will  be  a  binding 
EU regulation  once  formally  adopted  by  the  Commission.  For  European  G-SIBs,  MREL 
requirements will need to be set consistently with the FSB’s Total Loss-Absorbing Capacity 
(TLAC) standard. Consultation responses on this are being considered alongside the results 
of the impact assessment. The standard will be finalised by the time of the G20 summit in 
November. 
So  no  definitive  statements  today,  but  I  want  to  address  some  recurrent  issues,  including 
some points that have cropped up in the FSB and EBA consultations. 
I want to talk about three big themes: 
• 
• 
MREL and TLAC: how far are they the same or different? 
The relationship between the regulation of banks’ liability structures via TLAC and 
MREL and resolution planning. 
And why, if we are preparing firm specific resolution plans, have a TLAC standard at 
all? 
 Starting with MREL and TLAC, much has been made of the differences between them. Let 
me set these out in turn: 
• 
TLAC  sets  a  global  standard  for  G-SIBs1  while  MREL  is  for  all  EU  banks  and 
investment firms. 
TLAC describes a Pillar 1 minimum requirement, while MREL is set by the resolution 
authority, bank by bank on the basis of a resolution plan. 
The TLAC requirement is set in terms of risk weighted assets (RWAs) and leverage 
while MREL is formally set in relation to total liabilities and own funds. 
The FSB consultation specifies the quantum and quality of TLAC a G-SIB requires 
and sets out how TLAC should be distributed within groups. While BRRD provides 
for more flexibility, certainly on whether liabilities need to be subordinated to count 
as MREL. 
   So much for the differences. But both are founded on the same principles and in the Key 
Attributes have the same DNA. Both are designed to achieve the twin objectives of: 
• 
Maintaining critical economic functions in the event of failure; and 
                                                
1   Global systemically important banks. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Doing so, without recourse to public funds. 
• 
What  this  implies  for  the  size  of  MREL  and  TLAC  is  the  same.  Resources  should  be 
sufficient to support the continuation of critical economic functions at the point of resolution. 
Based on an assumption that going concern capital is eroded on the way in to resolution, this 
implies that there is sufficient loss absorbency to convert to equity capital to stabilise the firm. 
Stabilisation  for  this  purpose  means  having  resources  available  to  allow  the  firm  to  be 
reauthorised by all relevant home and host supervisors and to maintain market access. 
All of these factors are set out in the EBA’s technical standard. The same considerations are 
described in the principles that cover the FSB Term Sheet. 
It is worth pausing to unpack what this is likely to mean for different sorts of firm and different 
group structures. Certainly for G-SIBs, the assumption lying behind the calibration of TLAC is 
that  given  the  size  and complexity  of their  operations  and their  activities  cross-border  it  is 
hard to conceive of a significant restructuring at the point of resolution. Rather the accent is 
on stabilising the firm via bail-in2 to restore solvency to buy time for an orderly restructuring 
and/or  a  solvent  wind-down  afterwards.  This  should  be  good  for  the  system  and,  by 
preserving value, for creditors of the firm. 
By contrast, a very small bank may need no MREL beyond its current capital requirements. 
If, at failure, there is no obstacle to putting the firm into insolvency and paying out covered 
deposits  using  the  relevant  deposit  guarantee  scheme  (DGS)  then  no  MREL  is  required 
beyond capital requirements as a going concern. 
This  goes  too  to  the  location  of  TLAC  or  MREL  in  groups.  There  needs  to  be  externally 
issued MREL wherever, under the preferred resolution strategy, bail-in of external liabilities is 
likely to occur or where other resolution tools are to be applied. 
The plan under a single point of entry (SPE) strategy is that only the entity at the top of group 
is put into resolution on the basis that the interdependencies within a group are so extensive 
that  resolving  the  different  operating  companies  within  a  group  separately  is  either 
impossible or not credible. By contrast where a group is organised in a more modular fashion 
with  limited  or  no  interlinkages  between  the  parts,  then  the  resolution  can  have  multiple 
points of entry (MPE). It has been convenient for exposition to set up this dichotomy between 
SPE and MPE. But in practice, many SPE firms will have around the periphery subsidiaries 
that  could  be  resolved  separately  or  allowed  to  enter  an  insolvency  without  adverse 
consequences  for  the  resolution  of  the  firm.  And  many  MPE  banks  are,  in  practice, 
collections of SPE strategies. They may be set up to be resolved jurisdiction by jurisdiction. 
But  within  jurisdictions  the  resolution  is  likely  to  involve  keeping  together  in  resolution  the 
legal entities within that jurisdiction. 
All of this can be summed up with two observations and one implication. The first observation 
is that the resolution strategy will govern decisions on MREL. The second is that TLAC can 
and  will  be  applied  for  G-SIBs  through  the  setting  of  MREL  requirements.  In  other  words 
TLAC  is  just  one  particular  expression  of  how  we  will  set  MREL  for  firms  where,  as 
authorities, we are likely to face no choice other than bail-in in order to continue the firm’s 
economic functions. 
The implication is that there needs to be some level of disclosure about resolution strategies 
and liability structures at the legal entity level. Otherwise investors will not be able to price 
the  risks  they  are  exposed  to.  The  Basel  Committee  intends  to  consult  on  new  Pillar 3 
standards for this purpose by the end of this year. This is welcome. But it is welcome too that 
banks are starting to do more to provide this kind of information to investors. 
                                                
2   Bail-in  is  used  here  to  cover imposing  losses on creditors either through use of  a bail-in  tool  or  through  a 
bridge transaction. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
Let me turn to my second theme – the relationship between setting MREL and TLAC and 
resolution  planning.  The  TLAC  standard  describes  an  end-point.  Beyond  proposing  a 
conformance  date  of  2019  at  the  earliest,  it  does  not  describe  how  the  standard  will  be 
implemented  and  what  will  happen  in  transition.  Similarly  European  resolution  authorities 
setting  MREL  in  the  EU  will  need  to  consider  how  to  go  from  MREL  in  current  liability 
structures  to  an  MREL  that  ultimately  meets  the  BRRD  objectives.  The  RTS  allows 
transitional MREL to be set until 2020. 
Work needs to be done to clean up existing liability structures to make them consistent with 
requirements.  This  is  firm  level  work  which  will  be  addressed  as  part  of  the  resolution 
planning process. Let me give you some examples of what I have in mind. 
• 
My first is structured notes. Some respondents to the FSB consultation suggested 
the  blanket  exclusion  of  structured  notes  from  TLAC  should  be  relaxed.  We  are 
reflecting on that. But the current situation is that in many cases structured notes 
have been issued to meet the needs of often quite small pockets of investors. The 
result is that some firms have many thousands or even tens of thousands of notes 
outstanding each with different structures and embedded derivatives. Trying to value 
all these instruments and bail them in would be a barrier to making resolution work. 
And as such will need to be addressed as part of the resolution planning process for 
a particular firm. 
My  second  example  is  non-equity  capital  instruments  issued  out  of  operating 
companies. As I described earlier, SPE strategies are built around putting only the 
top  company  in  a  group  into  resolution  and  avoiding  legal  risk  and  the  potential 
dislocation  of  systemic  functions  by  keeping  operating  subsidiaries  outside 
resolution. But there is a tension with this strategy where banks want to count non-
equity  capital  instruments  issued  out  of  subsidiaries  as  TLAC  or  MREL.  The 
instruments  may  meet  the  other  requirements  to  qualify  –  minimum  maturity, 
subordination  etc  –  but  if  the  only  way  that  they  can  bear  loss  is  by  putting  the 
subsidiary  into  resolution  there  is  a  question  of  compatibility  with  the  resolution 
strategy. As part of BRRD we have in the EU a statutory power at the point of non-
viability  (PONV)  to  write-down  regulatory  capital  instruments.  But  the same  is  not 
true  outside  Europe.  As  part  of  the  resolution  planning  process  we  will  need  to 
identify these cases and how to address them. 
 Incidentally  one  advantage  of  this  PONV  write-down  power  is  that  in  resolution  we  can 
ensure the order of depletion of liabilities follows the creditor hierarchy. That is, losses are 
first absorbed by regulatory capital instruments in the operating company where they occur. 
If the losses are sufficient to wipe out the capital, then the operating company is recapped by 
write-down or conversion of any other internal TLAC. This pushes losses up into the parent 
company or holdco where they are absorbed following the creditor hierarchy, capital first and 
then debt. 
• 
My  third  example  of  issues  that  will  be  addressed  through  resolution  planning  is 
foreign  law  debt.  We  cannot  count  as  MREL  or  TLAC  instruments  where  the 
statutory powers of the resolution authority to bail them in are uncertain. BRRD is 
explicit  on  this  requiring,  under  Article  55,  all  third  country  unsecured  liabilities  to 
carry contractural terms that provide for bail-in. Most existing debt instruments do 
not. As part of the resolution planning process, we will ensure that they do and that 
our statutory powers in resolution are enforceable. 
These examples illustrate the basic idea that there is much to be done through the resolution 
planning process to make existing liability structures compatible with resolution. This won’t 
be  a  matter  of  grandfathering.  Indeed  even  if  a  particular  liability  meets  the  definition  of 
MREL,  on  the  face  of  the  directive  it  does  not  mean  it  does  not  represent  a  barrier  to 
resolvability. As resolution authorities we will address these barriers as part of our resolution 
planning work and find ways to remove them. Or else we will adjust MREL requirements for 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  
 
firms. In the FSB proposal this is the placeholder for a Pillar 2 element alongside the Pillar 1 
minimum requirements set out in the term sheet. 
My third theme is why then a standard – if we are going to be preparing resolution plans and 
setting  MREL  for  individual  firms  why  have  a  standard  at  all?  There  is  an  obvious  level 
playing field consideration, especially among the G-SIBs that compete with each other and 
operate internationally. But there is a deeper reason that goes to making resolution – and 
indeed international banking – work. 
The resolution naysayers point to the events of the crisis and the Lehman failure in particular 
and say that cross-border resolution will never work, national interest will always win out. 
Clearly the whole enterprise of resolution planning is to face up to this challenge ex ante. The 
Key  Attributes  envisaged  Cooperation  Agreements  (CoAgs)  among  the  authorities  to 
describe  a  common  resolution  plan  for  an  individual  G-SIB.  But  to  work  CoAgs  need 
underpinning and this is where TLAC comes in. Not only does TLAC provide countries with 
confidence that G-SIBs are operating with sufficient resources to be resolved safely. But that 
confidence is provided in a concrete form. This is the internal TLAC downstreamed in SPE 
groups from the parent entity to material subsidiaries. This is intended to provide hosts with 
comfort  that  in  the  event  of  a  resolution  they  will  not  be  exposed  as  losses  would  be 
upstreamed  to  the  holdco,  enabling  the  hosted  legal  entity  to  continue  to  operate.  Hosts 
would therefore not need to take the sort of unilateral actions to ring-fence assets that were 
so damaging during the crisis and have tended to fragment the international financial system 
since. In short we need cross border resolution to work through structural changes like TLAC 
for international banking to work. 
And we need this to be internalised by the market as well. I mentioned before disclosure for 
investors.  But  it  is  as  important  for  liability  holders  that  are  unlikely  to  be  bailed  in  to 
understand that too. Part of the rationale for locating TLAC at holdco in SPE strategies is to 
keep  the  resolution  away  from  the  operating  companies  and  to  be  able  to  give  liability 
holders  at  opco  a  strong  message  that  where  losses  and  recap  needs  can  be  met  within 
TLAC they will not be bailed in. This way we maximise the chances of achieving continuity in 
the CEFs of the firm and avoiding any amplification in adverse systemic consequences. 
To  sum  up,  MREL  or  TLAC  is  a  watershed  on  the  road  to  making  resolution  work. 
Finalisation  of  the  TLAC  proposal  this  year  and  joint  decisions  on  MREL  in  resolution 
colleges for EU firms in early 2016 will clear the way for banks to engage investors on their 
capital planning and debt issuance for the year ahead. Changes to existing liability structures 
may take time. But the clarity this will bring will mean that we have a regime that is not only 
feasible – after all we have the legal powers under BBRD to bail in the things we need – but 
credible. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
