  Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Global Findex Database 2014 – measuring financial 
inclusion around the world 
Speech  by  Dr  Zeti  Akhtar  Aziz,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Malaysia  (Bank  Negara 
Malaysia), at the World Bank’s Asian Region Launch of the “Global Findex Database 2014: 
Measuring Financial Inclusion around the World”, Kuala Lumpur, 20 August 2015. 
 It is my great pleasure to be at this World Bank Asian Region launch of the “Global Findex 
Database  2014”.  The  Global  Findex  is  one  of  the  most  comprehensive  and  authoritative 
source  of  financial  inclusion  data,  that  offers  valuable  insights  into  the  state  of  financial 
inclusion in the world today. We are most honoured that the World Bank Group has selected 
our  cosmopolitan  city  of  Kuala  Lumpur  to  host  the  Asian  regional  launch  of  the  Global 
Findex. 
Financial  inclusion,  the  provision  of  cost  effective  and  quality  financial  services  to  all 
segments  of  society,  has  been  acknowledged  as  an  important  structural  enabler  for 
economic development and progress. There is also a greater appreciation that development 
which  empowers  every  individual  to  achieve  their  full  potential  raises  the  aggregate 
productivity  and  income,  which  in  turn,  supports  a  more  dynamic  and  durable  economic 
growth.  Therefore,  financial  inclusion  needs  to  be  pursued  more  extensively  beyond  the 
underserved  to  achieve  a  more  effective  participation  in  the  financial  system  and  thus 
unlocking the further potential to contribute towards the overall growth and development of 
economies. 
Financial inclusion in Malaysia: Our evolution 
Since Bank Negara Malaysia’s inception in 1959, financial inclusion has been an important 
agenda for the Bank as it was recognised that it is central to supporting the aspirations for a 
balanced  and  sustainable  growth  of  our  economy.  Attention  was  initially  given  to 
establishment  of  a  diverse  range  of  financial  institutions  to  meet  the  needs  of  the  various 
consumers and businesses, including rural communities and small businesses. 
Bank  Negara  Malaysia  has  also  worked  towards  providing  an  enabling  regulatory 
environment  which  encouraged  the  financial  system  to  develop  innovative  products  and 
services that would better meet the needs of the underserved. The Bank introduced the basic 
banking services, a no frills low cost savings account in 2005 and on the financing side, the 
micro-financing  framework  was  established  in  2006  to  facilitate  an  uncollateralised  micro 
financing scheme that provides access to financing in a fast, easy and convenient manner. 
Another  important  policy  initiative  is  the  development  of  such  financial  services  based  on 
Syariah  principles.  This  has  allowed  many  segments  of  the  Malaysian  society  to  now 
meaningfully use and benefit from the financial system. 
In line with the transformative importance of financial inclusion, the Central Bank of Malaysia 
Act 2009 states that promoting a sound, progressive and inclusive financial system as one of 
the primary functions of the Bank. This has provided a clear mandate and legislative power 
for the Bank to advance the financial inclusion agenda. The financial inclusion mandate of 
the Bank is further reinforced by The Financial Sector Blueprint 2011–2020, which charts the 
future development of the Malaysian financial system. It details the Bank’s holistic approach 
toward achieving greater financial inclusion. 
An  important  evolution  in  the  advancement  of  our  financial  inclusion  strategies  is  the 
increasing focus on data and measurement. Success can only be celebrated if it is proven by 
visible  developments 
the  cornerstone 
recommendations  under  the  Financial  Sector  Blueprint  is  the  development  of  a  Financial 
Inclusion  Index,  a  framework  to  measure  accessibility  to  financial  services  as  well  as  its 
the  ground.  Hence,  one  of 
felt  on 
that 
is 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
usage  and  quality.  Our  performance  on  this  agenda  has  therefore  been  measured, 
consistent  with  our  drive  for  accountability  and  excellence.  Further  policy  initiatives  have 
included the introduction of agent banking which has enabled 99% of Malaysians today to 
enjoy convenient access to safe, reliable and affordable financial services. 
International efforts to enhance financial inclusion measurement 
Internationally,  there  is  an  emerging  common  understanding  that  measurement  is  an 
essential policy tool for implementation. In this regard, the Alliance for Financial Inclusion, a 
network  of  central  banks  and  financial  regulators  from  96  countries,  has  provided  an 
important platform in advancing the global agenda of financial inclusion measurement. With 
the  Sasana  Accord,  which  was  agreed  upon  in 2013  during the Global Policy  Forum  held 
here in Sasana Kijang, AFI members underscored the importance of measuring the progress 
of  financial  inclusion  using  a  common  set  of  measurable  indicators.  This  Accord  has 
formulated the measuring tools for the monitoring of Key Performance Indicators (KPIs) that 
has assisted policy makers in implementing and refining strategies to assist the underserved. 
Immense progress has also been made in gathering accurate and timely data for financial 
inclusion KPIs. Traditionally, financial inclusion data has been scarce as they have depended 
on  national  user  surveys.  In  this  regard,  the  Global  Findex  has  made  a  very  significant 
contribution to financial inclusion policymakers and practitioners, as it is a database of more 
than  150,000  survey  responses  from  more  than  140  countries  across  the  world.  With  the 
data from the Global Findex, which is updated every 3 years, we are now able to compare in 
a consistent manner the financial inclusion performance across countries and analyse trends 
over time. The availability of country performance data not only provides peer pressure that 
spurs action, but also provides empirical evidence on which financial inclusion policy actions 
are delivering the most optimal impact. The analysis of the Global Findex data has provided 
strong  evidence  that  countries  which  adopted  mobile  banking  outperformed  those  that  did 
not. Such empirical evidence facilitates policymakers and the private sector in their drive for 
greater financial inclusion. 
Priorities for greater financial inclusion 
In  these recent  years,  there  has  been  significant  progress  in  advancing financial  inclusion 
across the world. According to the Global Findex, 700 million adults have gained access to 
formal financial services since 2011. This is indeed a significant achievement. Yet 2 billion 
adults  today  are  still  unbanked.  Therefore  both  the  private  and  public  sectors,  need  to 
intensify efforts to accelerate meaningful and effective efforts in the drive for greater financial 
inclusion.  In  Malaysia,  our  priorities  are  to  enhance  greater  access  to  digital  financial 
services,  as  well  as  to  enable  the  underserved  to  benefit  from  increased  convenience, 
greater efficiency and lower cost. Another important priority would be financial education for 
the newly banked, to ensure that new entrants into the financial system behave responsibly 
and do not suffer the unintended consequences of being over-indebted. 
For  ASEAN,  financial  inclusion  is  an  increasing  priority  because  it  is  estimated  that  260 
million adults in the region still do not have access to the formal financial system, while 45 
million small businesses have difficulties in accessing financing. To overcome this challenge, 
ASEAN  Finance  Ministers  and  Central  Bank Governors  in  March  2015  decided  to  elevate 
financial inclusion to be a policy priority. It is our shared vision that every person and every 
small business in the region can participate and benefit from the opportunities that will be 
brought forth by greater regional integration under the ASEAN Economic Community. 
Conclusion 
Our  collective  efforts  in  advancing  financial  inclusion  have  yielded  many  significant 
achievements. The Global Findex Database 2014 will be an important contribution to more 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
optimal  and  impactful  financial  inclusion  policy  making  and  implementation.  Bank  Negara 
Malaysia  would  like  to  congratulate  the  World  Bank  Group  on  this  accomplishment.  We 
would also like to reaffirm our unwavering commitment to the financial inclusion cause and 
look  forward  to  deepening  our  cooperation  with  all  stakeholders  to  fulfil  the  promise  of 
greater 
to  our 
communities. 
Thank you. 
thereby  bringing  hope  and  better  opportunities 
inclusion, 
financial 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
