   Rodrigo Vergara: Monetary policy through asset markets – lessons from 
unconventional measures and implications for an integrated world 
Opening remarks by Mr Rodrigo Vergara, Governor of the Central Bank of Chile, at the Central 
Bank of Chile’s Nineteenth Annual Conference, Santiago, 19 November 2015. 
 Monetary  policy  has  mostly  been  about  setting  the  appropriate  interest  rates  to  stir  the 
economy towards a path coherent with its fundamentals. In this sense, the developments in 
most central banks in the last 6 years have not been out of the box, so to speak. But we can 
probably say, with little risk of overstating reality, that the ways of achieving changes in the 
cost of credit through monetary policy has changed significantly since the global financial crisis.  
To fully appreciate the extent of these changes, it’s useful to do a quick recap of what traditional 
monetary policy was prior to 2008. In the vast majority of countries, the name of the game was 
setting the stance of the short term rates –indeed, the overnight rate at which banks lend to 
each other. The hope was that, by influencing this very short-term rate, monetary policy actions 
would feed into the broader economy by affecting longer term rates, as well as spreads of 
riskier forms of credit which in the end are the channels by which the policy stance affects the 
cost of borrowing of households and firms. In this context, perhaps the biggest advances of 
monetary policy of the last 20 years leading to the GFC had to do with the transparency and 
the  overall  macroeconomic  coherency  of  interest  rate  decisions,  which  led,  among  other 
transformations, to the adoption of explicit inflationary objectives in a number of advanced and 
emerging market economies.  
In the aftermath of the global crisis, it soon became clear that traditional MP was simply not 
going to cut it, especially given the limitations of other policy options, such as fiscal expansion, 
to reactivate the global economy after the major blow it suffered. Central bankers were forced 
to  be  creative  and  think  outside  the  box  of  traditional  monetary  tools  in  order  to  make  a 
difference.  
A useful framework to understand how policy tools have evolved is to think about interest rates 
in the following way. The price of a given form of debt, issued at a particular maturity and by a 
specific counterparty, is the sum of three main components. The first is the expectations of 
short-term, risk-free debt over the maturity of the instrument. Let’s call this component the path 
of risk-neutral rates. The second is the compensation for risk that must be offered to an investor 
to account for the fact that longer maturity instruments are more volatile (have higher duration) 
than short-term rates, let’s call it the term premium channel. The third is simply default risk. In 
essence, all policy actions by the Fed, the ECB, the banks of Japan, England, Canada, and of 
many small open economies in the last 6 years have been about affecting long-term rates by 
influencing one, and often times more, of these interest rate components.  
Take the case of forward guidance. When nominal rates reached the ZLB, and particularly due 
to the low inflation environments, traditional monetary policy became very constrained –fully 
constrained by definition, one might say, given the impossibility of lowering short term rates 
any further. However, to the extent that one can credibly influence the expected path of future 
monetary policy actions, risk-neutral rates at different horizons can be lowered, perhaps even 
significantly so. However, as pointed out by Mike Woodford in an influential paper presented 
at  Jackson  Hole  a few  years  ago,  to  truly  make  a  dent  on  rates  with  this  strategy,  central 
bankers were likely to run into a temporal-inconsistency problem. This problem is basically that 
in the event that long-term rates can be reduced enough to jump-start the economy, the ex-
post  optimal  policy  stance  would  be  inconsistent  with  the  one  promised  in  the  midst  of 
stagnation. Quoting from his paper: “the future policy that one wishes for people to anticipate 
is one that the central bank will not have a motive to implement later, if it makes its decisions 
then in a purely forward-looking way, on the basis of its usual stabilization objectives.” (end 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   quote) This does seem like a hard conundrum to get away from, and probably limits the traction 
of this type of tool as a strong driver of longer-term rates.  
Partly due to these limitations, Central banks have also directly tackled the term premium by 
purchasing large quantities of long-term assets. The idea is that by removing some duration 
from the fixed income markets, private investors’ aggregate exposure to interest rate risk is 
diminished, leading to a lower required compensation for bearing such risk. Of course, this 
logic relies on some form of imperfections and/or market segmentation, but there is by now 
significant evidence, including some excellent papers to be presented in this conference, that 
QE  has  had  a  measurable  impact  on  long-term  rates  through  this  channel.  A  similar  logic 
applies to the default risk-premium: to the extent that returns on safer debt are compressed by 
central  bank  purchases,  investors  are  tempted  to  reach  for  yield  into  other  fixed-income 
markets, such as mortgages, corporate bonds, and emerging market instruments.  
Against this backdrop, it seems appropriate to dedicate this year’s conference to taking stock 
of the transformations that have occurred in monetary policy, if not in the objectives, at least in 
the tools by which these objectives are achieved. Moreover, such introspection seems crucial 
to our understanding of how to go forward. Indeed, it is very likely that such measures will 
become  standard  practices,  with  the  subtitle  “unconventional”  eventually  scratched  off 
altogether.  
In fact, there are several reasons to suspect these exceptional measures are here to stay. On 
the one hand, it might very well be the case that we are witnessing profound structural changes 
that imply a new normal of much lower interest rates that we have been accustomed to –I 
suspect the keynote address by Larry Summers tomorrow may touch upon such issues. If this 
is so, then it is more likely that we will run into the ZLB in future business cycles, forcing central 
banks to  tap  upon  these  so-called  unconventional  measures  time  and again. On  the  other 
hand, these measures have apparently worked. Why then should we not embrace them as 
part of our standard set of instruments?  
The  structure  of  this  conference  follows  the  logic  of  addressing  three  main  aspects  of  the 
transformation in the practice of Monetary Policy in the last decade. Our first session includes 
three papers that tackle, from both a theoretical and empirical perspective, the impact of such 
unconventional  measures  on  interest rates  at  different  horizons  and  over  a  wide  variety  of 
securities.  Here  we  are  fortunate  to  have  among  the  presenters  Dimitri  Vayanos,  Gautti 
Eggerston, and Eric Swanson, all accomplished scholars who have dedicated an important 
part  of  their  research  in  recent  years  to  delve  deeper  into  the  quantitative  effects  of  such 
policies.  
The second session deals with the financial stability considerations of these measures. After 
all, to date several unconventional policy efforts have begun in Japan, the US, Europe and 
elsewhere, but none has so far ended –in short, we are not out of the woods yet, and claiming 
success might still be a bit preliminary. The concern is that while an ambitious program of asset 
purchases might be welcome by different investor classes as asset prices are pushed upwards, 
it might prove much more difficult to orchestrate an orderly retreat which inevitably relies on 
increasing discount rates at which future income streams are priced. This is particular true if 
some  projects  were  only  funded  to  begin  with  due  to  the  exceptionally  low  interest  rate 
environment, and/or if such investments were intermediated by fund managers who care not 
only about income streams, but also (and mostly) about short-term price fluctuations. Here we 
will have an interesting discussion including papers by Stephen Morris, Michael Woodford, and 
Gustavo Suarez, which will enlighten us about the theoretical aspects to keep in mind when 
evaluating the broader consequences of asset purchase programs, as well as the empirical 
evidence regarding the effects of the risk-taking channel on the quality of loans originated.  
But  this  is  not  only  a  conference  about  monetary  policy  in  developed  economies.  Indeed, 
securities  from  emerging  markets  fit  naturally  into  the  category  of  riskier  assets  that  are 
expected to be affected by investors’ search for yield in an environment of low interest rates, 
as has been documented by a growing and exciting empirical literature. This will be the topic 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   of the third and final session of the conference, and will include presentations by Helene Rey, 
Simon Gilchrist, and Elias Albagli. This topic is of particular concern for central bankers and 
policymakers in LATAM and other emerging regions, which have good reasons to be worried 
with  the  consequences  of  US  monetary  normalization  in  an  environment  where  further 
exchange rate pass-through will put increasing pressure on our inflation targets, while at the 
same time interest rate pass-through puts increased pressure on subpar levels of growth.  
Before giving an official start to our nineteenth annual conference, let me end by stressing a 
related but perhaps less appreciated aspect by which the events of the last few years have 
changed, I believe in both a fundamental and desirable manner, the way monetary policy is 
handled and communicated. And if you permit me, I will illustrate the point using the recent 
Chilean experience.  
In  Chile,  although  economic  conditions  have  been  far  less  complex  than  in  developed 
countries, we have also experimented with unconventional policies ... and frankly, I think the 
experience has been successful.  
First,  in  response  to  the  Global  Financial  Crisis  of  2008  the  Bank  increased  the  supply  of 
liquidity in pesos and dollars – through repos and swaps –, augmented the extensions of the 
swap  program,  and  broadened  the  range  of  eligible  collaterals.  They  were  all  measures 
designed to align market rates with the Monetary Policy Rate and to mitigate foreign currency 
liquidity tensions. Forward guidance was also an important tool. With the Monetary Policy Rate 
close  to  zero  –  we  cut  the  interest  rate  from  8.25%  to  0.5%  in  less  than  a  year  –  , 
communicating that we planned to keep a very low short-term interest rate for an extended 
period of time. This was essential in keeping medium and long term interest rates low. 
These measures – as well as some other more exogenous developments such as the rapid 
recovery  of  commodity  prices  –  allowed  the  economy  to  rebound  quite  fast  from  a  mild 
recession in 2009. Actually, in the post-crisis years GDP growth was above 5% in a context of 
low inflation.  
Over time, these measures were eliminated, but certainly the lessons we learned from the 
crisis have been incorporated into our policy analysis and toolkit. Among the most significant I 
would mention two: First, the fact that the central bank must be rapid to respond and use all 
the available tools if necessary. Second, that a clearer signal about what we believe will be the 
path of interest rates in the future helps to have a more efficient transmission of the Monetary 
Policy, particularly in turbulent times. In fact, in the more recent period, marked by a higher 
than  normal  level  of  uncertainty  associated  with  both  a  grimmer  outlook  for  the  Chinese 
economy  and  the  normalization  of  monetary  policy  in  the  United  States,  we  have  made  a 
special effort to signal the financial market what is the likely direction of our monetary policy in 
our  baseline  scenario  as  well  as  the  risks  involved.  We  have  done  this  by  increasing  the 
transparency of our analysis and, especially, by being more precise in our communication. Of 
course  it  is  too  soon  to  make  a  comprehensive  and  definite  analysis  about  the  costs  and 
benefits of this policy, but in my view this extra amount of forward guidance has been positive 
in order to achieve a smoother economic adjustment in difficult times.  
I  thank  you  for  being  here,  and  without  further  delay,  welcome  to  our  nineteenth  annual 
conference: “Monetary policy through asset markets: lessons from unconventional measures 
and implications for an integrated world.” 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
