  Mark Carney: The European Union, monetary and financial stability, and 
the Bank of England 
Text of the  Cairncross Lecture by  Mr  Mark Carney, Governor of the Bank of England and 
Chairman of the Financial Stability Board, St Peter’s College, Oxford, 21 October 2015. 
 I would like to thank Ben Nelson and Iain de Weymarn for their assistance in preparing these remarks, and Aaron 
Clements-Partridge,  Rashmi  Harimohan,  David  Ronicle,  Thomas  Smith,  James  Talbot,  Ryland  Thomas,  Nicola 
Anderson, Phil Evans, Richard Blows, George Murphy, Mike Flood, Peter Nagle, Nicola Shadbolt, Sinead Meany, 
Jumana Saleheen, Dennis Reinhardt, Bob Hills and Siobhan Clark for their work preparing EU Membership and 
the Bank of England. 
Introduction 
1. 
It is a great honour to give this Cairncross Lecture in Wren’s exquisite Sheldonian Theatre. 
Sir Alec Cairncross was a celebrated economist whose career bestrode public service and 
academia. 
Born to a Lanarkshire ironmonger in 1911, he rose, via Glasgow University and Cambridge, 
to  serve  as  the  first  head  of  the  Government  Economic  Service  and  later,  much  more 
illustriously of course, as Master of St Peter’s College. 
His work serves as a reminder of how enduring are the most trying economic questions we 
face. 
His  PhD  thesis,  eventually  published  after  great  anticipation  in  1953,  concerned  British 
investment at home and abroad during the last great wave of globalisation – a Golden Era for 
global commerce that stretched from Canadian Confederation to the eve of the Great War.1 
His  professional  preoccupations  included  how  international  capital  flows,  trade  and  labour 
mobility influence people’s well-being. 
These factors remain uppermost in policymakers’ minds as they seek to secure the resilient 
dynamism we all need for sustainable prosperity. And they are among the factors I want to 
consider this evening in discussing the impact of the UK’s European Union (EU) membership 
on the Bank of England’s objectives. 
Today we are publishing a report that examines this question.2 
I would like to be clear at the outset what this report is about, and what it is not. 
Our report is solely concerned with how EU membership affects the Bank’s ability to 
achieve our core objectives of maintaining monetary and financial stability. 
It  is  not  a  comprehensive  assessment  of  the  pros  and  cons  of  the  United  Kingdom 
“being in Europe.” 
And for the benefit of those of you who join us from the ranks of the nation’s press corps, I 
say again that this report it is not a comprehensive assessment of the pros and cons of the 
United Kingdom “being in Europe”! 
Answering that question involves much, much broader issues. Issues for others to analyse, 
describe  and  debate.  And  even  those  contributions  will  only  be  partial  responses  to  a 
question that only the British people can decide. 
                                                 
1   Cairncross, A K (1953), Home and foreign investment 1870–1913, Cambridge University Press. 
2   Bank of England (2015), EU Membership and the Bank of England, October. Available here. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
So if the narrowness of my scope disappoints, I would invite you sit back. Literally. Admire 
the Sheldonian’s ceiling. Marvel at how Wren’s original design bridged such an expanse with 
neither  beams  that  could  individually  span  its  width  nor  floor-to-ceiling  columns  that  could 
support it. Reflect on the allegory in the paintings that shows Truth descending upon the Arts 
and Sciences, expelling ignorance from the University. 
While you do, I will attempt my more meagre exam question.  
The  Bank’s  very  great  –  yet  rightly  circumscribed  –  responsibilities  are  formalised  in  the 
remits of the three major policy-making bodies of the Bank – the Monetary Policy Committee 
(MPC),  the  Financial  Policy  Committee  (FPC),  and  the  Prudential  Regulation  Authority 
(PRA). 
The  MPC’s  remit  requires  it  to  achieve  price  stability,  formalised  as  2%  CPI  inflation,  and 
subject  to  that  to  support  the  Government’s  economic  policy  including  its  objectives  for 
growth and employment. 
The FPC works to remove or reduce systemic risks with a view to protecting and enhancing 
the resilience of the UK financial system as a whole, and is subject to the same secondary 
objective as the MPC. 
And finally, the Bank of England’s PRA is required to promote the safety and soundness of 
individual firms; to contribute to securing an appropriate degree of protection for insurance 
policyholders; and, subject to that, to facilitate effective competition. 
Price  and  financial  stability,  as  well  as  safety  and  soundness  of  banks  and  insurers,  are 
essential macroeconomic pre-requisites for sustainable prosperity, but they are not sufficient 
for its attainment. They are the foundations not the edifice. 
The  Bank’s  responsibilities  are  enshrined  in  statute.  We  pursue  them  under  operational 
independence and are accountable to the people of the United Kingdom through Parliament 
for their achievement. 
Effectively  discharging  our  responsibilities  requires  a  deep  understanding  of  the  forces 
affecting the UK economy. EU membership entails some of the most important. 
There are three ways in which EU membership affects the Bank of England’s objectives: 
 
First, to the extent it increases economic and financial openness, EU membership 
reinforces  the  dynamism  of  the  UK  economy.  A  more  dynamic  economy  is  more 
resilient to shocks, can grow more rapidly without generating inflationary pressure or 
creating risks to financial stability, and can also be associated with more effective 
competition. 
Second,  increased  economic  and  financial  openness  means  the  UK  economy  is 
more exposed to economic and financial shocks from overseas. As a result of closer 
integration within the EU and, more recently, with the euro-area crisis, this may have 
increased the challenges to UK economic and financial stability; and 
Third,  EU  regulations,  directives  and  rules  define  many  of  the  Bank  of  England’s 
policy  instruments  particularly  in  relation  to  financial  stability.  These  must  be 
sufficiently  flexible  and  effective  to  manage  the  consequences  for  the  United 
Kingdom of shocks originating at home and abroad. 
  All of these forces are in flux. 
For the majority of the period since the UK joined the EU, the first factor – greater openness 
and  deeper  integration  afforded  by  EU  membership  –  very  likely  increased  the  UK’s 
dynamism. 
To be clear, by dynamism I mean the ability of an economy to grow and progress. Dynamism 
is reflected in the rate of productivity growth, the degree of labour engagement, the pace of 
new business creation and the rate of new innovation. In the period since joining the EU, the 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  
 
UK has had among the fastest per capita growth rates in the G73 has consistently been one 
of the top destinations for foreign capital amongst advanced economies as well as the top 
destination for Foreign Direct Investment in the EU. Today, the UK economy stands as one 
of the most flexible not just in the EU but across the advanced world. 
Since  the  crisis  began,  the  second  factor  –  shocks  arising  from  our  biggest  and  closest 
trading partner – has challenged UK dynamism and made it more volatile. 
In  the  aftermath  of  the  crisis,  it  is essential  that  the  third  factor  –  EU  rules,  directives  and 
regulation – continues to support the UK’s ability to address risks to financial stability in the 
future. 
Openness, dynamism and stability 
2. 
The UK is an open economy par excellence. In fact, the UK has bet on openness for almost 
two centuries. A bet that has paid off handsomely. 
From the repeal of the Corn Laws onwards, the UK has acknowledged that impediments to 
free trade are seldom, if ever, “first best” responses to the many maladies from which market 
economies can suffer.4 
Where the UK has led, others eventually followed. In time, every major advanced economy 
has come to embrace openness as a strategy to promote the well-being of its citizens. 
Today, the UK’s trade totals around two-thirds of its GDP (Chart 1). Its external assets and 
liabilities exceed ten times GDP. And its share of global Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) is 
around two times its share of global activity, accounting for the largest share of FDI into the 
EU (Chart 2). 
Its openness extends beyond the real economy to the financial economy. 
The scale, complexity and degree of global activity of the UK financial system are unmatched 
in the European Union (Chart 3). More foreign banks operate in the UK than any other EU 
country,  and  more  than  half  of  the  world’s  largest  financial  firms  have  their  European 
headquarters in the UK. The UK has the largest global share of cross-border bank lending, 
foreign exchange trading, and OTC interest rate derivatives. It has the world’s third largest 
insurance  industry  and  its  second  largest  asset  management  industry.  The  UK  banking 
sector is four times GDP and non-bank financial institutions are a similar size (Chart 4), while 
financial services accounted for 8% of output and around 3½% of employment in 2012. 
From this real and financial openness flow two important consequences for the UK economy 
and for the Bank’s objectives. 
Openness and dynamism 
2.1  
The first is dynamism. 
Cross-border  integration  of  goods,  services,  labour  and  capital  markets  increases  an 
economy’s dynamism through increased specialisation, enhanced competition, and greater 
possibilities for diversification and risk-sharing. 
Greater openness boosts the size of markets that UK households and firms can access. In 
turn,  trading  in  larger  markets  spurs  innovation  and  promotes  the  adoption  of  new 
                                                 
3   Per capita growth in the UK was fastest in the G7 1973–2008. Including the period since the crisis, the UK 
falls to second, after Japan. 
4   See, for example, Lipsey, R G and Lancaster, K (1956), “The general theory of the second best”, The Review 
of Economic Studies, 24 1.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
  
 
technologies from abroad. It also intensifies competition and drives efficiency improvements 
not least by allowing firms to exploit economies of scale. 
The openness associated with the free movement of labour can help better match workers 
with  firms,  alleviating  skills  shortages  and  boosting  the  supply  side  or  the  potential  growth 
rate of our economy. 
And greater openness can enhance the allocation of capital by better matching lenders with 
borrowers, potentially financing growth-enhancing investment. Foreign Direct Investment has 
particular  benefits.  By  creating  stable  and  long-lasting  links  between  economies,  it  assists 
economic integration and boosts dynamism by establishing channels for technology transfer 
and skills improvements. 
The impact of openness on dynamism is not unambiguous, however. It depends on a range 
of  factors  including  an  economy’s  factor  endowments,  the  complementarities  that  exist 
between these and its production technologies, and the correlation of shocks between the 
domestic and world economies.5 
Although openness supports dynamism, integration also brings greater exposure to foreign 
shocks. 
Openness and stability 
2.2  
Those observations point to a second important influence of openness on the UK economy: 
stability. 
As  the  UK  has  become  more  open  over  time,  its  interdependence  with  other  economies, 
including others in the EU, has increased. 
For the macroeconomy, this has two opposing effects. 
First,  openness  can  enhance  the  investment  returns  and  opportunities  to  diversify  risks  of 
households, firms and financial institutions. 
Well-managed  openness  can  therefore  grow  wealth  while  enhancing  risk-sharing,  insuring 
households’ consumption, smoothing their working patterns, and augmenting their borrowing 
and saving opportunities. 
That insurance helps people plan for the future in the knowledge they’ll have to change their 
plans less abruptly when the unexpected happens. 
The  flip-side  is  that  openness  can  change  the  nature  of  the  unexpected  itself,  altering  the 
type and scale of shocks hitting the economy. 
For  example,  the  complexity  of  financial  linkages  can  grow  and  become  more  opaque, 
creating new vulnerabilities and more severe shocks. 
And openness has the potential to exacerbate existing distortions or inefficiencies. In times of 
euphoria,  foreign  capital  can  flood  in  and  amplify  domestic  trends.  The  speed  of  its  flight 
when passion turns to panic can then deepen the bust that follows boom. 
Most obviously, openness ties the fates of trading nations together. 
That can mean a “second engine” for growth from abroad. But it can also mean a dragging 
anchor when things go awry across borders. 
                                                 
5   See for example Grossman, G and Helpman, E (1991), Innovation and growth in the global economy, MIT 
Press. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  Role of the EU in UK dynamism and stability 
3. 
How has the EU affected the UK’s dynamism and stability? Let me begin with the first. 
Role of EU in UK dynamism 
3.1 
In some respects the UK is the leading beneficiary of the famous “Four Freedoms” first set 
out in the 1957 Treaty of Rome.6 
These are the free movement of goods and services, capital and labour, enhanced over time 
through a range of measures to reduce impediments across the EU. 
So although the UK’s dynamism is the product of many factors including deep human capital, 
well-developed physical infrastructure, a competitive fiscal regime and the rule of law; the EU 
has  arguably  bolstered  it  by  establishing  the  world’s  largest  single  market  with  free 
movement of goods, services, capital and labour. 
The UK has further benefited from these dynamics by retaining relatively flexible labour and 
product markets. 
In  product  markets,  home  and  foreign  firms  receive  close  to  equal  treatment;  the 
administrative burden on start-ups is second lowest in the G7; incumbent firms receive the 
lowest regulatory protection in the G7; and product market regulation is light (Charts 5–8). 
Partly as a result, in 2012 the UK economy created firms at more than three times the rate of 
the US.7 
Taken together, these measures promote competition and spur innovation which ultimately 
benefits us all. 
And the UK has managed to combine some of the most flexible labour markets in the G7 
with some of the most cooperative labour relations (Charts 9–10). 
This relative labour market flexibility helps the economy to absorb shocks, illustrated by the 
experience of the Great Recession. UK unemployment rose by less than in the US, and has 
fallen faster than in the euro area. Since the start of the Global Financial Crisis, UK jobs have 
grown 3 percentage points more than the US. 
Moreover, people’s attachment to the workplace has remained broadly intact. Compare that 
with  the  case  of  some  euro  members,  where  youth  unemployment  in  particular  has  been 
devastatingly  high,  and  with  the  US,  where  there  was  an  unexpected  rise  in  worker 
discouragement,  with  many  working  age  adults  exiting  from  the  labour  market  altogether.8 
This out-performance is positive for the UK’s dynamism in the medium run. 
More  to  the  point,  that  means  more  people  in  work,  building  not  losing  skills,  with  real 
prospects for higher wages and better living standards. 
That  is  important  because  the  UK  still  has  work  to  do  to  close  the  gap  between  its 
productivity  performance  and  the  world  frontier,  defined  by  the  United  States  (Chart  11). 
However,  over  the  broad  sweep  of  its  EU  membership,  the  UK’s  productivity  growth 
performance compares favourably. And its potential growth is at the top of the class of the 
major advanced economies. 
An  important  driver  of  that  dynamic  has  been  FDI.  Since  the  establishment  of  the  single 
market in 1992, the UK has been the top recipient of foreign capital in the EU. 
                                                 
6   And now set out in the Treaty of the EU and the Treaty on the Functioning of the EU. 
7   Compared using business creation rates scaled by relative GDP. 
8   For a further discussion of these points, see: Carney, M (2014), Speech at the Trades Union Congress Annual 
Conference, September. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
  
 
Evidence suggests that the openness of EU economies to foreign investment has improved 
firm-level productivity both through technology transfer and enhanced management practices 
(Chart 12). This has likely been complemented with labour flows leading to better-matched 
skills. 
Broadly speaking, the evidence suggests that UK has successfully harnessed the benefits of 
openness  afforded  by  its  EU  membership  while  avoiding  some  the  drawbacks  of  reduced 
flexibility from which some continental European economies suffer. 
Role of EU in UK stability 
3.2 
If the impact of EU membership on openness and dynamism is relatively clear, its effect on 
stability is more complex. 
Greater dynamism makes a given burden of debt easier to service, enhancing resilience to 
shocks.  And  the  common  rules  and  diversification  afforded  by  EU  membership  bring  the 
potential for financial stability benefits. 
But there have also been challenges. 
Greatly increased financial openness, in part associated with EU membership, has made the 
UK financial system larger, more complex and more exposed to shocks from abroad. 
These  developments  reinforced  domestically  generated  vulnerabilities  in  the  run  up  to  the 
Global Financial Crisis. The UK, along with many of its main international partners, lacked 
the institutions and tools for managing and addressing them when they crystallised. 
As  a  result,  when  the  crisis  hit,  global  shocks  were  transmitted  virulently  across  borders, 
doing great damage to the financial systems and real economies of many countries. The UK 
was particularly affected given its high degree of financial openness. 
Most  recently,  challenges  arising  from  European  Monetary  Union  (EMU)  have  been 
particularly evident. Our ties are close. 40% of our exports go to the euro area, and major 
UK-owned  banks  have  financial  exposures  to  the  euro  area  totalling  almost  twice  their 
capital, worth a quarter of UK GDP. 
These figures underscore the importance to the UK of further building the resilience of the 
euro area as part of a strengthened European Union.9 In this regard, the progress made in 
recent  years  is  particularly  welcome.  Nonetheless,  as  highlighted  in  the  European 
Commission’s “Five Presidents’ Report”, the euro area remains “unfinished business.”10 
Actions to complete European Monetary Union should be taken with regard to their impact on 
all  members  of  the  European  Union.  From  the  Bank  of  England’s  perspective,  steps  to 
ensure financial stability for those within the euro area should not impede the achievement of 
financial stability for those without, including the United Kingdom. 
Impact on the Bank of England objectives 
4. 
So  what  does  this  analysis  means  for  the  achievement  by  the  Bank  of  its  statutory 
objectives? Let me begin with monetary policy. 
                                                 
9   For further discussion of these points, see Carney, M (2015), “Fortune favours the bold”, Speech at Iveagh 
House, Dublin, 28 January. 
10   See Draghi, M (2015), “Stability and prosperity in monetary union”, 2 January. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  Monetary policy 
4.1 
Put simply, economies with sustainable dynamism can grow more quickly before running into 
excessive  price  pressures.  The  UK’s  greater  openness  as  a  result  of  EU  membership 
provides potential for both greater growth and shocks. 
The MPC naturally takes these into account when setting monetary policy for the UK. While 
they have posed challenges at times, the influence of EU membership on these dynamics 
does not prevent the MPC from achieving its price stability objective. 
Under  inflation  targeting  the  MPC  has  ultimate  control  over  the  UK’s  nominal  destiny, 
allowing the flexibility of the exchange rate and free capital flows to facilitate adjustment to 
global shocks. 
The  precise  path  of  that  adjustment  is  a  policy  choice  we  are  free  to  make,  within  the 
framework provided by our monetary policy remit. 
For example, at the onset of the crisis, a large adjustment of the UK’s real exchange rate 
was  necessary  to  rebalance  from  domestic  to  foreign  demand,  reflecting  the  severe 
headwinds to domestic growth from deleveraging by UK households.11 
The  consequences  of  this  real  adjustment  for  inflation  depended  on  the  monetary  policy 
response.  The  MPC  was  able  to  strike  an  appropriate  trade-off,  consistent  with  its  remit, 
between  the  needs  to  stabilise  inflation  and  to  avoid  undue  volatility  in  employment  and 
output.  Some  have  put  this  more  colloquially  as  “looking  through”  the  effects  of  sterling’s 
depreciation on inflation on this occasion. 
More  persistent  shocks  require  monetary  accommodation.  For  example,  the  euro  area’s 
difficult sequence of internal price adjustments, together with its overall fiscal restraint and 
tight credit conditions, imparted persistent headwinds to UK growth, and, had they not been 
addressed, on inflation. 
Those headwinds contributed to a persistent lowering of the “equilibrium” interest rate in the 
UK – the rate required to maintain demand in line with potential. That called for Bank Rate to 
be held lower for longer in order to lean against the disinflationary impulse emanating from 
abroad.  And  low  real  rates  have  had  to  be  complemented  by  targeted  macroprudential 
measures to insure against the risks of excessive indebtedness. 
Both of these points illustrate that the UK’s openness is central to the deliberations of the 
MPC in formulating monetary policy strategy. But neither openness nor any obligation of EU 
membership ultimately prevents the MPC from doing its job. 
Financial stability 
4.2 
The impact of EU membership on financial stability is more challenging. 
Given the close integration of the UK financial sector with the rest of the EU, it is imperative 
that the EU has a robust regulatory framework. This is in the process of being achieved. 
Through  its  membership  of  the  EU,  the  UK  is  promoting  a  strong  global  regulatory 
framework, and UK authorities have worked in close concert with our European partners to 
find solutions to the fault-lines of the past. Examples include moves to end Too Big To Fail by 
enhancing bank recovery and resolution, a solution developed locally at the Bank of England, 
implemented  regionally  in  the  European  Union,  and  now  agreed  globally  through  the 
Financial Stability Board. 
Given the scale of the UK’s financial sector relative to its economy, the Bank of England also 
has a special responsibility to the UK, to Europe and the world. The UK must ensure that the 
                                                 
11   See Broadbent, B (2011), “Rebalancing and the real exchange rate”, Speech at Thompson Reuters, London. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
  
 
system  is  robust  to  shocks  and  that  financial  institutions  can  be  resolved  in  an  orderly 
manner. 
After  all,  financial  stability  is  a  national  responsibility,  with  the  UK  taxpayer  serving  as  the 
ultimate backstop of the UK financial system. 
The comprehensive reform of the UK’s institutional framework for financial stability since the 
crisis  creates  a  coherent  architecture  of  national  macroprudential  and  microprudential 
regulators and supervisors. This is now commensurate with the scale and nature of the risks 
that the UK’s high degree of financial openness can pose. And it provides the foundations for 
the UK to remain the world’s leading international financial centre, one which can safely be 
home to the largest global, systemically important banks and insurers. 
The effectiveness of our reformed domestic framework for financial stability depends in part 
on the quality of financial regulation set at the EU level as well as the flexibility we have to 
apply that regulation to meet the UK’s specific financial stability challenges. In the main this 
combination has been achieved thus far. 
However, there have been some limits on flexibility in certain areas, including: 
 
a bonus cap restricting the proportion of pay that can be clawed back in the event of 
excessive  risk 
from 
remuneration; 
trigger thresholds for contingent convertible capital instruments that some may judge 
too low; and 
a reduced role for national discretion in insurance supervision. 
 
While common international standards and effective EU rules should continue to support the 
operation  of  the  single  market,  it  is  imperative  that  UK  authorities,  including  the  Bank  of 
England, continue to retain the flexibility to impose the high standards necessary to manage 
the world’s leading global financial centre. 
This flexibility may be challenged by how EU financial regulation evolves. Ensuring the Bank 
of  England  has  the  instruments  necessary  to  achieve  its  financial  stability  objective  will 
depend on the EU continuing to have regulations of the highest standards, which strike the 
appropriate  balance  between  harmonisation  and  flexibility,  and  which  accommodate 
necessary national responsibilities, including for supervision. 
thereby  weakening  discipline 
taking  or  poor  conduct, 
 Principles of a new settlement for financial stability 
5. 
A successful and sustainable Economic and Monetary Union is important for the dynamism 
and stability of both the euro area and the UK. Since the crisis, many euro-area economies 
have  undergone  difficult  reforms  to  improve  competitiveness.  Adjustment  mechanisms  to 
address  the  underlying  problems  of  the  euro  area  have  been  built,  including  measures  to 
create  a  Banking  Union  and  the  development  of  the  European  Stability  Mechanism,  a 
permanent crisis resolution facility for euro area countries. 
Although much has been accomplished, further financial and fiscal integration within the euro 
area will be necessary to put EMU on a more sustainable basis. In particular, closer financial 
integration requires increased risk sharing in the public and private sector. That risk sharing 
can be achieved by the development of the more complete Banking Union in the euro area 
and, more broadly, a Capital Markets Union for the EU. 
How financial regulation in the EU evolves in future will be critical to the resilience of both the 
euro area and the UK economy. Closer union between euro-area member states is likely to 
necessitate further harmonisation of financial regulation across the euro area. By extension, 
those regulations can affect the rest of the EU. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  
 
In  that  light,  it  is  important  that  any  future  EU  legislative  measures,  designed  to  meet  the 
needs of deeper integration in the euro area, do not adversely affect the Bank of England’s 
ability to ensure the stability of the UK financial sector or compromise the single market. 
It  is  desirable,  particularly  given  the  weight  of  the  ECB  and  of  the  members  of  the  single 
currency within the EU, that there are clear principles to safeguard the interests of non-euro 
member states. 
The future direction of EU financial reform should recognise that the EU comprises multiple 
currencies with multiple risks. 
Such  principles  would  enable  the  Bank  of  England  to  continue  to  ensure  that  EU 
membership contributes fully to the attainment of the Bank’s statutory objectives. 
 Overall,  EU  membership  has  increased  the  openness  of  the  UK  economy,  facilitating 
dynamism but also creating some monetary and financial stability challenges for the Bank of 
England to manage. Thus far, we have been able to meet these challenges. 
Our efforts have been helped by the strong domestic framework for financial stability that has 
been  put  in  place  post  crisis.  Going  forward,  these  should  be  further  buttressed  by  an 
evolution of the EU regulatory framework that continues to work for all members of the EU. 
The increased resilience that brings is a necessary condition for dynamism. And a dynamic, 
resilient domestic economy will enhance the prosperity of the people of the UK and beyond. 
And  for  those  still  looking  upwards  in  wonderment?  The  genius  of  Wren’s  ceiling  was  its 
inspired interlocking beams, individually insufficient to span the Sheldonian’s diameter, but 
collectively  arranged  so  that  each  could  support  another,  perfectly  balancing  the  forces  of 
those  pushing  down  with  others  pushing  up,  resting,  ultimately,  on  the  foundations  Wren 
began in 1664. 
And  this  is  the  architecture  of  Europe:  a  single  market  whose  participants  are  interlinked, 
relying  on  and  complementing  each  other.  Just  as  Wren’s  wooden  lattice  supports  Robert 
Streater’s art, this market network supports the creativity of Europe. Of course, the weight of 
the ceiling doesn’t disappear but rests on hidden foundations. So too does the single market 
rely on invisible supports, some of which are the responsibility of the Bank of England and 
European  regulatory  authorities.  While  these  foundations  have  worked  well  thus  far,  they 
may in time need to be buttressed to realise the full creative potential of the peoples of the 
United Kingdom and Europe. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
 Charts 
 Chart 1: UK trade is two-thirds of GDP 
 Chart 2: UK receives largest share of EU FDI(a) 
Source: OECD 
  
 
 
Chart 3: Global activity of UK financial system 
unmatched in the European Union… 
(a) EU-15 countries’ share of average annual FDI inflows into 
the EU: 1993 to latest. 
Source: UNCTAD. 
Chart 4: … and UK financial system is very 
large relative to GDP(a) 
Source: Radcliffe Report (1959), Wilson Report (1980), ECB, 
OECD, Swiss National Bank and Bank calculations. 
 Notes: Bars show share of global activity for cross-border 
lending, interest rate OTC derivatives and foreign exchange 
and share of global assets for all other categories. 
Cross-border bank lending and mutual fund asset data are 
from 2014; all other data is from 2013. 
Source: BIS, City UK, IMF’s GFSR, Bank calculations. 
 
 
 10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  Chart 5: Foreign suppliers receive close to 
equal treatment to domestic firms in the UK(a) 
Chart 6: UK administrative burden on start-
ups second lowest in G7(a) 
 Source: OECD (2013), Product Market Regulation Database. 
 
 
 
 
Chart 7: Incumbent firms least protected in 
UK(a) 
 Source: OECD (2013), Product Market Regulation Database. 
 
Chart 8: UK product market least heavily 
regulated in G7(a) 
 Source: OECD (2013), Product Market Regulation Database.
   Source: OECD (2013), Product Market Regulation Database. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11
  Chart 9: UK employment protection in middle 
of the G7 pack(a)… 
Chart 10: … while securing favourable labour-
employer relations compared to Japan and 
Germany(a) 
 Source: OECD Employment Protection Legislation. 
 
 
 
Chart 11: UK still has work to do to close the 
gap between its productivity level and world 
frontier, but growth since 1970 compares 
favourably(a) 
(a) Indicator based on responses to the following question in 
the WEF Executive Opinion Survey: “In your country, how 
would you characterize labour-employer relations? (1 = 
generally confrontational; 7 = generally cooperative)”. 
Source: WEF Global Competitiveness Report 2014. 
 Chart 12: Firms report FDI as a channel for 
technology transfer, particularly in the UK(a) 
(a) Output per hour measured in 2014 US$, with price levels 
converted using 2011 PPPs. 
Source: The Conference Board Total Economy Database. 
 12 
  (a) Indicator based on responses to the following question in 
the World Economic Forum Executive Opinion Survey: “To 
what extent does FDI bring new technology into your country? 
(1 = not at all; 7 = to a great extent – FDI is a key source of 
new technology)”. 
Source: WEF Global Competitiveness Report 2014. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches
