  Haruhiko Kuroda: Japan’s economy and monetary policy 
Speech by Mr Haruhiko Kuroda, Governor of the Bank of Japan, at a meeting with business 
leaders, Nagoya, 30 November 2015. 
 Introduction 
It is my great pleasure to have the opportunity today to exchange views with administrative, 
financial, and business leaders in the Chubu region. I would like to take this opportunity to 
express  my  sincerest  gratitude  for  your  cooperation  with  the  Bank  of  Japan’s  Nagoya 
Branch. 
Looking  at  recent  economic  developments,  the  slowdown  in  emerging  economies, 
particularly  China,  has  affected  Japan’s  exports  and  production.  Nevertheless,  as  I  will 
explain, the fundamentals of Japan’s economy are sound and the environment surrounding 
Japan’s firms and households has improved significantly compared to a few years ago. The 
underlying  trend  in  inflation  has  also  been  improving  steadily.  Quantitative  and  qualitative 
monetary  easing  (QQE),  which  the  Bank  introduced  in  April  2013,  has  been  exerting  its 
intended effects toward overcoming deflation. 
Today, I would like to explain the Bank’s view on the outlook for economic activity and prices, 
as  well  as  on  its  monetary  policy,  and  then  touch  on  remaining  challenges  for  Japan’s 
economy to overcoming deflation. 
Developments in Japan’s economic activity and prices 
I. 
To begin with, let me talk about developments in Japan’s economic activity and prices. 
Economic activity 
The  slowdown  in  emerging  economies,  particularly  China,  has  recently  become  more 
pronounced,  and  this  has  affected  Japan’s  exports  and  production.  Mainly  reflecting  the 
slowdown  in  overseas  economies,  the  projected  real  economic  growth  rate  for  fiscal  2015 
was  revised  downward  in  the  Outlook  for  Economic  Activity  and  Prices  (Outlook  Report) 
released at the end of last month to 1.2 percent from the 1.7 percent projected in July 2015 
(Chart 1). 
However,  Japan’s  economic  fundamentals  are  sound  and  the  economy  has  continued  to 
recover  moderately.  Real  GDP  growth  in  the  July-September  quarter  of  2015  was  slightly 
negative for the second consecutive quarter, due mainly to inventory adjustments, but final 
demand as a whole has been increasing. 
Regarding  the  corporate  sector,  firms’  investment  stance  has  continued  to  be  positive 
reflecting  the  favorable  earnings  environment.  Corporate  profits  as  a  whole  have  reached 
record highs, and fixed investment plans have also been robust. According to the September 
Tankan  (Short-Term  Economic  Survey  of  Enterprises  in  Japan),  the  year-on-year  rate  of 
growth of planned fixed investment for all enterprises and industries was 6.4 percent, up from 
the June Tankan. 
In the household sector, the employment and income situation has been improving steadily; 
as a result, private consumption has been resilient. Turning to labor market conditions, the 
active  job  openings-to-applicants  ratio  is  currently  1.24,  a  level  last  seen  in  1992,  and  the 
unemployment rate has declined to 3.1 percent, a level last seen in 1995. Thus, labor market 
conditions have continued to tighten and Japan is in a situation close to “full employment.” As 
seen  in  the  diffusion  index  for  employment  conditions  released  in  the  September  Tankan, 
firms’ perception that they are facing a shortage of labor has intensified, and labor market 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  conditions  seem  to  continue  to  be  tight  despite  the  flattening  of  exports  and  production 
(Chart 2). 
With  corporate  profits  having  risen  to  historically  high  levels  and  the  tightening  in  labor 
market conditions continuing, there has been upward pressure on wages. Scheduled cash 
earnings have been increasing on a year-on-year basis for three consecutive quarters since 
the turn of the year, reflecting in part increases in base pay, which has gone up for two years 
in  a  row.  Moreover,  various  surveys  suggest  that  summer  bonuses  this  year  were  raised 
again  following  the  substantial  increase  last  year  (Chart  3).  On  the  back  of  the  steady 
improvements  in  the  employment  and  income  situation,  private  consumption  in  the  July-
September quarter increased on a quarter-on-quarter basis. Taking, in addition, more recent 
anecdotal  evidence  into  account,  the  Bank  judges  that  private  consumption  has  been 
resilient. 
With a virtuous cycle from income to spending in both the corporate and household sectors 
in  place,  Japan  is  likely  to  continue  to  see  real  GDP  growth  through  fiscal  2016  of  about  
1.0–1.5  percent.  This  rate  exceeds  Japan’s  potential  growth  rate,  which  is  currently 
estimated to be around 0.5 percent or lower. 
Prices 
Let me turn to prices. The year-on-year rate of change in the consumer price index (CPI, all 
items  less  fresh  food),  which  was  minus  0.5  percent  just  before  the  introduction  of  QQE, 
increased to as high as 1.5 percent in April 2014, excluding the effects of the consumption 
tax hike. However, reflecting the substantial decline in crude oil prices since the summer of 
2014, annual CPI inflation declined and has been about 0 percent in recent months (Chart 4). 
Nevertheless, once the effect of the decline in energy prices is excluded, the underlying trend 
in inflation has steadily improved. For example, the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI 
for all items less fresh food and energy had been negative before the introduction of QQE, 
but  turned  positive  in  October  2013.  Since  then,  it  has  been  positive  for  25  consecutive 
months, and increased to 1.2 percent this October. This is the first time since the late 1990s, 
when  Japan’s  economy  fell  into  deflation,  that  sustained  price  increases  have  been  seen. 
Meanwhile,  the  rate  of  increase  in  the  daily  and  weekly  price  indices  gathered  by  the 
University of Tokyo and Hitotsubashi University based on the prices of items such as food 
and  daily  necessities  has  continued  to  show  an  accelerating  trend  since  this  April.  Price 
hikes by firms have become widespread and sustained, as seen in the fact that the share of 
items in the CPI for which prices have risen has been outweighing that for which prices have 
declined by an increasing margin (Chart 5). 
Meanwhile,  some  economists  argue  that  the  recent  price  rises  are  just  a  temporary 
phenomenon  brought  about  by  the  rise  in  import  prices  prompted  mainly  by  the  past 
depreciation of the yen and that therefore it is difficult to judge whether the underlying trend 
in inflation has been improving. It is certainly the case that the rise in import prices prompted 
by the depreciation of the yen has contributed to the rise in consumer prices. However, as I 
mentioned earlier, attempts by firms to raise prices can be seen across a wide range of items 
and are not confined to items affected by import prices. In addition, neither the recent extent 
of inflation nor its persistence can be explained as the result of the depreciation of the yen. 
Instead, it makes more sense to interpret the extent and persistence of recent inflation as a 
result of improvements in the employment and income situation as well as changes in firms’ 
and households’ perceptions of price developments. 
Looking ahead, the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI (all items less fresh food) is likely 
to be about 0 percent for the time being, due to the effects of the decline in energy prices. 
However, with the underlying trend in inflation steadily rising and the effects of the decline in 
crude oil prices dissipating, the rate of increase is expected to accelerate toward 2 percent – 
the price stability target. Although the timing of when inflation of around 2 percent is reached 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  depends on developments in crude oil prices, the Bank projects this to be around the second 
half of fiscal 2016, assuming that crude oil prices will rise moderately from recent levels. 
Developments in emerging economies and their effects on Japan’s economy 
II. 
One of the risks to this outlook is the slowdown in emerging economies, particularly China, 
and its repercussions. Looking around the global economy, a clear contrast can be observed, 
with  the  economic  situation  in  advanced  economies  improving,  while  emerging  and 
commodity-exporting economies have been decelerating. 
In  China,  economic  activity  in  manufacturing  has  continued  to  be  sluggish,  but  that  in 
nonmanufacturing has remained robust (Chart 6). Spending by local governments was one 
of  the  reasons  for  the  sluggishness  of  the  Chinese  economy  in  the  first  half  of  this  year. 
However,  the  pace  of  spending  increases  has  accelerated  recently,  partly  as  a  result  of 
instructions  by  the  central  government  and  measures  to  facilitate  the  financing  of  local 
governments  (Chart  7).  With  these  initiatives  taking  effect,  China’s  economic  growth  is 
expected to accelerate from the end of 2015 to early 2016. That being said, China continues 
to  suffer  from  structural  problems  such  as  excess  capacity  and  there  are  uncertainties 
surrounding the outlook. Even if the Chinese economy were to recover, uncertainty remains 
to  what  extent  this  recovery  would  push  up  other  economies  in  East  Asia.  Looking  at 
emerging economies as a whole, although there have recently been signs of a pick-up in, for 
example, the production of IT-related goods in East Asia, commodity prices remain low, so 
that  commodity-exporting  economies  continue 
face  difficult  circumstances  and 
developments differ across individual economies. 
A  continued  increase  in  corporate  profits,  despite  lackluster  developments  in  exports  and 
production reflecting the effects of the slowdown in emerging economies, are not something 
one  would  normally  have  observed  in  Japanese  economic  recoveries  in  the  past.  This 
suggests  that  Japan’s  economic  fundamentals  have  become  more  resilient  to  external 
shocks and the economy is becoming more stable. Reasons for this resilience likely include 
favorable changes in the external environment – such as the decline in crude oil prices and 
the  correction  of  the  excessive  appreciation  of  the  yen  –  as  well  as  the  firmness  of  the 
nonmanufacturing sector, which has been a key feature of the recent economic recovery. In 
other words, the fact that a virtuous cycle from income to spending is operating steadily has 
led to the current resilience of Japan’s economy (Chart 8). 
Based  on  these  observations,  let  us  consider  the  repercussions  for  Japan  if  emerging 
economies were to slow down further. The risk that a contraction in exports and production 
will  undermine  corporate  profits  and  hence  investment  does  not  seem  to  be  that  great. 
Corporate profits are extremely high and some decline in exports and production could be 
easily  absorbed.  On  the  other  hand,  what  does  warrant  attention  is  the  possibility  that 
increased  uncertainty  regarding  emerging  economies  undermines  business  confidence  in 
Japan,  which  might  lead  firms  to  scale  down  investment  and  wage  increases.  Although 
business confidence has been improving, it would be premature to say that it is sufficiently 
strong. I will further elaborate on this point later. 
to 
Looking ahead to the post-deflation era 
III. 
In  sum,  while  Japan’s  economy  has  continued  to  recover  moderately  and  the  underlying 
trend in inflation has steadily improved, due attention should be paid to risk factors such as 
developments  in  emerging  economies.  With  regard  to  monetary  policy,  QQE  has  been 
exerting  its  intended  effects,  and  the  Bank  will  continue  with  QQE,  aiming  to  achieve  the 
price stability target of 2 percent, as long as it is necessary for maintaining that target in a 
stable manner. The Bank will make the most appropriate policy decisions by scrutinizing the 
current situation of economic activity and prices and their outlook, various risk factors, and 
developments  in  financial  and  capital  markets  at  every  Monetary  Policy  Meeting.  Let  me 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  reiterate  that  the  Bank  will  make  adjustments  without  hesitation  if  judged  as  necessary  to 
achieve the price stability target of 2 percent at the earliest possible time. 
Lastly,  I  would  like  to  touch  on  overcoming  deflation  and  corporate  strategy.  In  my  recent 
speeches in Osaka and Tokyo, I said that the data to date give the impression that the pace 
of  increase  in  fixed  investment  and  wages  was  still  relatively  slow  when  considering  that 
firms have been making record profits. To avoid any misunderstanding, I would like to note 
that increases in fixed investment and wages are necessary not only for Japan’s economy as 
a whole, but would also benefit themselves. That is, given that Japan’s economy is on the 
road to overcoming deflation and entering a new phase in which the economy will grow in a 
sustainable manner under price stability with 2 percent inflation, now is the time for firms to 
wipe  out  the  deflationary  mindset  and  make  investment  in  human  and  physical  capital. 
Taking actions now is a prerequisite for firms to be among the winners in the future. 
In this context, the one key message that the Bank wants to get across is that deflation will 
be overcome and the price stability target of 2 percent will definitely be achieved. And this 
will  happen  at  the  earliest  possible  time.  The  Bank  considers  it  desirable  to  achieve  a 
situation in which both prices and wages rise in a balanced manner. However, this does not 
mean  that  the  Bank  will  adjust  its  policies  aimed  at  achieving  moderate  inflation  simply  in 
response  to  the  pace  of  increase  in  wages.  From  both  a  theoretical  and  an  empirical 
perspective, prices generally move in parallel with wages (Chart 9). If the Bank were to move 
slowly toward achieving the price stability target, wage adjustments would also be slow. At 
the  end  of  the  day,  this  issue  comes  down  to  a  chicken  and  egg  situation.  In  order  to 
overcome  deflation  –  in  other  words,  break  the  deadlock  –  somebody  has  to  show  an 
unwavering  resolve  and  change  the  situation.  This  means  that,  when  it  comes  to  price 
developments being at stake, the Bank must be the first-mover. The Bank has been pursuing 
QQE based on the stance that it will do whatever it can to achieve the price stability target. 
As  a  result,  conditions  in  financial  markets  –  as  exemplified  by  stock  prices  and  foreign 
exchange rates – as well as corporate profitability and labor market conditions – particularly 
the unemployment rate – have improved significantly, so that the underlying trend in inflation 
has changed markedly. Looking at the CPI for October 2015, the year-on-year rate of change 
in the CPI for all items less fresh food and energy was 2.0 percentage points higher and that 
for all items less food and energy was 1.5 percentage points higher than in March 2013, that 
is, immediately before the introduction of QQE. As evidenced by these figures, the Bank has 
the capability as well as the strong will to achieve price stability at 2 percent inflation at the 
earliest possible time. 
The Bank of Japan’s price stability target of 2 percent provides a benchmark which firms can 
refer to when adjusting wages and individual prices. Once 2 percent inflation prevails, firms 
that continue to base their investment, hiring, and price-setting decisions on a deflationary 
mindset  will  be  at  a  disadvantage  and  fall  behind  their  competitors.  In  our  view,  the 
environment for wage increases – such as a tight labor market and high corporate profits – is 
certainly  already  well  established.  However,  it  is  of  course  up  to  firms’  management  and 
labor whether to raise wages in line with the 2 percent inflation benchmark in anticipation of 
price increases of 2 percent as we move on. 
In fact, I see that an increasing number of firms are already moving in new directions. And I 
am  aware  that  this  region,  which  produced  Japan’s  first  domestically-manufactured 
automobile,  is  home  to  many  forward-looking  entrepreneurs.  Coincidentally,  the  Mitsubishi 
Regional Jet (MRJ) – Japan’s first domestically-produced passenger jet – recently made its 
successful maiden flight. At this juncture, we are witnessing the start of a new legend in this 
region. I am hoping that the wind of change blowing from the Chubu region will give flight to 
Japan’s economy and lift it to a new, post-deflationary stage. 
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    5 
   6 
    BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    7 
   8 
     BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   9 
