   Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Central banking – using leadership energy to build 
resilience 
Speech  by  Dr  Zeti  Akhtar  Aziz,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Malaysia  (Bank  Negara 
Malaysia), at the Iclif Leadership Energy Asia Summit 2015, Kuala Lumpur, 1 December 2015. 
 Welcome to this year’s Leadership Energy Summit Asia organised by our Iclif Leadership and 
Governance Centre. This is our third summit in the series on leadership energy. The focus on 
leadership energy reflects its importance in today’s leadership. The contemporary environment 
we  are  living  in  has  become  increasingly  more  challenging  –  characterised  by  highly 
destabilising and tumultuous events. Not only are we living in a world that has become highly 
unpredictable  and  unstable  but  a  world  that  is  being  more  frequently  subject  to  extreme 
conditions in which we are tested to the limit. How do we survive against the odds manifested 
in this environment? It is all about having the ability to endure and prevail. It is also about being 
able to succeed and thrive in such an environment. It is about being resilient. Resilience is key 
to surviving in this environment. 
Today we are privileged to hear and be inspired from the experience of personalities who not 
only survived against such great odds but who have also achieved great success. Let me take 
this opportunity to express our gratitude to our distinguished speakers who have come from 
different parts of the world to share their knowledge and experience on this subject. It is all 
about their perseverance and resilience and how they have defied all expectations. The issue 
before us is the source of their energy to persevere and their courage to stay the course when 
it all appears to be hopeless. 
In  the  business  of  central  banking  we  are  increasingly  being  confronted  by  such  extreme 
conditions. Building resilience is therefore key. I have described central banking as being an 
unfinished  business  because  there  are  always  new  challenges  on  the  horizon,  endless 
demands  emerging  from  an  ever  changing  and  more  complex  environment  and  great 
expectations  that  the  Central  Bank  will  provide  the  solutions  to  resolve  the  financial  and 
economic  problems  that  confront  us.  The  Central  Bank  is  also  at  the  forefront  in  the 
management of any financial and economic crisis – a phenomenon that continues to plague 
the world with increasing frequency. 
The Central Bank can be described as a high impact organisation. Its decisions or indecisions, 
its action or inaction will have major and far reaching repercussions and consequences on the 
economic  well  being  of  the  public  at  large  and  the  entire  spectrum  of  businesses.  The 
responsibility and accountability is therefore immense. Our business is about bringing value 
and  benefits  to  our  citizens.  In  an  environment  of  greater  transparency  and  enhanced 
communication  there  is  also  greater  awareness  of  the  prevailing  circumstances.  This  has 
produced higher expectations for the delivery of results. Energy is derived from this very sense 
of meaning of what responsibility brings. It is the drive to making the difference to the economic 
well being of our citizens. 
Fiercely knowing this responsibility and accountability is the very source of the intense energy 
necessary to preform the function of central banking. Knowing the high costs that destabilising 
developments can have on the people and businesses and its potential damage to the nation 
is a major prompt of the perseverance to press on, to survive and to succeed. Often we need 
to just confront the realities and produce a solution when it seems hopeless. Courage is also 
needed to stay the course. Knowing the stakes are high, knowing that you are being counted 
upon spurs the unwavering determination. 
From my experience as a lifelong career central banker, such extreme conditions that test us 
to the limit have become increasingly frequent. While there have been many great successes 
that have been achieved, there have also been those moments that have been most trying 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   and devastating. During such times, developments set you back to a much worse situation 
than your original position. Those times have arisen from external shocks that are beyond our 
control,  from  ambitious  agendas  that  have  been  met  with  violent  resistance  and  domestic 
stress  brought  on  by  actions  that  are  in  conflict  with  the  Bank’s  mandate  or  from  political 
tensions. 
The ability to endure, to persevere, to be resilient in the face of such extreme odds is about 
having a great sense of purpose of what needs to be achieved and the motivation of why it 
needs to be achieved. The sheer responsibility and the awareness of the accountability that 
comes with it is the very driver of such perseverance. It is also the fear of failure and knowing 
the  far-reaching  and  damaging  consequences.  This  is  reinforced  with  the  values  and  the 
discipline to stay the course to do what is right and to do what is in the interest of the people. 
The  discipline  is  also  important  so  that  the  Central  Bank  is  consistent  in  its  behaviour  in 
managing the challenging conditions or in its aspirations to push the frontiers and create great 
value for the country. 
During  such  times,  having  great  clarity  in  the  vision  and  on  the  objective  of  what  is  to  be 
achieved becomes paramount. This has to be the starting point if it is to draw on the energies 
of the entire organisation. Articulating it with great clarity throughout the organisation allows 
the collective alignment to the goals. This also avoids being diverted by distractions when we 
are  confronted  with  destabilising  times.  It  is  also  imperative  when  we  are  ambitious  with 
bringing about change and transformation. Knowing clearly the outcomes and the benefits it 
brings increases the potential of bringing diverse groups within a country and across countries 
to building the consensus on achieving a common goal. 
Another  aspect  that  needs  to  be  mentioned  is  being  paranoid  about  the  worst  that  could 
happen. This is sometimes referred to as productive paranoia. Central bankers need to excel 
as risk managers – knowing what could go wrong and prepare for the worst that is yet to come. 
In part it involves building the buffers to prepare for the unexpected events before they happen. 
When  I  am  asked  the  question  about  how  we  are  going  to  manage  ‘the  lift  off’  –  the 
normalisation of interest rate by the Federal Reserve in the United States – my response is 
that it is not what we will do now but what we have done before it happens that will see us 
through this period. It is not only the buffers that have been built but also the capability that 
has been developed that will better allow us to intermediate and thus absorb the shock. This 
will enable us to withstand the volatile financial flows that are already occurring in anticipation 
of this eventuality. 
Sometimes there are also Black Swan events. These are defined as those developments that 
have a low probability of happening and that is difficult to predict and anticipate. Being paranoid 
and building the resilience against such shocks will contain its damaging effects. Therefore 
continuous rigour needs to be applied all the time, during the good times and the challenging 
times. Vigilance, detecting developments that could signal danger, early recognition of risks 
are all important. Also knowing how your risk profile changes over time will avoid one being 
taken by surprise. 
Central banking is therefore not for the faint of heart. It not only demands the high levels of 
energy – not just the physical energy, but that of the emotional, spiritual and the mind. When 
tested  to  the  limit,  it  is  from  these  sources  of  energy  from  which  the  strength  is  derived. 
Investing in these sources of energy will avoid its depletion. Energy should not be taken for 
granted. Then there  is  the  courage that  is  needed.  It  is derived from  your  convictions  and 
values that you hold, reinforced by your sense of purpose and what motivates you. 
At the Leadership Energy Summit Asia in 2014, I spoke of having the ability to generate and 
ride on the positive cycle of leadership energy. In mobilising energies in the organisation to be 
aligned to achieving an outcome, it generates a second round of energy burst from others in 
the  organisation.  The  continuous  positive  energy  loop  provides  continuous  motivation  and 
momentum in a two way direction and intensifies energy in the organisation. It is a mutually 
reinforcing phenomenon that I have experienced in the Bank time and again. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   Let  me  conclude  my  remarks.  The  demands  on  leadership  is  immense.  In  the  current 
international and domestic environment, it also requires leadership energy that is sustainable. 
This Leadership Energy Summit will hear from the experience of successful individuals on the 
source of their energy in generating outcomes and results that have made a difference. We 
will also learn about other sources of energy from which we can tap on and strengthen. This is 
the challenge of the new generation of leaders if they will truly be able to make lasting and 
meaningful changes in their environment. 
On this note, let me wish you a highly energised Summit. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
