  Yves Mersch: A currency beyond the nation state –  the euro and its 
institutional challenges ahead 
Dinner speech by Mr Yves Mersch, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central 
Bank, at Société d’Economie Politique, Paris, 16 November 2015. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
I  am  deeply  shocked  by  what  happened  here  over  the  weekend.  Those  atrocious  attacks 
have  killed  and  wounded  hundreds  of  people.  I  would  like  to  express  my  solidarity,  my 
compassion, and my sincere condolences to the families and friends of the victims. 
Our  societies  are  founded  on  a  social  contract.  A  common  understanding  of  fundamental 
values and principles, such as democracy, the rule of law and human rights, forms the basis 
for peaceful coexistence. 
Such a social contract need not be constrained to the national level. It can also – and does – 
exist  at  the  supra-national  level.  It  is  on  this  basis  that,  in  Europe,  Member  States  share 
sovereignty, most notably as some of us share a “currency beyond the state”. 
In my remarks today, I will: 
• 
• 
first, lay out the legal scope for sharing sovereignty; and 
second, elaborate on what this means for further European integration in different 
policy areas. 
The Lisbon Treaty sets out several restrictions regarding the transfer of sovereignty from the 
national to the European level: 
• 
Sovereignty  in  the  Union  rests  with  the  Member  States.  The  Union  owes  its 
existence to the Member States, as they confer competences on the Union in order 
to  attain  common  objectives  (Article  1  of  the  Treaty  on  the  Functioning  of  the 
European Union (TFEU)). 
National security remains the sole responsibility of the constituent states (Article 4 
Paragraph 2, TFEU). 
The Union is governed by the principles of subsidiarity and proportionality (Article 5 
TFEU). 
  As you can see, the letter and spirit of the Lisbon Treaty do not suggest that the EU should 
be  transformed  into  a  sovereign  state  called  Europe.  Nevertheless,  some  national 
constitutional courts saw the need to further emphasise that Member States remain viable 
and independent political entities, coining the term “constitutional identity”. 
Constitutional identity assumes that each Member State enjoys the right to democratic self-
determination  through  its  own  institutions,  in  particular  national  parliaments  elected  by  the 
people. 
However,  distinguishing  between  the  original,  constituent  power  of  the  people  and  the 
derived, constituted power of the legislator does not limit the ability to share sovereignty. 
Only  a  very  radical  interpretation  of  constitutional  identity  would  dictate  that  competences 
cannot  be  transferred  to  another  entity  without  violating  the  original  power  of  the  people. 
Such an interpretation is based on the antiquated belief that the nation state is the sole locus 
of legitimacy. 
This belief is rooted in the so-called Westphalian model of international relations. It assumes 
that only the nation state has sovereignty over its territory and domestic affairs. This model 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  refers  to  the  Peace  of  Westphalia  –  a  series  of  peace  treaties  signed  between  May  and 
October  1648  in  Osnabrück  and  Münster  (in  Germany).  These  treaties  ended  the  Thirty 
Years’ War (1618–48) in the Holy Roman Empire, and the Eighty Years’ War (1568–1648), in 
which  the  Kingdom  of  Spain,  the  Dutch  Republic,  the  Kingdom  of  France,  the  Swedish 
Empire and sovereigns of the free imperial cities were also involved. 
The Westphalian model was justified as a means to end the long-lasting wars back in 1648. 
However,  some  300  years  later,  after  two  devastating  wars,  the  dangers  of  a  warped 
understanding of patriotism, i.e. nationalism, became apparent. Overcoming the limits of the 
nation  state  was  a  precondition  for  a  peaceful  Europe.  Sharing  sovereignty  rather  than 
sacrificing it has been the preferred method of achieving this. 
Indeed,  the  European  approach  since  then  has  shown  that  democratic  states  can  share 
sovereignty in a number of policy areas without losing statehood. 
The EU has developed an identity as a union not only of Member States, but also of citizens 
establishing a model of transnational democracy with an elected, European Parliament and 
an  independent  Court  of  Justice  (the  ECJ).  EU  citizens  have  ample  reason  to  say,  as  the 
incoming President of the ECJ, Koen Lenaerts, once put it: Civis Europaeus sum.1 
The Treaty signed by Member States also confers rights to citizenship which can be claimed 
in the European courts. 
In  particular,  the  euro  area  has  shown  that  like-minded  people  and their  governments  can 
introduce,  manage  and  safeguard  a  single  currency  without  having  to  merge  into  one 
overarching  federal  state.  The  “currency  beyond  the  state”2  has  revealed  as  false  the 
widespread belief that a monetary union without a state is not viable. 
There is a broad consensus that the design and implementation of monetary policy should be 
taken  out  of  the  political  arena  to  protect  citizens’  purchasing  power  from  short-term 
temptations and pressures of the election cycle. This is why monetary policy was transferred 
to an independent institution, the ECB. 
While independent, the ECB is accountable to a democratically elected body, the European 
Parliament. Our decisions are taken at the European level. They are taken in the interest of 
Europe.  And  –  as  a  logical  consequence  –  they  are  democratically  legitimised  at  the 
European level. Currently, this democratic control includes parliamentarians from countries 
that do not share the currency of the Union, which the Treaty explicitly states as being the 
euro. 
This logic cannot, however, be directly applied to all other policy areas. 
Deciding on taxation and the allocation of budgetary expenditures is the core competence of 
national parliaments, and for good reason. Taxation mirrors the people’s preferences for the 
supply of public goods and – just as importantly  – their willingness to finance these public 
goods.  Taxation  and  the  allocation  of  budgetary  expenditures,  therefore,  requires  a  high 
degree of democratic legitimacy and parliamentary control at the national level. The concept 
of  a  European  taxpayer,  briefly  discussed  during  the  negotiations  leading  up  to  the 
Maastricht Treaty, did not end up being included in the Treaty. 
This is currently a national prerogative, but that does not mean that we should shy away from 
further fiscal integration in the long run. We just need to get it right. 
                                                
1  Lenaerts, K., Cardonnel, P., Rosas, A. and Wahl, N. (2012), “‘Civis Europaeus Sum’: from the Cross-border 
Link to the Status of Citizen of the Union”, Constitutionalising the EU judicial system, Oxford. 
2  Hoeksma,  J.  (2015),  “EU  &  EMU:  Beyond  the  2005–2014  Crises  Decade”,  Duisenberg  School  of  Finance 
(DSF) Policy Paper Series, No 51, April. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  One of the ideas currently being discussed is a euro area-wide fiscal stabilisation function. 
This function could help to better cushion the economy against large macroeconomic shocks 
that cannot be dealt with at the national level alone. For such euro area stabilisation to work, 
however,  we  first  need  a  significant  degree  of  economic  convergence  and  financial 
integration according to the Five Presidents’ Report.3 
In any case, a fiscal stabilisation function is meant to be just that: a stabilisation function. It 
should not be misused to introduce a transfer system through the back door. 
A  fiscal  stabilisation  function  could  be  managed  by  a  euro-area  treasury  that  would  be 
responsible  for  those  fiscal  policy  decisions  that  are  more  effectively  dealt  with  at  the 
European level than at the national level. 
Such a euro area treasury or finance ministry would clearly need a high degree of democratic 
legitimacy  and  strong  parliamentary  control.  Any  college  with  powers  delegated  from 
intergovernmental forums would hardly satisfy these requirements. In my view, the European 
Parliament  convening  in  euro  area  composition  would  be  the  right  body  to  undertake  this 
task. It would ensure that the actions of a European finance minister are legitimised at the 
same level at which decisions are taken. 
A high degree of democratic legitimacy also implies that a European finance minister cannot 
be  an  unelected  technocrat.  Under  the  current  institutional  framework,  he  or  she  certainly 
cannot  be  a  delegate  from  the  Eurogroup.  In  an  integrated  Union,  this  informal, 
intergovernmental body lacks its raison d’être. 
Could a delegate from the European Commission assume this position? 
In principle, yes. With the election of its President and the vetting of Commissioners by the 
European  Parliament,  the  European  Commission  enjoys  a  higher  degree  of  democratic 
legitimacy 
is 
increasingly experiencing tensions between its ever-more political orientation and its role as 
the  guardian  of  the  Treaties.  These  tensions  would  need  to  be  solved  first.  And  a 
“Spitzenkandidat” is not an elected President. 
Any such moves towards closer fiscal integration will need time. Some of them require treaty 
changes for which I currently do not see political willingness. Given the urgency of the crisis, 
the  minimum  consensus  was 
intergovernmental 
arrangements  to  increase  the  Union’s  resilience.  This  ought  to  be  a  temporary  solution  to 
avoid  tensions  of  a  political  and  legal  nature  between  community  and  intergovernmental 
institutions. 
For 
(ESM)  was  established  as  an 
intergovernmental  institution  that,  for  tasks  such  as  payments,  still  requires  prior  consent 
from national parliaments. As soon as there is political willingness to change the treaties, the 
ESM should be made a proper European institution. In the longer run the intergovernmental 
approach is a dead end. 
Let me conclude by summarising my main point. 
While legal doctrine is important and necessary, it needs to be free of ideological interference 
and must not be used for purposes that go beyond its legal nature. 
If national courts claim the right to defend national sovereign prerogatives over and above 
the  decisions  of  their  democratically  elected  representatives,  the  legal  doctrine  of 
“constitutional identity” morphs into a political question. There is then a risk that sovereignty 
becomes  an  ideological  concept.  Such  “sovereignism”  clashes  with  any  attempt  at  further 
intergovernmental  gatherings.  However, 
the  European  Stability  Mechanism 
the  Commission 
temporarily  opt 
than  various 
therefore 
instance, 
for 
to 
                                                
3 
“Completing  Europe’s  Economic  and  Monetary  Union”,  a  report  prepared  by  J.-C.  Juncker,  in  close 
cooperation with D. Tusk, J. Dijsselbloem, M. Draghi and M. Schulz, 22 June 2015. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  European  integration.  It  could  result  in  a  failure  to  complete  the  European  integration 
process. 
It  should  not  be  used  as  an  excuse  to  opt  for  intergovernmental  arrangements  where 
supranational  solutions  would  be  more  conducive  to  achieving  a  genuine  Economic  and 
Monetary Union. The European integration process has demonstrated that democratic states 
can share sovereignty in a number of policy areas without losing statehood. 
Nevertheless, we need to take into account that some policy areas do need a higher degree 
of  democratic  legitimacy  and  parliamentary  control  at  the  national  level  than  others.  This 
reasoning in no way supports those championing a national or constitutional identity. Rather, 
it illustrates the need for different approaches to the respective policy areas, especially as the 
concept of constitutional identity has not only hampered deeper integration but risks winding 
back earlier achievements. As Jaap Hoeksma, philosopher of law put it, “the transition of the 
EU from an international organisation to a European democracy has proceeded faster than 
most  euro-sceptics”  predicted;  at  the  same  time,  “the  quality  of  this  […]  democracy  [still] 
needs more improvements than euro enthusiasts tend to assume”.4 
                                                
4  Hoeksma, J., op. cit. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
