  Muhammad bin Ibrahim: Link between financial education, consumer 
protection and financing inclusion 
Closing  remarks  by  Mr  Muhammad  bin  Ibrahim,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of 
Malaysia (Bank Negara Malaysia), at the Malaysia-OECD High Level Global Symposium on 
Financial Well-Being, Kuala Lumpur, 1 October 2015. 
 As this year’s Global Symposium on Financial Well-Being comes to a close, I thought it is 
appropriate to contemplate the world surrounding us. I want to make a short remark on the 
link between financial education, consumer protection and financing inclusion. 
Financial education, consumer protection and financial inclusion is a tractable endeavor if we 
work  in  a  collaborative  manner. They  are  means  to  a  noble  end.  Properly  synchronized  it 
would  create  a  sustainable  growth  and  financial  stability,  a  prerequisite  to  continuously 
improve people’s lives. 
For the full promise of financial inclusion to be realised, financial education is a powerful tool 
to equip consumers with the financial competence to manage their finances more effectively 
and improve the overall well-being of individuals and households. It also means that financial 
education must enable consumers to liberate themselves by equipping them with the ability 
to  make  informed  decisions  thus  ensuring  their  meaningful  participation  in  the  financial 
system. The focus on strengthening the ability of consumers and businesses to use financial 
services  confidently  and  effectively  must  therefore  be  an  important  part  of  any  effort  to 
promote  financial  inclusion,  to  make  a  real  difference  to  people’s  lives  including  the  two 
billion adults globally, who still do not have access to financial services. 
The  role  of  financial  inclusion  in  supporting  sustainable  economic  growth  is  particularly 
important now, given the global economic landscape where countries continue to search for 
an engine of balanced, sustainable and long-term growth. 
Financial  inclusion  provides  low-income  households  with  equal  opportunities  to  save  and 
invest securely, borrow for productive activities and buffer against unforeseen shocks. The 
utilisation of relevant financial services improves households’ income and empowers them to 
attain  healthcare,  education  and  social  mobility,  effectively  reducing  social  and  economic 
inequality. Research (IMF) has shown that countries with lower inequality tend to have higher 
and  more  durable  growth.  There 
to  credit  spurs 
entrepreneurship and job creation, and improves the economic well-being of households. 
Inculcating financial capability and discipline so that all segments of society have the ability 
to  make  sound  decisions  regarding  saving,  use  of  credit,  investment  for  education  and 
retirement, and protection against adverse events is one fundamental way to raise financial 
well-being  for  all.  Financial  literacy  becomes  even  more  important  for  those  who  are 
financially less privileged. For households with limited resources, it becomes vital for them to 
manage the finances even more effectively to attain financial security and improve economic 
well-being. 
Improving access to finance and responsible lending by the financial institutions coupled with 
sensible and prudent use of credit by the borrowers are an imperative for the consumers and 
for the wider economy. Being financially competent can also act as the first line of defence 
against  falling  prey  to  financial  scams  or  frauds  and  abusive  selling  practices.  Indeed, 
financial  education  initiatives  complemented  by  fair  and  responsible  business  conduct  are 
not  only  essential  complements  to  financial  inclusion,  they  contribute  to  broader  financial 
stability and consequently improving the lives of members of society. 
For financial educators and policymakers, the challenge ahead is a daunting one, given the 
scope  of  the  task  and the  rapidly  changing  environment. There  has  been  no  time  like  the 
is  also  evidence 
that  access 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
present,  where  the  financial  education  and  financial  inclusion  agenda  has  risen  to  such 
prominence at the global, regional and national levels. We should seize this opportunity. 
The increased visibility of financial education and financial inclusion should at least make our 
work a little bit easier especially in securing top level commitment to advance this agenda 
and ensure better alignment among various stakeholders. 
It is in this context that the global leadership of institutions like the OECD, the Alliance for 
Financial  Inclusion  (AFI)  and  the  World  Bank  is  important  to  sustain  the  momentum  for 
greater progress and champion the financial education and financial inclusion agenda. More 
can  be  done  collaboratively  with  national  agencies  to  propagate  successful  financial 
education  strategies;  to  promote  more  effective  coordination  with  financial  inclusion  and 
financial  stability  mandates;  and  to  develop  frameworks,  tools  and  guidance  that  can  be 
adapted to local conditions. Frameworks for evaluating the effectiveness and measurement 
of financial education initiatives should be developed to avoid pitfalls that can lead to poor 
outcomes despite significant time and resources invested in many activities. 
At the regional level, consumer protection measures are being developed in tandem with the 
proposed  economic  measures  to  achieve  greater  economic  integration  under  the  ASEAN 
Free  Trade  Area.  For  the  region,  enhancing  financial  literacy  of  consumers  will  be  an 
important consideration in raising the standards for consumer protection frameworks and in 
promoting financial inclusion. I expect that this will be discussed at the ASEAN Roundtable 
which  will  take  place  tomorrow  and  I  encourage  your  active  contribution  to  this  important 
dialogue.  The  roundtable  discussion  will  provide  opportunities  for  ASEAN  policymakers  to 
share  countries’  experiences,  exchange  key  insights  on  promising  approaches  and  to 
explore  new  ideas  and  identify  opportunities  to  deepen  collaboration  at  the  regional  level. 
These  are  important  matters  as  it  enables  policy  makers  to  formulate  new  development 
policies and better strategies. 
It  has  been  a  very  productive  symposium.  The  dedication  and  commitment  expressed  by 
those who have participated so actively in the various sessions should energise and inspire 
us all to strive even harder and achieve more to improve the well-being of our communities. 
On behalf of Bank Negara Malaysia, let me take this opportunity to express our thanks to the 
OECD  and  INFE,  and  the  moderators,  speakers  and  discussants  in  making  this  event  a 
success. I would also like to thank all delegates for your active participation throughout this 
symposium.  I  hope  you  have  gained  valuable  insights  for  charting  your  own  national 
strategies for financial education. 
Enjoy the rest of your stay in Malaysia, and we look to the opportunity to welcome you back 
in the future. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
