Benoît Cœuré: Interview with CNBC Television 
Interview by Mr Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
with CNBC Television, conducted by Mr Geoff Cutmore and broadcast on 12 October 2015. 
 Since the low of 2013 it has been Germany and Spain that have been delivering slightly 
better economic data and yet, in recent weeks, what we have seen is perhaps they have 
come off the boil a little bit. Italy is still not really knocking it out of the park but doing a 
little better than expectations, and France actually surprising to the upside a little bit. 
Do  you  think  that  tells  us  now  that  the  periphery  economies  and  France  are  as 
competitive as Germany? 
Well, my first remark would be that if we look at it from an ECB perspective we don’t want to 
focus  too  much  on  the  short-term  ups  and  downs.  What  we  see  is  a  steady  recovery 
momentum in the euro area. This is being confirmed, so one month it comes from Germany, 
the other month from Italy. When you look through it you see a steady recovery momentum in 
the euro area, and that is exactly  what we want to see. And then, yes, in the periphery of 
Europe we are seeing reforms finding their way into the economy at different paces, at different 
rhythms. But yes, reforms are working, they are delivering. 
Quite a lot has been achieved since the bottom of the financial crisis and yet this doesn’t 
get talked about too much at the moment. Do you undersell that story? We’ve had the 
banking union, we’ve had all sorts of progress in the area of reforms. Does that message 
get lost when people just look at the headline data? 
Well, it’s not so bad not to be too much in the news. We do look at the discussion, we do hear 
the discussion here in Lima. And that is not really about Europe, which is good news; it shows 
that there is trust in our recovery. It is true that a lot has been done. A lot has been done from 
an institutional standpoint, the banking union in particular. A lot has been done in countries 
that  are  reforming  their  economies,  reforming  their  labour  markets,  and  we  are  gradually 
seeing it in the numbers. 
What is it though that needs to happen next for Europe to get back its confidence, to 
get back its swagger? Because, would you not agree with me, that the uncertainty itself 
is something that is undermining confidence and preventing economic activity? 
That is absolutely right: you can see it in the numbers, you can see it in the lack of investment 
that we have today in Europe. We want investment to come back and investment is about 
confidence. Investment is about animal spirits, so you need these animal spirits to gather and 
to show up. And for that, you need reforms in countries. There are very high expectations for 
Europe – people want to be in Europe, they want Europe to deliver jobs, they want Europe to 
deliver reforms. We’ve got to live up to these expectations. 
How do you deliver that message from an ECB perspective? 
Well, the first thing the ECB has to do is to just do our job, which is to bring inflation back 
towards 2% and to create an environment that makes it possible to invest and to reform. That 
environment is there now. The ECB is not going to create projects, the ECB is not going to 
create jobs. We create the environment, and the governments have to get their act together 
and  reform.  The  governments  have  to  make  tax  reforms  and  regulatory  reforms  and  instil 
confidence in the business community. 
We’ve  had  two  very  interesting  political  outcomes  recently:  Alexis  Tsipras  easily 
survived  a  no-confidence  vote  this  week,  and  we  also  have  seen,  of  course,  a  pro-
austerity  minister  return  in  Portugal.  What  do  you  think  that  tells  us  about  how 
Europeans feel about their economic future? 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Well, obviously, I don’t want to pass judgement on political outcomes. But what we can see is 
that the people of Europe understand the need for reforms. It has to be done differently in 
different countries and different environments, but there is a need for reform that is very well 
understood. 
But is it a reflection of, perhaps, people’s improving incomes or the fact that they feel 
financially better off? 
They feel better because the whole environment is better than it was only one year ago or six 
months ago. We are moving out of a crisis, and the conditions are here for recovery to kick off, 
to accelerate, and this is understood. But now people have to create the right projects, they 
have to invest and they have to create jobs. And that is not something the ECB will do or can 
do. 
Let’s talk about what the ECB can do for a moment here, because the markets are now 
very much looking at China, its impact on Germany and wider Europe and the fact that 
the Federal Reserve has delayed its interest rate increase. They are saying that these 
two issues point to the ECB ultimately having to extend its programme or indeed deepen 
it.  Do  you  think  that  those  institutions  are  making  a  mistake  by  jumping  to  that 
conclusion? 
I guess we are all in the same place here. The global economy is growing modestly and the 
euro area economy is recovering modestly. We don’t want to waste that recovery, so we have 
to be very careful. Certainly, in our judgement, in our analysis, the risks come from the outside. 
So we see a downside risk to recovery. That downside risk doesn’t come from inside the euro 
area,  it  comes  from  outside,  and  in  particular  from  emerging  market  economies.  We  are 
following this very carefully and, of course, we have got to be ready. If anything were to happen, 
we want to know what we would do. Here in Lima we are very much in fact-finding mode. We 
are listening. We are listening to Chinese colleagues, listening to the IMF very carefully. If 
anything  were  needed, we  would  need to  be  ready.  But  it  is too  early  to  pass that kind of 
judgement. 
So we shouldn’t prejudge here. I wonder if part of the reason is that there’s still a lag 
effect in the existing QE programme? 
Of  course,  we  have  only  executed,  delivered,  one  third  of  the  programme.  We  are  also 
benefiting from these lag effects of the previous measures: targeted liquidity tenders, forward 
guidance, low interest rates. It is all feeding into the economy at a slow pace, so it is certainly 
too early to measure the full extent of what we have done over the last couple of years. 
So, is it premature to start thinking about another QE programme? 
It’s premature to discuss it. But it is certainly our duty to be prepared to cope with all kinds of 
contingencies. 
The oil price has been fascinating recently. We are back at USD 50 a barrel here. So we 
are starting to ask the question whether inflation expectations are being pitched too 
low, because people are fixated on a continuation of a very low oil price. 
Inflation expectations are well on course in the long term, so the whole discussion is about how 
fast they will come back to 2%, how fast inflation will come back to 2%? The faster, the better, 
obviously, so if the oil price were to stabilise, if that gave a sense of stability and security to 
economic actors, that would certainly be good news in that picture. That 2% inflation target is 
really the encore for the whole recovery process in the euro area. It is very important that it 
comes as quickly as possible. 
But is there potentially a faster rebound out here because of what’s happening in the oil 
price? I mean if anybody’s taking a short euro position on expectations of continued 
deflationary pressure from low energy prices, should they be reviewing that position 
and thinking hard as to whether they want to take that chance? 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Well, it’s not going to change the growth outcome, the growth outlook much, but if it [a rise in 
the oil price] can bring inflation expectations in line with 2% sooner, that would certainly be a 
positive factor for the whole recovery process. 
Just one final question. We are talking about how Europe gets its mojo back, if you like, 
its swagger. Do you think credit availability and bank lending now are on a clear upward 
trajectory from here? Any reason to be concerned at all that the credit taps are starting 
to get turned off? 
No, the credit taps are clearly open everywhere in the euro area, and what we have done at 
the ECB has been very helpful. It is really finding its way to the end of the pipeline, that is to 
the corporations. Funding costs for non-financial  corporations have decreased by 75  basis 
points  over  the  last  year,  so  there’s  no  financial  obstacle  to  recovery.  The  obstacles  are 
elsewhere. It’s really about confidence coming back and animal spirits coming back. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
