   Lesetja Kganyago: South Africa’s growth performance and monetary 
policy 
Address by Mr Lesetja Kganyago, Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at the Bureau 
for Economic Research, Cape Town, 22 October 2015. 
 Introduction 
Thank you for inviting me to address you today. 
South  Africa’s  growth  rate  has  been  declining  persistently  since  the  post-crisis  rebound  of 
2011. The Bank’s 2015 forecast has GDP growth at 1,5 per cent, the lowest level since 2009. 
We expect next year to be only slightly better, at 1,6 per cent. These narrowly positive growth 
numbers  are  disappointing,  not  least  because  they  fall  well  below  the  5,4  per  cent  growth 
described  in  the  National  Development  Plan  as  the  rate  necessary  for  meaningful  progress 
against unemployment and poverty. 
I would like to talk to you today about this low growth problem – and about the role of monetary 
policy. 
Boom and bust, recovery and relapse 
It  is  perhaps  worth  reminding  ourselves  how  we  arrived  at  the  present  circumstances.  The 
current  post-crisis  era  of  low  growth  was  preceded  by  a  large  boom.  The  South  African 
economy  expanded  continuously  from  the  end  of  1998  to  the  middle  of  2008,  its  output 
increasing by almost half. Real GDP, on a per capita basis, grew from R44 000 to R54 000.1 
This  partly  reflected  marked  structural  improvements  in  the  country:  a  much  better  fiscal 
situation, a switch to inflation targeting, and South Africa opening to world trade and financial 
flows.  But,  in  the  mid-  to  late-2000s,  these  structural  improvements  coincided  with  powerful 
cyclical forces. Soaring terms of trade and robust borrowing sent growth levels to well above 
potential,  understood  as  the  rate  of  expansion  which  does  not  accelerate  inflation.  The 
economy overheated as prices for labour and capital resources were bid up and export prices 
increased continuously. Moreover, sustained growth in house prices revealed an asset price 
bubble which had developed in response to low credit costs. 
The domestic economy was on an unsustainable trajectory. Rising global food and oil prices – 
pushed  upward  as  part  of  the  commodity  price  bubble  –  added  to  domestic  inflation  and 
prompted greater efforts to slow the pace of fiscal spending growth and a tightening monetary 
policy stance.2 This acted on credit extension and started to slow lending. 
It  was  in  these  slowing  conditions  that  the  Great  Recession  hit  in  2008,  following  the 
bankruptcy of the Lehman Brothers. This was an exogenous shock; it was not obvious that it 
had much to do with South Africa, but it had a major impact on how we have had to reconsider 
the potential growth rate of the economy. What was our potential growth given the scale of the 
pre-crisis commodity and house price boom and the post-crisis collapse in global trade? What 
has  been  the  impact  of  our  electricity  constraint?  The  search  for  our  own  ‘new  normal’  has 
been  an  increasingly  difficult  problem  for  policymakers  in  recent  years  and  will  continue  for 
some time as the economy continues to adjust to the series of shocks that have hit over the 
past decade. 
                                                
1  
2   The National Credit Act also came into force at this time. 
In 2010 rands. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   When  the  crash  hit,  South  Africa  had  the  leeway  to  conduct  countercyclical  policy.  National 
Treasury  had  fiscal  space  to  keep  aggregate  demand  up  as  foreign  demand  evaporated, 
running significant budget deficits.3 The initial impact on public debt levels was low as a result 
of  the  small  fiscal  surpluses  in  the  last  years  of  the  boom.4  Monetary  policy  could  also  be 
loosened as inflation was receding rapidly: declining from nearly 9 per cent in 2007 and 2008 
to  6  per  cent  by  the  end  of  2009  and  3,5  per  cent  by  the  end  of  2010.  Vigorous  stimulus 
measures helped output rebound in 2010 and 2011, with growth rates reaching around 3 per 
cent. Other emerging markets enjoyed similar vigour, and often more. China’s growth was in 
double digits for both years. Brazil was close to 8 per cent in 2010, Russia over 4 per cent. The 
financial press was filled with speculation of decoupling: the idea that emerging markets could 
grow by themselves even if developed economies were in crisis. 
The vision  was attractive but misleading. Emerging markets were actually on the  verge of a 
slowdown.  Within  a  few  years,  China’s  growth  would  be  under  7  per  cent,  and  Brazil  and 
Russia  would  be  in  recession.  From  this  perspective,  2011  looked  like  the  last  year  of  the 
boom. But it did not seem that in real time. In South Africa, with potential growth estimated at 
4 per cent, the economy seemed to be operating below its normal level even with growth over 
3 per cent. The problem got worse from 2012 as growth fell further from this goal. The output 
gap – the accumulated distance between potential and actual growth – kept growing. 
Inflation was similarly uncooperative. We experienced breaches of the inflation target around 
the end of 2011 and the start of 2012, and again in mid-2013. The case for looking through 
these breaches was compelling. Each of them could be traced to specific supply shocks, from 
food  or  administered  prices.  The  departures  from  the  target  were  temporary.  Core  inflation 
remained within the target range. Inflation expectations were elevated but highly dispersed and 
reasonably  stable.  For  a  flexible-inflation-targeting  central  bank  facing  persistently  sub-par 
growth, there was a robust case against responding to these price developments. But that did 
not make the choice free. The policy had costs. And the benefits disappointed. 
One of these costs was shifting to a much higher level of core inflation. When headline inflation 
first  exceeded  6  per  cent,  the  top  end  of  the  target  range,  towards  the  end  of  2011,  core 
inflation was at 3,9 per cent.5 From that point, it tracked steadily upwards to a peak of 5,8 per 
cent in late 2014. It did so in line with repeated, if temporary, deviations of headline inflation 
from  the  target  range.  Headline  inflation  averaged  5,8  per  cent  between  2012  and  2014.  In 
these circumstances, it is unsurprising that other, less volatile prices adjusted to that level.6 
Another cost was the consolidation of inflation expectations around the very top of the target 
range. As I have already mentioned, average expectations have been fairly stable around the 
top  of  the  target  range  for  several  years  now.  But  focusing  on  a  simple  average  conceals 
useful  information.  Medium-term  expectations  have  converged  strongly  over  the  past  four 
years, revealing something near a consensus that South African inflation will be around 6 per 
cent over the longer term. This is not because of shocks, which cannot be foreseen with any 
clarity several years out. This is because the 6 per cent is perceived as the normal level. 
What of the benefits? 
The goal of cutting rates to historically low levels was to close the output gap as inflation was 
easing. Growth did not accelerate; it slowed persistently: from just over 3 per cent in 2010 and 
2011 to slightly over 2 per cent in 2012 and 2013, and a mere 1,5 per cent in 2014. Very low 
                                                
3   The consolidated government balance, as a percentage of GDP, moved from a surplus of 1 per cent in 2007/08 
to a deficit of 3,9 per cent in 2014/15. 
4   Over the period, total gross loan debt as a percentage of GDP rose from 26,6 per cent in 2007/08 to 46,2 per 
cent in 2014/15. 
5   Core  inflation  is  defined  here  as  headline  minus  food,  non-alcoholic  beverages  and  energy  costs,  including 
petrol. 
6   For example, services inflation has averaged 6 per cent since the beginning of 2012. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   interest  rates  did  not  encourage  rapid  credit  uptake  in  the  private  sector.  Households  were 
overextended  from  the  pre-crisis  boom.  They  benefited  from  lower  borrowing  costs,  which 
facilitated debt repayment and permitted some income to be directed to spending. But they did 
not  show  much  appetite  for  new  debt,  except  in  some  relatively  small  sectors  of  the  overall 
household credit market.7 Corporate finances have been in better shape than households’, but 
businesses also responded unenthusiastically to very low rates. Private sector investment has 
been weak.8 In fact, the strongest movements in credit to corporates have occurred over the 
past two years, during which we have gradually raised rates. 
Meanwhile, the output gap did narrow – but not because growth had picked up. Rather, it was 
because potential growth had slipped lower. And the inaccuracy of our output gap estimates 
did  not  come  as  a  surprise.  It  is  a  well-established fact that  output gaps  are  very  difficult  to 
estimate,  especially  in  real  time.  The  phenomenon  itself  is  unobserved.  There  is  no  single, 
agreed  method  for  its  determination,  and  competing  methods  yield  varying  results.  So 
policymakers do not accept output gap estimates uncritically. 
In  real  time,  we  thought  in  late  2013  that  the  output  gap  may  have  widened  to  as  much 
as -3,5 per  cent.  Since then,  we  have  repeatedly  re-estimated  the gap. Our  latest measures 
suggest that the gap may have been closer to –0,5 per cent at that time in late 2013. 
An intensifying slowdown 
This  background  matters  as  we  contemplate  the  accumulating  evidence  of  a  further  growth 
slowdown, both in the world economy and domestically. 
In China, there are new fears of worsening growth. Of course, we have known for some time 
that China had to slow from double-digit growth rates. We have also known that it was unlikely 
to  need  continually  expanding  quantities  of  commodities,  particularly  industrial  commodities 
such as coal, iron and copper. What we have not known is whether this slowdown would be 
abrupt  or  gentle.  Market  assessments  have  recently  shifted,  to  some  extent,  away  from  the 
benign,  gradual  scenario.  Commodity  prices  have  tumbled  as  a  result;  the  Bloomberg 
commodity index fell to levels last seen during the Great Recession in 2008. 
There  were  two  triggers  for  this  shift.  One  was  the  inflation  and  subsequent  collapse  of  the 
Shanghai stock exchange bubble. The second was a devaluation of the renminbi. Exactly what 
these events mean for China’s growth trajectory remains unclear. The IMF’s forecasts have not 
changed from the April to the October edition of the World Economic Outlook: 6,8 per cent for 
2015 and 6,3 per cent for 2016. Bloomberg consensus forecasts have finally edged down, in 
the third quarter of the year, with the median for 2015 now at 6,8 per cent and for 2016 now at 
6,5  per  cent.  That  median,  however,  was  constant  throughout  the  period  of  market  turmoil, 
suggesting that markets remain unsure of the GDP data. It is often argued that forecasts for 
China’s economic growth remain anchored at too high a level. The debate is very active. It is 
even possible that the data are understating growth by undercounting the services sector and 
overemphasising the industrial sector, which is plagued by overcapacity. All we really know is 
that uncertainty over China’s prospects spiked in the second half of this year. Along with falling 
commodity  prices,  this  has  fuelled  speculation  about  a  possible  third  chapter  to  the  world 
economic crisis, with emerging markets taking their turn after the US and the UK, in 2009, and 
the euro area, in 2011. 
These events also affect the advanced economies. The US Federal Reserve declined to raise 
the  Fed  Funds  Rate  recently,  despite  repeated  signals  that  this  course  of  action  was  likely. 
Two  Fed  governors  have  since  publicly  suggested  that  rates  will  not  rise  at  all  in  2015, 
                                                
7   Household debt to disposable income remains relatively high, at around 78 per cent. 
8   Since mid-2010, private sector investment has averaged 3,1 per cent – a full 6 percentage points lower than its 
2001–2008 average. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   although rising rates remains the baseline expectation.9 Headline CPI inflation was once again 
negative  in  the  US  in  September,  although  this  was  once  again  seen  to  be  temporary.  The 
deflation risk is higher in the euro area, which has faced more outright deflation than the US 
and continues to have  more risks weighted in that direction. Sinking inflation forecasts have 
prompted a renewed discussion of the possibility of expanding Frankfurt’s programme of asset 
purchases. The fact that the Fed cannot raise rates yet is a sign of global weakness and the 
European Central Bank must do even more quantitative easing. 
Domestic news have also been discouraging. The FNB/BER Consumer Confidence Index is at 
Great Recession levels. The Barclays PMI has spent much of the year below the neutral level 
of  50,  including  through  August  and  September.  Our  composite  business  cycle  leading 
indicator has trended lower this year, and is now at levels last reached in late 2009. 
Unexpectedly,  the  economy  contracted  in  the  second  quarter  of  the  year,  shrinking  by 
1,3 per cent, with negative contributions from agriculture, mining and manufacturing. But this 
number should not be treated as cast in stone. GDP estimates are necessarily uncertain. We 
are often reminded of this by the US, where the practice is to release preliminary estimates of 
growth followed by second and final versions – and then sometimes a revised estimate after 
that. In the first quarter of this year, for instance, US growth was described as 0,2 per cent, 
then –0,7 per cent, then –0,2 per cent and finally – I hope – 0,6 per cent. 
Similarly, calculations of South African output are not straightforward. The second quarter of 
this year is a particularly striking example. The estimate of South Africa’s GDP growth taken 
from  the  demand  side  gave  a  different  verdict  to  the  supply-side  version.  The  demand-side 
number was positive. The gap or residual required to reconcile the demand- and supply-side 
versions was 2,2 per cent of GDP. This is very large and suggests that revisions to the second-
quarter number will be significant. 
Our forecasts, like those of others in the market, showed weak but positive outcomes for that 
quarter, and it is possible that these will turn out to be somewhat less wrong than seen at first 
sight. We do anticipate growth to be positive in the third quarter, but this is scarcely comforting. 
Growth will remain very low over the next few years. Our best judgment is that potential growth 
for 2015 has fallen all the way to 1,8 per cent. And with actual growth expected to be 1,5 per 
cent, the output gap will increase somewhat. 
Policy and the problem of stagflation 
Let me turn now to our current policy stance. In this environment of weak economic growth, we 
are sometimes encouraged, as the monetary policy authorities, to try and do more for growth. 
This  is  a  valid  and  important  contribution  to  policymaking,  so  I  would  like  to  spend  a  few 
minutes  explaining  the  monetary  settings  we  have  in  place  now  and  why  we  think  these 
settings are supportive of growth. 
The inflation outlook is not favourable. We expect headline inflation to average more than 6 per 
cent in the first and fourth quarters of next year, and just less than 6 per cent in 2017. This 
forecast faces sizeable risks, especially from currency depreciation as well as wage and price 
determination processes. With weak commodity prices and US monetary policy normalisation 
coming  closer,  we  cannot  be  complacent  about  the  exchange  rate  and  its  potential  inflation 
consequences. Furthermore, we confront medium-term inflation expectations bunched around 
the top of the target range. The risk of positive inflation shocks feeding into higher expectations 
and price setting remains very high. 
                                                
9   Lael  Brainard,  Economic  outlook  and  monetary  policy  (http://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/ 
brainard20151012a.htm), 12 October 2015; Binyamin Applebaum, “A 2nd Fed governor opposes raising rates 
this year, breaking with Yellen”, New York Times (http://www.nytimes.com/2015/10/14/business/economy/a-2nd-
fed-governor-opposes-raising-rates-this-year-breaking-with-yellen.html?_r=0), 13 October 2015 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   Were  the  forecast  more  favourable  or  were  inflation  expectations  anchored  firmly  within  the 
target range, monetary policy would enjoy greater freedom of action. If wage and price setting 
in the economy were more attuned to weak demand and the usefulness of lower inflation, we 
would have more policy space. But we do not have that space. It has been eroded trying to get 
growth  back  up  to  potential.  Now  we  have  to  contend  with  significant  risks  of  a  sustained 
breach of the inflation target range. For this reason, we entered a tightening cycle in January 
2014, which has so far brought the repo rate 100 basis points higher, to 6 per cent. The real 
rate  has  been  slightly  negative  and  is  now  about  zero,  relative  to  an  historical  real  rate 
averaging around 3 per cent. This gradual and limited rise, occurring over nearly two years, 
has shown due concern for growth while maintaining our attention on a rising inflation rate. 
Some voices say that this is a mistake: that we should let inflation go and focus on the output 
gap.  This  advice  is  problematic  on  several  levels.  As  economic  literature  has  repeatedly 
demonstrated  and  as  our  experience  has  once  again  demonstrated,  the  output  gap  is  an 
unreliable  measure.10  It  is  a  poor  guide  for  policy  at  the  best  of  times.  It  is  an  even  worse 
reason to depart from the guidelines entirely. It is possible that cutting rates would boost short-
term  growth,  but  we  saw  little  evidence  of  that  before  the  commencement  of  the  tightening 
cycle. We should also note that with potential growth so low and structural constraints binding, 
additional  monetary  accommodation  is  likely  to  generate  more  inflation.  Rigidities  in  product 
and  labour  markets  mean  insiders  would  push  wage  and  price  demands  higher,  limiting the 
gains we think could be achieved with looser policy. The stickiness of expectations has been 
particularly obvious lately,  with oil prices suppressing headline inflation all  year but medium-
term  expectations  apparently  unmoved.  Evidently,  inflation  expectations  are  not  only 
backward-looking,  suggesting  that  expectations  are  already  stickier  than  they  should  be.  A 
more sustained and general rise in inflation expectations would be difficult and expensive to 
reverse. 
By  anchoring  expectations  within  a  credible  inflation-targeting  regime,  we  prevent  inflation 
creeping higher. This is a valuable objective. Additional inflation would hurt people who lack 
the  power  and  privilege  to  protect  the  real  purchasing  power  of  their  wages  and  savings. 
Higher  inflation  is  also  a  medium-term  threat  to  competitiveness.  World  inflation  is  currently 
unusually low. A number of major economies are close to deflation. This expands our inflation 
differential with our trading partners and competitors. The floating currency offsets the problem 
but not in a reliable or permanent way. Instead, whenever nominal exchange rates stabilise, 
the inflation differential helps the real exchange rate to appreciate. 
To defend the inflation-targeting framework and emphasise the costliness of inflation is not to 
ignore  growth.  Indeed,  monetary  policy  in  South  Africa  remains  extremely  accommodative. 
Interest rates have gone up but they are not high, nor are they climbing rapidly. The repo rate 
is still close to zero in real terms. This is a low level from a historical perspective. It is also low 
compared to peer countries. Monetary policy can be so supportive of growth precisely because 
of the flexible-inflation-targeting regime. We have the leeway to look through shocks and focus 
on second-round effects. For instance, we do not need to try and control the exchange rate, a 
difficult task at which we have traditionally failed. Rather, we can respond to the potential for 
depreciation  to  feed  into  inflation,  and  specifically  wages  and  inflation  expectations.  This  is 
why, for all the shocks buffeting the economy, not least a large depreciation of the rand, we 
have adjusted the repo rate just a quarter of a percentage point this year. 
Conclusion 
South  Africa’s  growth  has  slowed  steadily  since  2011,  despite  expansionary  fiscal  and 
monetary  settings.  These  policies  were  designed  to  restore  growth  to  its  potential. 
Unfortunately,  our  potential  growth  rate  has  declined.  We  anticipate  that  growth  will  start  to 
                                                
10   See,  for  instance,  Matin  et  al.,  “Potential  output  and  recessions:  are  we  fooling  ourselves?”,  International 
Finance Discussion Papers 1145 (http://dx.doi.org/10.17016/IFDP.2015.1145), 2015 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
   improve over a two- to three-year horizon, as potential rebounds. One important change will be 
a relaxing electricity constraint as new sources of supply feed into the grid. Improving world 
growth will also tend to support the domestic economy, and it is in this context that we need to 
be sure that inflation or other obstacles do not deprive us of market access or competitiveness. 
Over  the  next  few  years,  monetary  policy  will  contend  with  high  inflation. We  are  not  in  the 
position of the major economies in Europe, North America and Asia, which are having trouble 
lifting growth and also in generating inflation. Our problems are more prosaic, and are unlikely 
to  require  major  revisions  to  the  textbooks.  In  keeping  with  the  flexible-inflation-targeting 
framework,  monetary  policy  will  be  set  to  keep  inflation  within  the  target  range  over  the 
medium term. Fortunately, the credibility of our regime will help us to do this in a way that is 
also supportive of growth. 
Thank you. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
