  Andreas Dombret: The euro area – where do we stand? 
Speech  by  Dr  Andreas  Dombret,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Deutsche 
Bundesbank, at the American Council on Germany, New York City, 4 December 2015. 
 Introduction 
1. 
Ladies and gentlemen 
Thank you for inviting me to speak here today. Attending ACG events is always a pleasure 
for me. 
“The  unity  of  Europe  was  the  dream  of  a  few.  It  became  the  hope  of  many.  Today  it  has 
become a necessity for all of us.” These words will sound very familiar indeed to anyone who 
closely  follows  contemporary  politics  in  Europe.  They  were  spoken  back  in  1954  by 
Germany’s  first  chancellor  Konrad  Adenauer  in  remarks  underlining  the  need  for  a  unified 
Europe. 
Since then, European integration has proven to be extremely successful in securing peace 
and  economic  prosperity,  but  there  have  also  been  shocks  along  the  way  which  have 
threatened all these achievements. Europe has learned its lessons. We have set far-reaching 
reforms in motion at both the national and the European level. But we’re not finished yet. 
The euro area – current challenges and recent achievements 
2. 
Structural problems in the euro area need to be tackled with “structural solutions”. Monetary 
policy, then, is not a panacea. It cannot resolve the crisis, nor can it put the euro area back 
on a solid footing. That’s something that only structural reforms can achieve. 
At this point, I would like, if I may, to say a few words about yesterday’s decision by the ECB 
Governing  Council.  First  things  first:  the  Eurosystem  staff  macroeconomic  projections 
presented  give  no  cause  for  concern  over  the  development  of  the  euro-area  economy.  In 
fact, they confirm the view that the steep drop in energy prices is supporting the recovery of 
the euro area’s economy. The lower energy prices also go a long way towards explaining the 
expected evolution of consumer price inflation. 
It’s  clear  that  inflation  as  forecast  by  the  Eurosystem  staff  will  fall  short  of  the  Governing 
Council’s  price  stability  target  not  only  in  2016  but  probably  into  2017  as  well.  That’s  not 
something we should simply brush aside. But given the predominant role which the drop in 
energy prices plays in euro-area inflation and the extensive monetary policy measures that 
have already been taken –  which can entail risks and side-effects of their own – I am not 
really convinced that a further easing of monetary conditions was necessary. 
As I just said, monetary policy is not an all-purpose tool. Thus, I would like to come back to 
European reform efforts. 
Let’s look briefly at the national level. When the euro-area crisis erupted six years ago, many 
people dubbed it the “euro crisis”. However, it was not a currency crisis so much as a cocktail 
made up of one part debt crisis, one part banking crisis and a good size shot of a balance of 
payments crisis. 
A combination of hugely overambitious growth expectations, waning competitiveness caused 
by  generous  wage  settlements,  and  insufficient  financial  regulation  caused  sizeable 
imbalances to accumulate which then helped fuel the crisis. 
Hence, it is the countries themselves that need to adjust if the crisis is to be resolved. And it 
was  clear  from  the  outset  that  the  necessary  reforms  and  adjustment  measures  require 
patience.  Major  progress  has  been  made  in  the  meantime,  with  most  of  the  crisis-ridden 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  countries  having  succeeded  in  substantially  improving  the  state  of  their  public  finances. 
Current  account  deficits  have  largely  been  pared  back,  and  several  countries  are  now 
running  a  surplus.  Price  competitiveness  in  the  crisis  countries  has  also  improved 
significantly.  Unit  labour  costs  have  contracted  by  18%  in  Ireland,  5%  in  Spain,  4%  in 
Greece, and 1½% in Portugal. 
The finishing line is still some way ahead of us, but there is much to suggest that our efforts 
are paying off. But like in a marathon, the last few miles are always the toughest ones. And 
yet it is the final stretch that determines the final result. That’s why we must not falter in our 
efforts to pursue productivity-enhancing reforms which alone can provide a sound footing for 
stronger growth. 
Suffice it to say, correcting misalignments solely at the national level doesn’t go far enough. 
What we also need are structural reforms at the European level. And here, we’ve made a 
great deal of headway since the onset of the crisis. 
First,  the  rules  of  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  were  changed  and  a  fiscal  compact  was 
adopted  to  restore  confidence  in  public  finances.  Second,  a  procedure  for  identifying 
macroeconomic imbalances early on was put in place. And third, a crisis mechanism – that 
is,  the  European  Stability  Mechanism  –  was  set  up  to  act  as  a  firewall  safeguarding  the 
stability of the financial system in the euro area. 
Banking union – the SSM’s first anniversary 
3. 
On top of all this, major reforms were implemented in the European financial system itself. It 
is  now  thirteen  months  to  the  day  since  the  euro-area  countries  took  the  greatest  stride 
towards deeper financial integration since the launch of the euro. On 4 November 2014, the 
European Central Bank took charge of directly supervising the largest, most significant banks 
in the euro area – a step which erected the first pillar of a European banking union. As of 
today,  the  ECB  supervises  123  banks  which  together  account  for  more  than  85%  of  the 
aggregated total assets of the euro area’s banking sector. That makes the ECB one of the 
world’s largest supervisors. 
To me, the banking union is the most logical step to take in advancing and completing our 
monetary union. This is because the euro area’s single monetary policy relies on a deeply 
integrated and resilient financial system to be effective and efficient in pursuing price stability. 
Indeed, European financial markets were already interconnected prior to the euro crisis. But 
it  was  the  arrangement  by  which  national  authorities  were  solely  responsible  for  banking 
supervision  which  sparked  a  build-up  of  risks  that  finally  spread  across  the  entire  Union, 
gravely endangering its very existence. 
This experience gave way to an understanding that banking supervision needed to be shifted 
to the European level. That step has delivered three concrete benefits. 
First,  European  banking  supervision  enables  banks  throughout  the  euro  area  to  be 
supervised in a uniform manner and subject to the same high standards. These harmonised 
standards will emerge as national supervisors share their experiences with their international 
peers and adopt national best practices in banking supervision at the European level. 
Second, European banking supervision makes it possible to effectively identify and manage 
cross-border  challenges.  This  is  a  crucially  important  point  because  large  banks  usually 
operate in more than one country. 
Third,  switching  banking  supervision  from  the  national  to  the  European  level  will  add  a 
degree  of  separation  between  supervisors  and  the  banks they  supervise. This  will  prevent 
supervisors from handling “their” banks with “kid gloves” out of national interest. 
As  you  can  see,  we  have  placed  high  hopes  in  European  banking  supervision.  Today, 
thirteen months on from the establishment of the Single Supervisory Mechanism – or SSM 
for short – it’s time to take a first look back. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  We are already seeing the benefits of the new regime in our day-to-day business. There are 
123 mixed joint supervisory teams – or JSTs for short – for the banks directly supervised by 
the ECB. Bundesbank supervisors belong to 22 JSTs for German banks and to 12 host JSTs 
for  foreign  banks.  Such  a  cross-national  dialogue  is  probably  the  most  productive  way  to 
uncover and discuss idiosyncratic supervisory routines. 
Furthermore, a level playing field and cross-border supervision are facilitated within the SSM 
area. The European Single Rulebook and the European Banking Authority naturally have a 
part  to  play  in  this  development.  But  when  it  comes  to  the  cross-border  supervision  of  a 
banking group, institutional dialogue at the JST level has proven rewarding. In addition, the 
ECB  is  about  to  harmonise  its  use  of  roughly  100  regulatory  options  and  discretions  that 
were intended for specific national situations but which produced an inconsistent framework 
in the SSM area. 
Overall, I hear that banks consider their new supervisory counterpart to be “tough but fair”. In 
today’s  challenging  financial  environment,  I  am  inclined  to  read  this  feedback  as  a 
compliment for the SSM as a whole, that is the ECB and the national supervisors. We are 
performing two roles at once: that of a referee ensuring fair play and a level playing field, and 
that  of  a  diligent  doctor  who  makes  sure  our  patients  remain  sound  and  healthy  –  but 
prescribing a bitter pill if need be. 
It goes without saying that, for all its success, a project on the scale of the SSM won’t get 
from nought to sixty in the blink of an eye. Improving processes and cultural learning take 
time. And there is no doubt that it will be an ongoing challenge to ensure a consistently high 
level  of  supervisory  quality  that  reflects  both  banks’  individual  risks  and  their  changing 
environment. 
So  the  challenges  faced  by  the  SSM  are  multifaceted.  They  concern  transparent  and 
unbiased  processes,  timely  and  effective  decision-making,  avoidance  of  rivalry  between 
national  dogmas  and  the  promotion  of  a  cooperative  quest  for  appropriate  solutions  –  to 
name just a few. One of the SSM’s greatest strengths is its wealth of supervisory knowledge 
and  experience,  resulting  from  the  close  interaction  between  the  ECB  and  the  national 
supervisors.  It  is  our  task  to  develop  this  wealth  of  competences  in  the  most  efficient  and 
effective way. I am thus arguing, in essence, for a balanced mix of centralised stringency and 
national diversity. 
There are also some more fundamental challenges which the SSM needs to confront. First, 
one reason for launching the SSM in the first place was the need to decouple bank risks from 
sovereign risks. But the sovereign-bank nexus should not be replaced by one linking banks 
and central banks. Moreover, I am convinced that untying the Gordian knot between banks 
and  sovereigns  requires  not  just  a  pan-European  supervisor  but  also  adjustments  to  the 
regulatory treatment of sovereign exposures. I will come back to this issue a little later on. 
Second,  the  ECB  now  plays  different  roles  in  our  monetary  union:  it’s  a  microprudential 
supervisor,  a  macroprudential  watchdog  and  the  monetary  authority  all  rolled  into  one. 
Hence, banks are both the ECB’s business partners when it comes to monetary policy and 
its  supervised  entities.  I’m  not  denying  that  there  are  synergies  between  these  tasks  with 
respect to financial stability, but unintended symbioses are possible as well. It is especially 
with respect to institutions that are likely to fail that I fear that political incentives might go 
astray.  In  the  long  run,  I  therefore  call  for  a  strict  line  to  be  drawn  between  supervisory 
powers and monetary decisions. 
Meanwhile,  a  comprehensive  banking  union  has  to  comprise  more  than  just  effective 
European  banking  supervision.  The  second  pillar  of  the  banking  union  is  a  European 
resolution mechanism – the Single Resolution Mechanism – to deal with future bank failures. 
This mechanism will be in place from 2016 onwards. If push comes to shove and a bank is 
no longer viable, shareholders and creditors will be first in line to bear the resulting losses, 
with taxpayers’ money only being tapped as a very last resort. This will realign incentives and 
make the entire banking system more stable. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  That being said, I take a very sceptical view of the third pillar of the European banking union 
–  that  is,  the  European  deposit  insurance  scheme.  The  current  plans  lack  crucial 
prerequisites  for  entering  into  such  a  framework.  Even  though  the  SSM  contributes 
significantly to the stability of the European banking sector, banks’ well-being is still largely 
determined  by  national  policy  decisions.  For 
is  highly 
heterogeneous  among  EU  countries.  Moreover,  sovereign  debt  still  enjoys  preferential 
treatment  in  banking  regulation,  incentivising  banks  to  be  overexposed  to  government 
debtors.  In  such  an  environment,  a  European  deposit  insurance  scheme  would  result  in 
Eurobonds being introduced through the back door. 
instance,  bankruptcy 
law 
Capital markets union – the next step to take 
4. 
Although the European financial system is still dominated by its banking sector, Europe has 
to broaden its view beyond banks to achieve a comprehensive framework. Thus, the next big 
step for Europe will be to establish a capital markets union. Strengthening capital markets 
and integrating them across borders will deliver at least two major takeaways. 
First,  it  will  improve  access  to  funding  for  small  and  medium-sized  enterprises  especially, 
thus sowing the seeds for stronger and more resilient economic growth. 
Second, integrating capital markets across national borders will improve risk sharing. The US 
is  a  model  in  this  respect.  Here,  integrated  capital  markets  cushion  around  40%  of  the 
cyclical fluctuations among the US federal states. An additional share of 25% is smoothed 
via  the  credit  markets,  while  fiscal  policy  cushions  10–20%  of  shocks.  Altogether,  around 
80% of a given economic shock is absorbed before it can affect consumption. 
In Europe, by contrast, it is mainly credit markets that cushion economic shocks – and not 
particularly  effectively  at  that.  Altogether,  only  around  40%  of  a  given  shock  is  absorbed 
before  it  can  affect  consumption.  A  capital  markets  union  would  therefore  help  to  improve 
risk sharing in Europe and reduce the volatility of consumption. 
Last but not least, the recent crisis shed light on the real economy’s funding mix from another 
angle.  A  system  in  which  the  real  economy  relies  on  a  single  source  of  funding  will  most 
certainly run into trouble when that source dries up. 
Therefore, the objective of the European capital markets union is not to abandon bank-based 
financing  but  to  supplement  it  with  capital  markets-based  funding.  And  in  Europe  there  is 
plenty  of  scope  to  do  so.  The  European  stock  market  is  only  60%  the  size  of  its  US 
counterpart when measured in relation to GDP. Likewise, the European market for venture 
capital  is  20%  the  size  of  the  US  market,  and  for  securitisations  the  percentage  is  even 
lower. 
The capital markets union is a complex undertaking affecting many different areas, hence the 
broad range of proposals and suggested actions presented by the European Commission. 
Nevertheless,  I  firmly  believe  that  Europe  should  embark  on  the  path  towards  a  capital 
markets union to enhance the stability and prosperity of its economy. 
5. 
Conclusion 
Ladies and gentlemen 
Europe has many success stories to tell, and it has demonstrated that it is willing and able to 
adjust to economic and political necessities. We have introduced plenty of reforms and are 
now  beginning  to  reap  the  rewards.  Above  all,  major  steps  have  been  taken  to  deepen 
integration in Europe’s financial systems – in particular the continent’s banking system. 
The SSM can look back on a very successful first year indeed, and it will contribute to a more 
stable financial landscape. However, our work is far from over. Yes, the launch of the Single 
Resolution  Mechanism  is  just  around  the  corner;  but  when  it  comes  to  the  regulatory 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  treatment of sovereign debt and the capital markets union, there are still many challenges to 
resolve. 
And I am convinced that Europe will overcome them all, if only for one good reason: “The 
unity of Europe was the dream of a few. It became the hope of many. Today it has become a 
necessity for all of us”. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
