   Patrick Honohan: Debt and austerity – post-crisis lessons from Ireland 
Address by Mr Patrick Honohan, Governor of the Central Bank of Ireland, to the London School 
of Economics, London, 17 November 2015. 
Accompanying slides can be found on the Bank of Ireland’s website. 
 I am delighted to have been invited back to the LSE over forty years since I embarked on my 
PhD  studies  under  Michio  Morishima  and  Cliff  Wymer,  having  first  taken  the  M.Sc.  in 
Econometrics and Mathematical Economics anchored then by Terence Gorman and Denis 
Sargan,  ably  supported  by  up-and-coming  stars  such  as  Partha  Dasgupta,  David  Hendry, 
Steve Nickell and Amartya Sen. 
My topic then was “Uncertainty, Portfolio Choice and Economic Fluctuations”, a theme which 
has not proved irrelevant to someone involved in macroeconomic and financial sector policy 
in subsequent years! I still draw on the framework taught at the LSE in the 1970s, with its 
emphasis  on  solid  data  analysis  and  time  series  econometrics  as  well  as  attention  to 
distributional  issues  and  welfare  economics.  Certainly  all  of  this  and  more  is  needed  to 
understand  and  respond  to  the  required  economic  adjustments  that  emerge  following  a 
financial crisis. 
The challenge 
From  late  2008  the  inevitability  of  a  devastating  economic  downturn  in  Ireland,  entailing 
massive job losses and acute indebtedness difficulties, became increasingly clear. The task 
for the Irish authorities from then on was to minimise the aggregate damage and navigate 
through the coming years in such a way as to maximise the chances of a strong recovery of 
employment  and  incomes.  In  parallel  this  would  entail  choices  that  would  influence  the 
allocation of the heightened risks that had become evident as well as how the looming burden 
would be distributed. 
And recovery is under way. Having jumped from about 4 to 15 per cent, unemployment is back 
in single digits. The decline is partly attributable to migration, but job growth has also returned. 
The  Irish  downturn  hit  bottom  in  mid-2012,  and  the  recovery  since  then  has  been  solid: 
employment  grew  by  a  cumulative  7  per  cent  in  the  following  three  years.  [Three  Charts: 
unemployment and employment.] 
Origins of the Irish crisis 
The  origins  of the  Irish financial  and  economic  crisis  of 2008–12  are  well  understood. The 
strong economic performance of Ireland in the years running up to euro area membership (a 
performance  which  had  been  based  on  a  sustainable  expansion  of  competitiveness-driven 
exports) combined with the sharp lowering of interest rates at the time of entry created the 
preconditions for a property bubble, not least a subversive overconfidence in the continuity of 
growth and a complacent market-trusting regulatory and policy environment. From 2004–7, 
easily financed by the plentiful supply of international liquidity, Irish and foreign-owned banks 
advanced  vast  sums  to  Irish  property  developers  and  final  purchasers  of  residential  and 
commercial real estate at home and abroad. 
By 2007, 13 per cent of Irish workers were engaged in the country’s construction industry –
twice as many as normal – and, as the boom fed other domestic sectors, the Government’s 
tax revenue soared with swollen inflows from capital gains tax and corporation profits tax as 
well as property transaction-related receipts. The additional revenue allowed the Government 
to  lower  the  income  tax  schedule  substantially  over  the  years  (as  well  as  offering  many 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   property-investment  related  tax  concessions)  and  to  increase  social  benefits  and  public 
spending generally. 
Overall  real  GDP  growth  rates  –  previously  flattered  significantly  by  the  activities  of 
multinational corporations – were in the early 2000s being recorded at around 5 per cent per 
annum,  levels  which,  by  this  stage,  were  now  attained  largely  because of the  construction 
boom.1  
Role of bank credit 
Qualitatively similar features to the Irish boom were also in evidence in other countries in those 
years. What made Ireland distinctive was the scale of credit expansion, and the fact that a 
bank credit-fuelled property-price bubble was accompanied – yet not noticeably moderated by 
– a construction boom, exacerbating the scale of losses. 
As far as the local banks are concerned,2 it is worth recalling that their growth and their losses 
were entirely conventional and traditional in nature. For example, in contrast to the US case, 
Irish banks did not rely extensively on an “originate, package and sell” model for their lending; 
almost all of what they lent was kept on their balance sheets. And the Irish banks did not invest 
much in the notorious US-based securitisations.3  
After a record-breaking run-up to the point where Dublin residential property prices deflated by 
the CPI were about 3½ times the level of a decade before, property prices in Ireland peaked 
around the turn of 2006–7 and started falling quite sharply soon thereafter. [2 Charts House 
prices] By the Autumn of 2008, it was clear that a major economic correction was under way. 
Employment in construction was falling, with knock-on effects throughout the economy. The 
fiscal  position  was  suddenly  deteriorating.  While  there  had  been  on  average  a  general 
government surplus for the previous decade, with gross government debt shrinking to below 
25  per  cent  of  GDP  by  2007,  reliance  on  the  boom-time  revenue  sources  that  were  now 
evaporating had been so large that a sizable deficit was now emerging, augmented by the 
increased cost of social protection spending. The deficit was growing both in absolute terms 
and  especially  as  a  percentage  of  GDP,  which  was  already  shrinking  alarmingly.  Total 
Government spending jumped from 39 per cent of GDP in 2007 to 58 per cent two years later 
as measured at the time.4 Tax revenue fell by 30 per cent in the same period. While the tax 
and spending movements had the merit of being a strong automatic stabiliser – the general 
government position moved from balance to a deficit of about 14 per cent of GDP in the same 
                                                
1  
2  
Indeed these measured growth rates greatly exaggerated the degree to which sustainable income was being 
generated, given the future loan losses that were being embedded. 
In addition to the banks active in lending to domestic borrowers (and this included half a dozen foreign-controlled 
entities as well as the six main locally-controlled banks), almost half of the total assets of the Irish banking 
system on the eve of the crisis related to export-oriented banks located in what had been known as the Dublin 
International  Financial  Services  Centre.  These  included  sizable  operations  by  banks  such  as  DePfa/Hypo, 
Merrill Lynch, State Street, and Citi. Thus, to say that the Irish banking system amounted to about 8 times GDP 
in 2008 is correct, but exaggerates the size relevant to the Irish crisis by up to about half. (DePfa did fail in the 
crisis, as did a small number of other German-owned bank or nearbank entities, but the assets, liabilities and 
overall business of these entities were essentially all offshore, and their losses were not assumed by the Irish 
Government). 
3   Furthermore, there was only a modest involvement of Irish banks in explicit equity-type risk-sharing with their 
borrowers, in contrast to the case of Iceland, whose banking system imploded within days of the dramatic Irish 
guarantee of September 2008. Another contrast in pre-crisis banker behaviour with the situation in Iceland is 
reflected in the fact that, in post crisis Ireland, criminal proceedings have to date been taken only in respect of 
persons  in  one  bank.  Several  other  banks,  including  the  two  largest,  were,  however,  sanctioned  for 
administrative breaches. 
4   These are the figures as reported in 2010. The latest data give 37 and 54 per cent. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   period (and would have been 11½% in the absence of bank rescue spending), this would not 
be sustainable for long. 
Initial policy response 
Although  a  deficit  of  14  or  even  11  per  cent  of  GDP  can  hardly  be  considered  austere, 
Government had already begun a programme of fiscal adjustment in 2008, without which the 
deficit would have been even wider. The taxation of income in particular was increased, and a 
four-year  plan  of  tax  and  expenditure  changes  designed  to  restore  stability  to  the  public 
finances was under way. 
Additional  fiscal  pressure  was  emerging  from  the  banking  system.  Initially  interpreted  as 
merely part of the global liquidity tightening that emanated from the US subprime problems, 
the  Irish  banks  were  encountering  increasing  difficulties  in  rolling  over  their  international 
borrowings: maturities were shortening and the geographical spread of the providers of funds 
narrowing (Lane 2015). Eventually, at the end of September 2008, just after the bankruptcy of 
Lehman, the third largest bank (Anglo) was on the eve of being unable to meet its obligations 
when  the  Government  stepped-in  with  a  blanket  guarantee  for  the  liabilities  of  the  locally 
controlled  banks.  At  first  it  was  not  expected  by  the  national  financial  authorities  that  the 
guarantee  (which  was  copper-fastened  in  legislation)  would  entail  a  significant  budgetary 
outlay, but they had not built in any safety-first mechanism to limit the State’s exposure to the 
pig-in-poke  they  had  acquired.  It  soon  transpired  that  supervisory  awareness  of  the 
vulnerability of the banks to the property turn-down had been very limited. 
The sudden stop 
The combination of the loss of tax revenue and increased spending on social transfers with 
the emergence of a large contingent liability on foot of the bank guarantee was what created 
the vulnerability of the Irish sovereign to a sudden stop in its access to international funding. 
With market attention focused on Greece in the Autumn and Winter of 2009–10, and in the 
absence of clarity on the likely loan losses of the Irish banks, the sudden stop was somehow 
deferred. However, these conditions changed. The scale of the embedded bank losses began 
to crystallise as the larger property-related loans were purchased at a market-related “long-
term economic value” by the Government-created asset management agency NAMA. That the 
Government would have to meet either a large recapitalisation bill or an even larger cash call 
on  the  guarantee  became  clearer  in  the  third  quarter  of  2010.  With  the  ECB  reluctant  to 
envisage a long-term substitution of central bank funding for the private bank funding that was 
not  now  being  renewed  (despite  the  Government  guarantee5)  the  scene  was  set  for  an 
international rescue, engineered with the IMF and a new European lending mechanism. 
Worried  that  funding  costs  were  moving  higher  than  the  cost  of  borrowing  at  the  IMF,  the 
Government’s borrowing arm (the National Treasury Management Agency) withdrew from the 
market at the end of September 2010, hoping that conditions would improve before its sizable 
cash balances would run out in the middle of the following year. But the banks were no longer 
able to fund themselves and did not even have sufficient eligible collateral to refinance at the 
ECB’s normal operations: one-by-one they had to fall back on emergency liquidity assistance 
from the Central Bank of Ireland, a facility tolerated by the ECB only for the short-term. 
Had  the  ECB  convinced  the  market  that  the  Irish  banks  would  be  provided  with  sufficient 
liquidity for as long as needed, the Government might perhaps have been able to formulate 
and implement a renewed and deepened budgetary adjustment without the need for recourse 
                                                
5   The  initial  guarantee  had  been  for  two  years  and  as  a  result  there  was  a  large  bunching  of  maturities  in 
September 2010. The Government continued until March 2013 to offer a guarantee on new bank funding. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   to official financing. Absent such statements of support, it was clear that an IMF programme 
could not be avoided and this was negotiated in November 2010. 
Austerity and macroeconomic adjustment 
The  fiscal  plan  embedded  in  the  EU-IMF  programme  fully  recognised  the  deterioration  in 
economic  and  fiscal  conditions  that  had  occurred  since  the  Government’s  own  four  year 
adjustment programme had been launched back in early 2009. The deterioration of conditions 
at home and abroad meant that further belt-tightening would be needed, though in fact most 
of the heavy lifting had already been done in 2008–10. The new plan envisaged reaching a 3 
per cent deficit by 2015. This could have seemed a stretch to a naïve observer noting the 
recorded  deficit  of  31  per  cent  in  2010  (about  two  thirds  of  which  related  to  bank 
recapitalisation), but in fact it was more than achieved. [Chart: deficit] 
Unlike the situation with Greece, and to a lesser extent other stressed countries making fiscal 
adjustments  at  the  time,  the  Irish  programme  employed  a  realistic  set  of  macroeconomic 
spending multipliers from the outset (November 2010) and, while the forecasts did prove to be 
somewhat  optimistic  for  the  early  years  of  the  programme,  this  was  wholly  due  to 
underperformance of Ireland’s trading partners (not least in the double-dip euro area recession 
of  2012).  All  in  all,  the  programme  delivered  what  it  said  on  the  tin,  and  so  did  the  Irish 
authorities, who adopted a policy of seeking to promise only what could surely be delivered 
and then over-delivering. 
The fact that it was external macro conditions in 2011 and 2012 that underperformed what was 
projected at the outset of the Irish programme reminds us of the interdependence of European 
economies and justifies raising the question here of whether the euro area fiscal stance as a 
whole was not unduly contractionary in those years; I believe that it was. While many euro area 
governments were also concerned about the rapid rise in their indebtedness during the first 
phase of the crisis, it is easy to argue, especially given the sizable international balance of 
payments  surplus  of  the  euro  area  as  a  whole,  as  well  as  the  very  low  interest  costs  of 
borrowing, that the aggregate euro area fiscal stance  –  with fiscal consolidation of as much 
as two per cent of GDP in 2011, for example – was too tight. 
But with Ireland’s gross government debt soaring to 120 per cent of GDP by 2012, and with 
much punditry at first about the apparent attractions of a sovereign default or debt restructuring, 
Ireland’s unilateral ability to run a more relaxed fiscal stance was extremely limited. Indeed, I 
would argue that the speed of the subsequent recovery from about the middle of 2012 was 
enhanced by the way in which fiscal policy halted and then reversed the growth in the debt 
ratio. Delaying this dynamic would probably have slowed the economic recovery because it 
would  have  deferred  the  return  of  business  and  market  confidence  in  Ireland’s  financial 
stability. [Charts: debt] 
Not incidentally, it is important to bear in mind that the debt ratio figure of 120 per cent of GDP 
needs to take account of the very large difference in Ireland between GDP (which includes the 
profits of multinational corporations) and GNP. As has often been observed (IFAC, 2012) a 
more internationally comparable ratio for debt sustainability calculations would use a number 
closer to GNP than to GDP as numerator. So, comparing Ireland’s 120 with figures for other 
countries understates the relative scale of the Irish exposure.6  
Still, servicing costs are also relevant in assessing debt sustainability, and these improved 
dramatically from mid-2011, when the surcharges over cost of funds were greatly reduced in 
respect of the borrowings from the European official creditors. Repayment of most of the higher 
cost IMF borrowings in 2013 and 2014, and their substitution by market borrowings (now again 
                                                
6   On the other hand, the Irish treasury managers have operated with a sizable cushion of liquidity: this means 
that net debt has been a lot lower than gross debt. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   available  at  spreads  of  100  basis  points  or  less  above  Germany)  also  greatly  eased  debt 
servicing costs, as did the general lowering of long-term interest rates in the euro area, and 
the arrangements around the collateral seized by the Central Bank when the successor to 
Anglo Irish Bank (IBRC) was liquidated in early 2013. In the view of many, including myself, 
these servicing cost improvements made the difference between a sustainable programme 
and one which would have had to be prolonged or renegotiated. 
Q1: Should the fiscal plan built into the Irish programme have involved larger deficits? 
Could fiscal adjustment have been slowed sufficiently to reduce the employment loss without 
this simply postponing an inevitable adjustment and potentially making the long-run effect of 
the needed adjustment even worse? 
To  slow  the  fiscal  adjustment  would  clearly  have  entailed  a  higher  rate  of  primary  deficit, 
thereby contributing to the accumulation of debt. But would there have been offsetting effects, 
for  example  through  the  avoidance  of  hysteresis  in  unemployment  reducing  future 
unemployment-related fiscal  spending? What  would  the  medium-term  effect  on  the  cost  of 
borrowing have been? And what might the impact have been on capital formation and saving? 
These are not easy questions to answer. Macroeconomic models that work well through the 
crisis and recovery are hard to find, and calibration must be rather speculative. But in the range 
where  Ireland  has  found  itself,  it  is  simply  not  the  case  that  fiscal  contractions  are  self-
defeating: corrective action does work: the deficit ratio was reduced substantially and, in due 
course, the debt ratio was placed on a downward trajectory. 
I  agree  that  some  mechanisms  arguing  against  accumulation  of  debt  may  tend  to  be 
exaggerated in some quarters. The empirical growth impact of higher debt burdens is not as 
great as has sometimes been claimed. And both optimal and safe transitory levels of national 
debt are surely not insensitive to the medium term prospect for interest rates. 
Let us imagine some simple counterfactuals. Suppose the programme had envisaged a higher 
deficit path, thereby requiring the deficit to be reduced by, say, 2 percentage points of GDP 
less  than  the  actual  path  in  each  of  the  three  years  of  the  programme.  Under  such  a 
counterfactual, mechanically and assuming all other things equal, by the end of the three years 
of the programme the deficit would have been running at 6 percent of the baseline GDP more 
than it was and the debt ratio at that point would have been 12 percentage points higher. The 
somewhat higher GDP levels which might have been attained in the counterfactual (as a result 
of the higher fiscal deficit) would not have altered these ratios by much.7 Besides, GDP might 
not have been much higher despite more net Government spending: doubts about the chances 
of the Government recovering access to market financing on any reasonable terms at the end 
of  the  programme  would  likely  have  constrained  business  investment  and  household 
consumption. Undoubtedly, such a programme could not have delivered debt sustainability; 
official lenders could surely not have endorsed such a plan. 
But even if they had, could a path closer to full employment have been maintained at the cost 
of a more gradual adjustment of the deficit and accumulation of more debt? That too must be 
doubted: after all, the bulk of the peak-to-trough employment fall of 327,000 (over 15 per cent) 
had happened in the eleven quarters before the programme came into effect. Only a decline 
of 25,000 (seasonally adjusted) occurred between the fourth quarter of 2010 and the trough 
seven quarters later (chart).8  
                                                
7  
In as small and open an economy as Ireland, fiscal multipliers are small, and much of any stimulus is spent on 
imports. 
8   Unemployment had reached 14.7 per cent by the time of the programme; it peaked a little higher at 15.1 five 
quarters later. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
   Clearly, this sharp fall in employment – half of them construction jobs – in the first three years 
of the downturn would have been hard to eliminate with aggregate fiscal demand. I think we 
can rule out any Keynesian mechanism strong enough to re-employ workers who had lost their 
jobs as a result of this combination of a sectoral shock (construction) with an externally-driven 
macroeconomic demand contraction. 
Anyone wishing to assert that a significantly better aggregate fiscal adjustment path, in terms 
of  the  attained  output  and  employment  path,  than the  one  actually  negotiated  by  one  Irish 
Government – and implemented by its successor – in the EU-IMF programme of 2010 thus 
has their work cut out for them. I would go further and suggest (but not prove) that, all other 
things being equal (and I will come in a minute to the matters that might have been better not 
being  equal)  the  adjustment  path  was  close  to  the  best  available  to  Ireland.  Indeed,  the 
recovery might have consolidated somewhat faster if the Government had moved a little more 
ahead of the curve, as in my expressed opinion at the time, though there was probably not 
much in it. 
Q2: How important was the bank guarantee in creating the need for fiscal contraction? 
To be sure, in any assessment of the overall cost of the Irish boom and bust there are other 
questions that can be asked about counterfactuals that track back to earlier decisions. Most 
often discussed is the question of the bank guarantee. I have repeatedly observed that this 
guarantee was too wide and too unconditional; I will not repeat here the details of what might 
have  been  done  differently.  But,  while  it  is  often  correctly  emphasised  that  the  Irish 
Government’s  guarantee  socialised  private  bank  losses,  any  overall  assessment  needs  to 
consider a comprehensive alternative path, and not simply fixate on the direct fiscal long-term 
costs of making good on the guarantee, costs that have been variously estimated at between 
€35 and €43bn, or between 22 and 27 per cent of 2008 GNP. 
One approach is to consider a counterfactual in which Ireland would not have provided as 
extensive  an  unilateral  bank  guarantee  in  September  2008,  either  hoping  to  persuade 
European partner countries to share in the cost or risk of such a guarantee, or resolving the 
two weakest banks with heavy losses to senior bank creditors (as would be implied by the 
BRRD legislation just now coming into effect in Europe). Of course the decision makers of the 
time did not consider such options, because they did not think there was a significant risk of 
losses  on  the  scale  that  actually  occurred.  If  they  had  pursued  this  course,  it  is  clear  that 
economic  disruption  could  have  been  greater.  The  net  costs  would  have  been  lower,  but 
arguably only by a sum in single digits of billions. 
To be sure, the larger policy errors were made long before the bank guarantee. Perhaps the 
most interesting counterfactual to be considered is to imagine that the bank lending excesses 
of 2004–2007 could have been eliminated by effective bank regulation. If so, the post-crisis 
period of fiscal contraction could have been wholly avoided. (Chart) 
Inequality in boom and bust (i) income 
It’s one thing to say that aggregate economic activity was protected by the Irish Government 
as well as might be, but another to say that the income and capital losses were distributed in 
an equitable manner. 
At first sight, the situation here might not seem too inegalitarian. For example, while the Gini 
coefficient of market income jumped in 2008 and 2009 and by 2012 was still notably higher 
than  it  had  been  during  the  boom,  the  Gini  for  disposable  income,  after  taking  account  of 
income-related taxes and social payments, hardly moved and indeed reached a lower level by 
2012 than it had eight years earlier. [Charts: Gini and poverty] 
Likewise for relative poverty lines: while the poverty count (at the 50% threshold) measured on 
market income increased in the crisis; poverty rates measured on disposable income fell. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   The contrasting movements of the Gini on gross and net income reflect the degree to which 
reductions in social payments were limited in the fiscal cutback, and also the progressive tone 
of income-related tax changes in the downturn. The Irish tax-and-welfare system held relative 
poverty rates to levels comparable to those of the UK, for example, despite a much steeper 
increase in comparable market divergences in Ireland (likely reflecting the much steeper jump 
in unemployment to almost 15 per cent in Ireland by 2012.) 
Still, a proportional lowering of income surely means a more severe welfare impact on lower 
income groups. The fact that the Irish macroeconomic correction has not worsened measures 
such as Gini or relative inequality should not be interpreted as saying that the burden has been 
shared equitably. 
Inequality in boom and bust (ii) wealth 
And these income calculations do not take account of the capital losses incurred especially by 
those who had leveraged themselves near the top of the market to buy residential property 
and other assets (such as bank shares!) that subsequently slumped in price. 
There are areas of concentration. Households too uncreditworthy to have access to borrowing 
escaped this dimension of the boom and bust: this dimension to the downturn is not evidently 
correlated  with  that  of  income  changes.  Residential  property  losses  are  disproportionately 
found in certain age groups, notably those now in their late 30s and early 40s. 
Not everyone lost in the bust: after all, sellers of real estate in the boom period had a gain to 
fall back on when the downturn came. 
The first extensive household wealth survey for Ireland in over a quarter century was carried 
out during 2013 for the Central Bank of Ireland. Using this data and imputations based on 
independent sources of data on house prices and mortgage credit it is possible to quantify 
some of the main features of household wealth and indebtedness during the boom and bust. 
(Charts from Lydon et al). 
The  movements  here  are  large  but  they  affected  all  classes  of  individual  and  household. 
Attempts to measure the movements in Gini of wealth during the crisis suggest that these were 
small relative to the trend in the Gini of wealth over the previous quarter century.9  
Personal over-indebtedness 
Personal over-indebtedness remains a significant problem for many households, albeit a small 
minority.  Everyone  agrees  that  this  situation  is  suboptimal,  but  analysts  are  divided  as  to 
whether the ideal solution involved more collateral repossessions or deeper debt write-downs. 
The number of repossessions is very small if compared with the experience of the UK or US, 
for example, so we may take it that Ireland has escaped the error of levels of repossession 
that are so high as to be economically inefficient. On the other hand the banks have been too 
slow, despite sticks and carrots from the Central Bank, to recognise situations where deep 
debt  restructurings  involving  some  element  of  financial  engineering  (e.g.  split  mortgage 
solution)  would  result  in  debt  sustainability  and  better  loan-loss  performance  over  time. 
Progress has been made, but still the level of unresolved non-performing loans remains too 
high. As the economy recovers, so too will the debt servicing on some of these loans, but 
probably not as many as the banks hope. All available policy tools to improve the situation 
have been energetically deployed, but on the whole have proved somewhat lacking. 
                                                
9   Gini of wealth is estimated to have fluctuated between 0.63 and 0.65 between 2006 and 2013, whereas it was 
only 0.52 in 1987 (Lydon et al, 2015). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
   Q3: The role of international solidarity – could it have done more? 
Were some other options potentially available at the level of the European Union to reduce the 
damaging output and activity effects of the fiscal contraction, thereby potentially accelerating 
the recovery in Ireland (and why were they not implemented)? 
Ireland did lose access to the financial markets in late 2010 and would have had to implement 
a drastic and sudden fiscal contraction in the absence of international financial assistance. The 
Irish authorities were not entirely passive in the decisions about the speed of adjustment that 
would have to be implemented, but (as already indicated) they could not have negotiated a 
more gradual adjustment than actually happened. Still, perhaps other things should not have 
been equal. What factors, if implemented differently by partner countries, could have eased 
the situation and allowed a more gradual adjustment, without damaging longer term growth 
prospects? 
Financial engineering (i) bank recap – could have been profitable 
(a) 
The EU-IMF Programme as negotiated included a sum of €35 billion – about one fifth of annual 
GNP – to be provided by the Government for additional capitalisation of the banks if needed 
to meet the higher capital requirements of the programme and to cover deleveraging costs and 
more aggressive stress test assumptions that could result from a new and intensive capital 
adequacy review to be carried out in the early months of the programme. In the end, less than 
half of this €35 billion was needed – and much of what was injected in this phase will eventually 
be recovered by the Government as it sells off its stake in the three surviving banks. But would 
it not have been better for these sums to have been injected directly by the ESM directly? The 
ESM could, for example have taken an equity stake in the relevant banks, or it could have 
offered a tail-risk insurance on the banks’ assets, rather than adding to the debt overhanging 
the Government. This point was argued by the Irish authorities at the time, but received a stony 
response. 
A smaller debt overhang for the Irish Government in 2011 would surely have hastened the 
restoration  of  market  confidence,  the  recovery  of  productive  investment  and  consumption 
spending (sustaining domestic economic activity) and the recovery of the public finances. 
And the ESM could well have made a higher return on the capital injection than it has on the 
Government loan. 
(b) 
Financial engineering (ii) GDP growth-linked loan – could have enabled faster 
growth response with lower servicing at first 
The  Irish  Government  did  have  to  borrow  on  a  scale  which  threatened  debt  sustainability. 
Could the debt have been structured in a way that reduced that threat? Clearly: yes. A GDP-
growth linked loan could have substituted for part of the debt. Such a contract would have 
transformed the consequences of a slower-than-hoped recovery by limiting or eliminating debt 
servicing payments in an orderly and pre-agreed way until GDP recovered sufficiently. This 
too  would  have  accelerated  the  return  of  private  sector  confidence  and  boosted  economic 
activity. Servicing of the indebtedness would not in fact have been interrupted and here again 
the ESM could, depending on the parameterisation of the contract, have cleared a larger profit 
in a win-win result. This too was floated to an unresponsive ESM and IMF, neither of which 
had such tools available. 
Stronger EU demand policy from countries with headroom 
(c) 
Even if stressed countries like Ireland had no headroom for relaxing fiscal adjustment, this is 
not the case for the euro area as a whole. While debt ratios increased a lot during the crisis, 
they  were  still  well  away  from  a  danger  point,  not  least  when  the  low  level  of  long-term 
government bond yields on the unstressed countries are taken into account. Aggregate fiscal 
policy  in  the  euro  area  was  strongly  contractionary,  and  this  adversely  affected  stressed 
countries. The scale of the favourable demand spillover may not have been uniform or large, 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   but it would have been advantageous.10 The increase in ECB policy rates in 2011, announced 
to head-off what proved to be a short-lived, largely oil-price driven, uptick in inflation, didn’t 
help either. 
ECB promises 
(d) 
Could the ECB have prevented the need for an EU-IMF programme? Two suggestions have 
been made in this direction. One proposition is that reassuring statements from the ECB about 
the continued availability of funding for the Irish banks would have stemmed the deposit outflow 
and reduced the urgency of entering a Programme. That may be the case, but it can also be 
argued  that  attempting  to  struggle  on  with  bond  yields  at  7  or  8  per  cent  (because  of  the 
remaining concerns of the market about Government debt sustainability) would not ultimately 
have  reduced  the  burden  on  the  average  Irish  citizen  even  if  the  Government  had  indeed 
followed the same tightening of fiscal policy as it did in fact pursue. Probably a programme 
would have become inevitable within months anyway. 
The  second  proposition  is  that  the  Mario  Draghi’s  announcement  and  the  ECB’s  Outright 
Monetary Transactions (OMT) programme came two years late, and would have prevented 
the Irish crisis. This simply misunderstands the nature of OMT, which kicks in only for countries 
that are entering a programme (and is only really needed to protect the system as a whole 
when the pressure is coming on very large countries). By the way, one can recall that, even in 
2010, quite significant volumes of Government bonds of Greece, Portugal and Ireland were 
bought in the secondary market by the ECB in its SMP programme (extended in 2011 to Italy 
and Spain). 
Holders of unguaranteed senior bank debt 
(e) 
Finally I need to include the very widely discussed issue of the holders of senior bank debt. It 
is well known that the Irish Government was leaned upon in late 2010 and mid-2011 to avoid 
burden-sharing with the holders of unguaranteed senior debt in the failed banks Anglo and 
INBS. The sum involved was about €5 billion or around 3% of Ireland’s GNP. From Ireland’s 
point of view, saving even a fraction of this amount would have been a valuable contribution 
to the fiscal adjustment and the Irish authorities were, by late 2010, prepared to take the risk 
of a potential adverse effect on funding costs, especially now that the Sovereign’s financing 
was under the protection of the Programme. 
I think it’s fair to say that European decision makers subsequently had misgivings about having 
blocked this bail-in (not least when they eventually came around to the view, now embodied in 
the European bank resolution legislation, that Governments should be largely insulated from 
the costs of failing banks). This may well have influenced their willingness to acquiesce in the 
subsequent  arrangements  around  the  liquidation  of  the  relevant  institutions  in  early  2013, 
arrangements which had considerable financial advantages to Ireland. 
Restructuring and engineering 
It should be clear that bailing-in unguaranteed creditors of a failed bank is entirely different 
from restructuring of Government debt. The latter only comes into play when sustainability of 
the existing sovereign debt comes into question. Unfortunately, assessing debt sustainability 
is far from being a quantitatively precise science, with the result, I believe, that unsustainable 
situations are allowed to fester far too long, resulting in avoidable debt overhang situations. 
European  official  institutions  have  suddenly  become  among the  largest claimants  on  weak 
                                                
10   There is still room for collective action in this direction, as suggested on a modest scale by the so-called Juncker 
Investment plan of 2014. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
   sovereign Governments without having developed a sufficient methodology to deal with these 
problems. 
The sustainability of Ireland’s official debt came into question in 2010. Fortunately, European 
official  creditors  did  respond  relatively  quickly  to  this  situation  by  eliminating  the  penalty 
surcharges on the interest rates at which they lent to Ireland and extending maturities. (The 
arrangements around the bank liquidation in early 2013 also helped). 
But  the  unused  potential  of  financial  engineering  (e.g.  GDP-linked  contracts;  direct 
recapitalisation) points towards a better way of dealing with doubtfully sustainable situations. 
At debt burdens well below what would be indisputably unsustainable, official lending could 
embody state-contingent payment plans that would reduce the overhang and pre-arrange the 
response  to  unfavourable  shocks.  This  thinking  should  be  brought  to  bear  on  the  Greek 
situation: careful design of such contracts would limit the spillover to other indebted countries 
whose situation is much less acute. 
Concluding remarks: trust 
Dealing with the different categories of over-indebtedness, public or private, that emerged in 
crisis, has been far from straightforward. 
In the case of overhangs related to mortgaged principal private residences the debt is long-
term and the value of the collateral, even if low in the crisis when borrowers’ income is also 
stressed,  can  be  expected  to  recover  over  time  –  as  can  borrower  income.  These 
considerations can cause banks to be reluctant to deal conclusively with distressed mortgage 
debt (whether by repossession or by deep restructuring). This situation has proved difficult to 
resolve fully in Ireland despite energetic regulatory initiatives, some financial engineering and 
far-reaching reforms in insolvency law. 
Dealing  with  sovereign  debt,  especially  intergovernmental,  poses  even  greater  challenges. 
Official international lending in Europe is not operated by the maximiser of a social welfare 
function (of the type which I studied at the LSE four decades ago), but operates in a political 
environment  where  trust  among  senior  politicians  against  the  background  of  well-founded 
concerns about moral hazard is a decisive element. 
Distracted by the Greek crisis in 2010, financial markets woke up late to the scale of Ireland’s 
twin fiscal and banking imbalances, which the Irish authorities had already been tackling with 
fiscal  contraction,  bank  loss  recognition  and  recapitalisation.  This  delayed  recognition 
temporarily undermined market confidence and – against a background of defaultist rhetoric – 
also induced official lenders to seek to protect themselves with a programme which was unduly 
creditor-friendly  and  whose  initial  lending  terms  and  conditions  were  not  reflective  of  the 
collegiality appropriate to the European Union. 
Trust was, however, quickly restored, thanks to the credible performance of the successive 
Irish governments in the early months of the Programme, and the lending terms were soon 
adjusted. 
Trust, and the fear of moral hazard, has remained a pre-occupation of the official lenders, and 
has  inhibited  the  employment  of  more  innovative  contracts  that  could  help  restore  fiscal 
balance  with  less  damage  to  economic  performance  in  the  process.  Financial  engineering 
helped create the global financial crisis, even if it contributed little to the Irish bubble: it is time 
to use more of it to get us out of the unduly protracted tail to that crisis. 
Trust  of  the  general  public  in  the  intentions  and  judgement  of  policymakers  is  also  vital  in 
ensuring  that  society  as  a  whole  accepts  the  constraints  and  hardships  of  needed  fiscal 
adjustment.  A  patently  unfair  distribution  of  the  burden  will  not  long  be  tolerated  in  any 
democratic society. While there is plenty of room for disagreement on whether enough was 
done to shelter the most vulnerable, the Irish social safety net at least prevented any sizable 
deterioration in overall measures of inequality during the adjustment. 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
