  William C Dudley: Panel remarks at the Brookings Institution 
Remarks  by  Mr  William  C  Dudley,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve  Bank  of  New  York,  at  “The  Fed  at  a  crossroads: Where  to  go  next?”,  Brookings 
Institution, Washington DC, 15 October 2015. 
 It is a great pleasure to be here today to participate in this panel with John Taylor. I am going 
to take today’s topic – “Where to go next?” – to address the issue of how monetary policy 
should  be  conducted.  This  is  an  issue  that  is  getting  considerable  attention  among 
policymakers here in Washington, D.C. To put succinctly the question I wish to tackle: Is it 
better for policymakers to start with a formal rule as the default position, or for policymakers 
to  have  a  more  flexible  approach  that  considers  a  broader  set  of  factors  in  setting  the 
monetary policy stance? As always, what I have to say today reflects my own views and not 
necessarily those of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) or the Federal Reserve 
System.1  
To get right to the punch line, I favor a more flexible approach that incorporates a broader set 
of factors into the monetary policy decision-making process. The world is complex and ever-
changing. There are many factors that can affect the economic outlook and the attainment of 
the Federal Reserve’s mandated objectives and, thereby, the appropriate stance of monetary 
policy. 
At  the  same  time,  I  do  not  favor  total  discretion  in  which  the  monetary  policy  strategy  is 
determined in an ad hoc fashion as we go along. For monetary policy to be most effective, 
market  participants,  households  and  businesses  need  to  be  able  to  anticipate  how  the 
Federal Reserve is likely to respond to evolving conditions. That is because the transmission 
of monetary policy to the real economy depends not only on what policymakers decide to do 
today, but also on what the public anticipates that the FOMC is likely to do in the future as 
the economic outlook changes and evolves. 
Our  experience  at  the  zero  lower  bound  in  recent  years  underscores  how  important 
expectations are in influencing the effectiveness of monetary policy. Policymakers thus need 
to act in a systematic and consistent manner so that expectations are formed accurately and 
economic  behavior  can  respond  consistently  with  those  expectations.  In  my  view,  this 
consideration rules out a totally discretionary monetary policy. 
Before I critique the use of prescriptive rules in monetary policy-making, I’d like to make it 
clear at the start that the Taylor Rule (by which I mean the formulation based on John’s 1993 
and  1999  papers)  has  a  number  of  positive  attributes  that  make  it  a  useful  reference  for 
policymakers. First, it has two parameters – the long-term inflation objective and the level of 
potential  output  –  that  map  directly  to  the  Federal  Reserve’s  dual  mandate  objectives. 
Second, the Rule has the desirable feature that when economic shocks push the economy 
away from the central bank’s objectives, the Taylor Rule prescribes a policy response that 
can help push the economy back toward the central bank’s goals. Third, a number of studies 
have shown that Taylor Rules are robust in the sense that they generally perform quite well 
across a range of different assumptions about how the economy is structured and operates. 
Despite  these  attractive  features,  I  don’t  believe  that  any  prescriptive  rule,  including  the 
Taylor  Rule,  can  take  the  place  of  a  monetary  policy  framework  that  incorporates  the 
FOMC’s  collective  assessment  of  the  large  number  of  factors  that  impact  the  economic 
outlook. 
                                                
1   Jonathan McCarthy, Paolo Pesenti, Argia Sbordone and Joseph Tracy assisted in preparing these remarks. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
As I see it, the Taylor Rule has several significant shortcomings that can be detrimental to 
the attainment of the Federal Reserve’s mandated objectives. These shortcomings are not 
just theoretical; they have been very relevant to monetary policy in recent years. First, the 
Taylor Rule is not forward-looking. Its policy prescription is based on the current size of the 
output gap and the deviation of current inflation from the Fed’s objective, not on how these 
variables are likely to evolve in the future. So, in a rapidly changing environment, the Taylor 
Rule and other similar prescriptive rules will wind up being “behind the curve.” For example, 
in  the  fall  of  2008,  Taylor  Rule  prescriptions  were  well  above  the  level  of  rates  that  was 
appropriate  given  the  sharp  and  persistent  deterioration  in  the  economic  outlook  and  the 
sharp tightening in financial conditions that occurred during that period. 
Of course, many economists at that time recognized that such prescriptions would have been 
inappropriate and suggested various ad hoc modifications to the prescriptions – in fact, John 
himself suggested that modifications to his rule were appropriate at that time.2  
Nonetheless, there was no consensus about the “right” modification to the rules at that time, 
in part, because the circumstances were unprecedented and the outlook so uncertain. If the 
FOMC had been required to justify to Congress deviations from a reference rule at that time, 
I believe that this would have slowed down how we responded to the crisis and would have 
resulted  in  a  monetary  policy  that  was  not  sufficiently  accommodative.  The  consequence 
could have been a longer financial crisis and a deeper recession. 
Second, the Taylor Rule, as typically used, assumes that a 2 percent real short-term interest 
rate is consistent with a neutral monetary policy. However, a large literature concludes that 
the equilibrium real short-term rate is very unlikely to be constant, with its value affected by 
many factors, including the pace of technological change, fiscal policy and the evolution of 
financial conditions.3  
Sometimes it can be much higher than 2 percent. Presumably, this was the case during the 
late 1990s as rapid technological change lifted productivity growth. Sometimes it can be well 
below 2 percent. For example, when credit availability dried up during the financial crisis in 
late 2008, this drove down the equilibrium real rate far below 2 percent. 
More recently, the slow growth rate of the economy and the low rate of inflation are evidence 
that the equilibrium real short-term rate today is well below the 2 percent rate assumed in the 
Taylor Rule. If 2 percent really was consistent with a neutral monetary policy, then the very 
low real rates of recent years – buttressed by our large-scale asset purchases – should have 
been extraordinarily accommodative. As a result, we should have grown much faster than 
the 2½ percent pace evident over the past couple of years and seen an inflation rate much 
higher than what we experienced. This conclusion is supported by a number of more formal 
models. For example, the Laubach-Williams model currently estimates that the equilibrium 
real short-term rate is around zero percent.4  
Third,  the  Taylor  Rule  –  and  more  broadly,  any  prescriptive  rule  for  the  systematic 
quantitative adjustment of the policy rate to changes in intermediate policy  inputs such as 
real GDP or inflation – is incomplete because it does not fully account for factors that are 
crucial to how monetary policy impulses are transmitted to the real economy. Monetary policy 
                                                
2   For example, John suggested in February 2008 to lower the standard Taylor Rule prescription by 50 basis 
points to take into account the increase in the LIBOR-OIS spread at that time. See Monetary Policy and the 
State  of 
the  Committee  on  Financial  Services,  U.S.  House  of 
Representatives, February 26, 2008. 
the  Economy,  Testimony  before 
3   See James D. Hamilton, Ethan S. Harris, Jan Hatzius, and Kenneth D. West (2015), The Equilibrium Real 
Funds Rate: Past, Present and Future, working paper for U.S. Monetary Policy Forum, August. 
4   See Thomas Laubach and John C. Williams “Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest”, Review of Economics 
and Statistics, November 2003, Vol 85, No. 4, pp 1063–1070. Updated estimates available from the Federal 
Reserve Bank of San Francisco. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
affects  economic  activity  through  its  impact  on financial  conditions  –  including  the  level  of 
equity prices, bond yields, the foreign exchange value of the dollar and credit conditions. If 
the  relationship  between  the federal funds rate and  other  indicators  of financial  conditions 
were stable, then one could just focus on the level of short-term rates.5  
But, because financial conditions vary considerably relative to short-term rates, as we have 
seen in the financial crisis and its aftermath, one needs to consider developments in financial 
conditions more broadly in setting monetary policy. 
In  fact,  at  times,  when  short-term  rates  have  been  pinned  at  the  zero  lower  bound,  the 
Federal Reserve has taken actions that eased financial conditions  without changing short-
term interest rates. Such actions have included forward guidance that the FOMC was likely 
to keep short-term rates low for a long time and large-scale asset purchases that led to lower 
bond term premia. 
Now, as I said at the start, just because I don’t want to follow a rule mechanically does not 
mean that I favor the polar opposite – that is, a fully discretionary monetary policy in which 
market  participants,  households  and  businesses  cannot  anticipate  how  monetary  policy  is 
likely  to  evolve  as  economic  and  financial  market  conditions  and  the  economic  outlook 
change.  If  households  and  businesses  do  not  have  a  good  notion  of  how  the  Federal 
Reserve will respond to changing economic and financial market conditions, then this would 
loosen the linkage between short-term rates and financial conditions. This would also likely 
lead to greater uncertainty about the outlook and higher risk premia, and it  would make it 
more difficult for policymakers to attain their objectives. 
Instead,  what  I  favor  is  a  careful  elucidation  of  those  factors  that  influence  the  economic 
outlook and how monetary policy is likely to respond to changes in the outlook. This includes 
fiscal policy, productivity growth, the international outlook and financial conditions, as well as 
how much employment and inflation deviate from the Fed’s objectives. By conducting policy 
in a transparent way and communicating what is important in determining the central bank’s 
reaction function, I think policymakers can strike the best balance between a monetary policy 
that fully incorporates the complexity of the world as it is, while, at the same time, retaining 
considerable clarity about how the FOMC is likely to respond to changing circumstances. A 
formal  policy  rule  such  as  the  Taylor  Rule  misses  this  balance  by  going  too  far  in  one 
direction. 
What  is  important  for  attaining  the  Federal  Reserve’s  mandated  objectives  is  not  that 
monetary policy is described in terms of a formal prescriptive rule, but rather that the FOMC’s 
intentions  and  strategy  are  well  understood  by  the  public.  This  argues  for  clear 
communication through the FOMC meeting statements and minutes, the FOMC’s statement 
concerning  its  longer-term  goals  and  monetary  policy  strategy,  the  Chair’s  FOMC  press 
conferences and testimonies before Congress, and speeches by the Chair and other FOMC 
participants.  But  it  also  is  important  that  the  strategy  be  the  “right”  reaction  function.  This 
means  a  policy  approach  that  responds  appropriately  to  important factors  beyond  the  two 
parameters of the Taylor Rule – the output gap estimate and the rate of inflation. 
Thank you for your kind attention. 
 
                                                
5   An  analogy  can  be  made  to  the  applicability  of  a  Friedman  k-percent  monetary  aggregate  rule.  Just  as  a 
k-percent  rule  requires  a  stable  relationship  between  a  monetary  aggregate  and  nominal  GDP  (i.e.,  stable 
money velocity), a Taylor Rule needs a stable relationship between the policy rate and financial conditions. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
