  Fabio Panetta: Micro and macroprudential supervision in the euro area 
Introductory  remarks  by  Mr  Fabio  Panetta,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Italy,  at  the 
conference  “Micro  and Macroprudential  Supervision  in  the  Euro  Area”, Università  Cattolica 
del Sacro Cuore, Milan, 24 November 2015. 
 1. 
I  am  pleased  to  welcome  you  all  to  today’s  conference  on  micro-  and  macro-
prudential supervision in the euro area. First of all, let me voice my warm thanks to Università 
Cattolica  del  Sacro  Cuore  for  hosting  the  event.  The  conference  focuses  on  two 
developments that are reshaping the European financial landscape: the creation of a single 
micro-prudential  supervisor  in  the  euro  area,  namely  the  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism 
(SSM),  within  the  broader  context  of  a  prospective  Banking  Union;  and  the  institution  of a 
new macro-prudential framework. 
Banking Union represents a strong, vigorous response to the financial crisis. It rests on three 
pillars:  the  SSM  itself,  a  Single  Resolution  Mechanism  and  the  harmonization  of  existing 
national deposit guarantee schemes. The idea underlying the design for Banking Union was 
to restore confidence in the European banking sector and to preserve and enhance financial 
integration. The ultimate objectives are safeguarding financial stability and ensuring efficient 
resource allocation within the euro area so as to support economic growth. 
In this context, the new macro-prudential framework definitely has a crucial role to play. The 
crisis has made it clear that a narrow focus on the soundness of individual banks can cause 
supervisors to overlook emerging threats to the stability of the entire financial system. Macro-
prudential  policies  are  designed  to  smooth  the  financial  cycle  in  both  expansionary  and 
contractionary  phases,  working  counter-cyclically  to  prevent  the  emergence  of  systemic 
risks. 
The  toolkit  available  to  banking  supervisors  is  now  larger  but  also  more  complex.  The 
incentives  of  micro-  and  macro-prudential  authorities  tend  to  be  aligned  during  economic 
expansions, but they may well diverge in downturns. When the economy is weak, it is more 
difficult to strike the right balance between micro- and macro-prudential policies. In my view, 
this is one of the main challenges that European policymakers face today. 
These  are  the  reasons  why  Banca  d’Italia,  in  its  capacity  as  central  bank  in  charge  of 
banking supervision and financial stability, has organized this conference. We have invited 
two eminent, authoritative speakers to address us on these two topics. Danièle Nouy is Chair 
of the Supervisory Board of the SSM and an experienced banking supervisor and regulator 
both in France and internationally; and Claudio Borio, Head of the Monetary and Economic 
Department  of  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements,  is  one  of  the  world’s  leading 
researchers in the field of financial stability and macro-prudential policies. 
Please bear with me, before I leave the floor to Danièle and Claudio, for a few introductory 
remarks on the topics of the conference. 
2. 
Since its inception, one year ago, the SSM has made remarkable progress. Within 
the span of just months, a sketchy organization chart has been converted into a fully-fledged 
institution,  with  over  a 
from  different  countries  and  varied 
backgrounds.  The  SSM  has  developed  quickly  into  an  integrated  system  based  on  close 
cooperation  between  the  European  Central  Bank  and  national  supervisors.  Together, 
throughout  the  year  we  have  been  dealing  with  both  bank-specific  and  system-wide 
supervisory  issues.  A good  deal  of  effort  has  been  devoted  to  establishing the  basis for  a 
common, fair supervisory framework. 
In  its  short  life  to  date,  the  SSM  has  already  helped  in  the  stabilization  of  the  Eurozone, 
which is a prerequisite for growth. The Comprehensive Assessment enhanced transparency 
and  dispelled  doubts  about  the  resilience  of  Europe’s  major  banks. Together  with  national 
thousand  professionals 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  and European policies – above all the monetary policy measures decided by the Governing 
Council  of  the  ECB  –  the  SSM  is  contributing  to  the  normalization  of  credit  conditions  for 
firms and households. 
The important steps already taken need to be followed by further progress on several fronts. 
The overarching issue is to forge ahead towards European integration. We should not forget 
that  the  financial  crisis  was  originated  by  the  lack  of  progress  in  European  integration 
following the launch of the euro. The project for Banking Union helped to defuse the crisis 
and set the process back in motion. We must not make the same mistake twice. The process 
of integration cannot be allowed to stall again. 
Moving from broad principles to more practical issues, a number of challenges lie ahead for 
the Single Supervisory Mechanism. Let me mention a few. 
a. 
The  SSM  will  need  to  establish  common  regulatory  and  supervisory  practices, 
consolidating  the  level  playing  field  and  removing  the  barriers  that  prevent  the 
integration of the European banking sector. A good instance of the effort that will be 
required to achieve this goal is the SSM’s work on options and national discretions, 
directed to overcoming the residual differences in the national implementation of the 
CRR and CRDIV rules. A public consultation on a draft text was launched just a few 
days ago. 
Reinforcing cooperation and trust among the actors involved, from the ECB to the 
National Competent Authorities, is also crucial to our success. The Banca d’Italia, 
like the other NCAs, is fully committed to the SSM. Being part of “something bigger” 
is a challenge that we already faced with the launch of the monetary union, but the 
single supervisory mechanism is if anything an even greater challenge. If they are to 
contribute  effectively  to  the  monetary  policy-making  process,  the  members  of  the 
Governing  Council  need  to  understand  the  economic  conditions  that  prevail  on 
average  in  the  Eurozone.  The  members  of  the  Supervisory  Board  have  to  make 
decisions  bearing  on  over  120  large  banks.  Considering that  before  the  launch  of 
the SSM each NCA was responsible for only a handful of these banks, you realize 
just  how  great  the  additional  analytical  effort  imposed  on  NCAs  under  the  new 
regime actually is. It will require substantial investment in human capital and deep-
going organizational changes. 
Since  its  launch,  the  SSM  has  focused  its  supervisory  action  mostly  on  banks’ 
capital  position.  Concentrating  on  the  construction  of  a  strong  capital  base  was 
fundamental  to restoring  confidence,  which  had been  severely  undermined  by  the 
financial crisis. Now that the comprehensive assessment has demonstrated that the 
European  banking  system  is  solid,  it  is  essential  to  avoid  inducing  pro-cyclical 
behaviour by banks, which would curtail lending to the economy. 
Given  that  the  SSM  covers  123  major  euro-area  banks,  its  micro-prudential 
decisions  may  have  macroeconomic  consequences.  This  poses  significant 
challenges for both micro- and macro-prudential authorities, at a time when little is 
still  known  –  in  theory  as  well  as  in  practice  –  about  the  functioning  of  macro-
prudential  policies.  There  is  broad  agreement  that  at  present  the  main  danger  to 
financial  stability  stems  from  low  real  and  nominal  economic  growth.  The  ECB’s 
programme  of  quantitative  easing  is  directed  to  countering  these  risks.  In  most 
countries  and  on  average  in  the  Eurozone,  aggregate  credit  growth  remains 
subdued. The credit-to-GDP gap – the main indicator laid down by the Basel rules 
as a guideline for activation of the countercyclical capital buffer – is well below its 
historical  average,  but  in  recent  months  we  have  nevertheless  witnessed  several 
national macro- prudential decisions that resulted in a further tightening of financial 
conditions. Naturally, there are reasons for these decisions; since a full discussion of 
these developments would take me too far afield here, let me just emphasize that 
the  decisions  are  a  good  example  of  the  complex  way  in  which  monetary,  micro- 
b. 
c. 
 2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  interact.  A  number  of 
and  macro-prudential  policy  decisions 
regulatory 
developments  complicate  matters  still  further:  to  mention  only  a  few,  consider  the 
ongoing phase-in of the capital rules, the adoption of stringent liquidity requirements, 
the introduction of the TLAC framework, and the implementation of the BRRD. 
3. 
The  question,  in  conclusion,  is  how  we  should  steer  micro-  and  macro-prudential 
tools towards the objectives of stability and growth. Our answer will be crucial for the euro 
area and Italy, where banks play a predominant role. I am sure that Danièle and Claudio will 
help us to advance our understanding of this critical issue. 
My  own  answer  is  strong,  close  coordination.  Ensuring  consistency  between  micro-  and 
macro-prudential policies – and, based on what I have just said, monetary policy as well – is 
absolutely  necessary  to  support  the  economic  recovery.  As  I  have  already  observed, 
guaranteeing a strong capital base was essential to regain full confidence in the solidity of 
the European banking system and to provide adequate financial support to the real economy. 
But capital strength cannot be the sole line of defense against the risk of bank instability; if it 
were,  the  job  of  supervisors  would  be  much  easier  than  it  is. What  is  more,  the  particular 
path by  which stronger capitalization  is attained is not a matter of indifference. Micro- and 
macro-supervisors  need  to  devise  a  balanced,  coordinated  modus  operandi.  The  best 
guarantee that such an arrangement can be achieved in the Eurozone is the institutional set-
up, which assigns macro-prudential powers to national competent authorities as well as to 
the ECB Governing Council and the SSM Supervisory Board. 
Events like this conference can certainly make a valuable contribution to the current debate. 
Thanks again to Università Cattolica, to the speakers and to all of you for your participation. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
