  Peter Pang: Diverging monetary policies, global capital flows and 
financial stability 
Opening  remarks  by  Mr  Peter  Pang,  Deputy  Chief  Executive  of  the  Hong  Kong  Monetary 
Authority,  at  the  conference  on  “Diverging  Monetary  Policies,  Global  Capital  Flows  and 
Financial  Stability”,  jointly  organised  by  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York/European 
Central Bank/Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas/Hong Kong Monetary Authority, hosted by the 
Hong Kong Monetary Authority, Hong Kong, 15 October 2015. 
 1.  
It is my great pleasure to welcome all of you to this Conference jointly organised by 
the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, the European Central Bank (ECB), 
the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas and the Hong Kong Institute for Monetary Research. 
2.  
Today’s Conference is very timely. With the US Fed contemplating an imminent lift-
off  in  policy  rates,  while  the  ECB  and  the  Bank  of  Japan  (BoJ)  are  still  preoccupied  with 
quantitative easing (QE), central banks around the world are carefully weighing the potential 
impact of the expected divergence in monetary policies on global capital flows and financial 
stability.  Financial  markets  often  move  ahead  of  the  real  economy.  We  have  seen  global 
financial  markets  tumbled  and  emerging  market  economies  (EMEs)  experienced  quite 
intense  capital  outflow  pressures  during  this  summer.  Many  would  be  interested  to  know 
whether such gyrations of capital flows and asset prices have already captured a good part 
of the adjustment process or are just a curtain raiser for even stronger threats to financial 
stability of the EMEs. 
3.  
But, don’t get me wrong. We welcome the normalisation of monetary policy in the 
US.  A  timely  and  orderly  exit  from  zero  interest  rate  policy  by  the  Fed  should  facilitate 
adjustments  of  macroeconomic  imbalances  and  help  deflate  asset  bubbles  in  the  EMEs 
which have been fuelled by excessive global liquidity since 2008. As the Fed’s balance sheet 
is  expected  to stay  elevated  for some  time  while  the  ECB  and  the  BoJ  carry  on  with  QE, 
global  liquidity  should  remain  abundant  in  the  near  term,  which  should  help  cushion  the 
impact of a Fed rate hike to some extent. 
4.  
That said, no one should safely assume that monetary policy normalisation in the 
US would be a smooth, painless process for the global economy. Even though the Fed has 
repeatedly  signalled  that  its  future  rate  hike  path  will  be  slow  and  gradual,  its  impact  on 
global  fund flows  and financial  stability  is  highly  uncertain. This  is  particularly  the  case  as 
many  EMEs  have  built  up  varying  extents  of  macroeconomic  imbalances  amid  the 
exceptionally low interest rate environment in recent years. 
5.  
To consider what may lie ahead for EMEs, it is perhaps useful to look back at past 
episodes  of  US  monetary  tightening.  On  the  positive  effects,  Fed  rate  hikes  were  mostly 
associated  with  a  pick-up  in  US  growth  momentum  which  could  benefit  EMEs’  exports, 
although we have observed that the strength of this support has weakened considerably after 
the Global Financial Crisis. But, on the other hand, a tightening of US monetary policy and 
the  resulting  US  dollar  strength  could  expose  the  macroeconomic  vulnerabilities  of  EMEs 
and potentially trigger financial instability. Experience of the Mexican peso crisis in 1994, the 
Asian  financial  crisis  in  1997,  the  Brazilian  currency  crisis  in  1999  and  the  Argentine 
economic crisis in the early 2000s clearly indicates EMEs that had accumulated significant 
macro-financial imbalances could be vulnerable during a strong US dollar cycle. 
6.  
In fact, broadly speaking, most instances of financial turbulence in EMEs could be 
considered to be some form of balance of payments crisis, which were usually preceded by 
heavy capital inflows to EMEs that led to the build-up of macroeconomic imbalances, such as 
asset price inflation, strong credit growth and current account balance deterioration. These 
problems  were  particularly  serious  in  the  past  when  some  EMEs  violated  the  “impossible 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
trinity” by pursuing at the same time, a de facto dollar peg, free movement of capital and an 
independent  monetary  policy.  These  conditions  tend  to  encourage  an  accumulation  of 
significant short-term external debts in the EMEs. Eventually, a combination of US rate hikes 
and  strengthening  US  dollar  generated  momentum  for  capital  outflows  from  the  EMEs, 
exposing their fault lines and macroeconomic vulnerabilities as domestic liquidity conditions 
tightened.  Those  with  weak  fundamentals  and  significant  external  imbalances  could  face 
speculative  attacks,  sharp  currency  depreciation,  a  surge  in  value  of  their  US  dollar 
denominated debts leading to a financial crisis. 
7.  
Would  history  necessarily  repeat  itself?  Some  have  rightly  pointed  out  that  the 
economic fundamentals of Asian EMEs are now much more robust than two decades ago, 
with improved current account balances and better coverage of short-term external debts by 
sizable  foreign  reserves.  And  currency  and  maturity  mismatch  in  foreign  liabilities  are  no 
longer a serious issue. Moreover, the more flexible exchange rate regimes adopted by many 
Asian  economies  should  give  regional  currencies  more  flexibility  to  adjust  according  to 
market forces and may therefore serve as a shock absorber in the case of capital outflows. A 
number of Asian EMEs, Hong Kong included, have also stepped up their macro-prudential 
measures  in  recent  years  to  tackle  the  spill-over  effects  of  the  unconventional  monetary 
policies of the advanced economies. 
8.  
There  is,  however,  no  room  for  complacency.  We  should  also  be  aware  that  the 
external  environment  has  become much more  challenging  for  Asian  EMEs  compared  with 
the 1990s. The global economy is now much weaker, meaning that EMEs may be less able 
to  look  to  support  from  external  demand  to  cushion  the  effect  of  tighter  domestic  liquidity 
conditions  along  with  US  monetary  policy  normalisation.  Concerns  over  further  economic 
moderation in Mainland China have also weakened market sentiment towards Asian EMEs 
and the strength of the region’s “pull factor” to attract global capital flows. 
9.  
More importantly, the region is now facing new risk factors that were unseen before. 
First,  while  the  Asian  region  is  once  again  awash  with  excess  liquidity,  this  time  the 
magnitude of capital inflows  is unprecedentedly  large, with an  estimated cumulative short-
term non-resident inflow of US$1.6 trillion between 2009 and 2014, according to the balance 
of payments statistics. Up to the second quarter of this year, only around US$160 billion, or 
10%  of  the  total  inflows,  have  exited  the  region.  This  would  suggest  the  size  of  potential 
capital outflows and the resulting unwinding of financial imbalances could be significant and 
disruptive.  Second, 
financial  markets  are  now  more  globalised  and 
interconnected than back in the 1990s. The impact from capital outflows could therefore be 
transmitted  more  quickly  and  widely  across  financial  markets,  as  depicted  by  the  sharp 
equity  market  sell-offs  and  currency  depreciation  across  EMEs  in  August  this  year. 
Meanwhile, the increasing presence of foreign investors in Asia’s debt markets and declining 
bond  market  liquidity  in  the  region  in  recent  years  may  also  amplify  the  impact  of  capital 
outflows in case of distress. 
10.  
With  global  monetary  policy  paths  set  to  diverge,  significant  uncertainties  and 
challenges lie ahead for advanced economies and EMEs alike. To what extent will they be 
susceptible  to  US  monetary  policy  shocks?  How  should  policymakers  better  prepare 
themselves  to  minimise  possible  disruptions  to  their  economies  and  financial  markets?  I 
hope  that  this  Conference  will  contribute  useful  insights  and  advice  on  these  important 
issues. 
11.  
the  region’s 
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
