   François Villeroy de Galhau: Climate change – the financial sector and 
pathways to 2°C 
Speech by Mr François Villeroy de Galhau, Governor of the Bank of France, at the Conference 
COP21, Paris, 30 November 2015. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen,  
This conference organised by the 2°C initiative, the Oxford Martin School and France Stratégie 
for the opening of the COP21, is a major event in which I am delighted to participate. I would 
like to make some comments on a topic that has steadily gained ground in the climate change 
agenda,  namely  the  way  central  banks  and  prudential  authorities  take  account  of  climate-
related issues.  
This is in fact a relatively new question. We were already committed as both citizens and public 
policy-makers, but monetary and prudential authorities are today concerned by three broad 
categories of risk:  
– 
Direct  physical  risks,  related  to  the  increase  in  both  the  frequency  and  the 
magnitude of extreme climatic events, which raise questions in terms of insurance 
costs.  
Liability risks, related to the financial impacts stemming from compensation requests 
from those who have suffered loss or damage due to climate change.  
Macroeconomic risks related to the transition between two production models, 
which can result in disorderly adjustments in sectors too heavily exposed to global 
warming  or  that  become  unviable  due  to  the  governments’  climate  change 
commitment.  
  In  practice,  we  already  observe  some  financial  imbalances  in  carbon-intensive  industries 
facing rising costs, disruptive technologies, and regulatory uncertainties.1 The market value of 
most carbon-intensive industries has already been impacted. And re-pricing may occur rapidly 
and abruptly.  
What is less clear at present is how we should react to such a development since the horizon 
at  which  climate  change  risks  materialise  largely  exceeds  the  traditional  horizon  of  most 
economic agents, and notably financial players. This is what Mark Carney famously referred 
to as the “tragedy of the horizon”.2  
We all agree that a higher carbon price would send the right economic signal. But we are aware 
of how difficult international decision-making is in this area. Given my responsibility, and while 
awaiting such decisions, the following questions thus arise: how to ensure that investors and 
financial  intermediaries are  aware  of their  actual  exposure  to  risks?  And  how  to  prevent  a 
misallocation of capital to carbon-intensive sectors or stranded assets?  
To address these questions, I will start by stressing that, fortunately, the financial sector 
and  civil  society  are  already  mobilised  (I).  Next,  I  will  discuss  the  need  for  public 
intervention to ensure an alignment of interests (II).  
I/ The financial sector and civil society are already mobilised.  
                                                
1   Cf. Moody’s, “Impact of carbon reduction policies is rising globally”, March 2015. 
2   Mark Carney, “Breaking the Tragedy of the Horizon – climate change and financial stability”, speech given at 
Lloyd’s of London, 29 September 2015. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   This mobilisation, which has yielded progress, appears to have occurred in three main phases.  
First, the major public financial institutions were at the forefront of this movement. This is 
the  case  for  the  European  Bank  for  Reconstruction  and  Development  or  the  Caisse  des 
Dépôts,  with  its  subsidiary  CDC-Climat.  The  European  Investment  Bank  estimates  that  it 
currently grants 25% of its loans – over EUR 20 billion per year – to “green” projects.  
Second, under the aegis of the United Nations, projects were launched such as the UNEP 
finance initiative, a partnership between the United Nations Environment Programme and 200 
financial sector institutions, which make environmental sustainability a collective responsibility, 
share  best  practices  and  establish  principles  for  green  financing.  Thanks  to  the  Montreal 
climate  change  protocol,  or  to  the  Portfolio  Decarbonization  Coalition,  signatory  investors 
commit to measuring and disclosing the carbon footprint of their portfolios. The objective is 
ambitious: reduce investment in carbon-intensive projects by several hundred billion dollars.  
Lastly, financial institutions are now making more direct commitments. French banks and 
insurance companies have recently announced that they have withdrawn their support for the 
coal industry and increased their financing of renewable energies. Paris Europlace called for 
the creation of an energy transition fund, which would be invested in by French banks, insurers 
and asset management companies, and which could in turn invest EUR 10 billion by 2020, 
with a view to financing projects to improve energy efficiency or promote renewable energies. 
This is a commendable initiative.  
II/ To best align these private initiatives with the fight against global warming, which is 
a public good, public intervention is nevertheless necessary.  
For  central  banks  or  prudential  authorities,  three  questions  arise:  that  of  financing  –and 
interaction with monetary policy–, that of information – and of disclosure–, and lastly that of 
time horizons –and stress tests–.  
The question of financing: what interaction with monetary policy?  
1.  
Climate change is likely to affect the price of goods and services. It has a direct impact on food 
prices. But it will also more generally affect growth and the allocation of resources. Against this 
backdrop,  central  banks  should  remain  vigilant  about,  and  possibly  monitor  the  economic 
consequences of climate change. And monetary policy will have to play its role of contributing 
to a smoother rebalancing of price structures, in line with its price stability mandate.  
Article 2 of the European System of Central Banks statute states: “Without prejudice to the 
objective  of  price  stability,  the  ESCB  shall  support  the  general  economic  policies  in  the 
Community, with a view to contributing to the achievement of the objectives of the Community 
[economic activities, sustainable and non-inflationary growth respecting the environment…the 
raising of the standard of living and quality of life].  
Some would like to go a step further, using the quantitative easing tool to help finance the 
energy transition, purchasing “green” assets, granting favourable treatment to green assets 
that are eligible as collateral, or setting up dedicated long-term facilities; the list of possibilities 
is long.  
However, we must bear in mind the ultimate aim of monetary policy. It is designed to achieve 
macroeconomic  objectives,  not  sector-specific  goals.  The  underlying  assumption  for  direct 
monetary policy intervention is that the central bank is better equipped than private agents to 
ensure an efficient allocation of resources. But it is not a given that central banks would have 
such an informational advantage. Quantitative easing therefore does not aim to promote some 
types of assets over others but merely to free up capacity to finance the economy. For instance, 
current  monetary  policy  encourages  investment  in  longer-term  projects,  with  better  returns 
than  government  bonds,  such  as  infrastructures  and  energy  transition.  But  with  one 
prerequisite: prudential regulations must be consistent, which may require adaptations to the 
framework laid down by the Solvency II insurance Directive. I welcome a number of recent 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   proposals promoting infrastructures made by the European Commission, which are a step in 
the right direction.  
information  disclosure  schemes. 
The information challenge: the role of disclosure  
2.  
The potential risks posed by climate change to the financial sector are complex and we have 
only just started to understand them. The most urgent need is probably better information.  
Much high-quality work has been carried out in recent years to improve disclosure on climate-
related issues. The French act on energy transition, which was enacted on 17 August 2015, 
strengthens  the  requirements  regarding  the  disclosure  and  management  of  environmental 
risks. Article 173 requires institutional investors to include environmental objectives in their 
annual reports, in particular the exposure to climate risks, by measuring the carbon footprint 
of the assets that they finance and the "green” share of these assets relative to a set of targets. 
The  implementing  decree  of  the  act,  which  is  currently  being  drafted,  will  specify  the 
information concerned and its presentation.  
From a broader perspective, we should aim at greater clarity: there are about 400 climate-
related 
formulating 
recommendations in terms of information disclosure can be a powerful instrument for ensuring 
market  discipline,  as  long  as  the  information  is  targeted  and  pertinent,  as  evidenced  by  a 
number of successful examples. At the international level, under the aegis of the Financial 
Stability  Board,  a  first  task  force  known  as  the  "Enhanced  Disclosure  Task  Force"  and 
composed of sector representatives had already issued recommendations in 2012 to improve, 
simplify and focus the communication of systemically important banks on the nature of their 
risks. At the national level, the guide on the relevance, consistency and readability of financial 
statements published by the French financial markets Authority in July 2015 is another positive 
example.  
Clarification  is  a  challenge  to  be  taken  seriously.  We  have  therefore  decided,  within  the 
Financial Stability Board and with the support of the recent G20 in Antalya, to set up very 
shortly – by the beginning of 2016 – another dedicated task force (EDTF). Its work should be 
completed within one year in order to rapidly ensure the effective disclosure on climate risk. It 
will  formulate  recommendations  for  voluntary  disclosure,  according  to  harmonised  and 
therefore comparable methods. This should enable stakeholders and the public to find out 
about the share of financial sector assets linked to carbon emissions and the sector’s exposure 
to climate risk.  
requirements  or 
Imposing 
The time horizon challenge: the gradual implementation of stress tests  
3. 
Stress testing is an integral part of risk management by financial institutions. It is particularly 
developed  in  the insurance and reinsurance sectors.  Modelling  disaster  risk  and  capital 
levels – as set out in Solvency II – takes into account some of the climate risks. But the current 
regulatory framework for banks somehow overlooks climate change as a source of risk. Yet 
this would be the way to handle the question of the time horizon. In this respect, the Act on 
energy transition provides for the submission by end-2016 of a report on the implementation 
of a scenario of stress tests representative of the climate risks for banks.  
However,  achieving  this  raises  serious  questions.  Two  approaches  are  possible.  Either 
comprehensive  stress  testing,  covering  all  risks  and  associated  asset  classes  for  financial 
institutions, which would allow supervisors to monitor the total exposure to climate risk. Or 
granular stress testing, focusing on assets that are more specifically exposed to climate risk, 
which would be more appropriate for analysing specific sectors and financing needs, such as 
the financing of the oil sector.  
Whatever the approach chosen, the main challenge would be to take account of climate risks, 
either through economic estimates that we master – such as GDP observed under stress – or 
directly  through  climate variables  –  such  as  the  rise  in  temperature  –  which  would  require 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   developing new methods and gathering new information. This, of course, would mean relying 
on  expert  judgment  on  these  issues,  in  a  context  where  financial  institutions  do  not  have 
enough experience to understand future risks. We will work on this with the ACPR and the 
public authorities concerned.  
 Understanding and analysing climate risk is essential. The regulations currently being drawn 
up – the Act on energy transition and the work of the Financial Stability Board – on information 
disclosure are useful tools to ensure that the transition to a greener economy is active and 
therefore under control. These initiatives could also contribute to making market participants 
more aware of the need to use a discount rate that is more compatible with the transition to a 
greener economy. The Canfin-Grandjean report of June 2015 also includes many interesting 
avenues.  
However, we must at the same time remain modest. We, the public authorities, do not know 
everything. And we cannot substitute ourselves for private players, whether financial or non-
financial. We need to ensure that any new requirement provides the right incentives to financial 
institutions,  gives  a  certain  degree  of  flexibility  to  the  authorities  and  does  not  create 
disincentives to make headway in the energy transition process.  
Modest,  adaptable,  yet  determined.  Because  there  is  a  battle  to  be  won  and  because  the 
current  market  signals  –  overly  low  carbon  prices  and  an  overly  short  time  horizon  –  are 
insufficient to ensure full mobilisation. There are a large number of private initiatives. But there 
is also a need for a public framework to ensure the general and lasting alignment of interests. 
We are determined to play a full part, from Basel to Paris and elsewhere. Thank you. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
