  DeLisle Worrell: Economic and financial services developments in 
Barbados 
Welcome remarks by Dr DeLisle Worrell, Governor of the Central Bank of Barbados, at the 
Domestic Financial Institutions Conference 2015, Bridgetown, 8 September 2015. 
 Welcome  everyone  to  the  annual  one  day  conference  on  banking  and  other  financial 
services for Barbadians and residents, organised by the Financial Services Commission and 
the Central Bank, in association with the Bankers’ Association and our other partners in the 
private sector. As you know the FSC and CBB host two of these conferences every year, the 
other  one  with  a  focus  on  our  international  financial  services.  (The  2015  international 
financial services conference took place on April 10). 
Today’s conference comes at a time when the economy has overcome the foreign exchange 
challenge of 2013 by the decisive budgetary adjustment taken in that year. The adjustment 
policy is a textbook example of how economies like ours should respond to foreign exchange 
market  pressure.  The  keys  to  success  are  early  detection  of  the  problem  and  swift 
implementation of tax increases and public expenditure cuts, sufficient to reduce the demand 
for  imports.  With  that  episode  behind  us,  the  focus  returns  to  measures  to  grow  the 
economy. Tourism is our main source of foreign exchange and we have had an encouraging 
revival  in  numbers  and  spending  this  year.  New  investment  is  underway  or  in  prospect  in 
hotels,  tourism  related  services,  public  utilities  and  infrastructure.  Both  in  tourism  and  in 
international  business  and  financial  services,  government  and  private  interests  are  taking 
initiatives to enhance the quality and range of our offerings, to explore new markets and to 
build the Barbados brand as the basis for our competitiveness. Quality, branding and smart 
marketing  are  also  the  key  elements  of  the  strategy  for  exports  of  food,  beverages  and 
manufactured goods. We have begun to recognise that power generation through alternative 
energy  has  the  power  to  transform  our  economy.  Now  that  we  have  made  a  start  with 
photovoltaics,  incentives  for  investment  in  green  energy  must  be  made  effective,  so  that 
investment accelerates significantly. 
The economic benefits of expansion of the foreign exchange sectors are spread through the 
society largely via small and medium enterprises. These enterprises will be the main source 
of  job  creation  in  the  near  term.  SMEs  are  also  the  wellsprings  of  innovation  and  of  the 
development of cultural and ICT services Barbados aims to sell to an international market. 
Government plays a vital role in supporting these growth promoting activities with incentives, 
and technical, financial and other support. In addition, government has the responsibility to 
secure fair access to international markets for Barbados’ competitive products and services. 
This must be achieved within a Government budget that is further reduced to a level that is 
sustainable over time. The ongoing priorities that are being addressed in this regard are: 
• 
• 
Consolidation of government functions to reduce Government expenditures; 
Measures  to  raise  the  average  levels  of  productivity,  and  to  improve  Barbados’ 
record  for  bureaucratic  effectiveness.  These  measures  will  help  to  improve 
Barbados’  international  competitiveness  and  boost  the  capacity  to  earn  and  save 
foreign exchange; 
The elimination of Government arrears of payment. 
• 
Monetary policy plays a supporting role in the Barbadian economy. The Central Bank’s target 
is  to  keep  domestic  interest  rates  in  line  with  international  trends,  taking  account  of  the 
tightness of domestic liquidity. In the current circumstances where banks have funding well in 
excess of their customers’ demand, interest rates can be expected to decline, as the fiscal 
deficit falls, arrears are paid off, and confidence in fiscal management returns to the market. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  The Central Bank’s sole policy instrument is the Treasury bill rate, which the Bank aims to 
influence via the T-bill auction. Anton Belgrave will discuss how this market has behaved, in 
his presentation to the conference this morning. 
The  Financial  Services  Commission  and  the  Central  Bank  constitute  the  Financial  Market 
Oversight  Committee  (FMOC),  which  meets  to  review  the  health  of  the  financial  system. 
Together  we  issue  the  annual  Financial  Stability  Report  and  a  mid-year  update.  This 
conference provides an opportunity for the FSC and Central Bank to explore aspects of the 
financial  system  and  new  developments  in  some  depth.  Randy  Graham  will  provide  an 
update  on  the  FSC,  and  Tamara  Hurley  will  speak  on  the  latest  guidelines  on  the 
assessment of credit risk, as we continue the ongoing process of supervisory upgrades. 
The global phenomenon of low interest rates poses a challenge for pension funds, in their 
search  for  investments  that  provide  them  with  yields  sufficient  to  meet  their  obligations 
without eroding the capital value of their assets. Charles Herbert will make a presentation on 
the trends in pension investment. 
The global concern over the action by many international banks to discontinue provision of 
financial  services  to  certain  categories  of  customer  is  something  we  cannot  ignore  in  a 
conference  of  this  kind.  Allan  Wright  will  make  a  presentation  on  this  topic.  Allan  is 
coordinating  a  Caribbean-wide  study  to  garner  information  on  the  extent  of  the  problem, 
under the auspices of the regional central bank governors. Marlon Yarde will provide us with 
information on the activities and prospects for the Barbados Securities Exchange. 
We will end with a panel on electronic commerce in which we will discuss the availability of 
electronic  payments  facilities  and  what  measures  would  be  most  useful  in  promoting 
e-commerce. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
