   Per Jansson: Time to improve the inflation target? 
Speech by Mr Per Jansson, Deputy Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank, at  Handelsbanken, 
Stockholm, 3 December 2015. 
 I would like to thank Mikael Apel for helping me with this speech. 
Since the global financial crisis, the world economy has entered an unusually uncertain and 
turbulent period. The recovery following the crisis has progressed surprisingly slowly in many 
countries, the European monetary union has been periodically exposed to major strains and 
there are currently a great number of questions surrounding the developments in China and 
several other emerging market economies, to name just a few examples. 
When a storm is raging around you, it is a major advantage to be travelling in a reliable and 
robust vessel. In terms of an economy, this often means having well-designed economic policy 
frameworks and clear and credible ground rules which provide robustness and stability. I would 
argue that the Swedish economy has been such a vessel for a long time now, and that this 
has been highly beneficial to us, both from a longer-term perspective as well as during and 
after the financial crisis.  
It is evident that the Swedish economy is currently regarded as fairly stable when studying the 
difference in long-term yields in relation to Germany. This difference has been small for almost 
twenty years, and has occasionally even been negative (see Figure 1). When compared to 
how the situation was previously, the difference is quite striking.  
Fundamental reforms after the 1990s crisis provided stability 
This is something which in many respects we can thank the crisis at the beginning of the 1990s 
for. The Lindbeck Commission, appointed in December 1992, noted that the Swedish crisis of 
the  1990s  was  not  just  a  result  of  an  unlucky  combination  of  an  international  economic 
downturn, overly generous lending and individual policy errors, but in fact had much deeper 
roots.1 In their assessment it was to a large extent a “political and institutional crisis”, which 
exposed weaknesses in the way the political system worked. What they meant by this was that 
there was an underlying “systemic error” in the Swedish economy – a built-in bias towards 
systematically  overly  expansionary  economic  policy,  which  meant  chronic  problems  with 
excessively  high  inflation,  recurring  cost  crises  and  growing  national  debt.  The  Lindbeck 
Commission therefore advocated a policy which followed certain predetermined principles, or 
a “rule-based” policy.2 
Several important institutional and structural changes were implemented in connection with 
the crisis and in the following years to create greater stability and sustainability in economic 
policy. One of the more comprehensive reforms was that monetary policy was more directly 
focused on keeping inflation low and stable, instead of, as previously, indirectly by maintaining 
a fixed exchange rate. Sweden thereby became one of the first countries to adopt inflation 
targeting. The price stability target was later written into the law and the interest rate decisions 
were delegated to an independent Executive Board. Another very important change was the 
creation of a fiscal policy framework with an amended budget process. This framework and 
the new process aimed to get a grip on the evolution of public expenditures while also leading 
                                                 
1   The Economic Commission (1993). 
2   A debate about this had been taking place for a while at that point. The Swedish Centre for Business and Policy 
Studies (SNS) had been advocating a so-called norm-based stabilisation policy since 1985, see Heikensten and 
Vredin (2012) for an overview. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
   to an average surplus in terms of net lending. The overall aim was to ensure that fiscal policy 
would have the desired long-term orientation. 
Flexible inflation targeting preferable – but improvements not ruled out 
But even though these and other changes have made the Swedish economy more reliable and 
resilient to shocks, we too have been affected by the events of the past few years. The global 
financial crisis and surprisingly low inflation have meant that a number of previously accepted 
truths have begun to be called into question, and led to a debate about whether the economic 
policy framework developed prior to the financial crisis should be modified or potentially even 
replaced.  
My view here is completely clear: it is important for us to think very carefully before we make 
any comprehensive changes to the Swedish economic policy frameworks. We know little about 
what the world will look like in the future, and we should be careful not to casually abandon 
something which has essentially worked well. It is easy to forget previous problems as time 
passes, and to take for granted that certain things are simply working. This is a dangerous 
approach, however, which can lead to setbacks. Dismantling a framework can be done quickly, 
but building one up takes a long time and often involves major adjustment costs. 
In terms of the monetary policy framework, I am convinced that the flexible inflation targeting 
pursued by  the Riksbank and most  other central banks today will continue to be the most 
effective approach for the foreseeable future. This does not mean, however, that I oppose all 
forms of change and necessarily think that everything should remain exactly as it is today. If 
we  want  something  to  endure,  we  must  be  prepared  to  change  it.  To  continue  with  the 
metaphor I used at the beginning: it is important to constantly maintain the vessel and make 
any adjustments and improvements required for it to keep functioning well, even under new 
circumstances.3  
I would today like to highlight a few areas of the Swedish monetary policy framework about 
which there are grounds to open up a discussion, based on the experiences we have gathered 
over some twenty years of inflation targeting.4 It is perhaps mainly the experiences gained after 
the financial crisis which have increased the need for a serious discussion. If this discussion 
were to eventually conclude that it is appropriate to make certain changes within the areas I 
raise, then this would not have drastic consequences for the monetary policy framework as 
such. Rather, it would mean adjustments and improvements which could be accommodated 
well within the existing framework of flexible inflation targeting. 
Before I continue, I would like to underscore one important thing: the members of the Executive 
Board always give their own views in their speeches. The ideas I express here are therefore 
entirely my own. The issues I raise are issues we in the Executive Board have discussed off 
and on, but it is an ongoing discussion and we have not yet drawn any conclusions. What I say 
here should therefore not be interpreted as the Riksbank's official view on these issues. 
I would like to highlight two aspects of the monetary policy framework – the target variable and 
a potential interval, or band, surrounding the target. 
                                                 
3  
In Canada, this work has been formalised in that the monetary policy framework is reviewed every five years. 
This results in an “Inflation-Control Agreement” between the Bank of Canada and the government. 
4   The evaluation of Swedish monetary policy by Marvin Goodfriend and Mervyn King on behalf of the Committee 
of  Finance  (Riksdagen,  2014),  which  is  assessing  different  areas  of  the  monetary  policy  framework,  will 
undoubtedly further stimulate the discussion. This evaluation will be presented in January. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
   Important to follow the international debate 
One aspect which has been debated a great deal both in Sweden and internationally, and 
which I do not intend to highlight here, is the level of the inflation target. That issue has recently 
been discussed quite thoroughly by some of my colleagues, and I do not have much more to 
add.5 I would just like to say briefly that if we are going to discuss a change in the target level, 
then I, like my colleagues, have greater sympathy for the argument in the international debate 
that central banks should raise their inflation targets than for the argument in the Swedish 
debate that the inflation target should be lowered. The main reason for this is the motive usually 
stated as the main justification for a rise – that if the target is too low, or if inflation expectations 
are permanently too low for some other reason, then the policy rate will hit its lower limit more 
often and for longer periods.6 This means that monetary policy in the future would find it harder 
to counteract a recession. However, it is too early today to draw the conclusion that 2 per cent 
is too low a level for the inflation target, and the discussion needs to continue.7 
Nor do I intend to say anything about the issue debated both in Sweden and internationally as 
to whether monetary policy should be used to actively attempt to counteract the accumulation 
of financial imbalances. I also do not intend to comment on the principally international debate 
as to whether inflation targeting really is the best monetary policy framework, or whether a 
target for nominal GDP would be preferable, for example. As I have already mentioned, I think 
that flexible inflation targeting is the preferable framework, both now and for the foreseeable 
future.  
In general, however, it is important for us to follow the fairly intense international discussion 
about how monetary policy should best be conducted. We want to avoid ending up with rushed 
and home-cooked solutions that we eventually regret and find it difficult to change. However, 
the areas I will focus on here – the target variable and a potential interval – primarily refer to 
the Swedish debate and are things that we ought to be able to change, should we wish to, 
without a risk of major negative consequences.   
The target variable 
Let  me  therefore  begin  by  discussing  the  target  variable.  Since  the  inflation  target  was 
introduced in January 1993, it has been formulated in terms of the consumer price index, CPI. 
The reason the CPI was chosen as the target variable was mainly due to the fact that it was, 
and still is, the most well-known measure of price developments in Sweden. The CPI also has 
the advantages that it includes a large part of household consumption, it is published regularly 
and has well-known statistical properties. 
However, using the CPI as a target variable has occasionally led to a number of pedagogical 
difficulties, not least in recent times. The reason for this is that household mortgage rates are 
included in the CPI. For example, when the Riksbank lowers the interest rate to bring inflation 
up, mortgage rates will fall. The short-term effect on the CPI therefore heads in the “wrong 
direction”, that is, the interest rate cut makes inflation fall further (see Figure 2). 
                                                 
5   See, for example, Skingsley (2015) and Flodén (2015). 
6   When the inflation target is very low, say, 1 or 0 per cent, inflation will vary around that level. The nominal interest 
rate will also be lower on average for a lower target. The lower the interest rate is in normal conditions, the less 
scope there is to lower it before it hits its lower limit and can no longer be used to stimulate the economy. Another 
problem with permanently low inflation is that because it has proved to be difficult to lower nominal wages in 
practice, it can be difficult to adjust real wages between individuals at a company and between different sectors. 
7   Simulations by Dorich, Labelle, Lepetyuk and Mendes (2015) using a model for the Canadian economy indicate 
that a target of 2 per cent leads to a result that is almost as good as if the target were raised to 3 or 4 per cent, 
given that the policy rate can be complemented by quantitative easing as well as active and credible supporting 
communication. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
   Major direct impact of interest rate changes makes Swedish CPI unique 
This direct impact of interest rate changes on inflation is quite unique to Sweden. The reason 
for the effect is that we include household mortgage costs in the CPI in a slightly different way 
than  most  other  countries  with  inflation  targets.  More  specifically,  we  attempt  to  measure 
households’ costs for living in an owner-occupied property, where interest expenditure is an 
important  component.8  The  CPI  is  calculated  according  to  roughly  the  same  principles  in 
Canada, for example, but in practice the interest rate changes have a much smaller impact on 
the CPI there than here in Sweden.9 In Australia and New Zealand, interest rate changes also 
previously had a major direct impact on the CPI, but the method for calculating CPI changed 
in both countries at the end of the 1990s in a way that eliminated such effects.10 They now 
apply a method which is principally based on following price developments of new housing, a 
so-called  net  acquisition  approach.  In  other  countries,  for  example  the  United  States  and 
Norway,  costs  for  owner-occupied  housing  are  approximated  to  the  cost  for  renting  a 
comparable property – and this is far less affected by interest rate changes. In the euro area 
and the United Kingdom, the target is formulated in terms of the HICP index (harmonised index 
for consumer prices) which does not include costs for owner-occupied housing, only operating 
costs.11 
As Swedish CPI inflation has this characteristic, the Riksbank has, since the introduction of the 
inflation target, calculated several different measures of inflation and has also regularly let 
inflation indices other than the CPI guide interest rate decisions. The price index which has 
played the biggest role in recent years is the CPIF, or the CPI with a fixed interest rate. Unlike 
the CPI, the CPIF is not directly affected by changes in mortgage rates. CPIF inflation, with 
energy prices also discounted at times, has functioned as a “steering” variable in such a way 
that the Riksbank has normally aimed for it to be close to 2 per cent within the forecasting 
horizon.  
Major interest rate changes lead to substantial and long-term effects on the CPI 
Despite this, the target has been formulated in terms of the CPI. As interest rates sometimes 
go up and sometimes down, the idea has been that the differences in inflation according to the 
CPI and the CPIF will level out over time. The long-run average of the two inflation measures 
will be the same, and if the Riksbank aims to stabilise CPIF inflation around 2 per cent then 
CPI inflation will on average also end up at the target. Deviations between both measures were 
not expected to be too great or lasting, and if they were to occasionally differ and CPI inflation 
were  far  below  the  target,  then  this  could  be  dealt  with  by  clear  communication  from  the 
Riksbank. So it was thought at least.  
However, even though the “long term” in this case is not so long that we will all be dead, to 
paraphrase Keynes, it is long enough for the difference between the CPI and CPIF to pose 
problems. Interest rate developments over the past few years have led to major deviations 
between the CPI and the CPIF, both upwards and downwards (see Figure 3). The period of 
cuts which began in December 2011, and which is currently the longest continuous period of 
                                                 
8   See Johansson (2015) for a description of how interest rate changes impact the Swedish CPI and a review of 
the methods used for measuring costs for owner-occupied housing in different countries.  
9   See Palmqvist (2013).  
10   See Reserve Bank of Australia (1998) and Reserve Bank of New Zealand (1999).  
11   In  2003  the  United  Kingdom  decided  to  rename  HICP  CPI.  The  EU's  statistics  office  Eurostat  is  currently 
investigating the possibility of including owner-occupied housing costs in the HICP in line with the net acquisition 
model, but it is unclear whether or when this will happen. It is worth pointing out – against the background of 
proposals of taking rising housing prices into account in the inflation measure – that changes in housing prices 
in all methods only have a limited impact on the index, or no impact at all. How monetary policy should be 
affected by changes in housing prices (or other asset prices) is therefore an issue which must principally be 
handled separately from the actual measure of inflation.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
   interest-rate  cuts  since  the  inflation  target  was  introduced,  has  contributed  to  CPI  inflation 
falling substantially below CPIF inflation and remaining near zero for three years. 
Correspondingly, CPI inflation will be pushed upwards and exceed the target when the repo 
rate approaches historically more normal levels in the future. An extremely low rate of increase 
in CPI inflation therefore tends to be followed sooner or later by an unusually high rate of 
increase, and these periods can sometimes be relatively protracted. This could look something 
like Figure 4, for example. One could say that major, protracted interest rate movements lead 
to substantial and long-term surges in CPI inflation – more substantial and long-term than we 
previously believed would be the case. 
Risk of misleading image and uncertainty about the inflation target 
This has caused some difficulties, and will likely continue to do so in the future, not least in 
terms of monetary policy communication. One problem is that the focus on CPI inflation – 
which in itself is not entirely unnatural – has led to flashy headlines in the media from time to 
time over the years about Sweden being in a state of deflation. When CPI inflation is negative, 
this is obviously correct in a purely technical sense, but the story behind the headline often 
fails to explain that it is to a large extent a result of the Riksbank lowering the interest rate, and 
that CPIF inflation typically is considerably higher. Foreign commentators in particular have 
therefore often come to the conclusion that the Swedish economy is in a highly critical situation 
and  that  the  state  of  the  real  economy  is  deflationist  as  well,  with  very  weak  growth  in 
production and employment. It cannot be ruled out either that this kind of media reporting can, 
at least to some extent, affect economic sentiment. It is of course unfortunate if this kind of 
misleading image takes hold simply because the Swedish CPI is calculated in the way it is. 
A potentially more serious problem is that even if CPIF inflation were reasonably close to 2 per 
cent, the formal target variable, CPI inflation, could be relatively far from the target for fairly 
long periods of time. Even if upward and downward deviations were to level out in the really 
long term, there could be long periods where CPI inflation deviates from the target – long 
enough  for  there  to  be  a  risk  of  confidence  in  the  inflation  target  being  shaken.  To  put  it 
differently, participants in the economy could begin to question whether the Riksbank will truly 
also stabilise CPI inflation around the target by stabilising CPIF inflation around 2 per cent. 
And they would have fairly good grounds for doing so, not just based on past events but also 
if we look ahead. If we assume in Figure 4 that CPIF inflation will continue to be around 2 per 
cent  after  2018,  then  CPI  inflation  would  overshoot  the  target  for  a  long  time,  based  on 
reasonable assumptions about the development of the repo rate. Even if the repo rate did not 
continue to rise to levels considered normal before the crisis, but instead slowed to the average 
of 2.3 per cent seen over the period 1998–2015, CPI inflation would overshoot the target for 
around five years in total. If the repo rate did continue to rise, it would take even longer, all 
things being equal, for CPI inflation to return to 2 per cent.12 Of course it is problematic if the 
formal target variable deviates from the target for such long periods, even if this is a result of 
a conscious policy. 
Time to start a discussion about the target variable 
Set against this background, it is my belief that it may again be time to open up a discussion 
about the target variable. One option, which I personally find appealing and fairly natural, is to 
face up to the consequences and allow an inflation measure upon which interest rate changes 
do  not  have  such  a  direct  impact  to  not  only  be  the  “steering”  variable  but  also  the  target 
variable.  The  indices  which  come  to  mind  first  in  that  case  are  the  CPIF  and  HICP.  One 
                                                 
12   The exact course of the policy rate path is obviously crucial in terms of how much and how long CPI inflation 
will deviate from CPIF inflation. A policy rate rise implemented more quickly leads, all things being equal, to a 
greater but briefer deviation than an equally large but more protracted policy rate rise. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
   advantage  of  the  latter  index  is  that  it  is  an  internationally  comparable  measure,  but  the 
differences compared with the CPIF are quantitatively not particularly large.  
It is worth pointing out that this would not lead in practice to any particularly major change in 
monetary policy. After all, the Riksbank already typically aims for a CPIF inflation rate of around 
2 per cent within the forecasting horizon. 
It is also worth emphasising that the purpose of changing the target variable would not be to 
make it easier for the Riksbank to hit the inflation target. That would hopefully be a positive 
side-effect, but the main purpose would be to rectify the problems with the CPI as a target 
variable which have gradually become more and more evident. 
Naturally, a change of target variable must be preceded by a thorough analysis of how and 
when the replacement would take place and what consequences it could potentially have. My 
aim here is simply to highlight the issue and initiate a discussion.  
Of course, a new target variable would not solve every problem and be the only measure the 
Riksbank would have to look at. We would need to continue to analyse different measures of 
inflation to get as complete a picture as possible. For instance, as oil prices, and energy prices 
in general, often vary greatly, there are reasons on many occasions to study inflation measures 
where these prices are excluded. However, I believe the biggest problem would still be solved 
if interest expenditure were excluded from the target variable once and for all.  
Before I continue, I would like to make a comment about the target variable in relation to wage 
formation. This is connected to my assertion that the significance of interest expenditure for 
the CPI means that an extremely low rate of increase in CPI inflation tends to be followed 
sooner or later by an unusually high rate of increase. As we have seen, these periods can also 
be fairly protracted. If wage formation places a lot of focus on the current level of CPI inflation, 
I see a risk that this could create instability in the wage formation system. A situation similar to 
the one in the 1970s and 80s could then ultimately occur, whereby wage developments varied 
substantially  from  year  to  year  depending  on  the  current  inflation  rate,  which  also  varied 
extensively. It would therefore be better if wage formation were based on a less volatile inflation 
measure than CPI inflation.13 A new monetary policy target variable could hopefully take on 
that role. 
A band surrounding the target 
When the General Council of the Riksbank decided to introduce an inflation target of 2 per cent 
in January 1993, it also decided that there should be a tolerance band surrounding this target 
of 1 percentage point both above and below.14 The aim was to clarify that the Riksbank does 
not have the ability to control inflation exactly in the short term, but that it also aims to limit 
deviations  from  the  target  –  that  it  does  not  intend  to  “tolerate”  deviations  greater  than 
1 percentage point. The size of the interval was determined by what intuitively appeared to be 
reasonable. It was not possible to rely on any past experience as the monetary policy regime 
was entirely new and inflation had varied considerably during the old regime which had a fixed 
exchange rate. The Riksbank expected that inflation would now vary less, but was unsure as 
to how much. 
                                                 
13   It could be argued that wage formation should be based on inflation always being 2 per cent, as periods below 
and above the target should cancel each other out in the long term. However, if inflation deviates significantly 
from the target for a long time, it can be difficult for wage setters to stick to this. Therefore, wage formation would 
be facilitated if the inflation target were formulated in term of CPIF or HICP inflation rather than in terms of CPI 
inflation. 
14   Until 1999, when the Executive Board was established, monetary policy decisions were made by the General 
Council of the Riksbank. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
   The interval remained a part of the monetary policy framework for a long time, but was finally 
abolished in 2010. The reason for this was that the Riksbank assessed at that time that it had 
fulfilled its role and was not serving any practical function. In the memorandum published in 
connection with the decision, it was noted that: “There is considerable understanding for the 
fact that inflation commonly deviates from the target and that the deviations are sometimes 
larger  than  1  percentage  point.  Inflation  can  thus  be  outside  the  tolerance  interval  without 
threatening the credibility of the inflation target. Such deviations have proved to be a natural 
part of monetary policy.”15   
So as a few years now have passed, it may be justified to evaluate the period where there has 
been  no  interval.  Personally,  I  am  not  entirely sure  that it has  been  as  trouble-free  as  the 
Riksbank expected, even though I too thought that the decision to remove the interval was 
quite natural when it was taken.  
Debate about the interval – but a different kind than before? 
The question of whether the inflation target should be surrounded by an interval has recently 
gained some attention again in the Swedish debate. There appears to be differing views on 
what  function  an  interval  would  fulfil,  however.  The  previous  tolerance  band  was  first  and 
foremost a pedagogical tool intended to illustrate that we must accept certain, though not too 
large, deviations from the inflation target of 2 per cent – the point target the Riksbank is always 
aiming for.  
The interval that a number of commentators have been advocating recently appears to be of 
a different kind, however. They would prefer what could be called a target range, or in other 
words the target itself is 2 percentage points wide and not an exact figure.16 A target range 
implies that monetary policy is focused on inflation falling within the range of 1–3 per cent 
within a couple of years, but there is no requirement for it to reach the midpoint of the interval. 
Inflation of just over 1 per cent or marginally under 3 per cent is equivalent to inflation of 2 per 
cent. If there were a tolerance band, inflation of just over 1 per cent, or below 3 per cent, 
instead would be “tolerable” if unforeseen events meant that inflation ended up there, but it 
would not be something to consciously aim for. 
The  idea  that  many  commentators  seem  to  have  is  that  a  target  range  would  mean  the 
Riksbank would feel less forced to bring inflation up to 2 per cent, which in turn would mean 
that monetary policy would not need to be as expansionary and the risks linked to such a policy 
could be mitigated. 
Difficult to pursue another policy even with an interval 
I would like to point out here, without commenting on the pros and cons of a target range in 
general terms, that this idea appears to be based in part on a misunderstanding of the motives 
behind the Riksbank’s policy. The reason the Riksbank is eager to get inflation to rise is not 
that we have a rigid fixation with achieving exactly 2 per cent inflation all the time. It is due to 
the fact that the period in which inflation has been below the target has gradually become 
longer, and that long-term inflation expectations have shown a falling trend and still remain 
below  the  target.  For  the  reasons I  noted  a  moment  ago  when  discussing  the  level  of  the 
inflation target – that the interest rate hits its lower limit more easily and it becomes difficult to 
counteract a recession – it is important to avoid inflation and inflation expectations falling too 
far and get stuck at a level that is too low.  
This would be the case even if we had had a target range of 1–3 per cent. Inflation and inflation 
expectations which creep downwards and get stuck near the lower limit of this range could be 
                                                 
15   The Riksbank (2010). 
16   See for example Fromlet (2015) and Lars Jonung in Svenska Dagbladet (2015). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
   as problematic as if the inflation target itself had been lowered. It is thus difficult to see that the 
Riksbank would have pursued a notably different policy even if there had been a target range, 
or  that  there  would  be  grounds  to  adjust  the  current  policy  if  a  target  range  were  to  be 
introduced tomorrow.17  
This is probably also the reason why central banks in countries which have a formal target 
range, such as Canada and New Zealand, usually aim for the midpoint of the range.18 After all, 
the safest way to prevent inflation and inflation expectations beginning to slide out of the range 
is to attempt to keep them in the middle of it. In this sense, there is no great practical difference 
between a target range and a point target with a tolerance band. 
Interval good for illustrating uncertainty 
I believe there are still grounds for discussing whether the Swedish monetary policy framework 
should be complemented once again by some kind of interval. As I see it, the main reason 
would be to remind people that monetary policy is pursued under considerable uncertainty, 
and that the Riksbank is not able to fine-tune the economy and inflation. It could be seen as 
paradoxical that it is needed, as the justification for the interval being removed before was that 
there was widespread understanding for this being the case. My impression, however, is that 
there  is  a  lingering  perception  that  monetary  policy  is  a  tool  with  a  relatively  high  level  of 
precision and that most things can be managed using well-calibrated policy rate changes. In 
the discussion about monetary policy, many seem to assume that there are relatively precise 
relations between the interest rate, inflation and unemployment, a perspective that does not 
receive much empirical support.  
This is something to which the Riksbank itself probably has contributed somewhat, as some 
analyses in our reports could have given this impression. For example, we used to regularly 
present different interest rate scenarios in the monetary policy reports which were based on 
the  effects  of  policy  rate  changes  on  the  economy  and  inflation  being  calculated  relatively 
mechanically and with seemingly good precision. The fact that the effects of monetary policy 
are  surrounded  by  major  uncertainty  and  cannot  be  calculated  with  good  precision  is 
something we probably need to remind people of more or less constantly, and in that case an 
interval can be useful. 
The most obvious approach in this case would perhaps be to reintroduce a tolerance band 
around the inflation target. If this route is chosen, it is important of course that it is given a 
practical significance and fulfils some kind of function, in contrast to the interval removed in 
2010. One possibility could be that the Riksbank undertakes to explain in a special report why 
inflation has ended up outside the interval whenever this occurs – in roughly the same way as 
the Bank of England writes an open letter to the Chancellor of the Exchequer. On the one 
hand, this could lead to deviations outside the band being seen as slightly dramatic, but on the 
other hand it could also make deviations within the interval less dramatic. I believe the latter 
would be an advantage seen against the background of what I have just said about monetary 
policy not being able to fine-tune inflation.  
Naturally it is also important that the breadth of any band matches the variations in inflation in 
a meaningful way. It could be questioned whether this was the case for the previous tolerance 
                                                 
17   One possibility could be that long-term inflation expectations would have been anchored better if there had been 
an interval. The debate about target deviations could possibly have been less intense for example, which in turn 
could have led to a smaller fall in expectations. This is far from certain, however. 2 per cent does not represent 
a clear guideline in terms of a target interval, and regardless of whether the interval is a target or tolerance 
interval, inflation has now been so far below the lower limit for such a long time that expectations would likely 
have been severely affected in any case. 
18   The Bank of Canada aims for inflation to be “at the 2 per cent midpoint of a target range of 1 to 3 per cent over 
the medium term”, while the Reserve Bank of New Zealand aims to get inflation near “the 2 percent target 
midpoint” on average. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
   band. It is worth emphasising that the choice of target variable is important when choosing the 
breadth of the band. A reflection from Figure 3 is that the interval of 1–3 per cent would have 
much better suited a target variable upon which interest rate changes do not have a direct 
effect – that is to say CPIF or HICP inflation – than was the case for CPI inflation. The periods 
outside the interval for these measures are more short-lived and the deviations are smaller. A 
number of reports would still have needed to be written, but there would have been fewer than 
with the CPI, and above all they would have contained more meaningful explanations as to 
why inflation was outside the tolerance band than that households' interest expenditure in the 
CPI has been influenced by the Riksbank's altered repo rate. 
But once again – my aim here is mainly to contribute to the discussion. How an interval would 
be designed, and whether we should have one, is something that we will of course need to 
look further into. However, this is also a change I believe we could make without turning the 
monetary policy framework as it is inside out. 
The policy of inflation targeting does not need fixing, but can potentially be improved 
Let  me  now  briefly  summarise  what  I  have  said  here  today.  One  of  my  most  important 
messages is: “if it’s not broken, don’t try to fix it!”. In our eagerness to bring about change, we 
can often do more damage than good. The aspect I believe is not broken and therefore does 
not  need  fixing  is  the  policy  of  flexible  inflation  targeting,  which  in  recent  decades  has 
developed into something of an international standard. This is not to say that I think it is without 
problems and cannot be improved. I have highlighted a couple of areas for which I believe 
there are grounds for consideration as far as Sweden is concerned. One is the target variable, 
in  which  case  I  believe  we  should  consider  changing  to  an  index  upon  which  policy  rate 
changes  do  not  have  such  a  major  direct  impact  as  on  the  CPI.  Another  is  an  interval 
surrounding the target. The main reason for considering a reintroduction of an interval is the 
need to constantly remind people that monetary policy is pursued under significant uncertainty 
and that the Riksbank is not able to fine-tune the economy and inflation. I look forward to 
continued discussions about these issues.  
 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
   efficiently) 
(In  Swedish)  Svenska  Dagbladet  Debate, 
References 
Dorich,  José,  Nicholas Labelle,  Vadym  Lepetyuk  and  Rhys  Mendes  (2015),  Assessing  the 
Benefits of a Higher Inflation Target. Under publication in Staff Discussion Papers, Bank of 
Canada. 
The Economic Commission (1993), “Nya villkor för ekonomi och politik.” (New conditions for 
the economy and policy) (In Swedish) The Economic Commission's proposal, SOU 1993:16. 
Flodén, Martin (2015), Sweden needs its inflation target. Speech at Fores, 13 October. 
Fromlet, Hubert (2015), “Så kan Riksbanken fungera bättre.” (How the Riksbank can work 
more 
13  November, 
http://www.svd.se/ekonom-sa-kan-riksbanken-fungera-battre.  
Heikensten, Lars and Anders Vredin (2012), “Akademikerna och penningpolitiken” (Academics 
and monetary policy) (In Swedish). In Per Molander (ed.), “Kunskapen och makten – om det 
offentliga beslutsfattandets kunskapsförsörjning” (Knowledge and power – on public decision-
making knowledge management) (In Swedish) Atlantis, Stockholm. 
Johansson, Jesper (2015), How is inflation measured? Economic Commentary no. 5, 2015. 
Palmqvist, Stefan (2013), “Konsumentprisindex i Sverige och Kanada är inte så lika” (The CPI 
in  Sweden  and  Canada  are  not  so  similar)  (In  Swedish)  Post  on  the  blog  Ekonomistas, 
http://ekonomistas.se/2013/11/20/konsumentprisindex-i-sverige-och-kanada-ar-inte-sa-lika/. 
Reserve Bank of Australia (1998), The Implications of Recent Changes to the Consumer Price 
Index for Monetary Policy and the Inflation Target. Reserve Bank of Australia Bulletin, October. 
Reserve  Bank  of  New  Zealand  (1999),  Minor  Technical  Change  to  Inflation  Target.  Press 
release, 28 October. 
The Riksbank (2010), The Riksbank removes the tolerance interval from its specified monetary 
policy 
2010, 
http://www.riksbank.se/Upload/Dokument_riksbank/Kat_publicerat/Pressmeddelanden/2010/
nr27_beslutsunderlag.pdf. 
The Riksdag (2014), Committee on Finance appoints top names to evaluate the Riksbank's 
monetary policy. Press release, 17 June. 
Skingsley, Cecilia (2015), Inflation-targeting policy after the financial crisis. Speech at Almega, 
22 May. 
Svenska Dagbladet (2015), “Professorn varnar för låga räntan,” (Professor warns about low 
interest rate) (In Swedish) 18 November. 
 
 
Memorandum, 
Decision, 
target 
Basis 
May 
for 
31 
 10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 Figure 1. Stable Swedish economy 
   Note: The yield differential refers to 10-year government bonds, monthly data. 
Sources: Thomson Reuters and the Riksbank 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Major direct impact of interest rate changes on CPI inflation 
Note: Weighted mortgage rate is chained in December 2014 due to an altered measurement method.  
Sources: Statistics Sweden and the Riksbank 
 
 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11
 Figure 3. CPI inflation varies a lot more than CPIF and HICP inflation 
   Note: The CPIF is the CPI with a fixed mortgage rate. HICP refers to the EU-harmonised index for consumer prices.  
Sources: Statistics Sweden and the Riksbank 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4. CPI inflation deviates significantly and for a long time from the inflation 
target  
Note: The CPIF is the CPI with a fixed mortgage rate.  
Sources: Thomson Reuters and the Riksbank 
 
 
 12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
