  Philip Lowe: The Reserve Bank of Australia’s regulatory responsibilities 
Remarks by Mr Philip Lowe, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, at FINSIA 
Regulators Panel, Sydney, 5 November 2015. 
 I  would like  to  thank  Stephanie  Bolt,  Jon  Cheshire  and  Matt  Gibson  for assistance  in  the  preparation  of these 
remarks. 
I would like to thank FINSIA for the invitation to speak today. It is a pleasure to be part of this year’s Regulators 
Panel. 
The  Reserve  Bank’s  regulatory  responsibilities  lie  in  three  general  areas.  First,  along  with 
APRA, we have a broad responsibility for stability of the financial system. Second, we have 
specific responsibilities for competition and efficiency in Australia’s payments system. And, 
third, we have responsibility for prudential supervision of Australia’s clearing and settlement 
facilities. This afternoon, I would like to say a few words about each of these three areas and 
some of the issues that lie ahead. 
Financial stability – the importance of good quality data 
First, the financial stability responsibility. Over recent times, much has been said about the 
risks in the Australian housing market, with the Reserve Bank publishing its latest analysis 
just a few weeks ago in the six-monthly Financial Stability Review. Rather than go over this 
ground again, I want to highlight just one issue: that is, the importance of high-quality data. 
Now this might seem a rather obscure issue to highlight. But the basis of good analysis is 
good  data.  Improvements  over  time  in  the  quality  and  comprehensiveness  of  the  data  on 
housing  prices  have,  for  example,  helped  improve  the  general  understanding  of  housing 
market  developments.  In  contrast,  unfortunately,  recent  problems  with  the  data  relating  to 
banks’  owner-occupier  and  investor  housing  loans  have  worked  in  the  other  direction, 
complicating our understanding of what is going on in the housing market. 
These  data  problems  have  emerged  as  lenders  have  taken  a  closer  look  at  their  housing 
loans following increased supervisory scrutiny. As lenders have looked more closely,  what 
they have found has surprised and, to some extent, concerned us. 
There are two issues that are worth drawing your attention to. 
The first is that over the past six months there have been very large upward revisions to the 
value  of  investor  loans  outstanding,  with  offsetting  downward  revisions  to  owner-occupier 
loans. Material revisions have been made by more than 10 institutions, including two of the 
largest lenders. The scale of these revisions can be seen in Graph 1, which shows the stock 
of investor credit outstanding as reported in each of May, June and September this year. The 
cumulative effect of the upward revisions has been to increase the stock of investor credit 
outstanding  by  around  $50  billion,  or  10  per  cent.  According  to  these  new  data,  investor 
loans  now  account for  40  per  cent  of  total  housing  loans  outstanding,  not  the  35  per cent 
reported earlier in the year. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
 Graph 1 
 Click to view larger 
 While the reasons for some of these earlier errors have been identified, in other cases the 
reasons are unclear and lenders have not been able to provide comprehensive back data. As 
a result, when calculating growth rates for investor and owner-occupier credit, the RBA has 
had to make adjustments for what are effectively breaks in the series. 
The second data issue has emerged over the past couple of months and has worked in the 
other  direction,  with  lenders  reporting  that  some  loans  that  were  previously  recorded  as 
investor loans were really loans to owner-occupiers. This is partly because, when faced with 
the higher interest rate on investor loans, some borrowers have indicated to their bank that 
they are not an investor, but rather an owner-occupier, and so should not have to pay the 
higher rate. Our liaison with lenders suggests that further reclassifications of this nature could 
be expected over coming months. 
The  effect  of  these  recent  reclassifications  on  measured  growth  rates  can  be  seen  in 
Graph 2. Taken at face value, the data suggest a very sharp slowing in growth in investor 
credit and a sharp pick-up in owner-occupier credit (shown as the dotted lines). However, if 
we make adjustments for these reclassifications then the changes in growth rates are much 
less pronounced (the solid lines). 
Graph 2 
Click to view larger 
 2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  These various data problems have reinforced our view that the supervisory focus on investor 
lending  has  been  entirely  appropriate.  And  it  is  disappointing  that  some  lenders’  internal 
systems have not been up to the task of reporting accurate data on the split between investor 
and owner-occupied housing loans. 
This issue was discussed at the most recent meeting of the Council of Financial Regulators, 
with Council members considering what steps could be taken to improve the quality of data. 
Among other things, it has been decided that APRA, the RBA and the Australian Bureau of 
Statistics will, next year, undertake a thorough review of the data collected from authorised 
deposit-taking institutions regarding their domestic books. 
Payments system issues 
The  second  area that  I would  like  to  touch  on  is  the  RBA’s  payments  system  work.  Here, 
there are two issues of particular focus over the year ahead. 
The first is the industry efforts to develop a new 21st century payments system for Australia. 
These  efforts  are,  to  a  significant  degree,  in  response  to  the  RBA’s  strategic  review  of 
innovation in the payments system that was concluded in 2012. 
While some aspects of Australia’s payments system rank relatively well by global standards, 
the underlying architecture for some of our systems has aged and is limiting innovation. One 
example of this that many of you may be familiar with is that when you send a payment from 
your online bank account to another person or business you are limited to just 18 characters 
in  describing  the  payment.  The  reason  for  this  restriction  is  that  the  entire  payment 
instruction – including the BSB, the amount, the banks involved etc. – is limited to just 120 
characters. And the origin of this limit is the capacity of the magnetic tapes that were used to 
exchange information between banks and, before that, the capacity of computer punch cards 
with their 80 columns. In effect, our payments system in 2015 is still being constrained by the 
technology of earlier generations. So it is difficult to argue that this renewal of our payments 
system is before time! 
The new system will allow Australians to transfer money to one another almost instantly, no 
matter where they bank. It will also remove the need to know somebody’s BSB to make a 
payment; just a phone number or email address will be needed. And we will no longer be 
limited  to  just  18  characters  in  describing  the  payment;  instead  we  will  be  able  to  send  a 
wealth of information. 
The industry is working hard on building this new system. It is a very significant piece of work, 
involving  many  hundreds  of  millions  of  dollars,  and  the  timeline  is  relatively  tight.  But  when 
finished, it is likely to form the backbone of many of our payment systems over the next few 
decades. 
The RBA is closely involved in all of this work. It has played a major role in establishing the 
broad direction of the industry’s efforts. It is building a core piece of infrastructure that will 
allow payments to be settled in real time. And it is also building the capability for our own 
customers – primarily the Australian Government – to use this new payment system. 
The second area of focus over the next year is the ongoing review of the regulation of the 
card  payments  system.  Earlier  in  2015,  the  RBA  released  an  issues  paper  inviting 
submissions on a broad range of topics in this area. A number of these were also discussed 
in the Financial System Inquiry (FSI). 
The  topic  that  has  attracted  most  attention  is  the  concerns  about  excess  surcharging  on 
credit cards. In its response to the FSI, the government indicated that it will ban excessive 
surcharging and give the ACCC enforcement powers. An important element here is to define 
what exactly constitutes ‘excessive surcharging’. This is an issue the RBA will be working on 
over the months ahead. We will also be working closely with Treasury and with the ACCC as 
the necessary legislation is developed. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  Another  relevant  topic  is  the  appropriate  level  of  the  interchange  benchmarks  in  the  card 
systems and the compliance arrangements around those benchmarks. 
We are continuing to consult on whether it is in the public interest for these benchmarks to be 
lowered.  In  terms  of  compliance,  perhaps  not  surprisingly,  the  schemes  have  become 
increasingly adroit at maximising interchange fees while still complying with the benchmarks. 
We  have  seen  interchange  pricing  become  increasingly  complex,  with  significant  price 
discrimination between merchants. We have also seen the schemes introduce and promote 
new  high-interchange,  high-reward  cards,  with  merchants  typically  having  little,  or  no, 
visibility over the interchange fees that apply when a specific card is presented. How best to 
deal  with  these  developments  –  including  whether  the  compliance  arrangements  can  be 
simplified and whether transparency of the system can be further improved – is an important 
ongoing element of our work. 
Clearing and settlement facilities 
The third area of our regulatory responsibilities that I want to touch on is the one area where 
the RBA still effectively acts as a prudential supervisor; that is for central counterparties and 
securities settlement facilities – two types of so-called financial market infrastructures (FMIs). 
Since the financial crisis, the prudential regulation of these entities has taken on added focus, 
both  in  Australia  and  elsewhere.  This  reflects  the  critical  role  that  these  entities  play  in  the 
smooth functioning of the financial system, with this role increasing following the agreement by 
the G20 nations to clear all standardised OTC derivative through central counterparties. 
While, globally, the transition to central counterparties has been slower than was originally 
agreed,  significant  progress  has  been  made.  In  Australia,  the  majority  of  new  trades  in 
standardised interest-rate derivatives is now centrally cleared. This shift has been supported 
by recently introduced regulations that provide for mandated central clearing of interest-rate 
derivatives  denominated  in  Australian  dollars  and  other  major  currencies for  internationally 
active dealers.1 
Over  the  next  year  or  so,  the  RBA’s  priorities  for  work  in  this  area  will  include  two  key 
elements. 
The first is the development of more robust crisis management arrangements for FMIs. The 
RBA  currently  sets  standards  that  the  FMIs  it  supervises  are  required  to  meet.  These 
standards  provide  a  high  degree  of  assurance  regarding  the  stability  of  these  entities,  but 
they  don’t  rule  out  the  possibility  that  they  could  experience  severe  financial  difficulties, 
prejudicing the stability of the overall financial system. Given this, it is important that there 
are appropriate arrangements in place to deal with such an eventuality, should it ever arise. 
The  current  arrangements  in  this  area  were  considered  by  the  FSI  and  have  been  under 
review by the Council of Financial Regulators for some time. In its response to the Inquiry, 
the Government endorsed the implementation of a framework to provide regulators with clear 
powers  in  the  event  that  an  FMI  was  heading  towards  failure.  This  is  consistent  with  an 
existing proposal consulted on by the Government to make the RBA the resolution authority 
for  central  counterparties  and  securities  settlement  facilities  based  in  Australia.  Under  the 
proposed arrangements, the RBA would be able to give formal directions and to intervene if 
severe financial stress of an FMI risked causing wide disruption to the financial system. One 
way  that  the  RBA  might  do  this  is  to  appoint  a  statutory  manager  to  operate  the  critical 
functions of the FMI for a period of time. This is similar to the framework that is already in 
place for banks and that is the responsibility of APRA. 
                                                
1  For  a  more  detailed  update  on 
<http://www.rba.gov.au/speeches/2015/sp-ag-2015–10–22.html>. 
the  progress  of 
reforms,  see  Edey 
4 
 (2015),  available  at 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Developing  these  arrangements  for  FMIs  is  a  significant  task.  Changes  in  legislation  are 
required and the RBA is developing detailed strategies and operational arrangements. These 
efforts are drawing on international work on resolution strategies led by the Financial Stability 
Board, as well as similar work that has been undertaken for banks. 
The second, and related, priority relates to the growing threat to FMIs from cyber attacks. By 
their  very  nature,  these  entities  are  heavily  dependent  on  technology  and  connections  to 
external parties, and this dependency has increased over recent years. At the same time, the 
nature  of  cyber  threats has  rapidly  evolved,  with  increasingly  sophisticated  methods  being 
used by those attempting to cause disruptions. 
The RBA is working closely with the FMIs it supervises to better understand their approach to 
cyber resilience. As part of this work, the RBA and ASIC asked the ASX to conduct a self-
assessment  of  its  cyber-security  practices  for  the  FMIs  that  it  operates.  This  assessment 
concluded  that  the  ASX’s  practices  were  generally  aligned  with  the  upper  tiers  of  maturity 
levels under internationally used cyber security standards.2 But this is an area that needs to 
be continually watched, and there is considerable work going at the international level, with 
the RBA closely involved in this work. 
As  a  financial  institution  itself,  the  RBA  also  sees  the  increasing  prevalence  and 
sophistication of cyber attacks and has made its own very significant investments to address 
the risks. In the area of payment infrastructure, we are undertaking work to strengthen further 
the resilience of the Reserve Bank Information and Transfer System, commonly known as 
RITS.  This  system  is  owned  and  operated  by  the  RBA  and  lies  at  the  heart  of  Australia’s 
wholesale payment system. 
With those introductory remarks I look forward to participating in the panel discussion. 
Thank you. 
                                                
2  ASX’s  high-level  self-assessment  was  carried  out  against  the  United  States  National  Institute  of  Standards 
and Technology Cybersecurity Framework. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
