  William C Dudley: Improving culture and conduct in the financial 
services industry 
Opening  remarks  by  Mr  William  C  Dudley,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the 
Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York,  at  “Reforming  Culture  and  Behavior  in  the  Financial 
Services Industry: Workshop on Progress and Challenges”, Federal Reserve Bank of New 
York, New York City, 5 November 2015. 
 Welcome  to  the  New  York  Fed  and  to  a  discussion  of  how  culture  and  conduct  might  be 
improved within the financial services industry. I am pleased to see all of you here today – 
there is tremendous breadth of experience and responsibility within this room. We need to 
take full advantage of this opportunity. I encourage all participants to be candid and on-point, 
because the task of reforming culture is formidable.1  
Untrustworthy behavior on the scale that we have witnessed in financial services does not 
arise  in  a  vacuum.  Social  science  research  makes  it  clear  that  context  largely  drives 
conduct.2 This is not a new insight. Adam Smith observed centuries ago that, independent of 
personal sentiment, we often behave according to what we “[see are] the established rules of 
behavior.”3 We observe the activity around us, assess the norms of conduct and generally 
adapt to those norms in our own behaviors. 
Banking is not exempt from this universal propensity. Gerry Corrigan noted three decades 
ago that the “implicit codes of conduct” that govern banker behavior exist apart from “explicit 
regulations.”  He  posited  that  these  implicit  codes  must  align  with  the  public  good  –  an 
obligation that banks owe in exchange for the benefits “uniquely available to [that]particular 
class  of  institutions.”4  This,  in  Corrigan’s  view,  was  what  made  banks  “special”  –  the 
reciprocal  benefits  and  responsibilities  that  support  and  constrain  an  industry  essential  to 
public well-being. 
Corrigan’s premise is not an antique concept from a bygone era of banking. Then, as now, 
there are public purposes of banking – including financial intermediation, corporate valuation, 
facilitating  investment  opportunities,  providing  credit  and  creating  market  liquidity.  These 
activities  underpin  the  economy  and  financial  stability.  Reciprocity  –  in  other  words,  the 
expectation of a quid pro quo in the relationship between society and the financial services 
industry – is the basis of public trust in financial institutions. There is, however, a widespread 
sense that this principle has been compromised. 
                                                
1  What I have to say today represents my own views and not necessarily those of the Federal Open Market 
Committee or the Federal Reserve System. Stephanie Chaly, James Hennessy, Thomas Noone and Joseph 
Tracy assisted in preparing these remarks. 
2  See Malcolm Gladwell, The Tipping Point (2002), 133–168 (collecting sources). For additional information on 
the famous Stanford Prison Experiment, see www.prisonexp.org. 
3  Adam Smith, The Theory of Moral Sentiments (11th ed. 1812), 276. 
4  E. Gerald Corrigan, Are Banks Special?, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Annual Report, January 1983. 
Cf. Joseph Story, Commentaries on the Law of Bailments § 464 (1832). (“The soundness of the public policy 
of  subjecting  particular  classes  of  persons  to  extraordinary  responsibility,  in  cases  where  an  extraordinary 
confidence  is  necessarily  reposed  in  them,  and  there  is  an  extraordinary  temptation  to  fraud,  or  danger  of 
plunder, can hardly admit of question; and has been recognized in the jurisprudence of many countries.”). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Industry responsibility 
Two years ago, I noted that recent scandals in banking evidenced “deep-seated cultural and 
ethical  failures.”5  Many  of  the  industry’s  leaders  now  agree.  According  to  the  Federal 
Advisory  Council  of 
the  Federal  Reserve  System,  a  group  composed  of  senior 
representatives from the industry, “as often as not [...] the challenges faced in recent years 
have  been  behavioral  and  cultural;  post-crisis  episodes  such  as  LIBOR  and  foreign 
exchange manipulation provide hard evidence that there remains work to be done.”6  
Last year I argued that “the solution [to cultural problems] needs to originate from within the 
firms,  from  their  leaders.”7  I  view  today’s  workshop  as  a  progress  report  on  the  industry’s 
efforts. This is an opportunity for us to discuss collectively what is working, what is not, and 
the next steps that are needed. 
We should take care, though, not to confuse cause and effect. The banking scandals that 
followed  the  financial  crisis  are  evidence  that  something  fundamental  is  wrong.  I  would 
encourage each of you to consider not just specific examples of misconduct, but the patterns 
within them that point to underlying causes. I suspect we will see a strong overlap with those 
factors that contributed to the financial crisis. I think your focus should be less on the search 
for bad apples and more on how to improve the apple barrels. 
Role of the official sector 
Dodd-Frank  strengthened  bank  balance  sheets, and  banks  have  become  more  resilient  to 
systemic  shocks.  This  is  a  positive  development.  At  the  same  time,  it  is  also  important  to 
mitigate the sources of systemic shocks. Dodd-Frank apparently did little to curb misconduct 
– a possible source of systemic risk. If the people managing capital cushions and liquidity 
buffers  view  these  tools  as  sufficient  mitigants  for  the  costs  of  misconduct,  or  if  powerful 
incentives  encourage  workarounds  of  the  new  regulations,  then  the  connection  between 
post-crisis reforms and greater financial stability becomes threatened. 
In  the  last  year,  we  have  seen  emerging  approaches  to  supervision  that  aim  to  address 
culture,  conduct  and  governance.  These  methods  are  being  developed  in  a  number  of 
jurisdictions.8 I am pleased to welcome representatives of 15 foreign supervisors and other 
official  sector  agencies  who  are  joining  the  many  representatives  of  U.S.  supervisory  and 
regulatory agencies here today. The topic of culture and conduct has truly become a global 
dialogue. We have a lot to learn from each other. 
One question on the minds of many in the official sector is, “what is the most effective way to 
promote  reform?”  Sharing  ideas  on  leading  practices,  challenges  and  the  opportunities for 
industry  collaboration  is  a  start  –  but  it  is  not  the  end.  Financial  firms  need  to  act  on  this 
information,  and  the  official  sector  should  hold  institutions  accountable  for  demonstrating 
sustained, observable progress. 
Overview of agenda 
Let me now give a brief overview of today’s agenda. The first panel will present the Group of 
Thirty’s  recent  report  on  banking  conduct  and  culture,  which  calls  for  fundamental  and 
                                                
5  William C. Dudley, Ending Too Big to Fail, Remarks at the Global Economic Policy Forum, November 7, 2013. 
6  Federal Advisory Council and Board of Governors, Record of Meeting, May 8, 2015. 
7  William  C.  Dudley,  Enhancing  Financial  Stability  by  Improving  Culture  in  the  Financial  Services  Industry, 
Remarks at the Workshop on Reforming Culture and Behavior in the Financial Services Industry, October 20, 
2014. 
8  See,  e.g.,  Mirea  Raaijmakers,  ed.,  Supervision  of  Behavior  and  Culture:  Foundations,  Practice  &  Future 
Developments, De Nederlandsche Bank (2015). 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  sustained change. As you all know, the Group of Thirty is a forum consisting of senior public 
officials  and  private  sector  bankers.  Its  purpose  is  to  facilitate  non-partisan  discussion  of 
issues that threaten global economic stability and economic progress. It speaks volumes that 
the  Group  has  focused  its  work  in  recent  years  on  effective  governance,  the  role  of 
supervision, and on conduct and culture. 
Each of the four remaining panels will address one aspect of the multidimensional nature of 
cultural change. 
• 
In the first panel, we will hear about engagement with employees – especially those 
who are skeptical of the benefits or practicality of reform. 
In the second panel, we will discuss accountability – not only in the sense of being 
“held  accountable,”  but  also  in  the  broader  sense  of  promoting  responsibility  and 
stewardship.  I  am  particularly  interested  in  designing  incentives  –  both  the  carrot 
and the stick – that yield conduct aligned with the public purposes of banking. 
The  third  panel  will  focus  on  skill  development  –  particularly  on  recruiting  and 
training as levers for sustained cultural change. 
And  the  last  panel  will  focus  on  leadership  and  industry  collaboration.  A  prime 
element of leadership, within a firm and across the industry, is character – behavior 
anchored 
legitimate  expectation  of 
trustworthiness. 
in  values  consistent  with 
the  public’s 
   Our keynote speaker today is Christine Lagarde, the managing director of the International 
Monetary  Fund.  Christine  Lagarde  has  been  outspoken  in  her  view  that  “financial  leaders 
[must]  take  values  as  seriously  as  valuation,  culture  as  seriously  as  capital.”9  This  makes 
abundant sense to me – culture and capital each promote financial stability. Thank you for 
joining us. I am also grateful to Stanley Fischer, the vice chairman of the Board of Governors, 
who will speak with Christine Lagarde following her remarks. 
Please join me in welcoming Christine Lagarde. 
                                                
9  Christine  Lagarde,  Economic  Inclusion  and  Financial  Integrity,  Address  to  the  Conference  on  Inclusive 
Capitalism, May 27, 2014. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
