   Jon Cunliffe: The outlook for countercyclical macroprudential policy 
Speech by Sir Jon Cunliffe, Deputy Governor for Financial Stability of the Bank of England, at 
The Graduate Institute, Geneva, 10 November 2015. 
 In 1909, Albert Einstein received his first honorary doctorate from the University of Geneva. In 
1905, in his mid-twenties, Einstein published four papers which ushered out the Newtonian 
age of physics and changed forever our view of the Universe in which we live. 
It is an interesting experiment to think what Einstein might have accomplished had he chosen 
the world of economic policy rather than physics. Would he have brought to our world the same 
brilliant simplicity and achieved the same lasting change in our understanding? 
Economic policy of course is rather different to physics even in central banks. We may aspire 
to the same rigour, the same evidential base, the same level of proof. And we may apply many 
of  the  mathematical  tools.  But  our  world  is  more  indeterminate  and  shot  through  with  the 
vagaries of human behaviour. As policy makers, we have on a daily basis to take decisions on 
the basis of both imperfect information and imperfect understanding. 
The subject I want to talk about today, the credit cycle and how policy makers charged with 
financial stability should take it into account, is a very good example of this world. The concept 
itself is a difficult one. History suggests that there are periods in which credit in the economy 
builds up and periods in which it declines – often after an explosive turning point. But these 
are not I suspect something a physicist would be prepared to accept as proven to be cyclical. 
And  though they  are  associated  with  the  economic  cycle (which  also, I  suspect,  would  be 
thought of as unproven in the world of physics), the relationship between the two is unclear 
and much disputed. The build-up of credit in the economy is not always associated with higher 
growth nor does it always match the economic cycle. The long build-up of credit in the UK 
economy between 2000–2007 – from 125% to 170% of GDP – does not seem to have much 
affected economic growth which was little more than its long-run average. 
We do know, however, that a build-up of credit that ends explosively can trigger a rapid reversal 
– a spiral of “deleveraging” – that drives the real economy into a very deep decline, more 
severe and more persistent than the usual business cycle. Not only is this a lesson from the 
empirical literature. GDP in the UK fell around 6% in the crisis and the recovery since has been 
slower than our recovery from the 1930s recession. 
Policy makers in the UK have spent much of last 8 years trying to halt and reverse headwinds 
to the recovery, including from disorderly deleveraging. But, together with their counterparts in 
other jurisdictions, they have also spent these years designing and implementing reforms to 
prevent a recurrence of such an episode. 
Some of these have been to broaden and reinforce the underlying, the non-varying framework 
of regulation to make both financial firms and the financial system more resilient. Some of 
these reforms, however, have been to create the institutions, the macroprudential authorities 
such as the Financial Policy Committee (FPC) of the Bank of England, charged with assessing 
time-varying risk in the financial system and to give those institutions the tools to address such 
risks. 
Much of the FPC’s focus over the first four years of its existence has been reinforcing the 
underlying regulatory framework. While there remains much work to be done, the design of the 
main elements of the framework – addressing capital, liquidity, too big to fail – is essentially 
completed.  We  are  now  increasingly  moving  into  the  implementation  stage.  As  the  UK 
economy continues to expand, and as monetary policy normalises – which we expect to be 
limited and gradual – we will more and more need to think about the time-varying element of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   
our mandate, how the associated credit cycle is developing and whether and how we apply 
our reforms to address this. 
Aggregate credit 
After a very deep recession and slow recovery, the UK economy regained its pre-crisis level 
of output in the middle of 2013 and has since been expanding steadily. It has now been growing 
around its average historic rate for 11 quarters. Our forecast is for it to continue to expand at 
around these levels for the next few years, driven by private domestic demand. 
Credit  conditions  clearly  played  an  important  part  in  the  recovery  and  expansion  of  the 
economy so far. Indeed, the lift off of the economy around the middle of 2013 was, I think, due 
in part to the easing of credit conditions as a result of the Funding for Lending Scheme. I would 
also note that this easing happened at the time that the interim FPC actually raised the amount 
of capital in the banking system – to the accompaniment of some dire warnings about what 
would happen to credit and growth. 
Looking  forward,  credit  conditions  also  play  an  important  role  in  the  prospects  for  the  UK 
economy.  In  the  Monetary  Policy  Committee’s  forecast,  accommodative  credit  conditions 
alongside rising pay support the private domestic demand that drives economic growth at a 
rate around historic rates of 2.6%. In my own view, it looks as if we have entered into a more 
normal phase of the credit cycle. For the macroprudential authority the question is how we 
should establish where we are in the credit cycle and assess what risks it might engender? As 
I said at the outset, the credit cycle is a useful concept but you cannot measure it directly nor 
calibrate it easily. 
The credit to GDP ratio is obviously a good starting place. For the UK that is now around 140%, 
35 percentage points lower than in 2009. But is that a good number in macroprudential terms? 
The virtues of credit – facilitating consumption smoothing, house purchase, investment and 
risk  management  mean  that  more  credit  is  not  always  bad.  And  the  credit  intensity  of  an 
economy can increase as intermediation becomes more efficient. But at 140% of GDP it is 
high by historic standards and higher than the G7 average. 
One useful leading indicator of financial crises in the past has been the credit-to-GDP gap – 
that is, the gap between the credit-to-GDP ratio at a given point in time and its trend. For the 
UK that gap now stands at minus 25%. Does that suggest that credit in the economy is 25% 
below where it should be? The problem of course is that the credit-to-GDP gap measures the 
stock of credit in the economy relative to an historic average. For the UK, that average includes 
a sustained build-up of private non-financial credit from 115% of GDP in 1989 to 175% of GDP 
in 2009. 
For this reason we have not attached too great a weight on the credit-to-GDP gap to date. 
Looking at the flows rather than the stocks, private non-financial sector credit growth has begun 
to increase but is growing slowly in historical terms at around 2.5%. Of course, it is worth 
emphasising again that history is not something I necessarily  want to repeat. Private non-
financial sector credit grew by an average of 10% a year in the 20 year period before the crisis. 
Looked at through another lens, the level of indebtedness, the aggregate debt to income level 
of UK households is around 135%, some way below its crisis level of 160%. It dropped sharply 
after the crisis and has hovered around its current level for the last few years. But though it is 
below its pre-crisis level, it is again high by historical standards; average household debt to 
income between 1990 and 2006 was 110%. It also remains high by international standards; 
household debt to income is around 85% in Germany, 110% in the United States and 120% in 
Spain. 
Putting all of these high-level aggregate indicators together, the level of credit in the economy 
is beginning to grow again. It is not at pre-crisis levels and indeed looks below averages that 
include the long build-up of credit in the economy before the crisis. But if you look further back, 
it is high by historical standards. And it is high by international standards. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   
The high-level picture, of course, can only tell you so much. It is clear that important though 
they are, these high-level indicators cannot be linked mechanically to the assessment of risk 
or to action to address it. To build a fuller picture of how credit is affecting the level of risk in 
the financial system, it is necessary to drill down into the sectoral components of credit and 
their counterparts in the economy. 
Household credit 
The largest component of bank credit in the UK economy is of course lending to households 
and within that the great bulk, around 90%, is secured on dwellings. Mortgage lending is the 
single largest asset class on lenders’ balance sheets and stock of lending secured on dwellings 
is around 70% of GDP. Net secured lending to households is rising at nearly 3% – the highest 
rate since the end of 2009. 
Mortgage rates in the UK are now at very low levels – average quoted rates on two-year (75% 
LTV)  fixed-rate  mortgages  are  below  2%.  Some  of  this  of  course  is  because  the  Bank  of 
England’s official Bank Rate has been close to zero since 2009. But over the past three years, 
as  banks’  funding  costs  have  reduced  and  as  competition  in  the  mortgage  market  has 
intensified, on average mortgage interest rates have fallen by 2 percentage points. 
Unsecured lending to households is a much smaller proportion of credit; it accounts for only 
12% of lending to households and around 10% of GDP. And the stock of consumer credit 
remains £30 billion below its peak in 2008. But it is growing at around 8% a year, much faster 
than  secured  lending.  Again,  this  is  significantly  lower  than  pre-crisis  –  annual  growth  in 
unsecured lending was around 12% in the decade before the crisis. But it has picked up quickly 
and advertised rates on some products are close to historical lows. Much of the increase has 
been non-credit card unsecured loans such as personal loans and car finance – the majority 
of car finance is provided by non-banks. 
And, not surprisingly, alongside the pick-up in secured lending and lower mortgage rates there 
has been an increase in the growth rate of house prices and a pick-up in housing market 
activity. After a lull in 2014, house prices are now growing at just under 6% a year – more than 
twice the rate of earnings growth. Mortgage approvals for house purchase have increased by 
10% over the year to an average of 69,000. 
I do not think that the role of the macroprudential authority should be to control asset prices 
including house prices. But increases in house prices and housing market activity can give rise 
to macroprudential concerns. If they are debt financed this can in turn lead to vulnerabilities in 
bank  balance  sheets,  excessive  increases  in  aggregate  debt  to  income  ratios  or  adverse 
changes in the distribution of debt. It was this concern that led the FPC in June 2014 to limit 
the flow of high debt to income mortgages; those limits have not been reached but, as the 
housing market begins to heat up again it is prudent that they remain in place. 
The key development in the housing market however has been the rise of mortgage lending 
to “buy to let” purchasers – ie landlords – rather than to owner occupiers. The private rental 
sector  in  the  UK  has  been  growing  rapidly  over  the  past  15  years  partly  due  to  structural 
reasons. The stock of mortgage lending for buy to let has increased from £65bn to £200bn 
over the last decade. And it is growing quickly now, by around 9% a year. Buy to let now 
represents 16% of the overall mortgage stock and accounted for 80% of net lending over the 
past year. 
Buy to let mortgages pose different risks to owner-occupied mortgages. Buy to let mortgages 
are typically interest-only, so loan to value reduces more slowly than for owner occupiers. New 
owner-occupied mortgages are now almost entirely amortising. There is normally a larger initial 
equity cushion as buy to let mortgages in the UK are typically at lower loan to value ratios at 
origination than loans to owner occupiers. 
It is not clear how buy to let investors will behave when interest rates go up or if house price 
growth moderates. The greater initial equity in buy to let may mean that investors are more 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   
resilient to small falls in house prices and higher servicing costs than owner occupiers. But 
they may prove more vulnerable to larger falls in house prices and increases in rates that 
stretch their rental cover. The majority of buy to let investors in the UK are small landlords; 
78% of landlords have only one rental property and the majority of buy-to-let landlords are 
lower rate taxpayers. It is not in my view at all impossible that sharp movements in prices and 
a loss of confidence in future capital appreciation, in combination with interest rate increases, 
could cause a substantial number of buy to let landlords to seek to exit the market. This could 
put material downward pressure on house prices. Though buy to let investors are very different 
to owner occupiers, there is in the end only one housing stock and housing market in the UK. 
So the risk is that they could amplify an adverse shock to the housing market. 
Rapid  growth  in  any  type  of  debt  financed  activity  should  always  lead  a  macroprudential 
regulator to have a closer look. At present there does not appear to have been a general fall 
in lending standards. Indeed, a number of lenders have tightened their interest coverage ratio 
criteria over the last 12 months. But we should in my view at the least be monitoring activity 
and underwriting standards in this market closely and carefully. 
Corporate credit 
In contrast to household lending and the housing market, lending to corporates remains more 
subdued though it is recovering. Bond issuance has accounted for most of the recent increase 
in debt. In the two years to June 2015, UK PNFCs increased their level of borrowing from 
capital markets by £22.9bn and reduced their borrowing from banks by £1.4bn. Overall, UK 
PNFC’s net debt is still some 30% below its 2009 peak. The stock of lending to SMEs, which 
had been declining for over five years, now seems to have stabilised, though it is some way 
from growing in line with the economy. 
The commercial real estate (CRE) component of credit growth in the UK has often been a 
source of vulnerability. UK banks have suffered large losses on CRE portfolios in most of our 
severe recessions and the post crisis recession was no exception. 
On the face of it the UK CRE market is simmering. Transactions reached a record high of £81 
billion in the 12 months to June this year. Prices have risen by 10% over the same period. As 
prices rise, average yields are deteriorating and are now around 2005 levels. 
The  credit  element  of  the  story,  however,  which  is  most  relevant  from  a  macroprudential 
perspective, has been much less pronounced than in past episodes, CRE activity has been 
financed more with equity than debt; the share of equity financing of CRE investment increased 
from about a third pre crisis to three quarters in the years following the crisis. And particularly 
in London, much has been financed by foreign flows which reached £40 billion last year. But 
leverage has started to creep back up in the past year or so as we have seen the return of 
more leveraged investors. 
That  is  not  to  say  that  there  is  no  macroprudential  interest  in  the  UK  CRE  market  at  the 
moment. A rapid fall in CRE values could affect the UK economy through other channels. 
About 60% of lending to SMEs and smaller corporates is secured on property collateral so a 
fall in values could well constrain investment. And there are important initiatives in train to 
develop a database of CRE debt and to explore the use of “through the cycle” valuations1. 
In my view, the overall picture of the credit cycle in the UK suggests that it is entering into a 
more normal phase. Credit terms remain easy for both households and corporates and credit 
is readily available. At an aggregate level, credit in the economy is growing below pre-crisis 
levels  though  to  me  that  might  well  be  a  misleading  metric.  Aggregate  indebtedness  is 
considerably below pre-crisis levels though it remains high. At a more granular level, credit is 
                                                
1   See Brazier, A (2015) “Nurturing resilience to the financial cycle”. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   
growing  fastest  in  the  areas  of  unsecured  lending  to  consumers  and  lending  to  buy  to  let 
housing investors. The stock of credit in each of these areas is reasonably material at around 
10% of GDP. But it is a relatively small component of the overall stock of credit. While we are 
seeing  competition  between  lenders  pushing  down  on  rates,  particularly  in  the  mortgage 
market, we have not yet seen evidence of a general deterioration in underwriting standards. 
Countercyclical macroprudential policy 
As we move forward in the credit cycle, I think we will need to consider whether and how risks 
are  building  in  the  financial  system  and  how  they  should  be  addressed.  This  is  of  course 
already a regular and important element of the FPC’s discussions. But my guess is that it will 
become even more so in the next phase of the cycle. 
With that in mind I want to turn now from the conjunctural assessment of credit in the UK to 
what may look like a more theoretical question but one that is going to be increasingly important 
to us – what is the objective and the framework for time-varying macroprudential policy? 
Here I think one can distinguish a number of different strategies. The first is not to attempt 
time-varying macroprudential policy at all. The second is to set policy to aim to maintain a 
constant degree of resilience relative to risk. And the third is to use policy actively to lean 
against the credit cycle. I want to look at these three approaches for the core and riskiest part 
of the financial system – leveraged banking – and in particular the use of countercyclical capital 
buffers for banks. 
I have some sympathy for the “don’t do it at all” approach. While central banks have, throughout 
their history, tried to take some account of risks building up in the financial system, explicit and 
transparent macroprudential authorities like the FPC with mandates and objectives distinct 
from monetary policy and macroeconomic management are a new development. We have little 
experience in advanced economies with complex financial systems of operating regulatory 
policy in a way which varies with the credit cycle. As I pointed out at the outset, the credit cycle 
can be an even more elusive and difficult to track animal than its cousin the business cycle. 
And in some jurisdictions where, unlike in the UK, macroprudential policy is done by a number 
of regulators, with distinct and differing mandates and without clear single authority over the 
use of macroprudential tools. In those circumstances, time-varying policy may be more difficult 
to operate. 
For those reasons, it can be argued that rather than try to operate time-varying policy, the 
better course is to ensure that the regulatory framework is set to prevent the build-up of risk 
over the credit cycle and, to the extent it cannot achieve this, to have enough spare resilience 
in the system to cope with all eventualities. 
I see however two drawbacks to this approach. The first is that because policy cannot be varied 
through time, to achieve financial stability it probably has to be set at all times at a higher level. 
That may not only be inefficient in economic terms. It also means the macroprudential authority 
has  no  framework  and  tools  for  loosening  regulatory  policy  to  prevent  the  self-reinforcing 
deleveraging spirals that kick in in the downturn of the cycle. Second, it is difficult to know ex 
ante how strong the next credit cycle is going to be and so where to set underlying policy. 
The  FPC  faced  some  of  these  issues  in  the  design  of  the  UK’s  “leverage  ratio”  capital 
framework which the Committee agreed last year. Our conclusion, informed by an assessment 
of the economic costs and benefits, was that provided we had the ability to vary leverage-
related capital requirements countercyclically, in the same way that we could vary the risk-
weighted capital requirements, we could set the minimum leverage requirement at a lower 
point. 
The second approach is to try to maintain the overall resilience of the system over the cycle. 
The underlying regulatory framework is of course intended to cope with a wide range of risks. 
It is intended to keep such risks firmly located in the tail of the distribution. But the distribution 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
   
of risks changes through the cycle. One approach to time-varying macroprudential policy is to 
aim to ensure that tail risks do not increase with the credit cycle – ie that the resilience of the 
system is maintained over time and does not change with the distribution of risks. 
Stress  testing  of  banks  can  play  an  important  part  in  making  an  assessment  of  resilience 
through the cycle. Stress tests provide an assessment of whether the capital buffers held by 
banks are sufficient to absorb losses in a stress. So they are well suited to guide the calibration 
of countercyclical capital buffers. 
The  Bank  of  England  is  developing  a  countercyclical  approach  to  annual  stress  testing  of 
banks. Rather than applying a constant level of stress from year to year, the severity of the 
stress would vary with the cycle. It would increase as risks build up and decrease after they 
have  abated  or  crystallised.  The  parameters  of  the  scenario  –  falls  in  GDP,  asset  prices, 
employment etc – would be most severe during periods of exuberance when credit and asset 
prices  were  growing  quickly  and  the  financial  system  was  least  concerned  with  risk.  The 
parameters would be less severe when exuberance had evaporated and prices had corrected, 
which is often the time when the system is most risk averse. 
We aim to develop this approach over the next three years, starting with the 2016 stress test. 
Along with a regular assessment of data and indicators it will be a key part of a forward looking, 
data driven approach to setting the UK’s countercyclical capital buffer for banks. We have set 
out more details in a recent Bank paper.2 
As always, one issue will be assessing the costs and benefits through time in so far as that is 
practicable. Another is where to set the countercyclical capital buffer in different parts of the 
cycle to enable it to be relaxed at times of stress. A third will be how far in advance one needs 
to act. If you thought that the impact of changes in the CCB happened with a lag, that there 
were benefits in a CCB above zero that could be relaxed, that risks were building or that there 
were benefits to moving policy gradually, these would point to moving earlier rather than later 
in the cycle. 
This approach is intended to maintain the resilience of the system over the cycle. But, clearly, 
requiring banks to hold more capital will very probably also have a dampening effect, leaning 
against the cycle. The third approach to time varying macroprudential policy I mentioned would 
take this further. It would set policy with the explicit objective of pushing back on the cycle until 
the level and perhaps the composition of credit was judged to be more acceptable in risk terms. 
This  of  course  would  be  a  bigger  “call”  for  the  macroprudential  authority  than  targeting 
resilience. Again it requires a very careful assessment of costs and benefits. I do not think the 
macroprudential policy framework should “start” there; the starting point should be maintaining 
resilience. 
But given the history and the objective of maintaining financial stability, I do not think that the 
macroprudential authority can foreswear making such calls when necessary. Indeed, the FPC 
has implicitly already done this in taking action on the flow of high loan to income mortgages. 
In taking this action, the FPC took a view on the risks if the distribution of mortgages shifted 
towards a large share of high loan to income loans. We intended to limit the risks arising from 
increasing household indebtedness and the macroeconomic vulnerabilities this creates. The 
action was forward looking – limits were set at a level above the proportion of such mortgages 
being issued at the time and indeed have not subsequently been reached. 
And that brings me to my final point. The literature and theory of macroprudential policy is as 
yet relatively under-developed and concentrates on prudential regulation of banks and their 
role in the credit cycle. But it is apparent from my short time on the FPC that the time-varying 
risks we need to address go wider than the banking system. The action I have just described 
                                                
2   See “The Bank of England’s approach to stress testing the UK banking system”, October 2015. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   
on housing is one example. The growing attention being paid to potential risks from market as 
opposed to bank-based finance is another. The time-varying macroprudential policy maker 
needs to look wider than the banking system. 
Conclusion 
To conclude, while the credit cycle remains hard to identify with the precision of a physicist, a 
key element of macroprudential policy is try to assess it and to address the risks that build up 
in the financial system over the cycle. This is becoming a more pertinent issue in the UK as 
we move into a more normal phase of the credit cycle; credit is beginning to grow again albeit 
at  rates  below  the  pre-crisis  peaks.  And  within  the  aggregate  numbers  some  sectors  are 
growing relatively quickly. 
Time-varying macroprudential policy is hard and there is much new ground to be broken. But 
there is a benefit in ensuring that the financial system maintains resilience as the distribution 
of systemic risks moves through the cycle and where necessary trying to ensure that such 
risks do not build up unchecked. 
I am conscious that I have spent the last half hour talking about the role of policy through time. 
Einstein, of course, taught us that time was in the end indistinguishable from the dimensions 
of space: “for us physicists believe the separation between past, present and future is only an 
illusion, although a convincing one”. There is I am afraid only so much brilliant simplicity an 
economic policy maker can take. So I fear that for the immediate future at least we will need 
to maintain that convincing and indeed convenient illusion and set policy accordingly. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
