   Jens Weidmann: A central banker’s take on improving the euro area’s 
stability 
Speech by Dr Jens Weidmann, President of the Deutsche Bundesbank and Chairman of the 
Board of Directors of the Bank for International Settlements, at the Bank of Portugal, Lisbon, 
10 December 2015. 
 Introduction 
1. 
Governor Costa, Ambassador Brandenburg, President Martinho 
Distinguished members of the Portuguese Government and the Portuguese Parliament 
Ladies and gentlemen 
Thank you very much for inviting me. It is a pleasure to be here in Lisbon. I am very honoured 
that the event this evening has attracted such a distinguished audience. 
In my speech today, I will address the future of EMU ‒ the economic and monetary union in 
Europe. I will focus on the issue of making the euro area more prosperous and making the 
common currency more stable. 
The  euro  has  always  been  a  political  project  with  the  aim  of  establishing  ever  closer  ties 
between the nations of Europe. But, of course, it is more than just a political project – it also 
holds out the promise of prosperity. 
In recent years, this promise has lost credibility for many in the euro area, prompting some to 
regard the requirements of our common currency not as an anchor of stability, but as a source 
of  instability.  Interestingly,  this  view  is  shared  by  both:  observers  complaining  about  the 
institutional framework being too restrictive to allow for national stabilisation policies, and those 
complaining  about  monetary  union  evolving  into  a  transfer  union,  which  is  contrary  to  the 
stipulation of the Maastricht Treaty. 
It is undisputed, however, that the rescue mechanisms that were put in place prevented the 
crisis  in  the  euro  area  from  escalating.  But  they  did  so  by  mutualising  fiscal  liability  on  a 
substantial scale. 
Fiscal and economic policies, by contrast, are essentially still a national prerogative, though 
the rules have admittedly been stiffened somewhat. As a result, the balance between liability 
and control has been thrown out of kilter. 
However,  such  a  balanced  partnership  between  liability  and  control  is  so  crucial  for  the 
functioning of EMU that it calls to mind a Frank Sinatra song called “Love and marriage”. You 
may remember the words: 
Love and marriage, love and marriage / they go together like a horse and carriage / 
This 
... 
Try, try, try to separate them / It’s an illusion 
/  You  can’t  have  one  without 
tell  you  brother 
the  other 
I 
 However, while some would argue that love and marriage are separable concepts, it really is 
an illusion to separate liability and control without undermining the stability of monetary union. 
And there is no getting around the fact: a combination of national sovereignty and common 
solidarity can pose a risk to the stability of our monetary union. 
A large measure of solidarity certainly helps a country in crisis to cope in the short run. But, 
allowing a national fiscal burden to be shifted onto the community of all member states will 
weaken incentives for sound fiscal policy in the long run. 
The underlying economic problem here is known as the “tragedy of the commons”. This is a 
situation in which every individual tries to reap the greatest benefit from a given resource. Let’s 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   
take the example of overfishing: Just as fishing by the crew of one fishing boat reduces the 
number of fish available for others and threatens the entire fish population in the long run, 
excessive public debt harms the euro area as a whole. Rising debt in one member state drives 
up  longer-term  interest  rates  for  all  euro-area  countries.  And  if  the  excessive  debt  of  one 
country poses a threat to the financial stability of the entire euro area, the viability of the whole 
project might be called into question. 
The point of the tragedy of the commons is that it is, from a certain narrow point of view, entirely 
rational for a single fishing vessel to catch as many fish as it can, thus destroying the basis of 
such economic activity for others and for future generations. So, what we have here is a classic 
coordination failure. 
EMU’s architecture 
2. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
In their report on completing EMU, the Five European Presidents compare the monetary union 
with “a house that was built over decades but only partially finished. When the storm hit, its 
walls and roof had to be stabilised quickly”. 
However, after all those quick fixes in recent years, it needs to be decided how the house 
should look in the future, and if I may quote the Five Presidents again: “It is now high time to 
reinforce its foundations”. 
The  latter  is  certainly  true,  but  you  can  come  to  very  different  conclusions  about  how  to 
construct those foundations. 
To find out how the euro area could develop, we first need to take a closer look at the special 
terrain occupied by Europe’s monetary union. What sets our monetary union apart from other 
currency areas? 
I think the difference can be summed up in a single word: asymmetry. EMU unified monetary 
policy. But, fiscal and economic policies continue to be a national matter, albeit subject to 
coordination rules. 
As I have already mentioned, this asymmetry can give rise to instability. If the consequences 
of an unsustainable national economic policy can be shifted onto others – for example, through 
bail-outs or via the conduit of a common central bank balance sheet – incentives for prudent 
policymaking will be stunted. 
Still, hopes were high that, with sufficient safeguards in place, an asymmetrically integrated 
euro area could prove to be stable as well. As we now know, that hope has not been fulfilled. 
The safeguards installed to ensure sound public finances, such as the Stability and Growth 
Pact and the no bail-out clause, have failed to keep public debt in check. 
Beyond  that,  the  framework  also  had  its  shortcomings.  It  did  not  provide  for  resolution 
mechanisms to deal with the financial fallout of private over-borrowing. Nor has it prevented 
economic imbalances from building up, which eventually required painful adjustment policies 
in some euro-area countries. 
Rebalancing at national level 
2.1 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
In his novel Anna Karenina, Leo Tolstoy famously observed that happy families are all alike, 
while every unhappy family is unhappy in its own way. This insight puts me somewhat in mind 
of economic developments in the euro-area countries over the first decade of EMU. 
The underlying reasons why euro area economies got into trouble differed from country to 
country. Nevertheless, there are some factors which are more or less common to all “unhappy” 
countries. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   
In some cases, lower interest rates brought about by monetary union and inflowing capital 
fuelled unsustainable developments. The resulting domestic boom and existing labour market 
rigidities led to large wage increases well in excess of productivity growth, triggering a loss in 
price competitiveness, thereby impairing export performance. Current account deficits were 
therefore ultimately a symptom of countries living beyond their means. 
Portugal, for example, had a current account deficit before the crisis amounting to 12 % of 
GDP, which was definitely not sustainable. 
Economic adjustment was therefore unavoidable. And if countries like Greece, Ireland and 
Portugal had not drawn on European and international solidarity, the adjustment process would 
have been much more abrupt. The sudden stop of external capital inflows would have forced 
those economies to balance their current accounts immediately. 
In  response  to  the  crisis,  Portugal  implemented  considerable  consolidation  measures  and 
structural reforms. And the ongoing recovery not only of the Portuguese economy but also of 
the Spanish and Irish economies proves that the adjustment efforts are paying off. 
In  order  to  reap  more  benefits  and  to  create  a  higher  growth  potential,  fiscal  adjustment, 
structural reforms and moderate wage policies need to be continued. Otherwise, the country 
in  question  would  not  be  able  to  stop  the  increasing  backlog  regarding  GDP  per  capita 
compared to the European Union or even reduce it. 
I  am  aware  that  such  policies  are  not  always  popular,  but  as the  Portuguese  professor of 
finance, Pedro Santa-Clara was recently quoted as saying in the Financial Times, “Growth is 
a painful business”. And I would add: “But having no growth is even more painful.” 
Growth-enhancing reforms in individual countries including Germany are only one element, of 
course.  Measures  at  the  European  level  could  likewise  boost  innovation,  productivity  and 
employment. In particular, I believe that the completion of the single market for services, the 
creation of a single digital market and the capital market union could constitute an important 
growth impetus. 
One  of  the  most  important  lessons  to  be  learned  from  the  recent  crisis  is,  however,  that 
member states must adapt better to the requirements of a monetary union. This means, in 
particular, to adapt to the fact that wage increases above productivity growth can no longer be 
compensated by currency devaluations. 
But  the  crisis  has  also  made  it  obvious  that  national  economic  policies  need  collective 
surveillance. To quote Governor Costa: “It is clear for all of us today that the stability and 
prosperity of the euro area as a whole depend on the stability and prosperity of its individual 
members.” 
In other words: regarding national imbalances, benign neglect must belong to the past. This 
is, by the way, also true of economies with persistent current account surpluses. A surplus of 
more than 8% of GDP, such as we are currently seeing in Germany, is an economic challenge, 
too. 
On the other hand, it needs to be recognised that this high figure is not the result of protectionist 
economic policy measures, and that the recent rise is caused, not least, by the devaluation of 
the euro – also linked to the divergent monetary policy on both sides of the Atlantic – and by 
the fall in energy prices. Moreover, it should be noted that a surplus country – in contrast to a 
deficit country – is not at risk of being corrected abruptly, and is therefore less vulnerable. 
However, reinforcing the foundations of monetary union requires more than the prevention of 
new imbalances at national level. It requires institutional reforms at European level. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   A fiscal union 
2.2 
In  their  approach,  the  Five  Presidents  are  aiming  –  metaphorically  speaking  –  at  a  more 
symmetric  approach.  Completing  EMU,  as  they  understand  it,  implies  risk-sharing  and 
centralisation of economic policy issues. 
Even for Karl Otto Pöhl, the former Bundesbank president who was a member of the Delors 
Commission,  the  symmetric  approach  was  the  intuitive  one:  “In  a  monetary  union  with 
irreversibly fixed exchange rates, the weak would become ever weaker and the strong ever 
stronger. We would thus experience great tensions in the real economy of Europe. For this 
reason alone, monetary union without the simultaneous integration in fields like fiscal policy as 
well as regional and social policy is completely inconceivable.” 
Creating a fiscal union – that is, centralised decision-making in the fiscal realm, combined with 
fiscal transfers or mutual liability in the form of Eurobonds could make EMU less vulnerable. 
The balance between control and liability would be restored. 
Shifting decision-making from the national to the European level would mitigate the deficit bias 
of the individual member states that is inherent in the current set-up of EMU. While this in itself 
is not a guarantee of sound fiscal policy choices, such a framework would at least be consistent 
with the concept of mutual liability. 
What kind of sovereignty shift are we talking about? Last year, the French finance minister 
Michel Sapin declared that, “the Commission […] has absolutely no power to reject or knock 
down  or  censure  a  budget  […].  Here  as  elsewhere,  sovereignty  belongs  to  the  French 
parliament.” 
In a genuine fiscal union, that would change. A member state would have to follow through on 
the demands of a European fiscal authority. As such, a common fiscal authority would be the 
biggest step in integration since the introduction of the euro. It would be a tall order that would 
entail  treaty  changes  and  referendums.  But  anything  less  than  a  comprehensive  shift  of 
sovereignty would fall short of what is required. This holds true regardless of whether we move 
to a common euro-area treasury with its own budget or to a system allowing interventions in 
existing national budgets. 
Europe shying away from the political ramifications of a fully-fledged fiscal union would leave 
only one viable option – a decentralised approach based on individual responsibility, which 
means continuing on the path taken by the founding fathers of the Maastricht Treaty. 
In  this  asymmetric  approach,  economic  and  fiscal  policy  decisions  remain  largely  at  the 
national level. But final responsibility rests with the individual member states as well. 
Asymmetry does not automatically have to translate into instability. Just take a chair: a chair 
with three legs never wobbles; one with four legs sometimes does. A chair with three legs, 
remember, is always stable because three is the minimum number of points to define a plane. 
When all points lie on the same plane, the chair will be stable. If you add another leg, its end 
must also lie on that plane, otherwise things get wobbly. So, it is not about whether the legs 
are arranged symmetrically; it is about whether their feet are on the same plane. 
The same applies to monetary union. It is not necessary for all policy areas to be integrated 
symmetrically. What is necessary is that control and liability be situated on the same plane. 
Only by aligning control and liability either nationally or at the European level will the incentives 
for sound policymaking be put in place. This is why the measures taken so far to contain the 
crisis have skewed the delicate balance between control and liability. 
The  crucial  question  is  this:  how  can  we  restore  that  balance  within  the  decentralised 
approach? 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   A framework of individual responsibility 
2.3 
A  workable  decentralised  approach  would,  in  particular,  have  to  deal  with  a  blatant 
inconsistency in the current framework which makes the system as it stands fragile. While bail-
outs  and  monetary  financing  are  prohibited  under  the  Maastricht  treaty,  sovereign  debt  is 
nonetheless treated as risk-free in the capital regime for banks. 
Danièle Nouy, the chairwoman of the European banking supervision, said: “Sovereigns are not 
risk-free assets. That has been demonstrated, so now we have to react.” 
I totally agree with her. Sovereign debt in banks’ balance sheets needs to be backed by capital, 
just as is the case for any private debtor. But perhaps it is even more important to put a lid on 
banks’ exposures to a single sovereign. 
Sovereign risk is a cluster risk – that is, a risk so large that the default of a single debtor can 
bring  a  bank to  its knees. To  prevent  this from happening,  banks  are  subject  to the  large 
exposure regime, which means that they can only lend up to 25 per cent of their equity to a 
single debtor. This means that banks will be more likely to have enough capital to cope with a 
single debtor’s default. 
Sovereigns, however, are currently exempt from the large exposure regime. As a result, banks 
often hold an amount of bonds of their home country alone that exceeds the total of their equity. 
Particularly during the sovereign debt crisis, banks increased their holdings of domestic debt 
securities. 
According to an Economic Study by Banco de Portugal1, holdings of Portuguese government 
bonds on the balance sheets of domestic banks in Portugal are approximately five times higher 
than before the crisis. Other countries, and in particular those with vulnerable banking systems 
have experienced strong increases in sovereign debt exposures and home bias, too. 
That is why a sovereign debt restructuring currently poses the threat of bringing down the 
national banking system in question. And this is why, for a decentralised framework to function, 
the large exposure regime has to apply to bank lending to sovereigns as well. Simply doing 
away  with  the  zero-risk  weighting  will  not  suffice.  Banks’  exposures  to  their  respective 
sovereigns are often too large. 
Capping  the  amount  of  debt  issued  by  a  single  sovereign  that  a  bank  can  hold  does  not 
necessarily mean that a bank will hold less sovereign debt overall. It can still buy the debt of 
other sovereigns, up to the individual limit. 
What it does mean, therefore, is that banks cannot put all their sovereign eggs into one basket, 
so to speak. Diversification is of the essence. And this will go a long way towards ensuring that 
a sovereign debt restructuring will not bring down a country’s national banking system – leading 
to a vicious cycle with wobbling banks and stumbling states clinging to each other. 
Besides, there is no compelling economic argument why banks should be the main financiers 
of sovereigns in the first place. Banks’ long-standing ties with their private clients allow them 
to  glean  information  about  firms  and  managers.  This  information  allows  banks  to  allocate 
capital more efficiently than other intermediaries who lack such information. In the process, 
banks create value for the economy as a whole. 
However, banks do not have such privileged information on the debt of a nation – especially 
on the debt of central governments. It makes sense for banks to hold a certain amount of 
sovereign debt for liquidity purposes. But there is no reason why the financing of governments 
should not be more of a matter for the capital markets. 
                                                
1   Crosignani, M et al., The Portuguese Banking System during the Sovereign Debt Crisis, July 2015. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
   
Doing away with the regulatory privileges afforded to sovereign debt would force the markets 
to take account of the differences in sovereigns’ risk profiles. For countries that pursue sound 
policies,  this  would  mean  declining  risk  premiums,  while  unsustainable  policies  would  be 
sanctioned. And, as a last resort, a sovereign debt restructuring would be possible without 
bringing down the financial system. 
However,  changes  are  in  order  not  only  with  regard  to  the  capital  regulation  of  sovereign 
bonds. In a framework of individual responsibility, we need to make sure that responsibility 
rests with those who assumed the risks in the first place. 
As it is, a member state that loses market access can apply for an ESM rescue programme 
that  combines  financial  assistance  with  economic  reforms.  If  things  work  out  as  planned, 
deficits are brought down, growth capacity is raised, and market access is restored. 
However, if things do not work out as planned and the member state in question does not 
regain market access, the only way out might be a restructuring of the debt burden. But by 
then, the European taxpayer has already picked up part of the bill, as private bond holders 
have been replaced by the ESM. 
One way to change this would be an automatic three-year maturity extension for all bonds, 
activated  the  moment  a  government  applies  for  an  ESM  programme.  Such  an  automatic 
maturity extension would allow the sovereign in question to tackle its fiscal challenges while 
preventing investors from bolting. The amount of official financial support via the ESM would 
be  greatly  reduced,  and  time  could  be  bought  to  figure  out  if  the  problem  really  is  one  of 
temporary illiquidity or one of insolvency. 
A framework of individual responsibility requires not only that creditors are fit to absorb the 
losses from a sovereign debt restructuring, but also that they actually do so when the going 
gets tough. Obviously, it would be best if the need for sovereign debt restructuring never arose 
in the first place. 
A fiscal council 
2.4 
This is where fiscal rules come in. 
Prior to the crisis, the binding force of the euro-area fiscal rules was modest, to put it mildly. 
Thus, when the crisis hit, many countries had little fiscal space to counter its impact. This 
highlights the importance of fiscal buffers. And following up on a lesson of the crisis, the rules 
were stiffened somewhat. 
But, at the same time, the Commission was granted more leeway in interpreting the rules. So 
far,  the  Commission  has  made  ample  use  of  this  additional  leeway,  thereby  thwarting  the 
original intention of the revised rules. 
In my opinion, it would be best if the task of applying the rules were to be transferred to a new, 
independent fiscal council. This could help to unburden the Commission of its difficult political 
conflict of interest. On the one hand, the Commission is an important political player searching 
for a balance between the member states’ different interests. On the other hand, it has to be a 
neutral referee in assessing compliance with the Stability and Growth Pact. 
The Five Presidents’ report also envisages such a council, and recently, the Commission has 
followed up on the report and come forward with a proposal. But, as the ECB rightly points out 
in  its  current  Economic  Bulletin,  the  Commission’s  proposal  suffers  from  a  number  of 
shortcomings. 
The proposal does not make provision for the evaluations of the fiscal council being made 
public in a timely manner. If the alarm is raised too late, it might be a case of trying to shut the 
stable door after the horse has bolted. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   
What is more, the Commission has dropped the comply-or-explain approach outlined in the 
Five Presidents’ report, under which the Commission would have to explain itself whenever it 
deviated from the recommendations set out by the fiscal council. 
This does not bode well for the objective of a more depoliticised application of the rules. For 
that, a fiscal council needs to be truly independent, and its recommendations need to carry 
weight. 
And please let me emphasise again: fiscal rules are neither needless nor damaging for the 
euro area. This holds, even in these times of the extraordinary high influx of refugees or the 
struggle against terrorism. The fiscal rules already allow for additional public expenditures if 
they  are  irrefutable  and  unforeseeable  as  well  as  closely  related  to  these  extraordinary 
circumstances. 
But  more  generally,  the  current  debate  about  softening  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  is 
misleading, because it conveys the impression that sound fiscal budgets would get in the way 
of fulfilling important public duties. The opposite is true, however. Sound public finances are a 
precondition for being able to handle specific challenges. Correspondingly, Germany currently 
benefits from its budgetary surplus because it grants fiscal leeway for the expenditures related 
to refugees. 
Conclusion 
3. 
Ladies and gentlemen, let me conclude. 
Today, Economic and Monetary Union does not look like other successful currency areas. 
Maybe  it  will  never  match  their  degree  of  symmetry  with  regard  to  policy  integration.  But 
perhaps some findings about our perception of beauty can provide a little encouragement. 
While  symmetry  appears  to  play  a  role  in  whether  we  consider  a  face  to  be  attractive, 
researchers have found that this is only part of the story. Apparently, it is the little deviations 
from the norm, the minor asymmetries, that render a face truly beautiful. 
But we still have a long way to go before Europe’s citizens perceive EMU as truly “beautiful”. 
I am now looking forward to discussing with you the future of our monetary union. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
