   Peter Praet: Interview in La Libre Belgique 
Interview with Mr Peter Praet, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
in La Libre Belgique, conducted by Ms Isabelle de Laminne and Mr Vincent Slits and published 
on 21 December 2015. 
 What is the situation in the euro area on the eve of 2016? How do you see the coming 
years? 
The economic outlook has improved, in an environment where interest rates are low and oil 
prices  have  fallen  sharply.  The  positive  effects  of  the  structural  reforms  in  a  number  of 
countries, such as Spain and Ireland, should also be underscored. These factors have had 
positive effects on the labour market and on the economic recovery. Fiscal policies will be 
more neutral too, even slightly expansionary. In fact, they will contribute 0.1% to GDP growth 
in the euro area in 2016 and 2017. 
Enormous fiscal efforts have been made, although debt levels are still too high. However, we 
must bear in mind that real GDP in the euro area in the first quarter of 2016 will barely return 
to its level of early 2008. This means that over the last eight years the GDP of the euro area 
has not grown in real terms, on average, even though countries like Germany saw reasonable 
growth. Other countries have experienced a severe fall in their living standards for a very long 
period of time. 
This poses a number of problems. The damage caused by a period of non-growth, with two 
recessions,  is  considerable.  There  is,  of  course,  structural  unemployment,  but  business 
investment also declined considerably during this period and has still not regained its 2008 
level. Countries have also cut back sharply on infrastructure investment. 
And has the financial sector stabilised now? 
The financial sector is on a firmer footing. It has largely been recapitalised. Banking supervision 
is now carried out at European Central Bank level, and that is a very positive development. 
But  pockets  of  fragility  still  exist,  for  example  the  level  of  non-performing  loans  in  some 
countries.  Provisions  have  been made for  these  debts,  but  they  are  an element  of fragility 
nonetheless. The low profitability of some banks and the level of public sector debt, which is 
still significant, should also be underscored. 
Before the crisis, public debt in the euro area represented 60% of GDP, but today it stands at 
nearly 100%. 
To conclude, the economic situation in the euro area is improving but remains difficult. The 
main  challenge  for  the  euro  area  will  be  to  demonstrate  its  ability  to  bring  prosperity  and 
security. An enormous amount of work remains to be done. 
To  this  must  be  added  the  political  risks  of  what  I  call  “seeping  pessimism”.  There  is  still 
considerable support for the euro but at the political level greater European integration is still 
rejected to some extent. That is one of the risks for the coming years. The crisis has highlighted 
not the weaknesses of monetary union, but the weaknesses of an incomplete monetary union. 
The ECB often sends out the message that it can create the conditions for stronger 
growth but that governments must, in turn, undertake structural reforms to make their 
economies more competitive. Do the politicians expect too much from the ECB? 
Yes and no. 
No, because everyone responsible must take action. This is not a great coordinated plan. We 
need a mix. A mix that includes, on the one hand, a policy of structural reforms to stimulate 
supply  in  the  economy,  and  support  for  demand  led  by  the  ECB,  and,  on  the  other,  fiscal 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   policies  to  achieve  both  debt  sustainability  and  long-term  growth.  Cuts  affecting  public 
infrastructure should be avoided, for example; they are not good for long-term growth. 
The  principal  challenge  for  governments  is  to  regain  the  road  to  productivity,  a  source  of 
prosperity. If you look back to 2000 and the outlook for growth for the following five years, an 
average growth rate of 2.4% was expected. In 2015 the growth prospects for the next five 
years are no higher than 1.3% annually. This problem also affects Japan, the United States 
and the emerging countries. Productivity gains are limited to certain technology sectors. They 
need to be rolled out to the rest of society, the health sector for example, or to tax collection. 
Overall,  productivity  gains  have  slowed  with  respect  to  previous  decades.  The  priority  in 
structural reform must be the rapid dissemination of these technological advances throughout 
society. 
And yes, because people expect too much from the ECB, if other actors rein in their efforts 
whenever we take action. We are seeing less of an effort on the public finance side. The ECB 
made it possible to avoid an outright depression in 2012 and 2013, and even the break-up of 
the euro. It will pursue an accommodative monetary policy for as long as is necessary. Without 
giving a date, this timescale is fairly long. It’s a long lasting endeavour. Additional risks have 
arisen from the slowdown in the emerging countries, risks that are pretty significant for the euro 
area. There are also downward pressures on prices in the manufacturing sector as a result of 
surplus output and the very high unemployment level. 
But monetary policy alone will not solve all the problems. 
Is the situation in Greece under control now? 
Discussions are ongoing and are still intensive at the political and technical levels, but the will 
to succeed is there and the atmosphere of the discussions has improved considerably. It is 
distinctly more positive than it was at the beginning of the year. A great deal of progress has 
already been made through these negotiations. Significant reforms have been voted in. The 
banks will be able to be recapitalised. Nevertheless, the situation remains very fragile in this 
country. 
After the debt crisis, isn’t the migration crisis the next threat to European cohesion? 
Or does it represent more of an opportunity? 
Europe must show that it is a prosperous and secure area. In the short term migration will have 
an economic impact in the form of a fiscal expansion with some positive impact on growth. 
Germany’s fiscal situation is likely to deteriorate by around 0.3% to 0.4% of GDP in 2016 and 
2017. This deterioration will be weaker in other countries. In the long term we will also have to 
look at the impact of the refugee crisis. This population is different, and care will have to be 
taken in integrating the migrants into the labour market, especially in Germany. In the medium 
term, from a demographic point of view, it can be a positive factor. The key issue is that of 
integrating  migrants  into  the  labour market  in  line  with  their  profiles.  All of these  economic 
aspects are known and straightforward. From an economic perspective, this situation is not 
insurmountable;  it  is  above  all  a  political  issue.  The  more  integration  we  achieve  at  the 
economic level, the more it will be accepted politically. But all of this cannot be done in a day. 
Europe needs a young and well-trained workforce. We can create an opportunity out of a tragic 
situation, but it is not going to be easy. It is possible for a country to organise migration, and 
we have already done so in the past. 
The issue of security to combat the threat of terrorism will become a major challenge 
for governments in the months to come. France has already said that it will take a few 
liberties with the European deficit limits. Shouldn’t the fiscal straightjacket on Member 
States be loosened? 
This has been a little bit overstated, because the security figures are quite low in the budgets, 
and it is not prohibitively expensive to strengthen security. Of course, it is relevant from a fiscal 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   point of view, but the amounts are not very high. By contrast, if we include the cost of national 
defence  under  security,  then  the  figures  are  potentially  higher.  However,  it  should  be 
emphasised  that  this  is  not  the  source  of  France’s  fiscal  woes:  it  also  has  a  well-known 
structural problem. 
How can we counter the surge in nationalist and populist currents in Europe from an 
economic perspective? 
By delivering the prosperity and economic security that was promised when we created the 
euro area. Today, we have the same level of economic output as we had eight years ago. The 
crisis caused significant economic and social pain, notably in the countries that experienced a 
drop  in  their  living  standards.  Inequality  has  risen  as  a  result  of  unemployment.  This  is 
unacceptable  socially  and  has  political  consequences.  There  is  no  obvious  willingness  to 
integrate the euro area further. We are at a turning point. Integration at the financial level is 
progressing, but the European project as a whole needs to be further deepened. We must 
resist the temptation to go into reverse; we shouldn’t agree to stand still: we must forge ahead 
towards more integration. 
As a central banker, I am more of an observer than an actor in this area. Monetary policy is 
only one part of this. But even the harshest critics acknowledge that the ECB is an institution 
that functions well and has the capacity to take decisions and to avoid catastrophes. The same 
effectiveness would be required at the political level, even if, admittedly, it is more difficult. And, 
as I said earlier, the crisis did not reveal the weaknesses of monetary union, but rather the 
weaknesses of an incomplete monetary union. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
