  Mario Draghi: Interview in Il Sole 24 Ore 
Interview with Mr Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank, in Il Sole 24 Ore, 
conducted  by  Mr  Alessandro  Merli  and  Mr  Roberto  Napoletano,  published  on  31  October 
2015. 
 President Draghi, in Malta last week, you stressed the downside risks for both growth 
and inflation and, in particular, the developments in emerging markets. Also, the most 
recent data for the United States show that there is a sharp brake on growth. Can you 
quantify the risks to growth in the euro area? 
The conditions in the economies of the rest of the world have undoubtedly proved  weaker 
compared  with  a  few  months  ago,  in  particular  in  the  emerging  economies,  with  the 
exception of India. Global growth forecasts have been revised downwards. This slowdown is 
probably not temporary. To illustrate the importance of emerging markets, it is recalled that 
they  are  worth  60%  of gross  world  product  and  that, since  2000,  they have  accounted for 
three-quarters of world growth. Half of euro area exports go to these markets. The risks are 
therefore  certainly  on  the  downside  for  both  inflation  and  growth,  also  because  of  the 
potential slowdown in the United States, the causes of which we need to understand fully. 
The crisis led to a sharp drop in incomes. It is up to us to push them up again. This requires 
the  necessary  structural  reforms  to  be  carried  out  in  order  to  increase  labour  force 
participation  rates  and  boost  productivity.  There  are  still  at  least  20  million  unemployed 
people in the euro area – many of whom are young – who need to be brought back into the 
labour market. This represents enormous potential. 
In Malta, you said you were “less sanguine” about the inflation outlook. Based on the 
most  recent  data,  the  inflation  path  now  starts  from  a  lower  point  than  what  was 
expected  as  recently  as  September,  as  we  will  see 
from  your  December 
macroeconomic  projections.  How  realistic  is  it  at  this  stage  to  speak  of  inflation 
reaching 1.7% by the end of 2017? 
I  would  make  a  distinction  between  the  forecasts  for  the  next  period  and  those  for  the 
medium to long term. As far as the next few months are concerned, the most relevant factor 
will be the price of energy. We expect inflation to remain close to zero, and maybe even to 
turn negative, at least until the start of 2016. After that, the effect of the sharp decline in oil 
prices that we have seen between the end of 2014 and the end of this year will disappear 
from the one-year ahead annual price index. This will lead to a purely mechanical increase in 
annual inflation. 
What will happen in the medium term? 
From mid-2016 to the end of 2017, also due to the delayed effect of the depreciation in the 
exchange rate, we expect inflation to increase gradually. But what is important to note today 
is that, even in September’s forecasts, we had already lowered our inflation expectations for 
2017  compared  with  those  we  forecast  in  March,  when  we  had  just  started  purchasing 
€60 billion of public sector securities a month. 
It will therefore take longer than was foreseen in March to return to price stability. The good 
news about medium-term inflation expectations is that, after falling in September, these have 
now returned to a level above 1.7%, which is not far from our inflation objective. However, 
these  figures  should  be  viewed  with  caution,  because  these  expectations  have  always 
showed a degree of volatility. 
You have always said that this outcome depends on the full implementation of your 
monetary policy and you have added on a number of occasions that there is flexibility 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
in your asset purchase programme in terms of its size, composition and duration. You 
have  also  said  that  the  next  meeting  on  3  December  2015  is  when  you  will  
“re-examine”  these  aspects.  The  financial  markets  read  this  date  as  being  decision 
time  for  the  ECB.  Is  this  interpretation  correct?  Have  you  started  to  consider  the 
relative merits of these three types of action, which could have different effects? Do 
you envisage using them simultaneously? 
If we are convinced that our medium-term inflation target is at risk, we will take the necessary 
actions. In the meantime we are assessing whether the change in the underlying scenario is 
temporary  or  less  so.  Moreover,  after  the  meeting  in  Malta,  we  asked  all  the  relevant 
committees and ECB staff to prepare analyses of the relative effectiveness of the different 
options  for  the  December  meeting.  We  will  decide  on  this  basis.  We  will  see  whether  a 
further stimulus is necessary. This is an open question. The programmes that we have put 
together are all characterised by their capacity to be used with the necessary flexibility. 
However, for the first time you mentioned a cut in the ECB’s bank deposit rate and you 
said that “things have changed” since you had stated that –0.20% was the minimum 
lower bound. Can you explain what has changed? 
The circumstances informing the decision to reduce the bank deposit rate to its current level 
actually consisted of a macroeconomic framework that has since changed. The price of oil 
and  the  exchange  rate  have  changed.  I  would  say  that  the  global  economic  situation  has 
changed. The interest rate on deposits could be one of the instruments that we use again. 
Now  we  have  one  more  year  of  experience  in  this  area:  we  have  seen  that  the  money 
markets adapted in a completely calm and smooth way to the new interest rate that we set a 
year ago; other countries have lowered their rate to much more negative levels than ours. 
The lower bound of the interest rate on deposits is a technical constraint and, as such, may 
be changed in line with circumstances. The main test of a central bank’s credibility is – as I 
have  said  before  –  the  ability  to  achieve  its  objectives;  it  has  nothing  to  do  with  the 
instruments. 
So,  you  see  cutting the  bank  deposit rate  as  an  instrument  that  can  be  used  at the 
same time as the amendments to QE? 
I would say that it is too early to make that judgement. 
In Malta, you also said you had discussed “some other monetary policy instruments”. 
What did you have in mind? 
It would be too early at this stage to restrict the menu of instruments that will be assessed by 
the relevant committees and ECB staff. The existing menu is nevertheless extensive – you 
only have to look at what has been done in the past three years. However, it is too early to 
say in any case that “this is the menu” and that “there is nothing to add”. 
In light of the results achieved, do you think that your move to QE came too late? 
I  would  say  that,  overall,  the  Governing  Council  took  steps  based  on  the  information 
available. As regards the policy design, this move towards QE started with a speech at the 
Sciences Po in Paris in March 2014, continued with one in Amsterdam in April of that year 
and  finished  in  Jackson  Hole  in  August.  In  particular,  in  Amsterdam  it  was  said  that  a 
significant worsening of the medium-term outlook for inflation could warrant the purchase of 
government  securities.  As  these  conditions  gradually  materialised,  we  worked  consistently 
on this plan. 
But were you delayed or not? 
On  the  whole,  I  would  not  say  that  we  acted  late:  we  took  note  of  the  information  which 
became available and at the same time drew up the conceptual framework that led to these 
decisions.  It  should  also  be  taken  into  account  that,  in  the  case  of  monetary  union,  the 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  decisions  were  even  more  complex,  because  it  was  necessary  to  assess  the  relative 
importance of different factors driving the fall in inflation such as the structural readjustments 
in the countries which were in greater need of restoring their competitiveness, the fall in the 
price of oil and the strong appreciation of the exchange rate in 2013. I would say in short that 
what emerges from this experience is that the monetary policy framework which was reactive 
at the end of 2012 became proactive with the speeches I have mentioned. 
You  spoke  earlier  about  the  global  macroeconomic  environment which is  changing. 
The Vice Chairman of the Federal Reserve System, Stanley Fisher, said that the Fed 
today  takes  much  greater  account  of  international  factors  than  it  did  up  until  a  few 
years ago. Is this true of the ECB as well? And does the Fed’s delay in starting to raise 
rates influence in some way your decisions, considering that the exchange rate is not 
a policy target? 
As I said, external circumstances, the assumptions underlying our forecasts, are important 
because they influence inflation expectations, and therefore the profile of the return towards 
price stability and of the growth rate. They form part of the set of information that we, like the 
other policy-makers, use to take our decisions. As far as the Fed is concerned, there’s no 
direct link between what we are doing and what they are doing. Both central banks have their 
mandate defined by the jurisdiction in which they operate, for them it’s the United States, for 
us it’s the euro area. 
In Lima you said that high-debt countries had to prepare for the day when they suffer 
from  the  impact  of  higher  yields.  At  the  same  time,  these  countries  suffer  but  also 
from the fact that inflation is very low, making debt reduction complicated. Isn’t this an 
even more serious risk? In Europe an increase in yields is not imminent, while too low 
inflation is making itself felt. 
Low inflation has two effects. The first one is negative because it makes debt reduction more 
difficult. The second one is positive because it lowers interest rates on the debt itself. The 
path on which fiscal policy has to move is narrow, but it’s the only one available: on the one 
hand ensuring debt sustainability and on the other maintaining growth. If interest rate savings 
are used for current spending the risk increases that the debt becomes unsustainable when 
interest rates go up. Ideally, the savings are instead spent on public investments whose rates 
of  return  permit  repayment  of  the  interest  when  it  rises.  Growth  is  maintained  today  and 
future public finances are not destabilised when rates go up. 
Obviously it’s not simple because, as we know, there aren’t many public investments with a 
high rate of return. 
Precisely on the subject of fiscal policy, there’s a lot of discussion in Europe at the 
political level. You are one of the first to use the expression “fiscal compact” in the 
European  debate.  Do  you  think  now,  looking  back,  that  the  degree  of  budget 
restrictions in the euro area was too strong after the crisis, in other words that there 
has been excessive austerity which has held back the recovery in the euro area? 
First of all, there are countries which don’t have the scope for fiscal expansion according to 
the rules which we have given ourselves. Secondly, where this is possible, fiscal expansion 
must  be  able  to  take  place  without  harming  the  sustainability  of  the  debt.  The  high-debt 
countries have less scope to do this. But the fiscal space is not a fact of nature, it can be 
expanded, even a high-debt country can do it. How? By making the structural reforms which 
push  up  potential  output,  the  participation  rate,  productivity,  all  factors  which  substantially 
boost  the  potential  for  future  tax  revenues.  Increasing  revenues  on  a  permanent  basis 
expands  the  possibilities  for  repaying  debt  tomorrow  and  at  the  same  time  creates  the 
conditions for fiscal  expansion  today. The  structural  reforms  are  not  popular  because they 
involve  paying  a  price  today  for  benefits tomorrow,  but  if  the  government’s  commitment  is 
real and the reforms are credible, the benefits are gained more quickly and they include fiscal 
space. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  
 
What has been the impact of your monetary policy on Italy, in particular on credit and 
indirectly on the recovery which is finally arriving? 
The  impact  of  the  ECB’s  monetary  policy  is  clearly  visible  in  the  cost  of  bank  loans  to 
businesses and households. Since the announcement of the credit expansion measures in 
June  2014,  based  on  a composite  index  which  measures  the  cost  of  loans, the  index  has 
gone down by 120 basis points for businesses and by 80 basis points for households. The 
sovereign  spread  between  Italy  and  Germany  on  ten-year  securities  has  fallen  from  160 
basis  points  in  early  June  2014  –  not  to  mention  the  600-  700  basis  points  in  2012  –  to 
around 100 today. The interest rate on two-year Italian securities is near zero; it was above 
5%. Even the spread between mortgages of over €1 million and the small-sized ones, up to 
€250,000, has got smaller. Positive effects can also be seen in lending volumes. Our Bank 
Lending Survey points to similar trends. On the whole the attitude of Italian banks with regard 
to lending has changed; lending standard have become easier and continue to improve. 
There  has  been  some  recovery  in  Italy.  You  have  hoped  to  transform  this  recovery 
from “cyclical to structural” through reforms. Are there areas for reform in Italy that 
should be tackled more urgently by the government? 
These are political choices, which should be left entirely in the hands of governments. The 
menu of structural reforms is well known. I have spoken about it in a number of speeches in 
the past. The choices must be made by the political authorities chosen by the electorate, but 
I don’t believe that there is any disagreement about the necessity of reforms. 
On Sunday your presidency of the ECB will reach the four-year mark. This seems a 
good time to take stock of an extremely eventful time, starting with an interest-rate cut 
at the first meeting you chaired. 
And another at the second! 
This  was  followed  by  the  launch  of  long-term  refinancing  operations  (LTROs)  to 
finance  banks  and  a  whole  series  of  ground-breaking  decisions.  What  have  the 
milestones of the last four years been? 
They  certainly  have  been  eventful,  and  marked  by  profound  changes  to  the  structure  of 
monetary policy. In these four years a variety of new instruments have been introduced in a 
situation  which  has,  in  itself,  been  extraordinary.  In  addition  to  cutting  interest rates  seven 
times, we were the first major central bank to reduce the deposit rate to zero, subsequently 
taking  it  into  negative  territory,  and  we  introduced  the  first  three-year  LTROs. These  were 
followed by the targeted longer-term refinancing operations (TLTROs), the new programmes 
for the purchase of covered bonds and asset-backed securities and, lastly, the purchase of 
sovereign bonds in March 2015. This made it possible to avert the biggest threat to monetary 
union,  namely,  fragmentation.  In  August  2012,  with  the  launch  of  the  Outright  Monetary 
Transaction (OMT), for the first time, we tackled the risk of the redenomination of the euro 
and fragmentation of the entire banking and financial system in the euro area. This decision 
was endorsed by the European Court of Justice in June this year. 
To ward off this danger, it was also necessary to make another structural change, that is, the 
creation of banking union and the concentration of supervisory powers in the ECB. Creating 
banking  union,  setting  up  the  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism  (SSM)  and  simultaneously 
conducting a comprehensive assessment of banks was an extraordinary undertaking and I 
am deeply grateful to all those who contributed to it. Many among them are Italian, and the 
Banca d’Italia was one of the key players in this process of change. The ECB also played 
another role – to contribute to the design of monetary union over the long term – which took 
concrete  form  in  what  is  known  as  the  Presidents’  Report.  This  was  also  important.  Our 
decision-making process was made more transparent, too; for the first time, we decided to 
publish the minutes of our meetings. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
I’d like to touch upon your famous speech in London, in which you said that you were 
ready to do “whatever it takes” to save the euro. The speech had a huge impact on the 
markets. To assuage my curiosity may I ask whether you expected it to have such an 
impact, or did you feel it was a sort of last-ditch attempt at a time when the situation 
was worsening rapidly? Is the risk of a euro area break-up now definitively over? 
It’s clear that at the time, that speech provided information which highlighted the seriousness 
of  the  situation.  Since  then,  things  have  improved  overall.  The  risks  of  fragmentation  and 
redenomination  have  diminished  considerably,  if  not  disappeared. It  should  be  pointed  out 
that the euro area countries took action as well, launching a series of structural reforms and 
gaining credibility in fiscal policy. Although much has been achieved, much still remains to be 
done, also in terms of the future shape of the European Union. We must be able to propose 
a  way  forward  to  the  citizens  of  the  European  Union  and,  of  the  euro  area.  We  have 
attempted to do this with the Five Presidents’ Report. I’m not saying that it has to be followed 
in  its  entirety,  but  it  seems  to  me  that  this  is  the  perspective  that  our  leaders  and  our 
governments should also take, bearing in mind that the horizon is not cloud-free. We need 
only look at the newspapers to see that. 
However, the Greek crisis has led to a breakdown of trust and caused severe damage 
to the euro area. 
I  would  not  say  that.  Fundamentally,  trust  has  been  rebuilt,  primarily  by  the  Greek 
government, which today is in talks with the European institutions in an atmosphere of close 
collaboration.  The  bank  recapitalisation  process  will  commence  shortly,  as  soon  as  the 
aspects of our assessment have been published. Therefore, I do not believe that there is still 
a  background  of  mistrust.  This  was  certainly  another  severe  test  that  monetary  union  has 
nevertheless been able to face and overcome. It is too early to draw conclusions, but if we 
compare the current dialogue with the Greek government with how it was five or six months 
ago, we see an enormous difference. 
The  ECB’s  Governing  Council  stands  ready  to  increase  monetary  stimulus,  should 
this  be  necessary.  Your  critics  claim  that  this  reduces  the  incentive  to  implement 
reforms. 
I think that this is wrong for a number of reasons. First, if we look at the time frame of the 
main structural reforms implemented in the euro area over the past five years, it shows that 
this  has  no  correlation with  the  level  of  interest  rates  on government  debt  in  the  countries 
concerned. Labour market reforms, for example, were implemented in both Spain and Italy 
when interest rates were already very low, and the same is also true in other cases. Second, 
the structural reforms cover a very wide range of areas. I do not believe, for example, that 
reform of the legal system has anything to do with interest rate developments. Third, recent 
experience shows that also when interest rates are high because a country’s fiscal credibility 
is threatened, this does not increase governments’ propensity to carry out reforms. 
How do structural reforms correspond to low interest rates? 
Structural  reforms  and  low  interest  rates  complement  each  other:  carrying  out  structural 
reforms means paying a price now in order to obtain a benefit tomorrow; low interest rates 
substantially reduce the price that has to be paid today. There is, if anything, a relationship of 
complementarity. There are also other more specific reasons: low interest rates ensure that 
investment,  the  benefits  from  investment  and  from  employment,  materialise  more  quickly. 
Structural  reforms  reduce  uncertainty  regarding  macroeconomic  and  microeconomic 
prospects. Therefore, it is the opposite, rather than seeing an increase in moral hazard, I see 
a relationship of complementarity, of incentive. But it should never get to the point of having 
to  consolidate  the  government  budget  when  market  conditions  have  become  hopeless. 
Experience  over  recent  years  has  shown  that,  in  these  circumstances,  governments  often 
make  mistakes  in  designing  economic  policies,  dramatically  hike  taxes  and  reduce  public 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  investment,  without  significantly  reducing  current  spending,  and  postpone  the  structural 
reforms that require social consensus. In this way, they exacerbate the recessionary effects 
of the high interest rates and slow the fall of the debt-to-GDP ratio. 
To  conclude,  in  the  euro  area  the  markets  do  not  typically  influence  the  propensity  of 
governments to carry out structural reforms; when this happens, because the governments 
have  delayed  the  reforms  for  too  long,  and  owing  to  the  deterioration  in  the  general 
conditions, the resulting economic policy action does not foster growth. 
Can  banking  union  be  considered  complete  without  a  common  deposit  guarantee 
system, which some countries are opposed to? 
Banking  union  should  be  completed.  Agreements  have  been  drawn  up  both  on  the 
composition  of  a  deposit  guarantee  system  and  on  a  Single  Resolution  Fund.  These 
measures  should  be  implemented,  also  because,  in  this  way,  one  of  the  problems  that 
characterised  the  crisis  –  the  two-way  relationship  between  banks  and  sovereign  states  – 
would be weakened by these two measures. 
Speaking of Greece, you have acknowledged that even with the implementation of the 
programme,  Athens  will  need  debt  restructuring.  Do  you  think  that  this  should  be 
done gradually, so as to preserve the incentive for the Greek government to comply 
with its obligations? 
Greek  debt  is  sustainable  if,  first,  the  government  complies  with  the  obligations  under  the 
programme  that  it  has  agreed  to,  taking  responsibility  for  or  ownership  of the  programme. 
Second, for the debt to be sustainable a certain degree of relief is required; the latter should 
be such as to remove any doubt as to the future sustainability of the debt itself, once the first 
condition has been met. What type of “debt relief” to provide and how to calibrate it so that 
incentives for compliance with the programme are not distorted are decisions for the Member 
States, namely for those  whose balance sheets  will be affected by the decision. The ECB 
has nothing to say in this regard. 
The  past  four  years  have  been  extremely  stressful  for  all  involved  –  and  for  you  in 
particular,  I  imagine,  especially  given  your  level  of  responsibility.  What  helped  you 
through the worst times? 
The power of convictions, and the certainty or hope that the decisions we take ease hardship 
for Europeans. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
