  Norman T L Chan: When markets fail 
Speech by Mr Norman T L Chan, Chief Executive of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority, at 
the 6th Caixin Summit 2015, Hong Kong, 6 November 2015. 
 1. 
The topic of my speech today (“When markets fail”) is a little controversial as there 
are some who do not accept the premise that markets can fail. They believe that markets are 
capable of self-correcting and will eventually achieve the most efficient price discovery and 
resource  allocation.  However,  I  have  some  reservations  about  this  notion  because  our 
experience  tells  a  slightly  different  story.  Markets  do  sometimes  fail  to  perform  their  price 
discovery  and  resource  allocation  functions.  In  some  more  serious  cases,  market  failures 
have even led to destabilising financial shocks and crises. 
2.  
Indeed,  the  2007–08  global  financial  crisis,  which  ravaged  the  US  and  Europe, 
clearly repudiates the general belief that market failures and financial crises will only occur in 
third world countries or underdeveloped economies. On the face of it, the bursting of the US 
property bubble triggered the collapse of the subprime mortgage market, which in turn led to 
the financial crisis in the US. However, if we look more deeply, we find that prior to the crisis, 
the  banking  and  financial  systems  had  been  churning  out  a  great  number  of  subprime 
mortgage-backed  securities.  In  addition,  various  derivative  instruments  using  subprime 
mortgage-backed securities as underlying assets, like CDO2 and CDO3, added layers of risks 
like  snowpack. The  subprime mortgage  crisis  precipitated  an  avalanche  that  nearly  buried 
many financial institutions with tremendous losses. Obviously, human greed was at play. But 
this was not a sufficient explanation. Human greed has always existed. Why then had the US 
financial  market  sleepwalked  toward  the  brink  of  collapse?  Whenever  an  asset  or  credit 
bubble  forms,  many  bewildered  market  participants  are  often  of  the  view  that  it  will  be 
different to previous bubbles, and that the market boom is well supported by fundamentals. 
“This time is different,” so they say. In my view, the main cause of the market failure and near 
meltdown of the market was the collective failure of the various “safety valves” that maintain 
the orderly operation of the market. They include the internal risk control functions of financial 
institutions,  the  external  discipline  imposed  by  regulators  and  the  ratings  assigned  by 
international  credit  rating  agencies  (CRAs),  etc.  In  fact,  it’s  worth  noting  that  many  of  the 
subprime mortgage-backed securities and related credit derivatives rampant in the market at 
that time were assigned the highest AAA rating by the major CRAs. And, according to the 
general  estimates  of  these  agencies,  the  probability  of  default  within  a  year  for  debt 
instruments with such a rating was near zero (0.000%); while the probability of default within 
five years was a mere 0.09%. Now, we all know that these CRAs were dead wrong. Many 
people,  including  professional  and  institutional  investors,  had  a  misplaced  trust  in  these 
agencies and underestimated the risks involved. They learnt a painful lesson in 2008/09. 
3.  
Of  course,  CRAs  cannot  be  blamed  for  every  market  failure.  Let’s  turn  to  the 
European  sovereign  debt  crisis,  the  epicenter  of  which  has  been  Greece.  When  Greece 
joined the eurozone in 2001, its sovereign debt rating was a mere A-. The market yield of its 
sovereign debts denominated in the Greek drachma in 1995 was about 17%. In 2003 after its 
accession to the eurozone, Greece had its credit rating upgraded slightly to A+, still not a 
very  high  rating.  Yet,  in  the  ensuing  nine  years  or  so,  market  players  were  particularly 
exuberant  on  the  country’s  prospect  and  piled  into  Greek  sovereign  bonds  without  really 
taking into account its economic fundamentals, fiscal positions and sovereign rating. At one 
stage in 2005, the Greek sovereign bonds were traded at a spread of as low as eight basis 
points  above  the  triple-A  rated  German  Bunds.  Looking  back,  this  was  essentially  blind 
chasing  of  high  risk  investments  by  tens  of  thousands  of  market  players  and  investors 
impervious to objective economic analysis and credit ratings. In the end, they suffered great 
losses. Furthermore, the capital market failed to price in a reasonable risk premium for the 
Greek sovereign debts, suppressing Greece’s borrowing costs for a prolonged period of time. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
This effectively encouraged a borrowing binge by Greece that ended up in the plight today. If 
the market had asked for a higher risk premium, the increase in borrowing costs might have 
sent  a  sobering message  to the Greek  government  and  its  people  to  avoid  overstretching 
themselves  and  therefore  might  have  avoided  a  near  breakdown  of  their  economic  and 
financial systems. 
4.  
Hong Kong also experienced market failure in 1998, a year after the Asian financial 
crisis had severely hit a number of regional economies. Although Hong Kong managed to 
stand on its feet after the crisis, market confidence and sentiment were weak. International 
predators,  with  meticulous  preparation  and  organisation,  launched  an  attack  on  the  Hong 
Kong dollar and our financial markets. They first discreetly borrowed Hong Kong dollars and 
waited for the right moment to profit by short selling the currency and attacking our Linked 
Exchange  Rate  System.  At  the  same  time,  they  built  up  substantial  short  positions  in  the 
stock  and  futures  markets.  These  global  predators  also  spread  doomsaying  through  the 
Hong Kong media to stoke panic among Hong Kong people, creating an environment ripe for 
their short selling activities. The Hang Seng Index (HSI) dived 50% to 8,000 in August 1998 
from  16,000  a  year  earlier  and  the  predators  boasted  they  would  push  down  the  HSI  by 
another  50%  to  4,000,  which  was  an  extremely  low  level.  Aggregating  the  earnings  of  all 
listed companies, when the HSI was at 8,000, the price-earnings ratio was eight, and if the 
Index fell another 50%, the ratio would drop to just four. The Hong Kong SAR Government 
was  facing  a  “double-play”  by  the  predators  –  manipulation  and  profiteering  in  the  money 
market and stock market through massive short-selling. It was a critical situation – not only 
were we confronted with a sharp fall in the stock market and great losses to shareholders, 
there  were  also  systemic  risks  to  our  monetary  system  and  financial  markets.  Classical 
economics does not differentiate between big and small markets and assumes that market 
prices will not be manipulated by just a few players. Reality, however, is different from theory. 
At  that  time,  the  market  capitalisation  of  the  Hong  Kong  stock  market  was  only 
US$340 billion, a mere 3% of the New York stock exchange’s US$10.3 trillion. The predators 
were unable and hence did not choose to make their move on the big US markets, but were 
able to plunder Hong Kong’s mid-sized and open market with impunity. 
5.  
However,  on  14  August  1998,  with  the  authorisation  of  the  Hong  Kong  SAR 
Government and backed by the war chest of the Exchange Fund, the HKMA intervened in 
the  stock  and  futures  markets  through  market  operation  to  counteract  the  double-play  by 
international predators. When the market operation was completed by the end of August, the 
HKMA  had  used  about  HK$120  billion  to  acquire  a  vast  amount  of  Hong  Kong  stocks, 
propelling the HSI from the pre-operation level of 6,700 points to 7,800 points. 
6.  
The operation attracted harsh criticism from various quarters, with arguments that 
the Government’s intervention to prop up the markets was contrary to the basic principles of 
a free market economy. Nevertheless, the operation has proven to be a success. During an 
extraordinary time of market failure, our resolute and extraordinary measures stabilised the 
Hong Kong dollar and the local stock and futures markets, restored confidence of Hong Kong 
people and investors, and helped preserve the stability of Hong Kong’s financial system. But 
this is only half of the story; equally important is success in engineering a smooth exit. Our 
biggest challenge was to release the huge amount of Hong Kong stocks amassed during the 
operation to the market with minimal impact on market stability. This was no easy task. In a 
clear message issued promptly to the market when the operation ended, the HKMA made 
two  pledges.  First,  the  operation  was  only  an  extraordinary  measure  taken  at  an 
extraordinary time. The HKMA would arrange to dispose of the stocks as soon as possible. 
Secondly, the Hong Kong SAR Government would not intervene in the daily operations of the 
listed companies concerned through its shareholdings. We fully respect and uphold the clear 
division of labour between the public and private sectors under the market economy. Indeed, 
I can still remember that following the operation, my colleagues and I worked very hard on 
explaining at international forums and on other occasions the rationale behind the operation 
and  our  intention  to  start  disposing  of  the  stocks  quickly.  After  much  careful  study  and 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
planning for a year, the HKMA launched the Tracker Fund, an open-ended exchange-traded 
fund, in November 1999 and resold HK$33.3 billion worth of stocks to 180,000 investors. We 
continued  to  recoup  over  HK$100  billion  in  the  next  three  years  through  the  same 
mechanism.  Ultimately, our  market  operation  turned  in  a  profit  of  nearly  HK$100  billion  at 
prevailing stock prices at that time. 
7.  
The  experience  of  Hong  Kong  clearly  shows  that market failures  do  occur.  In  the 
example  I  have  just  outlined,  market  intervention  by  the  HKMA  proved  to  be  bold  and 
effective  in  securing  the  safety  and  soundness  of  Hong  Kong’s  monetary  and  financial 
system. It  was,  indeed,  undertaken  in  a  life-and-death  but smokeless  war  on  the financial 
front.  Hong  Kong  prides  itself  on  being  one  of  the  world’s  freest  and  most  open  markets. 
Nevertheless,  as  a  much  smaller  market  compared  with  our  American  and  European 
counterparts, Hong Kong could fall prey to global predators, resulting in market failures. If the 
markets  were  allowed  to  plunge  in  free  fall,  the  entire  financial  system  might  face  a  total 
meltdown. It was at such a critical moment that the Hong Kong SAR Government was left 
with  no  other  option  than  to  take  unprecedented  action.  Today,  with  17  years  behind  us, 
Hong Kong remains a free and open market and an international financial centre as before, 
and  any  lingering  doubt  has  vanished.  After  all,  “actions  speak  louder  than  words”.  The 
operation was an extraordinary strategy to deal with extraordinary circumstances. And, we 
delivered on our pledge to exit promptly and effectively. Over the years, we have drawn on 
this  experience  to  further  refine  the  Linked  Exchange  Rate  System,  enhance  risk 
management and strengthen the resilience of our financial system. 
8.  
Recently,  our  country  has  also  been  faced  with  the  need  of  taking  some 
extraordinary  steps  to  stabilise  the  stock  markets  and  guard  against  systemic  risk.  Any 
further measures by the Central Government and their effectiveness will be closely watched. 
In  my  view,  if  the  Central  Government  can  devise  a  robust  exit  mechanism  as  soon  as 
market stability returns and continue to push through financial reforms, including liberalising 
the  capital  account  and  internationalising  the  renminbi  –  in  other  words  demonstrating  its 
staunch  commitment  to  reform  and  liberalisation  –  it  will  be  able  to  regain  and  reinforce 
confidence  within  the  country  and  around  the  world  in  the  market  development  and 
investment environment in China. 
9.  
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
