  Andreas Dombret: Firm as a rock – is bank capital an all-purpose tool? 
The example of sovereign debt regulation 
Public  speech  by  Dr  Andreas  Dombret,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Deutsche 
Bundesbank, at Columbia University, New York City, 4 December 2015. 
 1. 
Introduction 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
Thank you for giving me this opportunity to speak at Columbia University. It is a pleasure to 
be here again. It is always inspiring to participate in such an academic environment. I was 
here three years ago and fondly remember talking to students. 
When I was here last in November 2012, I talked about the crisis in the euro area. At that 
time, the topic was a good pick. Since then, much has happened in terms of regulatory and 
supervisory  reform  in  Europe.  One  prominent  example  is  the  creation  of  the  European 
Banking  Union,  which  aims  to  introduce  a  supranational  perspective  into  European 
supervision. We  have,  since  November  4,  2014,  created  a  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism 
and  the  Single  Resolution  Mechanism  will  follow  in  less  than  a  month.  The  ECB  here 
assumed  responsibility  for  supervising  –  in  cooperation  with  national  supervisors  –  about 
120 largest  banks  in  the  euro  area.  These  banks  account  for  more  than  85%  of  the 
aggregate  balance  sheet  of  the  euro  area’s  banking  sector,  making  the  ECB  one  of  the 
biggest  banking  supervisors  in  the  world.  The  Bundesbank  very  much  supports  this 
development. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  one  prominent  Columbian,  as  you  call  yourselves,  was  Theodore 
Roosevelt. He once said: “In any moment of decision, the best thing you can do is the right 
thing, the next best thing is the wrong thing, and the worst thing you can do is nothing.” 
For  regulators,  the  crisis  definitely  constituted  that  moment  of  decision.  And  for  sure  we 
cannot be criticised for doing nothing. Time will tell whether we did the best – i.e. the right – 
thing. For my part, I am convinced that we did many things that were both worthwhile and 
right. 
Different traditions, but ... 
2. 
When you think of financial crises, one of the first ideas that come to mind is the need to 
make  banks  more  resilient.  And  one  key  factor  in  enhancing  the  resilience  of  banks  is  to 
strengthen their capital base. I will return to this point later on. 
When talking about capital and credit, it is quite obvious that there are different traditions in 
the United States and in Europe. While financing in Europe – with the exception of the United 
Kingdom – is still predominantly bank-based, the US tradition is much more market-based. 
Economists have debated which system is superior for decades, if not for centuries.1 
This  is  neither  the  time  nor  the  place  to  repeat  the  whole  debate  about  advantages  and 
disadvantages of the respective systems. Allow me, however, just to name some significant 
points of the discussion. There is empirical evidence to suggest that market-based systems 
react  more  procyclically  than  bank-based  economies  because  of  more  pronounced  asset 
                                                
1  Levine,  R  (2002):  Bank-based  or  market-based  financial  systems:  which  is  better?  In:  Journal  of  Financial 
Intermediation 11 (4), pp 398–428. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  price booms and busts.2 However, bank-based systems are also beset by procyclicality. A 
study conducted by the Bank for International Settlements has shown that, while bank-based 
systems are more effective at smoothing the impact of business cycle fluctuations, market-
based economies recover more quickly after crises.3  
Leaving aside the pros and cons of the two systems, it is my strong belief that the question of 
the proper financing source cannot be answered with “either/or” but has to be “both”. In the 
end, it comes down to the uncontested argument of diversification. And the answer is highly 
dependent  on  the  context.  In  Europe  for  instance,  the  bank-based  system  reflects  the 
corporate structure of the economy – there are many small and medium-sized entities, the so 
called  SMEs.  And  –  like  in  the  United  States  –  the  SMEs  tend  to  favour  bank-based 
financing,  if  only  as  necessity  because  there  are  barriers  for  small  companies  to  obtain 
market financing. 
Against  this  backdrop,  I  very  much  appreciate  the  European  Commission’s  efforts  to 
establish a European Capital Markets Union. By making it easier for small and medium-sized 
enterprises to access the capital markets, we could open up a further source of funding for 
them. To make one point clear: Referring to what I said before about “either/or”, the objective 
of  the  European  Capital  Markets  Union  is  not  to  abandon  bank-based  funding  but  to 
supplement it with capital markets-based funding. And in Europe of all places there is plenty 
of scope to do so. The European stock market is only 60% of the size of the US stock market 
as measured in relation to GDP. Similarly, the European market for venture capital is 20% of 
the size of the US market, and for securitisation the percentage is even lower still.4  
3. ... capital matters: regulatory reform after the financial crisis 
Although we represent different financing systems, one point is essential for both. Capital is a 
main  starting  point  for  safeguarding  the  strength  of  banks  as  well  as  financial  stability. 
Resilient  capital  markets  need  resilient  banks  as  key  players  in  the  financial  system.  And 
resilient  banks  need  capital  –  or  rather  equity  –  in  order  to  be  able  to  absorb  negative 
shocks. And this is where regulation comes into play. 
One  of  the  main  lessons  of  the  financial  crisis  was  that  the  rules  governing  the  banking 
system were insufficient. We saw excessive risk-taking, insufficient loss-absorbing capacity 
and banks that were “too big to fail” – to name just a few of the problems that led us into the 
crisis. 
Over the seven years since the collapse of Lehman Brothers, significant progress has been 
made on the regulatory agenda. The most important regulatory measure was the Basel III 
framework, which introduced stricter capital requirements and new liquidity rules. In the EU, 
CRD IV and CRR, the relevant directive and regulation, ensure harmonised implementation 
of the Basel III framework across all member states. 
When  Basel  III  is  fully  implemented  in  2019,  regulatory  capital  requirements  will  be 
significantly  higher  and  capital  will  be  of  higher  quality  than  under  Basel  II,  and  I  am 
convinced that the financial system will be much more stable than before. The calculation is 
quite simple: More equity that can absorb losses makes banks safer. Besides, more equity 
on the one hand strengthens the interest of the bank owners in good risk management and 
                                                
2  Adrian,  T;  Shin,  H  S  (2010),  Liquidity  and  leverage.  In:  Journal  of  Financial  Intermediation,  Vol  19  (3),  
pp 418–437. 
3  Gambacorta, L, Yang, J, Tsatsaronis, K (2014): Financial structure and growth. BIS Quarterly Review, March 
2014, pp 21–35. 
4  Bank of England (2015), A European Capital Markets Union: implications for growth and stability. Financial 
Stability Paper No 33, February 2015. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  on  the  other  hand  reduces  possible  losses  of  debt  holders  should  the  bank  be faced  with 
default. 
Capital is not the panacea – the example of sovereign debt regulation 
4. 
But are higher capital and liquidity requirements enough? Certainly not. And therefore, many 
other regulatory projects besides the Basel III regime have been tackled in response to the 
financial crisis. Let me discuss one example that I believe to be a very good illustration of the 
limits of capital as an all-purpose tool: The regulation of sovereign exposures. 
A  problem  that  unfortunately  became  apparent  during  the  European  sovereign  debt  crisis 
was  the  close  nexus  between  states  and  banks.  Under  the  current  regime,  banks  do  not 
need to hold capital against the risks associated with loans to sovereigns – unlike any other 
loans.  This  is  based  on  the  assumption  that  loans  to  governments  are  risk-free  because 
states cannot default, rendering capital buffers unnecessary. 
All  those  who  had  trouble  following  this  line  of  risk-free-debt  argument  saw  their  doubts 
confirmed by the sovereign debt crisis in Europe. It became obvious that we need to rethink 
the  assumption  that  loans  to  governments  are  risk-free.  In  actual  fact,  sovereign  risk  is  a 
cluster  risk  because  the  default  of  a  sovereign  as  single  debtor  can  well  cause  bank 
insolvency. Given the amount of home country sovereign debt that some banks hold – which 
sometimes  exceeds  their  equity  –  a  possible  restructuring  of  sovereign  debt  may  well 
threaten a whole national banking system. 
Consequently, changing the rules appears imperative. If banks were required to hold capital 
against the risks of their government bond portfolios, they would be more resilient to fiscal 
distress.  At  the  same  time,  banks  would  have  less  incentive  to  buy  large  volumes  of 
government bonds if these were not privileged any longer. Furthermore, this may incentivise 
governments to reduce their debt.5 
And this brings us to the second issue: Capital alone is simply not sufficient. A crucial tool in 
risk  management  is  diversification  –  as  specified  in  the  Basel  large  exposure  regime 
published in 2014 which will take effect from 1 January 2019. Large exposure caps prevent 
banks from becoming overexposed to a single borrower and the risk of its default. Currently, 
the regime is restricted to private borrowers, and sovereign bonds do not fall into its scope. 
To me, it is important to end this privilege and to create a level-playing field for private and 
sovereign  borrowers  alike. Therefore,  a  cap  on  loans  to  an  individual  sovereign  is  needed 
and should also be introduced. 
Let me be very clear on this issue: Actually, I see no economic argument why banks should 
be  the  main  source  of  funding  for  governments.  Unlike  relations  with  private  borrowers  – 
where banks have significant informational advantages compared to other creditors – there is 
no privileged information on the debt of a nation. As a consequence, I fail to see the reason 
why the financing of states should not mainly be a matter for the capital markets. 
And  I  very  much  welcome  the  international  community’s  efforts  to  tackle  this  topic:  this 
summer,  the  G7  finance  ministers  and  central  bank  governors  identified  the  regulatory 
treatment of sovereign debt as a major topic to work on. 
Also, the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision has been working on sovereign debt for 
almost  a  year  now.  I  believe  the  following  points  to  be  crucial  and  I  hope  they  will  be 
addressed by the Committee next year.6 
                                                
5  European Systemic Risk Board (2015): ESRB Report on the Treatment of Sovereign Exposures. March 2015. 
6  Dombret, Andreas (2015): Regulatory Reform in Europe – Mission Accomplished? Speech at the IIB Annual 
Conference, March 2, 2015, Washington, D.C. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
     First, as I argued before, the large exposures regime should also apply to sovereign 
debts. 
Second,  the  zero-weighting  of  sovereign  exposures  should  be  replaced  by  risk 
adequate weights and capital requirements. The calibration needs to be careful, and 
an appropriate phasing-in needs to be implemented. 
Third, and I find this equally important, regulation of sovereign exposures must be 
consistent for all credit institutions. 
If we succeed in establishing a regulation consisting of these three points, I see four main 
benefits. First, if sovereign bonds needed risk adequate capital requirements, banks would 
have to take greater account of differences in the risk profiles of states. Second, countries 
that burden their budget in an unsustainable manner would have to pay risk premiums – this 
is the so-called disciplinary force of financial markets. Third, a large exposure regime applied 
to  sovereign  bonds  would  prevent  banks  from  being  overexposed  to  a  single  borrower. 
Related  to  that,  the  fourth  last  benefit,  and  this  is  of  high  importance  to  me  as  a  banking 
supervisor  –  a sovereign  debt restructuring  would  not  any  longer  harm the  whole  financial 
system of a nation state and beyond. 
The regulation of sovereign debt is one topic we must centre our attention on in the nearest 
future.  I  am  cautiously  optimistic  that  we  will  come  to  a  transatlantic  solution  in  the  Basel 
Committee.  In  this  context,  I  cannot  say  often  enough  that  each  regulatory  project  –  be  it 
Basel  III  or  now  the  regulation  of  sovereign  exposures  –  very  much  calls  for  international 
cooperation.  If  we  do  not  coordinate  our  approaches  towards  regulation,  we  will  create  a 
fragmented financial system with vast opportunities for regulatory arbitrage. This cannot be 
our goal, and we need to resist any temptation of doing so. 
When all is said and done, we all have the same objective: a stable financial system – of 
course  at  the  national  level,  but  it  is  equally  important  at  the  global  level.  What  we  have 
learned in the recent years is that financial distress doesn’t stop at national borders. In the 
euro zone we have experienced the hard way that instabilities even in small member states 
have the potential to put the continuance of the entire European Monetary Union at risk. 
I would like, if I may, to say a few words about yesterday’s decision by the ECB Governing 
Council. First things first: the Eurosystem staff macroeconomic projections presented give no 
cause for concern over the development of the euro-area economy. In fact, they confirm the 
view  that  the  steep  drop  in  energy  prices  is  supporting  the  recovery  of  the  euro  area’s 
economy.  The  lower  energy  prices  also  go  a  long  way  towards  explaining  the  expected 
evolution of consumer price inflation. 
It’s  clear  that  inflation  as  forecast  by  the  Eurosystem  staff  will  fall  short  of  the  Governing 
Council’s  price  stability  target  not  only  in  2016  but  probably  into  2017  as  well.  That’s  not 
something we should simply brush aside. But given the predominant role which the drop in 
energy prices plays in euro-area inflation and the extensive monetary policy measures that 
have already been taken –  which can entail risks and side-effects of their own – I am not 
really convinced that a further easing of monetary conditions was necessary. 
Conclusion 
5. 
Ladies and gentlemen, since the beginning of the financial crisis, regulators have done a lot 
of  work  and  thereby  followed  the  instruction  given  by  Theodore  Roosevelt.  Do  you 
remember? – “In any moment of decision, the best thing you can do is the right thing, the 
next best thing is the wrong thing, and the worst thing you can do is nothing.” And I believe 
doing nothing and expecting the markets to recover on their own  would not have been an 
option. 
I am sure that the financial system is now safer and more resilient than it was before Lehman 
collapsed.  I  do  not  deny  that  stricter  regulation  may  translate  into  higher  costs  for  banks. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  However,  when  measured  against  the  burden  that  financial  crises  place  on  society,  I 
consider these costs to be very much justified. 
The post-crisis reforms are in large part finished, but some regulatory projects remain on the 
agenda.  I  strongly  argue  for  finishing  the  Basel  III  regulatory  projects  by  end-2016  and 
afterwards  give  them  the  time  to  take  effect.  The  regulation  of  sovereign  exposures  is  a 
prime example for outstanding regulatory projects. But even if we strike an agreement on this 
topic  regulatory  reform  will  never  be  complete  because  the  financial  system  is  evolving 
constantly  and  regulation  has  to  keep  pace.  So  this  means  that  we  will  have  to  follow 
Theodore Roosevelt’s advice once more when he said: “Get action. Seize the moment. Man 
was never intended to become an oyster.” 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
