   Miroslav Singer: European Supervisor Education Initiative “Financial 
supervision in Europe – on the right track?” 
Dinner  speech  by  Mr  Miroslav  Singer,  Governor  of  the  Czech  National  Bank,  at  the  ESE 
Conference 2015 “Financial supervision in Europe – on the right track?”, Prague, 1 October 
2015. 
 A trade-off between the costs and benefits of implementation. 
A trade-off between complexity and clarity. 
A trade-off between growth and safety. 
Good evening ladies and gentlemen, 
I am honoured and delighted to be here with you today to share my views on whether prudential 
regulation and financial supervision in Europe are on the right track. My opinions are based on 
the Czech National Bank’s long and direct experience of supervising the Czech banking sector. 
I’d like to emphasise that our banking sector was hardly affected at all by the financial crisis. 
Our banks have consistently been posting high profits in recent years, so recapitalisation has 
not been on the agenda. This allows me to maintain the necessary detachment when observing 
current developments in financial supervision. 
I believe that three major trade-offs are encountered when developing regulations. 
1. 
2. 
3. 
Often only the first one, between costs and benefits, is discussed. Mostly lip service is paid to 
the second one, the trade-off between complexity and clarity. And the third one, between safety 
and growth, is ignored in many cases. I will deal with all of them in what follows. 
In our day-to-day work, be it the preparation and implementation of European regulations or 
the actual performance of supervision, we run into the problem of overcomplicated and unclear 
regulations. The modern theory of law accepts that laws conflict. I believe we reached this 
point in regulation long before the Great Depression. We have made no secret of the fact that 
we believe the weaknesses in the European banking sector laid bare by the financial crisis 
should be dealt with by enhancing supervision, i.e. its processes, institutions and culture, rather 
than by adding more regulations or hastily changing the existing ones. 
Yet the regulatory whirlwind we are currently experiencing is far from over. This naturally gives 
rise to a number of questions. Can we be sure that such regulations will not generate even 
more problems? How will institutions cover all the costs of implementing the changes to all the 
regulatory requirements, costs which, even worse, are often hard to predict? Might a situation 
arise where all financial institutions have implemented CRD, CRR, BRRD, MREL, LCR, NSFR, 
leverage and so on, but still have little prospect of making the profits demanded by investors? 
Might the incentive to do business in the banking sector be weakened? Are we contributing to 
a shift of business not only outside our countries, but, more dangerously, outside the regulated 
market? 
These  fundamental  questions  are  not  prompted  solely  by  the  recently  adopted  or  planned 
regulatory changes. We also have doubts about the existing deposit insurance system of full 
cover up to EUR 100,000 adopted at the start of the financial crisis. At the time, this measure 
certainly helped calm the public and prevent runs on banks. However, we feel that the time 
has come to consider a return to normal, to reintroduce the system where depositors are not 
fully covered, at least with respect to non-SIFI banks. 
I think the question that forms the title of this conference is very topical and relevant. We believe 
that the time has come to pause and try to discuss these issues seriously. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   As to costs, supervisory authorities are also incurring high costs. On the European scale, we 
are recruiting hundreds of new employees to be able to meet the challenges of applying the 
new regulations. Mandatory impact assessments have been introduced, but these often sound 
like unconvincing or formal justifications for a result known in advance: “There will be costs, 
but the benefits will outweigh them in the long run”. 
As to complexity, we have plenty of evidence that the current sectoral approach to regulation 
does  not  make  our  life  as  supervisory  authorities  any  easier.  We  are  often  creating  three 
parallel but materially identical sets of basic requirements for banks, insurers and investment 
firms. It would be simpler to have just one set of basic licensing requirements, one set of basic 
requirements  for  general  managerial  skills  and  one  set  of  basic  requirements  for  the 
trustworthiness of senior officers for the entire financial market. We would welcome a single, 
universally applicable set of assessed functions and requirements for sound internal control 
systems. Examples could include harmonised basic requirements for outsourcing and for the 
distribution of own and third-party products. 
It is impossible, of course, to unify all requirements across the financial market. However, the 
basic set could, or even should, be unified. Even if we succeeded in harmonising only one-
third of all the requirements, the quantity of regulations would decrease sharply. This would 
substantially  reduce  the  load  on  financial  institutions,  which  are  currently  struggling  with 
inconsistencies  in  the  sectoral  regulations  applying  to  financial  groups  and  with  the  sheer 
number of such regulations. It would also be of great benefit to supervisory authorities. The 
necessary sectoral specifics could then connect to this single common base. 
Let me make one last remark on safety versus growth. In recent years, we have witnessed on 
numerous  occasions  just  how  diverse  the  impacts  of  financial  sector  problems  can  be  on 
national economies. Generally speaking, the greater the depth of financial mediation, the larger 
the relative size of the banking sector in the economy and the higher the level of private sector 
debt, the more vulnerable the economy, the greater costs of any financial crisis and thus the 
higher the  ensuing requirements  as  regards quality  of  banking regulation  and  strictness  of 
supervision.  Therefore,  effective  prevention  of  financial  crises  is  an  increasing  priority  for 
economic policy makers of countries with greater depth of financial mediation. Still, the depth 
of financial mediation differs systematically, for example, between the founders of the EU and 
recent entrants. For example, in the case of the Czech Republic, if the worst comes to the 
worst  we  can  revoke  the  licence  of  a  major  bank,  take  its  liabilities  onto  the  government 
balance sheet and sell its viable business, as we have done in the past, without increasing our 
government debt-to-GDP ratio above two or three hundred per cent, provoking a sovereign 
debt crisis and starting the vicious circle known to many European economies. Most developed 
European countries do not enjoy such freedom. On the other hand, many segments of our 
financial industries are still underdeveloped and their space for growth is rather high. I do not 
believe we have reached the point at which one should question the benefits to the economy 
of increasing the depth of financial mediation. Flexibility within a more unified and integrated 
framework of financial regulation should allow different countries to choose – within some limits 
preventing significant cross-border spillovers – different trade-offs between safety and growth 
of their financial industries and economies in general. 
This conference gives everybody room to think. Let’s make the most of it. Europe needs sound 
businesses,  but  sound  businesses,  in  turn,  need  a  stable  and  predictable  financial  and 
regulatory environment. Let’s do all we can to foster such an environment. 
Thank you for listening. Have a great evening and enjoy the rest of the conference. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
