  Norman T L Chan: A fascinating train journey 
Speech by Mr Norman T L Chan, Chief Executive of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority, at 
the  CUHK  (The  Chinese  University  of  Hong  Kong)  Business  School  Master  Degree 
Graduation Ceremony 2015, Hong Kong, 21 November 2015. 
 Professor Michael Hui, Professor Kalok Chan, parents, graduates, ladies and gentlemen: 
1. 
It is a great honour to be invited to attend today’s graduation ceremony. It is also a 
great  pleasure  to  be  back  to  CUHK,  where  I  spent  the  most  beautiful  part  of  my  life  as  a 
student. There were so many fond memories and I cannot tell you how much I have missed 
my campus life even though I have graduated for nearly 40 years. 
2. 
My fellow graduates, today is a memorable and joyful occasion not only for you, but 
also  for  your  parents,  your family,  your  loved  ones  and  your  friends.  You  have  all  worked 
very hard and gone through many rounds of examinations and challenges before you can be 
here today on this occasion. You must feel very proud and wish to tell everybody that “I have 
made  it”.  My  heartfelt  congratulations  to  you  all:  you  have  made  it.  You  have  received  a 
master degree that provides you  with the knowledge and skills that are badly needed and 
sought after in the modern era of business and finance. So many of you may think that you 
have earned a train ticket for a smooth journey to the place you are destined to go: Success. 
Is it so? 
I am not sure if I know the answer, but let me depict a different scenario for you to 
3. 
think  about.  Let’s  say  you  have  a  train  ticket  that  would  enable  you  to  go  through  the 
admission  gate  of  the  train  station  and  reach  the  train  platform.  When  you  are  there  you 
immediately realise that there are many trains waiting to depart. Your ticket doesn’t really tell 
you which train you should board and the signs on the trains are not clear either. So you will 
have to decide which train you should get on, without knowing whether this particular train is 
indeed the right one that can take you to your desired destination. But this is not the worst 
part. When you get on the train, you find that there are already lots of people there and that 
there is no seat assigned to you. All the window seats have been occupied. So you have to 
struggle to find a seat for yourself. And this is not the end of the story. 
4. 
After you have settled down on your seat and begin to feel comfortable, you would 
expect or hope for a smooth and swift journey to your final destination: Success – however 
you define it. To your big surprise, this is not what it is going to be. It is not a non-stop train 
and it annoyingly makes many stops on the way. Every time the train stops, there are new 
passengers boarding the train and, as your cabin is already full, you will always have to fight 
to protect your seat, or else you may be forced out from your seat. Occasionally, misfortune 
may fall on you. Not only do you lose your seat, but you are also bumped off the train at one 
of  the  stops.  While  all  these  passengers  who  got  bumped  off  the  trains  will  naturally  feel 
aggrieved and frustrated, they can have two kinds of responses. Some would complain to the 
station  master  about  the  unfair  or  rough  way  they  are  treated  on  the  train  and  demand 
“justice”. However, some may decide that, since they still have the train tickets in their hands, 
they’d rather not waste time complaining to the station master about the fierce competition or 
bad luck, but they should instead try to board the next train that stops at this station. If you 
belong to this latter category, you may be able to find yourself a seat on the next train, or 
even a better seat than your previous one. However, there is a difference this time: you have 
to work really hard, and much harder than before, as you are a late passenger trying to board 
a train that is already full. The simple truth is, unless you are on a train, you don’t have the 
chance to move forward and will never come closer to your destination: Success. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  5. 
If  you  feel  that  I  should  not  be  depicting  a  rather  scary  train  journey  on  this 
auspicious and joyful occasion, then please forgive me and let me try another scenario for 
you to think about, again using my train journey story. 
6. 
Suppose  that  you  have  been  bumped  off  the  train  once  or  twice  and  have  found 
your way back onto the next trains to carry on with the journey. You will gradually realise that 
there are certain rules and disciplines on the train that determine who get the good seats, 
who can be upgraded from the economy cabin to the business class and then the first class 
cabin. There are also rules and booking system that govern who can enjoy a good meal at 
the dining car and when. So you will come to realise that the train is not a wild jungle filled 
with animals, or people, trying to eat each other alive. You will also discover that there are 
some  passengers  who  have  got  upgraded  to  the  business  or  first  class  cabin  not  just 
because  they  are  muscular  or  clever.  They  are  ahead  of  most  other  passengers  because 
they possess certain qualities that we in modern time called leadership. Very often leaders 
are  ahead  because  they  are  supported,  respected  and  loved  by  their  followers  or,  in  this 
case, passengers, who actually want them to take the front seats and lead. 
7. 
On the question of what constitutes good and long lasting leadership, there exists 
tremendous  amount  of  academic  research  and  literature,  which  I  do  not  propose  to  talk 
about. What I would like to say today is to draw on the teaching by one of our great ancient 
teachers, Confucius. More than two thousand years ago, Confucius taught his students how 
to  become  a  “Gentleman”  or  “Jun  Zi  (君子)”.  What  strikes  me  most  as  the  qualities  of  a 
successful “Jun Zi” or “Leader” are the three words used by Confucius: “Wisdom”, “Morality” 
and “Courage” ( 智、仁、勇). I strongly believe that Confucius’ teaching was right not only in 
ancient times but also in the modern world. As a master degree graduate in the specialised 
fields of business and finance, you clearly are knowledgeable, but you may not be wise. So 
you need wisdom, a quality that can only be acquired with a sense of modesty and humility, 
understanding fully there are more things that you don’t know than you know. Treat learning 
as  a  life  long  process  that  won’t  stop  even  after  you  have  graduated  from  the  university. 
Success is your desired destination but you must not seek to achieve your goal with immoral 
means. The more successful you are on this train journey, the more you should care about 
the  other  passengers  who  may  not  be  as  accomplished  or  resourceful  as  you  are.  Have 
empathy and be just. Be generous to those in need of help. Finally, be fully committed and 
have  the  courage  to  tackle  challenges,  adversity  and  changes.  There  are  many  decisions 
during  the train journey  that  are  very  tough  and  difficult.  Many  involve  choices  that  do  not 
produce or guarantee good outcomes. Be courageous and decisive. In the real world, there 
is  no  such  thing  as  perfect  information.  Very  often  indecision  itself  can  bring  about  much 
worse outcomes than picking any one of the seemingly unsatisfactory choices. Life is full of 
changes and surprises and you will be much better off to embrace them rather than resist 
them and feel depressed when you are down. 
8. 
So my advice to you, my fellow graduates, is that write down on the back of your 
train tickets  these three words:  “Wisdom”, “Morality”  and  “Courage”  (智、仁、勇).  Keep  on 
reminding  yourself  that  these  are  the  tips  for  you  if  you  wish  to  reach  your  destination: 
Success. Success has to be earned, no matter how you define it. While you have your own 
right to define what you mean by success, I would advise you not to confine yourself just to 
the material benchmarks, although they are very important. A successful life is a meaningful 
life, something that money alone cannot buy. A successful person is someone whose life is 
filled with purpose and joy, something that can be felt, shared and remembered not only by 
his family and loved ones but also by people around him. 
9. 
Four  decades  ago,  I  was  just  like  you:  a  young  passenger,  filled  with  hopes, 
curiosity and anxiety on what might lie ahead of me in this train journey. I have worked very 
hard  in  all  these  years.  I  have  had  a  great  ride  and  learned  many  things  in  this  long  and 
fascinating train journey, which by the way is still continuing. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  10. 
My fellow graduates, let me conclude by asking you this simple question: are you 
ready  to  embark  on  this  fascinating  train  journey?  If  you  are,  hold  on  to  your  tickets  and 
board  the  train,  find  yourself  a  good  seat  and  fasten  your  seat  belt.  The  train  is  about  to 
depart now. Thank you very much. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
