   Andreas Dombret: Why focus on culture? 
Statement  by  Dr  Andreas  Dombret,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Deutsche 
Bundesbank,  at  the  Institute  of  Law  and  Finance  conference  “Towards  a  New  Age  of 
Responsibility  in  Banking  and  Finance:  Getting  the  Culture  and  the  Ethics  Right”,  Goethe-
University, Frankfurt am Main, 23 November 2015. 
 Ladies and gentlemen,  
It is a great pleasure for me to be here with you at the ILF conference to discuss responsibility 
in banking and finance with you. Let’s start with a little thought experiment. If I were to ask you 
to take out a blank sheet of paper and to write down your company’s values and ethics, would 
you be able to do it? Would it be easy or difficult? 
Let me go a step further: if I were to ask some of your colleagues to do the same – without 
conferring with each other – would your sheets be similar or different? My bet is that they would 
be different, at least in some of the details. 
However, I am pretty sure that most of you here today have already given some thought to 
culture and ethics, both privately and professionally. Furthermore, I reckon that a lot of your 
companies have already adopted a code of conduct, a code of ethics or the like. 
Under these assumptions, why do you think I believe no two sheets would look exactly alike? 
There are two reasons. One is that how corporate values are ranked in terms of priority is, of 
course, informed by personal values and ethics. The other is that a corporate culture may well 
exist on paper – and only there. 
And  this  is  exactly  where  the  heart  of  the  problem  lies:  creating  a  corporate  culture  and 
embodying this culture in one’s own behaviour and daily life are two altogether different things. 
Banks  support  the  functioning  of  the  economic  cycle  by  term  transformation,  lot  size 
transformation and risk transformation, to name just a few ways. To do so, they have to act as 
agents for at least two parties: savers and investors. However, for the bank to be able to act 
as an agent, both parties have to trust the bank. 
Trust – this is one of the most important factors in the banking sector. Without it, banking as 
we  know  it  would  be  difficult,  if  not  impossible. Sadly,  the financial crisis  and  its  aftermath 
demolished many people’s confidence and trust in the banking system. 
Now it is up to us to regain this trust, re-establish faith in the banking industry and restore the 
image of bankers as decent, trustworthy and upstanding businessmen. By “us,” I mean banks, 
other companies in the financial industry, and supervisors. Regulators can create a proper 
regulatory framework, set the right incentives and encourage good conduct. 
However, taking the necessary action – that is, implementing a code of conduct and focusing 
on ethics and culture in daily corporate life – is the responsibility of each financial company. 
But how can banks and financial companies achieve this aim? 
I already stated earlier that ethics and culture are highly personal. Individual values and ethical 
norms  are  informed  by  individual  life  experiences,  family  and  cultural  background,  the 
generation one belongs to, and many other things. 
But nonetheless, it is crucial for companies to find a common basis: a set of values accepted 
and lived by each individual employee and the company as a whole. This is not a trivial task: 
In the realm of culture and ethics, there are neither universal “best practices”, nor are there 
metrics by which success can be quantified. 
It  is  thus  very  difficult  to  develop  specific  criteria  that  define  the  culture  of  a  company.  To 
present an example: at the Bundesbank we have introduced six leadership principles, in order 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   to  set  a  good  tone  from  the  top.  These  principles  are:  Recognition,  Communication  skills, 
Responsibility, Equal opportunities, Judgement and Motivation. Of course, others may choose 
different leadership principles, but each entity has to make its own choice. However, these 
principles, although chosen for a different purpose, of course also influence the Bundesbank’s 
corporate culture. 
“Responsibility” is a value I would like to discuss with you. What about actions that are not 
expressly  prohibited?  Does  that  mean  they  are  permitted?  As  Seneca  said:  “Shame  may 
restrain  what  the  law  does  not  prohibit”.  So,  by  which  standards  do  we  define  what  is 
permitted? I think each bank should try to fulfil its corporate social responsibility. 
This is a kind of self-regulation by which companies commit to live up to their responsibility 
towards their stakeholders: their customers, their owners and their staff. Of course this is not 
legally  binding,  but  if  a  company  it  should  try  to  meet  these  expectations  and  have  its 
customers’ interests at heart. 
This should also be in the banks’ self-interest, because there is a feedback loop between a 
company and its stakeholders. So if the bank respects its stakeholders, it will generally be 
rewarded: stakeholders will feel valued, trust will grow, and the bank will acquire more business 
in the future. In a nutshell: sustainable profitability over the long term is not possible without 
ethical conduct. I’d like to know what you think of this statement. 
To sum up, in a memo to Berkshire Hathaway shareholders in 2006, Warren Buffett wrote that 
“culture, more than rule books, determines how an organization behaves.” I believe there is a 
lot of truth in this statement. In the end, corporate culture is defined not by rule books but by 
the  behaviour  of  each  individual  employee.  After  all,  a  company’s  public  reputation  is 
essentially the sum of the behaviour of all its individual employees. 
Finally,  introducing  a  corporate  culture  or  defining  a  set  of  ethics  and  values  is  important, 
applying them to daily routines is even more important. Each and every one of us can begin 
by reflecting on, and reexamining, our own behaviour. 
Thank you. 
 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
