  Patrick Njoroge: Empowering consumers of financial services through 
financial education 
Speech by Dr Patrick Njoroge, Governor of the Central Bank of Kenya, at the 9th Financial 
Sector Regulators’ Forum Joint Boards of Directors’ Retreat, Mombasa, 26 August 2015. 
 is  critical 
Information  sharing 
Information  Sharing: 
I am delighted and honoured to be here today, on the occasion of the 9th Financial Sector 
Regulators’  Joint  Boards  of  Directors’  Retreat.  I  am  particularly  grateful  for  the  warm 
welcome and strong support that I have received from you. It is great to be part of this great 
community. 
The theme of the retreat – Empowering Consumers of Financial Services through Financial 
Education  –  is  appropriate  and  timely.  At  the  outset,  let  me  thank  our  Keynote  speaker, 
Ms Gerda Piprek, for an excellent presentation. Her expert views on how financially literacy 
serves the broader goals of increasing uptake of financial services and enhancing financial 
stability and policy effectiveness, are quite insightful. Indeed, the rapidly increasing financial 
innovations  and  the  complexity  of  new  financial  products  make  it  an  essential  skill  for 
participating in a modern society. Thanks Gerda! 
Since  the  inception  of  our  formal  collaboration,  much  progress  has  been  made  in 
strengthening  the  bonds  that  bind  us  together.  As  you  are  all  aware,  we  entered  into  a 
Memorandum  of  Understanding  (MOU)  in  August  2009,  realizing  that  collaboration  can 
increase performance in our respective responsibilities of promoting a safe, efficient, sound 
and stable financial system. That said, there is scope for enhancing our current collaborative 
efforts in several areas. Let me highlight a few of these areas; 
1. 
the  success  of  our 
collaboration and I support fast tracking the establishment of a shared information sharing 
platform and database, for effective and evidence-based decision making. This would bolster 
surveillance of the financial system. I therefore expect the Technical Committee to fast-track 
this  activity  and  submit  a  preliminary  report  to  the  Chief  Executive  Officers  at  the  earliest 
opportunity. 
2. 
SMART  regulation  to  Foster  Stability  of  the  Financial  System:  The  wave  of 
innovations in the financial sector has resulted in increased cross industry, cross sector and 
cross  border  operations,  and  interconnectedness  within  the  financial  sector.  While  this  is 
laudable, it equally raises concerns about the potential for financial contagion, which could 
lead  to  economic  instability  and  damage  to  society.  This  calls  for  vigilance  and  more 
collaboration in prudential surveillance, data analysis and sharpening of supervisory tools. In 
particular, I want to underscore the need to enhance data quality, harmonize regulatory and 
reporting  practices,  and  building  adequate  capacity  among  the  Regulators.  This  requires 
moving  swiftly  to  develop  SMART  –  Standardized,  Measurable,  Actionable,  Reliable  and 
Transparent  Regulatory  and  Supervisory  Frameworks  –  surveillance  supervisory 
approaches,  and  assessment  tools.  This  would  effectively  safeguard  the  soundness, 
integrity, efficiency, and stability of the financial system in Kenya and the region. I believe 
SMART  regulation  is  the  way  to  go  because  its  very  architecture  minimises  regulatory 
burden,  focuses  on  outcomes  rather  that  processes,  and  applies  regulatory  measures  in 
proportion to the risk profile of individual institutions. SMART regulations allow regulators to 
enforce more efficiently and allow regulated entities to comply cheaply and reliably. 
3. 
Stress Testing: Stress testing has become a cornerstone of prudential supervision 
and risk assessment across the world. The Central Bank has strengthened its capacity and 
has  conducted  banking  system  stress  testing  exercise  using  the  Cihak  Framework  since 
January 2015. We have drawn important lessons from the results of these exercises and I 
to 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  urge other Regulators to adopt similar tools, which clearly demonstrate the value of forward-
looking assessments of risks and vulnerabilities to the financial system. 
4. 
Financial  Innovations  and  consumer  protection:  New technologies have  expanded 
the possibilities of financial services and products some of which have brought tremendous 
benefits  to  consumers,  and  resulted  in  measurable  improvements  in  financial  and  greater 
access to the mainstream banking system. However, along with the rapid growth of these 
financial  services  is  the  emergence  of  complex  financial  products  requiring  enhanced 
consumer protection measures. I see the need to prioritise consumer protection in ways that 
will  reduce  if  not  eliminate  consumer  susceptibility  to  abuse  or  fraudulent  activities.  An 
effective consumer protection regime is essential and should broadly entail: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
transparency and accountability in pricing; 
clarity on charges and terms of financial products and services; 
avoiding reckless and fraudulent lending practices; 
protection of financial service consumers against over-indebtedness; 
fair debt collections and transparent marketing practices; 
privacy of client data including credit information sharing arrangement amongst all 
credit providers through credit reference bureaus; 
ethical standards and staff behaviour in credit lending and screening practices; and 
alternative dispute resolution mechanism. 
• 
• 
In this regard, we should engage with our stakeholders to promote effective financial services 
consumer  protection  mechanisms  through  innovate  financial  education  programmes  and 
regulatory reforms. 
5. 
Recovery,  Crisis  Management  and  Resolution  Frameworks:  The  global  financial 
crisis that has affected us all since 2007, offers important lessons in crisis management and 
resolution frameworks. An important lesson from that experience is the centrality of a crisis 
communication  strategy.  Markets  need  certainty  and  assurance  that  competent  authorities 
have the facts and means to resolve crises if and when they arise. As we ponder the whole 
subject of crisis management and resolution frameworks, let us work to ensure that we have 
in place a crisis communication strategy embedded within the broader  Crisis Management 
and  Resolution  Frameworks.  Best practise also demands that regular simulation exercises 
be undertaken to review their efficacy. I urge the Technical Committee to move with speed 
and develop proposals for discussion in subsequent Forum meetings. 
Finally,  I  would  like,  at  this  juncture,  to  share  some  reflections  on  the  East  African 
Community  (EAC)  Monetary  Affairs  Committee  (MAC)  of  Central  Bank  Governors,  with 
regard  to  the  implementation  of  the  East  African  Monetary  Union  (EAMU)  Protocol.  I  am 
happy to report that significant progress has been made to harmonize monetary policies & 
frameworks, and macroeconomic statistics. Similarly, much effort has gone into modernizing 
and  integrating  payment  systems,  including  financial  markets  infrastructure.  We  are  now 
moving on towards full convertibility of EAC currencies. We therefore need to work very hard 
during  the  10-year  transition  window  provided  by  the  EAC  Summit  beginning  2014,  to 
establish the following EAC institutions; 
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
East African Central Bank; 
Surveillance, Compliance and Enforcement Commission; 
Financial Services Commission; 
Statistics Commission; and 
Any other institution necessary for the proper functioning of the Monetary Union. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
As  we  journey  on  the  road  to  a  Monetary  Union,  I  wish  to  underscore  the  importance  of 
undivided  commitment to  those  deliverables  within  the  ambit  of  EAC  Partner  States.  I  am 
sure that the full implementation of EAMU Protocol will change the way we do business as 
Domestic  Financial  Sector  Regulators.  Already,  a  draft  Bill  on  the  establishing  the  East 
African  Monetary  Institute  (EAMI),  a  precursor  to  the  establishment  of  the  above  four 
institution, has been drafted. Let us therefore continue with the collaboration to support the 
EAMU protocol implementation. 
In concluding, it is my conviction that our consolidated synergies will result in better delivery 
of the Forum’s objectives. 
Thank you! 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
