   Jacqueline Loh: Managing risks in an uncertain world 
Keynote address by Ms Jacqueline Loh, Deputy Managing Director of the Monetary Authority 
of  Singapore,  at  the  13th  Singapore  International  Reinsurance  Conference,  Singapore, 
3 November 2015. 
 Opening 
Distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen, good morning. 
It is my pleasure to join you today at the 13th Singapore International Reinsurance Conference. 
I believe the theme of this year’s conference, “Managing Risks in an Uncertain World”, is one 
which will resonate with many of you, as insurers, reinsurers and brokers alike navigate the 
crosscurrents in the reinsurance industry, in search of profitable growth and better returns. 
In keeping with the conference theme, I would like to share a few observations on how the 
Singapore insurance industry can capitalise on the opportunities created by new risks, new 
client segments, and new markets in Asia. 
Too much capital finding too little risks 
Those  of  you  who  attended  the  recent  Monte  Carlo  Rendezvous  would  have  discussed 
extensively the challenging conditions in the current reinsurance market, which some have 
warned  would  be  the  “new  reality”,  or  the  “new  normal”.  We  have  seen  how  structural 
responses – winning market share from competitors, and bulking up through acquisition of 
rivals – are largely built on a zero sum game. This becomes a problem when the pie is not 
growing, as could be the case if the industry does not innovate and create uncontested space. 
Indeed, the combination of sluggish economic growth globally and continuous expansion of 
alternative capital have led to too much insurance capital finding too little risks. These include 
traditional  risks  like  property  and  casualty  risks. At  the  same time,  the  insurance  sector  is 
struggling to find solutions for new and emerging risks. This confluence of structural changes 
across  demand,  intermediation  and  the  supply  side  of  the  insurance  value  chain  is  an 
unprecedented phenomenon. 
But the outlook is not for all grey skies ahead. The challenges also present a unique set of 
profitable growth prospects for the industry, particularly here in Asia. 
Asia’s changing risk landscape 
The Asian risk landscape is changing rapidly, with demand for insurance services projected to 
grow  especially  quickly  in  emerging  Asia  as  incomes  rise,  life  expectancy  increases,  and 
Asians become more aware of catastrophic risks. Asia currently accounts for 28% of the global 
insurance market, and premiums in the region are expected to double by 2020, with more than 
US$1.3 trillion generated. 
So why is excess capacity not being deployed in Asia which faces the greatest need? 
Many of Asia’s risks, ranging from marine, to property catastrophe insurance, to directors and 
officers liability, are actually insurable and traditional risks. 
Yet, Asia continues to remain severely underinsured. Many of these insurable risks are often 
not well understood or well developed in this region, due to a lack of risk awareness, insufficient 
data and nascent insurance markets. The insurance protection gap is widening inexorably: 
• 
Close to half of the world’s most underinsured countries are in Asia, and of these, half 
are in Southeast Asia. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   In the past two decades, Asia has borne 50% of the estimated global economic cost 
of natural catastrophes. Yet, less than 5% of all disaster losses in Asia are insured, 
compared to 40% in developed nations. 
The 2008 Sichuan Earthquake is a case in point. Less than 1% of the total economic 
costs  of  US$125  billion  were  insured.  The  disaster  further  left  governments  and 
taxpayers with a hefty reconstruction bill of almost US$150 billion after the event. 
  Going forward, it will also no longer be sufficient to just focus on traditional risks. As  Asia 
continues to grow and become more digitally-connected, new and emerging risks will arise and 
we should be proactive in adapting to these needs. 
I would therefore like to challenge the industry to: 
• 
raise insurance penetration of traditional risks and find innovative ways to cast the net 
wider to cover more insureds, and 
develop innovative and meaningful risk transfer products for new and emerging risks. 
• 
Specifically, I would like to highlight 3 key growth drivers for insurers and reinsurers today: 
• 
• 
• 
New and emerging risks 
New capital 
New technology and innovation. 
New and emerging risks 
The rapidly changing global landscape has given rise to new and emerging risks which are 
mostly intangible, such as cyber, liability, supply chain and reputation. 
Cyber risk is the new catastrophe, estimated to cost the global economy between US$300bn 
– US$1 trillion annually. This is much higher compared to the average annual cost of natural 
disasters at US$200bn. More than just the burden of cost, cyber risks often bring about much 
embarrassment and reputational damage to the company and its clients. 
However, cyber risks are not adequately prepared for and their associated costs and impact 
under-estimated: 
• 
A large majority of businesses believe that cyber risks are still not fully understood, 
and that risk readiness for cyber risk may have been “vastly overstated”. 
Challenges  exist  around  the  quantification  and  pricing  of  cyber  risks  and  their 
accumulation effects. 
 Yet such risks are the most likely to occur and carry the greatest potential impact on operation, 
with the leading risks in terms of impact and likelihood being: 
• 
Reputational  damage  from  a  sensitive  data  breach  (impact  on  organisation’s 
resiliency – 79%; likelihood 79%) 
Failure in a main IT data centre (59%; 77%) 
Disruption of online services due to a cyber attack (58%; 77%). 
• 
• 
Cyber risks thus present an enormous potential for insurance players – not just to capitalise 
on this insufficiently tapped space, but more importantly, to play a vital risk management role 
for the wider society: 
• 
Increasing awareness of cyber exposures, as well as the forces of regulatory change, 
will  underpin  the  rapid  growth  of  cyber  insurance.  It  is  estimated  that  the  cyber 
insurance market will grow 30% per annum to US$20 billion in annual premiums by 
2025. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
     Companies are increasingly focusing on cyber security issues. 63% of boards today 
actively address computer and information security, up from 33% in 2012. The sharp 
increase is likely driven by the recent high-profile and well-publicized cyber incidents. 
Governments are also gearing up to address the problem. There is a trend towards 
stringent data protection regimes that are backed by increasing levels of liabilities 
such as more notifications and significant fines for data breaches. US, Hong Kong, 
Singapore and Australia are among those already enforcing, or looking at, new laws, 
while the European Union is looking to harmonise pan-European data protection laws 
across the EU member states. 
 As technology and the users – or abusers – of technology get smarter, the extent of and impact 
from cyber breaches will correspondingly rise. Businesses must prepare for this new era of 
cyber risks with cyber insurance as a critical component in a comprehensive risk management 
strategy. 
To further the development of cyber insurance in Singapore, the MAS is supporting the Cyber 
Risk  Test-bed  project.  This  will  promote  both  the  demand  for  and  supply  of  insurance 
coverage, as well as tackle the difficulties that arise when nurturing new and emerging lines: 
On the supply side, a lack of loss and claims data that underpins an effective and 
• 
accurate risk pricing model. 
On the demand side, a lack of awareness as cyber risk is new and emerging, and 
exposures are therefore difficult to understand and quantify. 
Finally, insufficient technical expertise to underwrite such complex risks. 
• 
Led by the NTU-Insurance Risk and Financial Research Centre (IRFRC) in collaboration with 
the  Agency  for  Science,  Technology  and  Research  (A*STAR),  the  insurance  industry  and 
corporates, the industry-wide cyber insurance test-bed project seeks to address the limits of 
insurability of cyber risks in three ways. 
• 
First,  the  common  data  sharing  platform  encourages  pooling  of  not  just  insurers’ 
claims data, but also corporates’ potential loss data simulated through hypothetical 
events. 
Second, it helps corporates understand their potential exposures and losses. 
Third, the players on the platform can come together to establish industry standards 
on clear-cut definitions of cyber risks, coverage limits and terms and conditions. 
 Today, I am very pleased to announce SCOR as the first founding member to join the Cyber 
Risk Test-bed Alliance. We remain in close discussions with a number of insurance players, 
and look forward to the industry’s active participation on this strategic project. 
New capital 
The second opportunity is in new capital. New or alternative capital continues to increase its 
share in the global reinsurance industry, as alternative risk transfer solutions in the form of 
insurance-linked securities (ILS) such as catastrophe bonds, collateralised reinsurance and 
sidecars, among others, gain acceptance. 
Alternative capital grew 6% in the first half of 2015 to US$68 billion, while traditional capacity 
fell by 3% to US$497 billion. 
While the influx of alternative capital may have led to excess capacity, softening rates and 
narrowing  of  profit  margins,  this  same  capital  has  the  potential  to  unlock  opportunities  for 
insurers to access new products and markets. 
As I mentioned earlier, Asia, in particular, is especially attractive to insurers and reinsurers: 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
     Alternative capital, when deployed to markets in need of risk capital for protection 
against losses, will allow insurers and reinsurers to underwrite more risks and better 
serve society’s needs. 
As countries in Asia look to strengthen resilience to potentially debilitating events like 
catastrophes, it is not unexpected that alternative risk transfer mechanisms, such as 
catastrophe  bonds  and  government  pools,  will  increasingly  feature  as  regional 
insurers  leverage  alternative  sources  of  risk  capital  to  complement  traditional 
reinsurance. 
The management of catastrophe risks in Asia-Pacific is a priority for insurance players as well 
as governments in the region. A research by Lloyd’s has shown that a 1% rise in insurance 
penetration translates to a 22% reduction in taxpayers’ contribution following a disaster. 
In order to expand the insurability of catastrophe risks in the region and bridge the protection 
gap, an innovative public-private partnership (“PPP”) approach is needed. To do this, the MAS 
is supporting a Natural Catastrophe Data Analytics Exchange (NAT CAT DAX) for Asia Pacific. 
Led  by  the  NTU  Institute  for  Catastrophe  Risk  Management  (ICRM)  in  collaboration  with 
A*STAR and the industry, this common data analytics platform will enable industry to pool 
insurable claims data. More importantly, this platform will unlock new economic exposure and 
loss datasets through the use of new technologies such as satellites, remote sensors  and 
drones. With a comprehensive and integrated economic and insurance database, this will form 
a strong data backbone for the industry to not only underwrite traditional reinsurance better, 
but  also  catalyse  new  product  innovation,  such  as  government  pools,  and  alternative  risk 
transfer products, which will push the boundaries of insurability further. 
Today, it gives me great pleasure to announce the formation of the Nat Cat DAX Alliance, in 
collaboration  with  pioneer  industry  founding  members  Mitsui  Sumitomo  Insurance  Group, 
Renaissance Re, RMS and Aon. I urge the industry to be a part of this collaborative initiative, 
as we partner together to increase the availability of quality data, enhance the underwriting 
process, and spur collective market analytics and innovation. 
New technology and innovation 
Just as new disruptive technologies like 3D printing, autonomous vehicles, and the Internet of 
Things  have  emerged  in  various  sectors  of  the  economy,  such  technologies  will  similarly 
surface in the insurance industry. This will have an impact on all parts of the insurance value 
chain – product design, underwriting and distribution. 
• 
Product  design  –  While  there  is  tremendous  scope  for  enhancements  in  product 
design,  the  advent  of  new  technologies  and  innovation  could  even  render  some 
existing offerings obsolete. For example, autonomous cars and their safety elements 
could leave some motor insurance products out-dated, if not irrelevant, over the next 
couple of decades. 
Underwriting  –  With  big  data  and  smart  analytics,  underwriting  models  will  likely 
evolve  to  become  more  predictive  and  personalised,  such  as  through  the  use  of 
telematics  to  price  motor  premiums  according  to  driving  behaviour,  or  the  use  of 
wearables for a customised health protection plan. Data analytics is not new to the 
insurance sector, which has had decades of experience working with and analysing 
large amounts of internal data such as loss histories. This will now be boosted through 
the  insurers’  ability  to  incorporate  external  third-party  data  sources,  such  as 
government statistics on health, worker-safety, and energy data, in their underwriting 
and pricing of risks. 
Distribution – Mobile technologies are influencing financial buying decisions, including 
the way consumers purchase insurance. This will have a predominantly big impact on 
Generation Z, a “mobile first” and “mobile only” generation. 
  4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   
Technology and innovation will be a differentiator for the insurance industry, and a key enabler 
for insurers to access previously untapped risks and businesses. 
Singapore as a smart financial centre 
Singapore needs to position ourselves for this new future too. We have embarked on a national 
Smart Nation initiative, which seeks to harness info-communication technology, networks and 
data to support better living, create more opportunities, and support stronger communities. The 
Government will put in place the infrastructure, policies, ecosystem and capabilities to enable 
a  Smart  Nation,  but  we  also  need  industries  and  citizens  to  work  with  us  to  explore  and 
experiment with new solutions. And if these solutions can work here, we hope that they can 
also be relevant to other parts of the world. 
In line with our national vision to be a Smart Nation, MAS is also seeking to create a Smart 
Financial Centre, one where technology and innovation are used to increase efficiency, create 
new opportunities, manage risks better, and improve lives. 
The  MAS  will  pursue  this  with  the  industry  on  two  complementary  fronts  –  a  calibrated 
regulatory  approach  conducive 
twinned  with 
development initiatives to augment the Fintech ecosystem here. 
• 
On the regulatory front, financial institutions like yourselves are free to launch new 
ideas without first seeking MAS’ approval, so long as you are satisfied with your own 
due diligence. We are also encouraging a “sandbox” approach for you to launch your 
innovative products within controlled boundaries. 
On  the  development  front,  we  have  launched  a  Financial  Sector  Technology  & 
Innovation scheme to provide financial support, and will work closely with the industry 
and educational institutes to build competencies in Fintech and innovation. 
fostering  security, 
innovation  while 
to 
 The insurance industry is well placed to take the lead in making Singapore a Smart Financial 
Centre, given the industry’s fertile ground for innovation and the application of technology. 
The cluster of innovation labs that have steadily been hubbed here over the years is a reflection 
of  this. We  are  proud  to  be  home  to  Aon’s  Analytics  and  Innovation  Centre  and  MetLife’s 
recently launched LumenLab. To be unveiled later this year in Singapore are AIA’s EDGE Lab, 
Aviva’s Digital Garage and AXA’s Data Innovation Lab. 
This dynamic mix of insurance brokers, life insurers and composite insurers bear testament to 
the  vibrant  and  conducive  innovation  ecosystem  here,  supported  by  a  strong  Fintech 
community  of  start-ups  and  research  institutes.  Besides  improving  the  efficiency  of  the 
insurance sector, I am heartened that they are actively exploring opportunities brought about 
by  new  technologies.  This  is  an  important  step  towards  unlocking  untapped  insurance 
solutions and markets, and will go a long way in managing risks in this uncertain environment. 
To  reinforce  this  Fintech  ecosystem  and  as  part  of  our  broader  efforts  to  modernise  the 
insurance  marketplace,  we  are  supporting  the  establishment  of  an  electronic  reinsurance 
trading platform to enhance the efficiency of trading risks electronically. 
New risk management and insurance major 
As the industry seeks out profitable growth and new horizons, it is critical that the right talent 
and skills are available to support this. 
In the face of new and emerging risks, as insurance roles evolve and become more complex, 
different  and  deeper  skillsets  will  be  essential.  Skillsets  will  also  need  to  be  widened  as 
technology and financial services converge. 
To this end, I am glad to announce that the Nanyang Technological University will be launching 
the Risk Management and Insurance major next year. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
   
Beginning in August 2016, this new Insurance major will be structured as a major specialisation 
under  the  NTU  Business  Degree.  It  is  expected  to  produce  50  new  graduates  every  year 
starting  from  2018,  providing  a  strong  and  sustainable  talent  pipeline  to  support  industry 
growth. Alongside a robust curriculum, the students will get to build up their research, analytical 
and modelling capabilities, through working on research projects like the Nat Cat DAX and 
Cyber Risk Test-bed. 
Conclusion 
Insurance will continue to increase its relevance in an uncertain world. In these times of new 
risks, capital and technology, it is not sufficient to rely on a red ocean strategy. We need to 
open new horizons, and open them together. MAS will be a partner of the Singapore insurance 
industry as you forge a blue ocean strategy, manage risks and capitalise on the opportunities 
in the new reality. 
Thank you, and I wish all of you a successful conference and a productive time at the SIRC 
and in Singapore. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
