  Mario Draghi: Monetary policy – past, present and future 
Speech  by  Mr  Mario  Draghi,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the  Frankfurt 
European Banking Congress, Frankfurt am Main, 20 November 2015. 
 Summary 
The  ECB’s  monetary  policy  measures  have  clearly  worked,  in  fact  they  are  probably  the 
dominant  force  spurring  the  recovery.  They  have  been  instrumental  in  arresting  and 
reversing  the  deflationary  pressures  that  hit  the  euro  a  year  ago.  Yet  growth  momentum 
remains weak and inflation remains well below our objective of below but close to 2%. 
Composite lending rates for non-financial companies declined more than 70 basis points for 
the euro area as a whole between June 2014 and today, and by between 110 and 120 basis 
points  in  stressed  economies.  That  is  a  formidable  pass-through.  Small  businesses  also 
report improvements in access to external sources of finance. 
To highlight three risks: global growth this year will be the weakest since 2009; this is the 
weakest  euro  area  rebound  since  1998;  and  the  recovery  remains  very  protracted  in 
historical perspective. 
We  cannot  say  with  confidence  that  the  process  of  economic  repair  in  the  euro  area  is 
complete.  At  the  December  Governing  Council  meeting  we  will  thoroughly  assess  the 
strength and persistence of the factors that are slowing the return of inflation towards 2%. If 
we conclude that the balance of risks to our medium-term price stability objective is skewed 
to the downside, we will act by using all the instruments available within our mandate. We 
consider the asset purchase programme to be a powerful and flexible instrument, as it can 
be adjusted in terms of size, composition or duration to achieve a more expansionary stance. 
The level of the deposit facility rate can also empower the transmission of APP, not least by 
increasing the velocity of circulation of bank reserves. If we decide that the current trajectory 
of  our  policy  is  not  sufficient  to  achieve  our  objective,  we  will  do  what  we  must  to  raise 
inflation as quickly as possible. That is what our price stability mandate requires of us. 
Dear Lord Mayor Feldmann, 
Your Excellencies, 
Dear Governors, 
Dear Mr Fitschen and Mr Blessing, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
A year ago in this venue I said that it was essential to bring back inflation to target without 
delay, and that monetary policy would do its part to achieve that. In the following months we 
took the decision to reinforce our credit easing measures and to expand our asset purchase 
programme. 
That decision reflected the very difficult situation the euro area found itself in late last year. 
After  a  promising  start  in  the  spring  of  2014,  the  economic  recovery  had  faltered  in  the 
summer and, as the year drew to a close, we feared a renewed lapse into recession. This 
would have come at a time when inflation was falling and inflation expectations were already 
clearly destabilised. Our price stability objective was under threat. 
Today,  the  economic  recovery  is  on  a  firmer  footing.  Domestic  demand  is  gradually 
strengthening and replacing exports as the engine of growth. Consumption continues to be 
the main driver of real activity. And while global trade slowed remarkably in the first half of 
2015, euro area export growth has held up relatively well. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
Our measures have therefore clearly worked – in fact, they are probably the dominant force 
spurring  the  recovery  that  we  see  today.  They  have  been  instrumental  in  arresting  and 
reversing the deflationary pressures that hit the euro area a year ago. 
Nevertheless, that positive picture of the economy has to be seen in a wider context where 
risks  still  remain.  Though  the  recovery  has  proven  resilient  to  shocks,  growth  momentum 
remains weak for an economy coming out of a deep recession, and the headwinds blowing 
from the global economy have increased. The recovery in the path of real growth has also 
not yet been mirrored in the path of inflation, which still remains well below our objective of 
below but close to 2%. 
So what I would like  to discuss in my remarks today is how and why our monetary policy 
measures  have  been  effective  and,  in  view  of  the  prevailing  risks,  whether  they  are  still 
providing sufficient monetary accommodation to secure our price stability mandate. 
Effectiveness of asset purchases 
There are many reasons why asset purchases should have a strong impact on activity and 
inflation.  Purchases  compress  yields  and  reduce  the  cost  of  financing  in  the  economy 
through direct pass-through and portfolio rebalancing effects. For banks they make lending to 
the real economy more attractive than purchasing government bonds. Higher financial and 
real estate asset prices can also increase demand via wealth effects and lower the cost of 
equity for firms. 
When we launched the APP, however, it was in an environment where the strength of these 
conventional  transmission  channels  was  questionable  –  at  least  in  the  eyes  of  some 
observers. 
One concern was that the impact of interventions might be meagre given that yields  were 
already very low at the start of the purchase programme. As such, savers selling securities to 
the  ECB  might  not  feel  substantially  richer  and  spend  more,  while  borrowers  might  not 
perceive a material easing in their financing costs and borrow more. Indeed, at the launch of 
the  APP  nominal  borrowing  conditions  for  virtually  all  sovereign  issuers  were  the  most 
favourable in post-war history. 
But the low yields we saw in January were not a limiting factor on our programme; they were 
proof that it was already working. Following our communication on our reaction function in 
the first half of last year1, interest rates had in fact been falling consistently over the months 
preceding the launch of APP, as markets began to price in our likely response to a prolonged 
period  of  too-low  inflation.  Taking  the  GDP-weighted  average  of  the  euro  area  10-year 
government bond yields, yields fell by around 150 basis points between early June 2014 and 
early  March  2015,  interest  rates  had  in  fact  been  falling  consistently  over  the  months 
preceding the launch of APP, as markets began to price in our likely response to a prolonged 
period  of  too-low  inflation.  Taking  the  GDP-weighted  average  of  the  euro  area  10-year 
government bond yields, yields fell by around 150 basis points between early June 2014 and 
early March 2015. 
That also had spillover effects, through portfolio rebalancing, to the cost of market finance 
across the economy. Yields of bank bonds fell, on average, by 75 basis points between early 
June 2014 and the start of the APP. Yields of investment-grade bonds issued by firms also 
fell  by  about  100  basis  points  over  that  same  period.  Studies  by  ECB  staff  attribute  a 
significant portion of those declines to the credit easing package and the announcement of 
the APP. 
                                                
1  See speech by Mario Draghi, Monetary policy communication in turbulent times, at the Conference De 
Nederlandsche Bank 200 years: Central banking in the next two decades, Amsterdam, 24 April 2014. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
For asset purchases to boost activity and inflation, however, these improvements in financial 
markets need to be passed through into credit conditions for the real economy. Here there 
was another concern about the effectiveness of our policy – that with banks deleveraging, 
trying to enlist them as vehicles of monetary policy might be futile, as banks would retain the 
stimulus  and  try  to  deleverage  rather  than  create  more  loans.  In  fact,  the  power  of 
transmission through the banking system has been rising through the life of our programme. 
Between  June  2014  and  today,  composite  lending  rates for  non-financial  companies  have 
declined by more than 70 basis points for the euro area as a whole, and by between 110 and 
120  basis  points  in  stressed  economies  in  the  euro  area  periphery.  That  is  a  formidable 
pass-through. To give you a comparison, we estimate that in normal times our policy rate has 
to be instantaneously reduced by 100 basis points to see a similar impact on lending rates 
after such a short time period. Banks’ rate-setting process is typically slow, but not this time. 
And  we  are  not  only  seeing  this  pass-through  for  larger  firms,  but  also  for  small-  and 
medium-sized  enterprises  (SMEs).  Remember  that  at  the  height  of  the  crisis  in  2012,  the 
rates  on  very  small  business  loans,  which  are  typically  given  to  SMEs,  were  about 
2.5 percentage points higher than those on large loans. Other terms and conditions, such as 
collateral,  were  also  more  demanding.  As  documented  by  our  surveys  on  SME  access  to 
credit,  at  this  time  “access  to  finance”  was  considered  the  dominant  concern  for  small 
enterprises, right after “finding customers” for their business. 
Our measures are gradually changing that picture. Since the first round of our survey in April 
this year, “access to finance” has dropped to among the least important concerns for SMEs. 
They in fact report an improvement in the availability of external sources of finance, and in 
the willingness of banks to provide credit. Terms and conditions have also sharply converged 
towards those enjoyed by large corporate borrowers. 
So why has transmission been so accelerated? 
There are two reasons. First, the APP was launched against the backdrop of the completion 
of our Comprehensive Assessment of bank balance sheets, which ensured that banks were 
in the strongest possible position to transmit the boost to credit supply. Second, and even 
more  fundamentally,  banks’  lending  processes  react  to  macroeconomic  conditions  in  a 
feedback loop. For much of the crisis, that loop was pernicious. But our measures have been 
able to turn it positive. 
When the economy was weak, banks tended to increase lending rates because they feared 
that the probability of default on their loans would rise. Those higher rates meant good credit 
demand  fell  and  the  economy  worsened  further.  As  the  slump  deepened,  servicing  credit 
then became more difficult for firms and households with outstanding loans, pushing higher 
numbers  of  borrowers  into  delinquency.  The  loop  then  returned  back to  the  beginning,  as 
banks’ original increase in lending rates was validated ex post. 
Starting  in  the  summer  of  2014,  however,  our  measures  began  to  increase  competitive 
pressures on banks to reduce lending margins. The Comprehensive Assessment meant that 
more banks were in a position to benefit from low funding costs and lend, while the Targeted 
Long Term Refinancing Operations (TLTRO) gave them stronger incentives to do so. Bank 
credit therefore became more affordable, which in turn stoked higher credit demand. And as 
that  has  fed  through  into  a  better  macro  picture,  loan  delinquencies  have  fallen.  Indeed, 
since the second quarter of this year non-performing loans (NPLs) have been declining, even 
in those economies where banks had built up high stocks of bad quality assets. 
What this underlines is that policies that are good for the economy are good for banks. Even 
though low  interest rates put pressure on banks‘ unit margins, that is compensated for by 
volume effects – there is more activity in the banking sector as a whole because monetary 
policy is supporting the recovery. Moreover, as NPLs have started to go down banks have 
been  able  to  reduce  provisions,  which  also  supports  profitability.  Evidence  from  our  Bank 
Lending  Survey  suggests  that,  for  the  euro  area  in  aggregate,  the  net  impact  of  our 
measures on bank profitability is broadly neutral. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  
 
The macroeconomic impact of our policy on small firms is already clear. In the most recent 
October round of our survey, the number of SMEs reporting an increase in revenues  was 
almost 20% larger than those which reported the opposite. The improvement has also been 
widespread across most countries, with the notable exception of Greece. For the first time 
since  2009,  the  net  percent  of firms  that  register  an  improvement  in  business  activity  has 
turned  positive  for  all  size  sub-groups,  including  for  the  micro-firms  that  had  in  the  past 
suffered most. 
Reviving the supply of credit to these firms has also helped lay the ground for an economy-
wide recovery in investment, activity and employment. Think that SMEs are 99 out of every 
100  businesses  in  Europe,  produce  58%  of  value  added  and  employ  two-thirds  of  all 
employees. And those benefits have accrued not only to countries with a high concentration 
of  SMEs,  such  as  those  in  the  euro  area  periphery.  Removing  the  obstacles  that  have 
suppressed growth in those economies reverberates across the whole euro area. 
In particular, the budding recovery in vulnerable countries today provides a partial cushion for 
exporters in core economies against the fall-off in demand from emerging markets. Between 
2011 and late last year, extra-euro area exports were systematically stronger than intra-euro 
area exports for those countries. But more recently, while shipment of goods and services to 
China, Russia and Brazil has dropped, export substitution to vulnerable countries has partly 
offset that shock. 
Importantly,  what  this  story  shows  is  not  just  that  our  policy  is  effective.  It  shows  that 
concerns that asset purchases would lead only to asset price inflation, and that would benefit 
only  more  wealthy  groups,  were  misguided.  It  is  true  that  our  purchases  raise  the  market 
value of financial assets. But what matters for the economy is the exact mirror effect of this: a 
lower cost of capital for firms and an associated boost in their spending power. That has a 
much broader impact on output and inflation, and eventually on employment and incomes, 
which reduces income inequality. 
Do we need to do more? 
So  the  economy  is  responding  to  our  measures  in  the  direction  we  had  anticipated,  and 
today we can look at our prospects with cautious confidence. The question we face now is 
not  therefore  whether  we  have  the  tools  available  to  provide  the  appropriate  degree  of 
monetary  stimulus. We have  proven  that. The  question  is  one  of  calibration  –  whether,  in 
view of the increasing headwinds we have faced since the summer and the impact they are 
having  on  the  balance  of  risks  for  inflation  going  forward,  the  calibration  of  the  monetary 
stance decided in January is still sufficient now to ensure a return of inflation towards our 
objective, and without undue delay. 
Let me highlight three risks in particular which are relevant for that calibration. 
First, the downside risks to our baseline scenario for the euro area economy have increased 
in recent months due to the deterioration of the external environment. The outlook for global 
demand, especially in emerging markets, has notably worsened, while uncertainty in financial 
markets has increased. Global growth this year will be the weakest since 2009. 
Second,  even  factoring  in  those  headwinds,  the  strength  of  the  underlying  recovery  is 
modest. Taking the Purchasing Managers’ Index, the present upswing which started in 2013 
is the weakest euro area rebound since 1998. That is striking considering that we are in the 
early phase  of a recovery, where one  would expect to see a much more vigorous pickup. 
Deferred spending typically comes back on stream in a bulky way, aided by more favourable 
financing conditions. 
It is also striking considering the important tailwinds helping the economy along – not just our 
monetary stimulus, but lower prices for energy. None of those previous rebounds since 1998 
could  benefit  from  cheapening  energy:  in  fact,  oil  prices  have  been  a  constant  headwind 
blowing  against  previous  recoveries.  Moreover,  in  none  of  those  previous  upswings  was 
monetary policy, measured by real EONIA rates, as supportive as it is now. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
Third, the recovery remains very protracted in historical perspective. It took between five and 
eight quarters for the countries now making up the euro area to recover their pre-recession 
level  of  real  output  after  the  slumps  of  the  1970s,  1980s  and  1990s.  During  the  recent 
recession  –  which  was  admittedly  the  worst  since  the  1930s  –  it  took  the  US  economy 
14 quarters to reach its pre-crisis peak. If our current assessment is correct, it will take the 
euro area 31 quarters to return to its pre-crisis level of output – that is, in 2016 Q1. 
This matters not just because of the lost output in that time. Such a prolonged downturn also 
inevitably  impacts  the  way  firms  and  social  partners  set  wages  and  prices,  and  this  will 
continue to affect the recovery of inflation. Though the most volatile components – principally 
energy  prices  –  explain  much  of  the  recent  decline  in  inflation,  indicators  of  underlying 
inflation  are  also  at  a  low  level.  That  could  imply  relatively  weak  price  pressures  going 
forward. 
We  see  subdued  wage  growth  in  the  euro  area,  suggesting  that  the  output  gap  is  still 
exerting  downward  pressure  on  wages.  The  so-called  core  measures  of  inflation  –  which 
strip out volatile components – have also been drifting down since mid-2012 when the euro 
crisis hit its climax, and have been hovering around 1% for nearly two years. The increase in 
October to 1.1%, while encouraging, is not sufficient to fundamentally change that picture. 
Low core inflation is not something we can be relaxed about, as it has in the past been a 
good forecaster for where inflation will stabilise in the medium-term. And while core industrial 
goods  will  receive  support from  the  depreciation  of  the  euro,  an  increase  in  core  services 
inflation – today close to an all-time minimum – will depend on rising nominal wage growth. 
For that to pick up the economy needs to move back to full capacity as quickly as possible. 
Putting  the  whole  picture  together,  we  have  a  situation  where  we  cannot  yet  say  with 
confidence that the process of economic repair in the euro area is complete. The moderate 
growth and price dynamics imply that we need to monitor closely whether – if left to its own 
forces – the economy will be able to reach a self-sustaining growth trajectory in conditions of 
price  stability.  If  not,  then  it  will  require  more  monetary  stimulus,  which  the  ECB  will  not 
hesitate to provide. 
At  our  December  Governing  Council  meeting,  we  will  thoroughly  assess  the  strength  and 
persistence of the factors that are slowing the return of inflation towards 2%. We will use as 
one  input  the  Eurosystem  staff  projections.  Another  input  will  be  the  work  of  our  staff  in 
consultation with the Eurosystem Committees on the monetary policy stimulus that has been 
achieved so far, and the range of instruments available in case more accommodation is seen 
as necessary. 
If we conclude that the balance of risks to our medium-term price stability objective is skewed 
to  the  downside,  we  will  act  by  using  all  the  instruments  available  within  our  mandate.  In 
particular,  we  consider  the  APP  to  be  a  powerful  and  flexible  instrument,  as  it  can  be 
adjusted  in  terms  of  size,  composition  or  duration  to  achieve  a  more  expansionary  policy 
stance. The level of the deposit facility rate can also empower the transmission of APP, not 
least by increasing the velocity of circulation of bank reserves. 
In  making  our  assessment  of  the  risks  to  price  stability,  we  will  not  ignore  the  fact  that 
inflation has already been low for some time. Looking forward, monetary policy will remain 
accommodative  for  as  long  as  needed  to  secure  a  sustained  adjustment  in  the  path  of 
inflation. That means we want to feel suitably confident that inflation will not only converge to, 
but also stabilise around levels close to 2% over the relevant medium-term horizon. 
So let me reiterate what I said here last year: if we decide that the current trajectory of our 
policy is not sufficient to achieve that objective, we will do what we must to raise inflation as 
quickly as possible. That is what our price stability mandate requires of us. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
