  S S Mundra: Indian banking sector – a regulatory perspective 
Keynote address by Mr S S Mundra, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the 
Global Banking Conference, organized by the “Mint”, Singapore, 2 October 2015. 
 1.  H.E.  Shri  Vijay  Thakur  Singh,  Indian  High  Commissioner  to  Singapore;  Smt.  Arundhati 
Bhattacharya,  Chairman,  State  Bank  of  India;  Shri  Piyush  Gupta,  Chief  Executive  Officer, 
DBS Group; Shri Ajay Kanwal, Regional CEO, ASEAN and South Asia, Standard Chartered; 
Shri Gunit Chadha, Member of Deutsche Bank Group Executive Committee, Co-CEO Asia 
Pacific,  Deutsche  Bank  AG;  Shri  Rajiv  Verma,  CEO,  HT  Media  Ltd;  delegates  at  the 
Conference; ladies and gentlemen! 
2. At the outset, I would like to thank Tamal, Sukumar and the entire Mint Management for 
inviting  me  to  deliver  the  keynote  address  at  their  Global  Banking  Conclave  here  in 
Singapore.  I  compliment  Mint  for  conceptualizing  this  event  and  deciding  to  hold  it  in 
Singapore which, in some sense, is an ideal setting, as this beautiful City State embodies 
what banking ought to be- free-spirited yet, conservative. The theme for the event could not 
have been more apt as it is being organized at a time when the banking system in India is 
witnessing some transformations of monumental proportions. The year can be considered as 
a major milestone for the Indian banking sector as it has witnessed the licensing of two new 
banks in the private sector as also issuance of in-principle licenses to differentiated banks -
payments and small finance banks for the first time in history. 
3. The theme’s relevance also stems from the fact that India is poised to achieve the fastest 
economic growth rate amongst large economies. There are a lot of positives about the India 
of today- a stable political system, improved fiscal situation, lower Current Account Deficit, 
sustained domestic demand emanating from a favourable demography, growing middle class 
and  rising  income  levels,  rapid  urbanisation  through  migration  of  population,  increasing 
requirements  of  physical  and  financial  infrastructure,  increased  mobile  and  internet 
penetration,  financial  inclusion,  Government’s  flagship  programmes  like  Make  in  India  and 
Digital India- they all gel in perfectly to give a potential leg up to investment and economic 
growth  in  the  country.  Being  a  proxy  to  the  economy,  the  banking  sector  would  benefit 
significantly  from  these  developments.  Banking  sector  regulation,  in  such  an  environment, 
should  serve  the  twin  purpose  of  support  as  well  as  prudence  to  ensure  a  healthy  and 
sustainable growth. 
4.  Against  this  backdrop,  in  my  address  today  I  would  like  to  talk  about  our  regulatory 
philosophy  and  approach  to  regulation  and  supervision  of  banks.  I  would  argue  that  our 
regulations  have  been  more  forward-looking  and  when  needed,  more  stringent  than  the 
internationally  agreed  standards.  I  would  also  briefly  dwell  upon  our  recent  initiatives  to 
strengthen the banking system in the country. But let me begin by talking about what is our 
regulatory  philosophy?  Well,  we  have  always  operated  with  a  conviction  that  the  banking 
system is meant to sub serve the needs of the real economy and it should not race ahead of 
the  real  economy.  Our  approach  to  regulation  is  also  guided  by  the  reality  that  the  Indian 
economy  is  bank-dominated  and  hence,  banks  are  central  to  the  process  of  credit 
intermediation  and  allocation  of  resources  in  the  country.  Our  regulatory  guidelines  also 
predicate  on  the  belief  that  banks  are  a  key  agency  for  promoting  financial  inclusion  and 
ensuring a sustainable development of the economy. 
5. How have we fared as regulators? To put things in context, it would be in order to ruminate 
over some of the recent trends in regulation and supervision in the global financial sector and 
assess where we stand on those. Among the ‘add-ons’ that are being employed as part of 
the regulatory reform package are stricter capital prescriptions, liquidity and leverage norms. 
Measures have also been taken for a more intense oversight of the shadow banking sector, 
improving  the  risk  management  practices  of  CCPs  and  regulation  of  OTC  derivatives. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Another important plank of the reforms has been to address the systemic vulnerabilities and 
ending the moral hazard associated with “Too Big to Fail”. A Total Loss Absorbing Capacity 
(TLAC)  prescription  and  the  resolution  framework  for  G-SIBs  are  at  an  advance  stage  of 
negotiation and are intended to precisely address this issue. 
6. Let me bring some perspectives. Ever since the Basel Capital standards were first set out, 
we have sought to not only align our capital adequacy norms with these global standards, but 
pitched  it  at  a  more  stringent  level.  Likewise,  since  long,  we  have  had  prescriptions  on 
maintenance  of  CRR/SLR  by  the  banks  in  place  which  also  serve  more  or  less  the  same 
purpose  as  is  now  being  sought  to  be  addressed  through  LCR  and  NSFR  regime,  post 
Crisis.  Leverage  in  the  Indian  banking  system  has  always  been  kept  at  a  lower  level  and 
hence, the leverage ratio that is now being implemented globally as a backstop to the risk 
measure as part of the overall Basel III package, is more or less a given for the Indian banks. 
We  have  also  been  calibrating  risk  weights  on  sensitive  sector  exposures  like  commercial 
real estate as a macro prudential tool to help arrest building of asset price bubbles, much 
ahead  of  the  prescriptions  on  countercyclical  and  capital  conservation  buffers  which  have 
since appeared as part of the Basel III reform pack. 
7.  In  regulation-making  we  have  followed  a  gradualist  approach  and  have  generally  been 
wary of complex and opaque instruments/products. For the same reason, we insisted on the 
lenders  having  a  ‘skin  in  the  game’  in  securitisation  transactions,  which  curtailed  reckless 
origination of loans without proper appraisal with the sole purpose of distributing the same to 
investors  at  a  later  date. We  all  know  now  that  inadequacy  of  the market  infrastructure  to 
deal  with  the  opacity  and  complexity  of  derivative  products  was  the  single-most  important 
reason for the Financial Crisis. We, in India, have exercised extreme caution on the financial 
derivatives, baulked at opaque structures with complex pay-offs and have insisted on banks’ 
ascertaining the suitability and appropriateness of the customers before selling any complex 
derivative  instruments.  RBI’s  approach  to  development  of  the  forex  and  interest  rate 
derivative  market  has  been  one  of  cautious  gradualism.  Regulators  have  also  been 
conscious about the risks emanating from the activities of asset managers, something which 
is viewed as a significant vulnerability in the global context today. In this regard, there are 
restrictions around extent of lending and leverage the asset managers in India can undertake 
and also limits on their use of derivative products. 
8. While we have been cautious on introduction of complex products/ instruments, we have 
not  been  found  wanting  on  efforts  towards  deepening  and  widening  of  financial  markets. 
India  is  amongst  the  first  few  countries  in  the  world  to  have  a  screen  based  electronic 
anonymous order matching system for secondary market trading in Government securities. 
Similarly,  Indian  equity  markets  are  amongst  the  best  in  the  world  in  terms  of  use  of 
technology, institutional mechanism, and products. In order to promote transparency, price 
discovery,  cost  effectiveness,  better  risk  management  and  a  market  for  hedging  of  risks, 
Exchange traded currency futures and Interest Rate futures have been allowed to trade in 
India. Few other developmental measures initiated by RBI are: 
• 
Permitting  banks  to  provide  Partial  Credit  Enhancements  to  bonds  issued  by 
corporates /special purpose vehicles (SPVs) 
Allowing banks to issue long-term bonds to raise resources for lending to long-term 
projects  in  infrastructure  sub-sectors  and  affordable  housing-  Instruments  exempt 
from  regulatory  pre-emptions  i.e.  maintenance  of  CRR/SLR  and  priority  sector 
lending 
Allowing corporates to issue Rupee denominated bonds(Masala Bonds) overseas 
Introduction of tradable Priority Sector Lending Certificate (PSLC) 
Introduction  of  Trade  Receivables  Discounting  System  (TReDS)  as  an  authorized 
electronic platform to facilitate discounting of invoices/bills of exchange of MSEs 
  2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    9. Let me now turn to some of our recent regulatory/supervisory measures that are aimed at 
further  strengthening  the  resilience  of  the  banking  system.  As  I  briefly  alluded  to  in  the 
beginning, the asset quality of the banking system has been a subject of concern for us and 
hence, many of our recent measures are centred around improving the ability of the banking 
system to overcome these. The principle that has guided our action in this regard is that the 
banks  must  recognize  the  problem  and  work  towards  resolution  rather  than  ‘pretend  and 
extend’  while  also  extending  a  helping  hand  in  genuine  and  deserving  cases  so  that  any 
productive  capacity  in  the  economy  is  not  put  to  jeopardy.  It  is  in  this  spirit  that  the 
forbearance on restructuring of accounts has been done away with. The measures include: 
• 
Framework for “Early Recognition of Financial Distress, Prompt Steps for Resolution 
and Fair Recovery for Lenders: Framework for Revitalizing Distressed Assets in the 
Economy covering formation of Joint Lenders’ Forum (JLF), Corrective Action Plan 
(CAP),  ‘Refinancing  of  Project  Loans’,  ‘Sale  of  NPAs  by  Banks’  to  facilitate  early 
recognition/resolution of financial distress 
Banks permitted to grant an extended debt repayment period to their borrowers in 
long-gestation projects (‘5/25’ scheme) 
Banks enabled to take steps for Strategic Debt Conversion (SDR) giving them the 
right to convert their outstanding loans into a majority equity stake if the borrower 
fails to meet conditions stipulated under the restructuring package 
Enhanced fraud monitoring framework 
 • 
10.  Certain  other  regulatory/supervisory  measures  introduced  by  RBI  in  recent  times  to 
improve the financial sector are: 
Framework for D-SIBs 
• 
Introduction of a risk-based approach to supervision 
• 
• 
MOU  with  supervisors  of  29  countries  for  promotion  of  greater  supervisory  co-
operation and information exchange 
Setting  up  of  supervisory  colleges  for  Indian  banks  with  significant  cross-border 
assets 
Framework  for  progressive  alignment  of  regulations  for  the  non-banking  finance 
companies  with  that  applicable  to  banks  for  preventing  instances  of  regulatory 
arbitrage 
Discussion paper on way forward for urban co-operative banks 
Discussion paper on relaxation in ECB norms 
Promulgation of a Charter of Customer Rights for implementation by banks 
Setting  up  of  Financial  Benchmarks  India  Pvt  Ltd,  with  the  objective  of  bringing 
transparency in the benchmark rate setting process. 
  11. Apart from asset quality challenges that the banking system is faced with currently, other 
key challenges that the system faces are on capital and human resources front. In fact, part 
of the asset quality problem is also attributable to poor underwriting skillset of the bank staff 
for  credit  appraisal  of  large  projects  at  the  head  office  level  and  for  lending  to  retail  and 
SMEs  at  operating  unit  level.  It  may  be  useful  in  such  small  ticket  loans  for  the  credit 
decisions to be centrally processed and technology-based credit scoring models to be used 
for making the lending decisions. 
12. A similar problem is also observed in meeting the KYC/AML rigor in the banks. Not only 
is there a general lack of sensitivity about KYC/AML compliance needs, the adherence to laid 
down  norms  at  the  field  level  is  often  sidestepped  on  account  of  lack  of  skillsets,  time  or 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  Inclusion of a large number of new customers within the formal financial system 
Rising levels of literacy 
Growing middle class and increasing income levels 
Growing urbanization 
Increased digitalization 
Thrust on finance to the MSME sector 
performance  pressure.  My  sense  is  that  a  centralized,  technology  supported  surveillance 
system would perhaps serve better for ensuring compliance to KYC/AML norms. 
Conclusion 
13.  As  I  mentioned  in  the  beginning,  the  landscape  in  which  the  banks  are  operating  is 
changing rapidly. Some of these changes which have direct implications and opportunities 
for banking system are: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
14.  With  the  gradual  widening  and  deepening  of  our  financial  markets,  it  is  expected  that 
banks would be more focused on SME and retail clients while leaving the long-term financing 
to other players more suited to the task. Enhanced disposable incomes would widen wealth 
management advisory and services. In keeping with the global trends, corporates may move 
to  raising  resources  directly  from  the  market  but  they  would  still  need  other  financial 
solutions, which banks would provide. Technology is both a disruptor as well as an enabler 
and banks would need to leverage it to their advantage. The impact of disruptive technology 
is  already  evident  in  the  form  of  competition  from  non-banks  such  as  e-commerce 
companies, P2P lenders, Crowd funding, which is likely to only intensify going forward. 
15. Let me conclude by saying that the Indian banking system would continue to remain the 
prime mover for the Indian economy in the foreseeable future. It is, therefore, important for 
us to ensure that the system remains healthy and vibrant. As regulators and supervisors, we 
would  also  need  to  be  vigilant  about  the  emerging  risks  that  the  banks  could  face  and 
proactively  suggest  measures  to  enable  banks  to  mitigate  them.  On  the  institutional  side, 
enactment of a bankruptcy code to deal with firms in distress and setting up of a resolution 
authority  for  liquidation  of  failed  financial  institutions  would  be  key  enablers.  Similarly, 
capacity building would be important for both the banks as well as the regulators. Hence, the 
banks would do well to: 
(i)  
Deal with, rather than postponing the asset quality challenges, so as not to miss on 
the emerging opportunities. 
Be opportunistic in raising capital 
Be prepared to live with a more intrusive and globalized regulatory framework 
(ii)  
(iii)  
I conclude by once again thanking the Mint team for inviting me to this Conference and I look 
forward to an interesting panel discussion. 
Thank you! 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
