Salvatore Rossi: Finance for growth – a capital markets union 
Keynote address by Mr Salvatore Rossi, Senior Deputy Governor of the Bank of Italy, at 
the Rome Investment Forum 2015 “Financing Long-Term Europe”, Rome, 11 December 
2015. 
 I would like to comment on the proposal for a capital markets union (CMU) by raising three 
questions, and giving some tentative answers to all of them. 
The first question is: do we actually need a CMU in Europe? Should it really be a priority in 
the European policy agenda? 
My  answer  is  a  resounding  “yes!”.  The  question  may  seem  rhetorical,  given  the  tide  of 
apologetic  documents,  papers,  and  seminars  (including  perhaps  this  one)  that  have  been 
dedicated to the project since its official launch last year. However, I think it”s important to 
keep in mind the reasons for that “yes”, because hesitations and even open dislike are quite 
widespread in some countries and sectors. 
The fact is that the European economies, with the partial exception of the UK, are strongly 
dependent on banks for their financing needs. Too dependent. Let me explain why. 
A  wide  literature  (I  have  in  mind for  example  a very  recent  piece  of  empirical  research  by 
Langfield and Pagano, 2015), shows that economic growth tends to be lower in economies 
with  a  bank-based  financial  structure,  particularly  at  times  of  falling  asset  prices,  and 
systemic risk to be higher. A “bank bias”, as L&P dub it, is bad, in any circumstance. 
But  even  if  we  believed,  just  for  the  sake  of  the  argument,  in  the  optimality  of  banking 
dominance in our financial systems, here comes another hard fact: also as a consequence of 
the new regulatory and supervisory framework, banks are less and less willing to lend money 
to  risky  borrowers  such  as  SMEs,  because  of  the  heavy  burden  of  non-performing  loans 
which is the legacy of the crisis; because more capital is required against risky assets, and 
capital  is  costly.  Requests  for  more  capital  buffers  come  from  all  international  regulating 
bodies,  both  at  the  global  level  (Financial  Stability  Board,  Basel  Committee)  and  at  the 
European  level  (Single  Supervisory  Mechanism  –  SSM),  as  a  shield  against  a  new, 
devastating  financial  crisis.  Up  to  now,  in  Europe  the  effect  has  been  procyclical: 
notwithstanding  the  cheap,  abundant  liquidity  supplied  by  the  ECB,  banks  are  reluctant  to 
increase lending to the real economy. 
The corporate sector, especially in southern Europe, is mostly made up of SMEs, for which 
access  to  financial  and  capital  markets  is  difficult,  if  not  impossible.  Hence,  we  have  an 
inconsistent  trio:  an  economic  structure  mostly  requesting  bank  finance,  regulators 
concerned  with  the  risks  posed  by  banks”  activity,  and  banks  consequently  stepping  back 
from ample parts of the credit markets. 
How  to  sort  ourselves  out?  One  way  is  to  move  the  European  financial  structure  from 
intermediaries  towards  markets  (Visco,  2015).  This  will  indeed  require  national  efforts,  but 
more  is  needed:  an  integrated  European-wide  capital  market,  with  harmonised  and  SME-
friendly rules. In other words, a CMU. 
The second question is: can we consider a European CMU a realistic project? 
This time my answer is much more doubtful. 
The  idea  for  a  CMU  was  first  put  forward  by  the  President  of  the  European  Commission 
before the European Parliament in July 2014 (Juncker, 2014), in very ambitious language. 
Last  September  the  Commission  presented  an  action  plan  to  transform  that  enlightened 
vision into reality (EC, 2015). From one document to the other the degree of ambition was 
apparently scaled down. As Nicolas Véron (2015) recently noted, the plan “mostly boils down 
to pruning existing rules and correcting some of [the] EU”s own recent regulatory overreach”. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
1 
  tax 
legal  system, 
But this is supposed to be the normal business of the Commission. Let”s check whether this 
harsh judgment is well founded. 
What does CMU mean in substance? It means creating a single market of non-bank financial 
services: the belated completion of the Single Market project of the “80s. A first attempt at 
merging European financial markets fifteen years ago did not succeed. In the goods market 
the main obstacles to integration were technical standards: harmonising them was the crucial 
move. In the financial services market, obstacles are of various kinds: every country has its 
own 
treatment,  accounting  standards,  and  prudential  regulation 
(Danielsson  et  al.,  2015).  These  specificities  are  entrenched  with  local  costumes  and 
traditions,  and  in  some  cases  they  protect  national  champions.  Harmonising  the myriad  of 
laws,  taxes,  and  regulations  in  a  short  period  of  time,  as  the  urgency  of  the  matter  would 
require, is extremely challenging. 
The most delicate problem has to do with the UK. It’s quite obvious that a European CMU 
excluding  the  City  of  London  would  have  little  sense.  But  the  UK  Government  is  highly 
sensitive  about  London’s  competitive  advantage  as  the  financial  hub  of  Europe,  and  the 
issue  will  remain  almost  intractable  until  the  referendum  on  the  UK  remaining  part  of  the 
European Union is held. 
The third question is: what can be done to facilitate/accelerate the process of creating a pan-
European CMU? 
The  approach  followed  by  the  action  plan  is  a  step-by-step  one.  Such  an  approach  was 
recommended,  not  by  chance,  by  most  of  the  stakeholders  involved  in  a  wide  public 
consultation held by the Commission in the first half of this year. Is it the right approach? In 
principle, one might have preferred a bolder attitude, one that addressed simultaneously and 
directly  all  the  needed  harmonisation  in  the fields, for  instance,  of  bankruptcy  laws,  taxes, 
investor protection and market infrastructure regulations: a Thatcher-like “big bang”. But that 
would have been definitely unrealistic. 
What the action plan intends to do, and I quote a key passage of the document, is to proceed 
“from  the  bottom  up,  identifying  barriers  and  knocking  them  down  one  by  one,  creating  a 
sense of momentum”. Among those to be knocked down first are, according to the plan: 
• 
red tape and information asymmetries making it too costly for SMEs to list on equity 
and debt markets; 
specific rules in both the new European insurance regulatory framework (Solvency 
2) and in the capital requirement regulation for banks (CRR) preventing insurance 
companies  and  banks  from  getting  more  involved  in  the  business  of  financing 
infrastructure investment; 
a  sort  of  damnation  still  weighing  on  securitisation  after  the  global  financial  crisis 
(asset-backed  securities  were  labelled  “toxic  sludge”),  while,  if  simple  and 
transparent,  it  could  be  a  fundamental  tool  to  bridge  the  gap  between  SMEs  and 
financial markets. 
and so on and so forth ... 
• 
These are all good intentions. Are they sufficient to create a “sense of momentum”? We will 
see. 
The risk is that we fall into a sort of “Ten Little Indians” trap. A risk still present, for example, 
in the banking union story. 
Banking union was conceived as an institutional framework with three pillars (Rossi, 2015): 
an SSM, a Single Resolution Mechanism (SRM), and a Single Deposit Insurance Scheme 
(SDIS).  The  three  pillars  were  originally  meant  to  be  concurrent,  symmetric,  and  logically 
connected. But the outcome has been different. The SSM was swiftly realised because it was 
seen  as  a  prerequisite for  restoring mutual  trust  among  countries  after  the  sovereign  debt 
  2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  crisis.  But  mistrust  has  remained.  On  the  crucial  issue  of  bank  resolution,  after  long  and 
tiresome negotiations it has been decided that sharing the cost of a banking crisis among all 
the  eurozone  countries  is  not  for  now;  it  is  foreseen  as  the  final  step  in  a  process  lasting 
many years, and in any case it will involve private funds only (the Single Resolution Fund, 
financed by all the eurozone banks). The use of money from the taxpayers of countries other 
than the one where the bank’s head office is located has been ruled out – contrary to the 
original intention (anyhow, the use of national public money is in general forbidden by state 
aid  rules).  As  to  the  SDIS,  it  was  first  postponed  to  an  indefinite  future;  more  recently,  a 
proposal has been presented by the European Commission, but envisaging the same many-
year  process  before  reaching  a  mutualisation  such  as  the  one  established  for  the  Single 
Resolution Fund. 
The CMU, needless to say, is a totally different endeavour. Still, overcoming the variety of 
national habits and interests will be a formidable task, the inherent difficulty of which must not 
be underestimated if we want CMU eventually to succeed. 
References 
European  Commission,  2015,  Action  Plan  on  Building  a  Capital  Markets  Union, 
http://ec.europa.eu/finance/capital-markets-union/index_en.htm#action-plan. 
Danielsson,  J.,  et  al.,  2015,  Europe’s  proposed  capital  markets  union: Disruption  will  drive 
investment  and  innovation,  http://www.voxeu.org/article/europe-s-proposed-capital-markets-
union. 
Juncker,  J-C,  2014,  A  New  Start  for  Europe:  My  Agenda  for  Jobs,  Growth,  Fairness  and 
Democratic  Change,  Opening  Statement  in  the  European  Parliament  Plenary  Session, 
Strasbourg, 15 July, http://ec.europa.eu/priorities/docs/pg_en.pdf. 
Langfield, S., Pagano, M., 2015, “Bank bias in Europe: effects on systemic risk and growth”, 
https://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/ 
ECB  Working 
pdf/scpwps/ecbwp1797.en.pdf 
Rossi, S., 2015, Towards a European Banking Union: a euro-area central bank supervisor as 
April, 
a 
https://www.bancaditalia.it/pubblicazioni/interventi-direttorio/int-dir-
2015/Rossi_02042015.pdf. 
Véron,  N.,  2015,  Europe’s  capital  markets  union  and  the  new  single  market  challenge, 
http://www.voxeu.org/article/europe-s-new-single-market-challenge. 
Visco, I., 2015, Investment Financing in the European Union, OECD-Euromoney Conference 
on Long-Term Investment Financing, 19 November, https://www.bancaditalia.it/pubblicazioni/ 
interventi-governatore/integov2015/Visco_19112015.pdf. 
1797,  May, 
the  Central 
of  Russia, 
Lecture 
Series, 
Paper 
Bank 
step, 
first 
at 
2 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
