  Agus D W Martowardojo: Inauguration of Indonesia Payment System 
Forum 
Speech by Mr Agus D W Martowardojo, Governor of Bank Indonesia, at the inauguration of 
Indonesia Payment System Forum (FSPI), Jakarta, 27 August 2015. 
 Distinguished, 
• 
• 
• 
Minister of Finance of RI, Bambang Brodjonegoro 
Minister of Trade of RI, Thomas Lembong 
Member of Board of Commissioners of Financial Services Authority, Firdaus 
Djaelani 
Deputy Commissioner for Bank Supervision Financial Services Authority, 
Mulya E. Siregar 
Deputy Governor of Bank Indonesia, Ronald Waas 
Director General for Treasury of Ministry of Finance, Marwanto Harjowiryono 
Director General for Domestic Trade of Ministry of Trade, Srie Agustina 
Director General for Application and Information of Ministry of 
Communication and Information, Bambang Heru Tjahjono 
Chair of Indonesia Payment System Association, Darmadi Sutanto 
Officials of Ministry of Finance, Ministry of Trade, Ministry of Communication 
and Information, and Financial Services Authority 
Heads of Working Units in Bank Indonesia 
Distinguished ladies and gentlemen, 
Assalammualaikum Wr Wb, 
Good afternoon and may God bless us all, 
“Salam” 
1. 
To begin our meeting this afternoon, I would like to invite all of you to praise God the 
Almighty. Because of God’s blessings, we have the opportunity to gather to witness 
the inauguration of Indonesia Payment System Forum or FSPI. Please also allow 
me to extend my gratitude and appreciation to all parties supporting the process of 
FSPI establishment. 
As  a  cross-institutional  forum,  FSPI  is  expected  to  become  a  forum  of  effective 
coordination,  communication,  and  harmony  between  Bank  Indonesia,  Financial 
Services  Authority,  Ministry  of  Finance,  Ministry  of  Trade,  and  Ministry  of 
Communication and Information in supporting the implementation and development 
of Payment System in Indonesia. 
With a close synergy through FSPI, it is expected that a smooth, safe, efficient, and 
reliable  national  Payment  System  for  all  Indonesian  people  may  be  realized. 
Furthermore, all stakeholders will also benefit from the planned collaboration. 
    2. 
3. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Distinguished ladies and gentlemen, 
“Background of FSPI Establishment” 
4. 
Following  the  current  development  of  Indonesia’s  economy,  we  observe  at  least 
3 (three)  issues  of  Indonesia’s  economic  management  under  the  international 
spotlight.  First,  the  ability  in  execution  and  implementation  of  policies.  Second, 
transparency  in  policy  making  with  sufficient  public  consultation.  Third,  how 
coordination is built between the Central Government, Regional Governments, and 
relevant authorities, thereby avoiding overlapping policy making. 
Today,  we  gather  to  inaugurate  FSPI  and  address  the  concern  for  coordination 
issues  between  authorities  in  Indonesia.  In  FSPI,  we  will  consistently  cooperate, 
build  coordination,  and  immediately  catch  up  Indonesia’s  lagging  development  in 
acceptable Payment System. 
We certainly expect the support and commitment of some of you as the heads of the 
relevant  ministries  and authorities to  realize  it.  In  addition,  we  believe  that  on  the 
technical  level,  all  technical  teams  need  the  commitment  and  direction  of  their 
respective leaders to allow effective role playing. 
Distinguished ladies and gentlemen, 
“BI’s Duties and Authorities in PS” 
7. 
8. 
Every Ministry and Authority present today has their own regulations. In its capacity 
as  a  Central  Bank,  BI’s  mandates  specified  in  the  law  include  not  only  ensuring 
effective  monetary  policies,  but  also  maintaining  financial  system  stability  and 
implementing smooth, safe, efficient, and reliable payment system. Furthermore, the 
law  also  mandates  Bank  Indonesia  to  grant  permits  for  Payment  System 
implementation. 
Implementation of such mandates correlates and supports one another in order to 
achieve  the  objectives  of  Bank  Indonesia.  The  reason  is  the  roles  of  monetary 
policies  in  affecting  real  sector  will  be  transmitted  through  financial  and  payment 
systems. 
Availability  of  adequate instruments  and  infrastructures  of  payment  system,  which 
can  support  financial  system  activities,  will  serve  as  a  highly  significant  factor  to 
facilitate public payment transactions. Without such supports, monetary policies will 
not be transmitted effectively. 
Distinguished ladies and gentlemen, 
“Development of PS in Indonesia” 
10. 
9. 
In  line  with  national  economic  growth,  Indonesian  people  make  more  payment 
transactions  every  year.  Various  non-cash  payment  instruments  have  started  to 
become an inseparable part of our daily lives. 
The  use  of  instruments,  such  as  debit  cards,  credit  cards,  and  electronic  money, 
keeps  developing,  as  followed  by  growing  new  payment  channels.  Through  the 
internet,  mobile  banking  and  internet  banking  facilitate  transactions  made  by  the 
people. The strong penetration of internet also offers a new online shopping medium 
for the people, which is also known as e-commerce. 
If we follow the recent growth of  e-commerce, it is unbelievable. We see that the 
rapid  growth  of  e-commerce  matches  the  penetration  of  cellular  phones.  Facing 
such development, we as the regulator may not delay in our response. We should 
have  been  able  to  make  an  architecture,  making  all  industries  develop  in  a 
consistent  manner.  Consistent  means  constantly  following  international  best 
practices and accommodating the needs of Indonesian people. 
5. 
6. 
11. 
12. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Distinguished ladies and gentlemen, 
“Challenges of Domestic PS” 
13. 
We warmly welcome such positive achievements. However, we observe there are at 
least 3 (three) domestic challenges ahead. First, compared to countries in ASEAN, 
electronic  payment  transactions  in  Indonesia  are  relatively  low.  With  the  high 
number  of  population  in  Indonesia,  there  is  a  huge  potential  to  expand  payment 
system service access in Indonesia. 
Therefore, in 2014, Bank Indonesia has launched Non-Cash National Movement in 
order to encourage the expansion of electronification. The National Movement has a 
mission to establish a less cash society (LCS). 
In  its  implementation,  Bank  Indonesia  involves  the  Central  Government,  which  is 
represented  by  different  Ministries,  and  Regional  Governments  to  encourage  the 
use  of  non-cash  transactions  in  the  Governance  and  daily  transactions  by  the 
community. 
Second,  with  the  vast  archipelago  of  Indonesia,  we  observe  unequal  Payment 
System services. People in remote areas may not experience the benefits of familiar 
services in big cities. 
The challenging supporting infrastructure availability, like quality telecommunication 
network, is key to help service expansion. Moreover, we all experience the benefits 
of quick and easy transactions provided by the latest Payment System services. 
Third,  we  observe  that  the  rapid  development  of  information,  communication  and 
technology has security risks. Crimes or fraud in online transactions will eventually 
pose legal and reputation risks to Payment System service providers. 
Therefore,  we  consider  that  consumer  protection  aspect  must  also  become  our 
priority. We must seek to do the following, including to increase the system security; 
expand  consumer  care  channels  to  allow  quick  and  easy  access  ;  increase 
consumer awareness on safe transactions ; and increase supervision  of Payment 
System implementation. 
Distinguished ladies and gentlemen, 
“Global & Regional PS Challenges” 
20. 
In addition to the three challenges, we also face global and regional development 
requiring close anticipation. As a country with an open economy system, Indonesia 
needs  to  consistently  increase  compliance  with  the  international  standard  in 
Payment System. 
Fulfillment of the international standard, one of which is specified in the Principle of 
Market  Infrastructure  (PFMI),  will  help  us  ensure  Payment  System  infrastructure 
supporting global financial market to have better resilience. Then, safety, reliability, 
and efficiency need continuous attention for improvement. 
Development of international standards is followed with the developing cooperation 
initiatives  between  countries 
to  develop  a  cross  border  Payment  System 
infrastructure. Amidst the increasing interdependence of economy between nations, 
various efforts have been made to allow development of more efficient cross-country 
clearing and settlement mechanism. 
As we all know, the economic integration trend of ASEAN Economic Community will 
affect the dynamic national Payment System industry. In order to reduce economic 
constraints  between  countries,  Payment  System  industry  will  receive  challenges 
from the regional industries. We need to act on it by increasing competitiveness and 
14. 
15. 
16. 
17. 
18. 
19. 
21. 
22. 
23. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  
 
service quality in order to create fair competitiveness climate by prioritizing national 
interests. 
Distinguished ladies and gentlemen, 
“Objectives of FSPI Establishment” 
24. 
25. 
26. 
27. 
29. 
30. 
The  different  challenges  I  mention  above  require  our  preparedness.  However,  we 
realize that to respond to such challenges, a strong collaboration is needed. 
The relevant Ministries and Authorities will play a very important role to establish a 
better  Payment  System  in  Indonesia.  Different  initiatives  by  the  Government  may 
serve  as  an  effective  drive,  such  as  by  facilitating  social  support  distribution, 
services related to tax and non-tax state revenue, and efforts to drive transactions 
through e-commerce. 
Last but not least, the roles of industries to provide infrastructures and services and 
consumers as the users will definitely serve as a very constructive part for the future 
development  of  national  Payment  System,  primarily  in  identifying  needs  and 
evaluating development plan feasibility. 
Therefore,  we  consider  it  necessary  for  us  to  communicate,  coordinate,  and 
collaborate  in  Indonesia  Payment  System  Forum.  We  consider  that  Ministries, 
Authorities,  and  Institutions  you  lead  play  vital  and  strategic  roles  to  harmonize 
various regulations, implement joint programs, and formulate the future direction of 
Payment System policies. In addition, with the collaboration, different innovations in 
Payment System are also expected to be made. 
Distinguished ladies and gentlemen, 
“Closing” 
28. 
To  conclude,  I  believe  that  FSPI  will  be  able  to  produce  feedbacks,  ideas, 
breakthroughs,  and  anticipatory  ideas  in  the  episode  of  Indonesia’s  Payment 
System journey in the future. 
The  inauguration  and  signing  of  FSPI  charter  today  are  expected  to  serve  as  a 
symbol  of  our  commitment,  where 
the  Steering  Committee  and  Technical 
Committee of FSPI are prepared to play their roles optimally. 
I  would  like  to  congratulate  the  Steering  Committee  and  Technical  Committee  of 
FSPI,  and  please  allow  me  to  hereby  inaugurate  the  establishment  of  Indonesia 
Payment System Forum. 
Thank you. 
Wassalamu’alaikum Wr. 
Wb. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
