  Benoît Cœuré: Interview in the Leading European Newspaper Alliance – 
LENA 
Interview  with  Mr  Benoît  Cœuré,  Member  of the  Executive  Board  of the  European  Central 
Bank,  in  the  Leading  European  Newspaper  Alliance  –  LENA,  conducted  by  Mr  Dominique 
Berns (Le Soir), Ms Anja Ettel (Die Welt) and Ms Manon Malhère (Le Figaro), and published 
on 11 November 2015. 
 How many bankers have you met this week? 
You’ll have an answer next February, when we will begin publishing the meeting calendars of 
the members of the ECB’s Executive Board on a regular basis. This will give you access to 
the  list  of  my  meetings  in  November  2015.  The  decision  to  regularly  publish  the  meeting 
calendars of the Executive Board members follows on from other initiatives that aim to make 
the  ECB  more  transparent,  in  particular  publishing  the  accounts  of  monetary  policy 
discussions and the new, clearer guidelines on public speaking engagements. 
Regarding the meeting calendars, weren’t you pushed into publishing them by the 
media, to some extent? 
No, we were already considering doing it. It was a natural decision for us because it reflects 
current  standards  for  large  public  institutions,  in  particular  the  European  Commission.  If 
publishing our meeting calendars enables us to avoid misunderstandings, so much the better 
– it shows that it is a useful thing to do. Public debate thus enables us to improve how we 
operate. 
You really didn’t think that meeting people from BNP Paribas on the very same day 
that the Governing Council took a major monetary policy decision would arouse 
suspicions about your independence? 
Do you really think there’s a risk there? Our independence towards banks is well known. The 
person  in  question  was  passing  through  Frankfurt  that  day  and  I  can  assure  you  that  we 
didn’t  discuss  monetary  policy.  To  be  clear:  in  such  meetings  we  never  divulge  sensitive 
information or indications about the future direction of monetary policy. That is against our 
rules. 
Publishing your meeting calendars may not be enough. Why not implement a “quiet 
period” like the Bank of England, during which no meetings are allowed? 
If  we  need  to  tighten  our  rules  because  the  public  has  a  negative  perception  of  how  we 
conduct  ourselves,  then  we  will  tighten  them.  Central  banks  are  public  institutions  and 
people’s  perception  of  what  we  do  is  important.  But  we’re  not  going  to  stop  talking  to  the 
market. Communicating with market players is a key part of monetary policy, and is all the 
more  important  given  that  the  ECB  is  implementing  new,  unconventional  monetary  policy 
instruments. 
The financial markets seem to think that the ECB will boost its very accommodative 
monetary policy of purchasing assets, or “quantitative easing”, from December… Are 
they right? 
The  decision  has  not  been  taken.  The  debate  is  ongoing.  The  euro  area’s  recovery  is  on 
track and gaining momentum, but still weak, as inflation expectations are not rising and core 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  inflation has levelled out. In December the Eurosystem staff macroeconomic projections will 
inform our decision. 
Given that the ECB has already sent strong signals to the financial markets, aren’t you 
obliged to act now? 
No.  The  decisions  we  take  are  based  on  the  economy,  not  financial  markets.  We  are 
currently asking ourselves the following question: are some factors, such as the fall in the 
price of raw materials, temporary? Or rather, will they prevent in a lasting way inflation from 
returning towards 2%? If the answer to the second question turned out to be yes, additional 
measures would be taken. In December we will take a decision based on the information we 
have available to us. 
In December the US Federal Reserve System (Fed) will take a decision on whether to 
maintain its key rates at zero or increase them. Will their decision influence yours? 
It will have no direct impact on our decision. Whatever the Fed decides, our monetary policy 
framework (zero rates, liquidity, “forward guidance” and asset purchases) allows us to keep 
interest rates low, no matter what happens in the rest of the world. Our policy protects the 
interest rate curve for the euro area from external shocks. What interests us above all is what 
the Fed’s decision tells us about the US economy. If the Fed were to raise its rates, it would 
be  a  sign  that  growth  and  employment  indicators  are  robust  in  the  United  States.  This, 
essentially, would be good news for Europe. 
Despite all of the ECB’s efforts to inject liquidity, large companies in the euro area are 
sitting on mountains of cash and not investing… 
Monetary policy is supporting the recovery in demand and has removed a key obstacle to 
investment  –  financing.  But  obstacles  remain  on  the  supply  side.  Weak  investment,  even 
though financing costs are low, shows that there is a dearth of projects that are sufficiently 
profitable  in  the  long  term.  This  reveals  a  lack  of  productivity  and  innovation.  The  ECB 
cannot do much about that. On top of this, there are external risks: slowing global growth, 
particularly in large emerging economies. 
In other words, it’s pointless to expect that an eventual increase in quantitative easing 
will be enough to stimulate investment… 
Quantitative  easing,  by  pushing  back  the  horizon  for  monetary  policy  action,  removed  the 
financing  obstacle.  Lending  rates  to  enterprises  have  fallen  significantly,  including  in  the 
stressed euro area countries. What we can do, what we must do, is maintain confidence in 
inflation returning towards our objective of 2%. The ECB, within its mandate, cannot accept 
inflation stabilising in the vicinity of 1%. 
You regularly underline the risks of inflation and growth being too low. But there are 
always risks – the sky could fall in! And many people in Germany, as elsewhere, on 
seeing that they are hardly earning anything on their savings, are wondering if we are 
ever going to see an end to quantitative easing. 
Today, the risks for growth and inflation are tilted to the downside. The best service that the 
ECB  can  provide  to  the  citizens  of  the  euro  area  is  to  fulfil  its  mandate  so  that  inflation 
returns towards 2%, which requires the economy to pick up again, jobs to be created and 
exports to the euro area to find solvent outlets. We are aware that the low interest rates also 
have negative effects, notably on savings, and could pose risks to financial stability if they 
were to stay low for too long. We don’t want this monetary policy to last too long, but we will 
apply it for as long as necessary in line with our mandate. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  In other words? 
Governments  need  to  take  action  and  implement  the  necessary  reforms  in  order  to 
consolidate confidence and growth, and to demonstrate a credible fiscal policy. If the euro 
area  policy  for  growth  rests  exclusively  on  the  ECB’s  shoulders,  things  will  end  badly! 
Admittedly, we are nowhere near that point. But we sense that there is a temptation to rely 
entirely on the ECB. 
What key measures do governments need to implement specifically in order to restore 
growth? 
It  is  my  personal  opinion  that,  depending  on  the  country  concerned,  reducing  public 
expenditure or reallocating it towards more productive expenditure is a necessary condition 
for growth. Governments must take strong and concerted action in order to stimulate private 
investment. Europe also needs to have a clear prospect of strengthening the single market, 
which  is  still  insufficiently  integrated  as  far  as  services  are  concerned.  Moreover,  markets 
need to open up to the rest of the world, and I am thinking here of the negotiations on the 
Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership. That will create opportunities for our firms. 
Another key aspect in my view is tax stability for firms. 
Some economists are of the view that governments should revive growth through 
expansionary fiscal policies. That’s what the Governor of the Oesterreichische 
Nationalbank said recently. Do you share this opinion? 
Everything  possible  must  be  done,  so  long  as  it  always  complies  with  the  Stability  and 
Growth Pact (European fiscal rules). 
There is very little room for manoeuvre… 
Indeed. Some countries have some fiscal leeway which they can use, but we don’t advise 
those  without  any  room  for  manoeuvre  to  enter  into  expansionary  policies.  The  European 
Commission  must  apply  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  to  small  and  large  countries  in  the 
same way. 
Another effect of quantitative easing is that certain countries, such as Italy, are today 
borrowing at negative rates. Is this desirable and in everybody’s interest? 
Sometimes we hear it said that the ECB should have a less accommodative monetary policy 
because it has created false incentives for governments. This reasoning is not in line with the 
spirit  and  the  letter  of  the  European  Treaties.  The  ECB  is  not  –  and  must  not  be  –  an 
instrument of fiscal policy. But we say to the countries in question that they should make the 
most  of  the  current  situation  and  of  the  gains  stemming  from  the  drop  in  interest  rates  to 
reduce their indebtedness rather than to spend more. 
Finally, do you think that the ECB will exit this state of emergency before you come to 
the end of your term? 
As far as the financial state of emergency is concerned, yes I do. The challenge now is to 
achieve long-term growth. 
So, the answer is no? 
Let’s  just  say  that,  increasingly,  the  challenges  that  Europe  is  facing  are  unrelated  to 
monetary policy. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  Let’s move on to the topic of Greece. Social discontent is on the rise, the negotiations 
between the Tsipras government and the “quartet” are already stalling over some 
points of the new financial rescue plan. Isn’t there a risk that the coming months will 
be turbulent? 
No  one  said  it  would  be  easy.  The  third  programme,  which  was  approved  by  the  Greek 
Parliament, is extremely ambitious. It covers areas that previous governments had not dared 
to  tackle,  which  call  into  question  existing  benefits,  for  example  the  battle  against  vested 
interests in some sectors. Nevertheless, a positive dynamic seems to have taken hold since 
July and is starting to bear fruit. Interest rates have fallen and money is flowing back into the 
Greek banks. And this will speed up once the banks are recapitalised, which must take place 
before the end of the year. But it won’t be easy. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
