  Ignazio Visco: 2015 World Savings Day 
Address by Mr Ignazio Visco, Governor of the Bank of Italy, at the 91st World Savings Day, 
organised by the Association of Italian Savings Banks (ACRI), Rome, 28 October 2015. 
 Since  the  beginning  of  this  year  the  cyclical  improvement  has  spread  throughout  the  euro 
area, benefiting from the expansive measures adopted by the ECB Governing Council. The 
cyclical indicators confirm the continuation of the upswing in the third quarter in the area as a 
whole and in Italy, with growth rates similar to those of the two previous quarters. 
Italian GDP has returned to growth for the first time since the inception of the sovereign debt 
crisis, at annualized rates of around 1.5 per cent. The initial stimulus from foreign demand 
has been flanked by a boost from domestic demand components with the consolidation of 
the recovery in private consumption and a gradual revival in investment. Business surveys 
confirm growing optimism about demand, favouring the propensity to invest. The significant 
expansion  of  employment,  which  has  also  benefited  from  government  measures,  will 
continue to sustain household consumption. In 2015 economic activity could grow by close to 
1 per cent, faster than our July forecast indicated. 
Looking ahead, however, the euro area and Italy face risks in connection with the Chinese 
economic  slowdown  and,  more  broadly,  developments  in  the  emerging  economies.  The 
repercussions  on  world  trade  and  commodity  prices  are  delaying  the  return  of  inflation  to 
levels  nearing  2  per  cent. The  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB  is  determined  to  use  all  the 
instruments available within its mandate in order to achieve the most appropriate degree of 
monetary  accommodation  under  the  current  circumstances.  We  will  assess  the  need  for 
additional monetary stimulus at our meeting in early December. 
Credit access and cost 
1. 
Credit  dynamics  have  improved  in  the  course  of  the  year,  benefiting  from  the  economic 
recovery and the plentiful liquidity made available by monetary policy measures. The volume 
of  lending  to  households  has  increased,  albeit  slightly,  compared  with  the  previous  year. 
Credit to manufacturing firms was up by 1.8 per cent in September, and the contraction of 
lending  to  service  firms  moderated  significantly;  for  construction  firms,  which  are  still 
penalized  by  an  uncertain  outlook  for  the  housing  sector,  the  attenuation  was  less 
pronounced. 
The  monetary  policy  measures  had  an  even  greater  impact  on  the  cost  of  credit.  The 
average interest rates on credit to firms and loans to households for house purchase in the 
euro area dropped to their lowest levels since 2003 (when the collection of harmonized data 
began);  in  August  they  were  at  1.8  per  cent  and  2.3  per  cent  respectively.  Differences 
between countries, which had increased greatly in 2011–2013, narrowed considerably. The 
average interest rate spread between Italy and the euro area for new floating-rate mortgage 
loans and new financing to firms dropped to around 10 basis points. 
In Italy, the heterogeneity in lending terms and conditions for firms according to size and risk 
profile is also gradually diminishing, following a sharp increase during the recession. Since 
the middle of 2014 the decrease in banks’ lending rates, which had initially only benefited the 
largest  and  financially  soundest  firms,  has  gradually  spread  to  the  rest.  The  reduced 
dispersion  of  interest  rates  is  related  to  the  improvement  in  the  macroeconomic  picture, 
which has been reflected in a generalized improvement in the outlook for earnings. This is 
confirmed by business surveys: the share of firms that expect to post a profit for the year is 
the highest in a decade. Interest rate dispersion is still historically high, but there is scope for 
a further decrease as the recovery firms up and the quality of credit consequently improves. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  The harmonized interest rates on new loans to firms and households are the best gauge of 
the  effectiveness  of  monetary  policy,  as  they  react  most  quickly  to  changes  in  monetary 
conditions. However, their information content as regards the terms and conditions of lending 
to single borrowers is only partial, because the harmonized rates are calculated as weighted 
averages based on loan amounts, exclude non-performing loans and, for almost all types of 
financing, are net of fees and other charges. 
Further information on the lending conditions for different categories of Italian borrowers may 
be drawn from other data collected and published by the Bank of Italy, and in particular the 
data supplied to the Ministry of Economy and Finance for the purposes of the anti-usury law. 
These rates are calculated as simple averages, and they include non-performing loans (but 
not  bad  debts)  and  bank  fees.  They  may  therefore  be  higher,  and  in  some  cases 
considerably higher, than those calculated by the harmonized method. The impact of bank 
fees is greatest on current account overdrafts, which are commonly used in Italy, particularly 
by small firms, which also rely on this instrument for liquidity management services, which 
are  remunerated  by  the  fees.  As  the  fees  are,  at  least  partially,  fixed,  they  have  a  larger 
impact on small loans. 
The widespread use of overdrafts in Italy, much greater than in almost all the other euro-area 
countries, should prompt a rethinking of their utilization. Firms need to consider more efficient 
and  less  costly  methods  for  managing  liquidity;  they  should  also  weigh  the  advisability  of 
greater  resort  to  fixed-term  loans.  Banks  must  guarantee  that  the  liquidity  management 
services embodied in current account overdrafts do not cost more than their effective value, 
and they must also take account, in their pricing, of the indirect advantages they reap from 
the  provision  of  these  services.  In  fact,  when  the  counterparties  are  small  firms,  the 
information  asymmetry  between  banks  and firms  is  more  severe,  and managing the firms’ 
liquidity enables banks to gather further information, thereby attenuating the risks connected 
with difficulties and uncertainty over the timing of credit recovery procedures. 
In August the Bank of Italy opened consultation on a draft of the resolution to be submitted to 
the  Credit  Committee  on  the  implementation  of  the  newly  revised  Article  120  of  the 
Consolidated  Law  on  Banking,  which  governs  accrual  of  compound  interest  on  banking 
transactions. 
Our proposal – prepared as required by the law – is intended as a clarification in the interests 
of transparency of the rules. It is based on a reading of the law that is shared by the Ministry 
of Economy and Finance. The solutions set out implement the principle established by the 
law,  namely  the  ban  on  compound  interest  on  banking  transactions,  in  keeping  with  the 
economic substance of contractual relationships and avoiding uncertainty and any effect on 
debtors that is contrary to the intentions of the legislature. 
The most technically complex case to regulate is the current account overdraft, which, as I 
just now noted, is a much more common form of credit in Italy than elsewhere. Since the law 
states that banks cannot require the automatic settlement of the interest due on overdrafts, 
we  have  had  to  create  a  framework  of  legal  certainty  to  cover  situations  in  which  the 
customer lacks – even temporarily – the liquidity needed to pay the interest on the due date. 
The proposal settles this issue by forbidding banks from taking immediate action. It allows 
the payment of interest by debiting the account, after a period of 60 days has elapsed, only 
at the request of the customer, who has an interest in allowing payment in order to avoid the 
legal  and  practical  consequences  of  non-performance  that  he  could  otherwise  suffer, 
including  default  penalties  and  revocation  of  the  credit  line  where  the  requisite  conditions 
apply.  Finally,  in  accordance  with  the  law’s  purpose,  the  draft  proposes  that  interest  be 
calculated only once a year and not quarterly, as is the usual practice. 
The consultation document envisages that the resolution be applied only after it enters into 
force, in accordance with general legal principles. It does not take a position on how the law 
should be applied prior to action by the Credit Committee. We hope for clear guidance on 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  this delicate issue,  which  will continue to be evaluated in light of the case law, in order to 
ensure certainty in the law and in banking transactions. 
The consultation was concluded a few days ago. We received numerous comments from an 
ample  cross-section  of  participants.  We  will  analyse  them  carefully  and  consider  the 
suggestions for improving the text to be submitted to the Credit Committee. 
Savings and the management of banking crises 
2. 
Starting next year the new European banking crisis resolution system will be fully operational 
with  the  transposition  of  the  EU  Bank  Recovery  and  Resolution  Directive  (BRRD).  The 
system forms part of the broader process of reforming international financial rules to reduce 
the probability and the impact of bank failures by strengthening capital requirements, setting 
limits on financial leverage and instituting new minimum liquidity ratios. Banks deemed to be 
systemically important are subject to additional safeguards, and further measures are being 
discussed at the international level. 
It must be understood that the new rules will tend to diminish both the profitability and the 
size of banking systems, shifting a portion of the financing of the real economy to the capital 
market  and  increasing  the  relative  importance  within  the  credit  market  of  institutional 
investors other than banks. In Italy, a shift of this kind in the financial system has long been 
desirable to accompany the transition of the economy towards a more modern structure, with 
less bank debt and more equity and bond issues. 
Under  the  new  European  system  the  Single  Resolution  Board  and  the  national  resolution 
authorities will be responsible for handling bank crises, with a division of competences that 
takes account of the type of intermediary involved and the possible need for recourse to the 
Single  Resolution  Fund.  The  Bank  of  Italy,  designated  as the  national  resolution  authority, 
has created a special unit that reports directly to the Governing Board and is independent of 
the Directorate General for Financial Supervision and Regulation, as required by European 
legislation. 
The  European  regulatory  framework  envisages  a  variety  of  tools  to  help  failing  banks 
restructure or exit from the market without interrupting the provision of critical functions and 
jeopardizing the overall stability of the financial system. The primary innovation is the bail-in 
procedure, which requires shareholders and creditors to directly bear the losses incurred by 
banks in difficulty and to shoulder the burden of recapitalizing them. 
This  tool,  which  is  entirely  new  for Italy,  was  requested  specifically  by  those  EU  countries 
that had to intervene heavily to support their banking systems during the recent global crisis. 
In  the  euro  area,  these  measures  weighed  on  the  public  debt  to  the  tune  of  around  5 
percentage  points  of  GDP  in  Belgium,  the  Netherlands  and  Spain,  more  than  8  points  in 
Austria and Germany, over 10 points in Portugal and over 20 points in Greece and Ireland. In 
Italy,  although  the  economy  was  hit  harder  by  the  recession  than  most  of  these  other 
countries, the system required practically no public intervention. 
Now, notwithstanding the undeniable success of our model of banking supervision and crisis 
management  in  containing  and  resolving  cases  of  failure,  with  extremely  marginal  use  of 
public  resources,  this  model  must  be  adjusted  to  bring  it  into  line  with  the  new  European 
rules. 
In  applying  the  bail-in  procedure,  we  must  take  into  account  the  need  to  protect  creditors 
while  at  the  same  time  safeguarding  financial  stability.  We  must  act  to  make  sure  the 
procedure  is  applied  only  in  limited  and  extreme  circumstances.  The  priority  ranking  of 
creditors  will,  in  any  event,  be  respected,  and  no  creditor  will  have  to  bear  losses  greater 
than those that they would suffer if the failing bank were liquidated under ordinary bankruptcy 
procedures (“no creditor worse-off” principle). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  Bail-ins  will  not  affect  deposits  up  to  €100,000,  which  in  no  case  will  be  called  upon  to 
contribute  to  the  costs  of  resolution.  Deposits  above  this  threshold,  going  by  the  current 
wording of the legislation transposing the Directive, will get preferential treatment over other 
liabilities of the bank; consequently there is little chance that they will be hit by the resolution 
of a crisis. 
Unsecured bank bonds may be subject to the bail-in tool, after regulatory capital instruments 
and subordinated debt. It is essential, therefore, that banks, bearing this risk in mind, fully 
discharge their obligations of transparency and correctness in the issuance, placement and 
trading of these securities with retail clients. The authorities will monitor compliance with the 
rules. Banks, for their part, will have to consider how to direct less sophisticated customers 
towards more secure forms of funding, those better protected in case of crisis. 
To avoid the possible adverse effects of bail-ins, the resolution authorities will make sure that 
banks carry  the  right  amount  and type  of  liabilities  to  ensure  the  absorption  of  losses  and 
recapitalisation; they may require that a part of the minimum requirement for liabilities eligible 
for  the  bail-in  tool  consists  of  subordinated  debt.  In  a  resolution,  where  necessary  to 
safeguard systemic stability and the continuity of essential business functions, the resolution 
authorities may exclude additional liabilities and resort instead to the resolution fund once at 
least 8 per cent of the liabilities of the bank in crisis have been bailed-in. 
In recent years we have managed a number of crisis situations, without losses for depositors, 
costs to the Treasury, market distortions or interruption of essential services provided by the 
banks. These objectives continue to guide the actions of the Bank of Italy, in a context that is 
complicated  by  the  transition  towards  the  new  resolution  system  and  the  increased 
importance of the intermediaries involved. Recourse to certain instruments widely used in the 
past, such as the support provided by deposit guarantee funds, has been called into question 
by  the  recent  European  Commission  stance  on  state  aid;  this  field  is  often  marked  by 
uncertainties,  which  may  hinder  the  rapid  action  indispensable  in  crisis  management.  The 
European  authorities  would  do  well  to  favour  coordination  and  certainty  of  law  in  the 
application of the competition provisions and the rules on bank resolution. 
3. 
The state of Italian banks 
Non-performing loans 
3.1 
Italian banks’ large stock of non-performing loans is a legacy of the long and deep recession. 
Their rapid reabsorption would facilitate a recovery in lending and a lowering of the cost of 
credit. Parliament’s recent measures to shorten credit recovery times are a step in the right 
direction  and  are  helping  to  rekindle  interest  in  investing  in  the  non-performing  assets  of 
Italian banks. It is estimated that if Italian recovery time had been as short as those of France 
and Germany, the ratio of bad loans to total loans would be less than half what it is now. 
What  matters  now  is  to  implement  the  measures  rapidly.  The  efficacy  of  the  bankruptcy 
procedures  could  be 
the  organizational  and 
independence requirements for curators and special administrators; significant impetus could 
come from the institution, as in other jurisdictions, of a publicly accessible national electronic 
register  containing  all  the  information  and  relevant  documents  relating  to  foreclosure  and 
bankruptcy proceedings. 
In the three years 2012–14, Italian banks sold or securitized bad loans amounting to about 
€11 billion (around 2 per cent of their outstanding bad debt). In the early months of this year, 
the sales continued to be for small amounts. For the most part the transactions involved the 
major groups and foreign banks operating in Italy. The smallness of the transactions to date 
can be ascribed to information asymmetry between buyers and sellers relating to poor data 
management at many banks and the objective difficulty of assessing the conditions of many 
indebted small businesses. Public intervention, obviously in compliance with the regulations 
further  enhanced  by  strengthening 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  on state aid, could facilitate the development of this market, serving as a catalyst for private 
sector initiatives. 
While the discussion continues on this matter between the Italian government, assisted by 
the  Bank  of  Italy,  and  the  European  Commission,  further  studies  are  being  conducted  to 
ascertain the actual interest of both potential investors and banks in a company to purchase 
and  manage  impaired  assets,  operating  at  market  conditions.  Public  participation  in  this 
asset management company would be marginal or nil; there could be a state guarantee for 
the senior liabilities it issues to finance its asset purchases. 
Over  the  next  few  weeks  the  feasibility  of  the  project  will  be  definitively  determined. 
Regardless  of  the  outcome  of  the  verification,  banks  burdened  by  large  non-performing 
exposures  will  still  have  to  identify,  in  accord  with  the  supervisory  authorities,  the  best 
procedure for efficiently managing those assets in order to gradually work off the overhang. 
Governance, cooperative (popolari) banks and mutual banks 
3.2 
Change  to  the  banking  system  has  been  given  significant  impetus  by  the  reform  of  Italy’s 
main cooperative (popolari) banks. The first steps provided for by the law for their conversion 
into joint stock companies have been taken: the presentation of the plans laying out the steps 
required  and  the  timeframe  within  which  the  operations  will  be  completed,  which  in  many 
cases could be by the middle of next year. In recent days the project for the conversion of 
one large cooperative group – directly subject to the Single Supervisory Mechanism – was 
approved by the shareholders’ meeting. As I have often had occasion to observe, a change 
in  the  legal  form  provides  a  golden  opportunity  for  strengthening  corporate  governance  to 
permit more rapid access to capital markets and facilitate mergers that could help to increase 
profitability. 
It is not for the authorities to suggest or impose any merger plans, which must be identified 
and decided by the corporate bodies themselves. Merger projects developed by the market 
will be carefully appraised in terms of their current and future financial soundness and the 
effects on the banks’ situation. 
For some unlisted cooperative banks, conversion into joint stock companies will be part of a 
broader  transformation  of  governance  also  comprising  stock  exchange  listing.  These 
interventions will greatly enhance access to capital markets and help overcome the problems 
with  the  current  process  of  share  price  determination,  which  the  law  reserves  to  the 
shareholders’ meeting. Stock exchange listing will also ensure the liquidity of the investments 
of shareholders who wish to dispose of their holdings. 
The Banca Popolare di Vicenza is one of the cooperative banks that have embarked on this 
process as part of the measures required by the supervisory authorities. As the explanatory 
note published on our website yesterday describes in more detail, in 2014 evidence emerged 
that  this  bank  had  committed  irregularities  in  share  buybacks.  In  agreement  with  the  new 
European supervisory bodies, which were about to start operating, we scheduled a targeted 
inspection 
the  European  Comprehensive  Assessment.  This 
intervention,  conducted  by  Bank  of  Italy  inspectors  as  part  of  the  Single  Supervisory 
Mechanism, revealed other practices not in compliance with the rules. As soon as the initial 
findings of the investigations begun last February started to emerge, the Bank of Italy and the 
ECB concurred fully on urging the Banca Popolare di Vicenza to adopt immediate corrective 
measures.  The  top  executives  and  almost  all  of  the  senior  management  were  replaced;  a 
capital strengthening plan was drawn up, the success of which is ensured by the presence of 
an underwriting consortium; and a radical reform of corporate governance is planned for the 
cooperative’s  conversion  into  a  joint  stock  company  and  its  simultaneous  stock  exchange 
listing. 
A reform of the mutual banking sector is also needed now. Self-financing, the main source of 
funds  for  increasing  these  banks’  capital,  has  essentially  dried  up  as  a  result  of  the 
recession.  In  the  absence  of  any  decisions,  the  necessary  increase  in  provisions  to  cover 
immediately  after 
for 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  non-performing  loans  would  lead  to  a  further  reduction  in  the  capacity  for  self-financing;  a 
significant  part  of  the  mutual  banking  system  would  incur  negative  evaluations  by  the 
supervisory  authorities  and  might  not  be  able  to  meet  the  need  for  a  larger  capital 
endowment. This could give rise to situations that would be difficult to manage within the new 
crisis resolution framework, also considering the constraints of the regulations on state aid. 
Mutual  banking  systems  in  other  euro-area  countries  have  long  since  instituted  highly 
integrated  organizational  structures  capable  of  realizing  economies  of  scale,  unitary  risk 
control mechanisms, and safety nets for the liquidity and solvency of the participating banks. 
Some of these arrangements are already in place among Europe’s major banking groups. 
We have followed the recent discussion within the mutual banking sector over plans for self-
reform. A point on which there is still open debate is whether there should be just a single 
mutual banking group or more than one. The idea of a single group, if agreed upon within the 
category, certainly has positive aspects, but the possible lack of consensus on a single group 
should not be a reason for blocking the reform. Greater capitalization, greater efficiency and 
improved corporate governance could also be achieved by a limited number of groups. 
 If  economic  activity  falters  and  incomes  shrink,  as  has  happened  in  Italy  for  seven  long 
years,  it  then  becomes  difficult  to  protect  savings.  The  first  response  is  macroeconomic 
policies and decisive and forward-looking structural reforms to promote strong and balanced 
growth,  efforts  to  which  we  are  strongly  committed  as  part  of  our  mandate  as  the  central 
bank. 
A long and deep recession weighs heavily on the banking system. Recent years have also 
seen  serious  instances  of  malfeasance,  compounded  by  the  economic  problems  in 
themselves. We are active in countering situations of serious difficulty or crisis by means of 
supervision,  strict  enforcement  of  the  rules,  and  verification  of  organizational  adequacy, 
prudence in lending, and transparency and correctness in funding. When a crisis does occur, 
action  must  be  taken  to  resolve  it  and  limit  its  repercussions.  This  is  no  easy  task,  it  is  a 
constant challenge, yet those episodes of malfeasance that have occurred in these difficult 
years  came  to  light  also  thanks  to  the  usually  decisive  if  not  always  publicly  known 
contribution of the Bank of Italy. 
Notwithstanding the recession and notwithstanding instances of misconduct, the system as a 
whole  has  held  firm.  I  am  confident  that  the  banks,  good  credit  and  sound  finance,  will 
contribute  significantly  to  the  economic  recovery,  which  needs  to  be  consolidated  and 
strengthened.  Our  economy  must  make  up  for  its  accumulated  lag  in  adapting  to  the 
transformations  of  the  global  economy,  technology  and  demographics,  a  process  in  which 
finance and the banks will play a vital role. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
