  Mario Draghi: Global and domestic inflation 
Speech by Mr Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank, to the Economic Club 
of New York, New York City, 4 December 2015. 
 Over 
the  past  years,  central  banks  across  advanced  economies  have  provided 
unprecedented support to our economies, and the results are being felt. Output has been put 
back on an upward path. Growth is strengthening. The output gap is gradually closing, as is 
the case in the euro area, or in some cases it is closed already. Insofar as monetary policy is 
intended as a macroeconomic stabilisation policy, it is succeeding. 
But  our  mandate  is  not  phrased  in  terms  of  real  growth.  It  is  phrased  in  terms  of  price 
stability.  And  there,  success  is  not  achieved  yet.  Inflation  remains  low  everywhere,  lower 
than our objectives require. And medium- to long-term inflation expectations have been less 
steady for some time, and also generally lower than our objectives. 
To  some  extent  this  apparent  disconnect  between  real  and  nominal  developments  is  an 
expression  of  lags  in  the  transmission  process.  But  it  has  also  triggered  suggestions  that 
perhaps central banks are unable to fully control the trend in inflation – either because they 
lack the appropriate tools, or because inflation in any one economy is driven to a large extent 
by global factors outside their control. 
I  would  dispute  entirely  the  notion  that  we  are  powerless  to  reach  our  objective.  The 
evidence  at  our  disposal  shows,  on  the  contrary,  that  the  instruments  we  are  currently 
deploying are having the effect intended.  
With this in mind, in my remarks this morning I would like to review both the nature of global 
factors  affecting  inflation  dynamics  today,  and  the  developments  in  core  inflation  that  are 
more determined by domestic factors.  
Whether  low  inflation  stems from  one  or the  other, the  central  bank  can  act  proactively  to 
counter  risks  to  price  stability  and  maintain  the  anchoring  of  inflation  expectations.  In  the 
euro area we have proven that our monetary policy tools work and, with the right calibration, 
have sufficient traction over the economy to deliver our medium-term mandate. 
This  was  reflected  in  the  Governing  Council’s  decision  yesterday  to  expand  our  monetary 
policy stance. 
The role of global inflation 
Over the last decade there has been a growing interest in the concept of “global inflation”. 
This  is  the  notion  that,  in  a  globalised  world,  inflation  is  becoming  less  responsive  to 
domestic economic conditions, and is instead increasingly determined by global factors.1 
Looking  at the  drivers  of  inflation  across  advanced  economies  today,  we  do  indeed  see  a 
strong  global  component  in  low  inflation.  Decomposing  inflation  for  the  average  OECD 
country, it is clear that since mid-2014 there has been a notable decline in domestic shocks 
                                                
1 
Inflation as a global phenomenon has been documented e.g. by M. Ciccarelli and B. Mojon (2010), “Global 
Inflation”, The Review of Economics and Statistics, 92:524-535. Measures of global economic slack are good 
predictors  of  national  inflation  in  advanced  countries,  as  shown  empirically  e.g.  by  C.  Borio  and  A.  Filardo 
(2007),  “Globalisation  and  inflation:  New  cross-country  evidence  on  the  global  determinants  of  domestic 
inflation”  BIS  WP  no.  227;  and  in  New  Keynesian  open  economy  models  e.g.  by  R.  Clarida,  J.  Gali,  and 
M. Gertler,  (2002)  “A  Simple  Framework  for  International  Monetary  Policy  Analysis,”  Journal  of  Monetary 
Economics 49: 879–904. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  driving  disinflation,  and  a  notable  increase  in  global  shocks.  Those  global  shocks  are, 
however, overwhelming associated with oil and commodity price falls (Figure 1).  
As is well-known, global factors linked to oil and commodities should not, in principle, have 
any effect on price stability over the medium-term. They may have a lasting impact on the 
price level, but not on the rate of change of prices. All things being equal, lower prices for oil 
should,  over  time,  lead  to  higher  prices  elsewhere  as  disposable  income  increases  and 
overall demand from consumption and investment rises. 
In light of this, central banks typically choose to “look through” such global forces until their 
effect on inflation fades out or until prices reverse. As oil and commodity prices swings have 
opposing effects on output and inflation, monetary policy usually does not want to overreact 
and reinforce the effect on growth, in either direction.  
But falls in oil and commodity prices can have a more lasting impact on inflation – and hence 
become relevant for monetary policy – if they feed into core inflation. That can happen under 
two circumstances.  
The first is if price falls are symptomatic of weakening global demand, rather than a boost to 
global supply. Then, lower oil prices might be accompanied by declining net exports, which 
could in turn cause firms to cut back on investment and drag down core inflation. This blunts 
the  growth-bolstering  effect  of  lower  commodity  prices.  Imported  inflation  might  also  be 
depressed as foreign producers cut prices in reaction to weakening global growth.  
The second circumstance is if there is a succession of supply shocks that keep inflation low 
for a long period and cause firms and households to revise down their inflation expectations. 
In  that  situation,  low  oil  and  commodity  prices  can  have  “second  round  effects”  as  lower 
expectations  feed  into  wage  bargaining  and  price  setting,  thereby  affecting  core  inflation. 
Then, the effect of supply shocks becomes more similar to demand shocks. 
In  both  cases,  central  banks  end  up  facing  a  situation  not  of  a  benign  supply  shock,  but 
rather of an adverse demand shock that, if left unaddressed, could derail price stability over 
the medium-term. That would call for a more forceful monetary policy response. Importantly, 
there were signs in the past that such circumstances were present in the euro area. 
Estimating  the  relative  contributions  of  supply  and  demand  in  oil  and  commodity  price 
dynamics  is  always  complex,  but  combining  evidence  from  several  different  sources,  both 
effects  appear  to  have  been  at  play.  While  supply  shocks  explain  an  important  part  of  oil 
prices  over  the  last  year,  adverse  demand  shocks  have  also  increased  driven  by  the 
slowdown at the global level (Figure 2).  
In that context we have also seen that, while the euro depreciation is contributing to higher 
import  prices  in  euro,  export  price  inflation  in  our  main  trading  partners  has  remained 
depressed, contributing to weak producer price pressures. This in turn has weighed on the 
recovery  of  industrial  goods  inflation,  which  is  sensitive  to  global  inflation  and  makes  up 
around a quarter of the consumption basket in the euro area. 
At the same time, a succession of oil price shocks over recent years has led to a prolonged 
period  of  low  inflation  in  the  euro  area  which,  at  times,  has  been  reflected  in  declines  in 
measures of inflation expectations. Against that backdrop, we have seen a higher risk that a 
continued period of low inflation – even if supply-driven – could start to have second-round 
effects and feed into core inflation. 
In sum, while in general the forces driving global disinflation are ones that should not, over 
the medium-term, affect central banks’ ability to deliver price stability, in the euro area the 
risks were higher that they might not “wash out” over time, and might instead feed into core 
inflation. For that reason, they became relevant for our monetary policy. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  The role of domestic inflation 
These global factors, however, have by no means been the only force driving disinflation in 
the euro area. If we decompose inflation in the euro area and the United States, a striking 
difference is that, at least until the start of this year, domestic factors explain a much more 
important part of our disinflationary trend (Figure 3). This stronger role for domestic forces in 
the  euro  area  has  contributed  to  core  inflation  diverging  from  some  other  advanced 
economies. It has hovered consistently around 1% since mid-2013 (Figure 4). 
The ECB’s objective is  headline inflation, and there are good reasons for this, not least to 
keep  purchasing  power  stable.  Headline  inflation  is  also  a  better  predictor  of  short-term 
inflation  developments.  But  core  inflation  has  to  be  taken  into  account  because  it  is  more 
closely  linked  to  medium-term  inflation  trends.  In  fact,  ECB  staff  analysis  shows  that  core 
inflation  is  a  better  predictor  of  medium-term  headline  inflation  than  headline  itself. 
Persistently low core inflation is therefore a risk to our mandate.  
So why have domestic factors affected inflation more in the euro area?  
The main reason is that, from 2011 onwards, the euro area experienced a sovereign debt 
crisis  and  a  double-dip  recession,  while  other  advanced  economies  recovered  (Figure  5). 
That led to a very prolonged downturn, which was associated with a decline in employment, 
depressed  wage  growth,  and  low  business  and  consumer  confidence.  According  to  ECB 
estimates, disinflation in this period is well explained by the existence of a very wide output 
gap.2  The  divergence  in  core  inflation  between  the  euro  area  and  other  advanced 
economies, in other words, is a story of domestic economic weakness. 
This  has  particularly  been  reflected  in  weak  services  inflation,  which  is  more  strongly 
determined  by  the  domestic  economy  and  domestic  wage  pressures  than  other  inflation 
components. And with services making up 43.5% of the consumption basket, that creates a 
strong  drag  on  overall  inflation.  Services  are  also  an  important  input  into  manufacturing, 
causing low services inflation to spillover into prices of domestic industrial goods.  
Looking  at  the  situation  today,  we  do  see  some  improvements  as  the  economic  recovery 
takes  hold.  As  domestic  demand  strengthens,  inflation  has  risen  from  its  trough.  In recent 
months, the share of items in the consumption basket with an inflation rate below 1% has 
fallen slightly, and crucially, the share with an inflation rate below 0% has fallen significantly, 
from 33% at the beginning of the year to below 21% now. This underlines that, thanks to our 
monetary policy actions, the risk of deflation in the euro area is firmly off the table.  
Yet  despite  those  positive  signs,  the  trend  in  services  inflation  continues  to  be  relatively 
weak.  Whereas  disinflationary  pressures  on  industrial  goods  can  be  partly  offset  by 
exchange rate, higher services inflation will depend on stronger wage growth. All measures 
of wage growth, however, are stuck well below their historical averages. And though the euro 
area unemployment rate is declining – down almost 1.5 percentage points from its 2013 peak 
– a great deal of slack still remains in the labour market.  
Indeed, if unemployment continues to decline at its current pace, it may take years before the 
euro area returns to its pre-crisis unemployment rates. And as we have seen in the UK and 
the US, even at that point – when the so-called “NAIRU” is reached – there may still be a 
substantial time lag before a tight labour market translates into higher wages. This suggests 
that, for services inflation to rise over the medium-term, we will need to see a faster closing 
of the output gap in the euro area and a quicker return towards full employment. 
                                                
2 
“Understanding Inflation Dynamics and Monetary”, Policy Panel remarks by Vítor Constâncio, Vice-President 
of  the  ECB,  at  the  Jackson  Hole  Economic  Policy  Symposium,  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Kansas  City, 
29 August 2015. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  The ECB’s monetary policy response 
So putting the picture together, we have seen two factors that could endanger medium-term 
price stability in the euro area and warrant a monetary policy response: a global environment 
of  volatile  oil  and  commodity  prices  that  could  feed  into  expectations;  and  a  domestic 
environment where persistent slack continues to constrain price pressures.  
But as we have shown, even with interest rates at zero, we have an array of conventional 
and  unconventional  measures  to  deliver  that  response.  Since  the  summer  of  last  year  we 
have cut our policy rates into negative territory, launched a credit easing package and begun 
purchasing private and public sector securities under the asset purchase programme (APP). 
A large body of evidence has accrued in that time that our instruments are powerful. And that 
evidence  has  allowed  us  to  refine  further  our  understanding  of  the  amount  of  stimulus 
required to bring inflation back to 2% without undue delay. 
For example, since we launched our credit easing package in June 2014, composite lending 
rates for firms have declined by more than 80 basis points for the euro area as a whole, and 
by between 110-140 basis points in stressed economies. That is a formidable pass-through. 
ECB staff estimates suggest that we would have needed to reduce the standard policy rates 
by around 100 basis points in June 2014 to achieve a similar effect on bank lending rates. 
Improving  financing  conditions  have  also  fed  into  improving  macroeconomic  conditions. 
According  to  Eurosystem  staff  assessments,  our  measures  will  add  almost  1%  to  GDP 
between 2015 and 2017. And we are seeing an effect even on smaller firms that are typically 
harder for monetary policy to reach. In our most recent survey on smaller firms in the euro 
area, for instance, we saw for the first time since 2009 that the net percentage of small firms 
registering an improvement in business activity has turned positive, for all size sub-groups. 
Crucially, our measures are also gradually feeding through into inflation. Inflation would likely 
have  been  negative  this  year  were  it  not  for  our  measures.  And  according  to  the  staff 
assessment, in the absence of our measures, it would be at least half of a percentage point 
lower next year and between 1/4 and 1/3 of a percentage point lower in 2017. 
So in assessing how to respond to the risks to price stability, the question we faced was not 
whether  our  tools  worked  –  indeed,  they  are  probably  the  dominant  force  spurring  the 
recovery we see today. It was whether, in light of the evolution of those risks, the calibration 
of our policy was still sufficient.  
This is the question that the Governing Council addressed yesterday. 
On the real side of the economy, our assessment was that the recovery is ongoing and the 
economy remains resilient to volatility in the global economy. Domestic demand is replacing 
foreign  demand  as  the  engine  of  growth,  and  our  outlook  for  the  coming  years  is  broadly 
unchanged.  On  the  nominal  side,  however,  we  perceived  that  the  downside  risks  to  the 
inflation outlook had increased, especially given continued declines in oil prices and a large 
output  gap.  Without  further  monetary  policy  action,  the  date  when  inflation  returns  to  our 
objective would once more have been pushed back.  
The Governing Council therefore decided that, to secure the path of inflation back towards 
2%, the calibration of our existing monetary policy measures needed to be adjusted. 
Specifically, we decided to lower the interest rate on the deposit facility by 10 basis points to 
–0.30% and to extend the APP. The monthly purchases of €60 billion under the APP are now 
intended to run until the end of March 2017, or beyond, if necessary, and in any case until 
the Governing Council sees a sustained adjustment in the path of inflation consistent with its 
aim of achieving inflation rates below, but close to, 2% over the medium term. We will also 
reinvest the principal payments on the securities purchased under the APP as they mature, 
for as long as necessary.  
To  help  you  appreciate  the  import  of  the  overall  recalibration  of  our  asset  purchase 
programme, you should consider that the extension of our net purchases to at least March 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  2017 and the decision to re-invest the principal payments on maturing securities for as long 
as necessary will add EUR 680 billion – some 6.5% of the euro area GDP – in liquidity to the 
system by 2019, relative to the situation that would have prevailed under previous policies. 
This  will  strengthen  our  forward  guidance  on  interest  rates  and  ensure  that  liquidity  will 
remain very supportive in the long term.  
There  was  very  broad  support  among  members  of  the  Council  for  recalibrating  our 
instruments to put inflation trends back on the path towards 2% that we envisaged when we 
launched our purchase programme. 
There was also very broad agreement with the extent of the recalibration, which was based 
on technical work carried out by the staff of the whole Eurosystem in our committees. The 
analysis we did before the inception of our asset purchases, and the evidence accumulated 
since,  give  us  confidence  that  the  additional  measures  announced  yesterday  provide 
material upward pressure on price dynamics to reach our objective as initially intended. 
Arguably, the only difference between our current situation and a more traditional situation is 
that our monetary policy stance is not determined primarily on the basis of just one tool – 
interest rates – but on the basis of an array of tools, which include also the pace of asset 
purchases, and forward guidance on both interest rates and asset purchases.  
But  similar  to  the  times  when  we  steered  policy  primarily  through  interest  rates,  we  are 
continuously  monitoring  economic  and  financing  conditions,  on  which  our  policy  action  is 
always  conditional.  If  these  developments  change  in  directions  that  make  it  necessary  to 
respond again, we are of course ready at any time to adjust this array of tools to secure the 
return of inflation to our objective without undue delay. 
There is no particular limit to how we can deploy any of our tools. And in this context it is 
important to recall that we operate under a clear framework of monetary dominance – we are 
ultimately driven by our mandate of maintaining price stability.  
Indeed,  it  is  inevitable  that  unconventional  policy  settings,  ranging  from  negative  interest 
rates  to  purchases  of  a  broad  range  of  assets,  can  have  unintended  consequences  on 
allocation and distribution. In the selection of our policy tools, we aim to minimise the extent 
of such distortions, which is why, for instance, we have so far focused our asset purchases 
as much as possible in the most liquid and generic asset classes.  
But there is no doubt that if we had to intensify the use of our instruments to ensure that we 
achieve our price stability mandate, we would. There cannot be any limit to how far we are 
willing  to  deploy  our  instruments,  within  our  mandate,  and  to  achieve  our  mandate.  And 
indeed  the  European  Court  of  Justice  has  stated  that  the  ECB  must  be  allowed  “broad 
discretion” when it “prepares and implements an open market operations programme”. 
I can say therefore with confidence – and without any complacency – that we will secure the 
return of inflation to 2% without undue delay, because we are currently deploying tools that 
we believe will achieve this, and because we can, in any case, deploy our tools further if that 
proves necessary.  
 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  6 
    BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    7 
    8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
