  William C Dudley: Panel remarks at The Clearing House Annual 
Conference 
Panel remarks by Mr William C Dudley, President and Chief Executive Officer of the Federal 
Reserve  Bank  of  New  York,  at  The  Clearing  House  Annual  Conference,  New  York  City, 
18 November 2015. 
 Dianne  Dobbeck,  Robert  Fitchette,  Charles  Gray,  Joyce  Hansen,  HaeRan  Kim,  Kristin  Malcarney  and  Joseph 
Tracy assisted in preparing these remarks. 
It  is  a  great  pleasure  to  have  the  opportunity  to  speak  here  today  alongside  my  fellow 
Reserve Bank presidents, Loretta Mester and Dennis Lockhart. Today’s event comes almost 
exactly  two  years  since  I  delivered  a  set  of  remarks  at  NYU  School  of  Law  that  covered 
various aspects of what we know as the “too big to fail” problem. In view of some significant 
milestones that have occurred over the past two years, I would like today to briefly review my 
sense of the work that has been accomplished on this critical issue, and the work that still 
remains to be completed. 
As always, what I have to say reflects my own views and not necessarily those of the Federal 
Reserve System. 
Broadly  speaking,  the  regulatory  reforms  that  the  U.S.  has  adopted  since  the  crisis  have 
been designed to address the risks posed by large financial institutions in two related ways. 
First, our reforms are designed to reduce the probability that large financial institutions will 
fail by requiring those institutions to be more resilient to stress. Second, a set of resolution-
related reforms are intended to limit the consequences to the financial sector if a failure by 
such an institution still were to occur. 
Given the limited time on this panel, I will not review in detail the post-crisis comprehensive 
capital and liquidity framework that the Federal Reserve has put in place. However, from the 
perspective of addressing too big to fail, it is important to highlight the Federal Reserve rule 
finalized this year that imposes risk-based capital surcharges on the handful of U.S. global 
systemically important banking organizations (GSIBs). Under this framework, a GSIB’s risk-
based capital surcharge will reflect the degree to which its failure would impact the financial 
system. In effect, the risk-based capital surcharge confronts each U.S. GSIB with the choice 
to either reduce its systemic footprint or instead to hold more capital. 
The policy approach to too big to fail recognizes, of course, that we can reduce but cannot 
completely  eliminate  the  possibility  of  a  large  financial  institution’s  failure.  Therefore,  a 
second aim of our post-crisis reforms has been to limit the adverse consequences that would 
result  if  a  large  financial  institution  were  to  fail.  That  is,  large  financial  firms  need  to  be 
capable  of  being  successfully  resolved  without  creating  unacceptable  collateral  damage  to 
the rest of the financial system and to the economy. 
In my November 2013 speech, I noted that an important foundation for making the resolution 
of  our  largest  banking  firms  feasible  would  be  to  require,  at  the  holding  company  level, 
sufficient minimum amounts of long-term debt that could be used to absorb losses in a single 
point of entry resolution. Important progress has been made on this front, both in the form of 
the  Federal  Reserve’s  recent  issuance  of  a  proposed  rule  to  establish  long-term  debt  and 
total  loss-absorbing  capacity  (TLAC)  requirements  for  U.S.  GSIBs  and  the  announcement 
last  week  by  the  Financial  Stability  Board  (FSB)  of  an  agreed  upon  international  minimum 
TLAC standard. It is notable that in several important respects the proposed U.S. rules are 
stronger than the FSB standard. 
With these new proposed requirements, if losses were to wipe out a firm’s capital and push a 
firm  into resolution,  a  sufficient amount  of  long-term  unsecured  debt  would  be  available  to 
absorb additional losses through a “bail in” process, recapitalizing the firm with no taxpayer 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  bailout  and  without  generating  systemic financial  contagion. These  proposed  requirements 
should also improve market discipline by ensuring that each GSIB has a class of creditors 
who are clearly “at risk,” and therefore have an incentive to monitor the firm’s risk-taking. 
In my 2013 speech, I also called for further work to address the challenges in a resolution 
scenario posed by potentially disruptive close-out of cross-border derivatives contracts. Here 
too, important progress has been achieved over the past two years. 
Thanks  to  productive  collective  action  by  the  private  sector  in  dialogue  with  U.S.  and 
international  authorities,  an  initial  set  of  18  GSIBs  and  other  large  dealer  banks  have 
adhered to the 2014 International Swaps and Derivatives Association (ISDA) resolution stay 
protocol covering OTC bilateral derivatives in connection with last year’s G-20 summit. Under 
the  protocol,  counterparties  agreed  to  the  cross-border  enforceability  of  existing  statutory 
stays  on  resolution-related  early  termination  and  other  default  rights  in  OTC  bilateral 
derivatives contracts. 
With support from the U.S. and other key jurisdictions, the FSB subsequently called on all 
GSIBs and other firms with significant derivatives exposures to adhere to the protocol by the 
end of 2015. In addition, the FSB requested that such contractual terms be incorporated into 
other  financial  contracts  with  resolution-related  termination  features−such  as  contracts 
relating to repo and securities lending arrangements. This goal has been accomplished this 
past week, and represents another positive milestone in improving cross-border resolvability. 
Importantly,  both  the  proposed  U.S.  long-term  debt  requirement  and  provisions  in  the 
resolution stay protocol support resolution under both Title I and Title II of the Dodd-Frank 
Act. 
While  we  should  recognize  the  extent  of  progress  that  has  been  made  to  set  the  basic 
foundations for the cross-border resolution of a GSIB, it is equally important in my view to 
recognize the significant challenges that still remain, and the important work that still needs 
to be carried out by both firms and authorities. 
Both within the official sector and within the largest banking firms, important work remains to 
be done to advance the capacity to effectively operationalize a GSIB resolution. 
Examples include: 
• 
establishing a more rational and less complex legal entity structure that takes into 
account the best alignment of legal entities and business lines to improve the firm’s 
resolvability; 
ensuring the continuity of shared services that support critical operations and core 
business lines throughout the resolution process; and 
improved  arrangements  to  enable  appropriate  access  by  the  firm  in  resolution  to 
Financial Market Infrastructures (FMIs), in a manner that is consistent with the need 
to ensure the safe and sound operation of FMIs. 
  This ongoing work is being pursued through a variety of channels, including through the joint 
Federal Reserve / FDIC review of Title I resolution plans, the Federal Reserve’s horizontal 
supervisory review of recovery and resolution preparedness, and in the international work of 
the FSB. 
In  addition,  while  Title  II  of  the  Dodd-Frank  Act  establishes  the  FDIC  Orderly  Liquidation 
Fund as a source of backstop liquidity provision for a firm undergoing a Title II resolution, no 
equivalent official sector liquidity backstop is available under the bankruptcy regime. Since it 
is the bankruptcy regime that is relevant for the purposes of resolution planning under Title I, 
this is a challenge that firms need to address under that framework. 
Further work remains as well with respect to the derivatives close-out issue in resolution. A 
key next step will be for the U.S. and other major jurisdictions to put in place regulations and 
supervisory  measures  that  will  require  non-bank  counterparties  of  GSIBs  to  trade  with  the 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  GSIBs on terms equivalent to those found in the ISDA resolution stay protocol. This further 
step is needed in order to limit the potential for arbitrage within the market and to promote 
greater stability in the event of a necessary resolution. 
As  we  move  this  work  forward,  we  should  acknowledge  and  take  stock  of  the  significant 
advances achieved over the past few years, while at the same time remain focused on our 
responsibility to address the challenges that remain. 
Thank you for your kind attention. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
