  Manuel Sánchez: The powers and limits of monetary policy 
Remarks  by  Mr  Manuel  Sánchez,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Mexico,  at  the  Cato 
Institute’s 33rd Annual Monetary Conference “Rethinking Monetary Policy”, Washington DC, 
12 November 2015. 
 Thank you very much for inviting me to be here today. It is an honor to participate this year in 
another monetary conference organized by the Cato Institute. 
Monetary  policy  is  powerful  when focused  on  what  it  can  clearly  accomplish.  But  negative 
consequences can occur when it takes on ancillary objectives. Some of its capabilities are 
well  known,  while  others  are  still  in  the  process  of  being  properly  understood.  Hence, 
addressing the question of what it can and cannot do should be approached with modesty. 
Today,  I  would  like  to  present  my  views  on  this  issue  by  first  discussing  positive  impacts 
expected from monetary policy. Second, I would like to examine potential negative effects. 
Third,  I  will  touch  on  the  need  for  time  consistency  to  make  policy  reliable.  Fourth,  I  will 
briefly discuss monetary challenges faced by emerging economies in the current context of 
the extraordinarily accommodative monetary stances of advanced nations. And finally, I will 
draw some conclusions. 
As  usual,  my  remarks  are  entirely  my  own  and  do  not  necessarily  reflect  the  views  of the 
Bank of Mexico or its Governing Board. 
What positive impacts can monetary policy have? 
The most indisputable contribution monetary policy can make to the wellbeing of any society 
is price stability. As succinctly stated by Milton Friedman, “inflation is always and everywhere 
a monetary phenomenon,” and hence, monetary policy can control it.1 
The benefits of price stability are well known. It provides a favorable framework for efficiency 
and economic growth. High inflation, on the other hand, breeds wasted resources, and, when 
unexpected,  can  generate  consumption  and  investment  errors.  It  can  even  fuel  a  loss  of 
confidence in a country’s currency. 
The widespread acceptance of monetary policy to control persistent changes in the average 
level of prices has led central banks to establish price stability as their primary objective. In 
practice,  central  banks  understand  this  as  a  minimum  inflation  rate,  say  2  or  3  percent, 
consistent  with  factors  such  as  innovations  and  consumer  responses  to  relative  price 
changes not properly accounted for by traditional price indexes. 
In light of this definition, pursuing price stability may encompass averting the risk of deflation, 
a fear recently manifested by several monetary authorities in advanced nations. Regarding 
deflation, the following four comments are in order. 
First,  some  deflation  can  theoretically  be  justified  in  terms  of  economic  welfare.  Friedman 
advanced  the  argument  that  one  way  the  economy  can  achieve  the  long-run  optimum 
quantity of money is with a rate of deflation that makes the nominal rate of interest equal to 
zero. Another way would be to pay interest on money balances.2 
                                                
1  Friedman,  M.  (1963).  Inflation:  Causes  and  Consequences,  Bombay:  Asia  Publishing  House.  For  a  recent 
examination  of  the  long-run  relation  between  money  and  prices,  see  Lucas,  R.E,  Jr.  (2014).  “Liquidity: 
Meaning, Measurement, Management,” Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review, Third Quarter 2014, 96(3). 
2  See Friedman, M. (1969). The Optimum Quantity of Money, Ch. 1, London: Macmillan. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Second,  large  time  series  data  reveal  that  there  is  no  clear  negative  relationship  between 
deflation and economic growth across countries. Furthermore, in the postwar period, bouts of 
deflation  have  been  milder  and  less  persistent  than  before,  with  average  growth  during 
deflation years exceeding that of inflation years.3 
Third, recent low inflation largely resulting from declining commodity prices, notably energy, 
has sparked deflation scares in several developed countries. However, these risks should be 
properly  assessed.  Falling  inflation  stemming  from  reductions  in  relative  prices,  while 
beneficial  to  consumers,  may  not  persist,  given  that  some  of  the  causes  behind  them  are 
necessarily transitory, such as overinvestment in the energy industry. 
Fourth,  as  with  the  fight  against  inflation,  monetary  policy  is  well  equipped  to  forestall 
unwelcome deflation. The historical international record of the ends of episodes of deflation 
proves this to be the case.4 
The existence of a Zero Lower Bound (ZLB) for policy interest rates in environments seen to 
be flirting with deflation has long inspired economists to conduct research. Approaches taken 
have  engendered  controversy  over  the  power  of  monetary  policy  at  the  ZLB.  However, 
recent  large-scale  asset  purchases  undertaken  by  central  banks  in  advanced  countries 
confirm that the possibilities for monetary policy do not end at the ZLB.5 
Finally, under emergency conditions of financial market distress, central banks may perform 
the role of lenders of last resort. One example can be found in the extraordinary actions of 
the  U.S.  Federal  Reserve  during  2008.  Provision  of  needed  liquidity  helps  restore  normal 
market  conditions.  This  should  always  be  done  at  a  penalty  rate  and  against  sufficient 
collateral, following Bagehot’s advice, and as a temporary measure, to avoid moral hazard.6 
What positives is monetary policy less certain to achieve? 
While there is broad consensus on the ability of monetary policy to control inflation over time, 
there  is  less  agreement  on  other goals  it  could  pursue. One  tendency,  accentuated  in  the 
wake  of  the  financial  crisis  of  2008–2009,  is  to  assign  additional  objectives  to  monetary 
policy. 
Two  goals  stand  out. One  is  the  long-standing aim  to  boost  economic activity.  It  is  widely 
accepted that long-term growth depends on real factors such as investment in both physical 
and human capital, as well as total factor productivity. Their behavior over the long haul is 
independent of monetary policy, and hence, the long-term neutrality of money should hold. 
Where the short term is concerned, there is controversy over the capacity of monetary policy 
to  stimulate  the  economy.  Under  conditions  of  full  employment,  completely  anticipated 
expansionary  monetary  policies  are  expected  to  produce  inflation.  Rational  expectations 
models  incorporating  frictions  such  as  imperfect  information  or  price  rigidities  have  been 
                                                
3  See Borio. C. et al. (2015). “The Costs of Deflation: A Historical Perspective,” BIS Quarterly Review, March; 
and  Ryska,  P.  (2014),  “Deflation  and  Economic  Growth  in  Long-Term  Perspective,”  Charles  University  in 
Prague, Institute of Economic Studies Working Paper 18/2014. 
4  An examination of the role of monetary policy in exiting deflation can be found in Bordo, M. and A. Filardo 
(2005).  “Deflation  and  Monetary  Policy  in  a  Historical  Perspective:  Remembering  the  Past  or  Being 
Condemned to Repeat it?” Economic Policy, 20(44). To review the Japanese experience with deflation, see 
Ito, T. and F.S. Mishkin (2006). “Two Decades of Japanese Monetary Policy and the Deflation Problem,” In Ito, 
T. and A.K. Rose (eds.), (2006). Monetary Policy under Very Low Inflation in the Pacific Rim, NBER-EASE, 
Vol. 15, Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 
5  For monetary possibilities at the ZLB, see Goodfriend, M. (2000). “Overcoming the Zero Bound on Interest 
Rate Policy,” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, 32(4). 
6  See Bagehot, W. (1873). Lombard Street: A Description of the Money Market, New York: John Wiley & Sons, 
(reprinted 1999). 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  used  to  replicate  short-run  tradeoffs  between  inflation  and  unemployment.  However,  given 
the  long  and  variable  lags  with  which  monetary  policy  acts,  attempts  to  exploit  those 
tradeoffs  can  result  in  output  instability.  International  experience  with  high  and  volatile 
inflation during the 1970s and 1980s illustrates this danger.7 
Under the shadow of the global crisis, many developed countries have held extremely loose 
monetary policies for a prolonged period of time. This has been possible, apparently, thanks 
to  the  relative  stability  of  long-term  inflation  expectations.  Some  studies  suggest  that 
extraordinary accommodation has supported economic activity, although the degree to which 
this  has  happened  is  still  subject  to  debate.  Meanwhile,  negative  side  effects  may  be 
accumulating.8 
Another goal which in recent years has gained prominence is to request that monetary policy 
safeguard financial stability. Although financial instability is a somewhat ambiguous notion, it 
is  generally  referred  to  as  a  situation  in  which  financial  markets  exhibit  dislocations  to  the 
extent that their functioning is impaired, with adverse impacts on economic activity.9 
Aside  from fulfillment  of  the  central  bank’s  role as  lender  of  last resort, the  best monetary 
policy  can  do  for financial  stability  is  to  avoid  becoming  a  source  of  problems,  notably,  by 
deviating  from  the  primary  goal  of  price  stability.  For  example,  monetary  policy  can  react 
preemptively  to  aggregate  demand  pressures  that  may  endanger  the  inflation  target.  As  a 
beneficial byproduct, this measure may contribute to the maintenance of financial stability by 
indirectly attenuating incentives for financial excesses. 
Even though monetary policy may thus aid financial stability, it can hardly take the task on as 
an objective in itself. To begin with, such a goal cannot be translated into an unambiguous 
quantifiable target. Hence, the evaluation of its attainment is cumbersome. 
Perhaps  more  importantly,  if  pursuing  financial  stability  is  meant  to  include  identifying 
potential  asset  price  bubbles,  leaning  against  them,  and  trying  to  prick  them,  this  may  be 
close to an impossible task. One essential characteristic of bubbles that lead to crises is that 
they do not obviously look like bubbles until they implode. 
The authorities have no comparative advantage in identifying financial bubbles. But even if 
they did have a crystal ball to tell bubbles apart from healthy growth, monetary instruments 
may be ill suited to the purpose. For example, higher interest rates in an emerging economy 
meant  to  deflate  a  bubble  fed  by  substantial  capital  inflows  may  actually  exacerbate  the 
problem by attracting more flows. 
Therefore, financial stability should be regarded as a separate objective to be tackled with 
non-monetary  tools.  The  first  line  of  attack  to  reduce  financial  systemic  risk  should  be  to 
maintain a sound regulatory and supervisory framework, which includes strict capitalization 
and liquidity rules as well as clear resolution schemes for financial institutions. 
In short, the biggest risk with additional goals, as Friedman warned almost fifty years ago, is 
that monetary policy may end up not accomplishing what it is most suited to do in the pursuit 
of what it is less suited to do.10 
                                                
7  For a discussion of the stop-and-go period prior to price stabilization in the United States, see, for example, 
Goodfriend, M. (2005). “The Monetary Policy Debate since October 1979: Lessons for Theory and Practice,” 
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review, March/April, 87(2). 
8  Martin, C. and C. Milas (2013). “Quantitative Easing: a Sceptical Survey,” Oxford Review of Economic Policy, 
28(4) reviews the debate regarding the effect of current monetary accommodation on economic activity. 
9  A  description  of  financial  stability  can  be  found  in  Tucker,  P.  (2011),  “Macroprudential  Policy:  Building 
Financial Stability Institutions.” Speech given at the 20th Annual Hyman P. Minsky Conference, April. 
10  See Friedman, M. (1968). “The Role of Monetary Policy,” American Economic Review, Vol. LVIII, No. 1. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  What negative impacts can monetary policy produce? 
As  with  other  policies,  monetary  actions  can  produce  negative  effects.  Although  in  some 
cases,  these  may  be  unintended,  in  others,  likely  costs  are  taken  on  because  they  are 
assumed to be outweighed by expected benefits. 
A  leading  traumatic  case  occurred  during  the  Great  Depression  in  which  the  U.S.  Federal 
Reserve  did  not  meet  an  increased  demand  for  liquidity  and  allowed  a  contraction  in  the 
money supply, resulting in widespread deflation, worsened financial panic, and plummeting 
economic activity. More often than not, in many economies, excessive monetary expansion 
has led to periods of significant inflation. 
Additionally,  monetary  policy  that  is  too  easy  may  be  a  cause  of  financial  problems. 
Specifically,  it  can  trigger  the  search  for  yield  and  the  undertaking  of  too  much  risk.  For 
instance, a loose stance may have contributed to the run up of the U.S. credit and housing 
bubbles prior to the big financial crisis. Debate over the importance of this element, relative 
to other policies, continues to this day.11 
Furthermore, the increasingly extraordinary monetary accommodation in advanced countries 
since the global turmoil, which has included massive asset purchases for a long time and, in 
some  cases,  negative  policy  interest  rates,  may  be  engendering  financial  imbalances,  not 
only in these economies but also in other nations. 
Other  negative  impacts  may  include  the  undertaking  of quasi-fiscal  operations  blurring  the 
independence of monetary policy, incentives for governments to postpone needed fiscal and 
structural  adjustments,  fewer  motives  for  business  to  improve  efficiency  and  distorted 
resource  allocation,  questionable  income  redistribution,  and  future  difficulties  controlling 
inflation.12 
Some of these costs may take time to become evident, thus allowing expansionary monetary 
policies to claim principally benefits. However, should significant problems arise, policy could 
lose  credibility.  An  objective  evaluation  of  causes  of  any  possible  negative  effects  will  by 
necessity take time. 
The need for time consistency 
Given  its  capabilities  and  bounds,  it  is  desirable  for  monetary  policy  to  focus  on  price 
stability.  Effectiveness  hinges  on  the  authorities’  commitment  to  this  goal.  In  addition,  the 
strategy must be well understood by the public. Complexities are inherent in this endeavor. 
One  is  political  pressure  or  principal-agent  problems  that  call  for  deviation  from  the  price 
stability target. For instance, resistance to interest rate hikes is far stronger than to cuts, and 
it may sometimes come from interest groups with high stakes in the matter. 
Another complication might stem from the existence of more than one goal, which may make 
the  rationale for monetary  policy  decisions  hard  to  convey.  One more may  come from  the 
lack of clarity regarding the way policymakers react to available information. 
As a consequence, monetary policy can easily be time inconsistent. This and dependence on 
high-frequency data can force economic agents to spend a great deal of time and resources 
second-guessing monetary policy actions. 
                                                
11  For a review of the debate regarding the role of lax monetary policy in the run up to the global financial crisis, 
see, for example, Cesa-Bianchi, A. and A. Rebucci (2015). “Does Easing Monetary Policy Increase Financial 
Instability,” IMF Working Paper, WP/15/139. 
12  Forbes,  K.  (2015).  “Low  Interest  Rates:  King  Midas’  Golden  Touch?”  Speech  given  at  The  Institute  of 
Economic  Affairs,  London,  February,  assesses  possible  unintended consequences  from easy  money  in  the 
United Kingdom. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  One way to facilitate coherence and clarity is for central banks to express long-term guidance 
for their future actions in a form that may approximate a policy rule. There is evidence that 
periods when monetary policy is rule-like largely coincide with good economic performance.13 
This should not be interpreted as using a rigid, mechanical rule for monetary policy, but a 
way to make it systematic and predictable. With long-term guidance, specifics are secondary 
as long as they lead to the goal and policy makers follow through. Deviations from strategy 
under extraordinary circumstances can be clarified when they are warranted.14 
Challenges for emerging economies 
Emerging  economies  confront  their  own  challenges  for  appropriately  conducting  monetary 
policy. On the one hand, these countries need to control inflation, especially in light of long 
histories  of  significant  price  instability.  During  the  postwar  period,  developing  economies 
have  commonly  lagged  advanced  countries  in  these  efforts,  frequently  because  of  fiscal 
dominance. To this day, some countries still suffer from high inflation and struggle to control 
it, within relatively weak macroeconomic policy frameworks, especially in matters related to 
fiscal discipline. 
On the other hand, emerging-market authorities have always had to consider the decisions of 
major  central  banks  and  the  effects  on  their  economies.  In  the  present  context,  loose 
monetary  stances  in  advanced  nations  may  have  triggered  spillover  effects  on  emerging 
economies  via  capital  flows,  including  ample  foreign-currency  (FX)  lending,  and  rises  in 
financial asset prices. Expectations for the unwinding of lax policies have started to turn the 
tables on these impacts, as reflected by a weakening trend for emerging market currencies, 
among other tendencies.15 
In  the  attempt  to  moderate  these  effects,  many  financial  authorities  have  responded  with 
measures frequently justified as macroprudential policies. In particular, initially, many central 
banks  cut  policy  rates.  In  fact,  there  is  evidence  that  in  recent  years  monetary  policy  in 
emerging economies has tended to become looser than what would have been granted by 
their  own  price  stability  mandates.  Many  economies  also  implemented  FX  intervention  to 
accumulate international reserves, while some added capital flow restrictions.16 
Recently,  several  countries  have  reversed  these  measures.  Barriers  to  capital  flows  have 
been  relaxed  and  international  reserves  have  been  used,  while  monetary  policy  has 
frequently  remained  accommodative,  potentially  implying  contradictory  policy  directions.  In 
some  cases,  however,  monetary  stances  have  begun  to  be  tightened.  A  concern  in  some 
emerging economies is high pass-through from currency depreciation to inflation. 
Trying  to  counteract  external  monetary  policy  effects  may  have  resulted  in  some  costs  to 
central banks in emerging markets. These may include possible moral hazard from investors’ 
expectations of being protected from losses in risk positions, increased uncertainty regarding 
policy measures, as well as damaged progress towards the attainment of price stability. 
                                                
13  See Nikolsko-Rzhevskyy, A. et al. (2014). “Deviations from Rules-Based Policy and Their Effects,” Journal of 
Economic Dynamics and Control, 49. 
14  This idea has been put forward by John B. Taylor. See, for example, Taylor J.B. (2015). “Getting back to a 
Rules-Based  Monetary  Strategy,”  Speech  given  at  the  conference  Getting  Monetary  Policy  Back  on  Track, 
organized by the Shadow Open Market Committee Princeton Club, March. 
15  See  Chen,  Q.,  et  al.  (2015).  “Financial  Crisis,  US  Unconventional  Monetary  Policy  and  International 
Spillovers,” BIS Working Paper, 494, March. 
16  See Hofmann, B. and B. Bogdanova (2012). “Taylor Rules and Monetary Policy: A Global ‘Great Deviation’?” 
BIS Quarterly Review, September; and Pasricha, G. et al. (2015). “Domestic and Multilateral Effects of Capital 
Controls in Emerging Markets,” ECB Working Paper 1844, August. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  In  fact,  in  some  cases,  it  has  become  clear  that  imbalances  have  largely  resulted  from 
misguided domestic policies, such as excessively stimulative fiscal and financial measures. 
Thus, blaming problems on foreign lax monetary stances may have distracted countries from 
correcting internal fragilities in a timely way. 
A challenge in the current global scenario is for central banks to pursue price stability in the 
face of upcoming monetary normalization in the United States, while at the same time taking 
into  consideration  possible  spillovers  to  the  extent  that  they  may  have  some  bearing  on 
achievement of their inflation targets. 
Concluding remarks 
The recent global financial crisis has generated increasing demands on monetary policy. The 
top risk of overburdening monetary policy with possibly incompatible objectives is diminished 
credibility. Hence, setting realistic expectations of what it can and cannot do is all the more 
important. 
The  greatest  contribution  monetary  policy  can  make  to  society  is  price  stability.  Given  the 
long-term neutrality of money, any attempt to use it to boost growth is by nature limited. With 
respect to financial stability, the best monetary policy can do is to avoid provoking problems, 
notably, by neglecting inflation control. 
Monetary policy can obviously engender adverse impacts. Some may take time to surface. 
But if significant problems arise, policy can lose effectiveness. Furthermore, monetary policy 
can be time-inconsistent, and to avoid difficulties from this issue, the intentions of decision 
makers  must  be  transparent.  An  explicit  long-term  strategy  goes  a  long  way  to  facilitate 
coherence and clarity. 
Emerging economies confront specific challenges in the wise use of monetary policy. Many 
of these countries have histories of high inflation and are struggling to leave it behind. Also, 
they  must  act  within  the  world  scenario  in  such  a  way  that  they  do  not  deviate  from  the 
objective of price stability. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
