  R Gandhi: Whither the co-operative banking? 
Speech by Mr R Gandhi, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the Maharashtra 
Urban Co-operative Banks’ Conference 2015, Nagpur, 24 October 2015. 
Assistance provided by Shri P K Arora is gratefully acknowledged. 
 Dear Co-operators, 
1. 
I  am  thankful  to  the  Maharashtra  State  Urban  Co-operative  Banks’  Federation  for 
inviting me to this Seminar. The topic chosen for the Seminar is very contemporary. While I 
will certainly make a few points about it later, I would like to first discuss the current status of 
the  urban  co-operative  banking  in  India,  how  it  reached  there,  what  recent  initiatives  the 
Reserve Bank has taken to strengthen the sector and what is the way forward. 
2. 
The  organisation  of  co-operative  institutions  in  India  dates  back  to  19th  century 
when  the  first  mutual  aid  society  “Anyonya  Sahakari  Mandali”  was  formed  in  Gujarat  at 
Baroda on February 05, 1889. 
The  Banking  Regulation  Act,  1949  was  extended  to  co-operative  societies  on 
3. 
March 01,  1966  when  there  were  about  1100  UCBs  with  deposits  and advances  of  ₹ 1.67 
billion and ₹ 1.53 billion respectively. As at the end of 1996, the number of UCBs increased 
to  1501  and  their  deposits  and  advances  rose  to  ₹  241.61  billion  and  ₹  179.27  billion 
respectively. With the liberalisation of bank licensing policy, UCBs continued to grow at a fast 
pace  till  2004  when  their  numbers  increased  to  1926  and  their  deposits  and  advances  to 
₹ 1020.74 billion and ₹ 649.74 billion respectively. 
Madhavpura crisis 
4. 
Very  few  regulated  entities  have  the  distinction  of  shaping  an  entire  sector  and 
generally it is in a positive sense; but sometimes in a negative sense. As destiny would have 
it,  the  Madhavpura  Mercantile  Co-operative  Bank  Ltd.  has  the  dubious  distinction  in  that 
regard. 
5. 
The  entire  episode  turned  to  be  a  watershed  event  in  the  history  of  urban 
Co-operative  banking  sector  and  the  crisis  led  to  decline  in  public  confidence  in  the  UCB 
sector as evident from the deceleration of the credit and deposit growth rate from 2003 to 
2005 and the existence of large number of weak UCBs. As on March 31, 2004, 732 out of 
1926 UCBs i.e. 38% were categorized in Grade III or IV signifying weakness and sickness. 
This forced the Reserve Bank to look at the sector differently and new regulations had to be 
prescribed. 
6. 
Some  of  the  major  changes  were  compliance  with  CRAR  prescription  in  phases, 
complete prohibition / ban on loans and advances to directors and their relatives, prescription 
of Interbank limits, imposition of restrictions on capital market exposure, increase in quantum 
of investment in G-Sec for SLR purpose and prescription of limit for single broker exposure. 
7. 
It  was  also  observed  that  nearly  one  third  of  the  newly  licensed  UCBs  became 
financially unsound within a short period. In view of this it was announced in the monetary 
policy  statement  for  2004–05  that  no  fresh  proposals  for  setting  up  of  new  Urban 
Co-operative Bank (UCB) or for conversion of Co-operative Credit Societies into UCBs will 
be  considered  till  a  comprehensive  policy  on  UCBs,  including  an  appropriate  legal  and 
regulatory framework for the urban co-operative banking sector is put in place and a policy 
for  improving  the  financial  health  of  the  urban  co-operative  banking  sector  is  formulated. 
Further, embargo was also placed on issuance of new branch licenses for the UCBs. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Vision document 
8. 
envisaged that state specific strategy would be adopted to deal with the UCBs. 
A  vision  document  for  the  UCB  sector  was  drawn  up  by  RBI  in  2005  which 
Business growth 
9. 
The UCB sector emerged financially stronger ever since RBI conceived the Vision 
document for the sector in 2005. The Vision Document envisaged a multi-layered regulatory 
and supervisory approach, revival of potentially viable UCBs and non-disruptive exit of non-
viable ones. The sector witnessed a process of rehabilitation and consolidation. There has 
been a continued reduction in the number of UCBs from 1872 as at the end of March 2005 to 
1579  as  at  the  end  of  March  2015,inter  alia,  due  to  amalgamation  of  UCBs.  The  sector 
accounted for 3.9% of the deposits of the banking sector and 3.3% of the advances by the 
banking sector as on March 31, 2015. 
10. 
During this period, while the number of UCBs were coming down, the business that 
all the UCBs recorded went on increasing. The number of UCBs declined in 2006 to 1853 
with total deposits of ₹ 1122.37 billion and advances of ₹ 703.79 billion. The number of UCBs 
further  declined  to  1579  as  on  March  31,  2015  although  there  is  absolute  increase  in 
deposits and advances at ₹ 3551.34 billion and ₹ 2243.08 billion respectively as at March 31, 
2015. 
11. 
Asset  quality  of  the  sector  has  steadily  improved  as  reflected  in  the  continuous 
decline in the gross NPAs ratio from 21% as on March 2003 to 6.02% as on March 2015. 
The gross NPAs are still very high as compared with commercial banks which have Gross 
NPAs at 4.62% as on March 31, 2015. 
12. 
The profitability of the UCB sector, too, has shown remarkable improvement as net 
profit increased to ₹ 34.89 billion during the financial year 2014–15. Return on Assets (RoA) 
has increased to 0.84% in 2015 and Return on Equity (RoE) has increased to 9.85% in 2015. 
As regards capital adequacy, it is observed that 1503 UCBs i.e. 95.18% of the total UCBs 
have reported a CRAR of 9 per cent or more as on March 2015. 
13. 
are having negative net worth and 29 UCBs under All Inclusive Directions, as on date. 
The sector, however, continues to be afflicted with the existence of 48 UCBs which 
Expert Committee on licensing of new UCBs 
14. 
Having satisfied with the stability achieved in the sector, an expert committee was 
set-up under the chairmanship of Shri Y. H. Malegam in 2010 for studying the advisability of 
granting  licenses  to  new  co-operative  banks.  The  Committee  recommended  that  new 
licenses may be given to UCBs having a good track record in relatively unbanked areas. It 
also recommended grant of licence to existing co-operative credit societies with proven track 
record. It observed that there is a need for clearly defined control system where co-operative 
character  of  a  UCB  is  controlled  by  RCS  /  CRCS  and  the  banking  function  by  RBI  for 
overcoming  the  problem  of  dual  control  and  recommended  the  creation  of  a  Board  of 
Management (BoM) in addition to Board of Directors (BoD). It also recommended creation of 
Umbrella  organization  at  both  national  and  state  level  for  the  urban  Co-operative  banking 
sector. 
15. 
RBI’s main objective of regulation and supervision has been to maintain confidence 
in  the  financial  system  by  enhancing  its  soundness  and  efficiency.  I  would  now  like  to 
specifically  highlight  the  steps  taken  by  RBI  for  development  of  the  sector  and  for 
strengthening the regulation and supervision in the recent past. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 Recent developments 
 Steps taken for development of the sector and augmenting the fee based income 
16. 
Introduction of Liquidity Adjustment Facility for scheduled UCBs, permission to offer 
internet  (view  only)  facility  to  all  UCBs,  enhancement  of  limit  under  the  scheme  of  bullet 
payment of gold loans from ₹ 1.00 lakh to ₹ 2.00 lakh, permission to offer Demat account 
trading facility and liberalization of opening of off-site ATM are some of the steps taken by 
RBI to strengthen the sector. 
17. 
More avenues have been provided for UCBs to earn fee based income. Accordingly, 
UCBs are now allowed to undertake Point of Presence (PoP) Services under Pension Fund 
Regulatory  and  Development  Authority  (PFRDA),  act  as  PAN  Service  Agent  (PSA)  for 
providing  PAN  Issuance  Services  to  its  Customers  and  issue  “Semi-Closed  Pre-paid 
Payment  Instruments”  permitting  payment  of  utility  bill  /  essential  services  up  to  a  limit  of 
₹ 10,000/- 
18. 
RBI  has  been  conducting  seminars  /  workshops  /  focused  training  sessions  for 
directors / officers / staff of UCBs. This is an on-going exercise and our goal is to ensure that 
all Directors are covered under the training programme at the earliest. 
19. 
It was decided to make it mandatory to conduct the statutory audit of UCBs with a 
deposit  base  of  above  ₹ 250  million  by  Statutory  Auditors  (SAs)  who  will  be  qualified 
Chartered  Accountants.  However,  it  was  observed  that  there  were  large  divergences 
between the audited financial parameters of UCBs and that assessed by Inspecting Officers. 
As  statutory  audit  is  one  of  the  important  inputs  based  on  which  on-site  supervision  is 
conducted,  it  is  imperative  to  improve  and  strengthen  the  quality  of  reports  of  SAs.  It  has 
therefore been decided to hold workshops / seminars for SAs to sensitize them with IRAC 
norms issued by RBI. Institute of Chartered Accountants of India (ICAI) is also being advised 
to prescribe a standard format for statutory audit report of the UCBs. 
Steps taken for strengthening the regulation and supervision of the sector 
20. 
RBI moved to CAMELS pattern of rating of UCBs w.e.f. March 31, 2011 in lieu of 
earlier  system  of  grading.  With  the  switchover  to  rating  system,  there  were  697  UCBs  in 
C & D rating which constituted 42.47% of the total UCBs as on March 31, 2011. The number 
of C & D rated UCBs has declined to 339 constituting 21.50% of total number of UCBs as at 
the end of March 31, 2015. The number of UCBs in A & B rating increased from 948 in 2011 
to 1240 as on March 31, 2015. 
21. 
A new Supervisory Action Framework (SAF) was prescribed by RBI in March, 2012 
which  replaced  the  Graded  Supervisory  Action.  As  a  part  of  the  SAF,  RBI  specified 
regulatory  trigger  points  in  terms  of  five  financial  parameters  viz.  CRAR,  Gross  NPAs, 
concentration of deposits, profitability and CD ratio for initiating structured and discretionary 
action in respect of banks hitting such trigger points. A revised SAF has been implemented 
based on the findings of inspection conducted with reference to March 31, 2014. Under the 
revised framework, the individual UCB will be advised of the specific corrective action they 
need  to  take  to  improve  the  financial  position.  With  the  revision  of  SAF  as  above  it  is 
expected that the Board of Directors of UCBs will be proactive in identifying the shortcomings 
/ deficiencies in the functioning of the bank and taking timely action to address them. 
In  view  of  the  critical  importance  of  CBS  in  the  banking  system,  it  has  now  been 
22. 
decided to include CBS implementation as an additional criterion for a UCB to be classified 
as  an  FSWM  bank.  With  a  view  to  imparting  transparency  and  removing  any  unintended 
element of subjectivity the criterion of “regulatory comfort” has also been redefined. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  Regulatory convergence 
23. 
Pursuant  to  the  amendment  to  the  Banking  Regulation  Act  through  the  Banking 
Laws (Amendment) Act, 2012, the percentage of CRR to be maintained by non-scheduled 
co-operative banks and the percentage of SLR to be maintained by co-operative banks were 
brought in line with that of commercial banks with effect from the fortnight beginning July 12, 
2014. The assets eligible for being reckoned as part of SLR were also brought on par. To 
ensure  that  this  is  achieved  in  a  non-disruptive  manner,  banks  were  allowed  to  reach  the 
target in a phased manner. Similarly KYC guidelines for co-operative banks have also been 
brought at par with commercial banks. 
Way forward 
24. 
RBI had come out with a discussion paper on “Banking Structure in India – The Way 
Forward”  in  August  2013.  The  paper  envisaged  four  tier  banking  structure  consisting  of 
International Banks at Tier I, National Banks at Tier II, Regional Banks at Tier III and Local 
Banks  at  Tier  IV.  The  paper  has  brought  to  the  fore  a  case  for  re-orienting  the  existing 
banking structure to make it more dynamic and amenable to meet the needs of the economy 
and  had  suggested  basic  building  blocks  of  the  re-orientation  exercise  which  inter  alia 
included setting up of specialized/differentiated banks and conversion of Urban Co-operative 
Banks which meet the necessary criteria into commercial banks or Local Area Banks/small 
finance banks. 
25. 
The  Discussion  Paper  noted  that  the  Urban  Co-operative  Banks  (UCBs)  are 
organised based on the principles of co-operation. UCBs are perceived as banks for people 
of small means. They cater to the financial needs of local communities and serve the lower 
and middle strata of population in urban and semi-urban areas, within a limited geographical 
boundary. 
Conversion of Multi State UCBs into commercial banks 
26. 
As regards the Multi-state co-operative banks, the paper noted that there is a case 
for their conversion into commercial banks. As UCBs become larger and spread into more 
states,  the  familiarity  and  bonding  amongst  their  members  diminishes  and  commercial 
interests  of  the  members  overshadow  the  collective  welfare  objective  of  the  organisation. 
The UCBs lose their co-operative character. In the process, some of them become “too big to 
be  a  co-operative”.  The  collective  ownership  and  democratic  management  no  longer  suit 
their size, and competition and complexities in the business force them to explore alternate 
form  of  ownership  and  governance  structure  to  grow  further.  Corporatisation  could  be  the 
best  alternative  for  multi-State  UCBs.  UCBs  enjoy  arbitrage  in terms  of  both  statutory  and 
prudential regulations. Only some provisions of Banking Regulation Act, 1949 are applicable 
to them. UCBs continue to be under Basel I capital framework. Though, these may not cause 
serious concerns when UCBs are small and their operations are limited, regulatory arbitrage 
may create incentives for large multi-State UCBs to have greater leverage. Their remaining 
under lighter regulation is a risk. Larger multi-State UCBs, having presence in more than one 
State, dealing in forex and participating in the money market and payment systems, could be 
systemically important. Their failure may have contagion effect and unsettle the UCB sector. 
The systemic risk could be minimized, by subjecting them to prudential regulations applied to 
commercial banks. Another supportive reason would be that larger multi-state UCBs having 
more restrictions in some respects in their functioning than commercial banks, may be at a 
competitive disadvantage and may lag behind their competitor commercial banks as they are 
unable to provide a wider range of facilities to their customers. Conversion into commercial 
banks would give more business opportunities to such UCBs. 
27. 
The existing laws governing co-operatives do not specifically provide for conversion 
of  UCBs  into  (banking)  companies.  Therefore,  the  Paper  suggested  that  necessary 
amendments to the Co-operative Societies Acts/Multi-State Co-operative Societies Act and 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Companies  Act,  1956 may  be  required for facilitating conversion  of  UCBs  into  commercial 
banks. 
28. 
On the whole, the Discussion Paper concluded that setting up stronger UCBs, with 
good  net  worth  and  strong  corporate  governance,  would  facilitate  extension  of  banking 
services in the regions characterized by poor banking outreach. Some UCBs could convert 
into  LABs/small  finance  banks  if  they  meet  the  required  prudential  requirements.  Such 
banks, freed from dual control and with better ability to raise capital, may be able to further 
extend the reach of banking services. 
Licensing of new UCBs and conversion of UCBs into commercial banks 
29. 
In  pursuant  of  the  conclusions  of  the  Discussion  Paper  and  in  view  of  the  high 
aspirations of UCBs to undertake the business akin to commercial banks despite lack of level 
playing  field  for  regulation  of  UCBs  vis-a-vis  commercial  banks  and  pursuant  to  the 
deliberations  held  in  the  31st  Standing  Advisory  Committee  of  UCBs,  a  High  Powered 
Committee under my chairmanship was constituted to examine and recommend permissible 
business  lines  and  appropriate  size,  and  examine  the  issues  with  regard  to  conversion  of 
UCBs  into  commercial  banks  besides  determining  whether  the  time  is  opportune  to  issue 
new licenses to UCBs as recommended by the Malegam Committee. 
30. 
UCBs  have  high  aspirations  of  competing  with  commercial  banks  despite  their 
restricted  ability  to  raise  capital  and  they  expect  RBI  to  provide  relaxation  in  various 
regulatory restrictions. However due to weak resolution regime and non-availability of powers 
to RBI to regulate and supervise UCBs at par with commercial banks, RBI faces constraints 
in  making  such  relaxations.  No  powers  are  available  with  RBI  for  constituting  Boards  of 
UCBs, removal of directors, supersession of Board of Directors, auditing of UCBs, winding 
up and liquidation. The resolution regime for UCBs exists in a rudimentary form. The growth 
of  the  sector,  therefore,  has  to  be  in  a  carefully  calibrated  manner,  consistent  with  legal 
framework and regulatory parameters and their limitations. It is in the above background that 
the  High  Powered  Committee  had  as  one  of  its  terms  of  reference  to  determine  whether 
unbridled growth of UCBs can be allowed and if so, in what form it should take keeping in 
view  the  restricted  ability  to  raise  capital,  lack  of  level  playing  field  in  regulation  and 
supervision  and  the  absence  of  a  resolution  mechanism  at  least  on  par  with  commercial 
banks. 
31. 
The  important  recommendations  of  the  HPC  inter  alia  include  UCBs  having  a 
business size of ₹ 200.00 billion or more may be expected to convert itself into a commercial 
bank.  The  conversion  need  not  be  de  jure  compulsory.  Smaller  UCBs  can  apply  for 
conversion  to  Small  Finance  Banks  provided  they  fulfil  the  eligibility  criteria  for  such 
conversion and the licensing window is open. 
32. 
Licenses to set up new UCBs may be issued to financially sound and well-managed 
co-operative  credit  societies  having  a  minimum  track  record  of  5  years  which  satisfy  the 
regulatory  prescriptions  set  by  RBI  as  licensing  conditions  and  putting  in  place  a  BoM  in 
addition  to  BoD  as  suggested  by  Malegam  Committee  has  to  be  one  of  the  mandatory 
licensing conditions for licensing of new UCBs and expansion of existing ones. The report 
has also suggested amendment of Section 56 of the B.R. Act, 1949 so as to empower RBI to 
bring in regulation of UCBs at par with commercial banks. 
The report is already placed on the website of RBI for soliciting public comments; I 
33. 
am glad that this Seminar today also has been arranged to discuss the recommendations of 
the Committee. Debate, in any case, is always welcome and differing or different views will 
certainly augment final decision which will be taken by RBI after duly considering the views of 
all the stakeholders. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  Co-operative character in co-operative banking 
34. 
While the likely loss of co-operative character of the large Multi-State Co-operative 
Banks  was  vividly  deliberated  in  the  Discussion  Paper  as  mentioned  above,  and  so  have 
become  “too  big  to  be  co-operatives”,  it  is  unfortunate  that  the  co-operative  character  is 
increasingly being undermined even in the uni-state co-operative banks. A study conducted a 
couple  of  years  ago  by  the  College  of  Agricultural  Banking  pointed  to  low  attendance  in 
AGMs, restrictive practices in admitting new members, low voting turnout for election of new 
management,  re-election  of  the  same  management  or  their  family  members,  unanimous 
elections, lack of meaningful discussions in AGMs, etc. Thus, it was observed that the co-
operatives especially UCBs are losing their co-operative character. 
35. 
We need to reflect on certain soul searching questions. It may cause certain shock 
to several of you, the veterans of co-operative movement, to undertake this search. Because, 
you need to find answers to some inconvenient questions. They are as follows: 
a. 
Has the co-operative movement retained its relevance after its 130 years existence 
in India? 
Has the Indian psyche grown beyond the need for “one person one vote for mutual 
benefit” idiom? 
Has the co-operative movement captured the imagination of younger generation? 
Has it produced enough qualified and energetic young leaders to carry forward the 
movement? 
How the movement can insulate itself from the trends that as the CAB study pointed 
out reduce the cooperativeness of co-operatives? 
I  would  strongly  urge  the  sector,  if  not  in  this  Seminar,  to  find  answers  to  these 
36. 
questions. 
37. 
Another area where the cooperativeness of co-operatives is missing relates to the 
Federations’ role. Several Committees have suggested that the co-operative banking sector 
need  umbrella  organisations  to  facilitate,  among  others,  funds  management,  IT  services, 
capacity  building  and  strategic  guidance.  I  hear  about  only  one  serious  attempt  has  been 
made  by  the  Gujarat  Federation  so  far  in  that  direction.  It  is  a  matter  of  regret  that 
Federations  could  not  so  far  come  forward  to  activise  such  umbrella  organisations.  I  look 
forward to the Federations moving ahead on this very useful, self-helping initiative. 
b. 
c. 
d. 
e. 
Conclusion 
38. 
To conclude, let me say that we do recognize that co-operative banks are unique in 
terms of their structure, clientele and credit delivery. The resilience shown by these banks 
during their long existence can be leveraged. Despite their inherent weaknesses in terms of 
low  capital,  poor  management  and  intrusive  policies  of  State,  co-operative  banks  in  India 
have  successfully  weathered  several  challenges  during  their  century  old  existence  and 
continued  to  grow  in  the  competitive  environment  which  emerged  following  the  Economic 
and  Financial  Sector  Reforms  initiated  in  1991.  RBI  has  been  continuously  taking  policy 
measures  to  strengthen  the  co-operative  banking  sector.  It  is  heartening  to  see  that 
supportive  regulatory  environment,  adoption  of  technology  and  re-orientation  of  business 
strategy  can  act  as  enablers  for  co-operative  banks  to  contribute  more  meaningfully.  Yet, 
looking into the future, some hard questions relating to maintaining the cooperativeness in 
co-operatives  need  to  be  answered.  And  Federations  have  to  deliver  on  Umbrella 
Organisations. 
39. Thanking you all for your patient attention. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
