  Mario Draghi: One year of ECB banking supervision 
Speech by Mr Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank, at the ECB Forum on 
Banking Supervision, Frankfurt am Main, 4 November 2015. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
Back  in  2012,  when  it  was  decided  to  establish  a  single  supervisory  mechanism  (SSM), 
many a critic claimed that either it was impossible, or that it would take forever. And yet here 
we are, marking the first anniversary of the SSM with this conference, reflecting no longer so 
much on the structure of supervision, but on its content. 
Now, the critics tell us that other necessary improvements to the institutional architecture of 
the euro area, and of the EU, are either impossible, or will not happen during our lifetime. 
You will forgive me for not being convinced. 
The establishment of the SSM was neither the start, nor the end of the suite of institutional 
reforms  that  we  must  undertake  to  restore  in  Europe the  stability  that  is  the  premise for  a 
return  to  prosperity.  But  it  was  a  crucial  step  and  in  many  ways  it  was  the  key  to  going 
further. 
Let me put the SSM’s significance in a broader perspective: 
In  the  early  years  of  the  euro,  we  lived  under  the  illusion  that  we  had  established  a  full-
fledged  monetary  union.  There  can,  however,  only  be  a  single  money  if  there  is  a  single 
banking system. For money to be truly one, it has to be truly fungible independent of its form 
and independent of its location. In particular, deposits, which are the most widespread form 
of money, have to inspire the same level of confidence wherever they are located. 
To ensure that deposits are truly as safe everywhere across the euro area, the likelihood that 
a bank fails has to be independent of the jurisdiction where it is established. Resolution has 
to follow the same process in the event that a bank fails. And, when push comes to shove, 
depositors must be afforded similar protection wherever they are located. 
Fundamentally, this was and remains the agenda of Banking Union. And it is why Banking 
Union was conceived with three pillars: a single supervisory mechanism, a single resolution 
mechanism,  and  a  uniform  deposit  insurance  scheme,  which  remains  to  be  specified.  For 
money to be truly one, we need all three. Supervision had to come first, not because it was 
the easiest to establish, but because it was the necessary condition to proceed with the other 
pillars of Banking Union. 
That the SSM was established at the ECB owes much to circumstances. There are benefits 
in  the  current  set-up,  but  that  was  not  of  vital  importance.  What  was  of  absolutely  vital 
importance, however, is that the SSM was established. In a fiat money system with fractional 
reserves,  sound  and  uniform  supervision  is  essential  to  there  being  a  sound  and  single 
money. 
It is now high time that these other aspects of banking union are also completed. Otherwise, 
we would make the same mistake that was made when the euro was introduced. Back then 
the  consequences  of  having  a  single  currency  were  not  fully  reflected  in  the  Union’s 
institutional  design.  Internal  inconsistencies  made  our  union  much  more  vulnerable  than  it 
needed to be when an external shock hit it. 
If the SSM is of great importance to the singleness of money, it is also greatly important to 
the  singleness  of  the  market.  The  single  market  is,  as  the  euro,  a  central  and  irrevocable 
creation of the European Union. But, as is the case for the euro, its irrevocability, to remain 
unquestionable, needs being buttressed by appropriate and credible institutions. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  The SSM is one such institution. And that is why it was – and remains – open to participation 
by countries which are not in the euro area. 
Before  the  crisis,  the  free  passporting  of  banking  services  across  borders  relied  on  the 
principle  of  home  supervision,  host  recognition.  This  principle,  however,  requires  equal 
standards of supervision across borders, and mutual trust in the quality of supervision. That 
trust did not always stand the test of the crisis. A single supervisor, applying homogenous 
methodology  across  institutions,  internalises  mutual  trust.  Its  establishment  was  thus  one 
answer, and certainly an effective answer to this challenge. A single supervisor builds trust 
not only between supervisors, but also with shareholders and other stakeholders, including 
the fiscal authorities that, in the past, were too often assumed to be the shareholders of last 
resort of their national financial system. 
The  importance  of  the  SSM  to  uphold  the  single  market  serves  as  a  reminder  that  the 
objective  of  having  a robust  supervisor  is  not just to make  banks  safe. The  objective  is  to 
make banks safe so that they can safely access resources and use them to fund innovation, 
investment, and growth. Similarly, creating a single supervisor was not an objective per se. 
But it was necessary so that the integrity of the single banking market is not questioned. 
What  I  have  said  of  banking  can  be  extrapolated  to  other  areas  of  finance,  which  is  one 
reason  why,  alongside  Banking  Union,  the  Capital  Markets  Union,  championed  by 
Commissioner Hill, also needs to be implemented fully and as quickly as practical. 
I am not saying “as quickly as practical” for no reason. If we want to restore in Europe the 
stability that is the premise for a return to prosperity, we need to consider the economic costs 
entailed by recurrent uncertainty over the operating environment of European firms. Not only 
does it cause a loss of growth today, but by impeding investment, it may also weaken our 
potential in a more lasting way. Increasing the horizon of visibility is desirable generally, but it 
is true that an apparently never ending train of reform is not greatly conducive to reducing 
uncertainty. 
There is a simple solution to that: specify what we want to change, clarify the calendar to do 
it, and then just do it. This is exactly how the SSM was established. And that is perhaps the 
last area of significance of the SSM that I have not yet mentioned: it is the yardstick against 
which we can now judge other achievements. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
