  Yves Mersch: Challenges for completing Europe’s economic and 
monetary union 
Speech by Mr Yves Mersch, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
at the MNI Connect event, Singapore, 13 October 2015. 
 Over the past few months, Europe has faced two exceptional challenges. First, there was the 
new  adjustment  programme  for  Greece.  And  second,  there  has  been  the  large  influx  of 
refugees, a challenge that is very far from the competences of the European Central Bank 
(ECB). Though very different in nature, these two events offer a common lesson for future 
challenges that we will collectively face: that Europe is strong only when it acts on the basis 
of solidarity and cooperation. 
I would like to talk about two further topics of importance today: first, the ECB’s assessment 
of recent economic developments and their implications for our monetary policy stance; and 
second,  the  necessity  for  completing  Europe’s  economic  and  monetary  union.  Over  the 
summer, industrial production and other indicators of economic activity in the euro area have 
shown  signs  of  resilience.  Yet  at  the  same  time,  the  macroeconomic  environment  has 
become more challenging. The ECB’s latest macroeconomic projections indicate a  weaker 
economic recovery and a slower increase in inflation rates than was expected earlier in the 
year. Inflation will remain close to zero in the very near term, before rising again towards the 
end of the year. It will take somewhat longer than previously anticipated for inflation to return 
to a rate that we consider sufficiently close to 2% and stabilise at that rate. 
Three  main  causes  underpin  these  developments:  first,  decelerating  growth  in  emerging 
market economies; second, a stronger euro; and third, the fall in oil prices and commodity 
prices  more  generally.  The  consequences  are  renewed  downside  risks  to  the  outlook  for 
growth and inflation. 
It is too early to judge whether these factors will cause lasting changes to the trajectory that 
the ECB expected inflation to follow. In particular, more time is needed to determine whether 
the loss of growth momentum in emerging markets is temporary or permanent in nature and 
to assess what is driving the fall in commodity prices and to what extent falling oil prices will 
have  second  round  effects.  As  always,  we  will  be  closely  monitoring  all  relevant  incoming 
information and its potential impact on price stability. 
The monetary policy measures that we have  in  place – including the TLTROs or ‘targeted 
longer-term refinancing operations’ – continue to have a favourable impact on the cost and 
availability of credit for firms and households. Thus far, despite the recent surge in financial 
volatility, the measures have prevented a measurable tightening in financial conditions for the 
real  economy.  The  sustained  decline  in  the  cost  of  borrowing  is  strengthening  domestic 
demand, supporting durable goods consumption and stimulating investment, particularly by 
small  and  medium-sized  businesses.  This  is  making  the  economy  of  the  euro  area  more 
resistant to external shocks. 
In the event that the downwards risks I have mentioned weaken the inflation outlook over the 
medium  term  more  fundamentally  than  we  currently  project,  we  would  not  hesitate  to  act. 
Should more monetary policy impulse become necessary. The ECB is determined to use all 
available instruments to achieve its mandate over the medium term. 
As for potential risks to financial stability, we do not see them materialising at present but we 
will naturally be monitoring them closely. Over the past two years, national authorities across 
Europe have been active in developing and implementing macroprudential policy measures 
but  their  effectiveness  still  has  to  be  tested.  Before  addressing  my  second  topic,  let  me 
mention  Greece  again.  The  comprehensive  agreement  that  has  been  reached  involved  a 
long and complication discussion. But if, as we all hope, the new programme is completely 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  implemented, it will put Greece in a strong position to grow again and to reap the full benefits 
of  participating  in  our  common  currency.  The  negotiations  over  the  summer  once  again 
confirmed  that  Europe’s  institutional  framework  is  not  yet  commensurate  with  the 
requirements of sharing a single currency. A more complete union is necessary. 
From  the  ECB’s  perspective,  two  elements  are  of  particular  importance.  First,  despite  the 
best  efforts  of  everyone  involved,  the  crisis  has  revealed  the  need  for  a  political  centre  to 
economic and monetary union. That centre must be able to take the relevant fiscal, economic 
and financial decisions for the euro area as a whole in a swift and transparent manner with 
full  democratic  legitimacy  and  a  clear  set  of  responsibilities  determined  by  the  legislators. 
This requires a move from rules-based coordination to sharing of sovereignty within common 
institutions. One proposal that now needs to be developed further in terms of scope, function, 
and democratic accountability is a euro area treasury. 
But – and this is the second important element from the ECB’s perspective – we should also 
go further with our current policies. It is clear that Europe’s economic and monetary union will 
need to strengthen its tools to manage and prevent the build-up of fiscal, financial and other 
macroeconomic  risks.  Recent  reforms  include  strengthening  the  framework  of  economic 
governance  and  establishing  the  European  Stability  Mechanism,  the  Single  Supervisory 
Mechanism  and  the  Single  Resolution  Mechanism.  These  are  important  first  steps  in 
improving  our  toolkit  for  crisis  prevention  and  crisis  management,  but  further  progress  is 
needed. 
In the nearer term, we should move towards completing Europe’s banking union through a 
common backstop for the Single Resolution Fund as well as a roadmap towards a European 
deposit insurance scheme. Both are essential for creating a truly single banking system to 
mirror our single currency. Both are also crucial for underpinning the credibility of the banking 
union  and  achieving  its  initial  promise  of  breaking  the  bank-sovereign  nexus,  making  the 
financial system more resilient and protecting taxpayers’ interests. In addition, we must look 
beyond  the  banking  sector  and  make  progress  in  developing  a  capital  markets  union  to 
enhance further the scope for cross-border private risk-sharing. 
It is also essential to prevent imbalances from developing into future crises. We need a new 
convergence  process  based  on  the  capacity  of  our  economies  to  withstand  shocks  and 
recover from them quickly. This implies not only establishing a more robust financial system; 
it also requires stronger governance of structural reforms and tighter control of national fiscal 
policies. To ensure that Member States can adjust to economic shocks, whatever their size, 
once we achieve greater convergence we will also need to add a layer of fiscal stabilisation 
at the European level. 
Taken  together,  these  steps  towards  completing  Europe’s  economic  and  monetary  union 
would help the euro area not only to survive, but also to thrive and prosper. 
 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
