   Peter Praet: EMU – disappointed expectations and how to move forward 
Remarks by Mr Peter Praet, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at 
the  5th  SEEK  Conference  on  “Overcoming  the  Crisis:  How  to  Foster  Innovation  and 
Entrepreneurship in a Diverging European Economy?”, Mannheim, 8 October 2015. 
 Thank you very much for inviting me to address this conference this morning. We are meeting 
today  against  a  mixed  economic  backdrop  in  the  euro  area. While  the cyclical  recovery  is 
progressively taking hold, many countries are confronting a situation of disappointed growth 
expectations.  For  the  euro  area  as  a  whole,  5  years  ahead  growth  expectations  among 
forecasters have been falling continuously since 2001, from around 2.7% then to 1.4% today. 
As  a  result,  the  economic  environment  is  characterised  by  seeping  pessimism  about  the 
prospects for long-term growth.  
This matters for two reasons. First, it holds back a stronger recovery, as uncertainty about the 
future  can  feed  back  into  weaker  investment  today  through  expectations  and  confidence 
channels. It is surprising, for example, that businesses currently perceive themselves to have 
limited excess capacity, despite a large estimated output gap. 
Second – and perhaps even more fundamentally – pessimism about future growth challenges 
one of the founding rationales for the single currency, which is that it would lead to sustainably 
higher wealth for all its members. This is relevant for the whole monetary union as the cohesion 
of the euro area depends on the fact that each country perceives itself to be permanently better 
off as a member.1 
In short, it is not an issue we can take lightly. In my remarks I would like to discuss how we 
arrived in this situation of disappointed expectations, and what we need to do to remedy it.  
The high expectations for EMU 
Why weak growth today is perhaps so disappointing is that the launch of the EMU in 1999 was 
associated with high expectations. Following the decade of so-called “Eurosclerosis” in the 
1980s, the single market and single currency were seen as creating the pre-conditions for a 
structural break in trend growth, reversing the weak performance in GDP and employment 
growth that had been visible in many European economies. 
As  laid  out  in  the  Commission’s  report  on  “One  Market,  One  Money”  in  1990,  EMU  was 
expected to create both “microeconomic efficiency gains, which arise from the elimination of 
exchange rate uncertainty and transaction costs, and lead to a permanent increase in output”, 
and  “macroeconomic  stability  effects,  which  arise  from  the  elimination  of  intra-Community 
exchange rates and from policy discipline in the monetary and fiscal fields.” Macroeconomic 
stability was also expected to be supported by increased financial integration, as in a monetary 
union “private markets will finance all viable borrowers, and savings and investment balances 
will no longer be constraints at the national level.”2 
Expectations for the positive effects of EMU always depended crucially, however, on the notion 
that  euro  membership  would  have  an  endogenous  effect  on  the  quality  and  efficiency  of 
national economic institutions – by which I mean, among other things, institutions governing 
competition, wage bargaining, civil justice, banking supervision and fiscal policies.  
                                                
1   See M. Draghi, “Structural reforms, inflation and monetary policy”, Introductory speech at the ECB Forum on 
Central Banking, Sintra, 22 May 2015. 
2   European Commission (1990), “One Market, One Money”. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   
This was because, as governments in a monetary union would have less scope for demand 
management, they would necessarily focus more on structural reforms. For instance, without 
the possibility to devalue to regain competitiveness, governments would have to compensate 
by making changes in product and labour markets to improve the flexibility of relative prices. 
Moreover,  the  principles  of  no  bailout  and  no  exit  in  the  EMU  framework  would,  it  was 
expected,  encourage  countries  to  improve  fiscal  sustainability,  not  least  because  markets 
would subject them to stronger discipline. All in all, the conditions for sustained real growth in 
euro area countries would be significantly improved.  
At  the  same  time,  it  was  anticipated  that  structural  and  fiscal  reforms  would  support  the 
functioning of adjustment mechanisms that would help keep growth on track. The euro area 
does not have some features that were seen as important in the literature on “optimal currency 
areas”, such as cross-country fiscal stabilisation or labour mobility. But if countries could adjust 
through relative price changes, adjustment through quantities (ie labour mobility) would be less 
important. And if national fiscal policies were sufficiently sound to allow the national stabilisers 
to play out in a downturn, there was less need for union-wide stabilisation mechanisms. Deeper 
financial  integration  would  also  allow  risks  to  be  shared  privately  across  regions,  thereby 
reducing the need for fiscal risk-sharing. 
So why were these high expectations not realised? 
Why expectations were disappointed 
It  is  beyond  the  scope  of  this  speech  to  give  a  comprehensive  answer.  But  part  of  the 
explanation is the fact that governments did not internalise the new constraints created by 
monetary union. As a result, few took advantage of the favourable financing conditions in the 
first decade of EMU to make progress on institutional reforms.  
On the fiscal side, the weakening of market discipline was not matched by a commensurate 
strengthening of fiscal governance at the European level,  which allowed countries to relax 
underlying consolidation efforts as interest expenditures fell. Some therefore entered the crisis 
with fragile public finances, which then had to be shored up in the downturn. Fiscal policies in 
the  euro  area  were  consequently  largely  pro-cyclical  and  unavailable  to  stabilise  national 
economies in the slump. 
At the same time, improving financing conditions triggered strong cross-border capital inflows 
into a number of countries and a surge in domestic demand and inflation. That in turn produced 
a steep fall in real interest rates and a self-reinforcing easing in credit conditions. This not only 
created  the  conditions  for  a  pronounced  boom-bust  cycle  and  a  severe  balance  sheet 
recession in the worst affected economies. It is also, crucially, masked the postponement of 
necessary reforms in the structural area. 
According to the World Bank’s governance indicators, the gap between the best and worst 
performers  in  terms  of  perceptions  of  institutional  quality  actually  diverged  in  this  period.3 
Relative  price  flexibility  also  hardly  improved.  Though  monetary  union  resulted  in  inflation 
differentials in the euro area falling to a level comparable to the US, their persistence remained 
much greater: the euro area experienced a divergence in relative prices twice as large as the 
one observed in the US.  
In addition, the boom phase contributed to a rapid but unstable form of financial integration in 
the euro area. There was price convergence in many asset classes coupled with a high volume 
of  short-term  flows,  creating  an  illusion  of  deepening  integration.  But  it  in  fact  remained 
relatively shallow, especially in the banking sector. While euro area interbank markets became 
                                                
3   World Bank, World Governance Index. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   
almost completely integrated, the retail banking sector stayed largely fragmented.4 Contrary to 
pre-crisis expectations, the banking sector therefore never developed the institutional features 
to effectively share risk across borders. 
In combination, this weakening institutional environment, while not per se a cause of the crisis, 
meant  that  EMU  did  not  provide  the  framework  for  higher  sustainable  growth  that  was 
expected. Countries with inflexible relative prices saw pronounced  losses in export market 
shares and price competitiveness, and capital flowed disproportionately into non-productive 
sectors, which ECB research suggests led to substantial capital misallocation5. In that context, 
despite relatively strong headline growth  rates in the first decade of EMU, the euro area’s 
potential growth rate in fact fell continuously throughout the 2000s.  
And  when  the  credit  cycle  eventually  turned,  the  euro  area  financial  sector  was  prone  to 
fragment  along  national  lines:  indeed,  whole  national  banking  systems  faced  conditions 
equivalent to a “sudden stop”. With banks in some of the most vulnerable countries heavily 
exposed  to  their  own  governments,  sovereign  and  bank  stresses  interacted  in  the  now 
infamous “diabolical loop”. In this way, the banking sector acted more as a shock amplifier 
rather than a shock absorber. All this exacerbated the negative impact of the balance sheet 
recession on the economy. 
Elements of a crisis response 
Against that background, dealing with the crisis required two types of policy response. The first 
was  a  determined  stabilisation  policy  to  offset  the  effects  of  the  boom-and-bust  cycle  on 
demand.  The  second  was  a  policy  of  structural  reform,  to  bring  about  the  necessary 
institutional changes that the early years of EMU had failed to elicit.  
Stabilisation can in principle be provided either by monetary policy or fiscal policy. With fiscal 
policies at best unavailable, however, the burden had to be borne principally by the central 
bank. That task was further complicated by the fragmentation of the banking sector, which 
severely  disrupted  the  transmission  of  our  monetary  policy  across  the  euro  area.  In  this 
situation,  we  necessarily  had  to  produce  a  resolute  monetary  policy  response  –  both  to 
compensate for the retrenchment of fiscal support for aggregate demand, and to compensate 
for the diminished traction of our policy over the economy. 
This  required  us  to  develop  several  so-called  “non-standard  measures”.  These  included 
targeted measures to overcome transmission blockages, such as altering our collateral policy 
or launching our Targeted Long-Term Refinancing Operations. And they included, as policy 
interest rates approached lower bound, deploying large-scale asset purchases to expand the 
monetary policy stance through our Asset Purchase Programme. Those measures were no 
doubt unprecedented for the ECB. But they should be understood as a necessary reaction to 
fragmented and depressed environment, where the central bank found itself, in the words of 
many observers, as “the only game in town”. 
Our policy has clearly contributed to stabilising the macroeconomic environment. We have 
always decisively addressed signs of a de-anchoring of inflation expectations. But stabilisation 
policy can ultimately only buy time for the second type of policy response to be implemented 
– addressing institutional weaknesses. So has the time bought by our actions been used well? 
In my view the answer is a qualified yes.  
In terms of structural reforms, a great deal of activity has taken place since 2010. To give just 
a  few  examples,  Greece,  Portugal  and  Spain  have  all  taken  measures  to  improve 
                                                
4   Financial Integration in Europe, European Central Bank, April 2008. 
5   See  Gamberoni,  Giordano  and  Lopez-García,  “Capital  and  labour  (mis)allocation  across  firms:  a  study  of 
selected euro-area countries”, work in progress. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   
competitiveness (such as increasing wage decentralisation), to strengthen competition (such 
as reducing barriers to entry in professional services), to enhance economic efficiency (such 
as  improving  the  functioning  of  the  judicial  system),  and  to  raise  employment  (such  as 
increasing flexibility over working arrangements). Similar reforms have also been implemented 
in Italy, Slovenia and Cyprus. 
Overall this had led to several countries improving their positions in global rankings of structural 
policies, which should now put them in a stronger position to reap the microeconomic benefits 
of monetary union. We should nonetheless not forget the lesson of the pre-crisis period that 
reform momentum can wane as economic conditions improve. The recommendations in the 
recent  “Five  President’s”  report  therefore  aim  to  keep  up  that  momentum  by  setting  out  a 
process of convergence towards “similarly resilient economic structures”.6 
We  have  also  seen,  in  recent  years,  a  strengthening  of  institutions  in  other  areas  where 
vulnerabilities were revealed by the crisis. We now have a reinforced European framework that 
should, if implemented effectively, produce stronger governance over fiscal policies, while also 
allowing some flexibility for the possible short-term costs of implementing structural reforms. It 
is important, however, that the assumptions underlying decisions to use such flexibility are 
spelled out in a clear and transparent way ensuring a consistent application over time and 
across countries. 
Perhaps  most  importantly,  policymakers  have  acknowledged  that  sustainable  financial 
integration does not follow automatically from sharing a currency. In short, a monetary union 
comprised of sovereign states requires a Banking Union. That has now largely been brought 
into being with the creation of the Single Supervisory Mechanism and the Single Resolution 
Mechanism, backed by a Single Resolution Fund.  
Banking Union should, in principle, support the functioning of the EMU framework in two crucial 
ways. First, European banking supervision should improve the capacity for micro- and macro-
prudential policies to be used counter-cyclically, thereby helping contain boom-bust dynamics. 
Second,  European  banking  resolution  should  provide  a  framework  for  harmonised  and 
predictable burden-sharing through the private sector, which is key to create the conditions for 
deeper retail banking integration, and hence for the financial risk-sharing benefits of monetary 
union to materialise. What is needed now is for Banking Union being completed in all the areas 
that have been identified.  
The challenge of lifting productivity  
Still, despite the present cyclical recovery and reforms already made, we cannot ignore the 
fact that the underlying pessimism I alluded to at the start remains. This may be partially lifted 
as the benefits of those reforms start to appear in headline growth rates. But in my view further 
reforms will be needed to decisively shift expectations, in particular in the priority area of raising 
total factor productivity (TFP) which is ultimately what drives long-term growth. The difference 
between  the  euro  area  and  the  US  in  this  regard  shows  the  possibilities  we  have  for 
improvement. 
The determinants of TFP growth are complex, but broadly speaking it is a function of within-
firm  and  across-firm  efficiency.  The  former  is  linked  to  investments  in  human  capital, 
innovation, management quality and technology. The latter relates to the efficiency of labour 
and capital reallocation. There are many factors that can influence these processes, but given 
the focus of today’s conference I would like to single out one in particular. That is the nexus 
between firm growth, technology adoption and resource allocation in the euro area and how it 
affects productivity growth. 
                                                
6   Completing Europe’s Economic and Monetary Union”, Report by Jean-Claude Juncker in close cooperation with 
Donald Tusk, Jeroen Dijsselbloem, Mario Draghi and Martin Schulz, June 2015. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   
Many euro area economies are characterised by a high proportion of micro and small firms, 
especially  in  comparison  with  the  US.  While  small  firms  can  add  important  value  to  the 
economy – indeed, young firms create most net new jobs7 – that value diminishes if they do 
not grow over time. For example, the average size of a manufacturing sector start-up in the 
US and Italy is roughly the same within its first two years – 5-10 employees. After ten years, 
however, the average US firm has grown to around 75 employees, while the average Italian 
still has below 15 employees.8 This static pattern of firm growth hinders both the within-firm 
and across-firm channels of TFP growth. 
Within  firms,  firms  that  stay  small  tend  to  be  less  likely  to  invest  in  new  technologies,  in 
particular ICT investments that are crucial to succeed in the digital economy. This is because, 
among other things, small firms face relatively higher fixed costs when adopting ICT9, while 
they exhibit higher risk aversion and encounter greater difficulties in collecting resources to 
finance more innovative projects.10 And if firms do not grow, it also weakens the potential for 
productivity growth through the across-firm channel: the more resources are concentrated in 
the most productive firms in each sector, the faster aggregate TFP grows. 
For these and other reasons, analysis by the IMF finds that firm size is strongly positively 
correlated with TFP in certain countries, with micro firms being about a third less productive 
than  large  firms.11  This  demonstrates  that  creating  the  conditions  for  a  more  dynamic 
distribution of firm growth could make a decisive difference to TFP developments in the euro 
area – and this is where the need for further structural reforms comes in. Let me lay out just a 
few of the channels through which structural reforms could support this process. 
Structural reforms and firm dynamics 
First, by removing regulations that encourage firms to stay below certain size thresholds. In 
Italy, for example, some studies argue that labour regulations that kick-in at the 15 employees 
threshold may have encouraged firms to stay small in the past, although these are de facto 
now no longer in force.12 A similar phenomenon has been observed in France, where size-
contingent regulations appear to cause firms to cluster below 50 employees.13 In Spain, too, 
there is evidence for substantial bunching of firms just below the “large taxpayer” threshold.14 
Second, by making it easier for new firms to enter markets and non-productive ones to exit. 
OECD  research  suggests  that  dynamic  firm  turnover  depends  strongly  on  product  market 
reforms that raise competitive pressures, labour market reforms that allow firms to adjust more 
easily to changing market conditions, and the efficiency of the legal framework in areas such 
                                                
7   De  Kok,  J.  et  al  (2011), "Do SMEs  create more  and  better  jobs",  EIM  Business  &  Policy  Research  report, 
November 2011. 
8   Criscuolo, Gal and Menon (2014), “The Dynamics of Employment Growth: New Evidence from 18 Countries”, 
OECD Science, Technology and Industry Policy Papers no. 14, OECD Publishing. 
9   Hitt, Wu, and Zhou (2002) find, when examining IT adoption by firms, ICT investments have high returns to 
scale because of their low marginal costs but higher fixed costs. See Lorin M. Hitt, D. J. Wu, and Xiaoge Zhou, 
“Investment in Enterprise Resource Planning: Business Impact and Productivity Measures,” J. of Management 
Information Systems 19, no. 1 (2002): 71–98. 
10   Amatori, F., Bugamelli M. and A. Colli (2011), “Italian Firms in History: Size, Technology and Entrepreneurship”, 
Banca d’Italia Economic History Working Papers, No. 13, October 2011. 
11   IMF (2015), “Spain: Selected Issues”, IMF Country Report No. 15/233. 
12   Schivardi, F., and Torrini, R. (2004). “Firm size distribution and employment protection legislation in Italy.” Banca 
d’Italia Economic Working Paper, No. 504, June 2004. 
13   Garicano  L.,  LeLarge  C.  and  J.  Van  Reenen  (2012)  “Firm  size  distortions  and  the  productivity  distribution: 
Evidence from France.” NBER Working Papers, No.18841, March 2012. 
14   IMF (2015), “Spain: Selected Issues”, IMF Country Report No. 15/233. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
   
as insolvency law.15 In keeping with this, other recent evidence suggests that legal reforms 
such as enhancing the efficiency of civil justice can lead to higher rates of firms’ market entry 
and attract greater foreign direct investment.16  
Third, by improving the efficiency of financial markets so that resources can be reallocated 
between growing and shrinking firms. In this context the key structural reform is advancing with 
the Capital Markets Union project, which should help deepen markets in Europe for early stage 
venture  capital,  as  well  creating  new  opportunities  for  market  financing  –  such  as  private 
placements – for more mature firms. Framework conditions matter here as well: a new ECB 
study finds, for example, that the probability to obtain credit is up to 40% higher in countries 
with a better legal system.17  
Fourth, by improving human capital, especially in the area of digital skills. After all, if workers 
lack the skills to operate ICT then firms will be less likely to invest in it, and those that do will 
find it harder to attract qualified workers and grow. In this sense, reducing barriers across-firm 
reallocation, such as enhancing skill level, can increase incentives for within-firm innovation 
and  technology  adoption.  This  is  primarily  comes  down  to  education,  but  labour  market 
reforms, such as lifelong learning schemes, can also play a role. 
Finally, efforts to complete the Single Market – which can be considered a structural reform – 
would strengthen incentives for firms to innovate and grow in order to benefit from the greater 
demand of a larger market and to exploit economies of scale. In this context, the Commission 
finds that reforms facilitating market entry and raising the level of competition on goods and 
services markets could, over the long-term, result in productivity gains of between 2-4%.18  
This  is  no  doubt  a  long  and  challenging  agenda.  But  it  also  an  achievable  one:  given  the 
distance to frontier of several euro area countries on structural reforms, fast improvements are 
well within their reach. And we should not forget, citizens’ trust in the euro remains high, and 
they  want  it  to  deliver  the  gains  that  were  promised.  It  is  therefore  incumbent  on  all 
policymakers to create an environment for stronger growth, where the many benefits of sharing 
a single currency and a single market can show through. 
On the central bank side, that means supporting demand for as long as necessary to work 
through  weak  cyclical  conditions.  On  the  side  of  governments,  it  means  enacting  the 
institutional reforms necessary for sustainable growth within monetary union. Only with such a 
comprehensive policy response can we ensure that the high expectations of monetary union 
are finally fulfilled. 
 
                                                
15   OECD (2015), “Young SMEs, growth and job creation”, OECD Policy Brief. 
16   Lorenzani, D. and Lucidi, F. (2014), “The Economic Impact of Civil Justice Reforms” EC Economic Papers 
No. 530. 
17   Maresch, S., A. Ferrando and A. Moro (2015), “Creditor protection, judicial enforcement and credit access”, ECB 
Working Paper no. 1829, July 2015. 
18   European Commission (2004), “The link between product market reforms and productivity: direct and indirect 
impacts”, The EU Economy 2004 Review. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
