  Mario Draghi: Reception for the opening of the European Cultural Days 
Welcome  address  by  Mr  Mario  Draghi,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the 
reception for the opening of the  European Cultural Days, Frankfurt am Main, 3 November 
2015. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
I am very pleased to  welcome you to this reception for the opening of the ECB’s Cultural 
Days. As you know, each year we dedicate this series to one of the 28 EU members as a 
way to underscore Europe’s diversity and richness. This time the focus is on Malta. At the 
formal  opening  I  will  speak  more  about  Maltese  culture  and  the  programme  of  upcoming 
events. Here, however, I would like to tell you something about your hosts – what the ECB is 
currently doing, and most importantly, why. 
Since last year, when we welcomed the panoply of Bulgarian culture to Frankfurt, the ECB 
has been through a major transformation. Tomorrow, we will celebrate our first full year as 
the  supervisor  of  Europe’s  significant  banks  – a  project  which  has  involved  us  hiring  over 
1000 new staff and setting up a new  European institution from scratch. We also this year 
officially  inaugurated  our  new  building,  which  has  now  become  a  symbol  of  the  Frankfurt 
skyline. 
What has not changed, however, is the ECB’s mandate to deliver price stability for the euro 
area, which we define as an inflation rate of “below but close to 2 percent” over the medium-
term. During the first 17 years of our history, inflation has averaged just over 1.8 percent – so 
pretty close to our objective. 
But note that this definition of price stability is symmetric: inflation should be neither too high 
nor too low. This is a legacy of our colleague Otmar Issing, who appreciated the risks of too 
low  inflation  at  a  time  when  most  people  only  had  the  risk  of  too  high  inflation  in  mind. 
Indeed, history shows that deflation can be just as damaging to the prosperity and stability of 
our economies as high inflation. 
To mention just some of the negative impacts, in a low inflation environment firms’ revenues 
fall but the wages they  pay their employees are typically more “sticky”, so the  real  wages 
they  have  to  pay  rise.  That  can  lead  to  higher  unemployment.  Monetary  policy  can  also 
become  less  effective  at  supporting  the  economy,  as  lower  inflation  leads  to  higher  real 
interest rates, which cannot be offset by conventional policy when interest rates reach zero. 
And in a situation of high indebtedness, too low inflation increases the burden of servicing 
that debt. 
In  the  aftermath  of  the  crisis  it  has  become,  at  times,  more  difficult  for  central  banks  to 
achieve the slow increase of price levels that they aim for. This is also true in the euro area 
where, thanks mainly to falling oil prices, inflation is currently around zero. That would not be 
a  serious  problem  if  we  saw  low  inflation  only  for  one  or  two  months,  but  it  becomes 
worrisome if there is a risk of too low inflation for too long. In that scenario, it can start to 
affect people’s expectations of future inflation, which then makes low inflation self-fulfilling. 
In  line  with  our  mandate,  the  ECB  has  therefore  made  full  use  of  its  conventional  tools  
– interest rate cuts – to ward off these risks to price stability and keep inflation expectations 
anchored 
to 
unconventional  measures  –  namely  large-scale  asset  purchases  –  as  the  main  means  to 
expand our stance and ensure that inflation returns gradually back to 2%. 
Those asset purchases are proceeding smoothly and continue to have a favourable impact 
on  the  cost  and  availability  of  credit  for  firms  and  households.  But  even  though  domestic 
demand remains resilient, concerns over growth prospects in emerging markets and other 
to  our  objective.  And  since  rates  reached  zero,  we  have  switched 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
external  factors  are  creating  downside  risks  to the  outlook for  growth  and  inflation. In  this 
context, the degree of monetary policy accommodation will need to be re-examined at the 
Governing Council’s December meeting. The Governing Council is willing and able to act by 
using  all  the  instruments  available  within  its  mandate  if  warranted  in  order  to  maintain  an 
appropriate degree of monetary accommodation. 
Such decisions by the ECB often trigger a lively discussion in the public debate – and often 
with a quite different flavour depending on the country concerned. While in some countries 
the main theme is typically that the ECB should “do more”, in Germany, as you know, the 
opposite is the case. The low interest rate environment is often seen as a cause for concern. 
I would not be surprised if that is the case for many of you here. 
One concern is low interest rates unfairly punish savers. I fully understand this – low interest 
rates of course lead to low nominal returns on certain types of assets. But I think the extent 
of disquiet with the ECB about this issue also reflects some misunderstandings. There are 
two points in particular I would like to underline. 
First, what matters for savers is not nominal returns on liquid assets such as deposits, but 
real  returns  –  i.e.  what  those  returns  actually  buy  –  on  the  portfolios  of  assets  that  most 
households  hold,  which  include  for  example  shares.  An  interesting  piece  of  research  last 
month  by  our  colleagues  at  the  Bundesbank1  showed  that  the  real  return  since  2008  for 
German households on a typical private portfolio lay at 1.5%. This was lower than the pre-
crisis average, to be sure, but better than in several repeated periods since the early 1990s. 
Second, we need to keep in mind why interest rates are so low today. It is not an arbitrary 
decision of the central bank; it is because the euro area has been in a long and deep crisis 
where the economy needed low interest rates to recover. And what would happen if we were 
to  raise  rates  in  that  environment?  The  answer  is  that  it  would  only  push  us  back  into 
recession, which would mean lower incomes and more job insecurity for everyone. And then, 
the ECB would have to keep interest rates lower for longer to get the economy back on track. 
None of this would be in the interests of savers in any country. 
Moreover, if one takes a longer-term perspective, it is clear that low interest rates are also 
being  driven  by  forces  outside  the  ECB’s  control.  It  is  the  productive  capacity  of  the  real 
economy that ultimately produces real returns on savings – and in the euro area, due to our 
ageing  societies  and  low  productivity,  that  is  currently  very  weak.  This  is  not  an  issue 
monetary  policy  can  solve;  it  depends  on  reforms  that  will  make  our  economies  more 
inclusive, flexible and innovative. The long-term interests of savers, in other words, depend 
on  governments  implementing  the  structural  reforms  that  will  transform  our  economies  in 
Europe. 
This  brings  me  to  another  concern  about  our  policies:  that  the  implementation  of  our 
monetary  policy  in  fact  creates  the  opposite  effect  –  that  it  decreases  the  willingness  of 
governments to undertake structural reforms because they pay little interest on their debts. 
Again, while I can understand this concern, I think it needs to be looked at in context. First of 
all,  the  argument  does  not  fit  with  the  facts  we  have  seen  in  the  euro  area.  Spain,  for 
example, started its labour market reforms when interest rates had already gone down. Italy 
undertook  labour  market  reform  at  the  beginning  of  this  year  of  its  own  volition.  France 
pursued the Macron Reforms this year as well, and they are not yet finished. So I do not see 
convincing evidence that structural reforms are impossible without strong market pressure. 
Moreover, where very strong market pressure does lead to reforms, are we sure that they 
are  the right  ones? Often  we  have  seen  in  recent  years  that,  when  countries face  severe 
sovereign  debt  tensions,  they  prioritise  raising  taxes  rather  than  cutting  unproductive 
                                                
1   Monatsbericht Oktober 2015. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
expenditure and delay structural reforms. Those reforms that countries really need to boost 
their long-term growth – such as improving education or judiciary – do not come about in a 
crisis environment. They have to come about through societies recognising their deep-rooted 
challenges and collectively fixing them. 
But let’s imagine for a moment that all this were not the case – that market pressure was 
essential for structural reforms to happen  – should that really be a factor in how the ECB 
makes its policy? 
Remember that we have been given a narrow  mandate in the Treaty to deliver euro area 
price stability, and that narrow mandate is what justifies our independence. Nowhere in the 
Treaty does it say that the ECB should set interest rates in such a  way as to force policy 
changes on unwilling governments. For us to do that would be undemocratic and a misuse of 
the  independence  we  have  been  given.  If  anybody  is  to  put  pressure  on  governments  to 
enact  structural  reforms,  it  has  to  be  other  governments  within  a  democratically-agreed 
framework.  Indeed,  this  is  why  the  ECB  has  frequently  called  for  stronger  European 
institutions for economic policymaking. 
The  point  here  is  that  one  cannot  expect  the  ECB  to  deliver  the  objectives  that  rightfully 
belong to other policymakers. We will meet our price stability mandate, as we are obliged to 
do in the Treaty. But it is up to individual countries to build on that foundation and make their 
economies work better; and it is up to the euro area as a whole to strengthen the institutional 
architecture of our union. 
Only with such a common, comprehensive response can we durably leave this crisis behind, 
and re-focus on the purpose for which the euro was launched: the unity and prosperity of the 
peoples of Europe. That is no doubt a challenging task. But the Cultural Days are a reminder 
what Europe is all about and why it is worth standing up for. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
