  Her Majesty Queen Máxima of the Netherlands: Financial inclusion and 
education – issues for central banks 
Speech  by  Her  Majesty  Queen  Máxima  of  the  Netherlands,  United  Nations  Secretary-
General’s  Special  Advocate  for  Inclusive  Finance  for  Development  (UNSGSA),  at  the  All 
Governors’ Meeting, Bank for International Settlements, Basel, 9 November 2015. 
 Thank  you  Mr  Caruana  and  Governor  Weidmann  for  inviting  me  to  participate  in  this 
important  gathering  at  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements  (BIS),  and  for  your  kind 
welcome. 
Esteemed governors, ladies and gentlemen, I am pleased to be back at the BIS and to speak 
about  the  opportunities  and  challenges  of  advancing  financial  inclusion  with  central  bank 
leaders from around the world. 
I was last here in October of 2014 to participate in the third highly productive engagement 
with  the  financial  standard-setting  bodies  around  financial  inclusion.  Their  commitment  to 
promoting  financial  inclusion  has  never  been  higher,  and  their  many  actions  have  been 
documented in a draft paper that will be presented to the upcoming G20 summit in Antalya, 
Turkey.  This  is  the  second  white  paper  from  the  G20’s  Global  Partnership  for  Financial 
Inclusion, for which I am pleased to serve as Honorary Patron. 
It has been produced in collaboration with the standard-setting bodies and it takes stock of 
the  evolving  financial  inclusion  landscape;  it  documents  their  individual  interests,  activities 
and cooperation in the area of financial inclusion; and sets out priorities for further work. 
What  do  I  mean  by  the  term  “financial  inclusion”?  Financial  inclusion  is  about  providing 
affordable,  responsible  and  sustainable  access  –  which  ensures  usage-to  formally  and 
professionally regulated and supervised financial services to those who are excluded. 
In the past few years it has become increasingly clear that providing individuals and small 
businesses  with  financial  services  has  a  powerful  role  in  fostering  equitable  growth  and 
furthering  vital  development  goals  such  as  poverty  reduction,  gender  equality,  and  food 
security. This was clearly recognized by 193 UN member states when they adopted the new 
2030 Sustainable Development Agenda in New York in September. 
We  have  also  seen  an  increasing  recognition  of  the  positive  connection  between  financial 
inclusion and financial stability. 
A World Bank Global Financial Development Report background paper noted that financial 
inclusion  can  enhance  stability  through  direct  and  indirect  channels1  (2014).  More  recent 
evidence outlined in an IMF staff note – which I have asked to be shared with you today – 
shows that greater financial inclusion contributes to financial stability in countries with strong 
supervision. This is noteworthy because it does provide us with a fresh perspective on the 
long-held view that the risk of financial instability increases when access to financial services 
is expanded. 
Since  2011,  700  million  adults  have  gained  more  access  to  an  account  at  a  financial 
institution or through a mobile device, according to the 2014 Global Findex report. While this 
20% improvement in access in 3 years represents significant progress, there are still 2 billion 
unbanked  adults  –  primarily  among  women,  those  living  in  the  developing  world,  and  the 
poorest 40% of households. 
                                                
1  Directly, if more people use bank deposits, banks could have a more solid funding base especially in periods 
of stress: a 10% increase in access to deposits can reduce the likelihood of withdrawal rate of deposits during 
periods of stress by 20% or more. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  The current business models of mainstream financial institutions are generally not geared to 
offering the kind of small-scale savings, payments, lending and insurance services that are 
tailored for these excluded households and still profitable for providers. 
But  this  is  beginning  to  change  at  a  rapid  pace,  driven  by  digital  and  other  technological 
innovations. Individuals in the most remote and poorest regions of the world are becoming 
increasingly  connected  thanks  to  basic  mobile  phones.  And  it  won’t  be  long  before 
smartphones become available to larger numbers of people, even those of very low income, 
bringing  with  them  the  power  of  the  Internet  along  with  other  capabilities  hard  to  imagine 
even just a few years ago. 
These  and  other  digital  technologies  are  being  used  more  and  more  to  deliver  financial 
services  to  people  who  have  been  excluded.  For  example,  in  many  African  countries  the 
percentage of adults who have a mobile money account is already very significant: 58% in 
Kenya, 32% in Tanzania, and 35% in Uganda2. 
These impressive numbers don’t tell the whole story. Mobile money helps local economies 
and spurs economic growth, for example by allowing for faster, cheaper and safer domestic 
remittances, which are an important economic contribution to rapidly urbanizing developing 
countries. 
The  digitization  of  retail  financial  services  also  enables  a  broader  range  of  services  to  be 
delivered  at  far  lower  cost.  Mobile  payment  histories  can  be  used  for  data-driven  credit 
underwriting  for  self-employed  entrepreneurs,  small  businesses  or  individuals  who  lack 
traditional  collateral.  And  low-cost,  mobile  retail  payment  systems  can  also  enable  small-
ticket  crop  insurance  or  the  micro-leasing  of,  say,  residential  off-grid  solar  energy  units. 
These  would  not  be  economically  viable  with  the  traditional  transaction  cost  structure  of  a 
cash-based business model. 
These  developments  and  other  nascent  technologically  based  but  largely  unregulated 
financial innovations – such as fin-tech or crypto currencies – could have a significant impact 
on  both  the  financial  system  and  the  wider  economy,  subjects  of  great  interest  to  central 
banks, regulators, and policy makers. 
They could affect the ability of the payments infrastructure to accommodate large numbers of 
small transactions as well as the emergence of new payment network operators. They could 
introduce new competitive dynamics with implications for the efficiency of payment services, 
and  both  opportunities  and  challenges  in  pursuing  interoperability.  And,  of  course,  new 
technologies have implications, positive and negative, for financial stability. 
Rapid changes clearly point to the need for good banking supervision, regulation and other 
measures such as close market monitoring. That will help ensure financial stability as well as 
progress  on  financial  inclusion,  as  successfully  demonstrated  by  many  countries  whose 
central banks are represented here today. 
However  we  have  recently  witnessed  some  setbacks  in  the  quest  for  greater  financial 
inclusion. The Financial Action Task Force and the standard-setting bodies housed here at 
the BIS have called for banks to engage in careful risk assessments. But, as many of you are 
already aware, some banks are engaging in what they call “de-risking” – simply ceasing to 
engage in lines of business that are seen as potentially high risk relative to their profitability. 
The  term  “de-risking”  is  problematic  because,  by  cutting  off  certain  clients  and  thereby 
increasing financial exclusion, de-risking can actually increase the risk of money-laundering 
and  terrorist  financing,  as  FATF  has  acknowledged.  The  problem  is  of  particular  concern 
because of its potential impact on cross-border remittances from migrants to family members 
–  sums  that  in  many  countries  dwarf  official  aid  flows.  De-risking,  if  not  addressed  in  a 
                                                
2  Number of accounts at a formal FI in these countries: Kenya 55%, Tanzania 19%, Uganda 27%. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  nuanced  fashion,  could  also  negatively  impact  the  ability  of  small  firms  to  obtain  export 
finance, or other entities to carry out development activities. 
The right balance calls for a proportionate, risk-based approach advocated in the standards 
and guidance of the bodies housed here at the BIS. 
It  is  also  important  to  recognize  that  the  potential  new  customers  for  these  fast-evolving 
financial services are, by definition, inexperienced with these tools. While the poor need to be 
financially  savvy  to  manage  uneven  and  unpredictable  income  and  expenses,  this  doesn’t 
necessarily  translate  into  the  capability  to  make  informed  decisions  about  the  full  array  of 
financial products. 
Many  are  illiterate  or  innumerate,  giving  rise  to  significant  consumer  protection  challenges 
especially in emerging but also in advanced economies. 
Again, central banks and other financial regulators and policy makers, have very critical roles 
to  play  to  ensure  that  sound  market  practices  are  accompanied  by  robust  consumer 
protection  and  financial  education.  It  is  vital  that  we  encourage  responsible  financial 
inclusion. 
Furthermore, to understand these fast moving developments and adopt the right policies to 
address financial  exclusion,  we  need  more  and  better  data.  In  this  regard  the  influence  of 
central  banks–alongside  a  growing  number  of  other  bodies  such  as  telecommunications 
authorities  –  is  vital  for  highlighting  existing  data  and  encouraging  the  collection  of  new 
indicators to keep us ahead of unfolding developments. 
Financial innovations are evolving before our eyes, and we are being challenged to keep up 
with them and to manage them properly. 
But  with  the  balanced  approach  their  impact  on  the  world’s  financially  excluded  could  be 
tremendously positive. 
I look forward to discussing these and other issues highlighted in the note that the BIS staff 
has kindly produced for our meeting today. 
I hope to hear a lot today from the many leaders around this table, who have made great 
strides in financial inclusion. Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
