   Takehiro Sato: Recent economic and financial developments and 
monetary policy in Japan 
Speech by Mr Takehiro Sato, Member of the Policy Board of the Bank of Japan, at a meeting 
with business leaders, Nara, 7 December 2015. 
 The charts can be found at the Bank of Japan’s website http://www.boj.or.jp/en/whatsnew/index.htm/. 
Introduction 
Thank  you  for  giving  me  this  opportunity  to  exchange  views  with  people  representing  the 
political,  economic,  and  financial  communities  of  Nara  Prefecture.  I  would  like  to  take  this 
opportunity to express my sincere gratitude for your cooperation with the activities of the Bank 
of Japan’s Osaka Branch. 
In today’s speech, I will begin by focusing on recent economic and financial developments in 
Japan  and  abroad,  as  well  as  the  Bank’s  monetary  policy.  I  will  then  touch  briefly  on  the 
economy of Nara Prefecture. Following my speech, I would like to hear your views on actual 
conditions in the local economy and on the Bank’s conduct of monetary policy. 
I.  
Recent economic and financial developments in Japan and abroad 
Overseas economies 
A.  
Overseas economies – mainly advanced economies – have continued to grow at a moderate 
pace,  despite  the  slowdown  in  emerging  economies.  In  a  situation  where  commodity  and 
energy  prices  remain  sluggish,  the  growth  rates  of  emerging  and  commodity-exporting 
economies  have  not  risen,  and  advanced  economies  have  been  affected  partly  by  the 
decrease  in  investment  related  to  resource  development.  This  presumably  means  that  the 
decline in commodity and energy prices, which at first was expected to have favorable effects 
on  the  world  economy  as  a  whole,  is  not  only  due  to  the  supply  factor  but  also  has  been 
influenced to a certain degree by the demand factor; namely, a decline in demand from China 
and other emerging economies. Regarding the supply factor, the textbook view that supply is 
automatically adjusted through the price mechanism appears to not necessarily fit with reality, 
as resource developers continue to operate at prices below the breakeven point in order to 
recover the sunk cost, for example. Considering this situation, it is difficult in the short term to 
envision a scenario of commodity and energy prices recovering remarkably and to expect a 
situation where the growth rate of commodity-exporting economies would increase. Therefore, 
even if emerging economies gradually move out of their deceleration phase due to favorable 
effects of the growth in advanced economies, the pace of increase in the growth rate of the 
world  economy  as  a  whole  may  continue  to  accelerate  only  moderately.  Recently,  the 
International  Monetary  Fund  (IMF)  has  also  been  fairly  consistently  revising  downward  its 
forecast of global growth in its World Economic Outlook (Chart 1). 
Although  the  Chinese  economy  has  been  slowing  somewhat,  mainly  in  the  manufacturing 
sector, its services sector has been firm (Chart 2). Under the authorities’ strong commitment 
to supporting growth, the economy is expected to broadly follow a stable growth path, albeit 
with the growth rate continuing to slow somewhat, as the authorities proactively carry out policy 
measures  to  support  economic  activity  from  both  the  fiscal  and  financial  sides  (Chart 3). 
However, there are signs of deflationary pressure from asset price adjustments, as shown in 
the GDP deflator turning negative again in the GDP statistics for the July-September quarter, 
and this warrants attention. The key to realizing stable growth will be whether the economy 
can  shift  from  being  investment-  and  export-driven  to  being  domestic  demand-driven, 
accompanied by structural reforms. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   I see downside risks to the outlook that I have just described, and note the following three 
points. 
First, the growth of the world economy is disproportionately led and driven by that of the United 
States. The expansionary phase of the U.S. economy already has lasted for around seven 
years since the global financial crisis, representing the fourth longest period of expansion in 
the  postwar  era,  and  from  the  perspective  of  the  economic  cycle,  it  can  be  said  that  the 
expansionary phase is maturing. Of course, under pressure from balance sheet adjustments, 
the pace of recovery after the global financial crisis has been moderate compared with that in 
past recovery phases, so making a simplistic comparison in terms of the duration of expansion 
may  be  problematic.  However,  if  wage  growth  –  which  so  far  has  been  lagging  –  gains 
momentum  while  the  slack  in  the  labor  market  diminishes  gradually,  it  seems  it  will  be 
necessary to keep in mind the risk that the economy may enter an adjustment phase due to 
the narrowing of the margin for firms. Under these circumstances, the Federal Reserve intends 
to  normalize  the  monetary  policy  at  a  moderate  pace.  I  would  like  to  watch  how  the 
normalization of interest rates plays out in relation to the duration of the expansionary phase. 
Second,  in  Europe,  there  remain  various  adjustment  pressures;  in  addition,  the  refugee 
problem is emerging as a serious challenge. For example, an agreement of sorts was reached 
among relevant countries on the Greek debt problem around the middle of the year. This is 
supposed to inject capital into banks at an early date in order to maintain financial system 
stability, but drastic measures to reduce sovereign debt have yet to be drafted. In this situation, 
there is a fair possibility that the debt problem will attract attention once again. Moreover, the 
influx of refugees will likely increase the fiscal burden on European countries for the moment. 
Third, in emerging and commodity-exporting economies, the pace of recovery may slow on the 
whole, albeit with differences across countries and regions, if the slump in commodity and 
energy prices is prolonged, or if the outflow of funds from those economies escalates in the 
global financial markets due to an interest rate hike in the United States. In particular, I have 
concern about the impact that may hit the fiscal position of oil-producing countries and the 
possibility of geopolitical risks growing if the slump in crude oil prices is prolonged. 
Global financial markets 
B.  
The global financial markets grew risk-averse toward summer 2015 because of such factors 
as concerns over the slowdown in the Chinese economy. Although such concerns remain, 
there has been an improvement in the market’s risk appetite due to last month’s employment 
statistics, which showed the steadiness of the U.S. economy, and to the proactive stance of 
the  European  Central  Bank  (ECB)  on  additional  monetary  easing.  Although  there  are 
heightened  expectations  among  market  participants  that  the  interest  rate  hike  will  be 
implemented in the United States at the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) meeting 
this December, there has been no sign so far of the risk aversion trend flaring up again, as the 
Federal Reserve has carefully engaged in communication with market participants. While there 
remain concerns over a further outflow of funds from some emerging markets that may be 
triggered by the interest rate hike, I expect that the first such hike since the global financial 
crisis will be welcomed as an event symbolic of the U.S. economic recovery, and also will lead 
to dispelling the uncertainties that have hung over the global financial markets for a long time. 
Looking forward, the first point that we should keep in mind under these circumstances is the 
impact of a decline in market liquidity. The exchange rate reform of the Chinese yuan was 
presumably  the  direct  trigger  of  the  global  turmoil  that  occurred  this  summer,  and  issues 
regarding the Chinese currency and monetary authorities’ communication have been pointed 
out on various occasions. However, at a more fundamental level, I have the sense that the 
global  financial  markets  were  affected  to  a  certain  degree  by  the  fact  that  market  liquidity 
declined  because  risk  taking  by  major  market  makers  was  constrained  by  the  full-fledged 
enforcement  of  the  so-called  Volcker  rule  since  July,  and  consequently  the  presence  of 
technical players – that is, players engaging in algorithmic trading and high frequency trading 
(HFT)  –  grew  amid  the  thin  summertime  trading  volume.  I  feel  it  is  necessary  to  carefully 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   monitor whether or not something trivial could lead to market instability not only in summer but 
also at other times, such as the end of the year or quarter, when liquidity tends to decline due 
to various constraints imposed by regulation (Chart 4). 
Second, there is a possibility that the U.S. dollar funding cost will hover at a high level due to 
structural factors. The cost of converting yen into U.S. dollars in the swap market has been 
increasing and the basis swap spread has widened, as expectations for the interest rate hike 
in  the  United  States  have  mounted,  in  addition  to  the  usual  end-of-year  strengthening  of 
demand for U.S. dollar funds (Chart 5). While I assume that Japanese banks already have 
been making efforts to enhance their stable foreign-currency funding base while expanding 
their overseas business, I feel that it is necessary to carefully monitor this situation. The Bank, 
in cooperation with the Federal Reserve, has a backstop in place in the form of the U.S. dollar 
funds-supplying  operations,  but  I  would  like  to  reemphasize  the  importance  of  financial 
institutions’ efforts to secure their own stable funding base. 
The third point is the impact of additional monetary easing by the ECB on the global financial 
markets. In Europe, the presence of negative interest rates already has become prevalent in 
some countries in relation to the currency policy, even before the deposit rate reduction by the 
ECB to a negative rate. The ECB’s recent deposit rate reduction is expected to escalate this 
situation. The yield curve in Germany, used as a benchmark, had temporarily turned negative 
with respect to bonds with maturities of six or seven years. I am keeping a close watch on how 
such an interest rate formation, coupled with the interest rate hike in the United States, will 
affect the flow of funds in the global financial markets, and whether or not the flattening of the 
yield curve will undermine the sustainability of government bond purchasing by the ECB from 
the perspective of the sustainability of the Bank’s purchases of Japanese government bonds 
(JGBs), which I will describe later. 
Japan’s economy 
C.  
Looking at developments in Japan’s economy, indicators had been relatively weak for the April-
June quarter through the July-September quarter, particularly on the industrial production side, 
and real GDP had declined for two consecutive quarters (Chart 6). Given this situation, there 
are views, mainly among overseas media, that Japan’s economy has technically entered a 
recessionary phase due to the slowdown in emerging and commodity-exporting economies, 
particularly  China.  That  being  said,  on  the  back  of  an  increase  in  receipts  of  income  from 
overseas business reflecting the yen’s depreciation, as well as an improvement in the terms 
of trade due to the declines in energy and commodity prices, firms have seen record profits, 
which consequently is reflected in gross national income (GNI) and gross domestic income 
(GDI) having been on clear increasing trends compared to GDP. The mechanism of aggregate 
income formation has been relatively robust and business sentiment at a high level (Chart 7). 
Thus, it seems that the economy has been resilient recently to exogenous shocks to a certain 
extent, such as the slowdown in overseas economies. In fact, despite relatively weak indicators 
of exports and industrial production, domestic demand has maintained its resilience, mainly in 
private consumption, and a virtuous cycle from income to spending has continued to operate 
on the whole. Final demand also remained firm in the July-September quarter. This is contrary 
to what the economy experienced from 2007 until the global financial crisis occurred in 2008, 
when Japan’s economy actually entered a recessionary phase triggered by the slowdown in 
overseas economies as the terms of trade deteriorated because of the surge in energy and 
commodity prices. 
Let  me  add  a  few  things  about  exports  and  industrial  production.  Real  exports  have  been 
picking  up  slightly  recently,  albeit  with  a  rising  concern  over  the  slowdown  in  the  Chinese 
economy (Chart 8). This is suggested by the divergence between the volume of exports in 
trade statistics and figures for real exports, which might be attributable to a rise in exports of 
goods with relatively high value-added – such as electronic parts and devices – observed after 
the  July-September  quarter,  reflecting  the  product  life-cycle  of  mobile  phones.  Moreover, 
strength in imports is also a reflection of firmness in domestic demand. Meanwhile, although 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   the  July-September  quarter  represented  the  second  consecutive  quarter  of  decrease  in 
industrial production, it is expected to pick up in the October-December quarter, mainly due to 
the  increase  in  production  of  automobiles.  We  are  currently  in  a  puzzling  situation  where 
exports have been more or less flat while industrial production has posted a relatively clear 
decrease and business sentiment has generally stayed at a high level. However, such firm 
business sentiment is evidence that a “mirage of demand,” which commonly occurs during an 
economic recession, is not taking place, and weakness in industrial production might be only 
due to the base year of statistics on production being set at 2010, which has not been revised 
for a while, thus making it difficult to fully reflect the increase in the weight of goods with high 
value-added brought about by the recent changes in the production structure. 
That being said, it is unclear whether the virtuous cycle from income to spending is strongly at 
work. For example, although firms’ fixed investment plans have been at high levels, coincident 
and leading indicators such as shipments of capital goods and machinery orders suggest that 
actual business fixed investment has been sluggish, and real business fixed investment on a 
GDP basis can be assessed as having been more or less unchanged, or even fallen marginally 
(Chart 9). In addition, firms still seem to have a negative stance toward increasing spending 
that could lead to an expansion in fixed costs, as seen in the fact that base pay has increased 
for two consecutive years but the pace has remained only moderate (Chart 10). 
One of the reasons behind firms maintaining such a cautious stance toward spending would 
be that the deflationary mindset has not been dispelled in a broad sense. In addition to this, 
even though corporate profits had registered a record high recently, this was not due to an 
increase in sales volume, but rather to an increase in foreign exchange gains of income from 
overseas business reflecting the yen’s depreciation, as well as to a decrease in input costs 
stemming  from  the  decline  in  commodity  prices.  Therefore,  firms  do  not  consider  the 
improvement in their profits to be indicative of a permanent increase in income, and remain 
cautious about expanding their fixed costs. In other words, their growth expectations for profits 
may not have risen that much. 
In an effort to assist firms from the financial side, the Bank has been taking the initiative to 
create  accommodative  financial  conditions  through,  for  example,  the  fund-provisioning 
measure  to  support  strengthening  the  foundations  for  economic  growth.  In  raising  growth 
expectations, however, there are many issues beyond the scope of monetary policy, and I 
consider  it  important  for  the  government  to  make  strenuous  efforts  to  change  firms’  and 
households’ expectations by steadily implementing the growth strategy. 
In relation to firms’ stance toward spending, I also would like to touch on the annual labor-
management wage negotiations in spring 2016. A sustainable rise in workers’ base pay is one 
of the key points for achieving steady recovery in household consumption expenditure and 
raising people’s medium- to long-term inflation expectations, which appear to remain lower 
than those in the U.S. and European economies. Thus, I am paying attention to whether or not 
base pay will see a rise for a third consecutive year in the annual labor-management wage 
negotiations in spring 2016. Although the Japanese Trade Union Confederation (Rengo) has 
presented a basic stance toward the next spring wage negotiations – namely, demanding a 
base pay increase of about 2 percent – it is uncertain how rises in the underlying trend in 
inflation  and  the  outlook  for  prices  will  be  reflected  in  base  pay.  I  therefore  expect  the 
government to take initiatives such as deregulating the labor market so that firms can find it 
easier to decide on a base pay increase. 
Prices 
D.  
Let me now turn to developments in prices. The year-on-year rate of change in the consumer 
price index (CPI) for all items less fresh food has been about 0 percent recently due to the 
decline in energy prices (Chart 11). The year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI for all items 
less fresh food and energy, on the other hand, has been about 1 percent recently, and the ratio 
of  increasing  and  decreasing  items  in  the  CPI  and  the  year-on-year  rate  of  change  in  the 
trimmed mean have been increasing moderately. In addition, people’s medium- to long-term 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   inflation expectations appear to be rising on the whole, albeit with some weakness, partly due 
to  changes  in  the  behavioral  patterns  of  firms  and  households  since  the  introduction  of 
quantitative and qualitative monetary easing (QQE). Given these factors, the Bank is of the 
view that the underlying trend in inflation has been rising steadily. 
I am aware that there are various views on how to assess the underlying trend in inflation. In 
a situation where price indicators have been affected significantly recently by the short-term 
fluctuations in energy prices, it does sound reasonable to look at the CPI excluding energy 
prices. Nonetheless, as I will describe later, I believe that it is necessary to closely examine a 
wide range of price indicators, including wages, as the recent rise in the CPI for all items less 
fresh food  and  energy  might  only  be  attributable  to  households’  acceptance  of  price rises, 
mainly in daily necessities, brought about by the decline in energy prices. 
With these factors in mind, I would like to discuss recent developments in the CPI for all items 
less fresh food and energy. There is a view that its recent rise can be inferred from the yen’s 
depreciation observed since the expansion of QQE at end-October 2014, and that such a rise 
will peak out after the turn of fiscal 2016 as no further depreciation is expected. I would say, 
however, that it seems unreasonable to explain the recent developments in the CPI for all 
items less fresh food and energy in a consistent manner by the yen’s depreciation alone, as 
prices of food products and durable goods – leading to the recent rise in the CPI for all items 
less  fresh  food  and  energy  –  have  resumed  a  clear  uptrend  recently  under  the  yen’s 
depreciation trend that has generally lasted since around the introduction of QQE in April 2013. 
I consider that the recent rise is actually attributable to the fact that households have more 
readily accepted price rises on the back of moderate improvement in the employment and 
income situation as well as the decline in energy prices, and firms accordingly have taken a 
somewhat aggressive stance of setting higher prices. 
Yet, it is uncertain whether or not households will continue to accept price rises if the effects 
of the decline  in  energy  prices  dissipate.  Moreover,  if  no further  depreciation  of the  yen  is 
expected, it is likely that prices of food products and durable goods will stop rising. In view of 
these possibilities, the key to whether or not the year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI for all 
items less fresh food and energy will remain stable at around 1 percent will likely lie in whether 
rises  in  services  prices  –  which  have  been  lagging  recently  –  would  start  to  be  observed 
following  the  wage  negotiations  for  fiscal  2016.  There  are  uncertainties  over  future 
developments in the wage negotiations, as I mentioned earlier, and also downside risks as to 
whether price rises in daily necessities and durable goods will lead to a rise in services prices. 
In my opinion, however, it is possible to generally maintain the annual growth pace of around 
1 percent throughout the projection period, excluding the effects of the decline in energy prices. 
As a member of the Policy Board – which has the responsibility to ensure price stability – I 
made  all  efforts  to  present  the  most  probable  scenario  in  the  October  2015  Outlook  for 
Economic Activity and Prices (Outlook Report). In my view, whether or not the underlying trend 
in inflation will jump to 2 percent depends on whether people’s medium- to long-term inflation 
expectations will jump to around 2 percent, and this suggests that people’s expectations are 
unlikely to become so bullish within the projection period as wages have not yet risen to that 
level. 
II.  
Future conduct of monetary policy 
QQE 
A.  
It has been two years and eight months since the introduction of QQE. My evaluation of the 
policy  is  that,  as  evidenced  by  economic  and  market  developments  during this  period, the 
intended purpose of promoting the conversion of the deflationary mindset is gradually being 
achieved, although we are still only halfway toward accomplishing this goal. Meanwhile, in the 
October 2015 Outlook Report, it was projected that the timing of reaching the price stability 
target would be delayed to around the second half of fiscal 2016 (Chart 12). I am aware that, 
consequently, there are various views on the Bank’s commitment to achieving the price stability 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
   target of 2 percent in a stable manner at the earliest possible time, with a time horizon of about 
two years. Given this situation, I find it necessary to go over what I had explained about the 
Bank’s commitment, and would also like to share my thinking again. 
I consider this commitment to be a rolling target. It is not intended to achieve a specific price 
level within a specific time frame but rather to achieve the price stability target at the earliest 
possible time with a time horizon of about two years. I also regard the price stability target itself 
as a flexible concept with a certain range for upward and downward deviations of the actual 
inflation rate from the target. I believe such commitment is as reasonable as the framework of 
the inflation target adopted by central banks in other major countries. 
In fact, developments in prices depend, for example, on those in crude oil prices in the short 
term, and inflation expectations that affect the underlying trend in inflation are susceptible to 
monetary policy as well as other factors that cannot necessarily be controlled directly through 
the  conduct  of  monetary  policy,  such  as  the  outcome  of  wage  negotiations  and  growth 
expectations. As I have stated before, prices reflect the state of the economy and are not a 
variable that can be directly operated by a central bank. Therefore, the policy conduct aiming 
at a specific inflation rate within a specific time frame seems unreasonable in the first place, 
and if a central bank persists in achieving such an aim, there may be a risk that its credibility 
will be undermined. 
Let me reiterate the significance of achieving the price stability target of 2 percent. The price 
stability target is set based on the CPI for all items, and as reference figures to capture its 
underlying trend, the Bank has used the CPI for all items less fresh food in presenting the 
Policy  Board  members’  projections.  However,  unlike  the  cases  in  Europe  and  the  United 
States, the CPI entails statistical problems in that stickiness of fees for public services is high 
and that private rent and imputed rent structurally exert downward pressure on it. Thus, the 
CPI, which is included in official statistics compiled by the government, seems to have deviated 
recently from being in line with people’s perception of inflation that reflects a price rise in daily 
necessities, as shown, for example, in the University of Tokyo Daily Price Index and the SRI-
Hitotsubashi Consumer Purchase Price Index. In particular, the year-on-year rate of increase 
in the SRI-Hitotsubashi Unit Value Price Index – which factors in firms’ strategy to maintain 
sales  prices  by  making  frequent  changes  in  their  products  –  has  been  around  2  percent 
recently, representing somewhat more of an acceleration than that in the CPI for the same 
items covered by this index (Chart 13). 
If the Bank conducts its monetary policy by focusing only on the CPI in official statistics, in a 
situation  where  people’s  perception  of  inflation  level  exceeds  its  growth  rate,  there  is  a 
possibility that people would come to feel an excessive rise in prices, and that could cause 
many distortions in their sentiment and actual spending behavior (Chart 14). What matters is 
that the inflation rate rises in balance with wages as the level of economic activity increases. 
With these factors in mind, I would like to reemphasize that achieving 2 percent in terms of the 
year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI for all items is not the ultimate goal of the price stability 
target, but rather that its achievement should be assessed flexibly from various aspects while 
examining a wide range of price indicators. 
Continuation of QQE 
B.  
Meanwhile, it seems that market participants still hold expectations for a further expansion of 
QQE. I believe this might be attributable not only to interpretation of the price stability target, 
as I explained earlier, but also to the thinking regarding the effects of QQE; namely, that easing 
and tightening effects would depend on the flow – that is, the amount – of financial assets to 
be  purchased  by  the  Bank.  Theoretically  speaking,  however,  the  effects  of  QQE  have  the 
nature of strengthening cumulatively with the progress in the Bank’s asset purchases. This 
means that, even if the Bank maintains the same amount of asset purchases, monetary easing 
effects will strengthen as long as it continues with the purchases. Therefore, I hold the view 
that the Bank’s decision at each monetary policy meeting to continue with the current QQE in 
and of itself is very critical in terms of monetary easing effects.  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   The Bank has committed to purchasing JGBs so that its net holdings will increase at an annual 
pace of about 80 trillion yen. Nonetheless, considering that the amount of redemption of its 
JGB holdings will increase, the amount of purchases on a gross basis is likely to rise even 
under the current policy commitment. For this reason, the Bank’s presence in the JGB market 
could increase further, although this also will depend on the government’s JGB issuance plan. 
Given this situation, for the Bank’s explanation – namely, that massive purchases of JGBs are 
carried out only in the context of the conduct of monetary policy and not in any way to finance 
the fiscal deficit – to remain fully persuasive, I also would like to reiterate that the government’s 
commitment toward fiscal consolidation is important.  
As I mentioned earlier, monetary easing effects appear cumulatively in theory, but in terms of 
positive  effects  and  side  effects,  it  is  likely  that  the  easing  effects  have  been  diminishing 
marginally, since the pace of decline in nominal interest rates has been minimal despite the 
progress in the Bank’s purchases, as evidenced by a limited decline in longer-term interest 
rates since the expansion of QQE at end-October 2014. There is no doubt that policy effects 
are always accompanied by side effects, and I believe that a basic approach is to decide on 
the continuation of monetary policy after comparing and examining its positive effects and side 
effects. I initially did not expect that QQE, which is a kind of shock therapy that influences 
formation  of  people’s  inflation  expectations  through  massive  asset  purchases,  would  be 
continued for a very long time, and am concerned about a possibility that continuation of the 
policy  will  cause  the  positive  effects  to  decline  marginally  while  the  side  effects  increase 
marginally. 
Sustainability of the bank’s market operations 
C.  
As the Bank continues with its JGB purchases at the current pace, the amount outstanding of 
JGBs in the markets will decrease by the difference between the amounts of the government’s 
net issuance and the Bank’s net purchases. Since the amount outstanding in the markets is 
limited, the Bank will not be able to continue with the purchases at the current pace indefinitely. 
In reality, financial institutions have reasons to hold a certain amount of JGBs, such as for use 
as  collateral,  so  they  would  stop  selling  their  holdings  to  the  Bank  before  the  amount 
outstanding in the markets hits the bottom. At this point, it is difficult to project when this critical 
point is likely to happen, because financial institutions’ incentive to sell their JGB holdings is 
expected to depend on the interest rate level and the shape of yield curves at each point in 
time. 
If QQE continues to exert its intended effects and market participants’ medium- to long-term 
inflation  expectations  rise,  the  yield  curve  will  steepen  and  financial  institutions  will  have 
greater incentive to sell their JGB holdings. On the other hand, in a case where the conversion 
of the deflationary mindset does not make progress and market participants’ medium- to long-
term inflation expectations do not rise, the yield curve would flatten and financial institutions 
would  have  a  stronger  preference  for  JGB  holdings.  Therefore,  the  Bank’s  massive  JGB 
purchases  involve  difficulties,  in  that  there  is  a  possibility  that  they  become  easier  if  the 
probability of realizing the policy objectives rises, whereas the Bank’s market operations might 
become  problematic  if  realizing  these  objectives  is  considered  to  be  difficult.  Thus,  when 
judging the necessity of continuing QQE, I would like to take into account the sustainability of 
the Bank’s market operations. 
Concluding remarks: economic activity in nara prefecture 
My concluding remarks will touch on the economy of Nara Prefecture. 
Compared  with  the  national  average,  the  industrial  structure  of  Nara  Prefecture  is 
characterized by the large weights of not only local industries – such as plastics, rubber, and 
textiles – but also of electrical machinery and general machinery. The prefecture is also well 
known for its production of such items as cha sen (a tea ceremony tool), sumi ink, ink brushes, 
leather products, and somen noodles, as well as goldfish farming. Although the economy of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
   Nara Prefecture has shown weakness recently in terms of production, a moderate recovery is 
underway. Production has been declining mainly because of decreases in electrical machinery 
and  general  machinery.  Meanwhile,  in  the  household  sector,  the  active  job  openings-to-
applicants ratio is rising moderately and employee income has been above the previous year’s 
levels. Private consumption has been recovering on the whole, as retail sales have remained 
robust, despite the continued weakness of passenger-car sales (Chart 15). 
From a longer-term perspective, the transfer of production sites from Nara Prefecture to other 
locations,  including  foreign  countries,  has  been  proceeding  amid  intense  international 
competition. In addition to such dwindling sources of employment, there also has been the 
critical  challenge  of  responding  to  the  aging  of  society  coupled  with  the  low  birthrate  and 
shrinking population, which reflects Nara Prefecture’s history of development as a commuter 
town for neighboring large cities such as Osaka and Kyoto. 
However, I hear that Nara Prefecture already has been conducting broad-ranging activities 
through cooperation between the public and private sectors in order to deal with this challenge. 
For example, as an initiative to become more than just a commuter town, the prefecture is 
inviting  businesses  from  the  outside  and  promoting  the  development  of  local  industries  by 
creating an industrial cluster area at a convenient location close to an expressway. Over a 
period of eight years, the prefecture succeeded in inviting 205 projects for factories and other 
facilities. In addition, in the southern and eastern parts of the prefecture, where large tracts of 
abandoned  farmland  exist,  agriculture  promotion  measures  are  being  implemented  to 
encourage a shift to the so-called sixth industry, including such activities as opening a privately 
run auberge (restaurant equipped with boarding facilities) using local food materials. In April 
next year, NARA Agriculture and Food International College will be opened. Furthermore, Nara 
Prefecture has an abundance of tourism resources, including several World Heritage sites, 
and the number of visitors has been rising, partly as a result of an increase in foreign visitors 
in recent years. Until now, there has been a scarcity of inns and hotels in the prefecture, so 
the rising number of visitors has failed to increase overnight stays, meaning that its tourism 
resources  have  not  necessarily  been  utilized  sufficiently.  However,  I  hear  that  there  is  an 
ongoing project, in order to resolve the shortage of hotel rooms, to build a large hotel at a site 
in Nara City that is owned by the prefectural government. 
I am hoping that Nara Prefecture will further revitalize its economy by continuing with steady 
efforts to do so through cooperation between the public and private sectors. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
