   Sabine Lautenschläger: The SSM after one year 
Keynote  speech  by  Ms  Sabine  Lautenschläger,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the 
European Central Bank, at the IIF (Institute of International Finance) Colloquium on European 
Banking Union, Frankfurt am Main, 18 November 2015. 
 banking union as well as capital markets union, 
their current and potential effect on banks, 
the establishment of the Single Resolution Board, and 
the activities of the Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM) in particular. 
Sylvie, David, ladies and gentlemen, 
Looking at the programme for tomorrow, I see you will have an interesting day full of valuable 
insights and discussions about 
• 
• 
• 
• 
It is a pleasure to be here this evening to set the stage for this upcoming conference. I welcome 
this opportunity to reflect on some of the messages the Single Supervisory Mechanism learnt 
during  its  first  year  of  operation.  (And  I  promise  my  comments  will  not  be  too  long  or  too 
exhaustive – the main course is still in front of us, after all). 
On our first anniversary, we received a lot of praise! At the same time, a few of our stakeholders 
expressed some understandable wishes and called for improvements. 
Let me first of all thank all those who praised us – you will not be too surprised that I would 
briefly  like  to  look  back on  some  of the  achievements for  which  we  were  praised  before I 
consider the room for improvement. 
Let me recall what the SSM is all about: the SSM was the result of one of the biggest financial 
crises in the last hundred years. Our task is to contribute to a safe and sound banking system 
in the euro area and thus to contribute to national, European and global financial stability. We 
are  asked  to  ensure  a  level  playing  field  across  national  borders.  We  aim  to  counter 
supervisory arbitrage and promote equal treatment. Our assignment is to establish a euro area 
supervisor which: 
• 
• 
• 
is objective and fair, with no home bias, 
acts effectively, efficiently and pre-emptively, 
brings together experience and knowledge of regional and European markets and of 
supervisory parameters, 
monitors European and global developments, 
identifies risk trends and finds quickly mitigating measures, and 
contributes to setting European and global standards. 
• 
• 
• 
The  SSM  is  one  of  the  world’s  largest  supervisors.  We  supervise  123  significant  banking 
groups in 19 countries, including nine out of the current 30 global systemically important banks 
identified for 2016. We are also responsible for the effective and consistent function of the 
SSM,  which  includes  overseeing  about  3,500  less  significant  institutions.  The  total  assets 
under SSM supervision amount to more than €26 trillion. SSM supervision is conducted by 
thousands of supervisors across Europe, most of whom work for the 26 national supervisory 
authorities. 
The last 12 to 18 months were marked by a whole series of measures, including: 
• 
recruiting more than 1,000 ECB supervisors and support staff; 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
          setting up central supervisory infrastructures; 
carrying  out  the  comprehensive  assessment  and  translating  the  results  into 
supervisory actions; 
developing and implementing the SSM’s legal and methodological framework; 
setting  up  the  Joint  Supervisory  Teams  and  establishing  a  consistent  and 
standardised database; 
identifying key risks within Europe’s banking sector, drawing up our strategic plan for 
2015 and planning our supervisory activities accordingly; 
enhancing  our  supervisory  methodology 
further, 
Supervisory Review and Evaluation Process (SREP); 
harmonising  supervisory  approaches  and  perspectives,  going  beyond  options  and 
national discretions; 
gaining an overview of the 19 national banking sectors with their 3,500 less significant 
banks; and 
conducting  day-to-day  supervision  of  the  123  banking  groups  with  1,100  directly 
supervised banks. 
in  particular  regarding 
the 
All in all, in our first year of operation we have laid the foundation for tough and fair supervision. 
And I am satisfied with the results we have achieved. But as some of the well-wishers pointed 
out on our anniversary, there’s still room for development and improvement. 
We  must  remain  vigilant,  because  banking  supervision  means  keeping  our  eyes  open  for 
trouble – yes, we are paid to worry! 
The second year of the SSM will also see a lot of fine-tuning of our supervisory approach and 
methodologies. We will establish further administrative practices for specific topics relating to 
the  banks’  governance,  risk  management  and  internal  controls.  We  will  deepen  our 
understanding of national specificities in banking sectors and national legal bases as we have 
to determine how much scope we have for harmonisation. 
Let me now focus on one particular wish that was repeatedly expressed in the run-up to our 
anniversary:  enhanced  transparency  regarding  the  SSM  methodologies  and  concepts,  in 
particular regarding SREP. 
We take transparency seriously. It is closely related to accountability and communication. We 
need to communicate and be in a dialogue with a number of counterparts: individual banks 
foremost,  other  key  stakeholders  involved  in  banking  supervision,  such  as  banking 
associations or auditors, Parliaments, and, last but not least, the general public. 
From  the  outset  the  SSM  has  actively  managed  its  communication  with  these  different 
stakeholders. A few weeks before the SSM officially started, we published a guide describing 
our approach to supervision and the key features of our organisation. 
We stated upfront that we would comply with the EBA guidelines on SREP, which provide a 
fairly detailed approach to how the banks’ risk profiles should be assessed. 
Since  the  beginning  of  2015,  we  have  started  having  regular  meetings  with  banking 
associations in order to answer their questions and explain our modus operandi. 
Supervisory teams have intensified their dialogue with banks on their risk profile, and how it is 
reflected in the respective SREP decisions: we have not only explained where they stood but 
we have also given them an idea of the benchmarking we used for calibrating the SREP ratio. 
As those decisions were being finalised, the communication was stepped up at all levels. More 
recently,  the  ECB  President,  the  Supervisory  Board  Chair  and  I  shared  publicly  some 
information about the overall impact of SREP decisions. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   
So, all in all, I believe that in its first year of operation the SSM has been a supervisor which 
has maintained a dialogue with all the stakeholders concerned. 
Now there are also challenges associated with transparency and communication. The right 
level of transparency has to be found. 
Banks need to clearly understand what shapes the supervisor’s assessment so that they can 
better explain their situation and also have the right incentives to improve their risk profiles. 
But efficient supervision builds on a wide array of tools – quantitative as well as qualitative 
ones, including meetings, indicators based on reporting, on-site reports, market information 
etc. – and these tools need to be flexible enough to adjust to changes in the banks’ situations 
and  external  developments.  This  is  why  our  approach  is  holistic  in  nature  and  based  on 
“constrained judgement”, and is certainly not a mechanistic tool box that would automatically 
produce a capital number for each bank; it is not a “push-the-button” method! Banks should 
therefore not expect us to publish one anytime soon. 
Regarding the general public, as often as possible we choose public consultation. This has 
been the case, for example, for the ECB regulation on the application of FINREP at the solo 
level and in respect of how we want to execute options and national discretions; moreover, the 
framework  regulation,  which  sets  the  parameters  for  the  working  relationship  between  the 
national competent authorities and us, is publicly available. 
But as I said, transparency is an important issue and that is why it will remain a regular item 
on the list of items to be worked on and accomplished in the next two to three years as our 
methods become more refined and holistic. When communicating with the public we also strive 
to  show  developments  over  time,  covering  several  supervisory  cycles  and  with  a  more 
comprehensive presentation of the national specificities. We plan not only to cover the more 
relevant topics of the supervisory universe but also to show the interconnectedness of different 
supervisory  topics.  We  aspire  to  a  kind  of  transparency  which  not  only  features  abstract 
methods but which also shows the results of applying a consistent and holistic methodology to 
123 banking groups – a methodology which of course will be anonymised but which will be 
meaningful  in  showing  trends.  This  kind  of  presentation  needs  careful  preparation  and  an 
underlying transparency concept; this kind of transparency needs time. And we still have to 
work on it. 
SSM methodologies and transparency are related to the data requested by the SSM – one of 
the topics discussed in the last few weeks – and I am not talking about AnaCredit, as there are 
no supervisory requests in AnaCredit yet. 
When talking about transparency, banks, associations and the public always want to compare 
individual  banks  or  banks  in  different  countries  or  banks  with  different  business  models. 
Everybody  craves  benchmarking;  but 
to  achieve  good  benchmarking  comparable, 
standardised data are needed to avoid comparing apples with pears. 
The SSM had to build up a database in order to adequately establish a basis for comparison, 
for  benchmarking  and  for  calibrating  its  decisions  regarding  significant  banks.  We  indeed 
benefited from the EBA implementing technical standards on FINREP/COREP that provide a 
wealth of information, but we had to collect additional data for our pillar 2 SREP decisions. 
Thus, we had to be tough on banks and on ourselves, too, to collect quantitative as well as 
qualitative information in a standardised way, as this is the only way to get an overview of 
banks in 19 countries which all had different reporting traditions. It was the only way, too, to 
work towards a level playing field. Such data collections are inevitably subject to adjustments 
over time to keep them aligned with the banks’ changing risk profiles and activities. 
In  the  spirit  of  transparency,  let  me  briefly  shed  some  light  on  how  we  set  our  priorities 
according to the tasks given to us and the risks emerging, and on our planning and execution 
cycle. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   
In the summer of each year, we start the preparatory work by conducting a top-down annual 
risk  stocktaking  exercise  together  with  the  ECB’s  financial  stability  experts  as  well  as 
colleagues from the national competent authorities. Additionally, we assess changes in the 
regulations and bring in supervisory insights via a bottom-up approach. In evaluating these 
three areas we ensure that risk orientation is taken into account when setting our strategic 
goals. 
The results of these analyses provide input into the strategic planning that we call supervisory 
priorities,  which  are  decided  upon  by  the  Supervisory  Board  and  Governing  Council  in 
November; these priorities are operationalised via the Supervisory Examination Programme. 
Independent of our strategic planning and the usual supervisory cycle and topics, there are the 
priorities set by others, by international groups and fora which are interested in interacting with 
a  single  euro  area  supervisor.  There  are  many,  very  useful,  large  European  and  global 
initiatives such as the EBA stress tests or other requests to be met or questionnaires to be 
filled in by my SSM colleagues. 
Operationalising supervisory activities for 123 banking groups with 1,100 banks presents a 
considerable challenge. Some of these activities are legally determined; some are based on 
external demands by international fora. They may also arise from the applications of banks or 
be the result of our work on identified emerging risks. 
I am still quite satisfied with the priorities we have set. This year our focus was on business 
models and profitability, as one might expect from a new supervisor needing to get its own 
fresh view – in particular when banks have to adjust their business model to a low interest 
environment and stricter regulatory requirements. We also conducted an initial review of the 
banks’ governance, focusing on the organisation and composition of bank managements and 
we got a first impression of the banks’ handling of cyber risk and data integrity. 
All three topics will have follow-ups in the coming years to give us deeper insights. 
Next  year  we  will  intensify  and  deepen  our  work  on  the  viability  of  business  models  and 
profitability drivers by analysing not only at firm level but also across business models. In 2016 
we will do a thematic review to assess compliance with the BCBS principles for effective data 
aggregation  and  risk  reporting.  Additionally,  we  will  focus  on  the  banks’  treatment  of  non-
performing loans and on the transition to IFRS 9. And we will follow up on the implementation 
of the SSM stance on options and national discretions to monitor the banks’ quality of capital. 
With regard to methodology, we plan to develop our SREP methodology for liquidity risk. 
With the priorities set now, we will start to draw up the 2016 working plan for each banking 
group in detail. This will happen in December; thus banks will have to wait for at least another 
month to get an insight into what kind of supervisory activities (for instance thematic meetings, 
onsite inspections or surveys) are relevant for the interaction with their supervisor in 2016. But 
one thing is for sure: 2016 will be a busy year for euro area banks as well as their supervisor. 
As I do not want to keep us any longer from enjoying our dinner, allow me to briefly conclude. 
What remains is my wish for next year: on the second anniversary, I hope that one or two of 
the same well-wishers will repeat their praise! I am convinced that the SSM staff at the national 
supervisory authorities and at the ECB will continue their excellent work, as they have been 
doing in 2015, and that we should be even further down the road of becoming a truly European 
supervisor – one which can contribute, to the greatest degree possible, to a safe and sound 
banking system in the euro area and one which ensures a level playing field. And I also hope 
that  we  will  have  implemented  our  plan  and  thus  fulfilled  this  year’s  wish  for  greater 
transparency. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
