  Lars Rohde: Denmark’s fixed exchange rate policy 
Speech  by  Mr  Lars  Rohde,  Governor  of  the  National  Bank  of  Denmark,  at  the  annual 
meeting of the Danish Bankers Association, Copenhagen, 7 December 2015. 
 Thank you for inviting me to speak. 
I have the following key messages today: 
In view of the special circumstances relating to the krone at the beginning of the year, and 
the ECB’s decision last Thursday to reduce its deposit rate further, I would like to make clear 
that  nothing  has  changed  as  regards  Danmarks  Nationalbank’s  willingness  and  ability  to 
defend Denmark’s fixed exchange rate policy. 
My second message is that a prolonged period of low interest rates may lead to high asset 
prices.  But  subsequently  the  assets  may  fall  considerably  in  value,  which  could  result  in 
losses, also for lenders. Furthermore, there is a risk that the low interest rates will impede 
productivity  development  in  Denmark  as  they  will  buoy  up  unprofitable  firms  that  would 
otherwise close. 
Finally, I would like to emphasise that under the new EU recovery and resolution regime for 
banks,  Danmarks  Nationalbank  remains  the  lender  of  last  resort.  But  the  banks’  liquidity 
management  should  not  be  based  on  access  to  emergency  liquidity  assistance  from 
Danmarks Nationalbank if they come under pressure. 
First, let me talk about the economic situation. 
While growth in the emerging market economies has shifted to a lower gear, the advanced 
economies  are  still  picking  up  steam.  The  USA  is  in  a  robust  upswing,  with  rising 
employment  and  falling  unemployment.  In  the  euro  area,  virtually  all  member  states  are 
growing  at  a  rate  above  their  potential,  so  that  they  are  approaching  a  normal  level  of 
capacity utilisation. 
In  Denmark, growth  will  be  a  little  lower  than  previously  forecast this  year,  but the  Danish 
economy remains on track and spare resources are likely to become more scarce in the next 
couple  of  years.  This  is  seen  most  clearly  in  the  labour  market,  where  employment  is 
expected to continue to rise, while unemployment is declining. 
As  regards  monetary  policy,  the  respective  authorities  in  the  USA  and  the  euro  area  are 
currently pursuing opposite paths. While the market expects the Federal Reserve to respond 
to a strong labour market by increasing interest rates soon, the ECB last Thursday reduced 
its  deposit  rate  by  10  basis  points  to  –30  basis  points.  In  addition,  the  existing  asset 
purchase  programme  has  been  extended.  Easing  of  monetary  policy  in  the  euro  area  is 
aimed at ensuring that the ECB achieves its target of inflation below, but close to, 2 per cent. 
In the light of the ECB’s monetary policy steps, Danmarks Nationalbank has chosen to keep 
its monetary policy interest rates unchanged. From April until and including November, our 
intervention sales of foreign exchange in the market totalled kr. 230 billion, and therefore it is 
appropriate to allow the interest rate spread between Denmark and the euro area to narrow a 
little. 
We have plenty of patience if it should once again become necessary to intervene to prevent 
the krone from strengthening. In that situation – as at the beginning of the year – there will be 
no upper limit to the amount of kroner that Danmarks Nationalbank can make available. We 
have no target for the size of the foreign exchange reserve. As long as short-term interest 
rates are lower in Denmark than in the euro area, the reserve even yields a positive return. 
Furthermore, we can reduce Danmarks Nationalbank’s interest rates if necessary. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Since March this year, the foreign exchange reserve has shrunk substantially as a result of 
intervention  in  the  market,  and  by  the  end  of  November  it  was  kr.  484  billion.  That  is  not 
much higher than the level before the large inflows of capital in January and February. The 
capital inflows prompted Danmarks Nationalbank to intervene in the foreign exchange market 
for very large amounts, and our interest rates were also reduced considerably. 
The  gradual  reduction  of  the  foreign  exchange  reserve  reflects  that  investors  have  sold 
kroner since the large inflows of capital at the beginning of the year. But they are not selling 
them  as  fast  as  they  have  done.  All  in  all,  the  foreign  investors  who  bought  kroner  at  the 
beginning  of  the  year  have  sold  them  again.  Domestic  investors  have  also  reduced  their 
holdings of kroner, but at a slower pace, and recently their holdings have increased again. 
Against  that  background,  the  Ministry  of  Finance,  upon  the  recommendation  of  Danmarks 
Nationalbank, has resumed issuance of government bonds. So far, five auctions have been 
held, and demand has generally been high. 
10 months have now passed since we reduced the rate of interest on certificates of deposit 
to  –0.75  per  cent.  At  that  time  we  were  moving  into  unknown  territory:  never  before  had 
Danmarks  Nationalbank’s  interest  rates  been  so  low,  and  internationally  only  Switzerland 
had introduced a corresponding level a short while earlier. The low interest rates have had 
the desired effect. The krone has remained stable against the euro and there have not been 
any signs of cash hoarding. 
Historically, monetary policy interest rates have been a little higher in Denmark than in the 
euro area. But right now the interest rate spread to the euro area is negative. This means 
that investors are willing to hold financial assets in Danish kroner even if the return is a little 
lower than for euro investments. The long-term interest rate spread between Denmark and 
Germany is positive, however. Like Denmark, Germany has a robust economy and current 
account surpluses. Furthermore, interest rates in Germany are to a large extent affected by 
the ECB’s asset purchase programme. 
The reduced interest rate spread to the euro area may be attributable to Denmark’s build-up 
of considerable net foreign assets in recent years. The increased wealth gives rise to various 
payment flows that tend to strengthen the krone, thereby reducing the interest rate spread. 
The accumulation of Danish net foreign assets is not a passing phenomenon. Consequently, 
there is reason to believe that the interest rate spread to the euro area will, in the long term, 
be lower than previously. Exactly how much lower it will be is difficult to say. Recent years 
have  been  characterised  by  extraordinary  events  such  as  the  sovereign  debt  crisis  in  a 
number of euro area member states and, most recently, quantitative easing by the European 
Central  Bank,  ECB.  So  these  years  cannot  be seen  as  an  indicator  of the  situation  in  the 
longer term. All the same, it seems likely that Danmarks Nationalbank’s interest rates will be 
very close to those of the ECB in future, and at times also a little lower. 
Shifts in the willingness of domestic investors to hold unhedged positions in euro may lead to 
fluctuations in the size of Danmarks Nationalbank’s foreign exchange reserve. It can become 
considerably larger than it has previously been. We have seen a clear example of that this 
year. If Danish investors are not willing to take on the foreign exchange risk linked to larger 
net  foreign  assets,  it  will  fall  upon  Danmarks  Nationalbank,  and  the  interest  rate  spread 
becomes low or negative. This is part of the fixed exchange rate policy, which has been the 
foundation for a stable economy for more than three decades. 
I will now turn my attention to credit quality. During the crisis we learnt, once again, that the 
value of the collateral pledged for loans may decrease considerably. This was the case for 
e.g. agricultural land, commercial properties and not least housing. In some cases the price 
dropped so much that the value of the collateral fell below the loan amount. As a result, a 
loan which looked safe at the time when it was granted might later result in large losses if the 
borrower  defaulted  and  the  collateral  had  to  be  realised.  This  led  to  losses  for  credit 
institutions, especially for the banks, as their loans are subordinated. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  We  should  not forget  that.  At  present  this  probably  applies  mainly  to  housing  loans  in  the 
Copenhagen  area.  Here,  the  rate  of  price  increase  has  been  unsustainably  high  for  some 
time, although quarterly price increases for owner-occupied flats have slowed down since the 
spring. The higher prices should be seen in the context of low interest rates and a rise in the 
population  of  the  capital.  One  reason  why  this  has  so  strong  an  impact  on  prices  is  the 
absence of automatic stabilisers in the form of countercyclical housing taxes. With the freeze 
on land tax in 2016, which will push up prices in the cities in particular, fluctuations will be 
even larger. That will increase the risk of the value of the home subsequently falling below 
the loan amount. 
When the housing bubble burst, we saw that prices in Copenhagen can dive very sharply. All 
the  same,  the  credit  institutions’  losses  on  housing  loans  were  modest.  This  was  mainly 
because of the low interest rates, which helped ensure that most homeowners were still able 
to  service  their  loans.  However,  we  cannot  assume  that  interest rates  will  also  be  low  the 
next time house prices fall. 
The fact that interest rates may go up and house prices down should be a natural element in 
the assessment of potential loans. These are sound principles, which are also reflected in the 
new  guidelines  from  the  Danish  Financial  Supervisory  Authority  on  “Prudent  credit 
assessment when granting housing loans in growth areas”. 
The currently very low level of interest rates makes it cheaper for firms to service their debt. 
And  the  low  level  of  interest  rates  is,  so  to  speak,  acting  as  a  life-support  mechanism  for 
some of them. If interest rates rise, and the firms have variable rate loans, it may soon turn 
out that they are unable to survive. 
The clearest example of this is the agricultural sector. In 2014, nearly 25 per cent of all farms 
were operating at a loss, even though they were being buoyed up strongly by the very low 
interest rates. If the rate of interest had been 2.5 percentage points higher in 2014, nearly 
half of all farms would have been in the red. That is, twice as many as was actually the case 
due to the very low interest rates. 
An interest rate increase of 2.5 percentage points is not a lot. If the variable interest rate on 
mortgage loans rises by 2.5 percentage points, it will more or less match the current rate of 
interest on fixed rate mortgage loans. This indicates that close to one in two farmers cannot 
afford to remortgage into a fixed rate loan, which would otherwise provide protection against 
future increases in short-term interest rates. This emphasises how vulnerable the agricultural 
sector is – and that many farmers have only been saved by the very low interest rates. 
The implications of the very low level of interest rates should be taken into account when a 
bank  assesses  how  to  deal  with  a  defaulted  loan.  This  applies  to  all  loans  –  not  just 
agricultural  loans.  In  some  cases  it  may  be  better  to  shut  down  the  exposure  rather  than 
waiting and hoping that the firm will, despite tough odds, survive and be able to repay all its 
loans, including interest. Especially if the bank must finance a deficit to keep the firm afloat. 
That is bad for the bank, which risks eventually suffering a larger loss than it would otherwise 
have  done.  And  it  is  bad  for  the  economy  because  it  impedes  productivity  development. 
Labour and capital are tied up in firms that are not viable, which means that they cannot be 
employed where they are most productive. 
I will now address the issue of cyber risk; a topic that is receiving considerable attention both 
in  Denmark  and  abroad.  In  an  increasingly  digitised  world,  society  is  dependent  on  IT 
systems functioning and data being protected. That also applies to the financial sector. It is 
well  known  that  future  problems  may  be  of  a  type  not  previously  seen,  and  the  next 
challenge  to  financial  stability  could  well  be  a  cyber  attack.  For  Danmarks  Nationalbank, 
increased focus on cyber risk is a priority. I have put cyber risk on the agenda for the meeting 
of the Systemic Risk Council later this month. 
Another topic currently receiving much attention is market liquidity. The focus is mainly on 
declining and less resiliant liquidity in the bond markets. High liquidity supports an efficient 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  financial  system.  Danmarks  Nationalbank  regularly  assesses  whether  changes  in  liquidity 
may  have  negative  implications for financial  stability  and  keeps  up  a  dialogue  with  market 
participants.  As  we  also  do  in  other  areas,  we  appreciate  our  close  cooperation  with  the 
Danish Bankers Association and its members in this respect. 
Market liquidity cannot be measured directly. Therefore, an assessment of liquidity must be 
based  on  a  number  of  indicators.  In  the  market  for  mortgage  bonds,  traditional  liquidity 
measures do not show any clear signs of reduced liquidity. All the same, liquidity has been 
more volatile since late 2014, which indicates that it has become less resiliant. Hence, there 
is  a  risk  that  smaller  shocks  than  previously  may  cause  liquidity  in  the  bond  market  to 
evaporate. 
Market  participants  point  out  that  market  makers  have  become  less  willing  to  absorb 
imbalances between bond supply and demand. This should be seen in the context of lower 
risk  appetite  and  increased  capital  and  liquidity  regulation  since  the  financial  crisis,  which 
could  mean  that  the  banks  reduce  their  market  making  in  the  bond  market.  Over  the  last 
year,  Danish  banks  have  reduced  their  portfolios  of  mortgage  bonds  for  market  making, 
which supports this view. 
Liquidity in Danish government bonds fell in 2015. The same pattern can be seen in other 
European government debt markets, but Denmark was particularly severely affected due to 
the  suspension  of  issuance.  Since  bond  issuance  was  resumed  in  October,  demand  has 
generally been high, and liquidity has improved. Trading volumes are back at the level seen 
before the suspension of issuance. Price quotation has also become sharper, but there is still 
room for improvement. 
Finally, I would like to mention that we – like the rest of the EU – now have a new recovery 
and  resolution  regime,  the  BRRD,  which  lays  down  uniform  rules  for  handling  distressed 
banks. The rules must be fully implemented by 1 January 2016. The fundamental principle is 
that the owners and creditors should bear any losses, not the government. This is a sound 
principle that is to eliminate the implied government guarantee for the largest banks. 
Under the new set of rules, all banks are required to prepare recovery plans. These plans 
must describe how the bank can respond if it encounters difficulties. The bank should, to a 
far higher degree than previously, be able to take the necessary steps to restore its liquidity 
situation itself. A bank must never count on emergency liquidity assistance from Danmarks 
Nationalbank.  
Danmarks  Nationalbank  is  still  the  lender  of  last  resort,  as  we  have  always  been.  This 
applies  in  connection  with  liquidity  problems  in  the  sector  in  general,  but  also  if  a  single 
solvent bank has an urgent need for emergency liquidity assistance – ELA. The role of lender 
of  last  resort  is  an  element  of  Danmarks  Nationalbank’s  task  of  contributing  to  financial 
stability. But the banks’ liquidity management should obviously not be based on access to 
emergency liquidity assistance from Danmarks Nationalbank if they come under pressure. 
If a bank requests ELA, Danmarks Nationalbank as lender will assess whether the bank is 
solvent  and  creditworthy  and  thus  able  to  repay  the  loan  when  it  matures.  Danmarks 
Nationalbank  will  include  the  Danish  Financial  Supervisory  Authority’s  assessment  of  the 
bank’s solvency and liquidity as a natural element in this connection. Furthermore, Danmarks 
Nationalbank will require adequate collateral for the amount granted. 
No  banks  are  precluded  from  ELA  in  advance.  But  besides  considering  solvency, 
creditworthiness  and  the  ability  to  pledge  collateral,  Danmarks  Nationalbank  will  assess 
whether financial stability considerations warrant ELA. This assessment will be based on the 
specific  circumstances  in  the  relevant  situation.  Under  the  new  recovery  and  resolution 
regime,  the  Financial  Stability  Company,  as  the  resolution  authority,  is  given  a  number  of 
resolution  tools  to  prevent  a  resolution  from  causing  financial  instability.  This  means  that 
there is a genuine alternative to granting ELA. We therefore expect the new recovery and 
resolution regime to limit the number of situations where ELA is relevant. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Let me conclude by reiterating my three key messages: 
Neither the unusual circumstances relating to the krone at the beginning of the year nor the 
ECB’s  decision  last  Thursday  to  reduce  its  deposit  rate  further  affects  Danmarks 
Nationalbank’s willingness and ability to defend Denmark’s fixed exchange rate policy. 
My  second  message  is  that  the  banks  should  be  aware  that  a  long  period  of  low  interest 
rates may entail credit quality risks, e.g. via fluctuations in the value of the collateral. The low 
interest rates may also impede productivity as they will buoy up unprofitable firms that would 
otherwise close. 
My final message is that Danmarks Nationalbank is the lender of last resort, also under the 
new  EU  recovery  and  resolution  regime  for  banks.  But  let  me  emphasise  that  the  banks’ 
liquidity management must not be based on access to emergency liquidity assistance from 
Danmarks Nationalbank. 
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
