   Yves Mersch: Keynote speech Euro Finance Week 
Keynote speech by Mr Yves Mersch, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central 
Bank, at the 18th Euro Finance Week 2015, Frankfurt am Main, 18 November 2015. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
It is my pleasure to welcome you to the Euro Finance Week and to today’s three conferences. 
Depending on  which conference you will be attending, you  will be focusing on TARGET2-
Securities, payments or the digital revolution in banking. However, clearly, all three of these 
topics are very closely related and are all big issues right now in Europe and for the 
Eurosystem. 
This morning, I would just briefly like to mention two big initiatives in Europe for which each 
of these three topics are highly relevant: the capital markets union and the Eurosystem’s vision 
for 2020. 
Initiative 1: CMU 
The capital markets union, or CMU, will boost private risk-sharing across borders, making 
public risk-sharing less necessary and giving greater protection to taxpayers. The ECB 
and the Eurosystem fully support the development of a European capital markets union and 
welcome the action plan published by the Commission on 30 September. In this action plan, 
the Commission has detailed the concrete steps needed to achieve the goal of CMU. 
Of  course,  one  ingredient that  is  essential for  capital  to flow  quickly  and  efficiently  around 
Europe is a strong market infrastructure. This is where the Eurosystem has already laid the 
foundations for the capital markets union with the development of TARGET2 and, most 
recently TARGET2-Securities, or T2S. 
TARGET2  is  the  long-established  interbank  payment  system  processing  cross-border 
payments in real time. T2S is Europe’s new single securities settlement platform. It went live 
on 22 June of this year. T2S moves us closer to the goal of CMU because it enables banks 
to hold a centralised pool of collateral, making it easier to move capital around to where it 
needs to be. The post-trade harmonisation agenda that accompanied the development of T2S 
has also removed many of the barriers to efficient cross-border clearing and settlement 
– with many of the remaining ones having been taken up under the Commission’s action plan. 
The financial crisis hit the financing of SMEs particularly hard. This is why the ECB and the 
Commission are fully behind measures that make it easier for the European SME sector 
to gain access to financing. In addition to the CMU proposal, other policies that support the 
competitiveness of European SMEs relate to integration and innovation in the retail payments 
market, particularly for payments in euro. The establishment of the Single Euro Payments Area 
(SEPA) has given Europe harmonised and efficient payment methods that help facilitate 
growth for SMEs. Innovative retail payments services such as instant payments, a topic I will 
further address in a few moments, can free up cash flow and improve liquidity. 
Looking to the future, a strong market infrastructure within a capital markets union moves us 
closer to a true Single Market in Europe and further integration in the euro area. This is why 
the Eurosystem fully backs the creation of CMU. We welcome the early actions laid out in 
the Commission’s action plan and believe sustained effort and an ambitious agenda will 
be required beyond these initial steps, together with a long-term vision, in order to make 
full CMU a reality. 
Continuing to look ahead, I would now like to turn to the second initiative I mentioned at the 
start. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   Initiative 2: Our vision for 2020 
This second big initiative currently underway is the Eurosystem’s vision for 2020 – our strategy 
for market infrastructure that is to be progressively developed and delivered over the next five 
years. 
I would like to briefly outline the three main pillars of the Eurosystem’s vision for 2020, 
which  summarise  what  we  want  to  achieve  over  the  next  five  years  in  the  field  of  market 
infrastructure. 
The  first  point  of  action  is  to  explore  synergies  between  TARGET2  and  T2S.  We  will 
consolidate  the  technical  infrastructure  so  that  TARGET2  can  benefit  from  state-of-the-art 
features currently available in T2S. We will adapt both platforms to keep up with technological 
change. 
The second goal under our vision is to develop a pan-European instant payments solution. 
Digitalisation is changing consumers’ expectations and people are right to ask themselves 
why, if they can send an email to the other side of the world in a split second, do they have to 
wait hours or even days for a bank transfer to go through. It is true that some national solutions 
have emerged, but they do not have pan-European reach. 
To prevent silos and closed loop solutions, the Eurosystem envisages that instant payment 
services should be built on three layers: the scheme layer, the clearing layer and the settlement 
layer. 
A common scheme for instant payments should harmonise how payment service providers 
interact with their customers and with other payment service providers. We are expecting the 
Euro Payments Council to deliver its proposal for the design of a SEPA credit transfer scheme 
for instant payments by next week. Although the scheme will not be legally binding, we expect 
that payment service providers that want to offer instant payments in euro based on credit 
transfer  will  adhere  to  the  new  scheme.  There  should  be  no  national  solutions  protecting 
specific market actors. 
Regarding the clearing layer, the question that has to be tackled is what kind of infrastructure 
will provide a viable solution for pan-European instant payments throughout the Single Euro 
Payments Area. On the one hand, we might want to avoid the emergence of a monopoly; on 
the other, interoperability between clearing infrastructures for instant payments could prove 
very challenging. 
With regard to the settlement layer, the Eurosystem will enhance TARGET2 services in the 
field of instant payments. While following this three-layer approach for instant payments, we 
are fully aware that distributed ledger technologies, of which Blockchain is probably the best-
known example, have the potential to have a profound impact on both the payments and the 
post-trade industry. Can they make our industry more efficient? This will be discussed in some 
of today’s panel sessions and I am looking forward to hearing your views. 
Coming back to the three main pillars of our vision, the third aspect is the harmonisation of 
collateralisation  techniques  and  procedures.  Collateral  management  has  become 
increasingly important since the financial crisis. The Eurosystem will look to harmonise and 
optimise its own internal procedures to make assets available for banks for intraday credit 
operations in TARGET2 and for monetary policy operations. If the harmonisation agenda is 
successful,  we  will  consider  the  business  case  for  a  common  Eurosystem  collateral 
management system to ensure that our service keeps up with technological change. 
Exploring  synergies  between  TARGET2  and  T2S.  Developing  a  pan-European  instant 
payments solution. Harmonising collateralisation techniques and procedures. These are our 
three  key  objectives  for  the  immediate  future.  We  have  seen  the  great  value  of  working 
together with the market to develop solutions. As we now work towards making this vision a 
reality, we will do so in close collaboration with the market, as we did with T2S, benefitting 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   
from its unique viewpoint and enabling us to ensure Europe’s market infrastructure is tailored 
to meet the needs of the market. 
Conclusion 
In conclusion, I have mentioned two big initiatives – the capital markets union and our vision 
for 2020. We have achieved much, but there is still a great deal left to do. 
These projects are good for Europe and good for its citizens. Why? Because if we achieve 
a capital markets union, supported by strong infrastructure, we will unlock funding across the 
European Union, creating stronger businesses, economic growth and greater financial stability. 
It will make the EU a more prosperous place. 
This morning I have touched on issues that will be discussed in much greater depth during all 
three of today’s conferences. I would like to take the opportunity now to wish you all a very 
enjoyable day, with many thought-provoking discussions and seminars. 
Just before I close, I would like to repeat what I said earlier this week in Paris: that I am deeply 
shocked by those atrocious attacks. I, again, express my solidarity, my compassion, and my 
sincere condolences to the families and friends of the victims. 
I would also like to mention that we should shy away from drawing premature conclusions 
about whether the terror attacks will have any economic impact. We have no indication of any 
economic pessimism as a result of the Paris attacks, let alone weaker hard data. Doom-and-
gloom talk is not warranted at this stage. 
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
