  Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Consultation, collaboration and cooperation – 
moving the capital market agenda forward 
Speech by Mr Amando M Tetangco, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the 
central  bank  of  the  Philippines),  at  the  CMDC  (Capital  Market  Development  Council) 
Inaugural Consultative Forum, Manila, 16 September 2015. 
 Today’s  forum  provided  us  another  opportunity  to  take  stock  and  look  ahead.  The  major 
difference  is  of  course  that  the  CMDC  has  invited  all  stakeholders  –  and  not  just  the 
members  of  the  Council  –  to  be  here  and  openly  discuss  the  issues.  With  this  broad 
audience, we aspire to take a more holistic view of the issues and take a collective stand. 
Introspection 
A critical need in this regard is to have coordination and collaboration, which I was told, the 
presentations  this  morning  clearly  emphasized.  The  issues  that  confront  us  do  so  as  a 
market and no matter how we see them through the lens of our own respective views, the 
consequences of any action or inaction will always be felt collectively. 
This  is  the  direct  consequence  of  being  a  market.  We  may  offer  different  products  and 
services but we certainly operate together as a collective basket of choices and alternatives 
for our constituencies. It is the very nature of financial markets that our products and services 
compete with one another as substitutes, but it is also in having this array of alternatives that 
we complement each other. 
This balance between substitutes and complements nurtures a stable market. This state of 
competitive  parity  also  reminds  us  that  in  pursuit  of  such  a  thriving  market,  we  need  to 
recognize that there are larger issues before us beyond competition at the product level. 
If we can step back for a moment, available data tells us exactly where we are. 
• 
We remain what analysts refer to as a bank-centric market, with the bulk of financing 
emanating from our banks rather than the capital market. 
For  the  equities  market,  we  have  262  publicly-listed  companies  with  a  market 
capitalization amounting to USD 279.5 billion. 
For the securities market, the turnover ratio of our government bonds is reported to 
be  0.49  with  the  corporate  bond  market  growing  but  still  in  its  nascent  stage  of 
development. 
In  terms  of  FDI,  the  Philippines  received  USD  78.6  million  in  flows  in  2014 
originating within ASEAN. 
With respect to pricing and valuation benchmarks, price-discovery across all tenor 
buckets remains work-in-progress; and 
On financial market infrastructure, this too is very much work-in-progress. 
     Do any of these really matter? 
If we are going to talk about ASEAN integration, we certainly need to have a thriving market 
that can connect and compete with the rest of the region. While many jurisdictions in ASEAN 
– and Asia for that matter – remain bank-centric, the pressure on the banking books needs to 
be mitigated when 15, 20 and 25 year loans are generated from a funding base largely made 
up of savings deposits. The gapping risk is significant and the global focus on liquidity risk 
makes this issue even more stark. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  But  being  bank-centric  cannot  be  taken  independently  of  the  other  financing  alternatives. 
While  we  have  262  publicly-listed  companies  with  a  market  cap  of  USD  279.5  billion,  the 
average for the rest of ASEAN-5 is 612 listed companies with a market cap of USD 406.9 
billion. 
Our GS turnover ratio of 0.49 is also lower than the average for the rest of ASEAN-5 which is 
at  0.69.  The  lower  trading  activity  could  be  attributed  to  several  factors.  The  net  effect 
however  is  that  we  have  less  liquidity  in  the  secondary  market  and  with  that  comes  our 
challenges with benchmarks. 
Renewed reform agenda 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  the  numbers  are  available  for  everyone  to  see.  But  beyond  the 
figures, I trust that today’s forum is a call to action, highlighting where we are and what needs 
to be done. 
From today’s proceedings, allow me to offer my own thoughts on four issues. 
First,  the  Capital  Market  Development  Blueprint  is  our  guidepost  in  terms  of  three  facets: 
price,  volume  and  infrastructure.  We  strive  for  price  discovery  to  develop  a  robust  yield 
curve.  We  should  do  this  by  trading  on  exchanges  or  electronic  platforms,  premised  on 
Government Securities that have depth across the curve. We should also be unrelenting in 
upgrading the financial  infrastructure to  ensure competitive  and  efficient  markets,  enhance 
market discipline and protect investors. 
Second,  ASEAN  integration  of  capital  markets  provides  both  investors  and  issuers  new 
opportunities.  We  can  only  effectively  reap  these  opportunities  by  ensuring  that  our  own 
market is competitive. Thus, the challenge is to appreciate what needs to be done, first for 
our market but with an eye towards the regional market. 
This agenda is massive because we need to focus on trading and post-trade infrastructure 
(from CCPs to CSDs, to SSS, TRs) to applying established standards (RTGS for large value 
payments and securities settlements to viable forms of deferred net settlement for the more 
retail  payments)  to  streamlined  processes  (DvP  and  the  settlement  cycles),  and  to 
acceptable products and the requisite policies and regulations to address financial risks. 
Third, tax reform is always going to be a slippery slope. We recognize the need for the State 
to  define  and  manage  its  fiscal  position.  We  also  believe  that  financial  choices  must  be 
based on the intrinsic value of the products rather than on the friction costs that arise from 
one transaction to another. Thus, what is needed is to strike a balance between fiscal and 
developmental initiatives. We must ensure to avoid tax arbitrage while being cognizant that 
we may need the legislative process to find a solution for some of the issues. 
Last, but not the least, all our efforts fall short if we are not able to improve the financial well-
being of our financial consumer. We need to be clear that this cannot simply be a matter of 
delivering off-the-shelf lectures on technical concepts and sophisticated products. 
The effort here needs to cultivate behavior and attitudes as well. And to ensure sustainability, 
hew  financial  education  initiative  needs  to  be  complemented  by  a  robust  and  effective 
redress mechanism for stakeholders who feel that their rights have been compromised. This 
is in keeping with our desire to develop a thriving market. 
Final Words 
Ladies and gentlemen, there are many initiatives, both onshore and at the regional level, that 
are  being  pursued  under  the  name  of  capital  market  development.  For  sure,  the  road 
towards  a  deep  domestic  and  an  integrated  ASEAN  capital  market  will  not  be  without  its 
challenges. But these challenges cannot be our binding constraints and I trust that creating 
the four new sub-committees in CMDC moves us forward. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  What is also clear is that we must intensify our collaboration and ensure that the governance 
of the  domestic  market  is  not  compromised. Through concerted  efforts, I  have  high  hopes 
that we will surpass our challenges and the rewards of capital market deepening will be ours 
for the taking. 
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
