  Lesetja Kganyago: African economic and financial development in 
challenging times 
Keynote address by Mr Lesetja Kganyago, Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at 
the Institute of International Finance (IIF)-First National Bank (FNB) Africa Financial Summit, 
Johannesburg, 4 November 2015. 
 Introduction 
Ladies and gentlemen, good afternoon. 
Allow me to first thank both the Institute of International Finance and First National Bank, our 
hosts, for inviting me to address this latest instalment of the IIF-FNB Africa Financial Summit. 
I am particularly honoured to join the impressive list of speakers and panellists. 
I have been asked to deliver the keynote address yet I do not want to pre-empt the debates 
that will follow. So, I will first try to summarise some of the challenges that our continent is 
facing. And, looking at the Reserve Bank’s own experience in the South African context, I will 
speak  about  implications  for  how  Africa’s  financial  systems  and  its  developing  capital 
markets  can  best  address  these  challenges  and  sustain  progress  in  developing  the 
continent. 
New global challenges for the African continent 
There is no denying that Africa is facing a more challenging global backdrop than in recent 
years; my colleague from the Bank of Tanzania, Governor Ndulu, as well as this morning’s 
panellists have already discussed some of these challenges. I will not dwell on them in detail, 
but would like to emphasise three key points. 
First,  global  growth  again  is  disappointing.  We  heard  last  month  how  forecasters  at  the 
International  Monetary  Fund,  or  IMF,  again  downgraded  their  outlook  for  world  economic 
growth: it is expected to reach 3,1 per cent this year, down from the 3,8 per cent expected a 
year  ago.  This  decrease  in  expected  growth  is  in  keeping  with  the  times,  but  it  raises  the 
concern about whether the weak growth is structural. Earlier this year, the IMF highlighted 
how  medium-term  growth  expectations  (five  years  ahead)  had  been steadily  revised  down 
since 2010, in both advanced and emerging economies.1 
The  fact  that  potential  growth  rates  are  falling  makes  explicit  our  global  problem  and  the 
apparent  inability  of  the  world’s  economy  to  fully  recover  from  the  global  financial  crisis  of 
2008.  Rather,  over  the  years,  the  crisis  seems  to  have  “morphed”  from  one  of  real-estate 
bubbles  and  lax  underwriting  standards,  mostly  in  the  US,  to  one  of  unsustainable  debt 
burdens in the periphery of the eurozone, and now to one of excess corporate leverage and 
deteriorating  macroeconomic  conditions  in  several  regions  of  the  emerging  world.  Policy 
responses  appear  uncoordinated  between  regions,  addressing  some  immediate  problems 
but also fuelling imbalances and exposing policy contradictions elsewhere. 
Looking at the mix of slowing growth and high private-sector leverage in emerging Asia, in 
particular  China,  some  observers  wonder  whether  the  world  may  face  a  repeat  of  the 
1997–98  Asian  crisis.  Such  concerns  may  prove  excessive:  in  contrast  to  1997,  Asian 
sovereigns are financially more solid, with stronger reserve buffers and – a point I will return 
to  later  –  more  flexible  exchange  rates,  which  have  limited  the  build-up  of  external 
                                                 
1  
International  Monetary  Fund,  “Where  are  we  headed?  Perspectives  on  potential  output”,  World  Economic 
Outlook, Washington DC: International Monetary Fund, April 2015. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
  
 
imbalances. Nonetheless, the era of lofty growth rates in Asia, driven by the fast expansion 
of China’s industrial sector, is most probably over – and this is a factor that African countries 
will have to take into account as their terms of trade weaken and export volumes decline. 
My second key point relates to the first, insofar as it deals with the outlook for commodity 
prices.  When  expressed  in  inflation-adjusted  terms,  the  composite  indices  of  commodity 
prices  (like  the  Reuters-CRB  index)  are  back  to  levels  seen  in  the  early  2000s,  providing 
evidence – in case there was still doubt over the matter – that the commodity “super-cycle” of 
the last decade has by now truly reversed. 
It is likely true that other factors have exacerbated the decline in commodity prices: the rise in 
supply and financial factors, including the strength of the US dollar. However, a central driver 
of that decline has been the slowdown in demand from key marginal importers, the largest 
being China. It seems sensible to me to take at face value the Chinese authorities’ aim to 
rebalance their economy away from investment, and for that reason it would be unwise for 
African commodity exporters to bank on a strong price rebound in coming years. 
Finally,  I  would  like  to  emphasise  the  potential  challenges  arising  from  the  eventual 
normalization of monetary policy in the US. We know the debate remains open as to when 
this  normalization  will  actually  start  and  that  the  forecasts  are  for  a  gradual  normalization. 
However, I fear we have been lulled into complacency by the years of abundant liquidity and 
a “search for yield”. Even a gradual unwinding of easy financing conditions will create greater 
competition for funds globally. The timing is not good. Sub-Saharan African countries have 
increased their funding needs by and large, and the potential for needs to increase is high as 
countries  try  to  sustain  spending  even  as  growth,  terms  of  trade  and  financing  costs 
deteriorate. 
South  Africa  has  not  been  immune  to  these  challenges.  With  world  demand  sluggish  and 
commodity prices declining, we have seen a loss of 9 per cent in our terms of trade between 
the  third  quarter  of  2011  and  the  second  quarter  of  2015.  The  current-account  deficit 
widened  to  as  high  as  5,8  per  cent  of  GDP  in  2013.  And,  while  we  saw  a  significant 
narrowing since (to as low as 3,1 per cent of GDP in the second quarter of this year), the 
Reserve Bank still expects a fairly large external shortfall in the next two years, worth close 
to 4,5 per cent of GDP. Net direct investment flows not far from zero, the country remains 
highly  reliant  on  net  portfolio  inflows  for  the  smooth  financing  of  that  deficit.  Our  statistics 
show a continued solid net portfolio inflow in the first half of the year, but JSE data paint a 
more challenging picture in the past two or three months, coinciding with renewed downward 
pressure on the currency. 
Currency implications and how to deal with them 
Downward pressure on the rand, as on many other emerging and African currencies, should 
not  come  as  a  surprise.  When  portfolio  flows  dry  up  (or  reverse),  the  ex  ante  financing  of 
large  current-account  deficits  becomes  problematic.  What  is  more  of  a  debating  point, 
however, is how to deal with such currency depreciation. 
Back  in  the  1990s,  many  emerging  countries  opted  for  more  or  less  stringent  systems  of 
fixed exchange rates (crawling pegs, hard pegs, currency boards), generally in the hope that 
such  systems  would  help  to  get  rid  of  perennial  high  inflation,  bolster  international  policy 
credibility, and provide a strong basis for increased foreign investment flows. At first, fixed 
exchange  rate  systems  did  bring  about  some  decline  in  inflation.  However,  they  equally 
allowed  the  build-up  of  imbalances  as  they  prevented  the  adjustment  of  relative  prices  to 
terms of trade, external demand shocks, and different productivity growth rates. In addition, 
they  encouraged  speculative,  “hot  money”  inflows  which  aimed  to  benefit  from  positive 
interest rate differentials while the fixed exchange rate held. Eventually, as the experience of 
the 1997–98 Asian crisis or the 2001 Argentinian default showed, most peg regimes had to 
be  abandoned  before  policy  credibility  was  restored  –  though  not  without  a  significant 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 that 
 
 
rundown  of  official  reserves,  a  severe  inflationary  shock,  and  a  need  for  painful  austerity 
measures. 
While  we  never  had  a  formal  fixed  exchange  rate  regime,  South  Africa  experienced  some 
version of these problems in the early years of our new democratic dispensation. As South 
Africa reintegrated into the world economy, with import tariffs and capital controls significantly 
reduced, the prices of our major commodity exports declined, resulting in intense downward 
pressure  on  the  real  exchange  rate  of  the  rand.  With  inflation  volatile  and  still  high,  the 
Reserve  Bank  intervened  to  stem  the  depreciation  of  the  currency.  But  these  attempts 
resulted in the country running a large net open forward position in US dollars – the same 
development  that  had  triggered  large-scale  economic  and  financial  turmoil  in  some  Asian 
countries in 1997. It was only when South Africa moved to an inflation-targeting regime in 
2000  and  let  the  market  determine  the  value  of  the  currency  relative  to  macroeconomic 
fundamentals 
the  currency  eased.  The 
contradiction  between  policy  effort  and  macroeconomic  fundamentals  was  removed,  and 
slowly  these  also  started  to  improve.  Gradually  but  steadily,  inflation  moved  downwards. 
Inflation expectations became more stable. And the Reserve Bank was able to wind down its 
forward position and rebuild a proper reserve buffer. 
Currency depreciation has always been trickier for economies that are more dependent on 
few  export  lines  and  require  greater  currency  stability  to  keep  inflation  in  check.  For  this 
reason,  historically,  many  economies  in  Africa  used  currency  pegs  of  one  sort  or  another. 
Many have now moved away from that approach, opening up a channel that might help to 
address  external  shocks.  With  commodity  prices  falling,  sub-Saharan  African  economies 
face a potential worsening of their internal relative price balance between tradables and non-
tradables.2  Assuming  that  inflation  falls  with  declining  export  prices,  moderate  currency 
depreciation  will  help  economies  to  rebalance  and  resume  growth.  Where  inflation  is 
persistent and economic growth weak, however, currency depreciation can exacerbate the 
stagflation  and  has  less  clear  policy  implications.  It  seems  sensible  to  allow  floating 
currencies  to  absorb  external  shocks,  to  maintain  policy  stances  that  do  not  worsen 
imbalances,  and  to  move  towards  the  microeconomic  reforms  and  network  infrastructures 
needed to help export diversification and sustain investment by the private sector generally. 
the  sustained  downward  pressure  on 
The experience of the Reserve Bank and reserves management 
The depreciation of South Africa’s currency has been in line with that of commodity exporters 
and other emerging markets, and substantial. So far this year, the rand has depreciated by 
16  per  cent  against  the  US  dollar.  While  the  pass-through  of  such  depreciation  has  been 
more muted than in previous cycles due to weak economic growth and moderate food price 
inflation,  the  Reserve  Bank  has  nonetheless  been  closely  monitoring  any  second-round 
effects from that depreciation. Aware of the risk that already-high inflation expectations are 
moving  higher  and  of  the  overall  loose  stance  of  monetary  policy,  the  Bank  has  raised 
interest rates by a cumulative 100 basis points since January 2014. The stance supports the 
economy while mitigating the risk of higher inflation. This represents a welcome contrast to 
the  pre-inflation-targeting  era  when  policy  was  tightened  (by  690  basis  points)  and  large 
US-dollar  liabilities  built  up  in  an  effort  to  more  directly  target  a  sharply  weaker  exchange 
rate. 
Our  approach  to  the  currency  has  been  qualitatively  different.  In  agreement  with  National 
Treasury,  we  unwound  US-dollar  liabilities  and  built  a  positive  reserve  position  over  time, 
with the objective of bolstering the national balance sheet and ex ante reducing the risk of 
                                                 
2   The  International  Monetary  Fund  (IMF)  has  recently  projected  that  the  region’s  terms  of  trade  will  drop  by 
about 14 per cent in 2015. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
  
 
financial and/or liquidity crises. Our official reserves remain rather low by most metrics and 
by overall emerging-market standards. 
For  African  countries  now  facing  lower  commodity  prices  and  a  more  challenging  global 
financial environment, the quality of a nation’s external balance sheet seems of paramount 
importance. African central banks have slowly rebuilt reserve buffers over the last few years, 
but  they  remain  relatively  low  by  overall  emerging-market  standards.  And  as  the  global 
environment  continues  to  worsen,  policymakers  need  to  focus  more  on  the  prudent 
management of external liabilities in order to maintain investor confidence. 
The growing role of financial stability 
Let  me  now  say  a  few  words  about  the  role  of  financial  stability  and  about  the  growing 
importance of stable, healthy and well-capitalised banking systems – as my colleague, René 
van Wyk, will no doubt discuss in greater detail in the next session. It was partly thanks to the 
prudent management of banks’ external exposure, on both the asset and the liability side, 
that  South  Africa  was  able  to  weather  the  shock  from  the  2008–09  global  financial  crisis 
without  suffering  severe  domestic banking  stains  and,  consequently,  limit  the  duration  and 
depth of its recession. 
Similarly, it was in part thanks to our prudent supervision of South Africa’s banks and their 
prudent management of risks that we weathered the global financial crisis as well as we did. 
In the recent past, South African banks have taken active steps to comply with the pending 
Basel III regulations, increasing in particular their ratio of liquid assets to short-term liabilities 
as the liquidity coverage ratio, or LCR, was phased in from 1 January 2015. 
For sub-Saharan Africa as a whole, issues of financial stability were mostly subsumed by the 
extension  of  financial  services,  reflecting  in  part  the  lack  of  depth  in  the  credit  markets  in 
many countries of the region and hence the limited role that bank lending has played as a 
policy transmission mechanism and driver of inflation. However, things have been changing 
in  that  domain  too.  Credit  growth  has  been  particularly  strong  in  several  countries  of  the 
region  in  recent  years,  and  while  credit  deepening  is  a  welcome  development,  it  also,  if 
unchecked, carries risks. The IMF, in its Regional Economic Outlook for sub-Saharan Africa 
released on 27 October, points out that episodes of unusually high credit expansion tend to 
be associated with increases in financial risk and that phases of falling commodity prices are 
often  linked  with  a  deterioration  in  banks’  financial  heath,  such  as  a  higher  rate  of  non-
performing loans or a decline in the returns on banks’ equity.3 
Chances and pitfalls from growing capital markets 
Admittedly, the financing of the economy, including in the emerging world, has long ceased 
to rely solely on banks, and capital markets have grown in the sub-Saharan African region in 
the past decade or so. In an environment of ample central bank liquidity and low returns on 
financial assets in the developed world, governments in the region have been able to take 
advantage of greater investor appetite for “frontier” markets. From negligible levels prior to 
2009,  sovereign  bond  issues  in  sub-Saharan  Africa  rose  to  more  than  US$6,0  billion  in 
2014.4  Similarly,  the  number  of  countries  rated  by  the  major  agencies  rose  from  only  4  in 
2003  to  17  in  2014.  By  2014,  the  stock  of  outstanding  sovereign  bonds  in  the  region  had 
risen  to  around  US$18  billion,  though  it  is  still  small  at  1,1  per  cent  of  regional  GDP. 
                                                 
3  
International  Monetary  Fund,  “Where  are  we  headed?  Perspectives  on  potential  output”,  World  Economic 
Outlook, Washington DC: International Monetary Fund, April 2015. 
4   J  E  Tyson,  Sub-Saharan  Africa  international  sovereign  bonds:  investor  and  issuer  perspectives, 
Overseas Development Institute, January 2015, available at 
http://www.odi.org/sites/odi.org.uk/files/odi-assets/publications-opinion-files/9435.pdf. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches
 4 
   
 
Furthermore,  development  in  African  capital  markets  has  not  been  limited  to  sovereign 
bonds. Global flows into the region’s equity markets, while still very small compared to other 
regions, nonetheless grew in importance relative to the size of the recipient economies. 
The  flow  of  capital  into  Africa  is  critical  to  its  ongoing  development.  Access  to  capital  has 
been greatly enhanced and a more competitively priced supply is currently offered, moving 
away  from  a  reliance  on  official-sector  financing.  However,  to  ensure  that  benefits  to 
borrowers are maximised, it is important that financing be transparent and that risk be fairly 
priced. Furthermore, where lending is overly risk-averse, the development of corporate bond, 
equity  or  even  venture  capital  markets  can  facilitate  the  expansion  of  a  private,  medium-
sized business sector. Finally, over time, as financial markets grow across the continent, one 
can equally expect to see increased cross-border portfolio and direct investment flows within 
sub-Saharan Africa, helping to facilitate regional economic and financial integration. 
These gains in hand, we need to be mindful of the risks associated with external  portfolio 
financing.  A  tightening  of  financial  conditions  in  the  developed  world  can  easily  prompt 
international  fund  managers  to  reduce  their  exposure  to  frontier  markets.  What  is  then  a 
small  portfolio  adjustment  for  a  large  US-  or  Europe-based  fund,  however,  can  result  in 
significant price action on a small and relatively illiquid sovereign debt market. Rising foreign-
currency  external  liabilities  equally  expose  a  sovereign’s  balance  sheet  to  currency 
depreciation,  limiting  the  benefits  I  described  earlier  of  foreign-exchange  adjustment  as  a 
“shock absorber”. 
In that respect, an increased focus on developing local-currency bond markets and on equity 
financing  may  present  a  solution  to  the  risk  of  excessive  foreign-currency  leveraging.  In 
South  Africa,  the  existence  of  a  large  and  liquid  domestic  government  bond  market,  with 
long-maturity instruments, has limited the rise in foreign currency-denominated debt, even as 
our  country  has  experienced  large  current-account  deficits.  The  ratio  of  foreign-exchange 
debt  to  GDP  stood  at  26,8  per  cent  by  the  first  quarter  of  2015,  up  from  12,2  per  cent  in 
2010. Had South Africa not been able to attract foreign capital inflows into rand-denominated 
bonds and equities, this ratio would have risen further. 
In sub-Saharan Africa, however, growth in local-currency bond markets has been stymied by 
the  absence  of  a  large  and  diversified  domestic  investor  base,  undeveloped  secondary 
markets,  and  the  lack  of  liquidity  of  many  instruments.5  In  most  cases,  moreover,  the 
issuance  of  local-currency  bonds  has  been  limited  to  the  sovereign.  Where  local  bond 
financing consists mostly of domestic banks, the buying of government securities will tend to 
crowd  out  finance  for  a  large  number  of  private  businesses  and/or  for  much-needed 
infrastructure projects. 
In this respect, it would be desirable to see the growth in domestic securities markets occur 
alongside  an  expansion  of  the  domestic  investor  base  through  incentives  for  longer-term 
savings  via  life  insurance  products,  pension  and  provident  schemes,  and  mutual  fund 
investments.  A  deep  domestic  investor  base  can  also  act  as  a  ‘buffer’  when  non-resident 
investors  reduce  their  investments.  In  South  Africa,  for  example,  yields  on  ten-year  rand 
government bonds have increased by only 30 basis points since the start of 2014, even as 
(according to data from the JSE) non-residents sold domestic bonds to the tune of R60 billion 
over the period. 
If  sub-Saharan  Africa  is  to  see  a  healthy  expansion  of  both  international  and  domestic 
investments  in  its  securities  markets,  the  region  requires  a  strong  governance  structure, 
proper regulation and supervision, and adequate reporting and auditing standards in these 
markets. We should not underestimate, for instance, the impact on South Africa’s ability to 
                                                 
5   See, for instance, M Mecagni et al., “Issuing international sovereign bonds: opportunities and challenges for 
sub-Saharan Africa”, Departmental Paper 14/02, Washington DC: International Monetary Fund, 2014. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
  
 
attract and retain foreign investments from our strong performance in this respect. Indeed, in 
the 2015 Global Competitiveness Report published this September by the World Economic 
Forum,  South  Africa  continued  to  score  first,  among  140  countries,  on  criteria  such  as 
“financing  through  local  equity  market”  and  “strength  of  auditing  and  reporting  standards”. 
We came second in the regulation of our securities exchanges and third in the protection of 
minority shareholders’ interests. 
Conclusion 
In conclusion, let me emphasise that the new challenges which our continent is facing, while 
real,  are  not  insurmountable  and,  if  properly  handled,  need  not  preclude  continued  solid 
economic growth in the years ahead. Major progress has been made in a range of areas that 
are  critical  to  long-term  economic  development,  not  least  of  which  was  attaining  a  much 
more sustained level of macroeconomic stability across much of the region. This has been 
built on steady improvement in policy formulation and institutional development, but also on 
some favourable trade winds. These are now changing direction as commodity prices fall, so 
it  is  essential  that  policymakers  double  their  efforts  to  sustain  foreign  interest  in  our 
economies  and  encourage  diversification.  Central  to  this  effort,  it  seems  to  me,  must  be 
supporting financial and capital market development, deepening what we already have, and 
building robust regional linkages between our markets. 
Thank you. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
