  William C Dudley: Beyond the macroeconomy 
Remarks  by  Mr  William  C  Dudley,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York, at the Economic Press Briefing, Federal Reserve Bank of New 
York, New York City, 4 November 2015. 
Aysegul Sahin and Joseph Tracy assisted in preparing these remarks. 
 to 
is  vital 
the  workings  of 
fully  understanding 
individual  outcomes 
Good  afternoon  and  welcome  once  again  to  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York’s 
Economic Press Briefing. I am pleased to have this opportunity to speak with you. Today I 
want to focus on how economic outcomes often differ substantially across different segments 
of the population. As always, what I have to say reflects my own views and not necessarily 
those of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) or the Federal Reserve System.  
The Federal Reserve has a dual mandate of maximum employment and price stability. While 
these mandates are expressed at an aggregate national level, it is important for policymakers 
to  understand  how  they  impact  different  groups  of  individuals  across  the  country. 
Consequently, in addition to monitoring macroeconomic conditions closely on a day-to-day 
basis,  economists  at  the  New  York  Fed  have  been  doing  a  substantial  amount  of  work  to 
understand how economic experiences differ across individuals and regions. As highlighted 
by  the  Nobel  Prize  Committee’s  recent  recognition  of  Professor  Angus  Deaton’s  work, 
analyzing 
the 
macroeconomy.  With  that  in  mind,  I  want  to  talk  about  two  important  areas  that  impact 
household well-being: labor income and housing opportunities. 
Let  me  start  with  labor  income,  which  for  most  households  is  the  dominant  source  of 
household income. As one would expect, differences in labor income across individuals of a 
given  age  tend  to  increase  as  people  get  older.  Some  of  this  is  due  to  education  and 
occupation  choices  –  and  how  they  impact  income  growth―and  some  is  due  to  various 
events  that  individuals  face  in  their  working  lives.  Unemployment  risk  is  an  example  of  an 
adverse development that can substantially affect people’s careers and labor income during 
their lifetime. Over the period from 1976 to 2015, the overall unemployment rate averaged 
around 6.5 percent, but unemployment varied substantially across regions and across worker 
backgrounds. Unemployment was especially high for workers with lower earnings, a group 
that tends to have little savings to draw upon. Looking across demographic groups, younger 
workers, less-educated workers and those in manual occupations, as well as workers who 
identify as Black or Hispanic, experienced significantly higher average unemployment rates 
when  compared  to  older  and  college-educated  workers.  These  stark  differences  across 
demographic  groups  in  terms  of  levels  of  unemployment  are  also  evident  in  terms  of  how 
unemployment  changed  over  business  cycles,  including  the  Great  Recession.  While  the 
overall  unemployment  rate  increased  from  5  percent  in  December  2007  to  10  percent  in 
October  2009,  it  increased  substantially  more  for  workers  with  lower  earnings.  In  other 
words,  looking  at  the  national  unemployment  rate  tells  only  part  of  the  story  of  the  labor 
market experiences for different groups of individuals. Understanding this diversity is critical 
to  better  understanding  the  health  of  the  labor  market  and  the  overall  economy,  and  is 
important for informing policy. 
Now let’s turn to housing. Macroeconomists focus on aggregate residential construction as a 
measure of how the housing sector is contributing to overall economic growth. It is important 
to  note,  however,  that  housing  market  experiences  vary  substantially  across  individuals  in 
ways not reflected in the aggregate construction data. For example, the type of housing units 
typically  occupied  by  low-income  households  saw  higher-than-average  rent  inflation  from 
2009 to 2011. Much of this difference appears to be due to contrasting ways that additions to 
the housing stock enter into different segments of the housing market. For households in the 
highest income quintile, new construction more than accounts for the net increase in housing 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  units, which in turn tends to hold down rent increases for these households. However, as one 
moves down the income distribution, new construction represents a smaller share of the net 
increase in housing units. For households in the lowest income quintile, additions to rental 
supply come more from units that with age have depreciated and are no longer rented by 
higher income households. These supply additions tend to have higher rents than existing 
units rented by low-income households, thus putting upward pressure on rental costs. 
The diversity of experiences is also evident with respect to access to mortgage credit, both 
for households attempting to transition to homeownership and for homeowners who want to 
trade up. We have also been monitoring mortgage originations at the zip code level using the 
New  York  Fed’s  Consumer  Credit  Panel. When  we  rank  zip  codes  by  their  2012  average 
adjusted gross income, we see mortgage origination volume in the lowest quintile locations 
was 38 percent of the volume for the highest quintile locations in 2007. By early 2015, this 
ratio had fallen to only 14 percent. 
As highlighted by these examples, and as you’ll hear during today’s presentation, data at the 
aggregate level and at  a more micro-level  illustrate different sides of the same picture. As 
such, both must be considered as we work toward fully understanding the economy. 
I  will  now  ask  Aysegul  Sahin  to  provide  a  detailed  account  of  how  various  economic 
outcomes vary across individuals, households and regions. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
