 Glenn Stevens: After the boom 
  Address by Mr Glenn Stevens, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, to an Australia-
Israel Chamber of Commerce (WA) Corporate Breakfast, Perth, 2 December 2015. 
 It is very good to be back in Perth. As you know, the Reserve Bank Board held its meeting 
here yesterday. 
We decided to leave the cash rate at 2 per cent. The reasoning was given with the decision, 
and so I don't propose to discuss that. Instead I want to reflect on the nature of the adjustments 
going on in the economy, and in which Western Australia is very important. 
It is four years since the Board last met here. The previous occasion was in September 2011. 
I don't need to tell you that quite a lot has changed in the intervening period. 
At that time, the price of a tonne of iron ore was about US$170. A tonne of hard coking coal 
was bringing in about US$300. These were among the prices that saw Australia's terms of 
trade soar to a level some 75 per cent above their average for the preceding century. Few 
countries have seen such a windfall. 
These extraordinary prices had already, by that time, triggered a massive investment program, 
which was lifting capacity. Four years ago, Australia was shipping about a million tonnes of 
iron ore each day, which was already double the rate of 2004. A bit under a million tonnes of 
coal left our shores daily. 
By 2011, capital spending by the resources sector had already roughly trebled since 2005. It 
would peak the following year after rising by a further 50 per cent. 
The  results  of  that  investment  have  come  on  stream,  or  soon  will.  Today,  Australia  ships 
around 2 million tonnes of iron ore and 1 million tonnes of coal per day. The investment was 
not just in iron ore and coal. On forecasts of strong demand from Asia – not just China but 
Korea and Japan as well – massive investments are under way in gas. LNG exports have 
begun from some of the Queensland projects and are expected to increase strongly over the 
coming years. As the WA projects come on line in the next few years, Australia's total LNG 
production capacity will reach over 80 million tonnes per year. This compares with a production 
capacity of around 10 million tonnes a decade ago. 
I should note in passing here that I have felt that we have been given a pretty good steer on 
the magnitude of the investment build-up and the early stages of the reversal, on the back of 
the very good work done by our regional liaison people, especially here in Perth. As a result, 
we've been much better at forecasting investment in the resources sector than in the other 
industries. That's because of the help we were given by the large players in the resources 
industry. I know that many of you have participated in these discussions, which have been 
extremely helpful in understanding the nature of the episode. So I want to thank you for helping 
in that way. 
As  it  happens,  about  the  time  the  Board  was  meeting  here  in  2011,  resource  prices  and 
Australia's terms of trade were about at their peak. And what a peak it was. On a ten-year 
average basis, the terms of trade exceeded anything seen for at least a century. This was not 
just a very brief spike like some commodity price events have been (such as the early 1950s 
rise in the price of wool). It was quite persistent. Not permanent, but quite persistent. 
Nonetheless,  the  peak  was  four  years  ago.  Since  then,  as  you  know,  prices  have  fallen 
considerably. Today the price of iron ore is about US$40 per tonne, and coking coal around 
US$75. At a national level, Australia's terms of trade, having been through an extraordinary 
surge, have fallen by a third and are still declining. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   But even at those reduced prices, iron ore is still bringing a price 60 per cent higher than it did 
in 2000. Natural gas prices are 50 per cent or more above their 2000 level. The terms of trade, 
though  down  a  long  way  from  the  peak,  are  still  nearly  30  per  cent  higher  than  their  20th 
century average. Of course they may yet fall further. Time will tell. In the meantime, many 
resource companies are making significant strides in reducing their production costs so as to 
remain viable, and in some cases still very profitable, at these reduced prices. That's consistent 
with most experience in the long history of the resources business. Australia's presence in 
these markets is greater now. It would be true to say that, though weaker demand is part of 
the story, a significant part of the fall in prices is a result of increased supply from this continent. 
The  ‘super-cycle’  in  commodity  prices,  and  the  associated  surge  in  capital  spending,  have 
been of national and international significance. At times, the price of iron ore has even, on 
occasion,  displaced from  page  one  of  newspapers  the  price  on  which  Australians typically 
focus most intensely – that of a house. The spill-overs of these activities have been felt around 
the country. For the fifty years up to 2005, resources sector investment had averaged just over 
1½ per cent of national GDP. Periodically, in a boom it tended to reach a peak of perhaps 3 
per cent of GDP. 
This peak was about 8 per cent – nearly three times the size of the ‘normal’ peak, and easily 
the biggest such surge for over a century. The resources sector was doing 40 per cent of the 
nation's total business capital spending. And, as you know, a big share of that was occurring 
here in WA. 
On other occasions, these types of events have ended up being very disruptive for the national 
economy. Terms of trade surges in the 1950s and the 1970s produced significant inflation on 
the way up and were followed by very major slowdowns or recessions in economic activity as 
the  terms  of  trade  fell  back.  That  hasn't  happened  at  a  national  level  on  this  occasion. 
Inflationary pressure was relatively contained on the way up, and while aggregate growth has 
been a little disappointing for the past couple of years, in the circumstances we face – including 
very difficult global conditions in the aftermath of the financial crisis – the outcomes are, I think, 
quite respectable. 
In fact, in a number of respects the economy has adjusted to the shocks in the way you would 
hope. Productive resources were re-deployed to sectors where returns looked like they would 
be higher. This was true for capital but also for labour – relative wages shifted upwards in WA, 
for example. Population shifted in response, we had fly-in-fly-out and an immigration response, 
facilitated  by  visa  arrangements  and  so  on.  These  were  helpful  parts  of  the  adjustment 
process. 
Likewise, the exchange rate adjusted, as would be expected in a flexible system. When we 
were here in early September 2011, the Australian dollar was trading around US$1.07 and had 
been as high as about US$1.10. Today it is about 35 per cent lower than that against the US 
dollar, and about 20 per cent lower against a relevant basket of currencies. This movement – 
both up and down – was part of what helped the economy through the commodity super-cycle 
without seriously inflating or crashing. 
Through all that, tested macroeconomic policy frameworks have aimed at overall stability, and 
the  financial  sector  has  been  kept  in  good  shape  by  sensible  regulation  and  generally 
competent management. 
While the episode is not yet over, at this point the economy overall has been recording growth. 
We will very shortly get a reading on GDP and the various expenditure and income accounts 
for the September quarter. 
Looking ahead, nationally, the outlook appears to be for a continuation of moderate growth. 
The Reserve Bank issued its latest forecasts a few weeks ago. I won't go into detail here, but, 
in brief, year-ended GDP growth is forecast to be in the range of 2 to 3 per cent in June 2016 
and to pick up a bit during the following year. Domestic inflationary pressures are expected to 
remain subdued. Inflation is forecast to be in the range of 1½ to 2½ per cent over the year to 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   June 2016, and 2 to 3 per cent over the year to June 2017. The unemployment rate is projected 
to remain around 6 per cent or a little above over the next year, before gradually declining. 
We do not make detailed forecasts at state level, but obviously the picture for WA relative to 
the rest of the country looks different from the way it did a couple of years ago. Previously, 
economic activity was very strong in the west and the north-east, driven by the investment 
boom, while in the south-east of the country it was somewhat subdued. Now, as the mining 
investment boom in the west is in the reversal phase, economic activity here in WA is more 
subdued, while in the south-east it is picking up. 
These differences are plain in most of the economic data. Whereas business investment in 
NSW and Victoria is growing (albeit modestly), in WA it is, of course, contracting very sharply 
(as it is in Queensland). I think most people have understood for some time that this was on 
the  cards.  Consumer  spending  and  employment  growth  in  WA,  which  had  outpaced  the 
national average by a wide margin, have come back to be a bit below the national average. 
The rate of WA's population growth has slowed. Housing prices have declined a little, while 
those in Sydney and Melbourne have, at least until recently, risen at quite a clip. Measures of 
business conditions in WA are at about their long-run average, having been a long way above 
that for some years. 
So WA has ‘come back to the pack’, though the pack has actually picked up some speed in 
the meantime. 
Yet  even  with  all  that,  employment  in  WA  is  still  increasing.  The  unemployment  rate  has 
increased, though only to the national average so far. Going back a few years, WA had, at 
times, the lowest unemployment rate recorded of any state at any time over the past 40 years; 
on occasions there was a ‘2’ before the decimal place. That was obviously not going to be 
sustained indefinitely. And while labour market performance not is as strong as it was, it is still 
a good deal stronger than it was in episodes like 1983 or 1991–92. Interestingly, those periods 
of serious weakness in the labour market in WA were part of a national event. In the early 
1990s, that event had little to do with mining and a lot to do with an asset price boom and bust, 
coupled with high corporate leverage. 
Of  course,  further  adjustment  in  the  resources  sector  is  still  ahead.  Although  most  of  the 
construction employment losses in the iron ore sector have probably occurred, the large LNG 
projects  in  WA  are  still  in  the  investment  phase.  Over  the  next  few  years  some  labour 
presumably will be released from these projects. So it will be a while yet before we will be able 
to say that the difficult phase is completed. 
That aside, the point I want to offer is that it's worth remembering the positive legacy of the 
events of the past decade. 
The sheer scale of the investment that has been undertaken makes WA production, already a 
powerful force in some key commodities, more powerful. To be sure, prices are lower, but the 
quality of the resources, the attention to cost reduction and of course a lower Australian dollar 
are likely to leave many producers well placed. 
Of perhaps more direct relevance to the ordinary person has been the trend in income per 
head.  In  2000,  WA's  per  capita  income  was  about  the  same  as  in  Queensland  or  South 
Australia but lower than in either NSW or Victoria. But WA has seen easily the largest increase 
over the intervening period. Today WA enjoys the highest per capita income of any state, at 
around $50 000 per person per year. It is true that the ACT and NT boast higher figures, but 
they  are  very  unusual  cases,  being  heavily  influenced  by  the  effects  of  government 
employment and/or subsidies, not to mention being quite small. It would take quite a few years 
at the current pace of growth for the other states to catch up to WA. 
Household  net  worth  in  WA  in  2013/14  (the  latest  available  data),  at  about  $950  000  per 
household, was a good deal higher than in any other state. Since then, housing prices in WA 
have declined while those in some other places have risen, so this gap may have diminished. 
Nonetheless, my guess is that, among the Australian states, the citizens of Western Australia 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   are on average, probably still among the richest. Even if the others gradually close the gap 
over time, as they well might, you are better off for having had the boom. 
WA has unique endowments of resources. Mining has always been a cyclical business, which 
has long been understood. On this occasion, given the size of the boom, you've done a pretty 
good job of managing it. As a result, there will be permanently more income and wealth than 
there was before. 
Conclusion 
I expect that, in a few years' time, the Reserve Bank Board will once again meet in Perth. I 
imagine that, by then, the current contraction in capital spending will probably have reached 
an end. New opportunities for growth will have emerged, resulting from things like the growth 
in the middle class of Asia, with all what that means for demand for services as well as for 
energy and agricultural production. The growth of India is surely also a potential opportunity 
for WA – facing as you do the Indian Ocean, and with the advantage of relative lesser distance. 
A  mere  eight  hour flight  time!  No  doubt Western  Australians  will  be  looking  to  seize  those 
opportunities. 
At the same time, this vast part of the Australian continent, endowed by nature with so many 
resources, will still be a major player in key commodities. Even if the extraordinary boom in 
investment was hard to digest, and even if some of the investments don't pay off quite as 
handsomely as hoped, it still seems that Western Australians will be richer for the experience. 
 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
