   Andreas Dombret: The situation in the German banking sector – 
challenges in striking a balance between weak profitability and the low-
interest-rate environment 
Speech by Dr Andreas Dombret, Member of the Executive Board of the Deutsche Bundesbank, 
at  the  press  conference  to  unveil  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank’s  Financial  Stability  Review, 
Frankfurt am Main, 25 November 2015. 
 Banking supervision: successful first year in the SSM 
1. 
Ladies and gentlemen 
Before I delve into the risk situation in the German banking sector, I would briefly like to look 
back with you on year one of European banking supervision. 
On 4 November 2014, the ECB assumed direct responsibility for supervising the largest 120 or 
so banks in the euro area. Those included 21 German institutions, although the number has 
risen  to  22  in the meantime.  Given  the  sheer  scale  of the  project  and  the  very  short time 
available for preparation, many were doubtful about whether European banking supervision 
could actually work. 
My answer after one year of the Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM) is: yes, it is working, 
and  I  am  confident  it  will  continue to  meet  the  high  expectations  placed in  it.  Cooperation 
between the ECB and the national supervisors is running pretty smoothly, and we are indeed 
observing a gradual Europeanisation of banking supervision. So I’m satisfied with the first year 
of European banking supervision. 
There  are  a  few  points  we  can  improve  on.  These  include,  for  instance,  decision-making 
structures and processes. In this regard, I believe that an adequate distinction is still not being 
made  between  important  processes  and  routine  decisions;  having  said  that,  however,  my 
comments are by no means intended to imply criticism. 
Of course, European banking supervision has heralded a lot of changes, especially for the 
major banks. Communication with banking supervisors is increasingly taking place in English, 
cross-border  peer  comparisons  between  banks  are  growing  more  important,  and  the 
supervisory approach has taken on a more quantitative slant on the whole. These factors all 
entail more work for the banks, of course; but the banks, too, ultimately stand to benefit from 
improved supervision and a Europe-wide level playing field. 
Looking  to  the  future,  another  topic  that’s  on  the  table  right  now  is  a  European  deposit 
guarantee scheme; indeed, the European Commission presented a plan only yesterday. I take 
quite a critical view indeed of this project because I don’t believe that the groundwork has been 
laid for such a scheme yet. 
We have a common currency and a single European banking supervision set-up. But to a large 
extent, it is still domestic fiscal and economic policymaking which determines the state of play 
in  the  banking  system.  As  a  case  in  point,  corporate  and  personal  insolvencies  are  still 
regulated very differently across Europe. Bearing this in mind, if a common deposit guarantee 
scheme were in place, the repercussions of flawed national policy decisions could be passed 
through to savers throughout the euro area. 
And there is another point which needs to be considered. As long as banks continue to carry 
a  large  stock  of sovereign  bonds  issued  by  their home  country  on  their  balance  sheets, a 
common deposit guarantee scheme would mutualise the risks of sovereign debt. Ultimately, 
that would introduce Eurobonds through the back door. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   
Aside from that, the question can be raised as to whether the Single Resolution Board would 
really be the right institution to operate a European deposit guarantee scheme. And last but 
not least, regulatory proportionality needs to be maintained as well – would the burden be 
shared fairly among the large and small banks? 
Banking regulation: nearly all items on the reform agenda ticked off 
2. 
But let’s return to the here and now. The first year of European banking supervision went very 
smoothly. But a functioning banking supervision set-up also needs a sound regulatory footing. 
From a regulatory perspective, we have now experienced seven years of reform. 
Many of the items on the Basel Committee’s reform agenda have been ticked off. Before we 
cast our minds to future regulatory projects, we should first observe the effect of the new rules 
– not just each one individually but how they interact with each other. 
Ultimately, though, regulation and supervision are not the only challenges facing banks, nor 
are they the most pressing ones. Let us now consider the risk situation in the German banking 
sector. 
The German banking sector: stability improved further ... 
3. 
As far as German banks’ resilience is concerned, we are seeing a gratifying development. 
German  banks  have  further  improved  their  resilience  by  raising  new  equity  and  retaining 
earnings. 
The tier 1 capital ratio of the German banking system as a whole rose by 0.6 percentage points 
between June 2014 and June 2015, and currently stands at 15.6 %. Thus, the long-term trend 
towards strengthening their equity base progressed further in 2015. You will recall that at the 
beginning of 2008, the year of the global financial crisis, the tier 1 capital ratio averaged around 
9.1 %. 
Meanwhile, leverage has continued to decline and is likewise following a multi-year trend. By 
way of illustration: to fulfil the minimum leverage ratio requirement under the Basel regime, 
eight  of  the  major  German  banks  with  an  international  focus  would  now  have  to  raise  a 
combined total of less than Euro1 billion of additional tier 1 capital. The corresponding figure 
at the end of 2013 was around Euro18.5 billion. So the gap has largely been closed. 
... but profitability still weak 
4. 
In order to safeguard resilience on a sustained basis, however, banks will also need to be 
sustainably profitable. And this is where, in my view, German banks still have some catching-
up to do – not least given the protracted spell of very low interest rates. 
Let us begin by returning to the German major banks with an international focus. Measured as 
a percentage of total assets, these institutions have improved their operating income slightly 
in the past years – from 1.31 % in 2009 to 1.46 % in 2014. 
The major banks’ return on total assets rose last year for the third time in succession. At a 
mere 0.2 %, their return on total assets is still low by international standards, however. And 
also in terms of their return on equity – which still stands at less than 5 % – German banks still 
have some catching-up to do relative to the rest of the world. 
Which brings us to the biggest challenge facing the German banking sector: it appears to be 
suffering from  weak  profitability.  Supervisors  also  have  a  problem  with  this,  as  banks’  low 
profitability limits their ability to retain earnings and build up equity. 
Nor is the persistent spell of very low interest rates helping to remedy the German banking 
sector’s weak profitability – quite the contrary, in fact. Particularly for credit institutions with a 
heavily interest-driven business model, the ongoing low-interest-rate environment could pose 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   
a serious threat in the medium to long term. The longer the low interest rate levels persist, the 
likelier it is that net interest income will come under pressure. 
Looking to the present, however, there is some good news which expressly also applies to 
small and medium-sized institutions. At the moment, the effects of low interest rates on the 
aggregate profitability and the stability of the German banking system are still limited. All told, 
the  operating  income  of  all  German  banks  rose  moderately  in  2014,  to  Euro121.5  billion, 
against the backdrop of declining total assets. Even aggregate net interest income in 2014, at 
Euro90.4 billion, was Euro4.1 billion up on the year. 
And even the credit cooperatives and savings banks, which depend comparatively heavily on 
interest business, were able last year to increase further both operating income and net interest 
income. This they succeeded in doing by expanding credit business on the asset side of the 
balance sheet and by shifting financing on the liability side to transferable deposits bearing a 
lower rate of interest. 
Yet both measures could easily lead to risks for the financial system. With regard to credit 
business, we do not currently see the savings banks and credit cooperatives loosening their 
lending standards, which would engender greater risk. Nevertheless, banks’ interest rate risk 
has increased significantly because loan maturities were expanded at the same time as lending 
was increased. We have seen the so-called Basel coefficient, which is a measure of a bank’s 
interest rate risk, rise almost continuously since 2011. 
With regard to German banks, I see three dangers. First, the currently good net measurement 
gains and losses could return to more normal levels if the economy falters. Second, banks 
could be forced to correct their optimistic projections of administrative spending. Third, plans 
to increase net fee and commission income could prove unfeasible. These three things could 
additionally weigh on the net profits of all banks and savings banks. 
And of course no look at the future would be complete without a stress test. To avoid any 
confusion, let my begin by saying that we calculated this stress test for our Financial Stability 
Review (FSR) on the basis of figures available to us; the banks themselves were not involved. 
It  is  therefore  not  to  be  compared  with  the  stress  test  carried  out  in  2014  as  part  of  the 
comprehensive assessment, nor is it to be compared with the pan-European stress test which 
the European Banking Authority (EBA) will carry out in 2016. In addition, a number of aspects 
were not taken into consideration in our FSR stress test – banks’ liquidity risks and negative 
feedback loops between the banking sector and the real economy, to name but two. 
However, this “small” stress test, too, produced a couple of interesting findings. We analysed 
how the simultaneous occurrence of various macroeconomic shocks over the next three years 
might affect the German banking system. To this end, we assumed a sudden rise in short-term 
interest rates and a sharp fall in stock prices, the real economy and real estate prices: all things 
considered, an exceedingly severe scenario. 
As  far  as  German  institutions’  profits  are  concerned,  this  extreme  scenario  would  have  a 
considerable impact. Pre-tax results would fall into negative territory for almost half of the small 
and medium-sized banks. The average annual profit of the small and medium-sized institutions 
would drop by 91 % at its most extreme. The big banks would be affected, too: in particular, 
they would suffer losses in their trading business and need to increase risk provisioning in their 
lending business. Owing to good capitalisation, however, none of the large institutions would 
run into difficulties. In light of the extreme scenario, that’s a gratifying outcome for the stability 
of Germany’s banking sector. 
Conclusion 
5. 
Ladies and gentlemen, allow me to conclude by reiterating the four main points of my speech. 
First,  the  first  year  of  European  banking  supervision  went  smoothly.  Of  course 
there are still a few things that we can improve upon, but we’re working on them. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   Second, many of the items on the Basel Committee’s reform agenda have been 
ticked off, and the entire list is expected to be finished by the end of next year. The 
Bundesbank is committed to regulatory certainty, since it enables banks to plan for 
the long term on a robust basis. 
Third, German banks have further increased their stability  – capital ratios have 
continued to climb; leveraging is down further. 
Fourth, German banks are suffering from persistent low earnings. Although the 
low-interest-rate environment is not yet making itself felt in this regard, looking to 
the medium to long-term future, however, small and medium-sized institutions in 
particular look set to feel the pinch. 
Ladies and gentlemen, Germany’s banking sector has become much more stable since the 
crisis, but some major challenges still need to be tackled – the low-interest-rate environment 
and weak earnings, to name but two. These are challenges that banks must overcome in order 
to assure their stability and profitability. 
Thank you very much. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
