  Maja Kadievska-Vojnovik: Macedonia’s central bank reserve 
management strategy 
Opening remarks by Ms Maja Kadievska-Vojnovik, Vice-Governor of the National Bank of the 
Republic of Macedonia, at the RAMO – Reserve Management Advisory Programme, Skopje, 
7 September 2015. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
On behalf of the National Bank of the Republic of Macedonia, it is my pleasure to welcome 
you  all,  colleagues  from  21  different  countries,  at  the  beginning  of  the  Workshop  on 
Settlement  and  Custodian  Relations,  organized  by  the  World  Bank  as  part  of  this  year 
workshop agenda within the RAMP.  
It is a great honor for the National Bank of the Republic of Macedonia to host this workshop, 
as our institution joined the RAMP "family" very recently, in second half of 2014. We, at the 
NBRM, see World Bank Reserves Management Advisory Program as an unique opportunity 
to  enhance  investment  management  framework  and  operations  on  a  sustainable  basis. 
Additionally,  RAMP  facilitates  sharing  knowledge  with  other  fellow  participants  in  the 
Program,  either  by  meeting  on  workshops  and  other  events,  as  well  as  in  direct 
communication between each other. But, organizing workshops in different countries enables 
also, meeting different cultures and enriching our knowledge in different ways.  
In that respect, allow me to briefly introduce our country, Macedonia. Located in the center of 
the Southern Balkans, the history of Macedonia tells how Macedonians were distinct nation, 
ethnically, linguistically and culturally different from our neighbors. The name "Macedonia" is 
the oldest existing name of a country on the European continent. Macedonia had its glory 
days during the build-up of its ancient empire ending with the sudden death of the Alexandar 
III of Macedonia (also known as Alexander the Great). Afterwards, the Romans established 
the  province  of  Macedonia,  which  in  time  of  Diocletian  was  divided  between  Macedonia 
Prima ("first Macedonia", on the south) and Macedonia Secunda ("second Macedonia" on the 
north). Most of the country's modern boundaries fell within the latter, with the city of Stobi as 
its capital. We will have the opportunity to take a brief look on this period of the Macedonian 
ancient history on Wednesday afternoon, when we take you to visit Stobi archeological site. 
The history of Macedonia later on was influenced by other great empires in which the country 
was part of, creating a treasury-trove of Byzantine, Slav and Turkish history, with a host of 
forgotten  monasteries,  mosques  and  castles.  After  the  II  World  War,  the  Republic  of 
Macedonia was one of the six republics that have formed Yugoslav Federation. As sovereign 
parliamentary  democracy,  we  have  gained  our  independence  in  1991,  and  the  monetary 
independence in 1992, with Denar as a national currency.  
Part of the rich history of Macedonia can be seen in Skopje, the capital city of the country. In 
that respect, the old fortress Kale, that overlooks the modern city center, offers an insight in 
the first Neolithic settlements, while Old Bazaar, with its narrow streets and craftsman shops, 
is a snapshot of the Ottoman rule. This part of the city survived the 1963 earthquake, when 
nearly  all  the  city's  beautiful  neoclassical  18th  and  19th  century  buildings  were  destroyed. 
After the earthquake, international financial aid poured into Skopje in order to rebuild the city. 
Today,  Skopje  is  seeing  a  makeover  in  buildings,  streets  and  shops,  and  many  projects 
(Macedonian Struggle Museum, the Archeological Museum of Macedonia, National Archive, 
Constitutional Court, New Philharmonic Theatre) were finished in order to return some of the 
looks and spirit of the city.  
In  economic  aspect,  being  many  times  since  2006  on  the  list  of  10  best  reformers  by  the 
Doing Business rank of the World Bank, proves that Macedonia has undergone considerable 
economic  reforms.  It  has  developed  as  an  open  economy  with  the  trade  accounting  more 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  foreign 
to  attract 
than country's GDP in recent years. Although the environment was highly difficult, first with 
the  global  financial  crisis,  afterward  with  euro  area  crisis  and  more  recently,  with  Greece 
crisis, our GDP growth was on average above 3% for whole this period, which is one of the 
highest in Europe, and for 2015 it is expected to be around 3.5%. The unemployment from a 
very high level, throughout this period is on declining path, by implementing many structural 
reforms  and  ALMP.  The  government  strategy 
investments  and 
establishment  of  a good  business  environment for  the  development  of  small  and  medium-
sized  enterprises  (SMEs)  was  paid  off.  To  attract  foreign  investors,  the  Macedonian 
authorities offer a favorable tax environment (flat tax system with low rates), undertake the 
necessary  infrastructural  investments  and  create  favorable  business  environment.  It  was 
allowed  by  the  fiscal  space  before  the  crisis,  and  although  the  trend  of  the  public  debt  is 
rising,  now  it  is  43%  of  GDP,  still  being  one  of  the  lowest  in  Europe  and  broadly. 
Government's  policies  and  efforts  for  attracting  FDIs  resulted  in  an  establishment  of  local 
subsidiaries  of  several  world  leading  manufacturing  companies,  especially  from  the 
automotive industry. This strategy of products' export diversification helped a lot in time of 
economic  difficulties  of  our  main  trading  partner  -  that  is  Europe.  This  strategy  of 
strengthening the export base has also contributed to lower trade deficit and CAD (falling to 
below  2%  of  GDP),  which  on  turn  helped  for  monetary  accommodation  under  the  chosen 
monetary  strategy  of  exchange  rate  targeting.  This  monetary  strategy,  the  NBRM  is 
conducting since the 1995 with fixed exchange rate of Denar, first with Deutsche Mark, and 
afterward with Euro. It delivers low inflation environment, which is the primary objective of the 
NBRM specified by law. Having in mind that the exchange rate of the domestic currency has 
not been changed since 1997, the selected monetary policy strategy demonstrates the high 
credibility of the central bank. 
However, this strategy underlines the importance of reserve management function within the 
central  bank.  Management  of  reserves,  as  we  are  all  aware  of,  is  a  complex  and  time-
consuming  business.  It  requires  clear  objectives,  extensive  decision-making  delegation, 
strong  control  systems,  open  and  transparent  reporting  and  a  realistic  appreciation  of  the 
constraints faced. If conducted properly, openly and successfully it will greatly strengthen the 
public’s  respect  for  and  confidence  in  official  policy,  and  make  a  material  contribution  to 
successful macroeconomic management.  
When we speak about reserve management strategy, we face the challenges of the new low 
yield environment, but at the same time, one should have in mind the constrains set by the 
country-specific factors like the foreign exchange regime, the domestic capital markets size 
and  depth,  the  reserve  volume  and  the  currency  of  the  country's  liabilities.  In  that  regard, 
main  building  block  in  the  reserve  management  process  is  naturally  the  strategic  asset 
allocation,  set  in  a  manner  that  ensures  achievment  of  the  key  goals  of  the  reserves 
management, that is: capital preservation, liquidity and at the end - return. In respect to the 
last goal of the reserve management process, as we are in the middle of the second decade 
of  21st  century,  competition  for  return  has  intensified,  reaching  new  levels,  as  the  global 
economy  enters  increasingly  challenging times.  In  that regard,  operational  functions  of  the 
reserve management can contribute as well, having in mind that like never before the most 
important goal of operational conduct of the transaction is to deliver the most value at the 
lowest cost in the least amount of time. 
During the following week, the focus of the Workshop will be exactly on the operational, back 
office  activities,  in  the  process  of  reserve  management.  No  transaction  can  take  place 
without the back office. It provides a vital service to the front office by ensuring that all funds 
flow  in  a  timely  and  correct  manner  and  all  the  necessary  documentation  is  completed. 
Inaccurate or untimely trade capture can have implications for the P&L and risk management 
process.  If  the  central  bank  does  not  capture  the  correct  transaction,  then  position  and 
reported credit exposure might be incorrect. Having in mind the importance of the back office 
service  to  the  reserve  management  process,  one  of  the  goals  of  the  workshop  will  be  to 
provide  best  practices  in  the  area  of  settlements,  then  different  services  provided  by  the 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  custodians,  and  the  importance  of  appropriate  IT  tools  to  perform  secured  and  efficient 
settlements.  All  the  aspects  cover  over  this  week  will  enable  to  improve  and  make  more 
efficient and controlled environment for the conduct of the reserve management transactions. 
In this regard, although back office activities should be separated from front and middle office 
activities,  it  does  not  mean  that  operations  should  be  considered  as  separate  from  the 
business. On the contrary, the closer operations management is the pulse of the business, 
and  the  better  communication  channels  between  all  the  areas  in  reserve  management 
function, the more responsive operations to changes in the business. Ultimately, the overall 
reserve management process will be better controlled. 
To conclude, I wish all of you a fruitful and efficient participation in the workshop, with hopes 
that you will have incentive to take out the maximum from all the issues to be discussed with 
the distinguished lecturers from the World Bank, as well as between each other during the 
exercises. Have a nice week during this workshop, in Skopje.  
Thank you. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
