  Ignazio Visco: “For the times they are a-changin’…” 
Lecture  by  Mr  Ignazio  Visco,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Italy,  at  the  London  School  of 
Economics  Institute  of  Global  Affairs  and  London  School  of  Economics  Student’s  Union 
Italian Society, London, 11 November 2015. 
 This  text  draws  on  the  first  chapter  of  Perché  i  tempi  stanno  cambiando,  Bologna,  Il  Mulino,  2015,  which 
originated from the author’s “Il Mulino Lecture”, 18 October 2014. I wish to thank Andrea Brandolini, Salvatore 
Rossi and Francesco Spadafora for their many useful comments. 
“For the times they are a-changin’”. This is what Bob Dylan famously sang over fifty years 
ago. And in this half-century, the times truly have changed. 
The history of humankind is in itself a story of change: demographic, technological, religious, 
social,  political,  economic.  Economists  often  distinguish  between 
“growth”  and 
“development”.  The  former  refers  to  the  production  of  goods  and  services  exchanged  in 
markets, which is an ingredient, and an important one, in economic and social well-being. It 
needs  to  be  considered,  however,  together  with  the  other  components  of  a  society’s 
development,  such  as the  distribution  of  natural  resources,  health  and  living  conditions,  or 
the quality of the environment. All these elements are often but imperfectly correlated with 
measures  of  economic  activity  like  the  gross  domestic  product,  itself  a  useful  but  limited 
indicator whose utilisation as an exclusive gauge has at times come under comprehensible 
criticism. 
In this regard, let us start with two issues. The first concerns labour, work. As Voltaire’s Turk 
explains to Candide, work serves to ward off not just need, but also boredom and vice. If our 
living conditions have improved so enormously over the past few centuries, we owe it largely 
to  one  fundamental  institution,  the  market,  which  made  it  possible  to  transcend  the  old 
subsistence economy based on barter. In the long run, market failures – which may range 
from monopolies and positional rents to laws and customs unfavourable to business activity 
or  rules  and  supervisory  practices  incapable  of deterring  excessive  risk-taking  –  engender 
disequilibria, impede growth, undercut labour and hinder development. 
The second question bears on the models used by economists. Often, these models depict 
economic growth as a balanced, linear process, but in reality it is far from regular, a fact that 
does  not  escape  economists  themselves.  Yet  over  the  past  two  centuries  the  market, 
demographics  and  technical  progress  have  produced  wealth,  work,  and  better  living 
standards for steadily increasing masses of people. This has come about through a series of 
social,  individual  and  collective  travails  that  have  made  the  process  non-linear,  yet  not 
random. 
In  what  follows  I  will  discuss  the  theme  of  change,  in  particular  the  rapid  and  constant 
change  now  associated  with  technological  developments,  and  the  multiple  interactions 
between  the  legacy  of  the  global  financial  crisis  and  new  challenges.  An  increasingly 
important  issue  in  the  debate  is  the  impact  of  new  technologies  on  jobs  and  on  the  skills 
required to seize the opportunities and govern the risks of the digital revolution. 
From industrial revolution to sustainable development 
The industrial revolution of the late eighteenth century gave rise to the “first machine age” 
(the second is the age we are now living in, as described by Erik Brynjolfsson and Andrew 
McAfee).1  Innovation  and  automation  have  gradually  transformed  material  production,  in 
                                                
1  E.  Brynjolfsson  and  A.  McAfee,  The  Second  Machine  Age:  Work,  Progress,  and  Prosperity  in  a  Time  of 
Brilliant Technologies, New York, W.W. Norton & Company, 2014. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  agriculture  and  industry  alike,  and  especially  in  manufacturing.  The  new  opportunities 
created over the course of this extraordinary period of human history have more than offset 
the jobs destroyed by the new general purpose technologies: the steam engine, the internal 
combustion engine, electric power. 
In  Why  the  West  Rules  –  for  Now,2  the  Anglo-American  historian  Ian  Morris  develops  an 
index of social development based on energy use, civil organisation, military capability and 
information  technology.  Brynjolfsson  and  McAfee  observe  that  his  index  points  to  an 
astonishing conclusion: none of the crucial innovations antedating the industrial revolution – 
the  domestication  of  livestock,  the  development of  agriculture,  the foundation  of  cities, the 
rise of philosophy and the great religions, the invention of writing, the introduction of numbers 
–  had  anything  like  the  importance  for  socio-economic  development  of  the  exceptional 
discontinuity of the late eighteenth century. This break was accompanied by the growth of 
world  population  from  800  million  in  1750  to  over  1.5  billion  in  1900,  2.5  billion  in  1950, 
3 billion fifty years ago and over 7 billion today. 
It  was  precisely  the  postwar  exponential  demographic  acceleration  –  the  “population 
explosion” – that prompted discussion on the “limits to growth.” At the start of the 1970s the 
Report of the “Club of Rome,”3 which centred on the predicted depletion of natural resources, 
raised  alarm  about  the  survival  of  the  Earth’s  ecosystem  and  of  the  human  species  itself. 
Consisting, as is frequently the case for forecasting activity, in linear extrapolations of current 
trends, these projections received great attention from the mass media and political leaders, 
but they were greeted skeptically by many economists, including some of the most eminent 
of  the  time. Without  seeking  to  downplay  the  limits  and  risks  of  the  exploitation  of  natural 
resources implicit in the population explosion and exponential growth, the critics noted that 
the Report failed to take due account of two major stabilisers: the ability of relative prices to 
rebalance supply with demand and the response of technology. 
Notwithstanding the demonstrated power of these two mechanisms, which makes such long-
term  projections  hazardous,  the  concern  has  not  abated.  The  debate  on  “sustainable 
development” – development that can “meet the needs of the present without compromising 
the ability of future generations to meet their own needs”4 – shows that today it is impossible 
to  ignore  the  environmental  balance  of  the  planet  and  the  reciprocal  compatibility,  or 
tradeoffs, between economic, social and ecological objectives.  
Climate change is no longer a scientific curiosity; it is a fundamental theme of today’s public 
debate. A significant step was the 2006 Stern Report,5 which followed a series of important 
international  agreements  (chief  among  them the  Kyoto  Treaty  of  1997) and  thoroughgoing 
albeit undervalued studies by the World Bank and the OECD. Some of its assumptions were 
criticised, such as the discount rate it used to estimate economic costs, which was very low 
and  thus  –  like  The  Limits  to  Growth  –  likely  to  neglect  potential  mitigating  and  feedback 
effects,  such  as  those  connected  with  technical  progress.  But  two  of  the  Stern  Report’s 
recommendations  appear  to  be  of  special  importance:  to  tackle  the  challenge  of  climate 
change  at  a  global  level,  with  the  cooperation  of  all  concerned,  advanced,  emerging  and 
developing  countries  alike;  and  to  devise  incentives  for  the  invention  and  use  of  new 
technologies to drastically curtail emissions of carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases. 
                                                
2 
I. Morris, Why the West Rules – for Now: The Patterns of History and What they Reveal about the Future, 
New York, Farrar, Strauss and Giroux, 2010. 
3  D.H. Meadows, D.L. Meadows, J. Rangers and W.W. Behrens III, The Limits to Growth: A Report for the Club 
of Rome’s Project on the Predicament of Mankind, New York, Universe Books, 1972. 
4  United  Nations,  Report  of  the  World  Commission  on  Environment  and  Development:  Our  Common  Future, 
New York, 1987. 
5  N.  Stern,  The  Economics  of  Climate  Change:  The  Stern  Review,  Cambridge,  Cambridge  University  Press, 
2007. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Fifty years of great change 
The transformations of the past half-century may not have been either linear or painless, but 
the gain in well-being for most of humanity has been extraordinary. 
The driving force has been technological change. This is made clear in a recent article by 
Ayhan Kose and Ezgi Ozturk in the International Monetary Fund’s slender review, Finance & 
Development.6  The  epoch-making  impact  of  information  and  communications  technology 
becomes self-evident if we compare the time, cost and process of drafting and publishing an 
article  today  and  fifty  years  ago:  a  computer  instead  of  a  typewriter;  the  immediate  online 
availability  of  data  and  bibliographical  references,  rather  than  their  laborious  acquisition  in 
print, possibly requiring visits to more than one library; worldwide transmission with a single 
click via e-mail and Internet, in place of print and the traditional distribution of paper copies 
by  post.  The  progress  generated  by  the  exponential  growth  in  the  computing  power  of 
microchips  (predicted  fifty  years  ago  by  the  legendary  “law”  of  Gordon  Moore7)  transpires 
from two simple facts. Today’s typical smartphone has 3 million times the computing power 
of  the  first  minicomputer  marketed  successfully  in  1965,  at  one  225th  the  cost.  And  I 
presume that the power is improving and cost is decreasing even as we speak. 
To add an example drawn from my own experience, back in the 1970s producing forecasts 
and economic policy analysis based on simulations from an econometric model – which at 
that  time  meant  solving  a  hundred  or  so  equations  –  could  take  several  hours  of  data-
processing  time.  Already  by  the  early  1980s,  when  we  built  the  Bank  of  Italy’s  quarterly 
model of the Italian economy, the time needed for each simulation had fallen to just a few 
minutes. Today we can carry out complex stochastic simulations in just a matter of seconds. 
Change  gathered  momentum  following  the  end  of  the  Cold  War.  The  introduction  of  the 
Internet in 1991 changed our way of communicating, forever, and the mobile telephone has 
made communication incredibly widespread and incomparably cheaper. The first commercial 
communications satellite was put into orbit by the United States in 1965; we currently have 
about  400  active  satellites  worldwide.  Whereas  in  1980  there  were  5  mobile  phone 
subscriptions per million population, there are now 90 for every 100 people. Technological 
advance has brought about much more efficient energy use, saving more than 25 per cent 
on energy for the same volume of goods and services produced, in comparison with 1991. 
Globalisation itself has been facilitated by the technological revolution. In transportation, the 
plunge in air travel prices has caused the number of passengers to soar, while rail travel has 
gained in speed and quality. The contribution to world growth coming from today’s emerging 
economies, which had been excluded from the economic integration of the twentieth century, 
has gone from 30 per cent in the 1965–1974 ten year average to 70 per cent over the last 
ten  years.  The  world  economy  is  six  times  larger  now  than  fifty  years  ago  and  per  capita 
output more than twice as great, even though world population too has more than doubled. 
At the same time, the mobility of labour has raised the number of people who live outside 
their native country, from under 80 million in 1970 to nearly 250 million nowadays; and the 
migratory flow between developing countries now exceeds that toward the West. 
                                                
6  M.A. Kose and E.O. Ozturk, “A World of Change”, Finance & Development, 51, 3 September 2014. A curious, 
and significant, coincidence: the authors took as epigraph to their article the verses of the same Bob Dylan 
song that I chose as the title for this piece. 
7  Moore – who was a cofounder of Intel – conjectured that the performance of microchips (broadly speaking, 
computing capacity) would double every twelve months (later re-estimated at 18-24 months); see G.E. Moore, 
“Cramming More Components onto Integrated Circuits”, Electronics, 38, 8, 1965. Another regular pattern in 
the speed of technical advance is “Wright’s law” by which the time (or the unit cost) of production (originally in 
the aeronautical industry) diminishes by a constant percentage every time the cumulative volume of output 
doubles:  T.P. Wright,  “Factors  Affecting  the  Cost  of  Airplanes”,  Journal  of  the  Aeronautical  Sciences,  3,  4, 
1936. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  These  are  clearly  extraordinary  changes. We  are  living  in  a  different  economy,  a  different 
society, from those of even a quarter of a century ago: a global society, with an exceptionally 
rapid  and  extensive  diffusion  of  ideas  and  knowledge,  an  enormous  mass  of  information 
available,  and  nearly  300  times  the  global  financial  assets,  in  dollar  value,  compared  with 
1970  (while  US  consumer  prices  have  risen  just  sixfold).  In  particular,  the  effects  of 
combining technological innovation with the opening of markets have been astonishing. The 
stepped-up growth in per capita incomes and employment that has been achieved, thanks to 
the  new  “supply  chains,”  in  many  emerging  countries,  headed  by  China,  is  the  clearest 
testimony. 
These  changes,  too,  have  not  occurred  in  a  straightforward,  linear  fashion,  owing 
unquestionably but not solely to discontinuities in geopolitical equilibria. In the economic field, 
recurrent financial crises have struck single countries and regions, ultimately producing the 
extremely  severe  global  crisis  of  which  we  still  face  the  legacies. The world  economy  has 
gone  through  a  recession  every  decade  since  the  1960s. The  increase  in  welfare  has  not 
been evenly distributed among the world population. 
Although near a billion  people still live  in extreme poverty and destitution (with incomes of 
less  than  $1.90  a  day,  the  new  benchmark  recently  adopted  by  the  World  Bank),  the 
objective of halving their number was attained in 2010, five years earlier than was called for 
by the UN Millennium Development Goals of 2000. And apart from the billion who have been 
lifted out of extreme poverty we should count another 2 billion added to the world population 
over the last twenty-five years, mostly in the emerging and developing countries, who have 
not entered this state. The gap in life expectancy between these countries and the Western 
world (where it has nevertheless continued to lengthen) has narrowed dramatically. 
However,  while  the  international  inequality  in  income  distribution  has  diminished,  the  fact 
remains that between 1990 and 2010 domestic inequality became more severe in two thirds 
of  the  countries  for  which  data  is  available.8  In  the  United  States,  while  per  capita  output 
expanded  by  some  40  per  cent  between  1990  and  2007,  real  median  household  income 
gained  less  than  10  per  cent.  After  the  sharp  drop  in  output  and  employment  due  to  the 
financial  crisis,  production  has  now  regained  and  surpassed  its  2007  level,  but  median 
income has fallen back to the levels of over twenty years ago. It is often remarked that the 
wealthiest 1 per cent of the population now accounts for about 20 per cent of US national 
income,  compared  with  8  per  cent fifty  years  ago.  And  the  increase  in  the  incomes  of  the 
super-rich  (the  top  0.1  per  cent)  has  been  sharper  still,  with  an  accentuation  of  the 
concentration of wealth.9 
“Secular stagnation” and the “second machine age” 
The fact that development is a non-linear process is perceptible, among other things, in the 
lack of substantial productivity gains in the advanced countries consequent to the spread of 
the  new  information  and  communications  technologies.10  In  most  of  these  countries  per 
capita output has risen only modestly, where it has not actually contracted, as in Italy. The 
global financial crisis, which stemmed from the bursting of the subprime mortgage bubble in 
                                                
8  On the enormous improvement in living and health conditions practically everywhere in the world since World 
War  II  and  on  the  uneven  developments  in  the  distribution  of  income  and  opportunities,  with  reference  to 
environmental, health, and political disasters, see Angus Deaton’s profound, impassioned recent book, The 
Great Escape: Health, Wealth and the Origins of Inequality, Princeton, N.J., Princeton University Press, 2014. 
9  A.B.  Atkinson,  T.  Piketty  and  E.  Saez,  “Top  Incomes  in  the  Long  Run  of  History”,  Journal  of  Economic 
Literature, 49, 1, 2011; F. Alvaredo, A.B. Atkinson, T. Piketty and E. Saez, “The Top 1 Percent in International 
and Historical Perspective,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 27, 3, 2013. 
10  D. Acemoglu, D. Autor, D. Dorn, G.H. Hanson and B. Price, “Return of the Solow Paradox? IT, Productivity, 
and Employment in U.S. Manufacturing”, American Economic Review, 104, 5, 2014. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  the United States in 2007, and the euro-area sovereign debt crisis, which was triggered in 
early 2010 by the revelation of grave underestimates of the Greek budget deficit, have been 
accompanied by what has come to be known, as if in contrast to the “Great Moderation” of 
the previous two decades, as the “Great Recession.”11 
Even in the United States and the United Kingdom, the countries that left the acute phase of 
the  crisis  behind  them  most  quickly,  the  growth  rate  remains  lower  than  in  the  pre-crisis 
years. In the euro area as a whole output is still below its pre-crisis level, which it is projected 
to regain by the end of this year. It is now quite generally held that the “potential” growth rate 
too has been lowered by the reduction in investment and the very high levels of long-term 
unemployment and underemployment. 
The recession’s legacy, in other words, consists of numerous, varied problems that threaten 
to  leave  permanent,  not  just  short-term  scars  on  our  economies.  Today,  there  is  renewed 
debate on the risk of hysteresis (i.e., the extent to which the short-term cycle influences the 
longer-term dynamics of the economy). Larry Summers has revived the “secular stagnation” 
hypothesis  originally  advanced  by  Alvin  Hansen  in  the  1930s  and  forcefully  rebutted  in 
practice by the protracted economic expansion that followed World War II.12 It is somewhat 
singular that there has been more (and earlier) discussion of this thesis in the United States 
than  in  the  euro  area,  where  the  difficulties  that  impede  a  return  to  sustained  growth  are 
particularly evident and the deficit in employment and demand is so substantial. 
The new secular stagnation hypothesis refers to the increasing propensity to save (in order 
to pay down excessive debt) and to the reduction in investment and in aggregate demand in 
recent  years.  The  decline  in  the  relative  price  of  capital  goods  induced  by  technological 
innovation,  despite  having  resulted  in  a  substitution  of  capital  for  labour,  may  also  have 
played a role in lowering investment expenditure in nominal terms. As Summers notes, unlike 
new business ventures in the traditional sectors, those in the digital economy may require a 
reduced amount of money to start up, thus resulting in a possible reduction in the aggregate 
capital  expenditure.  In  circumstances  like  these,  maintaining  the  balance  between  saving 
and investment – which is essential to achieving full employment – could require a level of 
negative  real  interest  rates  (that  is,  net  of  inflation),  that  monetary  policy  cannot  deliver. 
Nominal interest rates, in fact, are now close to zero and the increase in prices is minimal. 
The  consequence  is  stagnant  economic  activity  and  the  underutilisation  of  resources. 
Furthermore, the legacy of the financial crisis – namely the need to reduce financial leverage 
and  decrease  public  and  private  debt  –  would  not  appear  to  be  temporary.  Against  the 
backdrop  of  low  inflation  and  reduced  potential  growth,  the  global  ratio  of  debt  to  output 
continues to rise.13 
                                                
11  See,  for  one,  C.  Bean,  “The  Great  Moderation,  the  Great  Panic,  and  the  Great  Contraction,” 
Journal of the European Economic Association, 8, 2-3, 2010. For a discussion of the legacy of the 
financial crisis, see I. Visco, “The Aftermath of the Crisis: Regulation, Supervision and the Role of 
Central Banks”, CEPR Policy Insight, 68, December 2013. On the euro area sovereign debt crisis, 
see  I.  Visco,  “The  exit  from  the  sovereign  debt  crisis:  national  policies,  European  reforms  and 
monetary  policy”,  in  P.  Horvath,  P.  Mooslechner  and  A.  Staribacher,  eds.,  Europäische 
Wirtschaftspolitik  der  Zukunft,  Festschrift  zum  70.  Geburtstag  von  Ewald  Nowotny,  Wien,  New 
academic press, 2014.  
12  L.H.  Summers,  “U.S.  Economic  Prospects:  Secular  Stagnation,  Hysteresis,  and  the  Zero  Lower  Bound”, 
Business  Economics,  49,  2,  2014;  A.H.  Hansen,  “Economic  Progress  and  Declining  Population  Growth”, 
American Economic Review, 29, 1939. See also C. Teulings and R. Baldwin, eds., Secular Stagnation: Facts, 
Causes,  and  Cures,  VoxEU.org  eBook,  London,  CEPR  Press,  2014;  and  P.  Pagano  and  M.  Sbracia,  “The 
Secular  Stagnation  Hypothesis:  A  Review  of  the  Debate  and  Some  Insights”,  Banca  d’Italia,  Questioni  di 
Economia e Finanza (Occasional Papers), 231, 2014. 
13  L.  Buttiglione,  P.  Lane,  L.  Reichlin  and  V.  Reinhart,  Deleveraging,  What  Deleveraging?  The  16th  Geneva 
Report on the World Economy, London, CEPR Press, 2014. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  Apart  from  the  short-run  Keynesian  effects  linked  to  rigidity  and  constraints  on  the 
adjustment  of  relative  prices,  we  should  consider  the  possible  medium-term  repercussions 
that  a  protracted  state  of  high  unemployment  and  disinvestment  could  have  on  the 
economy’s  capacity  for  growth.  In  the  longer  run,  poor  expectations  for  demand  in 
connection  with  population  ageing  can  make  the  picture  even  gloomier.  Moreover,  we  are 
certainly aware – even if the risk is still remote – that holding interest rates very low for very 
long periods may result in fueling excessive financial risk-taking, imprudent lending practices 
and, ultimately, dangers for financial stability.14 
A second version of the stagnationist hypothesis, put forward notably by Bob Gordon, does 
not  consider  demand  and  investment  but  instead  focuses  on  the  supply  side,  and  in 
particular on the rate of growth of productivity, i.e. the economy’s potential output for a given 
amount  of  available  human  and  material  resources  employed  in  the  production  process.15 
The key argument here is that the great inventions that have resulted in massive productivity 
increases have for the most part already been introduced, so that a return to more moderate 
growth  rates  is  inevitable.  This  thesis  is  at  once  daring  and  perhaps  over-simplified,  even 
though  it  is  supported  by  some  careful  analysis  of  the  data  and  of  historical  trends,  both 
aggregate and sectoral. 
What truly characterises the new information and communications technology is its suitability 
for widespread use in practically every area of economic and social life. The introduction of 
personal  computers  and  the  Internet  may  have  been  gradual,  not  significantly  different,  in 
terms  of  the  time  taken,  from  electrification.16  However,  as  Brynjolfsson  and  McAfee  have 
observed, it is perfectly possible that the digital revolution is still far from having worked all its 
effects on productivity.  
Even if it is apparently gradual, the nature of technical progress in the digital age, they say, is 
exponential,  as  in  the  ancient  (Persian)  legend  in  which  grains  of  rice  placed  on  a 
chessboard must be doubled from one square to the next: the volume is almost negligible at 
first  but  in  the  second  half  of  the  board  it  becomes  overwhelming.  Not  to  mention  other 
pioneering  areas  of  research  like  robotics,  genomics  and  artificial  intelligence,  which  may 
have incredible applications that were once unimaginable (save for people like Jules Verne 
or Isaac Asimov), with an extraordinary impact on productivity and in the ultimate analysis on 
our well-being. This is the “second machine age.”17 
The challenge of technology 
Starting  with  the  first  industrial  revolution,  technical  progress  has  regularly  displayed  the 
ability to engender not only widespread rises in per capita income and living standards but 
                                                
14  See also L.H. Summers, “Reflections on the ‘New Secular Stagnation Hypothesis’”, in Teulings and Baldwin, 
op. cit. 
15  R.J.  Gordon,  “Is  US  Economic  Growth  Over?  Faltering  Innovation  Confronts  the  Six  Headwinds”,  NBER 
Working  Paper  18315,  2012;  and  more  recently,  R.J.  Gordon,  “The  Turtle’s  Progress:  Secular  Stagnation 
Meets  the  Headwinds”,  in  Teulings  and  Baldwin,  op.  cit.  For  a  contrary  thesis,  see  J.  Mokyr,  “Secular 
Stagnation? Not in Your Life”, ibid. 
16  B.  Jovanovic  and  P.L.  Rousseau,  “General  Purpose  Technologies”,  in  P.  Aghion  and  S.N.  Durlauf,  eds., 
Handbook of Economic Growth, Amsterdam, Elsevier, 2005. 
17  These  analyses  pay  little  attention  to  the  possible  effects  of  computerization  and  the  digital  revolution  on 
people’s cognitive capacities (beyond the impact on labour demand and the distribution of income), but other 
authors see them as anything but negligible. See for instance, N. Carr, “Is Google Making Us Stupid?”, The 
Atlantic,  July-August  2008,  and  M.  Näsi  and  L.  Koivusilta,  “Internet  and  Everyday  Life:  The  Perceived 
Implications of  Internet  Use on  Memory  and  Ability  to  Concentrate”,  Cyberpsychology, Behavior and  Social 
Networking,  16,  2,  2013.  See  also  the  theses  of  Norbert  Wieser,  mathematician  and  the  inventor  of 
cybernetics, on the severely depressing effect of automation on employment, in N. Wieser, The Human Use of 
Human Beings, Boston, Houghton Mifflin, 1950. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  also  expanded  and  more  rewarding  job  opportunities.  The  destruction  of  jobs  in  the 
industries affected by process and product innovation has always been accompanied by a 
rapid creation of new jobs in the economy as a whole. What underlies this mechanism is the 
ability of technical progress to trigger a virtuous sequence of productivity gains, a reduction in 
unit production costs, increased demand for the new goods and services, and rising national 
income. 
The  digital  revolution,  which  we  experience  every  day  in  our  ways  of  communicating  and 
acquiring information, confirms the far-reaching benefits that the entire society obtains from 
technical progress. But digital technologies have a distinctive feature: the greater speed with 
which  they  tend  to  replace  labour,  even  in  fields  in  which  human  intervention  has  always 
appeared  to  be  decisive.  This  suggests  the  revival  of  the  concept  of  “technological 
unemployment”  proposed  by  Keynes  in  his  1930  essay  on  the  prospects  for  future 
generations18 and thus indicated as one of the forces behind the decline in job opportunities 
and the stagnation of wages and incomes observed in a number of industries and countries. 
As we know, without bringing Ned Ludd or Karl Marx into it, this debate is not new. But we 
can recall Keynes’s own optimism and his prediction that given the tendencies of technical 
progress and the increase in productivity in the United Kingdom and the United States and 
“assuming no important wars and no important increase in population, the economic problem 
may  be  solved  …  within  a  hundred  years”  with  a  fourfold  to  eightfold  rise  in  per  capita 
income.  Today  we  are  talking  about  a  global  economy,  new  technologies  and  population 
ageing; we note that exceptionally violent wars and population growth have not been lacking, 
but even so the order of magnitude of the rise in per capita income that Keynes projected for 
the  century  does  not  appear  to  be  unreasonable.  However,  his  fear  that  the  most  severe 
challenge  would  be  how  to  occupy  our  leisure  time,  as  we  would  be  astonishingly  more 
wealthy but technologically unemployed, has certainly not materialised. 
Fifty years ago, when Dylan’s emblematic song first appeared in the United States, a small 
book  was  published  in  the  United  Kingdom  that  dealt  with  production  efficiency,  income 
distribution  and  corporate  ownership.  It  was  written  by  James  Meade,  an  economist  and 
Keynes’  disciple,  well-known  for  his  work  in  the  field  of  international  trade,  which  would 
eventually  earn  him  the  Nobel  Prize  in  1977.19  More  than  pose  the  social  and  economic 
problem of what to do when automation means that “we need to work only an hour or two a 
day to obtain the total output of real goods and services needed to satisfy our wants,” Meade 
asked “What shall we do when output per man-hour of work is extremely high but practically 
the whole of the output goes to a few property owners, while the mass of the workers are 
relatively (or even absolutely) worse off than before?”20  
What can we say on this point today? To my mind, we must consider the matter on three 
levels.  First,  the  crucial  question  is  to  determine  whether  the  net  loss  of  jobs  due  to 
technological innovation is temporary or permanent. As I recalled above, history shows that, 
although automation has certainly brought about the substitution of capital for labour in given 
economic sectors, for the economy as a whole, technical progress has been the source of 
new and better work opportunities. It is legitimate to ask whether things may not be different 
this time around. So far, in the United States and elsewhere, new technology has created a 
polarisation of occupations, with employment gains concentrated in low-paid service jobs and 
                                                
18  J.M.  Keynes,  “Economic  Possibilities  for  our  Grandchildren”,  in  Essays  in  Persuasion,  London,  MacMillan, 
1931. 
19  J.E. Meade, Efficiency, Equality and the Ownership of Property, London, Allen & Unwin, 1964. A similar view 
would be put forward a couple of decades later by another Nobel Laureate, Wassily Leontief, in “Technological 
Advance, Economic Growth, and the Distribution of Income”, Population and Development Review, 9, 3, 1983. 
20  The  implications  of  this  terrifying  prospect  for  income  distribution  –  which  Meade  dubbed  the  “Brave  New 
Capitalists’  Paradise”  –  are  the  centrepiece  of  a  short,  sharp  article  by  Benjamin  Friedman,  “‘Brave  New 
Capitalists’ Paradise’: The Jobs?”, The New York Review of Books, 7 November 2013. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  high-paid jobs requiring considerable  educational  attainment,  to  the  expense  of  mid-skilled 
jobs. 
A recent, widely-cited study by two researchers at Oxford has estimated that 47 per cent of 
existing  jobs  in  the  United  States  risk  being  automated  out  of  existence,  possibly  within  a 
decade or two.21 Other analysts, at the Bruegel research centre,22 have produced estimates 
of over 50 per cent for the main European countries, including Italy (which so far appears to 
have  suffered  more  from  globalisation  and  the  heightened  competition  of  the  emerging 
market economies than from technological innovation). Such estimates will certainly make a 
powerful  impression  on  readers,  but  they  must  be  handled  with  great  caution,  given  the 
patent  difficulty  of  assigning  risk  percentages  to  jobs  whose  content  may  change  radically 
thanks to the new technology itself. In the past we have seen drastic transformations in the 
composition of employment: just think of the drastic drop in agricultural employment in the 
industrial countries since World War II. The destruction of some jobs will certainly correspond 
to the creation of new ones, and the net result is anything but a foregone conclusion, though 
of course we cannot ignore the adverse effects characteristic of a phase of transition like the 
present. 
As  yet,  the  new  information  and  communications  technology  is  still  complementary  to 
managerial  and  intellectual  jobs  but  substitutive  of  routine  tasks.  The  new  wave  of 
technological  innovation  in  the  fields  mentioned  earlier  (robotics,  genomics,  artificial 
intelligence) could nevertheless have a substantial impact on the labour demand relative to 
non-routine tasks that cannot, apparently, be standardised, at both  high and low levels of 
skill.23 
The second question is the relationship between technological progress and the increase in 
income inequality so forcefully anticipated by Meade. Such a vast issue cannot be discussed 
in a few lines. The sensation made by Thomas Piketty’s Capital in the Twenty-First Century24 
readily demonstrates how topical it is. Here the point seems to me to be not just to decry the 
emergence  of  entertainment  superstars,  top  executives  and  the  great  rentiers  (the  top 
0.1 per cent of the population), who would appear to be – thanks to skill, luck, or monopoly 
positions  –  the  great  beneficiaries  of  the  economic  transformation  of  recent  decades,  and 
accordingly  call  for  income  redistribution  for  reasons  of  social  equity.  Rather,  it  is  to 
determine the extent to which current and prospective trends in technology can alter, for the 
purposes of economic growth, today’s relationship between capital and labour, how great the 
risk is that substantial portions of the work force will be driven out of the production process, 
regardless of their level of education and competence. The question, therefore, is what to do 
to avert human, social and political consequences that are potentially very severe indeed.25 
These are clearly questions for the long term. We must be skeptical of extreme projections 
that  would  have  all  or  almost  all  workers  replaced  by  robots  and  the  owners  of  capital 
expropriating, in the form of profit, practically all the income produced. Such predictions are 
afflicted by the obvious limits of linear extrapolation; they fail to consider the safeguards and 
                                                
21  C.B.  Frey  and  M.A.  Osborne,  The  Future  of  Employment:  How  Susceptible  are  Jobs  to  Computerisation?, 
Oxford Martin School, University of Oxford, September 2013. 
22  J. Bowles, The Computerisation of European Jobs, Brussels, Bruegel, July 2014. 
23  For a review of the debate see A. Sabadash, “ICT-induced Technological Progress and Employment: A Happy 
Marriage  or  a  Dangerous  Liaison?  A  Literature  Review”,  European  Commission,  Joint  Research  Centre, 
Institute for Prospective Technological Studies, Digital Economy Working Paper 07, 2013. 
24  T.  Piketty,  Le  capital  au  XXIe  siècle,  Paris,  Seuil,  2013;  English  translation,  Capital  in  the  Twenty-First 
Century, Cambridge, Mass., Harvard University Press, 2014. 
25  The issue is broached with force in Friedman, op. cit. See also L.H. Summers, “Economic Possibilities for our 
Children”,  NBER  Reporter,  4,  2013,  and  T.B.  Atkinson,  “After  Piketty”,  British  Journal  of  Sociology,  65,  4, 
2014. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  feedback that have tended to arise, in a more or less spontaneous fashion, in the course of 
human history. Nor, however, can we fail to observe that in the years to come, such issues 
as  the  concentration  of  market  shares,  equality  of  opportunity,  the  progressiveness  of  tax 
systems,  workers’  employability,  and  ownership  rights  will  inevitably  be  subject  to  political 
debate  and  decision,  in  a  context  that  is  difficult  because,  for  one  thing,  it  no  longer 
corresponds to national borders. 
The third consideration, given the re-emergence of issues like technological unemployment, 
income  and  wealth  concentration  and  the  domination  of  capital  (machines)  over  labour, 
involves the possible repercussions on aggregate demand. Those who argue that the fruits 
of technical progress and the relative increase in productivity will mainly benefit the relatively 
few  owners  of  the  new  technology  firms  are  certainly  raising  the  question  of  distributive 
fairness.  At the  same time,  however,  if they  are  to  be  produced  at  all,  those fruits  need  a 
sufficiently  high  level  of  effective  demand.  In  other  words,  there  is  also  a  broader, 
macroeconomic  question  involving  the  distribution  of  income:  in  order  for  the  goods  and 
services that will make up tomorrow’s output to be sold, income, jobs and property will have 
to  be  widely  distributed  throughout  the  population.  In  other  words,  for  the  enormous 
increases possible on the supply side to materialise, there will have to be consumers in a 
position to create effective demand for the new goods and services. 
Supply and demand today 
The  matters  addressed  to  this  point  concern  a  possible  future,  a  future  that  is  distant  but 
perhaps not too much so. Accordingly, in discussing them we must keep an open mind, in 
the  awareness  that  it  is  not  about  tilting  at  the  windmills  of  machines  dominating  men,  or 
capital  irremediably  crushing  labour.  We  must  remember  that  just  as  today’s  work  is  far 
different  from  yesterday’s,  so  tomorrow’s  will  differ  from  today’s.  And  the  same  goes  for 
capital: “digital” capital will have very little in common with the capital of the ironmasters. Yet 
we  cannot  ignore  the  problems  engendered  by  the  ever-increasing  computerisation  of  so 
many occupations. At a time of far-reaching transformation like the present, systems of social 
security for the workers who lose their jobs will have to be reinforced. 
In any event, the responses to the long-run slowdown in economic growth that many analysts 
fear  cannot  but  be  multiple,  and  very  likely  different  from  country  to  country.  Benjamin 
Friedman,  for  instance,  contends  that  at  least  for  the  United  States,  more  and  better 
education  for  an  increasingly  large  portion  of  the  labour  force  is  a  partial  solution  at  best, 
insufficient to buffer the impact of technology on jobs and earnings.26 On this issue, however, 
Ned  Phelps  observes  that  the  solution  is  not  the  indefinite  increase  in  the  number  of 
technical and scientific university graduates,27 of whom there are already a good many in the 
main advanced countries, but to aim for innovation and individual dynamism, creativity and 
adaptability, which depend greatly on customs and which must continue to be emphasised in 
schools and universities, through the humanities: history, philosophy, literature.28 
Brynjolfsson, McAfee and Spence suggest, with a new spirit, a strategy that is not new but, 
they  stress,  “intellectually  simple,  if  politically  difficult”:  stimulus  from  public  investment  in 
fields where the social return is especially high: basic research in science, technology and 
                                                
26  Friedman,  op.  cit.  On  the  asymmetrical  effects  of  the  new  information  and  communications  technology  on 
income distribution, owing to the differential complementarity between computerization and non-routine work 
of  high  and  low  human  capital  content,  see  C.  Goldin  and  L.F.  Katz,  The  Race  between  Education  and 
Technology, Cambridge, Mass., Belknap Press, 2008. 
27  E.  Phelps,  Mass  Flourishing:  How  Grassroots  Innovation  Created  Jobs,  Challenge,  and  Change,  Princeton 
N.J., Princeton University Press, 2014. 
28  Goldin  and  Katz,  op.  cit.,  note  that  what  matters  most  in  the  “race”  between  education  and  technology  is 
cognitive skills and interpersonal relations. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
  health;  spending  on  education;  and  infrastructure,  not  just  highways  and  airports  but  also 
water  supply,  waste  disposal,  electric  power  grids  and  communications  networks.29  In  its 
October  2014  issue,  the  International  Monetary  Fund’s  World  Economic  Outlook  returned 
forcefully  to  the  theme  of  the  possible  impact  of  infrastructural  investment  on  short-term 
demand and medium-term supply.30 In Europe, Bart van Ark, among others, maintains that if 
the  main  problem  is  still  making  good  the  deficit  in  productivity  growth,  then  firms  must 
rapidly catch up in adopting the new digital technologies.31  
Before asking what the future holds for us now, we must start from the recognition that there 
is a serious deficit in Europe, and especially in Italy, not only of growth but also of demand, 
hence  of  employment  and  incomes.  Strong  stimulus  for  investment,  public  and  private, 
national  and  European,  is  accordingly  essential.  Even  raising  the  rate  of  growth  in 
productivity  requires  well-targeted  investments  in  new  technology,  to  be  sure,  but  also  in 
intangible infrastructures that can generate increasing returns over the medium-to-long term. 
If there is a lack of investment due to the high cost of capital in some countries, doubts about 
demand,  or  uncertainty  over  the  state  and  continuity  of  “structural  reforms,”  it  is  the 
responsibility of the political system and economic policy – and of those in leading positions 
in society, in the information industry and in training and education – to act with resolution, 
foresight  and  singleness  of  purpose  to  remove  these  impediments.  In  Italy,  in  particular, 
given an economy and a society that have been practically stalled since well before the onset 
of the financial crisis, there is great potential for improvement, by removing constraints and 
rigidity,  accelerating the  adoption  of  new  technology,  closing  the gap that  separates  many 
industries from the  productivity  frontier,  and refurbishing  infrastructures,  including  the  most 
traditional ones. 
In the search for a new model of development, or at least a return to balanced, sustainable 
economic growth, we can start from Acemoglu and Robinson’s observation on how important 
it is to maintain a pluralist society and renew our political and economic institutions in a more 
inclusive  direction.32  Specifically,  it  is  not  enough  to  set  out  reasonable  objectives  if  the 
conditions for attaining them are lacking. 
In some cases, these conditions are unlikely to present themselves. The objective of bringing 
manufacturing value added back up from its current 15-16 per cent of GDP to 20 per cent by 
2020,  as  it  was  a  decade  and  more  ago,  proposed  quite  emphatically  in  the  European 
Commission’s  strategy  for  the  next  few  years33,  will  run  into  evident  historical  and 
methodological obstacles. On the one hand it is most likely, owing notably to the spread of 
automation, 
from  sectors  outside 
manufacturing. As in the case of agriculture, this does not necessarily reduce its importance 
for  a  nation’s  economy  or  a  society’s  value  system.  But  it  does  spotlight  the  risk  of 
overstating its potential to create jobs. On the other hand, the spread of new technologies is 
making even the very definitions of economic sectors obsolete. 
that  value  added  will  be  derived 
increasingly 
                                                
29  E. Brynjolfsson, A. McAfee and M. Spence, “New World Order: Labor, Capital, and Ideas in the Power Law 
Economy”, Foreign Affairs, July-August 2014. 
30  IMF, World Economic Outlook, Chap. 3, October 2014. 
31  B.  van  Ark,  “Productivity  and  Digitalization  in  Europe:  Paving  the  Road  to  Faster  Growth”,  Lisbon  Council 
Policy Brief 8, 1, The Lisbon Council, Brussels, 2014. Van Ark refers in particular to “Metcalfe’s law” (named 
after Robert Metcalfe, the inventor of Ethernet technology) to highlight the disproportionally large productivity 
effect  engendered  by  investment  in  digital  technology  (in  general,  the  network  or  interlinking  effects  of  the 
technology). 
32  D. Acemoglu and J. Robinson, Why Nations Fail: The Origins of Power, Prosperity, and Poverty, New York, 
Crown Publishing, 2012. 
33  European Commission, A Stronger European Industry for Growth and Economic Recovery, Communication 
582, 10 October 2012. 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  the  competitive  pressures  of  globalisation  and 
Twenty  years  ago  the  Italian  government  announced  a  “three  I’s”  programme,  in  Italian 
“impresa, inglese, informatica”, which correspond, in English, to the “three E’s” of Enterprise, 
English, and computer Education. Unhappily, there is no denying how far behind we still are 
on all three fronts – not because the objectives were vague or implausible but because the 
fundamental  administrative,  legal,  cultural  and  political  conditions  for  their  attainment  were 
not  present.  Certainly  there  are  financial  constraints.  But  I  do  not  believe  that  the 
insufficiency of investment in knowledge, in environmental and territorial protection, or in the 
valorisation  of  our  nation’s  incomparable  artistic  and  cultural  heritage  depends  solely  on 
these  constraints.  There  is  a  grave  deficiency  in  the  ability  to  grasp  the  fundamental 
importance of these factors as an investment in the future, including the near future. 
We can invent future scenarios, but we cannot foresee what our economy or our society will 
be  like  twenty  or  thirty  years  down  the  line.  When  we  ask  ourselves  what  we  must  do  to 
increase demand, income, and employment, or when we point to the necessity of designing 
new  industrial  policies,  the  primary  objective  can  only  be  to  put  our  economic  and  social 
system in a better position to face and foster change. 
Unquestionably 
the  challenge  of 
computerisation will require major changes in the organisation of work and the adaptation of 
education, training, and infrastructure. Slowness to adapt would constitute a third cause of 
stagnation, recently noted by Barry Eichengreen,34 in alternative or in addition to the lack of 
demand,  as  posited  by  Larry  Summers,  and  the  slowdown  in  productivity  growth 
prognosticated by Bob Gordon, a cause which could become the most important of all. 
That  said,  the  risks  of  technological  unemployment  are  aptly,  if  somewhat  controversially, 
summarised  in  Tony  Atkinson’s  recent  remark  that  “the  direction  of  technological  change 
should  be  an  explicit  concern  of  policy-makers,  encouraging  innovation  in  a  form  that 
increases  the  employability  of  workers  and  emphasises  the  human  dimension  of  service 
provision”.35 
However, what we should do is not so much fear the direct impact of the new technologies 
and computerisation on jobs, as work to take advantage of the enormous cost reductions that 
will  derive  from  them.  The  growth  of  innovative  industries  is  now  the  principal  engine  of 
growth in employment and in productivity. In an influential book, Enrico Moretti has shown 
that every high-tech job created in a particular US metropolitan area has been accompanied 
by five new jobs in the traditional, low-skilled, low-education sectors.36 Perhaps the level of 
generality of this result still needs to be established, but it is indicative of the powerful effects 
of innovation. What is certain is that people will have to work in different ways, in different 
jobs  and  different  places,  over  a  career  span  marked  by  continuous,  lifelong  learning  and 
training. 
We must acquire the skills necessary for the twenty-first century: critical thinking, aptitude for 
problem-solving,  creativity  and  acceptance  of  innovation,  the  ability  to  communicate 
effectively, and openness to cooperation and group work. This while we continue to invest in 
knowledge, in schools and universities, with the aim of rapidly overcoming the very serious 
deficit of “functional literacy and numeracy” observed in many countries (notably in Italy) by 
the  2013  OECD’s  Programme  for  the  International  Assessment  of  Adult  Competencies.37 
Indeed,  as  famously  stated  by  Benjamin  Franklin  in  his  almanac,  “An  investment  in 
knowledge  pays  the  best  interest”.  This  investment  in  knowledge  must  necessarily  pay 
                                                
34  B. Eichengreen, “Secular Stagnation: A Review of the Issues”, in Teulings and Baldwin, op. cit. 
35  A.B. Atkinson (2014), “After Piketty?”, op. cit. 
36  E. Moretti, The New Geography of Jobs, Boston-New York, Houghton Mifflin/Harcourt, 2012. 
37  OECD,  “OECD  Skills  Outlook  2013:  First  Results  from  the  Survey  of  Adult  Skills”,  Paris,  November  2013. 
These issues have been examined by the author in I. Visco, Investire in conoscenza, Bologna, Il Mulino, 2014. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
  attention to scientific advances and technological progress, without losing sight of the value, 
the importance, the practical relevance, of humanistic traditions.38 
Italy is a case in point as to the central importance of a comprehensive design in setting out 
structural reforms. The clearest example is how hard it is to improve the conditions for doing 
business and for the creation and growth of new firms, including those providing the services 
required  by  the  (new)  needs  of  an  older  society.  This  means  creating  a  more  propitious 
environment  by  removing  bureaucratic  and  administrative  obstacles  and  significantly 
improving courts, schools and infrastructures; but it also means establishing a framework of 
respect for rules, countering illegality and combating crime.  
A good deal of our progress depends on membership in the European community. The path 
towards  full  European  Union  appears  rocky,  today,  but  this  is  not  the  place  for  another 
discussion of that issue. Given the present theme, I should just like to recall that almost fifty 
years ago now the well-known Italian economist, and later politician, Nino Andreatta saw the 
technology gap between America and Europe as an essential “political prod for Europe.”39 
He cited the role of the US federal government in funding scientific research and creating a 
market for the products of “science-based industries” in order to stress how important it was 
to truly assess “the negative consequences of a multiplicity of procurement policies on the 
part  of  different  national  governments,  policies  that  call  forth  an  inefficient  proliferation  of 
research efforts in individual countries and slow growth in market size.” I am convinced that 
today  there  would  still  be  much  to  be  gained  if  the  EU  member  states  could  pool  certain 
substantial  portions  of  their  budgets  –  infrastructural  investment,  research,  defence  and 
security – as part of the process that will, or should, lead from Economic and Monetary Union 
through Banking Union to Political Union. 
To conclude, the times are still changing. The times are always changing. More than seeking 
to anticipate change, what matters is to be ready, to seek out and create better conditions for 
seizing the opportunities and reducing the risks brought about by this change, to pave the 
way for progress that is broadly and equitably distributed. 
                                                
38  In Italy, this means to transcend once and for all the severe divide between these two areas that originated 
from  the  heated  controversy  involving  as  protagonists  more  than  a  century  ago  the  great  mathematician 
Federigo Enriques and the great philosopher Benedetto Croce.  
39  B. Andreatta, “Tecnologia ed economia nella controversia sul divario tra America ed Europa”, il Mulino, XVI, 2, 
1968. 
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
