  Norman T L Chan: Hong Kong’s positioning in the post-QE era 
Speech by Mr Norman T L Chan, Chief Executive of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority, at 
the Hong Kong Economic Summit 2016, Hong Kong, 7 December 2015. 
 Accompanying charts can be found at the end of the speech. 
Distinguished Guests, 
1.  
When central banks, such as the US Fed, cut short-term policy interest rates to near 
zero and created money on a massive scale to purchase bonds and other financial assets, 
we called it quantitative easing (QE). 
2.  
It has been more than six years since the launch of QE in 2009. After spending a 
total of US$3.9 trillion to purchase bonds, the Fed wrapped up its asset purchase programme 
in October 2014. In 10 days’ time, the Fed will decide whether to lift interest rates. If it does, it 
will signal the beginning of the normalisation of US interest rates. 
“QE” Ineffectual? 
At the end of 2009, I initiated a guessing game with several chief economists from 
3.  
major commercial and investment banks. The question I asked was when they expected the 
Fed to exit from QE. Most bet on the second quarter of 2010 or earlier. The most dovish of 
them said Q3 2010. As we all know now, these guesses were wildly off the mark. To be fair, I 
don’t think anyone expected the US recovery to be so slow and sluggish. 
4.  
Indeed, after the Global Financial Crisis, the US suffered its worst recession since 
the  Great  Depression  of  the  1930s.  In  a  desperate  bid  to  stave  off  the  recession,  the  US 
literally moved mountains, including introducing the unprecedented QE policy and splashing 
out  US$1.8  trillion  between  2008  and  2010  to  cut  taxes  and  implement  other  fiscal  policy 
measures  to  prop  up  the  economy.  However,  as  we  can  see  from  Chart  1,  the  current 
recovery has been the weakest of all the economic cycles in the past 55 years. The average 
growth  rate  is  just  2.2%,  half  the  average  rate  of  4.6%  in  the  previous  recovery  cycles. 
(Chart 1) 
5.  
As for  employment,  the US  has  lost  a total  of  8.7  million  jobs  during the financial 
crisis  and  recession,  with  the  unemployment  rate  peaking  at  10%.  Although  employment 
bottomed  out  in  2010,  and  some  13  million  jobs  have  been  created  since  then,  this  only 
represents 4.3 million more jobs compared with the peak eight years ago in early 2008, and 
way behind the 8.8 million people who have been added to the labour force over the same 
period. In other words, while the US unemployment rate has declined to 5% recently, it does 
not mean the labour market has fully recovered. One of the main reasons for the faster-than-
expected drop in the unemployment rate is the dwindling labour force participation rate, from 
an average of 66% in 2007 to the current 62.4%, the lowest since 1977. This partly explains 
the feeble economic recovery and declining potential GDP growth trend in the US (Chart 2). 
6.  
The weak recovery in the US in recent years fell outside the expectations of many 
economists at the Fed. Because of the lacklustre growth, QE was extended and expanded, 
feeding  an  addiction  from  “low  for  long”,  to  “low  for  longer”  and  then  to  “low  forever”,  and 
developing a dependence on QE by the market. When the then Fed Chairman Ben Bernanke 
hinted  at  the  possibility  of  scaling  down  the  asset  purchase  programme  in  May  2013,  the 
market panicked in an episode we later called the “Taper Tantrum”. 
7.  
So,  why  is  the  present  recovery  weaker  than  in  previous  cycles?  This  is  a 
complicated  and  controversial  subject.  I  believe  that  both  cyclical  factors  and  structural 
factors, such as household de-leveraging, the high home inventory levels after the bursting of 
the housing bubble and structural changes in the population and labour market, are at play. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  (b)  
interest  expenses  of  borrowers, 
External  factors  are  also  involved,  including  the  European  sovereign  debt  crisis  in  2011. 
However, due to time constraints, I will focus on how QE may have supported US economic 
recovery and affected the global financial environment. 
8.  
The prevailing mainstream view, including the major advanced economies such as 
the US, Europe and Japan, as well as the International Monetary Fund, is that QE is the right 
policy  response  to  prop  up  the  economy  and  stave  off  deflation.  They  think  that  pushing 
down the interest rates to near zero and pumping large amounts of money into the banking 
system will give rise to the following positive chain effects – 
including 
(a)  
the 
governments, will be reduced; 
with  lower  interest rates  and  central  banks  scooping  up  low-risk  sovereign  bonds, 
investors can only resort to equities, properties and other assets in search of higher 
yields; 
asset  prices  will  rise  as  a  result,  creating  a  positive  wealth  effect  which  will  spur 
consumption and investment; and 
consumption and investment will, in turn, stimulate employment. 
(d)  
9.  
Since the consensus was that in a zero interest rate environment QE was the right 
prescription, when the recovery proved weaker than expected, the natural diagnosis was that 
the treatment was too short and the dosage was insufficient, which led to expansion of QE 
and  for  a  longer  period.  Indeed,  in  the  case  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  the  treatment 
went as far as introducing negative interest rates. 
individuals,  corporations  and 
(c)  
Is QE a panacea with no side effects? 
10.   While  there  are  benefits,  there  is  a  flip  side  to  QE.  I  share  the  view  of  some 
economists that the effectiveness of QE is partly offset by the adverse side effects of zero 
interest rates and its prolongation. Here are six side effects that may possibly arise. 
11.  
First,  and  foremost,  zero  interest  rates  and  QE  have  inflicted  big  losses  on  the 
savers and individuals, funds and institutions reliant on interest incomes. Deposit rates in the 
US have dropped by 3 percentage points from an average of about 3.5% in 2007. As interest 
incomes  approach  the  zero  mark,  many  depositors,  especially  low-  and  medium-income 
households  and  retirees  have  had  to  cut  their  spending.  And,  while  it  can  be  said  that  “a 
saver’s  loss  is  a  borrower’s  gain”,  this  has  not  been  the  case  for  every  borrower.  For 
example, because of negative equity or bad credit scores, many US families are stuck with 
hefty mortgage rates. In Hong Kong, deposit rates have also dropped by about 2 percentage 
points since 2007. With total deposits of about HK$10 trillion currently in our banking system, 
you may wish to think about the potential loss to savers.  
12.  
Secondly, most US families are still in the process of de-leveraging after the global 
financial  crisis  and  as  a  result,  growth  in  consumer  demand  remains  lukewarm.  On  the 
corporate  front,  notwithstanding  low  borrowing  costs,  many  US  companies  have  been 
reluctant  to  invest  domestically  in  expanding  capacity  and  enhancing  productivity.  In  fact, 
annual growth in business investments in the US has averaged only 3.7% since 2009, well 
below the average of 5.8% in the past economic expansion cycles. At the same time, many 
US  corporations  have  spent  their  cash  pile  to  buy  back  their  own  shares.  In  2014  alone, 
US$550  billion  was  spent  in  share  buyback,  bringing  the  cumulative  amount  to  US$2,500 
billion since 2009. As we all know, share buyback may buoy share prices and boost earnings 
per-share 
improve  a  company’s  productivity  and 
competitiveness, nor create any new jobs. 
13.  
Thirdly, with the US financial system awash with liquidity from QE and with feeble 
domestic  demand,  excess  liquidity  soon  found  its  way  to  emerging  market  economies 
(EMEs), such as China, Brazil and Russia, in pursuit of higher returns. Between the outbreak 
the  short  run,  but  will  not 
in 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  of the global financial crisis and the peak in 2014, total inflows to EMEs were estimated to be 
some  US$2.7  trillion,  with  roughly  US$1.6  trillion  of  it  destined for  Asia.  In  the face  of  the 
massive inflows, EMEs experienced currency appreciation, an increase in money supply, an 
expansion of the credit bubble, overheating in the economy and asset markets, etc.  
14.  
Fourthly,  the  tide  will  eventually  turn.  Currently,  with  a  strong  US  dollar  and  the 
imminent  normalisation  of  US  interest  rates,  EMEs  are  confronted  with  capital  outflows, 
currency depreciation, and sharp falls in energy and commodity prices. Their economies and 
asset markets are coming under varying degrees of downward pressure, which will adversely 
affect  the  US  and  other  advanced  economies.  EMEs  have  grown  much  larger  in  the  past 
decade  or  two.  In  particular,  China’s  GDP  ballooned  from  US$1  trillion  in  2000  to 
US$10 trillion in 2014. More importantly, while EMEs accounted for about 55% of global GDP 
since  2009,  their  contribution  to  global  economic  growth  was  as  high  as  80%.  So,  a 
slowdown  in  EMEs  will  be  an  impediment  to  recovery  in  the  US  and  other  advanced 
economies. 
15. Fifthly, zero interest rates and QE have indirectly widened the income gap. Because of 
ultra-low  interest  rates  and  excess  liquidity  seeking  better  returns,  stock  and  property 
markets  rallied  in  many  parts  of  the  world.  This  is  especially  true  in  places  with  more 
promising growth prospects like Mainland China, Hong Kong and Singapore. However, low-
income groups, with little if any stocks and properties, have missed out altogether. And their 
savings in deposit accounts have earned next to nothing. This has exacerbated inequality, 
resulting in negative implications for social stability and harmony. 
16.  
investment 
environment.  Yields  on  the  traditionally  more  conservative  bonds  and  fixed  income 
investments have declined. For example, 10-year US Treasuries’ yield has fallen from 5% to 
about  2%,  and  some  sovereign  bond  yields  in  the  Eurozone  have  even  plunged  into  the 
negative.  At  the  same  time,  both  the  exchange  rates  and  bond  prices  in  EMEs  have 
experienced sharp swings recently. With the soon-to-start normalisation of US interest rates, 
and distorting low-returns and high-volatility in the bond markets, the investment environment 
will become even more complex and difficult. 
17.   While the mainstream thinking recognises that zero interest rates and QE are not 
without side effects, they still believe that the benefits outweigh the costs. Only history will 
tell. 
interest  rates  and  QE  have  changed 
Sixthly,  zero 
the  global 
How should Hong Kong adjust to the US exit from QE? 
18.  
Let  me  offer  my  two  cents  on  the  future  outlook.  The  US  interest  rate  will  quite 
possibly start to normalise next week. The US economy will continue to grow at a moderate 
pace,  and  the  US  dollar  should  remain  strong  for  a  period  of  time.  However,  it  is  hard  to 
predict  how  interest  rates,  bond  yields,  fund  flows  and  asset  markets  will  react  as  we  are 
again entering uncharted waters, much the same as when QE was first launched. Moreover, 
economies interact with each other and respond to external factors differently, thus making it 
more  difficult  to  predict  market  responses.  Nevertheless,  one  thing  is  certain:  a  period  of 
difficult  adjustment  lies ahead for  EMEs.  Energy  and  commodity  prices  will  continue  to  be 
suppressed. EMEs will continue to witness capital outflows, currency depreciation, economic 
slowdown  and  downward  pressure  on  their  asset  markets.  And,  Hong  Kong  will  not  be 
immune. We should be prepared to face a period of capital outflows, rising interest rates and 
slower  growth.  Asset  markets,  including  the  property  market,  will  also  face  downward 
pressure. However, if there is an orderly adjustment to asset and property prices, this could 
provide a respite for prospective homebuyers and business owners squeezed by hefty rents. 
Now, I would like to take the opportunity to respond to some concerns that under our Linked 
Exchange  Rate  system,  the  Hong  Kong  dollar  will  appreciate  alongside  the  US  dollar, 
thereby  weakening  the  competitiveness  of  our economy,  in  particular  the  tourism  industry, 
and dealing a blow to the wobbly retail and tourism sectors. I wish to point out that there is no 
evidence  to  suggest  a  direct  linkage  between  the  recent  decline  in  visitor  numbers  and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  expenditure,  and  the  exchange  rate  of  the  Hong  Kong  dollar.  The  Nominal  Effective 
Exchange  Rate  (NEER)  of  the  Hong  Kong  dollar  rose  by  6.6%  year-on-year  in  the  third 
quarter  this  year,  but  price  levels  for  tourism-related  merchandise  and  services  fell  by  a 
greater magnitude. For example, prices for jewellery, clocks and watches fell by 8.2%, while 
the  average  room  rate  for  hotels  fell  by  15.3%,  which  more  than  offset  the  effects  of  a 
stronger  Hong  Kong  dollar.  This  clearly  shows  that  Hong  Kong’s  economy  is  sufficiently 
flexible to adjust speedily to changing markets. 
19.  
In  addition,  Hong  Kong  is  different  to  other  EMEs.  We  have  sound  and  robust 
monetary,  banking  and financial  systems. In response  to  the  large  capital  inflows  over  the 
past few years, we have got ourselves well-prepared by introducing seven rounds of counter-
cyclical macroprudential measures on property mortgages to enhance the resilience of the 
Hong Kong banking system. We should be able to withstand the shocks from a reversal of 
the  capital  flows  and  economic  adjustments  as  long  as  we  remain  level-headed.  We  are 
endowed with a strategic position with the “Hinterland of Mainland China and Interface with 
the World” under the “One Country, Two Systems” principle. It is true the Chinese economy 
is experiencing a slowdown, but this reflects a structural shift from unbalanced growth at a 
breakneck  speed  to  a  high-to-moderate  growth  rate  on  a  more  sustainable  basis.  Indeed, 
sustainable and healthy development will become the “new normal” in China if it can reap the 
“reform dividends” by remaining committed to reform and liberalisation, and moving towards 
a modern and market-based economy. 
20.  
Against such a backdrop, there is vast potential for Hong Kong’s intermediary role 
for trade and commerce as well as fund flows between China and the world. To fortify our 
role, we must, with support from the central government, foster more links with the Mainland. 
In  the  financial  sector,  we  should  strengthen  our  soft  power  by  attracting,  nurturing  and 
retaining professionals. We should also encourage financial innovation while keeping a firm 
grip  on  risk  management.  In  short,  we  must  trump  other  financial  centres  in  every  way  to 
continue  our  position  as  the  most  vibrant  and  competitive  international  financial  centre  in 
Asia. Thank you. 
 
 4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 Chart 1: Comparison of US economic recovery strength 
  * Excluding the 2001, 1970, 1974 and 1980 double-dip recessions. 
 
 
 
 
Chart 2. Decline in US potential GDP 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
