  
 
Harun R Khan: Corporate bond markets in India – a framework for further 
action 
Remarks by Mr Harun R Khan, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the FICCI 
CAPAM 2015, Mumbai, 27 October 2015. 
 Accompanying tables can be found at the end of the speech. 
The  speaker  acknowledges  the  contributions  of  Shri  Vaibhav  Chaturvedi  and  Shri  Vivek  Singh  of  the  Reserve 
Bank of India. 
1. Speaking at this event – in this panel – leaves me with a sense of déjà vu. The fact that I 
spoke about the same issue at the same forum three years back in 2012 – and many other 
fora earlier – reflects the deep-rooted, inertial nature of underlying factors. At least for more 
than 10 years now development of corporate bond markets in India has been the focus of all 
stakeholders but the arduous pursuit of the ‘holy grail’ has not delivered desired results. In 
the process this has unfortunately become a convenient stick to flag the policy and regulatory 
intent. Every set of stakeholders has its own views on what needs to be done but much of 
the prognosis ends up giving a limited perspective. 
2.  Maybe  it  is  time  to  dispassionately  understand  the  big  picture  and  acknowledge  ten 
fundamental facts about the financial ecosystem as it exists today: 
i. 
long-term 
Bond  markets  globally  are  institutional  in  nature  –  that  too  buy  and  hold  kind  of 
investors; 
A sound bankruptcy regime is a pre-requisite for deep bond markets; 
Development  of  bond  markets  needs  sustained  participation  of 
institutional investors across the credit curve; 
Tax  regime  for  financial  instruments  remains  one  of  the  key  drivers  of  investor 
interest; 
Development  of  the  market  mechanisms  and  infrastructure  can  at  best  be  an 
enabling factor – not the driving factor; 
Fiscal consolidation leading to lower sovereign borrowings can enhance the demand 
for corporate bonds; 
High indebtedness of major corporates both from domestic and external sources is 
not conducive for issuance of corporate bonds; 
The centrality of banks in the financial system is a given at our stage of economic 
development. The corporate debt market, therefore, cannot play a predominant role 
in financing in the near future; 
Predominant reliance on the banking system to support development of corporate 
bond market, directly or indirectly, militates against the very idea of the bond market 
de-risking the banking sector; and 
The corporate debt market cannot be looked as totally detached from the sovereign 
bond  market.  Corporate  bond  market  may  get  a  fillip  as  the  interest  rates  come 
down  and  the  fiscal  deficit  targets  are  achieved.  The  play  on  spreads  across  the 
credit curve will become more attractive. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
vi. 
vii. 
viii. 
ix. 
x. 
3.  Alongwith  recognizing  the  hard facts  comes  the  realization  that  there  are  not  many  low 
hanging fruits remaining to be plucked – work forward is contingent on multifarious factors 
and some hard policy choices. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  4.  There  have  been  a  number  of  reports  on  the  corporate  bond  markets,  viz.,  R.  H.  Patil 
Committee  report  (December  2005),  Report  of  the  High  Powered  Expert  Committee  on 
Making Mumbai an International Financial Centre in 2007 (Percy Mistry Committee) and A 
Hundred  Small  Steps  [Report  of  the  Committee  on  Financial  Sector  Reforms  (CFSR)]  in 
2009 (Raghuram Rajan Committee), Reports of the City of London, which have examined in 
detail various aspects related to the development of corporate bond market and have made 
useful  recommendations.  It  has  been  recently  decided  by  the  Financial  Stability  and 
Development Council (FSDC) and its Sub-Committee that the issue needs to be looked into 
its entirety. An inter-regulatory group has already started work in this direction. The focus of 
this group will be to distill key actionable recommendations made by all earlier committees 
and suggest a time bound plan for implementation of the same. 
Measures taken to develop the corporate debt market 
5.  Taking  into  account  the  recommendations  made  by  various  expert  committees,  several 
measures have been taken by the Government of India, the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) and 
the  Securities  and  Exchange  Board  of India  (SEBI) for the  development  of  corporate  debt 
market  in  India.  The  success  of  these  measures  in  achieving  the  intended  outcomes  has, 
however, been varied. Impact of some of the measures taken is captured below: 
Intended outcomes mostly achieved 
• 
• 
Setting up of reporting platform for post-trade transparency 
Introduction  of  DvP  in  settlement  of  OTC  trades  in  corporate  bonds  to  eliminate 
settlement risk 
Issue of long-term bonds by banks allowed with a minimum maturity of seven years 
to raise resources for lending to (a) long term projects in infrastructure sub-sectors, 
and (b) affordable housing. These bonds have been exempted from computation of 
net  demand  and  time  liabilities  (NDTL)  and  are  therefore  not  been  subjected  to 
CRR/SLR requirements 
The investment limit for Foreign Portfolio Investors (FPI) has been increased to USD 
51  billion  during  the  last  few  years.  Limit  allocation  methodology  have  been 
rationalized and withholding tax rate has been reduced from 20% to 5% 
FPIs  have  been  permitted  to  invest  only  in  corporate  debts  of  at  least  3  years  of 
residual maturity 
International financial institutions like IFC were permitted to float a rupee linked bond 
overseas to deepen the off-shore rupee bond market so that IFC and other investors 
can raise rupees to invest in India. This has facilitated development of benchmark 
yield for long term corporate bonds 
SEBI has allowed setting up of dedicated debt segment on the exchanges 
Intended outcomes partially achieved/ too early to say 
• 
Banks  and  PDs  allowed  to  become  members  of  stock  exchanges  to  trade  in 
corporate bonds 
Investment  norms  for  banks  and  PDs  relaxed  to  facilitate  investment  in  corporate 
bonds 
Final guidelines issued for partial credit enhancements by banks to corporate bonds 
Measures  taken  to  encourage  investor  interest/participation  in  the  corporate  bond 
market in terms of liberalizing the listing requirements; simplification in procedures 
       2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  and  processes,  simplified  disclosure  norms  and  standardisation  of  market 
conventions 
Rationalisation  of  FPI  regulations  has  been  put  in  place  for  easier  registration 
process  and  operating framework for  overseas  entities  seeking to  invest  in  Indian 
capital markets 
 Intended outcomes not achieved 
• 
• 
Introduction of Repo in corporate bonds to meet the funding needs 
Introduction of Credit Default Swaps to facilitate hedging of credit risk by the holders 
of corporate bonds Reissuance of bonds permitted by SEBI 
6.  The  measures  taken  by  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  SEBI  and  the  Government  have 
resulted  in  considerable  increase  in  issuance  as  well  as  secondary  market  trading  of 
corporate  bonds.  Total  corporate  bond  issuance  has  increased  by  around  155%  from 
₹ 2709.46  billion  in  2010–11  to  ₹  4,789.62  billion  in  2014–15.  Similarly,  the  number  of 
issuances increased by almost 77% from 4,280 in 2010–11 to 10,941 in 2014–15 (Table 1). 
7. In comparison to other economies, the size of the bond market in India, however, remains 
moderate as a percentage of GDP (Table 2). 
8. It, however, needs to be noted that the development of a corporate bond market in India 
has  lagged  behind  in  comparison  with  other  financial  market  segments  due  to  certain 
structural issues. Some of these issues include: 
• 
The corporate bond issuance is dominated by private placements as these account 
for more than 95% of the total issuance of corporate debt (2014–15); 
Issuances  are  concentrated  in  the  AA  or  above  rating,  largely  by  public  sector 
entities and financial institutions 
A majority of the issuances are concentrated in the 2–5 year tenor; 
Limited/narrow investor base. Investment mandates of institutional investors such as 
insurance  companies,  pension  funds  and  provident  funds  do  not  permit  large 
investment in corporate bonds; 
Reissuance of bonds has not picked up; 
Lack  of  functional  trading  platform  with  CCP  facility  like  NDS-OM  (as  available  in 
Government securities market) impedes the growth of secondary market; 
Market for credit risk protection instruments like CDS has not yet developed; 
Non-standardized  stamp  duties  on  corporate  bonds  across  various  states  affects 
issuances. 
    Way forward 
9.  Activating  the  corporate  bond  market  will  require  a  number  of  regulatory  measures  to 
address both the macro issues as well as the market micro-structure issues. While creating 
an  efficient  market  infrastructure  will  create  conditions  for  issuers  and  investors,  the 
structural  issues  can  be  addressed  over  the  longer  term  as  the  market  evolves  and  the 
financial system gets more integrated with international markets. It would be convenient to 
look  at  the  set  of  issues  in  a  comprehensive  manner.  I  would  like  to  classify  some  of  the 
possible  measures  in  the  “7I”  framework  which  I  had  talked  about  in  one  of  my  earlier 
speeches. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  Issuer 
Reissuance of bonds 
10.  Corporates may  be encouraged to re-issue existing  bonds  under the  same  ISIN  code. 
This  will  augment  market  liquidity  and  potentially  reduce  the  cost  of  borrowings.  Though 
SEBI has recently allowed reissuances by the corporates, there has not been any reissue of 
bonds by any corporate. In order to encourage reissuances, there may be a need for some 
incentives in the form reduced documentation formalities, less issuance fees, etc. 
Issuance of municipal bonds 
11. An active corporate bond market would enable market for municipal bonds issued by the 
Urban Local Bodies (ULBs). The potential for issuing municipal bonds assumes importance 
in the context of the proposal to set up 100 smart cities. However, the size of the municipal 
bond market in India is  rather limited and is distributed over a few strong municipalities of 
Ahmadabad, Nasik, Nagpur, etc. The possible reasons could be overlapping jurisdiction on 
municipal  bodies  leading  to  plethora  of  rules;  perceived  lack  of  specialized  project 
management support in ULBs; non-transparent budgeting and accounting systems in many 
of the ULBs and limited exit route for investors due to lack of secondary market trading. 
12.  To  address  these  issues  some  of  the  measures  which  could  be  considered,  are 
strengthening the governance structure of the municipal issuers by ring fencing the municipal 
bond funds; providing partial or full guarantee by the Central/ State government; mandating 
Escrow  account  for  debt  servicing  of  bond  proceeds,  etc.  SEBI  has  since  issued  the 
Regulations for Issue and Listing of Securities by Municipalities. 
Investor 
Liberalising the investment guidelines for long term players 
13. In order to encourage demand, investment norms for regulated entities may be reviewed 
to  facilitate  their  active  participation  in  corporate  debt  market.  The  current  investment 
guidelines for pension and other retirement benefit funds may be reviewed from ownership 
criteria (public sector / private sector) to ratings based criteria. They may also be permitted to 
use interest rate swaps, repos and credit default swaps. 
Encouraging Retail Participation 
14.  Participation  of  retail  investors  in  corporate  bonds  continues  to  be  limited.  In  order  to 
increase retail investors’ participation in corporate bonds, we need to encourage issuance of 
zero coupon bonds, provide clarity on taxation issues, include provision of special quota for 
retail investors in debt issues and provide reduced transactions costs for retail investors. 
Intermediaries 
Introduction of a market making scheme 
15.  A  market  making  scheme  in  corporate  bond  could  potentially  improve  market  liquidity. 
But market making in an illiquid market is challenging and not many intermediaries will be 
ready to take on the risks of making two-way quotes. A viable market making scheme may 
have to be formulated with suitable incentives  to encourage market participants to provide 
two  way  quotes.  Stock  exchanges  may  have  to  come  out  with  market  making  scheme  in 
consultation with the regulators. Perhaps the role of debenture trustees in this regard may 
also need to be explored. 
Infrastructure 
Efficient trading platforms for corporate bonds 
16.  NSE  has  developed  a  dedicated trading  platform for  privately  placed  corporate  bonds. 
There is, however, negligible activity on the trading platform. Although the system provides 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  for  DVP-III  guaranteed  settlement,  it  is  learnt  that  the  system  has  some  issues,  viz.  high 
margin, high penalty for default, non-availability of all the issued bonds on the platform, etc. 
According to some market participants, there is a need for combined settlement for corporate 
bond  repo  and  outright  market  under  DVP-III  mechanism  at  par  with  the  G-Sec  market  in 
order to increase the traders’ participation. 
17. Stock exchanges could discuss with the market participants and make suitable changes 
in  the  existing  platform  to  encourage  trading.  If  required,  they  may  adopt  a  calibrated 
approach in the matter and explore introduction of DVP-II settlement in initial stages and then 
move to DVP-III depending on development of the market. 
18.  An  electronic  trading  platform  similar  to  the  CROMS  platform  for  G-sec  has  been 
announced  for  repo  in  corporate  debt.  This  needs  to  be  taken  forward  quickly.  Legal 
framework for recognizing and regulating such platforms may have to be put in place. 
Rating Agencies 
19.  Rating  Agencies  play  an  important  role  by  way  of  providing  credit  evaluation  of  the 
instruments like bonds issued by corporates. Their role came into focus internationally after 
the Global Financial Crisis and certain principles for reform of the rating agencies had been 
agreed  internationally.  In  India  also,  SEBI  had  come  out  with  certain  transparency  and 
disclosure  norms  for  the  Credit  Rating  Agencies  (“CRAs”)  in  2010.  CRAs.  Based  on  the 
experience, the guidelines may need to be reviewed. 
Bankruptcy laws 
20. A robust and effective bankruptcy regime is essential to development of corporate debt 
market  from  investors’  point  of  view.  Steps,  such  as,  reforming  bankruptcy  law,  early 
resolution of bankruptcy cases and streamlining the procedures relating to insolvency would 
go  a  long  way  in  achieving  the  same.  The  issue  of  insolvency  of  financial  institutions 
established  under  statutes  and  bi-lateral  netting  among them  during  bankruptcy  also  need 
resolution.  One  of  the  most  significant  steps  in  this  direction  was  the  setting  up  of  the 
Bankruptcy Law Reform Committee under Shri T. K. Viswanathan which has just submitted 
its report. The Committee has come out with the draft legal framework for resolving matters 
of insolvency and bankruptcy which, when fully implemented, will have far reaching impact. 
Early enactment of this proposed legislation and the follow-up action will be a game changer 
for development of corporate bond markets. 
Incentives 
Cap on borrowings of corporate from banks for capital purpose 
21. Restricting the proportion of borrowings by large corporates from banks and making such 
corporates use the market mechanism (such as, corporate bonds, commercial papers and 
other instruments) to meet a part of their short term as well as long term financing needs will 
help  in  the  development  of  corporate  bonds  markets.  Reserve  Bank  has  already  issued  a 
Discussion  Paper  on  “Large  Exposures  Framework  and  Enhancing  Credit  Supply  through 
Market Mechanism” on March 27, 2015. 
Resolving distribution tax related issue for securitization 
22. Securitization of the corporate debt instruments would provide a big fillip to the market as 
it  would  improve  risk  transference  and  diversification  and  provide  liquidity  to  the  issuers. 
Subjecting income of SPV to tax hampers the growth of securitized debt. Market participants 
have  been  demanding  that  the  taxation  structure  in  securitized  debt  needs  to  be  changed 
from distribution tax at SPV level to taxation in the hands of investors. 
Rationalisation of stamp duty norms 
23.  In  terms  of  the  provisions  of  entry  91  of  Union  List,  the  Central  Government  has  the 
power  to  levy  stamp  duty  on  issue  of  debentures.  However,  some  state  stamp  laws  also 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  provide for duty on issue/transfer of debentures. Stamp duty laws need to be rationalised to 
provide an incentive to issuers and work is already on in this direction. 
Use of corporate bonds a collateral 
24.  Post  Global  Financial  Crisis  has  seen  large  scale  use  of  non-sovereign  papers  as 
collateral by the central banks for providing liquidity during periods of stress. Similar enabling 
arrangement in India, subject of course to appropriate haircuts and other safeguards, could 
be examined. This will enhance the demand for good quality corporate paper. 
Instruments 
Activating the repo market 
25. The reasons cited for lack of interest in corporate bond repo include non-signing of the 
Global  Master  Repo  Agreement  (GMRA),  lack  of  lenders  such  as  mutual  funds  and 
insurance companies in repo market, etc. Reserve Bank is engaging with other regulators to 
address these issues. It is also envisaged to widen the participation base in corporate debt 
repo by allowing more investors in repo market. 
26.  Internationally,  GMRA  is  the  standard  document  used  by  the  market  participants  to 
undertake  repo  transactions.  In  India  also,  we  have  adopted  the  same  document.  Market 
participants need to highlight the specific issues in GMRA which need to be addressed. 
Kickstarting CDS market 
27. Unavailability of credit risk transfer mechanism in the corporate bond market works as a 
deterrent. Though CDS has been introduced in India, there is no activity in the market. One 
of  the  major  constraints  is  restriction  on  netting  of  MTM  position  against  the  same 
counterparty for capital adequacy and exposure norms. Without netting, the trades in CDS 
have become capital intensive as banks and PDs have to provide higher capital charge on 
gross  basis  even  if  they  are  acting  as  market  makers  and  having  positive  and  negative 
position  against  the  same  counterparty.  Netting  has  not  been  allowed  due  to  lack  of  legal 
clarity. To provide clarity on the enforceability of netting including close-out netting, suitable 
amendments to provisions in the RBI Act are being proposed. 
28.  Regulators  are  also  examining  the  possibility  of  allowing  more  entities  to  buy/sell 
protection  through  CDS.  Availability  of  more  number  of  protection  sellers  will  encourage 
activity  in  the  CDS  market.  In  this  connection,  it  may  be  necessary  that  financially  sound 
insurance companies and other long term investors may be permitted to sell CDS protection 
subject to prudential norms prescribed by the regulators. 
Rated Municipal Securities 
29. As discussed earlier, a new asset class may be included for rated municipal securities 
under the IRDA & PFRDA investment guidelines. 
Innovation 
Use of banks’ PCE facility by corporates 
30.  Partial  credit  enhancements  (PCE)  by  banks  may  give  a  boost  to  the  corporate  bond 
market  in  its  evolution  phase.  Taking  into  account  the  feedback  received,  RBI  has  now 
issued  the  final  guidelines  under  which  the  banks  may  provide  PCE  to  support  (senior) 
project bonds issued by companies/SPVs, and thereby improve the credit rating of the bond 
issue making them more attractive to certain specific set of investors, such as the institutional 
and  long  term  investors.  It  is  expected  that  issuers  will  take  advantage  of  the  scheme  to 
issue long term bonds. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Bond Index 
31.  Though  indices,  such  as,  Nifty  50  and  the  BSE  Sensex  index  serve  as  popular 
benchmarks for equities, designing debt indices has posed challenges in India as the market 
lacks  breadth  and  depth.  Market  participants,  however,  need  a  debt  index  to  compare the 
performance  in  corporate  debt  vis-a-vis  the  performance  of  different  asset  classes.  More 
work needs to be done in this area by benchmark and index companies. 
Concluding Thoughts 
32.  A  well-developed  corporate  bond  market  can  truly  address  some  of  the  travails  of  the 
existing bank-based financial system. Development of efficient and robust bond markets is a 
challenge globally and only a few jurisdictions can claim to have genuine local currency bond 
markets.  Even  in  those markets,  the  concerns  relating to market  illiquidity  are  increasingly 
being  highlighted.  The  recent  IMF  Global  Financial  Stability  Report  has  discussed  these 
factors  at  length.  While  many  of  the  factors  may  not  be  of  immediate  relevance  to  our 
market,  the  experience  may  hold  important  lessons  as  the  regulatory  regimes  and  market 
systems across jurisdictions which are increasingly becoming homogenized. While regulatory 
changes are likely to have had mixed effects on market liquidity, several structural drivers, 
such as, concentrated holdings by institutional investors, growth of electronic platforms and 
high frequency trading, reduced market making, etc. have also played a part. 
33.  We  will  have  to  assess  the  implications  of  these  factors,  including  the  emerging 
regulatory  regime,  on  corporate  bond  market  development. While  it  is  recognized  that  the 
regulatory regime may need to respond positively to some of the critical issues unless the 
structural  factors  mentioned  earlier  are  addressed,  it  would  be  difficult  to  have  a  deep 
corporate bond market. Early implementation of the draft bankruptcy code submitted by the 
Viswanathan  Committee  alongwith  providing  legal  certainty  to  close-out  netting  for  certain 
transactions would address the two key issues for enabling a credit market. Work is already 
underway in addressing some of the market infrastructure issues, including development of 
an  electronic  platform for  repo  in  corporate  bonds.  Market  making  in  corporate  bonds  has 
proved  to  be  a  challenging  issue,  particularly  the  funding  of  brokers.  Banks  are  explicitly 
permitted to fund market making activities but at the end of day, it will be their call based on 
commercial judgement. Separate structure for market making with direct/indirect support of 
the Government could be a possible way out. 
34. It is also important to recognize that the path towards creating an enabling environment 
may  be  fraught  with  event-specific  hurdles  which  may  take the  process  a  few  steps  back. 
The  recent  case  of  default  on  a  top  rated  bond  is  a  case  in  point.  More  than  the  fact  of 
default, some of the market practices that have come to light through media reports can dent 
the confidence of investors in the market. This particular instance reiterates the importance 
of strong market practices and institutional frameworks in development of healthy markets. 
35. While there is a continuing, concerted effort to identify the constraints and address them 
in right earnest, we must, however, be careful that our pursuit of perfect bond markets does 
not end up as an endless chimerical chase. Bond markets are part of a broader ecosystem 
and it would be best if these markets evolve organically. As a regulator, our endeavor is to 
continually facilitate an enabling framework. The group set up under the aegis of the FSDC is 
expected to look into the whole gamut of issues, mostly focusing on the recommendations of 
all the earlier committees. One can expect more exciting times ahead for the development of 
the corporate bond market in India. 
 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
       8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
