   Joachim Nagel: The internationalisation of the renminbi – opportunities 
for German industry 
Speech by Dr Joachim Nagel, Member of the Executive Board of the Deutsche Bundesbank, 
at “Bayerischer China-Tag”, Ingolstadt, 19 October 2015. 
 Ladies and gentlemen 
Thank you very much for inviting me to the Bayerischer China-Tag. 
Over the past few years, China has become a subject that has grown ever closer to my heart. 
In saying that, I am not just thinking about the steadily closer ties between our countries. On 
my  trips  to  China,  I  have  also  constantly  been  noticing  many  things  we  have  in  common. 
Germany is regarded in China – at least in my experience – as a very reliable partner and as 
a  model  in many kinds of  issues.  In  particular,  the  German  economic  model  with  a  strong 
Mittelstand and the financial sector’s function of fundamentally serving the real economy are 
cited as models in China. 
Speaking about China at the moment, we often first think of headlines such as “Slump in growth 
in China” or “Stock market crash in Shanghai”. In my speech, I want to put those headlines 
into perspective and set them in the context of China’s ongoing opening – and, saying that, I 
explicitly  do  not  mean  just  its  financial  and  economic  opening,  but  rather  the  overall 
transformation process in the Chinese economy. I shall give a brief overview of the status quo 
and  present  the  outlook  for  the  future  internationalisation  of  the  renminbi  and  for  what 
opportunities this will open up not only for large German enterprises, but also – and especially 
– for the small and medium-sized firms which are so important in Germany and well regarded 
in China. 
Following a long period of strong gains, stock prices fell dramatically in the summer of this 
year, first in July and then again in August. As I see it, the significant slump in prices on the 
Chinese  stock  market  represents,  first  and  foremost,  a  correction  of  the  preceding  rapid 
increase.  Between mid-2014  and  June  2015,  equity  indices  went  up  by  around  150%.  For 
many market participants, this was a clear indication of an exaggeration. Yet again, it became 
apparent that financial markets are not a one-way street – not even in China. Since the capital 
market  in  China  is  still  comparatively  heavily  regulated  in  comparison  with  other  large 
economies, the direct wealth effects of the slide in prices were limited for foreign investors. 
That is because roughly only 3% of the equities are held by them. 
The contagion effects stem from the far greater worries of investors about a slump in growth 
in China and its repercussions for the global demand of the People’s Republic. Nevertheless, 
as  I  see  it,  the  price  slump  was  not  driven  solely  by  the  poorer  outlook  for  the  Chinese 
economy. Another key factor was speculation about when the United States would adjust its 
ultra-accommodative monetary policy with the first interest rate hike since 2007. These two 
topics  were  the  subject  of  much  discussion  during  the  typically  less  busy  trading  days  in 
August. The absence of many market participants led to less liquid and more volatile markets. 
These various factors can explain why the correction on the markets was so violent. 
The  Chinese  government  revised  its  growth  forecast  downwards  compared  with  previous 
years to what is now 7%.1 This is much lower than the larger growth rates of past years. Even 
so, I would like to put this supposedly bad news into perspective: China is now the second-
largest economy in the world. By virtue of its sheer size alone, this means that growth of 7% 
today will leave a larger footprint on the global economy than, say, growth of 11% did in 2005. 
                                                
1 
IMF forecast: 2015 6.8%; 2016 6.3%. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   In  addition,  more  moderate  rates  of  growth  are  a  typical  consequence  of  the  catching-up 
process of emerging market economies with rising per capita income. Just to make it absolutely 
crystal clear what this supposedly small growth of 7% means in terms of size, it should be 
considered that this is an increase which is roughly equivalent to the annual gross domestic 
product of Switzerland. 
The  lower  rates  on  the  road  to  a  more  balanced  path  of  growth  are  accompanied  by  a 
departure, which was initiated some years ago, from a purely export-oriented economic model 
to one that is more consumer-oriented. This transformation can also be seen in the sectoral 
growth rates. The services sector, for example, now contributes a share of roughly 50% to 
Chinese GDP. The government itself describes the lower overall rates of growth as the “new 
normal”. 
The current slowdown in Chinese economic activity has left a clear mark on the international 
financial markets recently. It is true that China’s economy, which takes up some 10% of global 
goods imports, is very important. But retarding effects on resurgent activity in Germany would 
be something to be concerned about only if there were to be a dramatic slump in the Chinese 
economy.  According  to  our  estimates,  a  4%-points  drop  in  growth  in  China  would  lower 
German gross  domestic  product  by  roughly  a  quarter  percentage.  Such  a  slump  is  not  be 
expected at present, however. All things considered, the neighbouring Asian countries – owing 
to their geographical proximity and strong economic links – are likely to feel the negative effects 
more severely than the western industrial nations. 
We are seeing a clear correction in the industrial sector, in which excess capacity is being 
reduced. This is also confirmed by German exporters and producers on site. Growth in trade 
and services still seems to be good, however. Retail sales are clearly increasing and many 
“New Economy” firms are rushing towards ever new records in sales and profits. Consumer 
demand  still  appears  to  be  intact.  Risks  exist  on  account  of  high  levels  of  debt  in  local 
government and state-owned enterprises. 
Many observers still rate the data quality of cyclical indicators as a challenge. For example, 
there are numerous monthly indicators for the industrial sector, but reliable data on the services 
sector are often available only on a quarterly basis. China is now tackling this problem. At the 
beginning of September, the National Bureau of Statistics announced that it would calculate 
gross domestic product in future in accordance with international standards. 
The  Chinese  currency,  the  renminbi,  is  playing  a  key  role  in  the  economic  and  political 
transformation. In the export-oriented growth model it was an important management tool, but 
its significance as an actively used instrument is waning given advancing transformation and 
stronger orientation to services. 
The internationalisation of the renminbi has come a long way over the past few years. The 
renminbi has now becomes established as a trading currency. According to data supplied by 
the  international  payment  service  provider  SWIFT,  in  August  the  renminbi  overtook  the 
Japanese  yen  among  the  most  traded  currencies.  Although  cross-border  payments  are 
currently well below the use of the US dollar or the euro, its share of now 2.8% is remarkable. 
As recently as 2012, it ranked in twelfth place with a share of merely 0.8%. This constantly 
increasing use of the renminbi as a transaction currency is also the outcome of the worldwide 
expansion  in  clearing  houses.  One  example  of  this  is  the  launch  of  the  clearing  bank  in 
Frankfurt am Main last year. 
The renminbi has thus already taken its first step to being a trading currency. The next step to 
becoming an investment currency is still being hampered by a number of capital controls. But 
the barriers are constantly being dismantled. So far, the Chinese side has been acting very 
prudently in these matters and I assume that will remain the case in the future. 
The  barriers  are  being  dismantled  by  the  constant  expansion  of  existing  programmes  to 
promote  cross-border  renminbi  transactions.  This  is  where  programmes  with  investment 
quotas  for  institutional  investors  are  playing  a  key  role.  Furthermore,  the  merger  of  the 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   Shanghai and Hong Kong stock exchanges allow foreign investors limited access to the capital 
market of the mainland. 
Investors are increasingly using the renminbi as an investment currency. Also establishing the 
renminbi as a reserve currency has been the declared aim of the Chinese government since 
as long ago as 2009. China’s interest in the renminbi being included in the basket of currencies 
for the special drawing rights (SDRs) of the IMF is therefore understandable. It is also clear 
that  the  currency  basket  should  reflect  the  world  economic  balance  of  power.  And,  in  that 
respect, China has now undoubtedly become an economic heavyweight. 
At present, the currency basket is based on the US dollar, the euro, the Japanese yen and the 
pound sterling. For a currency to be accepted into the SDR basket, it must be significant for 
international trade, serve as an internationally widespread medium of payment and be freely 
usable. Inclusion in the SDR basket is currently reviewed at regular intervals in accordance 
with the existing criteria. The outcome of the evaluation and the relevant decision are expected 
before the end of this year. 
Many  commentators  acknowledge  the  country’s  liberalisation  efforts.  The  availability  of 
market-based exchange rates and interest rates is essential so that the currency basket can 
go on fulfilling its intended purpose. 
Furthermore, the Chinese central bank announced on 11 August 2015 that the daily fixing of 
the exchange rate against the US dollar would be more closely geared to the price on the 
previous  evening. The  renminbi  subsequently  depreciated  markedly  and  can  now fluctuate 
more freely. Some voices in the media interpreted this as yet another deliberate attempt to 
manipulate the exchange rate with the aim of inducing an artificial devaluation. As they see it, 
China is supporting its own exporters by artificially boosting competitiveness. However, it is 
also a further liberalising step by the Chinese government. Even the IMF has praised the move, 
as this reform of the exchange rate fixing procedure gives greater weight to market forces. 
The  use  of  the renminbi  is forging  ahead  in  other  areas  of  the capital market  as  well.  For 
example, “Dim Sum bonds” are now being issued across the globe. Named after the tasty 
dumplings,  these  are  renminbi-denominated  bonds  issued  outside  mainland  China.  Such 
bonds issued in Germany have been dubbed “Goethe bonds” by market participants. Several 
Goethe bonds have been issued in the past two years and more such bonds are to be expected 
to be launched as the renminbi becomes more liquid. 
Germany is Europe’s largest economy and has the closest trade links with China. Due to these 
close real economic ties between our enterprises, it is obvious that the settlement of payment 
flows should be as efficient and thus as direct as possible. To this end, a clearing bank was 
set up in Frankfurt last year that clears, for instance, payments made by German companies 
to Chinese suppliers. 
Large German enterprises have had a presence in China for quite some time now. However, 
the ongoing opening of the Chinese market and the simplified clearing of transactions also 
provides small and medium-sized enterprises a wide range of growth opportunities. It is likely 
that these enterprises will step up their involvement in China even further in the future. Indeed, 
a survey by a commercial bank2 has revealed that 17% of SMEs engaged in business with 
China already settle their accounts in renminbi. Another 11% are said to be planning to switch 
their invoices to the Chinese currency. These enterprises are hoping to gain advantages in 
price negotiations as well as better market access. In addition, it means that enterprises can 
better hedge exchange rate risks. With a clearing bank in their own country, enterprises can, 
for example, settle accounts in their own time zone, in German and under German law while 
                                                
2  Commerzbank. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   still having a direct link to the Chinese payments system. In this way, payments can be settled 
faster and potentially also at lower cost. 
A direct connection is now also possible through the new China International Payments System 
(CIPS). Participating banks have been able to settle their payments directly with China via this 
system since 8 October 2015. The stability and efficiency of CIPS will have a decisive impact 
on the future of the various pre-existing trading platforms. The same is true of the clearing 
banks. 
Legal risks for foreign enterprises are often cited as a problem for those wishing to expand 
their business in China. The Chinese government, too, is aware of this problem. In February 
2015, Prime Minister Li stressed once again that the climate for foreign investors in China 
needed  further  improvement.  The  World  Bank’s  annual  Doing  Business  Report  examines 
business regulations in, at last count, 189 economies on the basis of 36 indicators. China is 
currently  ranked  in  90th  place.  There  is  therefore  still  room  for  improvement.  This  can  be 
achieved,  for  instance,  by  forging  ahead  with  agreements  to  use  common  standards  and 
dismantling barriers to market entry. 
Achieving a mutual understanding of corporate culture in the various markets can be aided 
through personal contact. More and more Chinese delegations are coming to Germany every 
year. One of the objectives of these visits is to examine and gain an understanding of small 
and medium-sized family businesses and their structures. After all, this organisational structure 
is often cited as a blueprint in reforming the Chinese growth model – even though it could never 
be adopted in every single aspect. In China, it is intended that a corps of small and medium-
sized private enterprises will provide “new”, more qualitative growth and boost the innovative 
power and competitiveness of Chinese enterprises. Over the past decade, China has been 
attempting, through various channels, to support the established enterprises by offering fiscal 
incentives such as tax breaks. 
At a meeting between the Chinese President and the Federal Chancellor during the former’s 
visit in March 2014, both countries agreed to establish a high-level financial dialogue. This took 
place for the first time in the spring of this year in Berlin. The aim of the meeting between the 
finance  ministries  and  the  central  banks  is  to  institutionalise  cooperation,  also  in  financial 
matters.  This  concerns,  among  other  things,  not  only  issues  of  financial  supervision  and 
regulation, but also international cooperation within the G20. An outcome of the meeting is that 
assistance is to be provided for investment by small and medium-sized enterprises and the 
cross-border settlement of securities and derivatives is to be made easier. 
I expect that these trade relations will become even closer and that financial relations, too, will 
continue to deepen. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
