   Sayuri Shirai: Japan’s economic and price developments and monetary 
policy – underlying inflation trend and inflation expectations 
Speech by Ms Sayuri Shirai, Member of the Policy Board of the Bank of Japan, at a meeting 
with business leaders, Shimane, 25 November 2015. 
Accompanying charts can be found at the end of the speech. 
 Introduction 
I. 
Good morning. I feel honored to have an opportunity to meet with the local government officials 
and business representatives here today. Let me also express my sincere gratitude for your 
kind cooperation with the activities of the Bank of Japan’s Matsue Branch. Today, I would like 
to  talk  about  the  Bank’s  baseline  scenario  of  the  outlook  for  economic  activity  and  prices 
through fiscal 2017 as well as risks to the scenario, as described in the October 2015 Outlook 
for Economic Activity and Prices (hereafter the Outlook Report). Accordingly, I also will present 
and explain my views. 
Japan’s medium-term outlook for economic activity and risk assessment 
II. 
Let me begin with Japan’s economic activity. 
Outlook for economic activity 
A. 
In the Bank’s baseline scenario of the outlook for economic activity, the projected growth rate 
for fiscal 2015 was revised considerably downward while the projections for fiscal 2016 and 
2017 were more or less unchanged, compared with those in the July 2015 interim assessment. 
Nevertheless,  domestic demand is likely to  increase and exports are expected to  continue 
increasing moderately on the back of the recovery in overseas economies. A virtuous cycle 
among  production,  income,  and  spending  is  likely  to  be  maintained  in  the  corporate  and 
household  sectors.  Firms’  and  households’  growth  expectations  and  potential  economic 
growth  are  also  likely  to  rise  moderately  in  line  with  continued  accommodative  financial 
conditions. In fiscal 2017, the rate of economic growth is likely to decelerate significantly – 
mainly due to the effects of the planned consumption tax hike and cyclical deceleration  in 
business fixed investment – but is still likely to remain positive (Chart 1). 
My  outlook  for  economic  activity  is  somewhat  lower  than  the  median  of  the  Policy  Board 
members’ forecasts: around 1 percent for fiscal 2015; a little less than around 1.5 percent for 
fiscal 2016; and slightly above 0 percent for fiscal 2017, owing to a significant decline in the 
growth rate, due, for example, to the planned consumption tax hike. Let me explain in some 
detail. 
For fiscal 2015, my projection is lower than that in the July 2015 interim assessment, reflecting 
the  negative  economic  growth  recorded  in  the  April-June  quarter  (relative  to  the  previous 
quarter), mediocre performance thereafter, and the prospect that such performance is likely to 
continue for the time being. 
Several factors comprise the background to this outlook. First, I adopted a more conservative 
projection of real exports, not only because external demand was temporarily weak, but also 
because more consideration was being given to the possibility that structural changes had 
been hampering rapid export recovery. The latter point is consistent with the fact that industrial 
production  and  exports  by  Japanese  firms  have  remained  sluggish  while  those  by  their 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   
overseas subsidiaries have expanded rapidly since 2009.1 In particular, a shift to overseas 
production, mainly in the transportation machinery and electrical machinery sectors, left the 
Japanese economy with the general-purpose, production & business oriented machinery, and 
information  &  communication  equipment  sectors,  etc.  as  the  main  engine  for  generating 
domestic production and export growth. The export performance of these leading sectors has 
been stagnant, mainly due to a deceleration in economic growth in Asia. Although real exports 
improved very recently, partly due to the release of new smartphones, they are likely to be 
more  or  less  constant  for  the  time  being  in  light  of  the  economic  slowdown  in  emerging 
economies. 
Second, I revised downward my projection of real private consumption for fiscal 2015. Quarter-
on-quarter growth rates for real consumption and real retail sales have turned positive in the 
July-September  quarter.  However,  this  downward  revision  was  attributable  to  (1)  very 
moderate  real  wage  growth  after  turning  positive  in  July  this  year  and  (2)  stagnant 
developments in the consumer confidence index and its components over the next six months 
– including  consumer  perception  indices  on  income  growth  and willingness  to  buy  durable 
goods. Nevertheless, looking ahead, a moderate recovery trend in consumption is likely to be 
maintained as nominal wages will continue on a moderate rising trend, amid the tightening 
labor market conditions. 
Third, I revised downward my projection of business fixed investment for fiscal 2015 as well, 
owing to negative growth recorded in the April-June quarter (relative to the previous quarter). 
In contrast to positive business fixed investment plans for fiscal 2015 reported by the Bank’s 
Tankan (Short-Term Economic Survey of Enterprises in Japan), actual machinery orders and 
capital goods shipment have remained disappointing; some firms may postpone their fixed 
investment plans because of higher unexpected costs caused by labor shortages and rising 
prices  of  construction  materials.  One  positive  development,  meanwhile,  is  a  sustained 
recovery in residential investment. The recent problems related to the apartment construction 
wrongdoings  in  Yokohama  and  other  related  problems  may  dampen  such  investment 
temporarily. However, I continue to project a steady recovery in residential investment under 
the low interest rate environment, since a front-loaded increase in demand prior to the planned 
consumption tax hike will gradually materialize. 
For  fiscal  2016,  I  am  projecting  relatively  high  economic  growth  owing  to  a  front-loaded 
increase in private consumption and residential investment prior to the planned consumption 
tax hike, amid the favorable employment situation. However, I made a moderate downward 
revision compared with the July 2015 interim assessment, mainly due to lower-than-expected 
real export growth. My outlook is more cautious than the median of the Policy Board members’ 
forecasts,  probably  because  I  allocate  a  greater  weight  to  a  potential  loss  of  economic 
opportunities arising from labor shortages, resulting in a more moderate pace of economic 
growth. In Japan, firms with good business conditions tend to feel labor shortages and to be 
increasingly  constrained  from  expanding  business  activities,  while  firms  with  bad  business 
conditions tend to operate their businesses by managing existing employment. This may be 
one reason why the pace of replacing nonviable less active firms with viable active firms is 
slow, thereby hampering economic growth. 
Upside and downside risk assessment with regard to economic activity 
B. 
In the October 2015 Outlook Report, the Bank pointed out the following as risks to its baseline 
scenario for economic activity: (1) developments in overseas economies; (2) the effects of 
the planned consumption tax hike in April 2017; (3) firms’ and households’ medium- to long-
term  growth  expectations;  and  (4)  fiscal  sustainability  in  the  medium  to  long  term.  On  the 
whole, it assessed that risks are skewed to the downside. 
                                                
1   See Ministry of Economy, Trade and Industry, “Global Shipment Index.” 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   
In my risk assessment related to economic activity, the upside and downside risks are 
likely to remain balanced through fiscal 2015 and 2016. By contrast, risks for fiscal 2017 are 
tilted to the downside. Particularly, I find the following risks related to overseas economies 
important: 
• 
In  the  Chinese  economy,  while  the  labor  force  population  ratio  declines,  private 
consumption and Internet sales are firm, due in part to a continuing rise in wages. But 
the year-on-year rate of increase in retail sales for the first ten months of 2015 remains 
moderately below the annual target of 13 percent. The tertiary sector, i.e., services 
industries,  is  growing  and  already  accounts  for  over  50  percent  of  the  total  value 
added of the economy. Whether the services industries could become an engine for 
domestic and global economic growth in the foreseeable future is yet to be seen and 
may incur downside risk, given that an increasing number of private-sector firms face 
uncertainty  with  respect  to  financing  conditions  amid  the  more  cautious  lending 
behavior of the banking sector. 
Other Asian economies are expected to see stronger growth, led mainly by domestic 
demand,  since  the  pace  of  trade  growth  through  the  global  value  chain  has 
decelerated.  However,  the  downside  risk  is  that  such  developments  in  domestic 
demand could be contained by large-scale portfolio capital outflows and the amplified 
volatility  in  the  foreign  exchange  and  capital  markets,  perhaps  as  a  result  of  the 
normalization of the U.S. monetary policy. 
The  U.S.  economy  may  achieve  greater-than-expected  growth  if  business  fixed 
investment and residential investment expand firmly in tandem with greater growth in 
labor productivity and wages. This is plausible given that the deleveraging process 
has made progress in the corporate and household sectors. 
In  the  euro  area,  the fragmentation  in  interbank markets  has  improved  and  some 
cross-border  capital  flows  have  increased,  partly  owing  to  the  accommodative 
monetary  easing  performed  by  the  European  Central  Bank, thereby  leading  to  an 
increase  in  lending  to  firms  and  households.  In  addition,  the  intra-regional 
competitiveness gap has shrunk as the wage growth rate per worker in Germany has 
been  maintained  at  a  high  level,  at  around  3  percent,  while  wages  in  peripheral 
countries have been contained and adjusted. The upside risk is that these favorable 
developments  may  enable  the  euro  area  to  generate  stronger-than-expected 
economic recovery. 
   In  addition,  for  fiscal  2017,  the  downside  risk  is  greater  because  there  is  considerable 
uncertainty at present related to subsequent declines in demand and in real income after the 
planned consumption tax hike. It is not clear how much these negative impacts could be offset 
by a “quantitative” expansion of public- and private-sector fixed investment associated with the 
Tokyo 2020 Olympic Games, amid the tightened labor market conditions. 
Japan’s medium-term outlook for prices and risk assessment 
III. 
Next, I will turn to the price outlook and risk assessment. 
Outlook for prices 
A. 
In the Bank’s baseline scenario of the outlook for prices, the year-on-year rate of change 
in the core consumer price index (CPI, all items less fresh food and excluding the direct effects 
of the consumption tax hikes) is likely to be at around 0 percent for the time being, lower than 
that in the July 2015 interim assessment. After that, the rate of increase in the core CPI is 
projected to accelerate toward 2 percent as the underlying trend in inflation steadily rises and 
the effects of the decline in crude oil prices dissipate. Although the timing of reaching around 
2 percent depends on developments in crude oil prices, this is projected to happen around the 
second half of fiscal 2016, assuming that crude oil prices will rise moderately from the recent 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   
level. Thereafter, Japan’s economy is expected to gradually shift to a growth path that sustains 
such inflation in a stable manner (Chart 1). 
Regarding  my  outlook  for  prices,  let  me  first  present  an  overall  picture.  Although  the 
mechanism of the price rises I assume is the same as that in the Bank’s baseline scenario, my 
projections remain more cautious than the median of the Policy Board members’ forecasts. 
The outlook throughout fiscal 2017 was revised somewhat downward. Currently, my projection 
is that the rate of increase in the core CPI is likely to rise closer to around 2 percent “from the 
end of fiscal 2016 to early fiscal 2017” – a delay of about a quarter from my previous projection 
of “toward the end of fiscal 2016.” Let me explain my outlook in some detail. 
My projection for prices for fiscal 2015 is that the core CPI will be at around 0 percent. The 
slight downward revision from the July 2015 interim assessment is attributable to the decline 
in crude oil prices. Also, the delay in the pace of the output gap improvement was taken into 
account as the actual output gap deteriorated in the April-June quarter. My projection for 
fiscal  2016  that  the  core  CPI  inflation  will  rise  to  a  little  over  1  percent  is  rather  cautious 
compared to that presented previously. This reflects (1) the remaining effects of the drop in 
energy prices, (2) a delay of about a quarter in terms of the timing for the output gap to turn 
positive, and (3) a delay in the timing for inflation expectations to begin rising owing to a slower 
pace of increase in prices. Thereafter, the rate of increase in the core CPI will accelerate and 
reach  around  1.7–1.8  percent,  or  rise  closer  to  around  2  percent  from  the  January-March 
quarter of 2017 (the peak of the front-loaded increase in domestic demand) to the April-June 
quarter  (the  period  most  likely  to  see  an  opportunistic  price  increase  with  the  planned 
consumption tax hike). My outlook for fiscal 2017 as a whole is that the average rate of core 
CPI inflation will decline somewhat and reach around a little over 1.5 percent – slightly below 
my July assessment – mainly due to the effects of the decline in demand following the front-
loaded increase and a decline in real income. 
On the timing with respect to achieving sustained inflation of around 2 percent in a 
stable manner, it might be necessary to assess this over a little longer time span. This is 
because there is high uncertainty regarding the effects of the planned consumption tax hike 
and the “quantitative” expansion of public- and private-sector fixed investment associated with 
the  Tokyo  2020  Olympic  Games.  Moreover,  it  is  likely  to  take  some  time  for  inflation 
expectations to rise. 
Upside and downside risk assessment with regard to prices 
B. 
With regard to risks to the Bank’s baseline scenario for prices, the Bank highlighted the 
following  four  factors:  (1)  developments  in  firms’  and  households’  medium-  to  long-term 
inflation expectations; (2) developments in the output gap; (3) responsiveness of inflation to 
the output gap; and (4) developments in import prices. It assessed that risks are skewed to the 
downside. 
My risk assessment related to prices, on the other hand, is that risks for fiscal 2015 are 
balanced but those for fiscal 2016 and 2017 are tilted to the downside. In particular, there is a 
great deal of uncertainty related to crude oil prices and foreign exchange rate developments, 
which could generate both upside and downside risks to the price outlook. On the other hand, 
there is a downside risk that a steady increase in inflation expectations, a key factor in raising 
inflation in a stable manner, may not take place as fast as projected. On the whole, therefore, 
the risks are judged to be tilted to the downside. 
C. 
Expression on the timing with respect to achieving around 2 percent inflation 
In the baseline scenario described in the October 2015 Outlook Report, the Bank postponed 
the timing of reaching around 2 percent inflation by two quarters, from “around the first half 
of fiscal 2016” as described in the April Outlook Report to “around the second half of fiscal 
2016.”  On  this  front,  I  opposed  the  expression  “around  the  first  half  of  fiscal  2016”  and 
proposed to change it to “in or around fiscal 2016” at the Monetary Policy Meeting (MPM) held 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   
on  April  30.  Meanwhile,  at  the  MPM  held  on  October  30,  I  supported  the  Bank’s  revised 
expression. Let me explain why. 
Due to the fact that the median of the Policy Board members’ forecasts was revised downward 
sharply this time, it is apparently unfeasible to achieve around 2 percent inflation around the 
first half of fiscal 2016. Therefore, it is reasonable for the Bank to change the expression. 
However, given that it assessed that risks to prices are skewed to the downside, it may be 
appropriate for the Bank to use an expression that allows for a wider time span to reach around 
2 percent, such as “from around the second half of fiscal 2016 to around the first half of fiscal 
2017” – instead of “around the second half of fiscal 2016.” 
On the other hand, the timing expressed as “around the second half of fiscal 2016” practically 
corresponds  to  the  latter  half  of  the  intended  period  in  my  proposal  in  April.  Also,  more 
importantly, the expression is very similar to my present projection and could be regarded as 
more  or  less  in  line  with  it  by  interpreting  “around  2  percent” flexibly.  Based  on  these two 
reasons, I supported the Bank’s revised expression. 
Conduct of monetary policy 
IV. 
Despite the downward revision of the Bank’s outlook for economic activity and prices from the 
July  2015  interim  assessment,  I  view  that  it  is  important  for  the  Bank  to  maintain  the 
accommodative monetary environment by continuing the current guideline for money market 
operations. Before I elaborate on my line of thinking, by making referrals in contrast to trends 
observed last October when the expansion of quantitative and qualitative monetary easing 
(QQE) was implemented, let me emphasize that the price stability target of 2 percent does not 
just  pursue  a  price  hike;  the  target  should  be  achieved  with  sustained  wage  growth  and 
expansion of private consumption. On this front, it is important to assess whether  Japan’s 
economy  continues  to  face  a  virtuous  cycle  among  production,  income,  and  spending 
operating in both the corporate and household sectors. Let me highlight five viewpoints that 
are essential to making such an assessment. 
First,  firms’  business  conditions  and  current  profits  are  more  favorable  than  those  in  the 
previous year. For example, the Bank’s September 2015 Tankan indicates that the diffusion 
index (DI) for actual business conditions for all industries – calculated by subtracting the 
percentage  share  of  firms  responding  that  business  conditions  are  “unfavorable”  from  the 
share of those indicating that business conditions are “favorable” – improved moderately from 
7 percent in June to 8 percent in September, in contrast to a decline from 7 percent to 4 percent 
over  the  same  period  last  year.  In  particular,  the  business  conditions  DI  of  large 
nonmanufacturing enterprises improved further from 23 percent in June to 25 percent in 
September – exceeding the levels of the previous year (dropping from 19 percent to 13 percent 
over  the  same  period).  Projected  current  profits  are  favorable  as  well.  The  September 
Tankan shows that the year-on-year rate of change in projected current profits of all industries 
for  fiscal  2015  recorded  3.3  percent  (4.0  percent  in  manufacturing  and  2.7  percent  in 
nonmanufacturing). The profitability outlook shows a complete change from that for fiscal 2014 
reported in September last year, when the rate of change in projected profits was minus 4.0 
percent (minus 2.6 percent in manufacturing and minus 5.1 percent in nonmanufacturing). 
Furthermore, let me plot the relationship between the year-on-year rate of growth in projected 
current profits and sales for all industries for fiscal 2015 as of September 2015 (Chart 2). 
This shows that a relatively large number of sectors are positioned in the first quadrant (positive 
territory for both growth in current profits and sales). Generally, growth in current profits is 
much greater than that in sales – reflecting an improvement in the terms of trade (caused by a 
plunge  in  commodity  prices  such  as  for  crude  oil)  as  well  as  profits  from  revaluation  of 
dividends  from  overseas  and  higher  yen-based  export  prices,  both  driven  by  the  yen’s 
depreciation. Noticeable developments are that the rates of growth in current profits and sales 
in (1) food; (2) accommodations, eating & drinking services; and (3) services for individuals 
are greater than those for fiscal 2014 reported in September 2014. The food sector, which is 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
   
included in manufacturing, projects export sales growth of 5 percent and domestic sales growth 
of  3  percent  –  suggesting  that  domestic  private  consumption  is  quite  solid  as  well.  The 
aforementioned data indicate that domestic demand is recovering from the adverse effects of 
the consumption tax hike in April 2014. 
Second, a risk of returning to deflation is considered low given that prices of a wide range of 
consumption  items,  excluding  energy,  have  been  rising.  While  the  Bank  assesses  the 
underlying trend in inflation based on various indicators, typical indicators are mainly the core 
CPI and trimmed mean. Both exclude temporarily volatile items in order to grasp the trend 
behavior of prices. They often are utilized to project future prices owing to their relatively high 
predictive power. The difference is that the core CPI always excludes the same items that tend 
to show high volatility from the consumption basket weight. In contrast, the trimmed mean 
looks  at the  price  changes  every  month for  each  item of  the  CPI  and  eliminates  a  certain 
fraction (e.g., 10 percent) of the most extreme observations at both ends of the largest and 
smallest changes. Thus, items eliminated each month could vary month to month. 
The Bank uses the CPI for all items less fresh food, or the “core CPI,” in determining its 
medium-term outlook for prices in the Outlook Report. Energy prices are included in the core 
CPI because they did not have a statistically significant impact on CPI movements in the long 
term. However, as a sharp fall in energy prices since the latter half of the previous year has 
amplified the volatility in the core CPI, it has become more important to assess the underlying 
trend in inflation in a comprehensive manner, not only with the core CPI but also with multiple 
indicators. As one such indicator, the Bank has begun to release the “CPI for all items less 
fresh food and energy” on a monthly basis. While the rate of change in the core CPI has been 
at around 0 percent recently, that in the CPI for all items less fresh food and energy has risen 
to  1.2  percent  lately  (Chart  3).  Moreover,  the  trimmed  mean  is  increasingly  becoming 
important since the indicator automatically removes highly volatile items every month – given 
that  fluctuations  in  commodity  prices  and  foreign  exchange  rates  have  amplified.  The  “10 
percent trimmed mean” has been rising moderately and is currently at 0.6 percent, and this 
contrasts sharply with the declining trend observed about the same period last year. 
Third, firms’ pricing behavior with respect to sales prices has shown positive developments. 
To see this, let me plot the relationship between the actual sales price DI and the rate of 
growth in projected domestic sales for fiscal 2015, according to the September Tankan 
(Chart  4).  The  sales  price  DI  is  calculated  by  subtracting  the  percentage  share  of  firms 
responding that their sales prices are “falling” from the share of those indicating that the prices 
are “rising.” Chart 4 indicates that a few sectors are positioned in the first quadrant (positive 
territory for both the actual sales price DI and projected domestic sales). Developments in 
sectors such as (1) food and (2) accommodations, eating & drinking services are worthy of 
note. The sales price DI in these sectors used to be negative to a relatively large degree or 
showed greater responses with “fall” than those with “rise” before QQE was launched. This 
indicates a significant turnaround in firms’ pricing behavior toward an environment where they 
find it easier to raise their sales prices than before. 
The current rise in a wide range of CPI items reflects three factors: (a) an import price rise 
driven by the yen’s depreciation; (b) an increase in domestic demand; and (c) a pass-through 
of a wage rise. While it is difficult to disentangle these factors, the impact of (a) above, the 
import price rise, seems large and it eventually will fade away unless a further depreciation of 
the yen takes place. Meanwhile, firms have provided high value-added goods and services, 
and higher sales prices have accompanied a sales increase in some items, as seen in the food 
and accommodations, eating & drinking services sectors. Looking ahead, nominal wages are 
likely to rise and the output gap is likely to improve in positive territory, which will help enhance 
the sustainability of a price rise. 
Fourth, developments in inflation expectations should be monitored closely, although some 
indicators have declined recently. Inflation expectations are a collective term referring to those 
of households, firms, and economists, as well as market-based indicators. Attention should be 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   
paid to a recent decline in inflation expectations of firms and economists, as well as in market-
based indicators. At the same time, however, a decline in inflation expectations has been a 
global phenomenon since summer 2015. Therefore, it is important to understand whether such 
a  decline  reflects  a  downward  revision  of  commodity  price  projections  and  a  temporary 
deceleration in global economic growth, or alternatively a deterioration of the outlook for the 
domestic  supply-demand  balance.  On  this  front,  domestic  private  consumption  has  been 
resilient. The  corporate sector  has  maintained  its  positive  business  fixed  investment  plans 
according to various recent surveys, and thus fixed investment is likely to expand in the near 
future.  These  domestic  demand  conditions  support  the  view  that  domestic  supply-demand 
balance is not bad at all. Inflation expectations, therefore, are likely to show a sustainable rise 
once the rate of change in the CPI begins to rise following an improvement in the output gap. 
Fifth, as a related issue, households’ inflation expectations tend to be higher than those 
of firms. Households tend to  perceive that prices are always rising and they always  keep 
positive inflation expectations even under a mild deflationary phase or a very slight inflationary 
phase (Chart 5). This suggests the presence of an upward bias in inflation expectations. On 
this point, I have delivered several speeches abroad in the past and have suggested that the 
scale of upward bias appears to be generally greater in Japan than in Europe and the United 
States.2 Given the past long-standing stagnant wages, households appear to have formed an 
expectation  over  time  that  future  wages  will  always  decline.  This  has  led  households  to 
anticipate tighter budgets, and such strong defensive action has resulted in a larger upward 
bias in their inflation expectations. In this environment, it is important for households to form a 
perception that wages will increase steadily and that such an increase will continue; indeed, 
wages are currently improving moderately. In addition, at present, a further monetary policy 
action is unnecessary given that current sluggish movements of the core CPI caused by a 
decline in energy prices are temporary, and that a decline in production costs and the resultant 
improvement in corporate profits might enhance the opportunity for firms to raise wages more 
readily. 
Based on these five viewpoints, it is time to closely monitor whether prices will exhibit a rising 
trend under the current accommodative monetary easing environment. If such a path toward 
price rises does not materialize at all, the Bank – depending on the causes – may consider 
some adjustments with regard to the monetary policy. 
This brings me to the end of my speech. 
Thank you very much indeed for your kind attention. 
 
                                                
2   For recent speeches, see Sayuri Shirai, “Monetary Policies in a Diversifying Global Economy: Japan, the United 
States, and the Asia-Pacific Region,” Remarks at the Panel Discussion Organized by the Federal Reserve Bank 
of San Francisco, Bank of Japan, 2015, and Sayuri Shirai, “Unconventional Monetary Policies of the Bank of 
Japan and European Central Bank,” Remarks at the Panel Discussion at the Bruegel Annual Meeting, Bank of 
Japan, 2015. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  8 
    BIS central bankers’ speeches 
     BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
    10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
     BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
    12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
