   Erkki Liikanen: Eurosystem’s monetary policy and its transmission 
Speech by Mr Erkki Liikanen, Governor of the Bank of Finland, at the Rotman ICPM Forum, 
Helsinki, 5 October 2015. 
 Accompanying slides (PDF) can be found on the Bank of Finland’s website. 
[Slide 1: Title page] 
Welcome 
[Slide 2: Agenda] 
[Slide 3: I – Eurosystem’s Expanded Asset Purchase Programme (EAPP): Background] 
[Slide 4: Decisive action by the Eurosystem stabilised financial markets] 
The  financial  crisis  created  great  uncertainty  and  increased  challenges  from  the  monetary 
policy-making. Not just the Eurosystem but central banks around the world reacted by cutting 
policy rates, increasing their banking system’s liquidity and adopting so-called non-standard 
measures of monetary policy.  
In July 2012 the President of the ECB, Mario Draghi, committed to do “whatever it takes to 
preserve euro”. This came to mark a turning point for the crisis: markets calmed down and 
fears of euro area breaking down were removed.  
During the same month, in its monetary policy meeting, the ECB’s Governing Council cut the 
main  policy  rate  to  below  1  percent,  and  the  deposit  rate  to  zero.  By  mid-2014  all  crisis 
countries apart from Greece were again able to borrow from private markets. 
[Side 5: Traditional monetary policy restricted by the ZLB] 
Despite stabilisation of the financial markets, the operating environment of monetary policy 
remained challenging. Inflation and expected inflation continued to slow down and short term 
money market rates increased, which meant that further monetary policy easing was needed 
to maintain price stability over the medium term. 
The policy rate is, indeed, the most straightforward tool the central bank has to steer market 
interest rates. By 2014 we, the Governing Council, had cut the policy rates almost to zero. The 
deposit rate was cut to negative in the June 2014 policy meeting. 
The sheer existence of a lower bound for policy rates complicates monetary policy decision 
making as it creates asymmetry: A central bank can always increase its policy rate to control 
inflation but the policy rate cut is limited by the zero bound even if inflation drops to very low 
levels. 
[Slide 6: Real interest rates increase if inflation expectations fall] 
The zero lower bound creates a challenge, as falling inflation puts upward pressure on real 
interest rates. It is the real interest rates, and expectations of them – not the central bank’s 
policy  rate  –  that  has  the  ultimate  impact  on  household  consumption  or  firm  investment 
decisions.  
Increasing  real  interest  rates  thus  indicated  that  further  monetary  easing  was  necessary 
despite the policy rates being close to the zero lower bound.  
[Slide 7: Eurosystem’s accommodative monetary policy] 
In  the  June  2014  monetary  policy  meeting,  the  Governing  Council  eased  the  stance  of 
monetary policy. As a part of the package, we cut the deposit rate to negative, extended the 
guarantee of banks’ access to unlimited central bank finance (given that they provide sufficient 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   
collateral) by extending fixed rate full allotment policy, and we set up a series of additional 
long-term refinancing operations that provide the banks with finance on the condition that they 
increase the value of their loans to the real economy.  
The current cycle of monetary policy easing started in October 2014 when we introduced two 
private sector asset purchase programmes: the asset backed securities purchase programme 
and the third programme for covered bonds. 
In January 2015 the Governing Council judged that additional monetary policy easing was 
needed as the inflation outlook weakened further. The Eurosystem extended its purchases to 
bonds issued by euro area governments, government agencies and European institutions.  
[Slide 8: II – Key features of EAPP] 
Let us now discuss the current, expanded asset purchase programme, in more detail. 
[Slide 9: The Eurosystem sets the liquidity of the euro area banking system] 
The Eurosystem is able to regulate the euro area banking system’s liquidity with two tools.  
Firstly, the Eurosystem organises regular refinancing operations: tenders. The interest rate 
applied to these operations is the main policy rate, which currently stands at 0.05%. With these 
refinancing  operations  the  Eurosystem  steers  short-term  money  market  rates.  The  tender 
operations are demand driven: banks can decide whether or not to participate. 
In contrast, outright asset purchases are not demand driven. By asset purchases the central 
bank actively steers liquidity of the banking sector by bond purchases. 
Participants  of  regular  tender  operations  consist  of  monetary  policy  counterparties,  mainly 
banks. Outright purchases reach directly a much broader set of financial institutions, some of 
which are not even located within the euro area. 
As instruments bought by the Eurosystem may have maturity of up to 30 years, with these 
purchases the Eurosystem is able to steer longer term interest rates. 
[Slide 10: EAPP consists of two parts] 
The Eurosystem’s asset purchase programme consists of two parts.  
The first one is the private sector purchasing programme. In this programme the Eurosystem 
purchases  covered  bonds  and  asset  backed  securities  issued  in  the  euro  area  both  from 
primary issuance and secondary markets.  
The second part is the public sector purchase programme, PSPP. Under this programme the 
Eurosystem buys bonds only from the secondary market. 
[Slide 11: Key features of the programme] 
The monthly size of purchases is 60 bn. euros. This includes ABSs, covered bonds and public 
sector bonds. 
The Governing Council stated in January that purchases ‘are intended to be carried out until 
end-September 2016 and will in any case be conducted until we see a sustained adjustment 
in the path of inflation which is consistent with our aim of achieving inflation rates below, but 
close to, 2% over the medium term.’ 
With this forward guidance, we, i.e. the Governing Council, indicated that our commitment to 
the accommodative monetary policy to align inflation with the price stability objective was the 
key component of our January decisions.  
The organisation of the programme inside the Eurosystem is such that the ECB co-ordinates 
the programme but national central banks conduct the purchases. According to this division of 
labour, the national central banks buy domestic bonds. For example, the Bank of Finland buys 
Finnish  government  bonds  from  a  broad  range  of  financial  institutions.  The  size  of  each 
country’s purchases are calculated via the country’s capital key. This parameter reflects the 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   
relative population and output of each euro country. As a result, the Bank of Finland purchases, 
on average, about 700 million euros worth of public sector bonds each month. 
In order to minimise market disturbances, the Eurosystem participates in securities lending. 
Purchases extend from short, 2 years, maturities to very long ones, up to 30 years. 
[Slide 12: III – Impact EAPP] 
[Slide 13: Transmission of central banks’ asset purchase programmes] 
The Eurosystem buys securities with newly issued central bank money. The Eurosystem’s 
balance sheet expands, and liquidity of the banking system increases.  
The impact of asset purchases transmits to output and inflation via the financial markets: yield 
curves, lending rates, asset prices and exchange rates. Financial market prices react rapidly, 
but output and prices only gradually over time. 
[Slide 14: Implementation of EAPP has been smooth. “It is a marathon”] 
This slide presents all outright asset purchase programmes of the Eurosystem, including those 
that  are  no  longer  active.  The  current  expanded  asset  purchase  programme  started  off 
smoothly and purchases followed the agreed plan. As you can see, purchases of bonds in 
particular have increased the Eurosystem’s balance sheet.  
If the EAPP is compared with a marathon, we now have 15 km behind us. 
[Slide 15: EAPP affects inflation and output via several channels] 
In what follows I will focus on four main channels via which the purchase program transmits to 
the real economy. These channels are: the expectations channel; the signalling channel; the 
portfolio balance channel; and the exchange rate channel. 
[Slide 16: 1. Expectations: First impact, immediate intraday movements in asset prices 
on 22 January] 
Financial markets expected already in the second half of 2014 that the Eurosystem would 
expand its purchases to public sector bonds. Despite this, financial markets reacted strongly 
to the Governing Council’s announcement on 22 January to the launch of bond purchases. 
Stock indices increased by a percentage, euro depreciated against the US dollar by 1.4% and 
yields of Spanish and German government bonds fell by 0.25 percentage points. The market 
response was comparable on 5 March when the Governing Council, at its monetary policy 
meeting, announced further details of the programme and that purchases would commence 
almost immediately. 
The Governing Council’s announcement exceeded market participants’ expectations, which 
was a positive surprise shock to the markets. 
[Slide 17: 2. Signalling: Forward guidance is an integral part of EAPP] 
Already in 2013 the Governing Council employed forward guidance to reduce expectations of 
an early exit from accommodative monetary policy. The Governing Council said explicitly that 
interest rates would be kept ‘at present or lower levels for an extended period of time’. 
The asset purchase programme signalled itself a continuation of accommodative monetary 
policy. This was further amplified by the Governing Council’s forward guidance. If markets were 
to interpret the asset purchases as just a temporary measure, it would not bring about a broad-
based decline in long-term interest rates. 
The Governing Council has stated 3 September 2015 that the EAPP is intended to be carried 
out  until  end-September  2016,  or  beyond,  if  necessary,  and  in  any  case,  until  we  see  a 
sustained adjustment in the path of inflation that is consistent with our aim of achieving inflation 
rates below, but close to, 2% over the medium term. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   [Slide 18: Signalling: Money market rates expected to remain low] 
Forward  guidance  has  been  credible  in  a  sense  that  expectations  on money  market  rates 
remain low well into the future. The money market rates are expected to remain zero at least 
until 2017. 
[Slide  19:  2.  Signaling:  Transmission  of  low  policy  rates  to  provision  of  credit  has 
improved] 
Further  increase  in  accommodative  monetary  policy  by  asset  purchases  has  worked  itself 
through banks’ retail interest rates. Since the announcement of the purchase programme, the 
average interest rates of new corporate loan agreements have kept falling, especially in GIIPS 
countries.  As  banks’  expectations  on the  Eurosystem’s  monetary  policy  stance  eased, the 
money market interest rates fell. For example, the 12-month Euribor declined by almost 50 
basis points since mid-2014, to 0.15%. Almost 60 % of euro area corporate loans are linked to 
Euribor rates. 
[Slide  20:  3.  Portfolio  balance:  Share  prices  have  increased,  recently  increase  in 
volatility] 
The portfolio balance channel broadens the effects of asset purchases to the whole financial 
system. If a central bank purchases long-term debt securities, the average duration of debt 
securities on the market decreases. Narrowing of the yield spread encourages investors to 
purchase bonds with even longer maturities, and long-term bond yields decline further.  
Investors  will  also  have  to  look  for  substitutes  for  government  bonds  they  sell  to  the 
Eurosystem.  Rebalancing  investment  portfolios  is  reflected  in  corporate  bond  yields  and 
equities.  A  decline  in  yield  of  corporate  bonds  reduces  funding  costs  and  encourages 
investments. A rise in securities prices increases the wealth of securities holders and thus 
consumption. 
[Slide 21: Portfolio balance: Effects of EAPP on pension funds] 
In the short run, a bond purchase programme lowers yields and increases the value of asset 
classes such as stocks. Therefore, effectiveness of the portfolio channel depends partly on the 
ability of investors to sell their sovereign bond holdings to the Eurosystem and invest in other 
securities.  
This is an issue that might be challenging to institutional investors such as pension funds, as 
rules limit their ability to invest in riskier assets. On the other hand, search for yield and higher 
returns might make some investors to take on excessive risk. 
Central banks’ asset purchase programmes are not the only reason for the globally low interest 
rate environment. In any case, medium term profitability of pension funds may be challenging 
in the low interest rate environment. For those companies that have in past made contracts 
with high return guarantees, the low interest rate environment is particularly difficult.  
The ultimate aim of the Eurosystem’s asset buying programme is to support economic activity 
and contribute to a sustained return of inflation towards the price level target. Weak nominal 
growth  is  globally  a  key  source  of  risks  to  financial  stability.  In  the  long  run,  sustainable 
economic growth is a prerequisite of a sound pension system. 
Finally, it is worth noting that financial sector risks cannot be eliminated by monetary policy. 
Macroprudential  policy  is  needed  to  promote  financial  stability.  It  is  conducted  by  national 
bodies and by pan-European institutions such as the ESRB, European Systemic Risk Board. 
In  September,  the  board  published  a  report  on  systemic risks  in  the  EU  insurance  sector, 
including those originating from low interest rate environment.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   
[Slide  22:  EA  governments  bonds make  24 %  of  insurance  companies’  and  pension 
funds’ assets] 
Government bonds and other fixed-income assets represent a large share of all assets of euro 
area insurance companies and pension funds. Government bonds alone account for 24% of 
the assets. The rest are diversified across various asset classes.  
[Slide 23: Exchange rate: The fall in EUR/USD since mid-2014 reflects policy divergence] 
The  Eurosystem’s  asset  purchase  programme,  as  well  as  divergence  in  monetary  policy 
stance,  have  weakened  the  exchange  rate  of  euro.  Firstly,  the  increased  supply  of  euros 
relative to other currencies lowers the exchange rate. Secondly, many institutional investors 
may have considered the US and UK government bonds as substitutes for bonds of high-rated 
euro area countries. Demand for other currencies leads to depreciation of euro. The nominal 
exchange rate of euro has depreciated by 8 % since January 2015.  
However, the purchase programme is not the only reason for the weakening euro. In addition, 
economic growth, inflation and interest rates are higher in the US than in euro area. 
[Slide 24: Actual and expected inflation trended down before the EAPP decision; since 
then, the probability of deflation has declined] 
The impacts of the purchase program that I have mentioned so far – expectations, interest 
rates and exchange rates – are elements of the transmission mechanism of monetary policy. 
The  ultimate  aim  is  price  stability. The  Eurosystem’s  purchasing  programme  has  played  a 
crucial role in reducing the probability of deflation as perceived by financial market participants. 
[Slide 25: Renewed decline in oil prices have put downward pressure on prices] 
Most recently, the main reason behind sluggish inflation has been the decline in the price of 
oil. It has put strong downward pressure on inflation globally. The ECB’s policy actions and 
improved confidence have been key factors supporting inflation expectations in the euro area. 
[Slide 26: Lending volumes have improved] 
The effects of the accommodative monetary are being felt in bank loan developments. The 
growth of loans to the private sector has been positive from the beginning of the purchase 
programme. Investment activity has increased in euro area on average, and private sector 
confidence has strengthened. 
[Slide 27: ECB staff projections in September] 
The  ECB’s  latest  staff  forecast  from  September  indicates  a  continued,  though  somewhat 
weaker  recovery  in  the  euro  area.  Mainly  due  to  the  global  uncertainties  --  especially  the 
slowdown  in  China  and  the  moderation  in  world  trade  --  growth  projections  were  revised 
downwards  from  June.  Increase  in  inflation  is  also  slower  than  expected.  We  monitor  all 
relevant  information. And we are ready to act, if warranted. We recall that the programme 
provides flexibility in terms of adjusting the size, composition and duration of it. 
[Slide 28: Thank you!] 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
