Cyril Roux: Cybersecurity and cyber risk 
Address  by  Mr  Cyril  Roux,  Deputy  Governor  (Financial  Regulation)  of  the  Central  Bank  of 
Ireland, 
Ireland  Risk  Management  Conference 
“Cybersecurity and cyber risk”, Dublin, 30 September 2015. 
the  Society  of  Actuaries 
to 
in 
 Many  thanks  to  the  Society  of  Actuaries  in  Ireland  for  inviting  me  to  address  such  a 
distinguished audience of risk and insurance professionals. The conference agenda covers a 
number  of  substantial  topics,  and  I  am  pleased  to  speak  to  you  about  one  that  is  rapidly 
moving up the Central Bank’s supervisory agenda: cybersecurity and cyber risk. 
Raising awareness of cybersecurity risk 
We  know  a  lot  about  the  financial  risks  such  as  interest  rate,  liquidity  and  credit  risk  that 
contributed to the crisis from which  we are emerging. We also know that the next crisis is 
unlikely to be the same as the last one. That’s why we monitor other categories of risks, such 
as  operational  risks,  faced  by  supervised  firms  and  by  the  financial  system  as  a  whole. 
Operational risks come in many guises, and we pay in particular close attention to IT risks. 
Financial  firms  are  evermore  dependent  on  their  information  technology.  The  share  of 
financial  services  provided  online  to  their  customers  continues  to  grow,  and  the  inner 
workings of financial firms, as well as their relationships with their vendors and suppliers, are 
wedded  to  their  information  systems.  Regulated  firms  are  thus  exposed  to  large  scale  IT 
risks  on  a  number  of fronts. When  part  of their IT systems fail, their  business  is  impaired, 
and, in time, so are their reputation, their finances, and ultimately their survival. Regulated 
firms  perform  critical  economic  functions  on  behalf  of  the  general  public  and  businesses. 
Their  logical  resilience  and  safety  is,  if  anything,  even  more  important than  the  security  of 
their  business  premises.  Accordingly,  the  Central  Bank  expects  regulated  firms  to  have 
robust  governance  and  policies  frameworks  around  their  data  and  information  systems, 
including their outsourced functions. Regulated firms need to identify, monitor and mitigate 
their IT risks. 
Within that universe of IT risks, I wish to focus today on cyber risk, a growing risk that has 
serious implications for prudential supervision, consumer protection and financial stability. 
The Irish insurance industry appears to share the same view. Cyber risk is at the top of your 
firms emerging risk concerns, according to the 2015 PwC Insurance Survey. However, not all 
Irish firms regulated by the Central Bank assess their exposure to cyber risk properly, and 
not all mitigate risk sufficiently. So today I wish to heighten awareness on the need for firms 
to  be  prepared  for  cyber-attacks  and  to  build  resilience  to  a  successful  attack.  I  will  also 
speak about the steps the Central Bank is taking to supervise the way this risk is addressed 
in regulated firms. 
Sources of cybersecurity incidents 
Cybersecurity incidents can come from many different sources, but the most common are: 
•
•
Criminal organisations seeking financial gain.
Employees: disgruntled employees seeking revenge or motivated by financial gain,
or accidental breaches due to human error, failure to follow internal procedures or
ineffective internal procedures.
Outsourcing: exposure due to control failures in service providers who have access
to the firms’ systems.
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
1 
   Corporate  espionage:  competitor  firms  seeking  to  steal  intellectual  property  or 
trade secrets. 
Hostile nation-states: seeking to undermine a rival state’s economy. 
Ideological groups: seeking to damage the financial system. 
• 
• 
Even  though  most  firms  are  potentially  at  risk,  financial  firms  are  particularly  targeted 
because of the criticality of their economic function and the nature and value of their assets. 
Regulated firms hold financial assets of their clients, in the form of deposits, securities, life 
insurance contracts and pension accounts, among others. They also hold a treasure trove of 
personal data, credit card numbers, social security numbers, medical records, and the like. 
Client assets and personal data are prime targets of cybercrime. To give a recent example, 
this year, the personal data of 80 million customers of the second largest health insurer in the 
US was stolen. 
Worrying trends in cybercrime 
Cybercrime encompasses some recently outlawed activities such as data theft, hacking and 
disruption of IT services. It also encompasses traditional crime, such as bank heists, fraud, 
forgery,  theft,  industrial  espionage  and  ransom.  According  to  Europol  the  annual  financial 
losses due to online payment fraud now surpass those of payment fraud with physical cards. 
Some  organised  cybercrime  groups  operate  with  multiple  divisions  and  specialists  in  key 
areas such as management, distribution, hacking, coding, server administration and money 
laundering.  Such  cybercrime  groups  can  conduct  cyber-attacks  of  great  scale  and 
sophistication, such as advanced persistent threats, which are targeted attacks on specific 
firms, designed to evade detection and to last for months or even years. Typically it is only 
when significant damage has already been done that the firm will realize anything is wrong. A 
recent  example  is  the  Carbanak  attack,  which  targeted  the  money  processing  services, 
ATMs and bank accounts of over 100 banks worldwide over a period of two years and may 
have led to up to $1bn being stolen. 
The risk/reward trade-off for cybercrime is very attractive. Cybercriminals know there is a low 
likelihood  of  being  detected,  caught  or  prosecuted  and  many  attack  strategies  can  be 
executed cheaply. This has led to a substantial broadening of the attacker base. Due to the 
proliferation  of  the  cybercrime-as-a-service  business  model,  the  cybercrime  industry  is  no 
longer just the domain of highly skilled IT people. Now a relatively low-skilled cybercriminal 
can cause significant damage. 
Irrespective  of  size,  cybercriminals  can  use  a  variety  of  approaches,  some  highly 
technological,  such  as  exploiting  previously  undiscovered  defects  in  computer  software, 
some relying on human error, such as deception of employees or spear-phishing. It is this 
human element to which I now turn. 
Employee risk: Insider-Threat and Human Error 
People can be the most vulnerable and unpredictable part of a firm’s tech infrastructure. 
There are two main types of employee driven cybersecurity risk: Insider-Threat and Human 
Error. Disgruntled current and ex-employees can be a significant source of security risk due 
to  their  knowledge  of  firms’  systems  and  data  assets.  They  may  have  a  strong  personal 
motivation to damage the firm or hold it to ransom. While security or IT staff might be the 
obvious  cases,  other  examples  include  staff  with  access  to  valuable  intellectual  property, 
senior  management  or sales  staff  with  client  data.  Financial  firms  have  long  managed  the 
risk  of  employee  fraud  through  separation  of  duties,  two-person  authorisation  and  access 
limitations. Similar controls around high-value data and systems are needed. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  For  instance, firms  have  to  ensure  that  access  rights  are  reconfigured  when  an  employee 
leaves or moves internally. Firms should ensure that employees have at any moment only 
the access rights they need to carry on their job. 
Accidental and/or non-malicious employee security breaches accounted for around 25% of 
data breaches in 2013 and 2014. Often the breach occurs for well-intentioned reasons such 
as an employee wanting to work on something from home and sending a document to their 
personal email or copying data onto a USB drive, or when employees use external systems 
or software. If an IT system cannot give employees what they need to do their job, they tend 
to  seek  out  their  own  solutions  e.g.  use  of  personal  equipment/devices.  This  introduces 
security risks, as such shadow IT operates outside of the firm’s protected systems. 
Outsourcing risk 
Let me now turn to outsourcing. Financial services firms will often outsource critical functions, 
for example payment processing, IT, clearing and settlement, website management etc. This 
means that a firm’s IT security depends in part on the quality of IT security of its third party 
service providers. Providers typically have access to sensitive data and/or some of the firm’s 
systems. If a provider is hacked or compromised with malicious software this opens up the 
likelihood that the firm’s data or systems will also be exposed. 
Many large high profile firms have been successfully attacked this way. A prominent example 
is  the  US  retailer Target  in  2013,  where  40 million  customer  debit  and credit  card records 
were stolen as well as personally identifiable information on 70 million customers, through IT 
security lapses of its heating and air conditioning vendor. 
Firms should seek to mitigate this risk by carefully selecting and managing service providers 
and by incorporating cybersecurity and data protection requirements into third party contracts 
from  the  outset.  However,  many  firms  do  not  perform  due  diligence  on  the  security 
infrastructure of their vendors nor require them to meet minimum security standards. 
Cyber insurance market 
Cyber  risk  creates  insurance  opportunities.  Although  the  market  is  currently  quite  small  in 
terms of premium size (estimated at $2 billion), it is a growing one.1 
Several insurance companies have launched corporate policies and have accompanied their 
offers of contractual cover with a suite of services, such as assessment of exposure, advice 
for  managing  and  mitigating  the  risks,  and  loss  management.  In  so  doing,  the  insurance 
industry  performs  a  valuable  service,  similar  to  the  traditional  management  of  fire  risks  of 
business premises. 
However,  there  are  significant  challenges  for  this  new  insurance  offering.  Underwriting 
cannot  rely  on  long-run  loss  and  exposure  data  for  pricing,  measuring  profitability,  capital 
allocation and risk management. In any case, the nature and scale of cyber risk is evolving 
so rapidly that it is questionable whether whatever historic loss data there is, could be useful 
for forecasting future losses. New classes of risk are always a challenge to underwrite. 
Furthermore, as we have seen on the effect of the floods in Thailand on business interruption 
policies, there are also challenges in measuring risk accumulation due to the length of supply 
chains. A cyber-attack can have unexpected knock-on effects within the insured’s business 
which could trigger several independent policies. Other issues include the potential that there 
may  be  unintended  and  unidentified  exposure  overlap  between  standard  business  policies 
and stand-alone cyber policies and issues around the definitions and scope of cover. 
                                                
1  Marsh Risk Management Research: Benchmarking Trends March 2015. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  Potential systemic risks need to be better understood 
The  next  big  financial  shock  will  arise  from  a  succession  of  successful  cyber-attacks  on 
financial services firms. This is the prediction of Greg Medcraft, Chairman of the International 
Organisation of Securities Commissions (IOSCO). In 2014, 33% of financial industry survey 
respondents ranked cyber-attacks as the number one systemic risk to the broader economy. 
Such concerns are a welcome development as it means the risk is being considered before it 
materializes.  The  complex  interconnectedness  of  financial  institutions  and  markets  means 
that the financial system is only as strong as the weakest link in the chain. This is why the 
presence of cyber security risks in one firm could potentially give rise to systemic failure. So 
far we have not had a cyber-event that led to systemic problems but it may be only a matter 
of time. A seemingly manageable security incident at a single firm could cascade quickly to 
the  broader  financial  sector.  Consider  for  example  a  simultaneous,  coordinated  attack  on 
several  Global  Systemically  Important  Banks  or  critical  financial  infrastructure  providers 
(such as a stock exchange or a central counterparty clearing house). This could have a yet 
unknown domino-effect on those firms’ counterparties which could have the potential to lead 
to a systemic shock in the financial system.2  
Given the complex, rapidly changing and borderless nature of cybercrime, no single firm or 
regulator can successfully tackle the risk alone. Cybercrime’s international nature will require 
a collaborative response from governments, regulators and industry. Let me tell you what we 
are doing at the Central Bank about it. 
Recent central bank initiatives to address cybersecurity 
While information security has been on the Central Bank’s agenda for quite some time, this 
year we have intensified our efforts on cybersecurity through a number of initiatives: 
• 
Cyber risk is being considered in the FLAOR/ORSA reviews of insurance firms and 
as  part  of  the  supervisory  engagement  with  firms.  This  scrutiny  will  evolve  in  a 
Solvency II context in 2016; 
We established a banking IT risk inspection team with resources recruited in early 
2015.  This  team  is  undertaking  inspections  of  IT  risk  in  banks  which  will  include 
cybersecurity risk assessments; 
The Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM) issued questionnaires to banks to assess 
the  management  of  cybersecurity  risk  and  we  are  in  the process  of  reviewing  the 
Irish banks’ submissions. In addition, as part of our auditor assurance work, we are 
looking at cyber risk governance in banks. 
We  performed  a  themed  review  of  the  management  of  operational  risk  around 
cybersecurity  within  the  investment  firm  and  fund  services  industry.  The  review 
examined firms’ control environments (including policies and procedures) designed 
to  detect  and  prevent  cybersecurity  breaches  as  well  as  board  oversight  of 
cybersecurity. Our findings were communicated to the funds industry last week in a 
letter to firms. Included in the letter were examples of best practice that firms should 
consider. 
   The Central Bank is at an early stage of its work to address cyber risk. Our work will continue 
to evolve. This risk cuts across many Central Bank divisions including Insurance, Banking, 
Markets, Anti-Money Laundering, Financial Stability and Consumer Protection. Cybersecurity 
has serious implications for prudential, systemic and consumer risks, and thus an integrated 
                                                
2 
IOSCO suggest a number of plausible cyber-attack scenarios which could have systemic implications in the 
paper:  ‘‘Cybercrime,  securities  markets  and  systemic  risk’,  July,  2013,  IOSCO  &  WFE  Joint  Staff  Working 
Paper. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  supervisory approach is essential. We are bringing together a senior cross-directorate cyber 
group so that we can have a holistic view of this risk which will inform our overall supervisory 
strategy. 
Central Bank expectations of firms 
I would like to share with you our current expectations on the management of cyber risk in 
regulated firms. 
We  do  acknowledge  that  an  effective  cybersecurity  programme  should  be  reflective  of the 
size, business model, nature and sensitivity of the firm’s critical assets. That being said, there 
are a number of common themes that are pertinent to most or all firms. 
• 
for 
resilience 
intrusion 
the  successful  attacks:  build 
The  Board  should  have  a  good  understanding  of  the  main  risks:  The  Board 
needs  to  have  sufficient  knowledge  and  understanding  of  cybersecurity  risk  to  be 
able  to  effectively  challenge  senior  management  on  the  security  strategy.  Boards 
should  understand  what  the  firm’s  critical  assets  are,  how  they  are  shared  with 
external parties and the potential loss or damage to the firm in the event of a data or 
systems breach. 
Cybersecurity risk should be considered within the firm’s overall risk appetite 
and business strategy. This is not simply an IT problem. 
Perform  risk  assessments  and 
tests:  Firms  should  perform 
cybersecurity  risk  assessments  on  a  regular  basis.  Such  assessments  should 
include identification of critical assets and commissioned intrusion tests. They need 
to be performed frequently enough to capture changes in new systems, new product 
offerings or new security threats. 
Prepare 
through  distributed 
architecture  and  multiple  lines  of  defense  and  prepare  to  mitigate  the  impact  on 
customers. 
Manage  vendor  risk:  Firms  should  perform  cybersecurity  due  diligence  on 
prospective and existing outsourced service providers and incorporate cybersecurity 
and data protection provisions into outsourcing agreements. 
Gather  information  and  follow  best  practices:  Firms  should  follow  and  apply 
industry  standards 
frameworks  as 
appropriate  for  the  scale  and  nature  of  their  business  and  participate  in  industry 
information sharing groups. 
Educate staff: Firms should provide regular security awareness training to all staff. 
Firms should address the “human factor” by cultivating an environment of security 
awareness throughout the firm and providing regular security awareness training to 
all staff. Without good security awareness training, each staff member becomes a 
weak link from a security perspective. 
Have  robust IT  policies,  procedures  and technical  controls  are  put  in  place: 
That  includes  incident  reporting  and  response  plans,  recovery  and  business 
continuity plans, patch management, and employee access rights. 
Consider buying cyber-insurance: Firms may consider evaluating the possibility 
of using cyber-insurance as a partial risk mitigation strategy. 
their  cybersecurity  risk  management 
to 
        Looking ahead 
The Central Bank intends to sharpen its focus on the cybersecurity threat. We are committed 
to building up our knowledge and expertise. In line with the rapidly evolving nature of cyber 
risk, the Central Bank’s regulatory expectations will be evolving. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  Supervisors have an important role in fostering robust oversight of cybersecurity risks, even 
though the onus is on the firms to manage these risks. Our approach needs to be agile. We 
will  adopt  a  multi-pronged  approach  where  we  use  the  range  of  tools  at  our  disposal, 
including  thematic  reviews,  inspections  of  supervised  firms,  independent  reviews  by  the 
internal audit team or external third parties, issuing guidance and working to raise awareness 
and educate industry and consumers on cybersecurity issues. 
A single regulator cannot successfully tackle this threat alone. The threat does not stop at 
national  borders. There needs  to  be  a  united  and  coordinated  approach  among regulators 
and  to  this  end,  we  are  working  closely  with  the  ECB/SSM  as  well  as  international 
counterparts, the EBA and regulatory bodies to achieve this. 
Cyber  risk  will  be  a  permanent  feature  of  business  and  regulatory  life.  We  will  actively 
engage with industry to ensure the regulated firms address this risk. We intend to publish, in 
the  coming  months,  an  initial  paper  on  cybersecurity  risk.  In  this  paper,  we  will  share  our 
current  thinking  and  our  supervisory  experience  of  this  risk,  and  lay  out  our  expectations 
towards regulated firms. 
Thank you for your attention. I wish you an interesting and fruitful conference. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
