  Jens Weidmann: At the crossroads – the euro area between sovereignty 
and solidarity 
Speech by Dr Jens Weidmann, President of the Deutsche Bundesbank and Chairman of the 
Board  of  Directors  of  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements,  at  Sciences  Po,  Paris, 
12 November 2015. 
 1. 
Introduction 
Ladies and gentlemen 
Thank you kindly for inviting me here today. It is a great pleasure and a privilege to speak 
before such an international audience. 
Even  more  so  than  my  generation,  you  live  a  truly  European  life.  Your  studies  have  an 
international outlook, and, in all likelihood, you have done, or will do, part of these studies 
abroad. Some of you have started them at the Campus européen franco-allemand in Nancy. 
And you are the first generation that has come of age with our common currency. 
Europe  not  only  comes  naturally  to  you.  Your  perspective  on  European  matters  is  also 
invaluable because Europe is not yet your legacy – but it is your future. 
To  give  credit  where  credit  is  due,  the  European  legacy  that  you  have  come  upon  was 
shaped  to  a  large  extent  by  the  efforts  of  French  visionaries.  Back  in  1949,  economist 
Jacques Rueff declared that “l’Europe se fera par la monnaie ou ne se fera pas.” In 1962, a 
Commissioner penned a memorandum for a common currency for the first time – his name 
was Robert Marjolin. In 1969, the Commission made a second proposal for a monetary union 
that resulted in the exchange rate system known as the “snake” – here, the Commissioner in 
question was Raymond Barre, a graduate of Sciences Po. And the plan that finally served as 
a blueprint for our Economic and Monetary Union was developed by a committee of national 
central bank governors. But it was chaired by the then President of the Commission: Jacques 
Delors. 
The euro was always a political project that sought to establish even closer ties between the 
nations  of  Europe.  But  of  course,  it  was  more  than  just  a  political  project  –  it  was  also  a 
promise of prosperity. In recent years, this promise has proven elusive for many in the euro 
area, prompting some to regard the requirements of our common currency not as an anchor 
of stability, but as a veritable straitjacket. 
The rescue mechanisms  that  were  put  in  place  prevented  the  crisis  in the  euro  area from 
coming to a head. But they did so by mutualising fiscal liability on a substantial scale. Fiscal 
and  economic  policies,  by  contrast,  are  essentially  still  a  national  prerogative,  though  the 
rules were admittedly stiffened somewhat. 
As  a  result,  the  balance  between  liability  and  control  has  been  thrown  out  of  kilter.  This 
approach might have been politically expedient at the time. But ever since the Greek crisis 
this  spring,  which  is  perhaps  the  most  extreme  manifestation  of  this  issue,  its  limits  have 
been laid bare for all to see. Invoking independence while receiving assistance has sparked 
political tensions and economic uncertainty. 
There  is  no  getting  around  the  fact:  the  combination  of  national  sovereignty  and  common 
solidarity can pose a risk for the stability of our monetary union. A high degree of solidarity 
certainly  helps  a  country  in  crisis  to  cope  in  the  short-run.  But  by  allowing  for  a  shift  of  a 
national fiscal burden onto the community of all member states, incentives for sound policy-
making are weakened in the long-run. 
The underlying economic problem here is known as the tragedy of the commons. Let’s take 
the example of overfishing: Just as overfishing by one fisherman reduces the fish available 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  for others and threatens its population in the long-run, excessive public debt harms the euro 
area as a whole. Rising debt in one member state drives up longer-term interest rates for all 
euro-area  countries.  And  if  excessive  debt  of  one  state  threatens  the  financial  stability 
throughout the euro area, the viability of the whole project could be called into question. 
The point of the tragedy of the commons is that it is completely rational for one fisherman to 
overfish  and  so  to  destroy  the  basis  for  the  economic  activity  for  others  and  for  future 
generations. So what we have here is a classical coordination failure – similar to the well-
known prisoner’s dilemma. 
In  one  of  its  recent  issues,  The  Economist  took  what  at  first  glance  appeared  to  be  a 
surprising decision to write an obituary for a baseball player. The player in question was one 
of the most successful players of all time. But Yogi Berra rose to international prominence 
not  only  because  of  his  prowess  as  a  baseball  player,  but  even  more  so  because  of  his 
playful philosophical musings. 
Apparently,  The  Economist  thought  his  remarks  offered  insights  into  economic  matters  as 
well.  And  indeed,  he  once  neatly  summarised  the  problem  of  inflation  with  the  words  “A 
nickel ain’t worth a dime anymore.” 
This, however, does not seem to be the most pressing problem facing the euro area these 
days. 
But there’s another Yogi Berra insight which does go to the heart of the conundrum Europe’s 
monetary union currently finds itself in: “If you come to a fork in the road, take it”. And indeed: 
After all the stopgap measures and quick fixes in recent years, the euro area has arrived at a 
crossroads. 
This  is  what  both  Emmanuel  Macron  and  Benoît  Cœuré  highlighted  when  they  recently 
pushed for the urgently needed debate on the fiscal future of our monetary union. If we want 
to  make  lasting  progress,  we  will  need  to  resolve  the  tension  between  sovereignty  and 
solidarity. 
EMU’s fiscal architecture 
2. 
To find out which directions the euro area can choose to take, we first need to take a closer 
look at the special terrain Europe’s monetary union occupies. What sets our monetary union 
apart from other currency areas? 
I think the difference can be summed up in a single word: asymmetry. The Economic and 
Monetary Union united monetary policy. But, as already noted, fiscal and economic policies 
continue to be a national affair, albeit subject to coordination rules. 
As I have already mentioned, this asymmetry can give rise to instability. If the consequences 
of  an  unsustainable  national  economic  policy  can  be  shifted  onto  others  –  for  example, 
through bail-outs or via the conduit of a common central bank balance sheet – the incentives 
for prudent policymaking will be stunted. 
Still, hopes were high that with sufficient safeguards in place, an asymmetrically integrated 
euro  area  could  prove  stable  as  well.  As  we  now  know,  that  hope  was  not  fulfilled.  The 
safeguards installed to ensure sound public finances, such as the Stability and Growth Pact 
and the no bail-out clause failed to keep public debt in check. 
The framework also had its blind spots. It did not prevent economic imbalances from building 
up, nor did it provide for resolution mechanisms to deal  with the financial fallout of private 
over-borrowing. 
The question we are now facing is this: did the framework fail because the first draft needed 
some additional work? Or is an asymmetric monetary union fundamentally unworkable? 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Asymmetry does not automatically have to translate into instability. Just take a chair: a chair 
with three legs never wobbles; one with four legs sometimes does. A chair with three legs, 
remember,  is  always  stable  because  three  is  the  minimum  number  of  points  to  define  a 
plane. When all points lie on the same plane, the chair will be stable. If you add another leg, 
its end must also lie on that plane, otherwise things get wobbly. So, it is not about whether 
the legs are arranged symmetrically; it is about whether their ends are on the same plane. 
The same applies to monetary union. It is not necessary for all policy areas to be integrated 
symmetrically. What is needed is for control and liability to be situated on the same plane. 
Only if control and liability are aligned either at the national or at the European level are the 
incentives for sound policymaking in place. 
Take  the  example  of  a  credit  card.  If  it  draws  on  your  account,  and  you  are  the  only  one 
using it, then you will feel the consequences of splashing out. 
By  the  same  token,  if  you  share  a  credit  card  within  your  family  that  runs  on  a  shared 
account, things should be fine as well. But if you give away your credit card without being 
able to rein in spending, the beneficiary might be unable to resist the urge to indulge. This is 
why  the  measures  taken  so  far  to  contain  the  crisis  have  skewed  the  delicate  balance 
between control and liability. 
The crucial question is this: how can we restore that balance? 
A fiscal union 
2.1 
Benoît  Cœuré  and  Emmanuel  Macron  have  made  proposals  that  aim  at  creating  a  fiscal 
union – that is, centralised decision-making in the fiscal realm, combined with fiscal transfers 
or mutual liability in the form of Eurobonds. 
A  genuine  fiscal  union  could  indeed  restore  the  balance  between  control  and  liability.  If 
decision-making  is  shifted  from  the  national  to  the  European  level,  the  deficit  bias  of  the 
individual  member  states  inherent  in  the  current  set-up  of  EMU  would  be  mitigated. While 
this,  in  itself,  is  not  a  guarantee  for  sound  fiscal  policy  choices,  this  framework  is  at  least 
consistent with the concept of mutual liability. 
What kind of sovereignty shift are we talking about? Last year, Michel Sapin declared that “la 
Commission, je le rappelle, n’a absolument pas le pouvoir de rejeter, retoquer ou censurer 
un budget, comme j’ai pu le lire. Ici, comme ailleurs, la souveraineté appartient au Parlement 
français.” In a fiscal union, that would change. A member state would have to follow through 
on the demands of a European fiscal authority. 
As  such,  a  common  fiscal  authority  would  be  the  biggest  step  in  integration  since  the 
introduction  of  the  euro.  It  would  be  a  tall  order  that  would  entail  treaty  changes  and 
referendums. But anything less than a comprehensive shift of sovereignty would fall short of 
what  is  required.  This  holds  true  regardless  of  whether  we  move  to  a  common  euro-area 
treasury  with  its  own  budget,  or  to  a  system  allowing  interventions  in  existing  national 
budgets. 
If Europe were to shy away from the political ramifications of a fully-fledged fiscal union, that 
would  leave  just  one  viable  option  –  a  decentralised  approach  based  on  individual 
responsibility. 
In this case, economic and fiscal policy decisions would largely remain at the national level. 
But final responsibility would have to rest with the respective member state as well. 
These are the only two paths at the crossroads before us. 
A framework of individual responsibility 
2.2 
What would a workable decentralised approach look like in practice? 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  First  and  foremost,  it  would  have  to  deal  with  a  blatant  inconsistency  in  the  current 
framework which makes the system as it stands unworkable. While bail-outs and monetary 
financing are prohibited under the Maastricht treaty, sovereign debt is nonetheless treated as 
risk-free in the capital regime for banks. 
I can only agree with Danièle Nouy here, who has said: “Sovereigns are not risk-free assets. 
That has been demonstrated, so now we have to react.” 
Sovereign debt in banks’ balance sheets needs to be backed by capital, just as is the case 
for any private debtor. But perhaps it is even more important to put a lid on banks’ exposures 
to a single sovereign. 
Sovereign risk is a cluster risk – that is, a risk so large that the default of a single debtor can 
bring  a  bank  to  its  knees.  To  prevent  this  from  happening,  banks  are  subject  to  the  large 
exposure regime, which means that they can only lend up to 25 per cent of their equity to a 
single debtor. This way, banks will have enough capital even if the debtor defaults. 
Sovereigns,  however,  are  currently  exempt  from  the  large  exposure  regime.  As  a  result, 
banks often hold an amount of bonds of their home country alone that exceeds the total of 
their equity. 
This  is  why  a  sovereign  debt  restructuring  currently  poses  the  threat  of bringing  down  the 
national  banking  system  in  question.  And  this  is  why  for  a  decentralised  framework  to 
function,  the  large  exposure  regime  needs to  apply  to  bank  lending  to sovereigns  as  well. 
Simply  doing  away  with  the  zero-risk  weighting  will  not  suffice.  Banks’  exposures  to  their 
respective sovereigns are often too large. 
Capping  the  amount  of  debt  issued  by  a  single  sovereign  that  a  bank  can  hold  does  not 
necessarily mean that a bank will hold less sovereign debt in all. It can still buy the debt of 
other sovereigns, up to the individual limit. But what it does mean is that banks cannot put all 
their  sovereign  eggs  into  one  basket,  so  to  speak.  And  this  will  go  a  long  way  towards 
ensuring that a sovereign debt restructuring will not bring down a country’s national banking 
system. 
Besides, there is no compelling economic argument why banks should be the main financiers 
of sovereigns in the first place. Banks’ long-standing ties with their private clients allow them 
to  glean  information  about  firms  and  managers.  This  information  allows  banks  to  allocate 
capital more efficiently than other intermediaries who lack this information. In so doing, banks 
create value for the economy as a whole. 
However, banks do not have such privileged information on the debt of a nation – especially 
on the debt of central governments. It makes sense for banks to hold a certain amount of 
sovereign  debt  for  liquidity  purposes.  But  there  is  no  reason  why  the  financing  of  states 
should not be more of a matter for the capital markets. 
Doing away with the regulatory privileges afforded to sovereign debt would force the markets 
to  take  more  into  account  the  differences  in  sovereigns’  risk  profiles.  For  countries  that 
pursue unsustainable policies, this would mean rising risk premiums. And as a last resort, a 
sovereign debt restructuring would be possible without bringing down the financial system. 
However,  changes  are  in  order  not  only  with  regard  to  the  capital  regulation  of  sovereign 
bonds. In a framework of individual responsibility, we need to make sure that responsibility 
rests with those who assumed the risks in the first place. 
As it is, a member state that loses market access can apply for an ESM rescue programme 
that  combines  financial  assistance  with  economic  reform.  If  things  work  out  as  planned, 
deficits are brought down, growth capacity is raised, and market access is restored. 
However, if things do not work out as planned and the member state does not regain market 
access,  the  only  way  out  might  be  a  restructuring  of  the  debt  burden.  But  by  then,  the 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  European taxpayer has already picked up part of the check, as private bond holders have 
been replaced by the ESM. 
One way to change this would be an automatic three-year maturity extension for all bonds, 
activated the moment a government applies for an ESM programme. This automatic maturity 
extension  would  allow  the  sovereign  in  question  to  tackle  its  fiscal  challenges  while 
preventing investors from bolting. The amount of official financial support via the ESM would 
be  greatly  reduced,  and  time  could  be  bought  to  figure  out  if  the  problem  is  really  one  of 
temporary illiquidity or one of insolvency. 
A framework of individual responsibility not only requires that creditors are fit to absorb the 
losses from a sovereign debt restructuring, but also that they actually do so if push comes to 
shove. 
A fiscal council 
2.3 
Obviously, it is best if the need for sovereign debt restructuring never arises in the first place. 
This is where fiscal rules come in. Prior to the crisis the binding force of the euro-area fiscal 
rules was modest, to put it mildly. 
Thus, when the crisis hit, many countries had little fiscal space to counter its impact. As a 
lesson of the crisis the rules were stiffened somewhat. But at the same time, the Commission 
was granted more leeway in interpreting the rules. So far, the Commission has made ample 
use of this additional leeway, thereby thwarting the original intention of the rule overhaul. 
In my opinion, it would therefore be best if the application of the rules would be transferred to 
a new, independent fiscal council. The Five Presidents’ report on the future of the euro area 
also envisages such a council, and recently, the Commission has followed up on the report 
and come forward with a proposal. 
But as the ECB rightly points out in its current Economic Bulletin, the Commission’s proposal 
suffers from a number of shortcomings. The proposal does not foresee that the evaluations 
of the fiscal council are made public in a timely manner. If the alarm is raised too late, it might 
be a case of trying to shut the stable door after the horse has bolted. 
What is more, the Commission has dropped the comply-or-explain approach sketched out in 
the  Five  Presidents’  report,  according  to  which  the  Commission  has  to  explain  itself 
whenever it deviates from the recommendations made by the fiscal council. 
This does not bode well for the aim of a more depoliticised application of the rules. For that, a 
fiscal council needs to be truly independent, and its recommendations need to carry weight. 
The banking union 
3. 
Ladies and gentlemen 
A workable decentralised fiscal framework must be based on the same principle that guided 
the approach to financial reform: risk and reward need to be realigned – those who skim off 
the reward also have to swallow the losses. 
With regard to banking reform, we have made substantial progress. Banks now need to hold 
more and better capital so they have more skin in the game. And if even those increased 
capital buffers were to come up short in the face of losses, the plan is now to wind down the 
bank by drawing on bank owners’ and creditors’ rather than taxpayers’ money. 
This way, sound incentives for bank owners and managers are supported rather than being 
stunted  by  government  lifelines.  But  banks’  balance  sheets  are  influenced  not  only  by  the 
decisions  of  the  individual  bank,  but  also  by  economy-wide  factors  –  such  as  insolvency 
laws, for example. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  For  this  reason,  insurance  mechanisms,  such  as  a  deposit  guarantee  scheme,  are 
established at the level that also decides on these questions. Otherwise, control and liability 
would not be in balance. 
Euro-area-wide  deposit  insurance  therefore  only  seems  reasonable  if  the  decisions  that 
affect  banks’  balance  sheets  were  to  be  shifted  to  the  European  level  as  well.  Everything 
else would skew the balance required for a stable monetary union. 
Public and private risk-sharing 
4. 
The issues of bank capital and a common deposit guarantee scheme not only tie in with the 
question of how to balance liability and control. They also offer insights into how risks can be 
shared most effectively in the euro area. 
The  bail-in  of  creditors  is  crucial  for  realigning  risk  and  reward.  Equity  and  bail-in  debt 
provide a buffer in a downturn, paid for by adequate risk premiums in the form of dividends 
and interest. 
This form of risk-sharing is not only obviously superior to cost-free insurance provided by the 
taxpayer, which might encourage reckless behaviour. It might also serve as a blueprint for 
the sharing of risks within the euro area in general. 
When  it  comes  to  absorbing  shocks  and  sharing  risks  in  monetary  unions,  fiscal  transfers 
immediately come to mind. 
But when  we look at how risks are shared between regions in other monetary unions, the 
fiscal dimension is not as prominent as often thought. 
In  the  US,  for  example,  studies1  show  that  fiscal  policy  cushions  only  10–20%  of  an 
idiosyncratic economic shock, so that a local income shock does not translate into a drop in 
consumption to the same extent in this region. 
Integrated capital markets, especially integrated equity markets play a far larger role (40%). 
A further share of around 25% is cushioned via the credit markets. Altogether, around three-
quarters of a given economic shock in the US is absorbed before it can affect consumption. 
Studies for Canada yield similar results.2  
The picture is somewhat different in Europe. Here, it is mainly credit markets that cushion 
economic shocks – and not particularly effectively at that. Altogether, less than half of a given 
shock is absorbed before it can affect consumption (only 40%).3 
Moreover,  not  all  private  risk-sharing  is  created  equal.  In  the  case  of  equity,  risk-sharing 
takes place on a constant basis via flexible payouts that depend on the profit generated by 
the firm in question. With equity, risk-sharing is a feature, not a bug. 
With debt, things are different. In normal states of the world, risks are not shared. When a 
firm  –  or  country  –  runs  into  trouble,  however,  risks  can  be  shared  via  missed  interest 
payments or haircuts. 
And smoothing out income fluctuations via credit markets presupposes that credit is actually 
available when it is needed. 
                                                
1  Asdrubali,  P;  Sørensen,  B  E;  Yosha,  O  (1996),  “Channels  of  Interstate  Risk  Sharing:  US  1963–1990”, 
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 111(4), 1081–1110. 
2  Balli, F S; Kalemli-Ozcan, S; Sørensen, B E (2012), Risk Sharing Through Capital Gains. In: Canadian Journal 
of Economics, Vol 45(2), pp 472–492. 
3  Afonso,  A;  Furceri,  D  (2007),  Business  Cycle  Synchronization  and  Insurance  Mechanisms  in  the  EU.  ECB 
Working Paper No 844, December 2007. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  A phenomenon known as the financial accelerator effect can broaden the availability of credit 
during  a  boom,  as  collateral,  such  as  real  estate,  rises  in  value.  But  when  the  value  of 
collateral diminishes, the supply of credit can tighten up. 
If the financial system is really procyclical, relying on credit markets in the downturn might be 
a risky proposition. 
Strengthening equity markets therefore seems to be the more promising route to take. 
But if we want to fully reap the rewards of deeper equity markets, the measures currently on 
the table probably will not suffice. This is where the topic of taxes comes into play. 
Currently, the tax regime still favours debt financing over equity financing. Removing this bias 
in taxation would encourage companies to strengthen their equity base and thus turn more to 
the equity markets as a source of funding. It could therefore be a game-changer in terms of 
strengthening private risk-sharing. 
Conclusion 
5. 
Ladies and gentlemen, let me conclude. 
Today, Economic and Monetary  Union does not look like other successful currency areas. 
Maybe  it  will  never  match  their  degree  of  symmetry  with  regard  to  policy  integration.  But 
perhaps  some findings  in  the  science  of  beauty  can  provide  a  little  encouragement. While 
symmetry seemingly plays a role in whether we consider a face to be attractive, researchers 
have found that it is only part of the story. Apparently, it is the little deviations from the norm, 
the minor asymmetries, that render a face truly beautiful. 
But for Europe’s citizens to perceive EMU as truly “beautiful”, we still have a long way to go. 
Whatever option we ultimately choose, Yogi Berra has reminded us that the most important 
thing is to actually choose. But to be able to choose, we have to be mindful of another of his 
insights as well: “If you don’t know where you are going, you might not get there.” 
I  am  therefore  now  looking  forward  to  discussing  the  direction  of  our  monetary  union  with 
you. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
