   
Barry Whiteside: Financial inclusion developments and challenges in Fiji 
Keynote address by Mr Barry Whiteside, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Fiji, at the National 
Financial Inclusion Strategy Workshop, Suva, 13 November 2015. 
 Salutations: 
Distinguished Guests; 
National Financial Inclusion Taskforce and Working Group members; 
Colleagues and fellow stakeholders in Financial Inclusion; 
Ladies and Gentlemen. 
Bula vinaka and a very warm welcome to you all. 
Introduction: 
It  was  six  years  ago,  nearly  to this  very  day,  when  we  held  our first  ever  workshop  at  the 
Novotel Lami to determine our future in financial inclusion in our country. This was the start of 
what has been an incredible journey of taking financial services and financial literacy to the 
underserved of Fiji and providing them that necessary hand-up needed to lift themselves out 
of poverty and continuing hardship. This was and still is the ultimate goal of financial inclusion 
worldwide;  a  goal  that  has  been  taken  up  by  many  countries  targeting  the  almost  2 billion 
people across the globe that remain unbanked. 
But we have also come to realise that Financial Inclusion is a key driver for economic growth. 
The whole world recognises that it is difficult to pursue economic growth if a large sector of our 
society is financially excluded from active participation in the economy. Hence we have seen 
massive worldwide support in this area over the last five or six years. The fact that many of the 
institutions driving financial inclusion initiatives are central banks and ministries of finance in 
their respective countries is truly a clear indication of its importance and recognition. We in Fiji, 
I am really glad to say, are no different. 
With the completion of our initial 5-year Financial Inclusion Strategic Plan in 2014 we are now 
at our first major crossroads, needing to set ourselves new goals and new pathways forward. 
So let me say how delighted I am to be here this morning to say a few words about our journey 
so far, and also elaborate a little and stir your minds into some possibilities on the way forward. 
I am confident that through our collaboration and sharing at this workshop today, we will be 
able to “hammer” out together a new strategy to take this journey to a new level, extending the 
boundaries and improving the livelihoods of our most vulnerable communities. 
Overview of our Financial Inclusion Journey since the first Workshop 
Dear friends and colleagues, a number of us sitting here today were a part of our first workshop 
back in November, 2009. 
At that workshop, we had agreed to a home-grown structure, a financial inclusion model that 
would be based on collaboration, partnership and a multi-stakeholder approach. The model 
was embraced by all stakeholders across the public and private sectors, civil society, NGOs 
and development partners. 
A National Financial Inclusion Taskforce was formed to provide the leadership and drive to 
coordinate and monitor the financial inclusion strategies and goals that would be set. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   To  assist  the  Taskforce,  three  working  groups  were  formed  to  handle  issues  centred  on 
Financial Literacy, Microfinance, and Statistics. A fourth working group on Inclusive Insurance 
was established only recently. 
While I personally feel that this model has worked really well for us over the last six years, of 
course as Chairman of the Taskforce I may be a little biased. So can I suggest that at some 
point in our discussions today, we consider revisiting our financial inclusion structure with a 
view  to  its  relevance  and  effectiveness  as  we  move  forward.  Maybe  we  will  come  to  the 
conclusion that it is still very relevant and workable. Maybe it could use a little tweaking. We 
have had the past six years to be able to make a good assessment. 
Our initial goals: 
So what goals did we set ourselves at the first workshop in 2009? 
We wanted a quantitative reference number first up so we could monitor our progress. So a 
key goal was to reach 150,000 unbanked Fijians by the year 2014. We later tweaked this to 
read ‘underserved’ instead of ‘unbanked’. I am happy to say that we achieved that target in the 
first quarter of 2014. 
We also agreed to other key outcomes and these included: financial competency and financial 
literacy training; creating a conducive regulatory environment; and last but by no means least, 
good data collection. 
Let me say a little about each of these. 
It was agreed that in order to promote greater consumer empowerment as well as increase 
financial competency of households, we would need to introduce financial education into the 
Fijian schools curriculum as well as raise the awareness in parts of our adult population where 
it was most needed. 
With the schools program this strategy ensures that our next generation will be more financially 
competent. After a successful pilot program through 28 schools in 2012, we were able in 2013, 
in partnership with the Ministry of Education, to roll out the FinED program to 907 schools 
impacting  about  197,000  students.  The  lessons  in  class  now  help  our  children  to  develop 
sound habits and nurture a future as financially capable and responsible adults in our Fijian 
community.  Thanks  must  go  to  the  Ministry  of  Education  for  taking  on  the  role  with  such 
enthusiasm. 
Having established this initial footprint in the schools, I am of a strong view that there is now a 
need to go a step further. All our youths that leave school and tertiary institutions tend to come 
out with the view to getting a good job and working for someone else. There is no problem with 
that.  I  know  I  did  this  and  my  daughters  did  this  as  well.  But,  I  would  love  to  give  my 
grandchildren an alternative mind-set when they complete their schooling and that is the ability 
and desire (if it is there), to establish their own businesses and work for themselves. 
Now, more than ever, we are seeing the importance of micro, small and medium enterprises 
(MSMEs) across the world as extremely important contributors of jobs and economic growth. 
Fiji should be no different. I would like to see built into the education curriculum as we have 
done with our initial steps of financial education, some training in entrepreneurial skills and 
thinking. It would be nice to witness a portion of our youths developing the necessary skills to 
be able to work for themselves by setting up their own small businesses. “Work for Self” or “Be 
my own Boss” could be slogans championed to create a paradigm shift in the mentality and 
attitude of how our youths think and behave at the point of leaving school or tertiary training. If 
we can, on an annual basis, get even a small portion successfully coming out and starting new 
businesses with appropriate support mechanisms, then we are on our way to building what 
could be a strong MSME sector. 
On the regulatory environment, work in this regard focused on keeping a balance between 
development and regulations. It is important that as we develop, with new innovations, there 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   is also the responsibility to ensure that this growth is orderly and within a regulatory framework 
that will nurture and assist growth. 
Finally I would like to say something on data collection, our other major initial target. 
We all can understand that the lack of a full set of reliable data on financial inclusion hinders 
good policymaking and prioritisation of projects at a national level. Six years ago when we 
started on our financial inclusion journey, there was limited data available to help us benchmark 
and measure the level of financial inclusion in Fiji. What we had was mainly supply side data 
from our financial institutions. 
In  2012,  we  conducted  a  financial  competency  survey  to  measure  the  level  of  financial 
competency of our Fijian households. The findings from this survey were used to develop our 
initial  National  Financial  Literacy  Strategy.  The  Data Working  Group  has  also  managed  to 
complete a detailed mapping survey of all financial access points and mobile coverage across 
Fiji. This vital information can now be shared and used to target areas around the country 
which are deficient of any coverage and service. Furthermore, in 2014, we secured funding 
support from the Alliance for Financial Inclusion and the Pacific Financial Inclusion Programme 
to carry out a Demand-Side Survey of financial services in Fiji. The survey report was released 
earlier this year. 
All this data means we are now better placed to make evidence-based decisions on financial 
inclusion matters and focus our strategies going forward. The data provides the foundation for 
our discussions today. 
My friends and colleagues, it is clear that much has been achieved during our initial strategic 
plan period from 2010 to 2014. It has been a truly humbling experience, as Chairman of the 
National Financial Inclusion Taskforce and Governor, to see complete and unselfish support 
across the board for the work we have been doing. Our success can only be attributed to the 
hard work and contributions you have all made in getting us this far. I have certainly been 
proud to take our model to the world stage and to witness the recognition it has received. 
However, whilst a lot has been achieved, more still needs to be done. The challenge now is to 
build on what has already been achieved as a partnership of committed stakeholders and look 
at how we can extend this to greater heights. During our deliberations today a new vision will 
be proposed, one that will hopefully provide us with that challenge. 
Our Alliances since our first strategy 
Ladies and Gentlemen, before I conclude, let me acknowledge some of our important strategic 
alliances since we started this journey. 
Financial  inclusion  in  recent  years  has  attracted  increasing  interest  not  only  from  the 
development  and  donor  community,  but  also  from  developing,  emerging  and  developed 
countries across the globe. We have joined international institutions and groups that play an 
active  role  in  developing  new  research,  setting  standards  and  promoting  best  practices  to 
improve financial inclusion. These include the Alliance for Financial Inclusion (AFI), CGAP, 
and the G20. 
In  2011,  Fiji  made  commitments  as  part  of  AFI’s  Maya  Declaration,  the  first  global  and 
measurable commitments by developing and emerging countries to unlock the economic and 
social potential of the more than 2.5 billion unbanked people of the world. This number has 
since come down to 2 billion in 2014 through the concerted efforts of many countries that have 
taken up the challenge. 
We have learned from member countries’ successful models and have shared our experiences 
and have benefited from such fora through capacity building. More than 60 countries across 
the world have now set formal financial inclusion targets. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   In September I had announced that through our association with AFI, Fiji has been given the 
nod  to  host  this  prestigious  world  body’s  Global  Policy  Forum  on  Denarau  Island  next 
September. We have the pleasure in having in our Workshop today AFI’s Deputy Executive 
Director, Norbert Mumba, Head of Communications and Media, Peter Foster, Events Manager 
Pattarin Bureerax and Policy  Manager Eliki Boletawa, who will be facilitating our workshop 
today. We welcome and extend our appreciation to Mr Mumba and his team for being part of 
this strategic process. 
It would be remiss of me not to thank our donor partners who fall under the banner of the 
Pacific Financial Inclusion Program (PFIP). These include the UNCDF, EU, the Australian and 
NZ Departments of Foreign Affairs and Trade and the UNDP. We certainly could not have 
gone very far without the support provided. Our sincere thanks must also go to the staff of 
PFIP for the close collaboration over the years. Thanks also go to the World Bank and ADB 
for technical assistance provided over the duration of the first plan period. 
I also express my gratitude to all members of our National Financial Inclusion Taskforce and 
the 4 Working Groups. Your contributions have been immense and I cannot thank you enough. 
The fact that it is all voluntary with everyone working towards a common goal to assist our 
underserved citizens speaks volumes for you, your organisations and for Fiji. 
Conclusion 
Dear friends, may I conclude by saying that the Reserve Bank of Fiji, as the co-host for this 
Workshop, greatly appreciates your presence and continued support. We have very pertinent 
issues to consider in today’s programme, which I hope will spur very interesting and productive 
discussions as well as identify solutions. 
This workshop is also very timely as we strategize on the next phase of financial inclusion from 
2016 to 2020, and as we prepare ourselves to host the 2016 AFI Global Policy Forum and 
showcase Fiji and the Pacific to more than 600 delegates from across the globe. 
I wish you all a very successful day of deliberations. 
Vinaka vaka levu. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
