   Gaston Reinesch: How to achieve stronger growth in the EU? 
Opening remarks by Mr Gaston Reinesch, Governor of the Central Bank of Luxembourg, at 
the Eurofi Financial Forum 2015, Luxembourg, 9 September 2015. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
Distinguished guests, 
At the outset, I would like to thank Eurofi and its President Jacques de Larosière for inviting 
me to make  the  opening  remarks to this  afternoon’s  debates  on “How  to  achieve  stronger 
growth in the European Union”, a highly topical subject, to say the least. 
I will focus on the euro area and structure my remarks in two parts. 
First, I will touch upon the economic outlook in the euro area. I will do so in light of the European 
Central Bank’s (ECB) staff euro-area macroeconomic projections, which have been published 
last week, referred to hereafter as the “staff projections”. 
Second,  I  will  proceed  with  a  broad  overview  of  the  issues  and  challenges  of  longer  term 
growth in the euro-area and put forward some avenues for reflection and discussion. 
The  information  available from  the  staff  projections  indicate  a  continued  though  somewhat 
weaker economic recovery and a slower increase in inflation rates compared with previous 
expectations.  As  far  as  inflation  is  concerned,  the  staff  projections  foresee  an  annual 
Harmonized Index of Consumer Price Inflation (HICP) of 0.1% in 2015, 1.1% in 2016 and 1.7% 
in 2017.1 In comparison with the June projections,2 the outlook for inflation has been revised 
down, largely owing to lower oil prices and, to a much lesser extent, a slower closing of the 
negative output gap. Furthermore, taking account of the most recent developments in oil prices 
and  recent  exchange  rates,  there  are  downside  risks  to  the  September  staff  inflation 
projections. 
Concerning the economic situation, recovery is expected to continue, albeit at a somewhat 
weaker pace than earlier expected, reflecting in particular the slowdown in emerging market 
economies, which is weighting on global growth and foreign demand for euro area exports. 
Domestic demand should be further supported by the monetary policy measures of the ECB 
and their favorable impact on financial conditions as well as by the progress made in fiscal 
consolidation. Moreover, the decline in oil prices should provide support for household real 
disposable income and corporate profitability and, thereby, enhance private consumption and 
investment. 
Overall, this assessment is broadly reflected in the staff projections which foresee an annual 
real GDP growth of 1.4% in 2015, 1.7% in 2016 and 1.8% in 2017. Again compared with the 
projections in June, the outlook for real GDP growth has been revised downwards. This is due 
primarily to lower external demand owing to weaker growth in the emerging markets. The risks 
to this outlook are tilted to the downside, reflecting in particular the increased uncertainties 
related  to  the  external  environment.  Notably,  current  developments  in  emerging  market 
economies have the potential to further affect global growth adversely via trade and confidence 
effects. 
Before addressing the second part of my remarks, let me revert to the evolution of the output 
gap,  i.e.  the  difference  between  actual  and  potential  output.  The  negative  output  gap  is 
expected  to  narrow  gradually  over  the  projection  horizon,  which  is  encouraging  news. 
                                                
1  ECB Staff Macroeconomic Projections for the Euro Area, September 2015. 
2  Eurosystem Staff Macroeconomic Projections for the Euro Area, June 2015. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   However, it is also necessary to stress that while the output gap is narrowing, it is occurring 
against a background of weak potential output growth, which is estimated to be around 1% 
over the projection horizon. 
This is below its pre-crisis level. In noting this, we should, moreover, not overlook the fact that 
since the late 1990s the euro area experienced a steady decline of potential output growth: 
from about 2% in 2000, it declined continuously to about 1.5% before the crisis. There is indeed 
a problem in long-term growth dynamics. This problem is not new but has deepened over time. 
With this in mind, let us consider very briefly fiscal and monetary policy before focusing later 
on  structural  reforms.  Starting  with  fiscal  policy,  it  should  support  the  economic  recovery, 
particularly  through  growth-enhancing  public  investment,  material  and  immaterial,  while 
remaining  fully  compliant  with  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact.  A  full  and  consistent 
implementation of the Pact is crucial to maintain confidence in the euro area’s framework. This, 
in turn, would have positive implications for future growth prospects, which should help ensure 
debt sustainability and be conductive to future fiscal space. 
With regard to monetary policy, which has to be focused on the primary objective of maintaining 
price stability over the medium term, its highly accommodative stance has contributed and 
continues  to  contribute  to  support  economic  activity  and  investment,  narrow  the  negative 
output gap and foster economic growth. Let us also bear in mind the important fact that price 
stability,  as  well  as  financial  stability,  is  a  conditio  sine  qua  non  for  a  stable  and  growing 
economy. The monetary policy stance currently provides a window of opportunity to implement 
reforms. 
This brings me to the third crucial policy area, which can and should contribute decisively to 
future  growth,  namely  structural  reforms.  There  exists  a  large  consensus  that  structural 
reforms are needed to boost potential output and productivity growth in the euro area and to 
reduce unemployment which is much too high, especially, but not only, among the youth. 
Incidentally, let me say that I prefer speaking more generally of increased productivity rather 
than increased competitiveness, the latter being a more elusive and relative concept. The world 
as  a  whole  can  become  more  productive,  but  it cannot gain  in  competitiveness.  Structural 
reforms,  notably  in  product  and  labour  markets,  but  also  through  actions  improving  the 
business environment, can have two key effects and here I refer to ECB President Draghi’s 
speech this year at the ECB Forum on Central Banking, which took place in Sintra earlier this 
year.3 
First, they lift the path of potential output, either by raising the inputs to production – the supply 
and quality of labor and the amount of capital per worker – and by ensuring that those inputs 
are used more efficiently, that is to say by raising total factor productivity. Second, they make 
economies more resilient to economic shocks by facilitating price and wage adjustments as 
well  as  a  swift  reallocation  of  resources  within  and  across  sectors.  These  two  effects  are 
complementary. An economy that rebounds faster after a negative shock is an economy that 
grows more over time and it suffers lower hysteresis effects. And the same structural reforms 
will  often  increase  both  short-term  flexibility  and  long-term  growth.  A  comprehensive  and 
credible package of structural reforms will therefore help increase resilience and growth and 
reduce unemployment. 
Structural  reforms  are  often  considered  with  a  critical  eye,  if  not  fiercely  opposed.  Three 
considerations  are  mainly  mentioned  in  this  context:  the  “ugly”  argument,  which  has  to  be 
resisted; the “bad” argument, which calls for careful refutation; and the “well meant” argument, 
which raises an issue that needs to be addressed. 
                                                
3 
“Structural reforms, inflation and monetary policy”, Introductory speech by Mario Draghi, President of the ECB, 
ECB Forum on Central Banking Sintra, 22 May 2015. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   The  ugly  argument  can  be  considered  as  a  problem  of  collective  action  and  rent-seeking. 
Structural reforms touch vested interests. 
The benefits of such reforms are large, but spread among the whole economy and are partly 
backloaded. Disadvantages, albeit globally low, are concentrated in relatively small groups, 
who are highly motivated to oppose them. This kind of opposition should be resisted and these 
arguments discarded. 
The  bad  argument  has  some  intellectual  merits.  It  states  that  in  a  situation  of  significant 
economic shock, structural reforms may have a negative effect on short-term demand. Such a 
conclusion, implying that structural reforms should be postponed – and here again I refer to 
President Draghi’s speech4 – has nevertheless to be rejected. The reason for such a rejection 
is that the short-term impact of structural reforms does not simply depend on when they are 
implemented  but  how,  the  credibility  of  reforms  and  their  interactions  with  other  policy 
measures. And if structural reforms are well designed along such parameters, they can in fact 
have a largely neutral, if not positive, impact on short-term demand even in adverse cyclical 
conditions.5 
Then, there is a line of argumentation stemming from the more general concern of increasing 
inequality in our economies. In the context of structural reforms, this issue has to be taken 
seriously.  European  citizens  are  sensitive  to  the  problem  of  increased  inequality.  Or, 
successful reforms require the acceptance of citizens and their conviction that such reforms 
will eventually increase per capita income without adverse inequality effects. 
Structural reforms have therefore to be designed in such a way as to avoid increased inequality 
and, if needed, accompanied by budgetary redistributive measures. For example, and this is 
also relevant in the more general context of growth, it seems that there is scope in a lot of 
countries for tax reforms, which could be both efficiency and equality enhancing, whilst being 
revenue neutral. 
All  this  being  said,  structural  reforms  in  the  euro  area  are  necessary  and  should  be  seen 
beyond the confines of national economies. This is important in order to enhance all possible 
mutually  reinforcing  effects  and  positive  spillovers.  Further,  it  would  also  be  helpful  to 
strengthen coordination, minimize national discretion and think of the euro area as being one 
economy  and  not  the  simple  addition  of  19  economies.  The  implementation  of  measures 
should  be  enforced  and  national  parliaments  should  be  involved  to  ensure  democratic 
accountability and local ownership. 
So far, I used the term “structural reforms”. However, the term “structural policies” might be a 
more  appropriate  and  all-encompassing  terminology.  In  that  sense,  let  me  very  broadly 
mention  how  other  policy  areas  or  initiatives  can  through  different  channels  contribute  to 
enhance medium and long-term growth: first, innovation; second, the transition to a low carbon 
economy; third, the completion of the Financial Union; and fourth, institutional reforms in the 
governance of the economic pillar of the Economic and Monetary Union. 
Technological progress, product and process innovations are key drivers to long-term growth 
as recalled by Professor Christopher Pissarides in his presentation at the Sintra ECB Forum 
on Central Banking,6 who stated that Europe as a whole was not doing very well in this field, 
although there were exceptions. 
                                                
4 
5  Let us note that the current accommodative monetary policy and its effectiveness should not be used as an 
Ibid. 
excuse to delay necessary structural reforms. 
“Structural  Perspectives  on  European  Employment:  The  Role  of  Innovation  and  Growth”,  Sir  Christopher 
Pissarides, Professor, London School of Economics and University of Cyprus, Paper presented at the ECB 
Forum on Central Banking, Sintra, 22 May 2015. 
6 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   This points to the need to improve the ecosystem of innovation throughout the different stages, 
from  basic  research  to successful  market  applications. There  is  still  a  too  broad  and  deep 
Death Valley along this process. 
Second, the transition to a low carbon and more resilient economy represents another key 
challenge in this respect. This is a global problem. Europe is, however, a key player in this 
field, as the forthcoming United Nations climate change conference in Paris demonstrates. 
Climate preservation is not only a necessity but also, as continuously stressed for example by 
Nicholas  Stern,7  an  opportunity  for  the  enhancement  of  the  co-evolution  of  growth  and 
structural change. 
Third, the Financial Union has also a strong potential to support future growth. The Banking 
Union has to be completed and the Capital Markets Union has to be launched successfully. 
You will discuss that in detail over the next days. 
Allow me only to touch on one specific element, which by the way was considered important 
enough  by  “The  Economist”  for  a  cover  story  some  months  ago,  with  the  title  “The  Great 
Distortion – A Dangerous Flaw at the Heart of the World Economy”,8 namely the difference in 
taxation  between  debt  and  equity.  This  point  has  also  briefly  been  touched  upon  in  the 
comprehensive  Eurosystem  contribution  to  the  Commission’s  Green  Paper  on  Building  a 
Capital Markets Union. 
Let me quote part of the relevant paragraph: 
“Initiatives  in  taxation  should  aim  to  reduce  the  preferential  treatment  of  debt  financing  as 
opposed to equity financing… 
This can facilitate a greater reliance by firms on equity and have a positive impact on their 
access to other forms of finance. It could also be important to rebalance the financial structure 
of  firms,  especially  in  those  countries  where  the  level  of  indebtedness  in  the  non-financial 
corporation sector is still significant.”9 
Fourth, and last but not least, there is also a case to contemplate institutional innovation and 
governance change in the Economic pillar of the Economic and Monetary Union. 
Let me on this point quote Mario Draghi’s response during last week’s monetary policy press 
conference to a question by a journalist. 
“If I look at the ECB – now, of course I am a biased observer here – you would judge that the 
integration of monetary policy has been pretty successful. Why that? Because we moved from 
a rules-based system that we had in the 1980s and 1990s to an institution-based system where 
you have co-decision. 
Co-decision  in  our  sense,  not  co-decision  in  the  way  it’s  been  used  in  Brussels  between 
Parliament  and  different  institutions.  So  it’s  a  sharing  of  responsibility  and  a  sharing  of 
sovereignty, within the same institution. And what I have been arguing is that the same path 
ought  to  be  adopted  in  other  areas,  one  of  which  is  the  budgetary  area,  where  we  now 
coordinate our actions based on a set of rules, one of which is the Stability and Growth Pact. 
Another one is the six-pack and so on. Now, we think, and I certainly think, that this system is 
not completely satisfactory, for a variety of reasons that you’ve seen in the last few years, and 
so it would be a good thing if we were to move to a common institution also in the budgetary 
                                                
7  See for instance: “Economic development, climate and values: making policy”, paper by Nicholas Stern, Chair 
of the Grantham Research Institute on Climate Change and the Environment, July 2015. 
8 
“The Great Distortion – A Dangerous Flaw at the Heart of the World Economy”, The Economist, 16 May 2016. 
9  Eurosystem contribution to  the  European  Commission’s  Green  Paper  on  Building  a  Capital  Markets  Union, 
2015. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   area. And this is a point that’s been made in the Five Presidents’ report so it’s not only my own 
view.”10 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I hope that some of these inevitably piecemeal and largely incomplete remarks offer some food 
for discussion for the upcoming debates. 
Thank you very much for your attention. 
                                                
10  “Introductory statement to the press conference (with Q&A)”, 3 September 2015. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
