   Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Scaling up inroads in financial inclusion for a 
quantum leap 
Speech by Mr Amando M Tetangco, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the 
central  bank  of  the  Philippines),  at the  Asia  Pacific  Financial  Inclusion  Summit,  Makati,  27 
October 2015. 
  
We at the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas welcome and thank all of you for participating in this 
first Asia Pacific Financial Inclusion Summit. In particular, we are pleased that this maiden 
summit is being held here in our country. For this we thank the organizers– Financial Times 
(FT), led by MD Angela Mackay, the Foundation for Development Cooperation (FDC), led by 
Exec. Governor Stephen Taylor, and Citi led by Asia Pacific Chairman Shengman Zhang and 
Citi Philippines Country Head Aftab Ahmed. 
Indeed, for a country such as the Philippines where financial inclusion is deemed necessary 
to achieve inclusive growth, this summit of thought leaders on financial inclusion is both timely 
and essential. 
For your information, the Philippines has been able to sustain uninterrupted economic growth 
for 66 quarters now. Economic opportunities abound across our country therefore at a time 
when  our  financial  system  is  sound,  stable  and  liquid.  This  makes  for  fertile  ground  for 
proactive work on financial inclusion.  
This is exactly what we have been doing in the last ten years – broadening and deepening 
the reach of our financial system to get to the unserved and the underserved. Sure, we had 
hits  and  misses.  But  along  the  way,  our  central  bank  has  been  receiving  awards  and 
recognition  for  its  success  in  providing  one  of  the  world’s  best  regulatory  framework  for 
promoting the development of microfinance and financial inclusion.  
Indeed,  we  have  witnessed  how  successful  microentrepreneurs  lifted  their  families  from 
poverty along with others in their community toward higher incomes, risk-protected assets, 
and brighter futures. We have also seen increases in our savings rate.  
Nevertheless, millions of our people still live in poverty. That the Philippines is an archipelago 
of 7,107 islands with a population of 100 million makes financial inclusion quite challenging 
for us indeed.  
This is the reason behind our move to link up with 12 other government agencies to craft and 
implement our National Strategy for Financial Inclusion or NSFI which was launched last July. 
Secretary Nicolas of Commission on Filipinos Overseas under the Office of the President is 
a  strong  supporter  of  the  NFSI.  With  the  NSFI  as  our  road  map,  we  focus  on  achieving 
financial inclusion that promotes inclusive growth, consolidate our efforts to avoid overlaps, 
and together set priorities to maximize use of our resources.  
The  NSFI  spells  out  high-level  principles  and  systematic  strategies;  guides  coordination 
across government and private sectors; ensures policy and program cohesion; and promotes 
multi-sectoral synergies.  
In particular, the NSFI lays down precise objectives: (1) Financial products that are diverse, 
well-designed, suitable and relevant to different market segments; (2) Providers and business 
models that are diverse, responsible, responsive and innovative; and (3) A citizenry that is 
financially-learned and adequately protected.  
The  goal  is  to  mainstream  Filipinos  across  the  country  as  regular  clients  of  our  financial 
system, particularly (1) MSMEs, (2) overseas Filipinos and their beneficiaries, (3) agriculture 
and agrarian reform sectors, (4) indigenous peoples and cultural minorities, (4) women, (5) 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   the  youth,  (6)  and  persons  with  disabilities.  These  sectors  are  typically  unserved  or 
underserved by conventional financial service providers. 
Indeed,  we  have  set  high  expectations.  Nevertheless,  while  I  am  optimistic  these  can  be 
achieved, I am also realistic that there are challenges we need to address. For this keynote 
address, I will not focus on these challenges; rather, I will highlight three elements which I 
believe are essential in overcoming challenges and in achieving a quantum leap in financial 
inclusion. 
First is research and measurement; second is purposeful action and innovation informed by 
research; and third is convergence of objectives and actions across domestic, regional and 
international arenas. 
Building up Research, Data and Measurement 
Let  me  expound  on  the  first  of  these  three  elements--  building  up  research,  data  and 
measurement. Ladies and gentlemen. Time and again, we have seen that rigorous research 
can lead to breakthrough knowledge and innovations. This is also true for financial inclusion.  
Among others, present research in behavioral economics, psychometrics, big data analytics, 
virtual mapping and imaging technology are allowing us to understand the excluded: who and 
where they are, what they need, and how they want to be served. The new information is 
opening up opportunities for new players, giving rise to exciting platforms and more efficient 
channels with the potential to positively “disrupt” the financial inclusion landscape.  
I am glad to note therefore that our summit will tackle new trends and technology that could 
catalyze a quantum leap in lowering financial exclusion levels around the world.  
R&D also makes regulators and practitioners more responsive and effective. At the Philippine 
central bank, we use research extensively to design and implement regulations and programs 
that target barriers to financial inclusion.  
Data and measurement, on the other hand, enable us to see the results of our initiatives -- it 
provides evidence on whether our initiatives are bearing fruit, whether further enhancements 
are needed, or whether our program is plainly unable to achieve intended objectives. More 
importantly, it provides guidance on what we are doing wrong, which should push us back to 
the boardroom to re-calibrate regulatory approaches and refine program operations. Let me 
cite a few examples:  
Our National Baseline Survey on Financial Inclusion which was completed early this year, 
indicates that only 43% of Filipino adults have savings, and that majority or 68% of those who 
save, keep their money at home. This data now challenges us to find more effective ways to 
encourage Filipinos to open bank accounts, and fully address the barriers that prevent them 
from doing so. 
A report from BSP-supervised E-Money Issuers gives us additional food for thought. They 
report  that  27  million  e-money  accounts  have  been  opened  since  we  issued  e-money 
regulations in 2009. Yet increases in the volume and value of transactions are minimal.  
To drive up usage and make the system more efficient for consumers, the BSP is working 
with  the  industry  to  set  up  a  National  Retail  Payment  System.  We  envision  a  digital, 
interoperable infrastructure and ecosystem for low value, high volume payment transactions.  
The  second  possible  trigger  for  speeding  up  the  pace  of  financial  inclusion  is  Purposeful 
Action and Innovation Informed by R&D 
Ladies and gentlemen. Research behind the mobile phone would have been futile if it was 
not applied to create the practical, usable, and affordable gadget that it is today. Similarly, in 
financial inclusion, research and measurement results must be intentionally used to inform 
concrete action and generate innovations that push frontiers in financial inclusion.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   For example, the BSP is currently undertaking policy research to examine the linkages of 
financial inclusion regulations with the objectives of financial stability, integrity and consumer 
protection (also known as I-SIP method ). We hope to use the research results in optimizing 
positive  linkages,  maximizing  synergies  and  minimizing  trade-offs  among  these  policy 
considerations.  
 
Research tools also inform the development of our financial education materials. For instance, 
using  research  on  the  type  of  messaging  that  appeals  to  the  youth,  the  BSP  developed 
animated  videos  to  encourage  students  to  spend  wisely  and  save  regularly.  To  date, 
thousands have viewed these videos on social media.  
R  &  D  provides  good  value  for  the  private  sector  as  well  –  it  can  be  used  for  product 
innovations, targeting niche markets, business model development and strategic decision-
making.  
Indeed, regulators and providers alike can invest in R&D and leverage on the growing body 
of financial inclusion research to challenge what we currently know, inspire innovation and 
propel the speed of financial inclusion across the globe.  
Convergence of Local/International Objectives/Actions  
The third element that could accelerate the spread of financial inclusion is the convergence 
of objectives and actions across local, regional and international arenas. We see more and 
more players and a variety of entities engaged in different aspects of financial inclusion. It is 
imperative to converge on a common understanding and shared vision so that different actors 
can move in unison to attain inclusion objectives. 
The BSP realized the importance of convergence in the course of our financial inclusion work. 
Thus, within our central bank, we have done the following:  
• 
Established  an  Inclusive  Finance  Steering  Committee,  which  I  chair,  to  provide 
common direction and oversight on the BSP financial inclusion agenda. 
Established an enabling regulatory environment for financial inclusion in the area of 
Policy,  Regulation  &  Supervision.  Among  others,  our  issuances  on  microfinance, 
micro-banking offices, electronic money, transparent lending, and reduced customer 
due diligence are inclusion-friendly regulations. These regulations allow banks and 
non-banks  to  deliver  a  range  of  services  to  underserved  market  segments  like 
microenterprises, SMEs, overseas Filipino workers (OFWs), among others.  
In  the  area  of  Financial  Education,  we  implement  a  nationwide  economic  and 
financial learning program (EFLP) for targeted audiences starting with students, the 
employed,  overseas  Filipinos  and  their  beneficiaries,  and  participants  in  the 
government’s conditional cash transfer program. Underpinning this initiative is our 
belief that a citizenry knowledgeable in practical economics and finance is a better 
partner  in  ensuring  monetary  policy  effectiveness,  banking  system  stability  and 
payment system efficiency.  
In  terms  of  Consumer  Protection,  we  institutionalized  a  consumer  assistance 
mechanism  so  that  consumer  concerns  are  addressed  by  BSP-supervised 
institutions. We are implementing a Financial Consumer Protection Framework to 
enforce compliance with market conduct rules and consumer protection principles so 
that  all  financial  consumers,  including  the  less-sophisticated  and  vulnerable,  are 
safe-guarded from deceitful practices. 
We also conduct Advocacy Activities thru strategic partnerships. One good example 
is the Citi Microentreneurship Awards that the BSP has been carrying out annually 
with Citi Foundation, Citibank and the Microfinance Council of the Philippines. This 
    BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   awards program highlights inspiring success stories of microentrepreneurs across 
the Philippines.  
Ladies and gentlemen. The Philippine National Strategy for Financial Inclusion (NSFI) brings 
the  central  bank  and  12  other  government  agencies  together  thru  a  highly  consultative 
process to achieve convergence. It also sets a framework for government and the private 
sector to systematically collaborate, ensure cohesion and promote synergy.  
Agency  Tactical  Plans  are  being  finalized  with  specific  policies,  programs  and  progress 
indicators  which  will  be  shared  thru  dialogues  to  jumpstart  convergence  of  multi-sectoral 
actions, and identification of concrete areas for partnership and collaboration.  
It  is  pleasing  to  note  therefore  that  8  countries  in  Asia  Pacific  are  at  varying  stages  of 
implementing  their  own  NSFIs,  while  9  other  countries  are  currently  formulating  theirs. 
Evidently, we all aim to facilitate domestic convergence and quantum leaps thru a national 
strategy.  
Indeed, convergence across regions and with international partners is necessary in the light 
of cross-cutting issues that may impact financial inclusion objectives. These issues include 
the cost of cross-border remittances, the potential impact of economic integration on small 
businesses,  and  international  standards  that  may  adversely  affect  institutions  providing 
financial services in rural areas, to name a few. These all require concerted global attention 
and strategic convergence.  
Fortunately, such a convergence is beginning to happen. APEC and ASEAN have committed 
to  promote  financial  inclusion.  And  financial  inclusion  is  already  being  discussed  in 
international bodies such as the G20, the United Nations, the World Bank and the IMF, as 
well as standard setters like the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision and the Financial 
Action  Task  Force.  In  addition,  about  95  developing  countries  are  now  members  of  the 
Alliance for Financial Inclusion.  
Conclusion 
Ladies and gentlemen. We have before us the opportunity to catalyze a quantum leap for 
financial inclusion in Asia Pacific and the world. Clearly, it is an ambitious goal; but the 1.2 
billion people  who remain unserved in our part of the world represent a billion compelling 
reasons to continue to escalate our efforts to bring financial inclusion to the excluded, to those 
who continue to live in poverty.  
Together in this Summit, I hope we can craft an action plan that would help make the Asia-
Pacific  a  better  place  --  where  levels  of  financial  inclusion  are  high;  where  markets  offer 
innovative products that are affordable; where marginalized sectors get access to financial 
services that improve their economic status; and where economic growth generates benefits 
all the way down to bottom-of-the pyramid.  
Finally, I hope that everyone will participate actively in our first Asia-Pacific Financial Inclusion 
Summit to accomplish what we set out to do – to help improve lives through financial inclusion.  
Thank you all and good morning. Mabuhay!  
   
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
