   Alberto G Musalem: Why focus on culture? 
Remarks by Mr Alberto G Musalem, Executive Vice President of the Integrated Policy Analysis 
Group  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York,  at  the  Institute  of  Law  and  Finance 
conference “Towards a New Age of Responsibility in Banking and Finance: Getting the Culture 
and the Ethics Right”, Goethe-University, Frankfurt am Main, 23 November 2015. 
 Thank you to the Institute for Law and Finance for the invitation to speak here today. It is a pleasure to be at Goethe 
University. 
The New York Fed has, for the last two years, been part of an international dialogue on the 
reform of culture in the financial services industry. Why culture? Let’s begin with the following 
hypothesis: environment drives conduct. What each of us learned from our parents governs 
some  of  our  behavior,  but  not  nearly  as much  as  any  of us  who  are  parents  would  like  to 
believe. Place ordinary people in a bad environment, and bad things tend to happen. That said, 
place someone in a good environment, and good things tend to happen. This is just part of 
being human. We observe and adapt. 
Before continuing, I would like to clarify that the views I express today are my own and may 
not reflect the views of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York or the Federal Reserve System. 
Part  of  any  organization’s  environment  is  its  culture.  Some  have  labored  over  a  precise 
definition of the word “culture.” Bill Dudley, the President of the New York Fed, has offered the 
following  description,  which  works  for  me:  “Culture  relates  to  the  implicit  norms  that  guide 
behavior in the absence of regulations or compliance rules – and sometimes despite those 
explicit restraints. Culture exists within every firm whether it is recognized or ignored, whether 
it is nurtured or neglected, and whether it is embraced or disavowed.”1  
The New York Fed’s interest in reforming culture is a product of events since the Financial 
Crisis. Take, for example, the manipulation of LIBOR and foreign exchange rates, much of 
which was collusive. Each of those episodes involved misconduct affecting wholesale markets 
on which the real economy relies. Both cases shared an underlying, flawed outlook. Bankers 
failed  to  see  beyond  their  immediate  financial  goals.  They  ignored  the  broader  social 
consequences  of  their  decisions  on  the  firm  and  its  customers,  as  well  as  on  consumers, 
producers,  savers  and  investors.  The  same  flawed  outlook  may  have  contributed  to  the 
Financial Crisis.2  
There are many more examples. One bank was fined for doing business with Sudan despite 
economic sanctions imposed for engaging in genocide.3 Another bank manipulated electricity 
markets in California and Michigan.4 Other banks helped U.S. citizens evade taxes.5 I will not 
review the full litany. Notably, none of these recent episodes had anything to do with capital 
                                                
1  William  C.  Dudley,  Enhancing  Financial  Stability  by  Improving  Culture  in  the  Financial  Services  Industry, 
Remarks at the Workshop on Reforming Culture and Behavior in the Financial Services Industry, October 20, 
2014. 
2   Cf. William C. Dudley, Opening Remarks at Reforming Culture and Behavior in the Financial Services Industry: 
Workshop on Progress and Challenges, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, November 5, 2015, (“The banking 
scandals that followed the financial crisis are evidence that something fundamental is wrong. I would encourage 
each of you to consider not just specific examples of misconduct, but the patterns within them that point to 
underlying causes. I suspect we will see a strong overlap with those factors that contributed to the financial 
crisis.”). 
3   SeeThomas C. Baxter, Jr., Reflections on the New Compliance Landscape, Remarks at The New Compliance 
Landscape: Increasing Roles – Increasing Risks Conference, July 24, 2014. 
4   See Order Approving Stipulation and Consent Agreement, In re Make-Whole Payments and Related Bidding 
Strategies, No. IN 11–8-000, IN 13–5-000, U.S. Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (July 30, 2013). 
5   See Baxter, supra n.3. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   levels or liquidity ratios. The many post-Crisis reforms to bank balance sheets – including the 
Dodd-Frank Act and new standards developed by the Basel Committee on Bank Supervision 
and the Financial Stability Board-provided necessary bulwarks against systemic risks. Capital 
and liquidity requirements, and the enhanced testing surrounding them, have made banks and 
the financial system more resilient to stress. But those new laws, regulations, and standards 
have done little to curb banker misconduct. Each post-Crisis episode demonstrates a narrow 
cultural focus on short-term gain and disregard of broader social consequences. 
Last  year  the  New  York  Fed  challenged  the  industry  to  consider  many  factors  that  have 
contributed  to  recent,  widespread  misconduct.  There  are  no  simple  answers  and  that 
discussion is continuing. This year, by contrast, our focus has been more on solutions-what’s 
working, and what is not. In both years, we have offered three messages to the industry. 
First, cultural problems are the industry’s responsibility to solve. The official sector can monitor 
progress  and  deliver  feedback  and  recommendations.  In  fact,  many  individual  supervisory 
findings are often symptoms of deeper cultural issues at a firm. But the banks themselves must 
actively reform and manage their cultures. 
Second, a bank’s implicit norms-especially those reinforced through incentives-must align with 
the public purpose of banking. Gerald Corrigan, more than three decades ago, presented a 
theory  of  banking  based  on  the  principle  of  reciprocity.6  Banks  receive  operating  benefits 
unavailable  to  other  industries  because  they  provide  important  services  to  the  public.  For 
example, financial intermediation is enhanced through deposit insurance and access to the 
discount window. Public benefits, though, are not a gift. They are part of a quid pro quo. In 
exchange for receiving valuable operating benefits, a bank’s implicit codes of conduct-that is, 
its culture-must reflect the public dimension of the services that banks provide. 
Third, the reform  of  bank  culture  should  aim to restore trust.7 The  bedrock  of  the financial 
system is trust and the word credit derives from the Latin notion of believing or trusting. We 
saw seven years ago that the public’s trust is critical in a crisis. The repair of the financial 
system would not have been possible without public support. If another crisis were to happen 
tomorrow, would there be that support? 
A lack of trust-or, more accurately, low trustworthiness-also imposes day-to-day costs.8 For 
starters,  there  are  fines.  Then  there  are  the  legal  costs  in  investigating  allegations  and 
defending lawsuits. Internal monitoring also becomes more expensive as rules become more 
extensive. Some might say that the proliferation of rules since the Financial Crisis is inversely 
proportional to a decline in the industry’s perceived trustworthiness. The choice between rules 
and standards depends on the trustworthiness of the regulated. A more flexible, standards-
based legal regime requires a degree of trustworthiness that, in recent years, banks have not 
demonstrated. 
Those are the measurable costs of low trustworthiness. There may be other, longer-term costs 
that  are  more  difficult  to  price.  Let  me  raise  just  two.  If  employees  perceive  a  firm  as 
                                                
6   E. Gerald Corrigan, Are Banks Special?, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Annual Report, January 1983. 
7   See Christine Lagarde, Economic Inclusion and Financial Integrity, Address to the Conference on Inclusive 
Capitalism, May 27, 2014, (“Trust is the lifeblood of the modern business economy. . . . To restore trust, we 
need a shift toward greater integrity and accountability. We need a stronger and systematic ethical dimension.”); 
Mark  Carney,  Rebuilding  Trust  in  Global  Banking,  Speech  at  7th  Annual  Thomas  d’Aquino  Lecture  on 
Leadership, Ontario, February 25, 2013, (“The real economy relies on the financial system. And the financial 
system depends on trust. Indeed, trust is imbedded in the language of finance. The word credit is derived from 
the Latin, credere, which means ‘to have trust in.’”); Dudley, supra n. 1 (“Unless the financial i See generally 
Onora  O’Neill,  A  Question  of  Trust  15–17,  23–24,  and  43–47  (2002)  (distinguishing 
from 
trustworthiness).ndustry can rebuild the public trust, it cannot effectively perform its essential functions. For this 
reason alone, the industry must do much better.”). 
trust 
8   See generally Onora O’Neill, A Question of Trust 15–17, 23–24, and 43–47 (2002) (distinguishing trust from 
trustworthiness). 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   untrustworthy or disloyal, will they choose to work in that firm? And, if they do, how will they 
behave toward the firm and its stakeholders? 
I am encouraged that the industry seems to understand the importance of reforming its culture. 
Consider for a moment the following data points. In September 2013, shareholders of a major 
U.S. bank requested that the bank prepare “a full report on what the bank has done to end [its] 
unethical  activities,  to  rebuild  [its]  credibility  and  provide  new  strong,  effective  checks  and 
balances within the [b]ank.” That request was forwarded, by the way, by a Catholic nun. The 
bank  responded  through  its  attorneys  that  the  nun’s  proposal  was  “materially  false  and 
misleading” and “impermissibly vague and indefinite.”9 Fast forward to May 2015. The Federal 
Advisory Council-a panel of bankers that advises the Federal Reserve System-reported that 
“Regulators  and  the  banking  industry  have  worked  extensively  to  restore  financial  stability 
through a series of mechanisms and rules that establish appropriate levels of capital, liquidity, 
and leverage. . . . As often as not, however, the challenges faced in recent years have been 
behavioral  and  cultural;  post-crisis  episodes  such  as  LIBOR  and  foreign  exchange 
manipulation provide hard evidence that there remains work to be done.”10 This is clearly an 
encouraging difference in perspectives. 
The public sector, too, has paid increasing attention to culture. The Group of Thirty, the Basel 
Committee, the European Systemic Risk Board, and the Financial Stability Board have issued 
papers on culture, governance, and misconduct risk. The Fair and Effective Markets Review-
a  joint  project  of the  Bank  of  England, the  Financial  Conduct  Authority,  and  Her  Majesty’s 
Treasury-has called for heightened standards for market practice in matters affecting the public 
good. And in the last year, we have seen emerging approaches to supervision that aim to 
address culture, conduct, and governance. In particular, the central bank of the Netherlands-
De  Nederlandsche  Bank-has  pioneered  new  techniques  for  the  supervision  of  corporate 
governance, especially for assessing the group dynamics of boards and senior management.11  
Culture  also features  prominently  in  criminal  enforcement. The  U.S.  Department  of  Justice 
requires  its  prosecutors  to  determine  “the  pervasiveness  of  wrongdoing”  at  a  corporation 
before  seeking  an  indictment.  According  to  its  prosecutors’  manual,  “[T]he  most  important 
[factor in making this determination] is the role and conduct of management. Although acts of 
even  low-level  employees  may  result  in  criminal  liability,  a  corporation  is  directed  by  its 
management and management is responsible for a corporate culture in which criminal conduct 
is either discouraged or tacitly encouraged.”12 Individuals, including senior managers, also face 
criminal liability for their conduct. Recent guidance from the U.S. Department of Justice places 
greater  emphasis  on  individual  culpability.13  And  the  recent  convictions  of  two  traders  for 
rigging LIBOR, one of whom served as the Global Head of Liquidity and Finance at a major 
bank, may send a powerful message to bankers about the consequences of their misconduct.14  
The new acceptance of culture as an important area of focus was evident at a workshop that 
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York hosted on November 5. Christine Lagarde, Managing 
Director of the International Monetary Fund, and Stanley Fischer, Vice Chairman of the Board 
of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, headlined a contingent of over 20 public sector 
authorities from around the globe. They were joined by the CEOs, senior executives, and board 
                                                
9   Letter of  Martin  P.  Dunn to  the  Office  of  Chief  Counsel  at  the  U.S.  Securities and  Exchange  Commission’s 
Division of Corporation Finance, January 17, 2014. 
10   Federal Advisory Council and Board of Governors, Record of Meeting, May 8, 2015. 
11   See Supervision of Behavior and Culture: Foundations, Practice & Future Developments (Mirea Raaijmakers, 
ed. 2015). 
12   U.S. Attorneys’ Manual, § 9–28.500. 
13   See  Memorandum  of  Sally  Quillian  Yates,  Deputy  Attorney  General,  regarding  Individual  Accountability  for 
Wrongdoing, September 9, 2015. 
14   See U.S. v. Allen et al., 14-cr-00272, Dkt. No. 147 (S.D.N.Y Nov. 6, 2015) (jury verdict against Anthony Allen 
and Anthony Conti). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   members of global financial institutions. Together, they discussed methods of reforming culture 
and the continuing challenges in this effort. In my view, the workshop offered a number of 
useful insights, chiefly: 
• 
Culture is a soft concept that is hard to measure, and perhaps harder to manage and 
sustain. But it is as important as capital and liquidity, and should receive continuous 
and persistent attention. 
A bank’s culture must be consistent with public expectations and promote behavior 
that  considers  the  firm’s  many  stakeholders,  including  the  public.  Also,  a  positive, 
constructive culture can be an important pillar aligned with the execution of a firm’s 
business strategy. 
Culture cannot be set by fiat. Leadership is indispensable, and requires more than a 
“tone from the top.” Managers of all levels must take action to promote a greater sense 
of personal responsibility and stewardship among employees. The next generation of 
financial leaders will reflect the expectations of leaders today. 
Despite firm-wide statements about values and codes of conduct, banks may have 
several  dissonant  sub-cultures.  “Silos”  or  “tribes”  as  they  are  sometimes  called, 
appear in most if not all of the episodes I described earlier. By sharing best practices 
across the industry, firms might identify common warning signs of problems within 
sub-cultures and behaviors that are incompatible with the firm’s values. 
Diversity  of  thought  and  background  are  valuable  cultural  assets  because  they 
generate  better  questions  and  decisions,  contributing  to  effective  challenge.  A 
diversity of views, though, must be complemented by a sense of common purpose. 
Certain  basic  principles-fair  treatment  of  customers  and  employees,  for  example-
cannot be open to debate. 
    The Federal Reserve Bank of New York recently launched a webpage that collects resources 
on bank culture.15 We’ve included the papers by the Group of Thirty and other organizations 
that I have mentioned, and summaries of our two workshops on culture. I hope you’ll take a 
look. 
To conclude, the Financial Crisis and subsequent scandals revealed deep and continuing flaws 
in  the  culture  of  banking.  The  responsibility  to  address  these  flaws  rests  with  the  banks 
themselves.  Many  industry  leaders  have  initiated  reform  programs  within  their  firms.  It  is 
important to keep the momentum going. Reform requires relentless and sustained effort: from 
the top of an institution to its most junior employees, and across all of the institution’s business 
activities. Reform must include the full scope of an employee’s career, beginning with recruiting 
and  continuing  with  annual  performance  management,  compensation  and  promotion 
decisions. We in the official sector will be looking to the industry to fulfill its end of the bargain-
to act consistent with the public well-being, to value long-term stability over short-term gain, 
and to take account of all stakeholders in making decisions. 
Thank you for your time and attention. 
                                                
15   https://www.newyorkfed.org/governance-and-culture-reform/index.html. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
