  Raghuram Rajan: Tolerance and respect for economic progress 
Convocation address by Dr Raghuram Rajan, Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the 
IIT Delhi Convocation, Delhi, 31 October 2015. 
 Thank you very much for inviting me back to the Institute to deliver the convocation address. 
I graduated with a degree in Electrical Engineering 30 years ago. I was overly anxious then 
about what the future held for me, because I did not realize that the Institute had prepared 
me  so  well  for  what  lay  ahead.  Our  professors  –  and  I  will  not  single  out  any  to  avoid  a 
disservice to those I do not name – were dedicated professionals. They asked a lot of us, 
knowing that  in challenging  us  they  allowed  us  to  learn  what  we  were  capable  of.  Equally 
important, our Electrical Engineering class – in those days, Computer Science was part of 
Electrical Engineering in IIT Delhi – had some of the smartest people it has been my privilege 
to  know.  After  working  with  them  as  colleagues,  and  competing  with  them  for  grades,  I 
learned what it took to succeed in the fiercest environments; very hard work, friendship, and 
boatloads of luck. Those lessons have stayed with me since. 
IIT Delhi then, as I am sure it is now, was not only about studies – it was about growing up. 
We were, with a few notable exceptions, the proverbial school nerds who had been excluded 
from all school sports by the macho sports cases. With almost everyone in the same boat at 
IIT, for the first time in our lives we got a chance to bat and bowl at the nets, instead of being 
posted at deep long on to retrieve the odd six by the stars. Everyone did something, ranging 
from photography to publishing. Of course, we all aspired to join dramatics, where you got to 
spend long hours with members of the opposite sex. Unfortunately, I was no good at acting, 
so I had to look for self-actualization elsewhere. But there were enough places to look. 
Student politics was vibrant, with plenty of scheming, strategizing, and back-stabbing. It was 
an  intellectual  pastime,  however,  without  the  violence  and  corruption  that  plagues  student 
politics elsewhere in our country. You had to convince the small intelligent electorate to vote 
for you, and in figuring out how to get that vote, we all learnt the art of persuasion. 
So  we  grew  up  in  the  classrooms,  in the  squash  courts  at  the  RCA,  in the  civilizing  SPIC 
Mackay  overnight  classical  music  concerts  and  in  the  over-crowded  rock  concerts  at  the 
OAT.  Some  of  us  spent  long  hours  waiting  hopefully  outside  Kailash  Hostel,  and  when 
occasionally our  wait  was rewarded, beautiful autumn nights with our friends, chatting and 
gazing at the stars while sitting on the roof of Convocation Hall. The Institute replaced our 
naivety with a more confident maturity. We came in as smart boys and girls and left as wiser 
young men and women. I am confident that the Institute has done to you what it did to us. 
You will thank it in the years to come for that. 
In  speaking  here  today,  I  am  aware  that  most  convocation  addresses  are  soon  forgotten. 
That creates a form of moral hazard for the speaker. If you are not going to remember what I 
say,  I  don’t  have  the  incentive  to  work  hard  at  crafting  my  words.  The  net  effect  is  what 
economists refer to as a bad equilibrium; my speech is forgettable, and you therefore forget it 
soon. If so, we are all probably better off with me skipping the rest of the speech, and all of 
us going on to other pressing duties. 
Nevertheless,  I  am  going  to  look  beyond  my  personal  incentives  and  fulfil  my  dharma  as 
Chief Guest. I will speak on why India’s tradition of debate and an open spirit of enquiry is 
critical for its economic progress. Let me explain. 
Robert  Solow,  won  the  Nobel  Prize  in  Economics  for  work  that  showed  that  the  bulk  of 
economic growth did not come from putting more factors of production such as labour and 
capital  to  work.  Instead,  it  came  from  putting  those  factors  of  production  together  more 
cleverly,  that  is,  from  what  he  called  total  factor  productivity  growth.  Put  differently,  new 
ideas,  new  methods  of  production,  better  logistics  –  these  are  what  lead  to  sustained 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  economic  growth.  Of  course,  a  poor  country  like  ours  can  grow  for  some  time  by  putting 
more people to work, by moving them from low productivity agriculture to higher value added 
industry or services, and by giving them better tools to do their jobs. As many of you who 
have  taken  economics  will  recognize,  we  in  India  are  usually  far  from  the  production 
possibility frontier, so we can grow for a long while just by catching up with the methods of 
industrial countries. 
But more intelligent ways of working will enable us to leapfrog old methods and come more 
quickly to the production possibility frontier – as for example, we have done in parts of the 
software industry. And, of course, once you are at the frontier and using the best methods in 
the world, the only way to grow is to innovate and be even better than others in the world. 
This is what our software firms are now trying to do. 
Our alums, whom you students will shortly join, are leading India’s charge to the frontier and 
beyond.  Take  the  fantastic  developments  in  E-commerce,  ranging  from  the  creation  of 
electronic  market  places  to  new  logistics  networks  and  payments  systems.  Today,  a 
consumer in a small town can have the same choice of clothing fashions that anyone from 
the large metros enjoy, simply because the Internet has brought all the shops in India to her 
doorstep. And while her local shop no longer can sell shoddy apparel, it now focuses on the 
perishable items she needs in a hurry, even while sub-contracting to provide the last leg of 
the  logistic  network  that  reaches  her.  Economic  growth  through  new  ideas  and  production 
methods is what our professors and alums contribute to the nation. 
So what does an educational institution or a nation need to do to keep the idea factory open? 
The  first  essential  is  to  foster  competition  in  the  market  place  for  ideas.  This  means 
encouraging challenge to all authority and tradition, even while acknowledging that the only 
way of dismissing any view is through empirical tests. What this rules out is anyone imposing 
a particular view or ideology because of their power. Instead, all ideas should be scrutinized 
critically,  no  matter  whether  they  originate  domestically  or  abroad,  whether  they  have 
matured over thousands of years or a few minutes, whether they come from an untutored 
student or a world-famous professor. 
I am sure many of you have come across Richard Feynman’s Lectures on Physics, a must-
read when  we  were at IIT. The Nobel prize-winning physicist was one  of the giants of the 
twentieth century. In his autobiography, though, he writes how he found the atmosphere at 
the Institute of Advanced Studies at Princeton stultifying. Now, as you know, the Institute of 
Advanced  Studies  brings  together  some  of  the  finest  scholars  in  the  world  to  ponder 
problems in a multi-disciplinary environment. But he found the atmosphere sterile because 
there were no students to ask him questions, questions that would force him to rethink his 
beliefs  and  perhaps  discover  new  theories.  Ideas  start  with  questioning  and  alternative 
viewpoints,  sometimes  seemingly  silly  ones.  After  all,  Einstein  built  his  theory  of  relativity 
pondering the somewhat wacky question of what someone travelling in a train at the speed 
of light would experience. So nothing should be excluded but everything should be subject to 
debate  and  constant 
to  offer  unquestioned 
pronouncements. Without this competition for ideas, we have stagnation. 
This then leads to a second essential: Protection, not of specific ideas and traditions, but the 
right  to  question  and  challenge,  the  right  to  behave  differently  so  long  as  it  does  not  hurt 
others  seriously.  In  this  protection  lies  societal  self-interest,  for  it  is  by  encouraging  the 
challenge of innovative rebels that society develops, that it gets the ideas that propel Solow’s 
total factor productivity growth. Fortunately, India has always protected debate and the right 
to  have  different  views.  Some  have  even  embedded  these  views  in  permanent  structures. 
Raja  Raja  Chola,  in  building  the  magnificent  Brihadeeswara  Shaivite  temple  at  Thanjavur, 
also  incorporated  sculptures  of  Vishnu  as  well  as  the  meditating  Buddha  thus  admitting  to 
alternative viewpoints. When Shahenshah Jalaluddin Muhammad Akbar invited scholars of 
all  manner  of  persuasion  to  debate  the  eternal  verities  at  his  court,  he  was  only  following 
testing.  No  one  should  be  allowed 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  older traditions of our Hindu and Buddhist kings, who encouraged and protected the spirit of 
enquiry. 
What then of group sentiment? Should ideas or behaviour that hurt a particular intellectual 
position or group not be banned? Possibly, but a quick resort to bans will chill all debate as 
everyone will be anguished by ideas they dislike. It is far better to improve the environment 
for ideas through tolerance and mutual respect. 
Let me explain. Actions that physically harm anyone, or show verbal contempt for a particular 
group  so  that  they  damage  the  group’s  participation  in  the  marketplace  for  ideas,  should 
certainly not be allowed. For example, sexual harassment, whether physical or verbal, has 
no  place  in  society.  At  the  same  time,  groups  should  not  be  looking  for  slights  any  and 
everywhere,  so  that  too  much  is  seen  as  offensive;  the  theory  of  confirmation  bias  in 
psychology suggests that once one starts looking for insults, one can find them everywhere, 
even  in  the  most  innocuous  statements.  Indeed,  if  what  you  do  offends  me  but  does  not 
harm  me  otherwise,  there  should  be  a  very  high  bar for  prohibiting  your  act.  After  all,  any 
ban, and certainly any vigilante acts to enforce it, may offend you as much, or more, than the 
offense to me. Excessive political correctness stifles progress as much as excessive license 
and disrespect. 
Put  differently,  while  you  should  avoid  pressing  the  buttons  that  upset  me  to  the  extent 
possible, when you do push them you should explain carefully why that is necessary so as to 
move the debate forward, and how it should not be interpreted as a personal attack on me. 
You have to tread respectfully, assuring me that a challenge to the ideas I hold is necessary 
for progress. At the same time, I should endeavour to hold few ideas so closely intertwined 
with  my  personality  that  any  attack  on  them  is  deemed  an  intolerable  personal  affront. 
Tolerance means not being so insecure about one’s ideas that one cannot subject them to 
challenge – it implies a degree of detachment that is absolutely necessary for mature debate. 
Finally,  respect  requires  that  in  the  rare  case  when  an  idea  is  tightly  associated  with  a 
group’s core personality, we are extra careful about challenging it. 
Tolerance can take the offense out of debate, and indeed instil respect. If I go berserk every 
time a particular button is pressed, rebels are tempted to press the button, while mischief-
makers indeed do so. But if I do not react predictably, and instead ask button pressers to 
explain their concerns, rebels are forced to do the hard work of marshalling arguments. So, 
rebels do not press the button frivolously, while the thuggish mischief makers who abound in 
every  group  are  left  without  an  easy  trigger.  Tolerance  and  respect  then  lead  to  a  good 
equilibrium where they reinforce each other. 
For  example,  rebellious  youth  in  the  United  States  used  to  burn the  American flag. It  was 
calculated to upset the older generation that had fought in America’s wars, for the flag was a 
symbol of all they had fought for. And the police, many of whom were veterans, used to react 
with violence, which was precisely the reaction the rebels sought to further their cause. Over 
time, though, U.S. society has become more tolerant of flag-burning. Because it no longer 
triggers a reaction, it is no longer used as an instrument to shock. In sum, if group sentiment 
becomes  more  tolerant and  less  easily  hurt,  the  actions  that try  to  hurt it  will  diminish.  As 
Mahatma Gandhi said “The golden rule of conduct is mutual toleration, seeing that we will 
never all think alike and we shall always see Truth in fragments and from different points of 
vision.” 
Let  me  conclude.  IITans  like  you  will  lead  India’s  race  for  ideas.  The  India  that  you  will 
graduate into is much more capable of using your technological prowess than the India we 
graduated into. I wish  you unlimited ambition, and forecast great success for those of you 
who  continue  thinking  and  challenging.  But  as  you  go  out  in  the  world,  remember  our 
tradition of debate in an environment of respect and tolerance. By upholding it, by fighting for 
it, you will be repaying your teachers in this great institution, and your parents who worked so 
hard to send you here. And you will be doing our country a great patriotic service. Thank you 
and good luck. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
