  Andréa M Maechler: Monetary policy in 2015 – a first assessment 
Speech by Ms Andréa M Maechler, Member of the Governing Board of the Swiss National 
Bank, at the Money Market Event, Geneva, 19 November 2015. 
 Accompanying slides can be found at the end of the speech and on the Swiss National Bank’s website. 
The  speaker  would  like  to  thank  Dirk  Faltin,  Marco  Huwiler  and  Bettina  Simioni  for  their  valuable  support  in 
preparing  this speech.  She  is  also grateful to  Vincent  Crettol  and  Peter  Kuster  for  helpful comments  and  SNB 
Language Services for their assistance. 
Ladies and gentlemen 
It is my great pleasure to welcome you tonight to our traditional Money Market Event. I feel 
very honoured to be here in Geneva, the city of my birth, giving my first public speech for the 
Swiss National Bank (SNB), having joined the Governing Board in July this year. 
It has been a very eventful year for monetary policy in Switzerland. In January, the SNB took 
two momentous decisions: It discontinued the minimum exchange rate against the euro, and 
lowered  the  interest  rate  on  sight  deposits  further  into  negative  territory.  Thus,  the  SNB’s 
monetary policy has changed significantly. Tonight, I shall provide a first assessment of this 
new monetary policy environment. 
My speech is divided into three parts. First, I shall discuss the SNB’s monetary policy since 
the  discontinuation  of  the  minimum  exchange  rate,  and  the  impact  on  the  Swiss  franc 
exchange rate. Second, I will assess how the negative interest rate as a policy instrument 
has been transmitted to different segments of the financial markets. Finally, I shall discuss 
the outlook for economic growth and inflation in Switzerland. 
Following  my  speech,  my  colleague  Dewet  Moser  will  take  a  closer  look  at  the  many 
operational aspects involved in the implementation of our monetary policy. 
Monetary policy environment: breaking new ground 
On 15 January, the SNB discontinued its minimum exchange rate of CHF 1.20 to the euro, 
and announced a further cut in the interest rate on sight deposits to –0.75%. These decisions 
were  the  response  to  international  developments.  Over  the  course  of  2014,  market 
participants  began  to  expect  that  the  US  central  bank,  the  Federal  Reserve  would  start 
increasing its policy rates. Meanwhile, the ECB indicated that additional monetary stimulus 
would be required in the euro area. As a result, the euro weakened substantially against the 
US dollar. 
The  euro/Swiss  franc  minimum  exchange  rate  came  under  intense  pressure,  and  by  mid-
January 2015, it had become clear that it was no longer sustainable. Had the SNB not acted 
as it did in discontinuing the minimum exchange rate against the euro, it would have been 
forced to buy enormous amounts of foreign currency. The SNB’s balance sheet would have 
expanded rapidly, potentially to a size that would have severely impaired our ability to fulfil 
our constitutional mandate in the long term. 
Since  the  discontinuation  of  the  minimum  exchange  rate,  the  SNB’s  monetary  policy  has 
been  based  on  two  pillars,  which  are  designed  to  mitigate  upward  pressure  on  the  Swiss 
franc  and  to  ensure  price  stability  over  the  medium  term.  The  first  pillar  is  the  negative 
interest rate on sight deposits at the SNB. The second pillar is our willingness to intervene on 
the foreign exchange market as required. These two pillars are complementary and mutually 
reinforcing policy instruments. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  The negative interest rate 
The negative interest rate applies to sight deposits above a certain threshold, held by banks 
and other financial market participants at the SNB. This threshold was introduced to limit the 
financial  burden  on  banks.  It  was  set  at  20  times  the  minimum  reserve  requirements.  By 
linking  the  threshold  to  the  statutory  minimum  reserve  requirement,  the  SNB  adopted  a 
measure that is both firmly anchored in law and for which clear rules exist. For depositors 
that are not subject to minimum reserve requirements, a fixed exemption threshold of at least 
CHF 10 million has been set. 
The  thresholds  imply  that  banks  which  hold  large  sight  deposits  relative  to  their  minimum 
reserve  requirements  are  affected  most  by  the  negative  interest  rate.  Thus,  like  any  other 
monetary  policy  measure,  the  negative  interest  rate  affects  different  market  participants 
differently. However, in the interests of the Swiss economy as a whole, it is important that the 
negative interest rate be allowed to function as effectively as possible, by applying it broadly 
and keeping exceptions to a minimum. 
The aim of the negative interest rate is to reduce the relative attractiveness of Swiss franc 
investments,  and  to  counter  upward  pressure  on  the  exchange  rate.  Hence,  it  is  primarily 
directed  at  the  external  contributions  to  monetary  conditions  in  Switzerland.  As  such,  the 
negative interest rate is not an ordinary policy instrument. It is a consequence of the fragile 
international environment and its exceptionally low interest rates. Historically, Swiss interest 
rates have been lower than those of our main trading partners. This interest rate differential 
is  a  reflection  of  our  country’s  long-standing  strengths,  including  political  stability,  sound 
institutions, a resilient economy, and a first-class financial sector. 
My first chart shows the interest rates of German and Swiss ten-year government bonds. The 
orange area indicates the interest rate differential. As central banks around the world fought 
to  mitigate  the  worst  effects  of  the global financial  crisis,  short-term  interest rates  in  many 
advanced economies fell towards zero. Importantly, foreign interest rates, including those in 
Germany,  have  fallen  more  sharply  than  those  in  Switzerland.  As  a  result,  Switzerland’s 
interest rate differential had practically disappeared, making Swiss franc investments more 
attractive than comparable investments in other currencies. By lowering the interest rate on 
sight deposits into negative territory, the SNB restored the traditional interest rate differential 
to more normal levels, as illustrated by the orange area in the chart. 
The SNB’s willingness to intervene in foreign exchange markets 
A  higher  interest  rate  differential  reduces  the  relative  attractiveness  of  the  Swiss  franc. 
However, financial markets may be exposed to a sudden increase in volatility, which could 
lead  to  a  sharp  rise  in  the  demand  for  Swiss  francs.  This  is  where  our  willingness  to 
intervene in the foreign exchange market plays a crucial role in stabilising the markets. For 
example,  this  summer,  when  the  Greek  government  announced  a  referendum  on  the 
international bailout programme, we intervened in the forex market at a time of great market 
volatility and global uncertainty. This willingness to intervene in the forex market as required 
is a key pillar of our monetary policy. 
The  size  of  the  SNB’s  balance  sheet  reflects  our  monetary  policy  measures.  One 
consequence  of  a  larger  balance  sheet  is  larger fluctuations  in  the financial  results. In the 
first  three  quarters  of  this  year,  the  SNB  incurred  a  provisional  loss  of  CHF  34  billion, 
predominantly  reflecting  valuation  effects  following  the  discontinuation  of  the  minimum 
exchange rate. This is shown in chart 2. It is still too early to draw conclusions for the 2015 
year-end result, particularly in the current volatile international environment. 
Let me be clear, however: It is not the purpose of the SNB to generate and distribute profits. 
Instead, the SNB’s main concern is to conduct a monetary policy that serves the interests of 
the country as a whole. Our monetary policy operations have a direct impact on the SNB’s 
balance sheet, meaning that substantial losses may occur in individual years. Significantly, 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  however, in the long term, our financial results should be positive, thanks to our monopoly on 
creating banknotes and sight deposits, which ensures low funding costs. 
The Swiss franc since the discontinuation of the minimum exchange rate 
Our two-pronged monetary policy is proving effective in reducing the relative attractiveness 
of the Swiss franc. After the sharp appreciation immediately following the discontinuation of 
the  minimum  exchange  rate,  the  franc  has  weakened  steadily  against  the  euro,  despite 
intermittent bouts of heightened financial market volatility during the summer. However, the 
Swiss franc remains significantly overvalued. For example, the real effective exchange rate –
the Swiss franc’s exchange rate against a basket of currencies of our main trading partners – 
is still around 15% above its long-term average, compared to less than 10% at the end of 
2014. 
The  situation  on  the foreign  exchange  market  has  not  yet  normalised. Chart  3  shows  that 
private  capital  outflows,  which  have  traditionally  balanced  Switzerland’s  structural  current 
account  surpluses,  have  turned  into  net  inflows  since  the  global  financial  crisis.  Changing 
investor  preferences  are  behind  this  reversal  of  capital  flows.  While  global  economic 
conditions have improved, substantial uncertainty remains, causing some investors to seek 
the relative safety of the Swiss franc. This also applies to domestic investors, including large 
institutional investors, which have partly repatriated their assets and investment returns. Until 
investor  preferences  normalise,  the  franc  is  likely  to  remain  under  pressure.  The  second 
quarter  of  2015  suggests  a  return  to  net  capital  outflows  –  a  development  undoubtedly 
supported  by  the  negative  interest  rate.  However,  it  is  too  early  to  say  whether  this  is  the 
beginning of a new trend. 
Transmission of the negative interest rate to financial markets 
This brings me to the question of how the negative interest rate has been transmitted to the 
different segments of the Swiss financial market. 
With  regard  to  money  and  capital  markets,  our  experience  so  far  shows  that  the  negative 
interest  rate  has  worked  remarkably  well.  The  entire  term  structure  of  interest  rates  has 
shifted downwards without generating market disruptions. This is illustrated in chart 4. After 
an initial undershooting, the Swiss franc three-month Libor levelled off in the middle of the 
SNB’s target range of –1.25% to –0.25%. Other money market rates followed suit, leaving 
spreads between the different money market rates more or less unchanged. 
From  the  money  market,  the  negative  interest  rate  worked  its  way  to  the  capital  markets. 
Government  bond  yields  fell  across  the  entire  yield  curve,  with  short-term  yields  dropping 
more  than  yields  of  longer  maturities.  Yields  on  Swiss  government  bonds  are  currently 
negative up to a maturity of 13 years. In the market for private sector bonds, interest rates fell 
as  well,  but  not  by  as much  as government  bond  yields,  reflecting  the greater  substitution 
opportunities for corporate bond investors. 
While the introduction of the negative interest rate caused interest rates on the money and 
capital markets to decline, mortgage rates did not decrease to the same extent. Indeed, for 
long-term mortgages, interest rates are slightly higher than they were at the beginning of the 
year. This is because banks’ refinancing costs have not fallen to the same extent as money 
market  interest rates.  As  a result,  banks’  interest margins  have  come  under  pressure.1  To 
partially offset this effect, banks have raised their mortgage interest rates. As yet, therefore, 
fears that the negative interest rate might contribute to stronger growth in mortgage lending 
have proved unfounded. 
                                                
1  This  affects  the  banks’  “liability  margin”,  which  is  the  difference  between  the  interest  on  maturity-matched 
alternative funding sources and the interest on deposits. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  The Swiss economy in a difficult environment 
So  far,  I  have  spoken  mainly  about  exchange  rates  and  interest  rates  –  that  is,  monetary 
conditions in the Swiss economy. I would now like to turn to the real economy. Switzerland is 
a  relatively  small  open  economy.2  In  general,  this  means  that  international  developments 
matter a lot to Switzerland. However, during the global recession of 2009 and the sluggish 
recovery that followed, the Swiss economy proved to be surprisingly resilient. The reasons 
for this relatively strong performance are manifold: To start with, Switzerland did not suffer 
from  a  housing  market  correction  or  over-indebtedness  of  the  private  sector.  Moreover, 
favourable  labour  market  conditions  and  migration  have  remained  a  constant  support  to 
private consumption. 
Chart 5 shows the level of GDP for different countries, indexed to 100 at the respective pre-
crisis peak. Swiss GDP is now nearly 8% above its pre-crisis peak. As can be seen in the 
chart,  among  large  advanced  economies  this  performance  is  matched  only  by  the  US. 
Economic growth held up relatively well even in years when the economy faced a strong and 
abrupt exchange rate appreciation. A major factor here is monetary policy: With its monetary 
policy measures, the SNB was able to absorb some of the risks affecting the economy during 
the various episodes of the financial crisis. 
Another factor  is  the  Swiss  economy’s  high  degree  of  competiveness.  Chart  6  shows  that 
Switzerland  topped  the  global  competitiveness  ranking  once  again  in  the World  Economic 
Forum’s  report  for  2015–2016.  Swiss  companies’  technological  readiness,  business 
sophistication  and  flexibility  are  among  the  factors  that  make  Switzerland  one  of  the  most 
competitive countries in the world. 
This is not to say that adjustment is painless. Far from it: Organisational changes are never 
easy  and  cost-cutting  is  often  painful  –  especially  for  employees.  Moreover,  the  relative 
resilience  of  real  GDP  growth  is  to  some  extent  due  to  companies’  willingness  to  accept 
lower profit margins. Chart 7 shows real, i.e. inflation-adjusted, export volumes and nominal 
export turnover. While nominal export turnover fell sharply, real export volumes held up much 
better.  Hence,  when  the  strong  appreciation  of  the  Swiss  franc  raised  prices  for  foreign 
buyers  of  Swiss  products,  Swiss  companies  responded  by  cutting  export  prices,  thereby 
preventing a sharp fall in real export volumes. Further evidence for this ‘margin compression’ 
comes from our own surveys, which SNB delegates for regional economic relations conduct 
regularly among Swiss companies. 
Global demand conditions have deteriorated somewhat in recent months. Emerging market 
economies  in  particular  –  but  also  some  commodity-producing  countries  –  have  seen 
economic  momentum  fade.  By  contrast,  major  advanced  economies  continue  to  recover, 
albeit at a modest pace. On balance, we expect the global economy to grow moderately in 
the  coming  years.  This  should  help  to  partially  offset  the  drag  from  the  overvalued  Swiss 
franc.  Thus,  following  a  contraction  in  the  first  quarter  of  2015,  economic  activity  in 
Switzerland expanded again in the second quarter. In our estimation, GDP is likely to grow 
by close to 1% this year. 
Price stability is not in doubt 
In  the  last  part  of  my  speech,  I  would  like  to  present  our  inflation  outlook.  Last  year,  the 
inflation rate – as measured by the consumer price index – averaged around zero. This year, 
inflation has fallen well into negative territory. Two factors are behind this development: the 
sharp appreciation of the Swiss franc following the discontinuation of the minimum exchange 
                                                
2  According to World Bank data, the Swiss economy ranked 20th out of 194 countries in 2014. Switzerland’s 
export intensity is significantly above the OECD average. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  rate and the pronounced fall in oil prices last year. These factors are transitory, and as such 
do not pose a threat to price stability over time in Switzerland. 
Exchange  rate  appreciation  and  the  energy  price  decline  are  the  results  of  international 
spillovers  that  affect  consumer  prices  primarily  by  lowering  import  price  inflation.3  Chart  8 
shows  that  most  of  the  downward  pressure  on  Swiss  inflation  is  attributable  to  these 
international spillovers. However, as can be seen in the chart, domestic price components 
have  shifted  down  as  well.  This  harks  back  to  the  flexibility  of  Swiss  companies,  which  I 
referred to earlier. In particular, those Swiss companies that compete in markets for imported 
goods  have  lowered  their  prices  in  order  to  maintain  competitiveness  in  the  wake  of  the 
exchange  rate  appreciation.  Such  price  cuts  play  an  important  role  in  restoring  the  Swiss 
economy’s  price  competitiveness  over  the  medium  term.  They  are  thus  part  of  the 
adjustment  process  in  response  to  the  sudden  exchange  rate  appreciation.  That  such  a 
process can be painful for some of the companies directly involved goes without saying. 
For this year, we expect consumer price inflation to average about –1.2%. We think that the 
inflation  rate  will  reach  its  trough  this  quarter.  For  2016,  we  expect  average  inflation  of 
−0.5%. As you can see from the chart, inflation will move back into positive territory in early 
2017. These forecasts assume that the three-month Libor remains at –0.75% over the entire 
forecast  horizon,  that  the  Brent  crude  oil  price  remains  at  USD 50  per  barrel  and  that  the 
Swiss franc weakens. 
Again,  our  forecasts  show  that  the  current  period  of  negative  inflation  is  temporary. 
Nevertheless,  even  temporarily  negative  inflation  rates  are  undesirable.  Yet  they  cannot 
always be avoided – especially during phases of strong exchange rate appreciation. What 
matters is that inflation expectations remain firmly anchored and that monetary policy is able 
to ensure medium-term price stability. Medium and long-term inflation expectations are still 
positive. This can be seen in various surveys of inflation expectations, and is confirmed by 
discussions  between  the  SNB’s  delegates  for  regional  economic  relations  and  company 
representatives  from  different  sectors  of  the  economy.  Thus,  we  do  not  expect  sustained 
negative inflation, let alone a deflationary spiral. 
Concluding remarks 
This brings me to the end of my speech. Earlier this year, the SNB took some far-reaching 
decisions:  It  discontinued  the  minimum  exchange  rate  against  the  euro,  and  lowered  the 
negative interest rate on sight deposits significantly into negative territory. These measures 
were  necessary  to  promote  adequate  monetary  conditions  for  the  Swiss  economy,  and  to 
ensure the SNB’s ability to provide medium-term price stability in the future. 
Since  mid-January  this  year,  the  SNB’s  monetary  policy  has  been  based  on  two 
complementary  pillars:  The  negative  interest  rate  and  our  willingness  to  intervene  on  the 
foreign exchange market as required. These instruments are proving effective at countering 
excessive  pressure  on  the  exchange  rate,  thereby  ensuring  price  stability  in  the  medium 
term.  However,  I  would  like  to  stress  that,  at  current  levels,  the  Swiss  franc  remains 
significantly overvalued. 
With an interest rate of –0.75% on sight deposits, we have gone far compared to most other 
countries. We have observed that money and capital markets are functioning smoothly under 
the negative interest rate. However, mortgage rates have not fallen to the same extent as 
interest  rates  on  money  and  capital  markets.  Hence,  fears  that  the  negative  interest  rate 
                                                
3  Jordan,  T.  (2015)  “The  impact  of  international  spillovers  on  inflation  dynamics  and  independent  monetary 
policy:  the  Swiss  experience”,  conference  paper  prepared  for  the  39th  Economic  Symposium  on  ‘Inflation 
Dynamics and Monetary Policy’ in Jackson Hole, 28 August 2015. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  could contribute to imbalances on the mortgage and real estate markets have so far proved 
unfounded. 
Finally,  economic  conditions  remain  challenging  in  Switzerland.  The  SNB  monitors  the 
situation  continuously,  and  our  latest  analysis  and  forecast  will  be  published  at  the  next 
monetary policy assessment on 10 December. In general, we believe that the economy has 
returned to a moderate path of recovery, although significant downside risks remain. These 
originate,  in  particular,  from  the  fragile  international  environment  and  exchange  rate 
developments.  Currently,  the  inflation  rate  is  too  low,  but  the  main  factors  pushing  down 
domestic inflation are of a transitory nature. Medium-term price stability is not in doubt. 
Thank you very much for your attention. 
 
 
 
 
 6 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
      BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
   8 
    BIS central bankers’ speeches 
      BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
   10 
    BIS central bankers’ speeches 
