Ewald Nowotny: Toward a genuine Economic and Monetary Union 
Opening remarks by Prof Dr Ewald Nowotny, Governor of the Central Bank of the Republic 
of  Austria,  at  the  workshop  “Toward  a  Genuine  Economic  and  Monetary  Union”,  Vienna, 
10 September 2015. 
 Dear colleagues, 
Dear Paul, dear Otmar, 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
It is a great pleasure to welcome you here in Vienna to today’s and tomorrow’s Workshop, 
hosted by the Oesterreichische Nationalbank and organized in cooperation with the Euro50 
Group,  a  network  of  leading  experts  and  policymakers  in  the  field  of  European  monetary 
integration. 
Obviously,  the  title  of  our Workshop,  “Toward  a  Genuine  Economic  and  Monetary  Union,” 
implies that Economic and Monetary Union, or EMU for short, is not genuine yet. But despite 
all its deficiencies, let us not forget that EMU and the euro are major achievements. For its 
member countries, EMU has anchored price stability and increased cross-border trade and 
financial  integration.  Even  during  the  financial  crisis,  the  number  of  countries  sharing  the 
euro increased to nineteen, and is set to grow further. For the European Union as a whole, 
the single currency is a symbol of a peaceful Europe, a keystone of economic integration and 
political  unity.  And  for  the  world,  the  euro  has  become  a  major  player  in  the  international 
monetary system and the global economy. 
Yet, during the global financial crisis, EMU was seriously put to the test. The fact that the so-
called  “sovereign”  debt  crisis  (which  incidentally  had  also  been  caused  by  private  debt 
accumulation)  occurred  in  Europe  and  not  in  other  regions  with  even  higher  debt  levels  is 
certainly  related  to  the  incomplete  institutional  setting  of  EMU. While  the  monetary  part  of 
EMU was fully implemented in 1999, the economic counterpart is still an unfinished business. 
But  how  can  we  ensure  the  smooth  functioning  of  EMU?  The  recently  published  Five 
Presidents’  Report  “Completing  Europe’s  Economic  and  Monetary  Union”  tries  to  address 
this  question.  The  five  presidents  in  question  are  those  of  the  European  Commission,  the 
European Council, the Eurogroup, the European Central Bank and the European Parliament. 
Their  proposals  rest  on  four  pillars:  First,  an  Economic  Union  that  promotes  convergence, 
prosperity and social cohesion; second, a Financial Union that integrates banking and capital 
markets  regulation;  third,  a  Fiscal  Union  that  guarantees  sound  public  households;  and 
fourth, a Political Union that strengthens democratic accountability, legitimacy and institution 
building. 
As an aside, let me point out that the structure of the Five Presidents’ Report varies slightly 
from that of the preceding Four Presidents’ Report, published during the height of the crisis in 
2012  by  the  same  institutions  except  for  the  European  Parliament.  In  that  report,  the  four 
pillars  of  genuine  EMU  were  listed  in  the  following  order:  a  Banking  Union  followed  by  a 
Fiscal, an Economic and a Political Union. There may be political economy considerations 
behind  the  fact  that  the  Five  Presidents  prioritize  Economic  Union,  as  buoyant  economic 
activity  facilitates  the  implementation  of  ambitious  reforms.  Apparently,  the  renewed  dip  in 
economic  activity  observable  since  2013  has  hampered  European  citizens’  appetite  for 
further  deepening  of  EMU  and  indeed  strengthened  disintegrative  forces  across  the  EU. 
Moreover, the progress made in recent years in the fields of Banking and Fiscal Union may 
justify their “downgrading” in the current report. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
1 
  The  Workshop  builds  on  our  conviction  that  such  a  comprehensive  framework  deserves 
academic scrutiny from various disciplines and  a broad public debate.  Without anticipating 
the outcome of this Workshop, let me just make some personal comments on the issues at 
stake. 
I would like to start with some reflection on Monetary Union – a fifth pillar the Five Presidents 
implicitly  seem  to  take  for  granted.  In  the  run-up  to  the  crisis,  the  question  was  raised 
whether a one-size monetary policy can fit all, as some countries were enjoying an economic 
boom  while  others  were  still  struggling  against  economic  contraction.  This  uniformity  of 
monetary policy should not be overstated at the current juncture; however, as almost all euro 
area economies still have a negative output gap. But sooner or later, some countries will be 
forced to adopt fiscal, macroprudential or structural policies that counteract a monetary policy 
stance that might be inappropriate for them in particular, while the ECB can and must only 
target the euro area aggregate with its monetary policy. 
Currently,  Eurosystem  monetary  policy  helps  improve  the  otherwise  lackluster  outlook  for 
economic  growth  and  price  stability  in  the  euro  area.  Low  or  even  negative  interest  rates 
favor spending over saving. Asset purchases (or quantitative easing) help fix the monetary 
transmission mechanism. The provision of long-term liquidity to the banking sector supports 
lending  to  the  private  sector.  Forward  guidance  affects  long-run  interest  rate  and  inflation 
expectations. 
Let us not forget that the ECB’s readiness to do “whatever it takes to preserve the euro,” as 
announced in mid-2012, was undoubtedly the decisive element in reestablishing confidence 
in  sovereign  bond  markets  –  a  precondition  for  recovery.  Additionally,  the  ECB  is  the  key 
player  in  the  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism  (SSM),  a  core  element  of  Banking  Union. 
Moreover, it is one of the institutions involved in the assistance programs for Member States 
under  financial  stress.  All  this  made  some  commentators  fear  that  the  ECB,  as  “the  only 
game  in  town,”  might  be  stretching  beyond  its  mandate.  More  importantly,  however,  it 
underlines the need for other or new institutions to step in and relieve the ECB from some of 
its responsibility. Actually, this is the central message of the Five Presidents’ Report. 
The rationale behind a genuine EMU as a complement to the ECB’s monetary policy comes 
from the optimal currency area (OCA) theory, which states that within a monetary union, the 
lost mechanism of exchange rate adjustments must be replaced by that of labor and capital 
adjustment  if  countries  are  affected  by  asymmetric  shocks.  Hence  the  justification  of 
structural reforms in labor and product markets. They should increase the flexibility of wages 
and prices while taking into account the autonomy and responsibility of social partners. 
Another  element  to  improve  the  resilience  of  EMU  would  be  stronger  business  cycle 
synchronization  through  economic  and  financial  integration;  but  here  the  evidence  is 
sobering.  Yet,  while  the  OCA  theory  concentrates  on  asymmetric  external  shocks,  what 
seems to matter more are really asymmetric trends. That is to say, that since the introduction 
of the euro, Member States have systematically built up external imbalances as a result of 
unsustainable debt accumulation and asset bubbles. 
Here  comes  in  another  element  of  the  OCA  theory:  the  role  of  risk-sharing  mechanisms. 
Given  the  lack  of  fiscal  risk-sharing,  however,  this  role  has  been  more  or  less  explicitly 
delegated  to  financial  markets.  Unfortunately,  however,  financial  market  participants 
insufficiently  understood  the  risks they  were  taking.  The  rest  of  the  story  is  well  known:  A 
dramatic  stop  of  private  financing  flows  required  economies  under  stress  to  quickly  adjust 
their external imbalances via improved competitiveness at the cost of internal disequilibria, 
notably  high  unemployment.  The  negative  spillovers  have  been  felt  all  over  the  euro  area 
during the double dip recession, albeit at different degrees. 
What can we learn from this crisis? Apart from market-based risk-sharing mechanisms, EMU 
needs  a  fiscal  framework  that  combines  risk  reduction  and  risk-sharing,  in  other  words: 
discipline and solidarity. While the ultimate shape of a genuine EMU will remain a matter of 
political  preferences,  it  seems  essential  that  some  pooling  of  sovereignty  takes  place  to 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  ensure (1) sound national fiscal policies, (2) the joint provision of common public goods, (3) a 
credible backstop to break the vicious circle of weak sovereigns and banks, and (4) a shared 
emission of safe securities. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
Our  Workshop  will  start  with  two  keynote  lectures,  one  by  Paul  De  Grauwe  and  one  by 
Otmar  Issing.  With  their  academic  contributions  on  EMU,  both  speakers  have  shaped  the 
discussion on the economics of EMU. I am very much looking forward to their independent 
and critical assessments of EMU’s deficiencies and the necessary remedies. 
The  subsequent  Policy  Panel  will  outline  the  current  state  of  affairs  in  EMU  reform.  The 
panelists will represent the institutions behind the Five Presidents’ Report. They will be joined 
by two academics, both renowned experts on European monetary integration. The fact that 
several of our panelists contributed substantially to the drafting of the Five Presidents’ Report 
promises a debate that will deliver deep insights into the Report’s underlying intentions. 
The remainder of the Workshop will comprise ten Paper Sessions; in each of the sessions, 
two  high-profile  researchers  from  academia,  think-tanks  or  institutions  will  present  their 
papers.  Almost  all  of  these  papers  were  selected  from  a  pool  of  around  50  high-quality 
submissions  in  response  to  our  call  for  papers.  After  an  overview  session,  the  next  three 
Paper Sessions will cover three pillars of the Five Presidents’ Report: Economic, Financial 
and Fiscal Union. 
The second Workshop day will be opened by László Andor, former EU Commissioner, who 
will  focus  on  EMU’s  social  dimension.  In  the  remainder  of  the  Workshop,  speakers  will 
present  their  views  on  the  desirability  and  feasibility  of  various  specific  economic  reform 
proposals: (1) introducing automatic stabilizers such as a common unemployment insurance 
scheme; (2) defining sustainable wage-setting benchmarks; (3) establishing Capital Markets 
Union to broaden financial integration; (4) finding ways to deal with the legacy of sovereign 
debt; (5) ensuring an adequate level of public investment; and (6) creating a fiscal capacity 
for interregional adjustment in the euro area. 
Each  Workshop  day  will  end  with  a  wrap-up  by  political  economy  experts,  reminding  the 
audience  of  the  complex  interactions  between  the  various  proposals  and  the  formidable 
challenge to overcome existing deadlocks. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
To be sure, our institutions will not become perfect, and their improvement is a permanent 
process  of  trial  and  error.  Disagreement  is  a  natural  human  feature,  and  concerns  will  be 
understandable  when  put  into  context;  therefore,  our  Workshop  will  be  ready  to  openly 
address  skepticism  as  well.  We  believe  that  national  central  banks  like  the  OeNB  have  a 
responsibility to encourage debate that goes beyond the deliberations of policymakers. 
Not every aspect of the EMU reform project that will be discussed during the next two days 
may seem realistic for the immediate future. In this context, I would like to say a few words 
about the timing and sequencing of this very important reform project. In particular, I would 
like to caution against those voices arguing that EMU needs to be fundamentally re-built, or 
even re-established from scratch, within the next two years and arguing that „otherwise it will 
fail“.  This  argumentation,  in  my  view,  is  extremely  dangerous  as  it  puts  our  already 
substantial  achievements  of  the  past  years  at  stake.  Offering  a  contrasting  perspective,  I 
would like to recall Sir Karl Popper’s piecemeal approach, and strongly argue for a step-by-
step approach. As you may know, also the Five Presidents’ Report prudently envisages two 
different  stages  toward  completing  EMU.  In  a  first  step,  changes  would  build  on  existing 
instruments  and  make  the  best  possible  use  of  the  existing  Treaties,  thus  increasing  their 
probability of being implemented in practice. Only in a second stage, in a rather long-term 
perspective, the Five Presidents’ Report proposes measures of a more far-reaching nature, 
requiring fundamental Treaty changes. We should keep in mind that these days the political 
feasibility of substantial changes to the Treaty seems rather limited, as it is not even clear 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  how  many  members  the  EU  might  comprise  in  two  years  from  now  and  as  every  single 
Member  State  may  veto  a  suggested  Treaty  change.  Thus,  unrealistic  reform  proposals 
cannot  be  seen  as  constructive  contributions  to  the  project  but  are  rather  politically  and 
psychologically dangerous. 
To  put  it  in  the  words  of  ECB  Board  Member  Benoît  Coeuré,  “The  EU  is  a  union  of 
democracies  and  it  should  be  more  trustful  of  the  power  of  democracy  to  produce  the 
solutions that will address the deep causes of the crisis.” Monetary integration is a means to 
the  ends  enshrined  in  Article  3  of the Treaty,  which  states that the  European  Union  “shall 
promote  economic,  social  and  territorial  cohesion.”  Together,  we  can  contribute  to  smart, 
inclusive  and  sustainable  growth  in  a  Europe  where  the  single  currency  becomes  a  true 
common currency. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
Our first keynote speaker, Paul De Grauwe, does not really require an introduction. He is a 
professor at the London School of Economics and Political Science. Prior to that, he worked 
at the University of Leuven, Belgium, and lectured at various European and U.S. universities. 
He  also  was  a  member  of  the  Belgian  parliament,  a  visiting  scholar  at  the  International 
Monetary Fund, the Federal Reserve, the Bank of Japan and the ECB and an advisor to the 
former  President  of  the  European  Commission,  José  Manuel  Barroso.  Paul  De  Grauwe 
directs a research network of CESifo, University of Munich, and is a research fellow at the 
Centre for European Policy Studies in Brussels. 
Dear Paul, 
Many  times  in  my  professional  career  I  have  been  impressed  by  your  creative  and 
unconventional analyses. I am extremely curious to see what you will present to us today. 
The floor is yours. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
