  Arjuna Mahendran: Central Bank of Sri Lanka’s 65th anniversary 
Speech  by  Mr  Arjuna  Mahendran,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Sri  Lanka,  at  the 
commemorating ceremony of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka’s 65th anniversary, Central Bank 
of Sri Lanka, Colombo, 28 August 2015. 
 Today is a very important day for all of us. 65 years is not a small period in the life of an 
institution and first and foremost I must thank all of you who have kept the torch of central 
banking alive and well in Sri Lanka over the last 65 years. I know most of you haven’t been 
here for that length of time but certainly those traditions have been passed on to you and you 
are I think preserving them very well and making sure that they are moving on into the next 
generations’ hands in good condition. At this point, we should take a step back and look at 
what we have achieved in those 65 years. 
First of all, when we were established in 1950, the statute that enabled the establishment of 
this  institution  was  very  clear,  in-terms  of  its  objectives  and  that  statute  has  more  or  less 
remained unchanged in that whole period, which I think in Sri Lankan terms is quite a record. 
There haven’t been significant amendments to the Monetary Law Act in that period and our 
objectives  still  remain  the  same;  the  control  of  inflation,  the  promotion  of  financial  stability 
and  banking  sector  and  financial  system  stability  and  the  thrust  for  a  broader  economic 
development of the whole country, that in a nutshell is what our objectives are, which is very 
clear, its unambiguous and it has kept us on the straight and narrow path through some fairly 
challenging periods. 
I think there are very few central banks in the world that have gone through the sort of events 
that we have been through, most notably the bomb blast which you know affected us, the 
physical  lives  of  several  of  our  colleagues  and their families  and  such  like  over  the  years. 
And that was related obviously to the civil strives that this country went through for almost 
thirty years. Nevertheless I think the central bank has maintained financial stability, we have 
kept  inflation  reasonably  under  control,  and  the economic  development  of  the  country  has 
done  reasonably  well  despite  those  challenges,  which  is  in  no  small  measure  due  to  the 
efforts of successive generations of central bankers who have stuck to their principles by and 
large and kept the momentum of the country moving forward. So it is appropriate for us to 
take  a  moment  and  just  accept  a  little  bit  of  self-congratulation  at  this  point  of  time.  And 
certainly, my endeavor is to see that we promote these noble ideals and take the country and 
this institution to even higher heights, now that we have peace in this country and a lot of 
those  hurdles that  the central  bank faced  in the  last  three  decades  are behind  us  and  we 
have  to  gear  ourselves  to  promote  those  objectives  of  this  institution  in  relatively  normal 
circumstances in the future. 
To do this, we now have to assess what those three objectives of ours mean in the broader 
sense and I have been reaching out to some of you over the last six months in this regard. 
First of all, when we look at the control of inflation, I think that has been fortuitously resolved 
by external events. You can see that in the global markets we have falling commodity prices 
worldwide. The large country that has appeared in the last decade, China, has indulged in a 
lot  of  spending  in  the  last  ten  years  to  revive  the  global  economy  and  in  the  process, 
commodity prices shot up which caused no small measure of problems for us. But now, that 
spending  boom  is  over  and  as  you  can  see,  China’s  growth  is  slowing  down.  And  as  a 
consequence,  we  also  benefit  from  falling  commodity  prices  and  therefore  our  inflation  is 
easier to control. 
On the financial stability front, I would say that the banking system looks in reasonably good 
shape. That is partly because banks have been extremely conservative in the last twenty to 
thirty years because of the war situation and they did not lend aggressively. More recently we 
saw some of them becoming a little aggressive and they got a bit burned when agriculture 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  was affected by the drought last year. Then you saw the big exposure to gold and pawning 
activities which also affected bank balance sheets slightly. Most of those problems I am glad 
to  say, seem  to  be  behind  us.  So the  banking system  looks  in fairly good  shape.  Finance 
companies pose some concerns and. I think we have far too many of them. We were a bit 
too liberal in-terms of encouraging finance company growth in the last ten to fifteen years. As 
a consequence, today we are coping with some unusual situations in that sector. But there 
again,  with  some  resolve  and  some  out  of  the  box  thinking,  we  will  be  able  to  bring  that 
sector also under control. So all in all, I think the financial system is responding favourably. 
We  have  several  infrastructural  challenges  ahead  of  us  so  we  have  to  make  our  stock 
markets,  our  bond  markets  and  our  foreign  currency  market  work  as  a  market  and  really 
respond  to  the  challenges  of  bringing  in  more  participants,  broadening  its  appeal  and 
becoming  real  instruments  of  channeling  the  savings  not  only  of  Sri  Lankans  but  also  of 
people  living  overseas  so  that  institutions  and  our  real  businesses  can  benefit  from  those 
flows of financial activity and grow at a stronger pace than they have grown in the past. That 
is our broad challenge going forward and at the same time ensuring that we do not allow the 
sort  of  excesses  that  creep  in,  in  such  situations  which  cause  financial  disturbances  and 
panics. 
So this is going to be the challenge going forward for all of us, to establish that stability and 
to  have  a  very  clear  set  of  rules.  Remember  that  the  way  financial  markets  have  evolved 
historically for centuries is on the basis of having “rule-based” systems, where every player in 
the market, whether it is the regulator or the regulated, abides by a set of rules. And that is 
the  most  effective  way  for  any  system  to  function.  It  cannot  be  based  on  the  whims  and 
fancies of the regulator, or the government or any single player in the market. There has to 
be an even playing field, the goalposts have to be stuck very firmly in the same place and the 
same rules have to apply, just like game football or cricket. You cannot change the rules as 
you go along. That to me, is very essential. So at the moment we are trying to make those 
rules very clear to all the market players in various forms. We have already done so in most 
of the markets, in the foreign exchange market, in the fixed income markets, and I think the 
SEC is now trying to establish the rules in the equity market. Once all that comes together I 
think you will see a significant improvement in the way our entire financial sector operates 
and hopefully that will be the main conduit for financing of development in the years to come. 
So this deals more or less with the challenges we have in the financial space and our efforts 
to ensure financial stability. 
But really, it is the third objective, which is the economic development of the country that I 
wish to spend a few minutes on today. This is the area, which, for various reasons central 
bank has engaged and disengaged over the years and decades. Basically, the bank took a 
backward step about fifteen to twenty years ago and very understandably so, because that 
was  the  time  when  the  war  was  raging  and  we  had  our  own  problems  to  contend  with, 
particularly  in-terms  of  ensuring  stability.  Therefore  the  central  bank  did  not  pursue 
aggressively a strategy of engaging with the rural sector and with the broad development of 
the entire country. We more or less stuck to our basic activities in-terms of financial stability 
optimization  and  inflation  control  and  economic  development  objective  took  a  slightly 
backseat. I think now it is incumbent on us to really re-engage with the government, with all 
the social sector players, with all sorts of industry groups, agriculture groups, service sector 
groups and really map the way forward on how this country can grow. When you look at the 
situation  it  is  not  bad,  but  on  the  other  hand  there  is  a  lot  of  work  to  be  done.  Take  for 
instance the fact that the entire Northern Province contributes only 4% of the total national 
GDP. That is simply unacceptable. We have nine provinces in this country and you cannot 
have one of them only contributing 4%. That is simply unbalanced, and the opportunity is that 
we  have  in  Northern  Province  three  branches,  in  Trincomalee,  in  Jaffna  and  now  in 
Kilinochchi, and there is no reason at all why we cannot spur all the banking institutions in 
Northern Province to come under our umbrella and really see that the economic potential of 
that region is achieved. It is very simple. We just have to see that the banking institutions and 
ourselves work on a coordinated basis to look at what resources that area of the country has, 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  whether  it  is  manpower  or  land  that  is  unutilized,  and  the  agricultural  potential.  I  am  not 
saying that we should only focus on the Northern Province, even the Southern Province. We 
have a branch in Matara, but I think there is a lot of work to be done. I recently visited areas 
around Hambanthota, and I find that the potential there really, is still not exploited. There are 
a  few  factories  here  and  there,  few  agricultural  projects  that  we  are  funding,  but  we  are 
nowhere near the sort of potential we can achieve particularly since so much infrastructure 
has been installed in that area and built in recent years. I think that infrastructure is not being 
used. We have the rather comic situation today where an airport is being used to store paddy 
because of a mismatch of the needs of that airport to be economical with the needs of the 
broader  economy  which  has  other  pressing  problems  to  be  achieved.  So  this  is  a  classic 
example  how  we  have  to  put  on  our  thinking  caps  and  come  up  with  solutions  for  the 
government. 
One big advantage that we have is that central bankers have through the decades, manned 
very important government institutions. Even when I look today, institutions as varied as the 
Ministry of Defense, the Ministry of Finance and such like have very senior central bankers 
working there in some form or another. And even in the legal sector, the Attorney General’s 
Department is working very closely with us. I think we have a significant role to play in-terms 
of capacity building not just in the banking sector, but in several other sectors that are vital to 
the economy. That is the challenge that all of you have to remember and try and participate. I 
myself, when I worked in these institutions few decades ago, the Ministry of Industries, in the 
Treasury, it was a very enriching experience personally. But at the same time, I carried over 
the expertise I had picked up in the Central Bank and enriched those institutions as well. So 
that tradition should continue and I think it is incumbent on the central bank to really use our 
manpower. 
All  of  you  are  a  concentrated  pool  of  brainpower  in  this  country.  I  do  not  think  any  other 
institution  has  so  many  qualified  individuals. We  have  engineers,  we  have  people  from  all 
sorts of fields, not just economics, in this institution, and we have to really build on those skill 
sets. One of the plans I have, which I am discussing with the DGs, AGs, is to try and deepen 
our skill sets. We have to identify specific skill sets which are necessary for the central bank 
in the first instance, and also for the broader nation and to try and deepen those skill sets in a 
conscious basis so that our manpower development, what you call the improvement of our 
human  capital  becomes  much  more  entrenched  and  becomes  much  more  integrated  in-
terms of the national economic developmental effort. Just to give you an example, we do not 
have enough accountants in the government service. When I talk to the police, the CID, the 
Attorney General’s Department, all these departments they do not have accountants. They 
cannot analyze when they see a balance sheet in any corporate case, they do not know how 
to handle it. There is a desperate shortage of manpower, partly because the accountants in 
this country can get much better salaries when they work for the private sector. Now how do 
we bridge this gap? I think given that the Central Bank is a very secure service – maybe we 
do not pay as much as the private sector but we do give security of tenure, you all get EPF 
and pensions – these sort of long-term prospects will attract good people to this institution on 
continued basis. I have tried in my own way to fight with the government to get increases in 
wages for all of us and also reinstating the pension and I hope that will make it much more 
attractive  for  people  to  work  for  this  institution  and  keep  you  from  moving  away  into  the 
private sector. But in the process we also have to develop our skill sets and really organize 
and prepare ourselves for the challenges of the future. 
The future I think is going to look very different from the past in this country. We are now 
reaching a level of normalcy which most of us have never experienced in our lifetimes. The 
year  I  joined  this  institution,  1983,  was  when  the  problem  of  the  ethnic  issue  started, 
unfortunately. And it raged on for almost thirty years. So I do not think any of us have really 
experienced  that  normalcy  and  as  a  result,  people  are  not  really  prepared  to  take  on  the 
challenges of what a normal market economy looks like. Hence, it is really incumbent to us, 
to define for the country, for the government, for the people. And to propagate that message 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  we have to be much more forceful in-terms of using the media, whether it is the newspapers, 
the television or social media, to bring forward views on what we think the future of Sri Lanka 
will  look like. Obviously  in consultation with the government, we have people, as I said, in 
various  institutions  of  government  who  can  coordinate  with  us  to  come  up  with  a 
comprehensive  message,  and  using  our  annual  report  and  other  publications,  we  can 
continue  to  project  that  report,  that  view,  that  map  of  the  future  and  engage  with  the 
government  on  how  that  will  be  achieved,  all  the  while  stressing  the  need  for  financial 
stability, the control of inflation and for seeing that economic development takes place in an 
optimal  manner.  That  I  think  is  really  the  challenge  for  us.  We  have  to  imagine  what  the 
future is going to look like. And at the moment I think this is the best institution to do so. 
So the challenges are ahead of us. It is not easy to change mindsets. Remember, that a lot 
of people in this country, particularly those who work for the government have been used to a 
war situation. For most of their working lives, they have been living in a war economy. A war 
economy is  very different from an economy at peace. That, in my view, is  why  you had a 
change of government this year and you have a new government, who is trying to win the 
peace.  We  won  the  war,  but  it  was  very  difficult  to  win  the  peace.  Why?  Because  our 
mindsets  were  stuck  in  the  past.  There  was  that  concept  of  control.  You  had  to  control 
everything in the economy including prices. When I say prices, I mean the exchange rates, 
the  interest  rates,  other  prices  which  affect  the  functioning  of  the  economy.  That  is  all 
justifiable in a war situation. But when you come into a peace situation, where it is a normal 
functioning  market  economy,  then  you  have  to  re-think,  you  have  to  get  back  to  first 
principles,  and  reassess  how  the  economy  should  work  in  a  new  dispensation.  That  is  a 
challenge  before  us,  and  I’m  asking  all  of  you  to  join  in  this  effort  to  try  and  redefine  the 
scope  of  everything  we  do  in  the  Central  Bank, to  see  that  we  reorient ourselves  towards 
winning peace in the broader sense, to making the financial sector, the economy and other 
types of institutions in this country work in an effective manner that can raise the growth, the 
potential of this economy, raise the skill levels, and most importantly, bring about that ethnic 
harmony which I think has been amply demonstrated here today in-terms of all religions and 
faiths  coming  together  and  propagating  the  message  of  peace  and  goodwill,  at  the  same 
time hoping for a better Sri Lanka for us, our children and grandchildren. 
So with that simple message, I thank you very much for all your efforts. I think the last six 
months for me have been a very steep learning curve, coming back and reorienting myself 
with  this  institution,  which  is  very  dear  to  my  heart.  I  have  observed  tremendous 
improvement, in-terms of several processes that were never there when I left this institution 
in  1993.  I find  that there  is  still  more to  do  but  I  think  Sri  Lanka  as  a country  has  a great 
potential. We are geographically situated in a location which is at the center of the fastest 
growing population cohort, globally. As you know, the last twenty to thirty years were the era 
of China. China grew massively because it had a very fast-growing population. Also the East 
Asian countries around it, like South Korea, Taiwan, Singapore and Hong Kong had mounted 
their  economic  miracle  by  opening  up  their  market  and  making  their  exchange  rates 
competitive  and  basically  getting  huge  amounts  of  foreign  investment.  That  model  worked 
effectively and it is the only model that really is open for emerging markets to prosper. But 
now they are facing a problem. Their populations have stopped growing so they do not have 
young, creative workers coming into the workforce in-order to make their economies continue 
to grow at the fantastic rates of growth they achieved for several decades; 10–12% of rates 
for  economic  growth.  So  now  the  challenge  is  for  the  countries  around  the  Indian  Ocean. 
Particularly  the  Southern  Indian  Ocean.  The  whole  SAARC  Region  including  India,  Sri 
Lanka, Pakistan, Bangladesh, even the Maldives in its own way, and then look at the Middle 
East, parts of the Middle East which are prospering, particularly the UAE, Oman, Qatar and 
similar  countries  and  then  the  whole  of  the  African  Continent,  which  you  may  or  may  not 
know, has about a billion people. This is almost the size of China about ten years ago. 
If Africa can get going with its vast stores of minerals and other types of natural resources, 
then you really see a transformation in this part of the world. This part of the Indian Ocean 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  will, I think, really be the fastest growing region in the world in ten years’ time. But we have to 
be part of that, we have the head start in-terms of human capital. I have travelled this region 
intensively and nowhere have I found the quality of manpower that you have in Sri Lanka. 
When I used to go Pakistan ten years ago, all my clients used to tell me that their teachers 
used  to  be  from  Ceylon. We  are  very  famous for  our  teachers,  even  in  Singapore  and  all 
these regional countries, Ceylonese teachers used to go and teach in the 1960s and teach 
their children how to speak, read and write in English and they have very fond memories of 
this.  This  shows  how  ahead  of  the  curve,  Ceylon,  as  it  was  then  known  was  in-terms  of 
grooming  and  teaching  people  basic  skills.  For  instance,  most  of  the  senior  doctors  in 
Singapore  were  Ceylonese  who  went  across,  including  people  in  the  judicial  sector.  The 
current Finance Minister of Singapore is Tharman Shanmugaratnam and his father was a Sri 
Lankan  from  Jaffna  who  went  across  and  is  still  a  member  of  the  Medical  Faculty  in  the 
Singapore University. So we have a head start in-terms of human capital. All our people as 
you know, have a hunger for education, whether you go to the village or the richest families 
in the cities, all of them have that great hunger for education. To me that is our strength. We 
have better human capital resources I would wager, on a per capita basis even than India 
and other countries in the region. So we can provide that real leading edge. Our people are 
all over the world. Wherever you go, if you look at expatriates, Sri Lankans in any country, 
anywhere in the world – I have been to the Caribbean, places like Barbados, even there you 
find Sri Lankans. And they are doing very well in their professional endeavours. So we have 
to  reach  out  to this  diaspora,  as  I call  it,  and  ensure  that they  also  come  and  help  us  but 
already  within  the  country,  we  have  a  sufficient  pool  of  people  who  really  can  lead  the 
charge, not just in-terms of raising Sri Lanka’s profile but also attracting foreign investment 
and  other  resources  which  will  help  this  country  provide  leadership  in  this  region  in  the 
decades ahead. 
So  remember  that  it  is  a  great  challenge  for  all  of  us,  this  institution  is  going  to  be  at  the 
epicenter of this country’s efforts to develop itself. President Maithripala Sirisena who visited 
us,  a  few  weeks  ago,  made  it  very  clear  that  his  main  objective  is  to  see  that  people’s 
incomes increase. That is his objective. He has spelt out his objective. How do we achieve 
that? That is where we have to sit now and brainstorm. To me the key challenge is how to 
raise productivity. Productivity is  very important, output per capita. This is the key element 
that  we  have  to  utilize.  We  have  to  see  how  we  can  harness  the  use  of  Information 
Technology to leapfrog a lot of time that we have wasted in this useless war that ended five 
years ago and see that we really enable ourselves to make this economy grow, leapfrog into 
the  21st  century,  start  using  IT  and  other  types  of  skills  which  will  then  make  us  a  very 
modern economy and raise our productivity levels which have lagged in the last thirty to forty 
years. That I think is a key challenge we should focus on, and how to achieve that is really up 
to you. It is your ideas that will make this happen. So thank you very much once again, I wish 
you all the very best for the next 65 years, I don’t know how many of us will be there but I am 
sure some of those young people who have just joined the bank will certainly be there for a 
large measure of that time. And I think we have everything at our disposal now to achieve 
what I have set out. It is really up to you now to make that happen. So thank you very much 
and God bless you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
