  Jens Weidmann: Euro crisis and no end in sight? 
Speech  by  Dr  Jens  Weidmann,  President  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank,  at  the  industry 
soirée of the industry confederation for the district of Gütersloh (Unternehmerverband für den 
Kreis Gütersloh e. V.), Gütersloh, 23 September 2015. 
 Welcome 
1. 
Dr Miele 
Ladies and gentlemen 
Thank you for inviting me to your industry soirée. I am happy to see that there are so many 
people who are interested in listening to my speech. 
According  to  the  astronomical  definition,  autumn  began  this  morning  at  precisely  10.21. 
Summer has, therefore, definitely come to a close now. 
The refugee crisis has been the political topic dominating the press these past few weeks, 
and I am sure it will continue to make the headlines in the autumn. 
The troubling pictures of death and forced displacement in the crisis regions of the Middle 
East give us an idea of the scale of suffering endured by the refugees of war and have set in 
motion  a  wave  of  willingness  to  help  here  in  Germany.  Giving  a  helping  hand  to  people 
whose lives are in danger should be the most natural thing in the world in a civilised country. 
However,  the  large  influx  of  refugees  undoubtedly  also  represents  a  colossal  challenge 
which will ask a lot of us – not only in financial terms. There are also language and cultural 
barriers that need to be overcome. 
But if we manage to integrate those who are allowed to stay into our society, migration also 
offers  long-term  opportunities.  Demographic  change  means  that  we  are  going  to  need 
additional workers in the future to maintain our level of prosperity. According to the current 
population  projection  by  the  Federal  Statistical  Office,  the  working-age  population  will 
diminish by up to 15 million persons by 2060, which represents a decrease of 30%. 
“Work  is  the  best  path  to  integration.”  This  wise  remark  by  the  deputy  chairman  of  the 
Gütersloh industry confederation, Dr Ernst Wolf, was quoted last week in the context of an 
initiative  that  was  launched  by  the  confederation  to  offer  these  people  greater  job 
opportunities,  which  is  something  I  can  only  support.  Integration  can  only  be  a  success 
overall if people are swiftly and sustainably integrated in the labour market. 
If we cast our minds back to the beginning of the summer, the headlines were dominated by 
a different topic altogether – the “Greek drama”. 
Following  what  could  be  described  as  a  showdown  in  the  night  from  12  to  13  July  in 
Brussels, a political agreement brought to an end a marathon session of negotiations. 
Since then, the third assistance programme for Greece has been concluded in formal terms, 
too. On top of the more than €200 billion in fiscal assistance already granted, Athens is set to 
receive  further  loans  from  the  European  Stability  Mechanism  (ESM);  however,  in  return, 
Greece must undertake lasting consolidation and reform steps. 
Unfortunately, a great deal of time and trust have been squandered recently. Last Sunday, 
the Greek people were asked to vote in yet another early general election. It is now up to the 
re-elected government to put the country on a course that will overcome the crisis once and 
for all. It now needs to deliver on its political promises. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
It will be crucial for Greece to implement reforms aimed at creating a competitive economic 
structure and a more efficient public administration, and for the country’s public finances to 
be consolidated in a sustainable manner. 
Admittedly, the problems faced by Greece cannot be compared with those of other countries 
as they run far deeper; but what other crisis countries have experienced ought to encourage 
the Greeks. They have shown that austerity and reform programmes do work – provided, of 
course,  that  they  are  not  implemented  only  half-heartedly.  The  trending  concept  of 
“ownership” is also part and parcel of this. The more reluctant a government is to embrace 
reforms and consolidation, the more questionable their success will be. 
Spain and Ireland have made clear progress on the path out of the crisis, as have Portugal 
and  Cyprus.  At  the  same  time,  it  would  be  short-sighted  to  imagine  that  the  situation  in 
Greece is the euro area’s only problem. 
The crisis in the euro area, which has been lingering on for more than five years now, is a 
clear lesson that the monetary union as a whole has weaknesses. These weaknesses and 
the  steps  that  are  needed  to  eliminate  them  and  to  preserve  monetary  union  as  a  lasting 
union of stability will be the topics of my speech this evening. 
Monetary policy in the spotlight 
2. 
After all, as a monetary policymaker, I have a vital interest in making sure that the European 
framework in which we create monetary policy is a coherent one. Without such a framework, 
monetary policymakers will find it difficult to deliver on their key remit of safeguarding price 
stability. 
The crisis laid bare that the success of monetary policy also hinges on factors over which it 
effectively has no control, such as the state of public finances, the financial system or the 
economy’s competitiveness. It showed that central banks can quickly be pushed to offer a 
quick fix by providing cheap money. 
Now, as then, European monetary policymakers are facing unrelenting pressure, and central 
banks are being expected to perform a multitude of different tasks. Before I delve into the 
topic of reforming the regulatory framework, I would therefore like to say a few words on the 
Eurosystem’s monetary policy. 
European monetary policy has been in a state of emergency for the past seven years. 
In  order  to  prevent  the  global  financial  and  economic  crisis  from  escalating,  the  ECB 
Governing Council began drastically reducing the key ECB interest rates from the autumn of 
2008  onwards  and  also  agreed  on  a  number  of  far-reaching  unconventional  measures. 
These measures aimed at shoring up liquidity levels at banks which had lost confidence in 
each other. A further objective was to uphold the supply of credit to the economy. 
With  the  onset  of  the  euro-area  sovereign  debt  crisis  in  2010,  European  monetary 
policymakers came under even greater pressure to act, and the focus increasingly shifted to 
the Eurosystem central banks. One major reason for this was that the political coordination 
processes  within  Europe  are  sometimes  cumbersome  and  central  banks  have  powerful 
instruments at their disposal to prevent the crisis in the euro area from coming to a head. 
Some would even say that it was ultimately the Eurosystem which kept monetary union alive. 
This should, however, have primarily been the task of politicians. At the end of the day, the 
instruments used by central banks are more like a painkiller, ie they temporarily make the 
problems more  bearable,  but they  do  not tackle  the  root  causes  and  are  even  associated 
with risks and side-effects. 
You could say the central banks played a “sweeper” role, and they did so by implementing 
measures that  took them  to  the  outer  bounds  of  their  mandate.  And  by  that,  I  particularly 
mean  the  targeted  purchases  of  government  bonds  of  individual  crisis-stricken  countries. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
Given that the profits and losses on this paper are distributed among the Eurosystem central 
banks,  the  purchases  are,  in  economic  terms,  nothing  more  than  the  introduction  of  euro 
bonds through the back door. 
Ladies and gentlemen 
The Eurosystem’s mandate is to ensure price stability within the euro area. It is not to ensure 
the solvency of the individual member states through the “communitisation” of such liability 
risks via the central banks’ balance sheets. 
Democratically elected politicians, ie parliaments and governments, should be the ones who 
decide whether liability risks should be mutualised. And it is important to remain within the 
bounds set by the European Treaties when making these decisions. Furthermore, monetary 
policy must be wary of playing second fiddle to fiscal policy as this could make it increasingly 
difficult for monetary policymakers to ensure price stability. 
As you are no doubt aware, the Eurosystem resumed its purchases of euro-area government 
bonds in March this year, this time on a very large scale as it is planned that these purchases 
will  continue  until  at  least  September  2016.  Unlike  in  the  case  of  the  previous  purchase 
programmes, the national central banks are now restricting their government bond purchases 
to securities issued by their home country; any profits or losses arising from the purchases 
are not distributed within the Eurosystem. 
This  approach  does  at  least,  to  a  certain  extent,  take  account  of  the  concerns  that  were 
previously voiced, also by me, in connection with the previous purchase programmes. And 
yet, these purchases still blur the boundaries between monetary and fiscal policy. After all, 
the  Eurosystem  central  banks  are  becoming  the  biggest  creditors  of  their  respective 
countries. That is why, in my opinion, government bond purchases are not a monetary policy 
instrument  like  any  other  and  should  therefore  purely  be  used,  if  at  all,  as  a  contingency 
instrument. 
As a result of a difficult weighing-up process, I therefore took a sceptical view of the recent 
decision  of  the  ECB  Governing  Council  to  purchase  government  bonds.  Nevertheless,  I 
cannot deny that in 2015 we are now in a completely different monetary policy situation than 
we were at the beginning of the sovereign debt crisis back in 2010. 
We  are  not  expecting  very  dynamic  price  developments,  also  in  the  medium  term,  and 
interest rates have already been reduced to zero. Our definition of price stability states that 
the inflation rate in the euro area ought to be just under 2% in the medium term. However, 
much  like  at  the  beginning  of  the  year  when  the  most  recent  government  bond  purchase 
programme was adopted, the inflation rate currently stands at just above zero. 
This is due to the sluggish growth in the euro area, the adjustment processes in the crisis-
stricken countries and above all the sharp decline in crude oil prices. Factoring this effect out 
of the inflation rate, price inflation currently stands at around 1%. 
Particularly, the dampening effect which the decline in energy prices is having on the inflation 
rate should be no more than a short-term phenomenon, and the adjustment processes, too, 
are only temporary. Hence the ECB’s medium-term projection that inflation will climb back 
towards 2%. 
I  am  still  of the  opinion that  monetary  policymakers  should  look  through  the  energy  price-
driven  inflation  fluctuations  since  they  are  of  a  temporary  nature  and  are  in  any  case 
strengthening the economy owing to an increase in purchasing power. 
In Germany alone, the decline in oil prices this year has saved consumers and enterprises 
something like €25 billion. That’s almost 1% of GDP. Unlike the monetary policy debate back 
in January, the economic recovery in the euro area has now stabilised. The concerns about 
deflation,  which  had  been  overblown  even  at  the  start  of  the  year,  have  now  dissipated 
further. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  
 
There is no disputing the fact that the subdued economic development in the euro area and 
the  muted  outlook  for  inflation  necessitate  an  accommodative  monetary  policy  stance.  So 
you might appreciate why a prospective normalisation of monetary policy is not currently on 
the agenda. 
What  you  may  not  be  able  to  understand,  however,  is  how  the  ECB  Governing  Council 
defines  price  stability.  You  may  be  wondering:  what  is  the  problem  if  prices  rise  by 
significantly less than 2% on average? 
From a consumer’s perspective I can fully understand this argument, especially as the 2% 
inflation  target  is  not  necessarily  a  precise  definition.  Nevertheless,  from  an  economic 
perspective  there  are  good  reasons  why  all  major  central  banks  worldwide,  such  as  the 
Federal Reserve, the Bank of Japan and the ECB, too, now tend to set inflation targets of 
around 2%. The Bundesbank likewise assumed a “2% price norm” when it derived its money 
supply  targets,  which  was,  however,  to  be  interpreted  as  “the  maximum  tolerable  inflation 
rate in the medium term”. 
In essence, an inflation rate of 2% is ultimately a compromise between two countervailing 
objectives: 
A low inflation rate helps to reduce the macroeconomic costs of inflation. These costs occur 
above all because in the event of inflation, prices can no longer serve to the same extent as 
an indicator of scarcity. For enterprises or consumers, it is more difficult to identify whether 
an increase in prices is the result of a rise in demand or a reduction in supply, or whether the 
price was merely adjusted during a wave of numerous price rises. 
Conversely,  a  higher  rate  of  inflation  provides  a  safety  margin  to  the  zero  interest  bound, 
which, as we have seen in a number of countries, actually stands at somewhat below zero. 
The lower the targeted rate of inflation, the higher the risk of bumping into the zero interest 
bound, which is currently the case in the euro area. Furthermore, central banks consequently 
also have less scope to stimulate the economy using conventional instruments and also to 
prevent deflationary developments. 
The  latest  research  indicates  that  an  inflation  rate  of  “close  to,  but  below  2%”  is  a  good 
compromise  between  the  permanently  accruing  inflation  costs  and  the  occasional  benefits 
resulting from having a greater safety margin. 
Moreover, the Governing Council’s credibility would undoubtedly take a major knock if it were 
to redefine its objective now of all times. It would probably be like what happened when the 
deficit  rules  were  relaxed  in  2005  after  several  large  countries  had trouble  complying  with 
them. That put paid to the credibility of the Stability Pact once and for all. 
When the time is right for the Eurosystem to exit the ultra-loose monetary policy, then that is 
precisely what it should do, undeterred by cries from finance ministers or financial markets. It 
should follow the example of former Chairman of the US Federal Reserve Paul Volcker, who 
once said: “Our credibility will be related more to making the right decision than to worrying 
too much about what the market says about it in the short run.” 
In short, the expansionary monetary policy should not be continued for longer than absolutely 
necessary  because,  over  time,  it  also  generates  risks  that  can  begin  to  play  a  role  for 
monetary policy if they influence long-term price developments or the central bank’s ability to 
safeguard price stability. 
One  risk  is  that  low  interest  rates  produce  an  illusion  of  sustainability,  with  the  result  that 
structural  reforms  and  fiscal  consolidation  might  end  up  being  kicked  further  and  further 
down the road. 
Another  that  springs  to  mind  is  the  risk  to  financial  stability  because  the  low-interest-rate 
setting can lead to excesses in the financial and asset markets. Low interest rates are also 
squeezing  the  earnings  of  banks,  insurers,  building  and  loan  associations,  pension  funds, 
and so on. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
The results of a survey of 1,500 small and medium-sized banks released last week by the 
Deutsche Bundesbank and BaFin show that these institutions are struggling to cope with the 
low-interest-rate  environment.  Looking  at  their  own  calculations  and  forecasts,  the  banks 
reported an aggregate drop in pre-tax profits of one-quarter up to 2019. 
At  the  same  time,  I  see  the  risk  that  zero  interest  rates  might  impede  the  process  of 
economic  mutation,  that  is  to  say,  what  Joseph  Schumpeter  once  described  as  “creative 
destruction”. The danger is that enterprises which are in fact insolvent continue to receive 
credit  and  therefore  do  not  disappear  from  the  market,  whilst  the  growth  of  healthy 
companies is stunted. We also talk about zombie firms and evergreen lending in this regard. 
But savers are also amongst the casualties of the low-interest-rate setting. Something that is 
often  overlooked  in  this  respect,  however,  is  that  the  real  rate  of  interest,  ie  adjusted  for 
inflation, on savings deposits is not really all that low by historical standards. The real interest 
rate on savings deposits in Germany is currently somewhere around 0.25%, on a par with its 
average  over  the  past  ten  years.  And  there  were  repeated  spells  of  negative  real  interest 
rates in the 1970s, 1980s and 1990s. 
The future of monetary union 
3. 
Ladies and gentlemen 
It’s not the job of monetary policymakers to serve the interests of one group or another. The 
primary task of monetary policy is to ensure price stability. That is, and always will be, the 
most valuable contribution which monetary policy can make to our prosperity. 
This  also  holds  true,  and  notably  so,  in  the  euro  area,  which  has  been  put  to  a  very  stiff 
challenge by the financial and sovereign debt crisis. It’s a challenge, incidentally, that we are 
still a long way from overcoming. That brings me to the weaknesses I mentioned earlier in 
the institutional framework of monetary union that need to be eliminated. 
The original structure sketched out in the late 1980s and early 1990s looked something like 
this. Monetary policy was to be entrusted to an independent central bank whose main task 
was to safeguard price stability. Fiscal and economic policy, on the other hand, would remain 
a matter for national policymakers. 
In  order  to  make  this  asymmetric  structure  safe  and  ensure  that  monetary  policy  would 
indeed be able to achieve the goal of price stability, various precautions were put in place. 
1. 
The ban on the monetary financing of governments by the central bank – to prevent 
money from being “printed” to fund government debt. 
The no-bail-out clause – which makes it clear that no member state is liable for the 
debts of another member state. 
Debt  rules  –  which  were  designed  to  prevent  member  states  from  accumulating 
excessive debt. 
2. 
3. 
The  founding  fathers  of  the  euro  probably  assumed  that  monetary  union  would  sooner  or 
later evolve into a political union anyway. Addressing the Bundestag in November 1991, the 
then  Federal  Chancellor  Helmut  Kohl  remarked  that  “the  idea  of  sustaining  economic  and 
monetary  union  over  time  without  political  union  is  a  fallacy”  –  a  view  shared  by  the 
Bundesbank at the time. 
His  expectation  that  the  euro  would  be  no  more  than  a  stepping  stone  towards  deeper 
political integration has been shown to be mistaken, at least it has so far. Monetary union will 
soon be seventeen years old and there is still no sign of a political union. 
And anyhow, monetary union without political union doesn’t seem all that far-fetched to me. I 
do  indeed  think  that  monetary  union  can  function  without  political  union  provided  that  the 
principle of individual national responsibility is rigorously adhered to. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  
 
But  the  past few  years have  shown  us  that monetary  union  in  its current form  is  a fragile 
creature  and  risks  going  astray.  So  perhaps  we  should  take  Kohl’s  remarks  as more  of  a 
warning than a prophecy. 
US investor Warren Buffett coined the phrase:  “You only find out who is swimming naked 
when the tide goes out”. 
That’s how it was in the euro area, where matters began to go astray very early on but didn’t 
emerge  clearly  for  all  to  see  until  the  crisis  erupted.  Dwindling  competitiveness,  yawning 
current  account  deficits,  the  inefficient  use  of  capital  inflows,  mounting  private  sector 
indebtedness – all these developments made the countries affected more prone to crisis, but 
they weren’t addressed by the EU. 
Indeed, unlike fiscal developments, matters that went awry at the macroeconomic level, such 
as excessive current account imbalances, weren’t even given a second glance. And even an 
area  which  has  been  regulated  since  time  immemorial  –  public  finances  –  brought  forth 
serious irregularities with the aid of the lax application of the agreed rules. 
The  crisis  ultimately  forced  the  countries  concerned  to  correct  the  above-mentioned 
distortions. The fiscal assistance from the rescue programmes helped them to drag out the 
necessary adjustment process and thus perhaps make it a little more feasible at a political 
level. 
The  numerous  rescue  and  crisis-response measures  taken  in  recent  years  have  therefore 
stabilised  the  euro  area  for  now.  But  they’ve  also  effectively  established  elements  of 
mutualised liability and thus upset the balance between liability and control. That is to say, 
risks have been mutualised, but the corresponding control rights have not been transferred to 
the Community level. 
The principle of individual national responsibility has obviously lost some of its credence, but 
it  has  not  been  replaced  by  a  compelling  approach  built  around  the  principle  of  common 
responsibility. 
Ladies and gentlemen 
Perhaps some of you know the famous “The crooked picture” sketch performed by German 
comedian Loriot. Loriot plays a man who is shown to a waiting room where he notices that a 
picture on the wall is crooked; he tries to straighten it but everything goes wrong – lamps are 
knocked down, cupboards topple over, porcelain is shattered and the whole room descends 
into chaos. 
The regulatory framework of monetary union is a little like Loriot’s picture frame: crooked. 
But  unlike  the  crooked  picture,  the  crooked  regulatory  framework  is  more  than  just  an 
aesthetic problem: it threatens the structural stability of monetary union as a whole. Yet how 
can we right it again without unleashing chaos? 
The  multitude  of  proposals  for  the  institutional  reform  of  monetary  union  that  have  been 
voiced in the past few weeks can essentially be divided into three categories. 
First, there are proposals that aim to strengthen the fundamental principle of the framework 
that was formulated in the Maastricht Treaty: they propose a continuation of decentralised 
decision-making  powers  in  fiscal  and  economic  policy  matters  alongside  national  liability, 
with the targeted removal of the weaknesses that this framework has revealed. 
Second,  there  are  proposals  for  a  huge  step  forward  into  European  integration;  these 
envisage  monetary  union  evolving  into  a  fiscal  union,  perhaps  even  an  all-encompassing 
political union – with joint liability, but also joint rights of control. 
And third, there are a host of proposals blending elements of the first and second categories, 
mostly in the guise of expanded joint liability but largely unaffected national sovereignty. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
These  reform  proposals  follow  the  maxim  of  “having  your  cake  and  eating  it,  too”.  The 
problem with these mixed forms is that liability and control fall out of balance. To my mind, 
however, the unity of liability and control is a key prerequisite for the structural stability of 
monetary union. 
Ultimately, then, I believe there are just two paths that lead to a stable monetary union. The 
middle path recommended by so many could, on the other hand, be a road to nowhere. 
The  Five  Presidents’  Report  on  the  future  of  the  euro  area,  which  was  authored  by  the 
President  of  the  European  Commission  Jean-Claude  Juncker  together  with  presidents 
Donald  Tusk,  Jeroen  Dijsselbloem,  Mario  Draghi  and  Martin  Schulz,  and  which  was 
presented at the end of June, appears to me to aim clearly for centralisation and risk-sharing. 
But  the  five  presidents  say  nothing  about  the  transfer  of  effective  control  rights,  not  to 
mention sovereignty rights – understandably so, one might add. After all, there is very little 
willingness  among  European  governments  to  veritably  relinquish  sovereignty.  And  the 
national  parliaments  insist  on  retaining  their  most  prestigious  right,  the  right  to  make  the 
budget. Nobody likes having their affairs meddled with. 
That’s  already  a  common  response  whenever  the  European  Commission  requests 
corrections be made to national budget plans. Last autumn, when there was the prospect of 
the European Commission rejecting the French budget, the French finance minister Michel 
Sapin  said:  “The  Commission  (...)  has  absolutely  no  power  to  reject  or  knock  down  or 
censure a budget. Here as elsewhere, sovereignty belongs to the French parliament.” 
Nobody would really dispute that comprehensive reform can only be achieved one step at a 
time. But if we don’t want to stumble, the steps also have to be taken in the right order. I will 
give you two examples. 
The five presidents call for the prompt establishment of a joint deposit guarantee scheme. 
Given that we now have a system of joint banking supervision in the euro area, it would be 
logical in a way, at least for the institutions supervised directly by the ECB, to belong to a 
single  deposit  guarantee  scheme.  However,  the  fortunes  of  banks  do  not  hinge  solely  on 
supervision,  but  are  still  heavily  influenced  by  national  economic  policy  and  national 
legislation, too. 
Consider the national insolvency codes, for example. More forgiving rules on the insolvency 
of corporates or private individuals can impair the profitability of banks and shift burdens from 
the  private  or  public  sector  into  banks’  balance  sheets.  If  this  drives  banks  into  distress, 
depositors from other European countries would then effectively have to foot the bill. 
This is why I regard cross-border risk-sharing in respect of deposit protection as premature. 
I  feel  similarly  about  another  form  of  risk-sharing  that  is  proposed  again  and  again, 
specifically the creation of a single unemployment insurance fund. 
As long as member states themselves control the main job creation levers – which is to say, 
they decide autonomously whether to implement labour market reforms, how high to set the 
minimum wage or even if they are investing enough in education and training  – then risk-
sharing would be premature here, too. 
Using these or other instruments – sometimes there is talk of a euro-area budget, sometimes 
of “fiscal capacity”, and at other times of a “macroeconomic stabilising function” – economic 
shocks affecting individual countries could, of course, be better cushioned. 
But  the  big  risk  is  that  payments  intended  to  cushion  country-specific  shocks  become 
permanent one-way transfers. 
Some have even come out and explicitly called for a revenue-sharing arrangement. France’s 
economy minister Emmanuel Macron, for example, said in an interview with the Süddeutsche 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  
 
Zeitung: “Monetary union without a revenue-sharing scheme – that’s impossible! The strong 
have to help.” 
Macron  concedes  that  advocating  permanent  fiscal  transfers  is  breaking  a  taboo  for 
Germany, but in turn, raises the prospect of reforms in France, arguing that we all have to 
change our ways. 
In other words, France wishes to remain the sole decision-maker in questions of structural 
reform, but is indicating good intentions. 
Ladies and gentlemen 
If I may return to the image of a crooked frame: regular transfer payments, without setting up 
a genuine fiscal union, would be like skewing the angle of a crooked picture even more. 
Genuine  fiscal  union  or  even  political  union  categorically  requires  sovereignty  to  be 
surrendered to the union level. This would not only necessitate amendments to the European 
Treaties,  but  in  many  cases,  to  national  constitutions  as  well.  And  questioning  monetary 
union’s focus on stability would be taboo as well. 
Transfer  payments  are  unhelpful  as  long  as  there  is  a  lack  of  political  will  to  relinquish 
sovereignty. Strengthening and reinforcing the Maastricht framework is thus the right way to 
make monetary union more stable. 
Decentralised decision-making powers in fiscal policy should, in principle, be retained. What 
needs to be strengthened is the liability principle, that basic law of the market economy which 
you, as businesspeople, also have to bear in mind. Walter Eucken once got straight to the 
heart of the liability principle with the succinct line: “Whoever reaps the benefits must also 
bear the liability.” Without liability, a market economy system cannot function. 
The  weaknesses  of  the  decentralised  approach  can  be  eliminated,  in  my  view.  A  host  of 
institutional  reforms  have  already  been  implemented,  several  of  them  somewhat  half-
heartedly, unfortunately. 
First, the fiscal rules of the Stability and Growth Pact were tightened and a fiscal compact 
was agreed upon. The aim is for the fiscal rules to become more stringent and binding again 
in order to build confidence. 
Second,  a  procedure  for  identifying  macroeconomic  imbalances  at  an  early  stage  was 
established, in which the European Commission regularly examines whether private sector 
debt  or  member  states’  current  account  balances,  for  example,  are  a  source  of  harmful 
imbalances. 
Third, a crisis mechanism was set up  – a temporary one at first, then a permanent one  – 
which is designed to serve as a “firewall”, safeguarding the stability of the financial system in 
the euro area. 
Fourth, a banking union was resolved, introducing a Single Supervisory Mechanism under 
the aegis of the ECB and a Single Resolution Mechanism for ailing banks. After all, it had 
become clear that banks’ difficulties have knock-on effects across national borders, but that 
national supervisors are all too keen to put on “rose-tinted spectacles” when it comes to “their 
institutions”. 
And fifth, financial market regulation was intensified. Here, too, it was important to enforce 
the liability principle more rigorously once again. 
Of course, merely putting stricter regulations in place is not enough; these actually have to 
be applied. As far as fiscal regulations are concerned, a certain degree of doubt about the 
consistent  implementation  thereof  is  not  entirely  unwarranted.  The  leeway  and  discretion 
accorded for interpreting these regulations are immense and being used time and time again 
to delay budgetary consolidation. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
Wolfgang Schäuble, Germany’s Finance Minister, recently reiterated just how important it is 
for the European Commission to strike the right balance between its political function and its 
role as guardian of the treaties. As a result of this double mandate, the Commission often 
leans towards compromises to the detriment of budgetary discipline. By instead entrusting 
budgetary surveillance to an independent fiscal authority, the regulations could be interpreted 
more stringently. 
Yet a stricter interpretation of the fiscal regulations alone is still not sufficient to safeguard 
sound  public  finances.  We  must  also  strengthen  the  disciplining  function  of  the  financial 
markets. 
The “no bail-out clause” simply lacks credibility. This is one key reason as to why there were 
next to no risk premiums on government bonds of highly indebted member states prior to the 
financial crisis. Investors quite rightly assumed that the euro-area countries would not allow a 
member  state  to  fail  as  this  would  have  negative  consequences  for  financial  stability 
throughout the euro area. 
Conversely, this means that the no bail-out principle can only be credible if there is an orderly 
procedure  for  winding  up  a  sovereign  without  this  having  a  knock-on  effect  on  financial 
stability. We have to make the prospect of a sovereign default less frightening, as it were. 
The collective action clauses implemented in 2013 have already signalled to investors that 
they should expect a debt haircut if a government becomes overindebted. In order to be in an 
even better position to hold bearers of government bonds liable for their decisions, it would 
be  helpful  to  have  in  place  a  mechanism  that  automatically  extends  the  maturities  of 
government  bonds  should  a  country  receive  funds  from  the  ESM.  This  would  prevent  a 
situation in which European taxpayers pay off private creditors. 
However, to make the prospect of sovereign default less frightening, it is also essential to 
ensure that such an event does not endanger the stability of the entire financial system. The 
assistance granted to Greece was justified not least by the fact that a Greek default would 
have put the stability of the European financial system at risk. 
And this is where banking regulation comes into play. The more equity and liable (ie bail-in-
able) debt capital that banks have, the better equipped they are to withstand sovereign debt 
restructuring. 
This is why it is so important that regulations on increasing liable capital are taken now at 
both international and European level. This will also boost the financial system’s resilience if 
it is faced with a negative shock. If banks had been better capitalised, the consequences of 
the financial crisis would not have been so severe. 
In order to effectively cut the toxic links between banks and sovereigns that the euro-area 
crisis  intensified  so  dramatically,  we  must  end  the  preferential  regulatory  treatment  of 
sovereign debtors in the medium term. This preferential treatment comprises, among other 
things, the fact that banks do not have to hold any equity for loans to governments as these 
are assumed to be risk-free. 
The consequence of preferential treatment is that banks have a strong incentive to invest in 
government bonds – precisely those banks that already have too little equity. 
The Greek drama has shown beyond a doubt that government bonds are far from risk-free. 
Gradually  abolishing  this  preferential  treatment  is  likely  to  inflate  risk  premiums  on 
government bonds with a higher probability of default. In turn, this should have an additional 
disciplining  effect  on  these  countries.  Conversely,  lending  to  households  and  corporations 
becomes more attractive, spelling an improved credit supply in certain countries. 
As  it  could  become  more  expensive  for  countries  to  borrow  funds,  there  is  considerable 
resistance at international level to abolishing this preferential treatment. However, the topic is 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
  
 
now on the agenda of the relevant committees, and my colleagues and I will not let up in the 
fight for change. 
Conclusion 
4. 
Ladies and gentlemen 
I do not wish to take up too much of your time, so I shall refrain from going into further detail. 
My aim is merely to demonstrate that centralisation is not the only route to a stable monetary 
union.  The  union  can  also  be  stabilised  with  a  decentralised  structure,  as  long  as  the 
conditions are right. And until member states are prepared to surrender sovereignty in return 
for improved risk sharing, this is also the better route. 
Incidentally,  strengthening  the  Maastricht  framework  would  also  relieve  the  strain  on 
Eurosystem central banks, which all too often had to take on the role of “sweeper” during the 
crisis. 
In the world of football, the position of sweeper has been outdated since back in the days of 
Franz Beckenbauer, and the emergence of the defensive back four has made it quite a rarity 
indeed.  Let  us  do  the  same,  then,  for  monetary  union;  let  us  replace  the  sweeper  with  a 
strong line of defence: a strengthened Maastricht framework. 
Thank you for your attention. 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
