  Muhammad bin Ibrahim: Building trust in the insurance industry 
Speech  by  Mr  Muhammad  bin  Ibrahim,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Malaysia 
(Bank  Negara  Malaysia),  at  the  Malaysian  Insurance  &  Takaful  Industry  Distinguished 
Partner  Awards  Dinner  2015  “Building  Trust  in  the  Insurance  Industry”,  Kuala  Lumpur, 
23 October 2015. 
 It  brings  me  great  pleasure  to  be  here  tonight  at  the  inaugural  Malaysian  Insurance  and 
Takaful Industry Distinguished Partner Awards Dinner. 
Since the Central Bank assumed regulatory role of the industry 27 years ago, the insurance 
and takaful landscape has transformed significantly. The insurance and takaful penetration 
rate, measured by the number of policies per population, has increased four-fold from 11% in 
1988 to 56% today, and the total paid-up capital of direct insurers has grown twelve-fold from 
RM635 million to RM8 billion over the same period. Today, the industry has emerged much 
stronger than when we first started the journey together in 1988. 
We should take pride in our historical track record the various changes that we had made, 
the  difficult  but  satisfying  journey  that  we  embarked  on  to  realise  the  full  potential  of  the 
industry. It is indeed a transformational change that enable the industry to be in the strong 
position they are now. 
But at the same time we should not believe that the same thinking and strategy that drove 
yesterday’s solutions will be as effective tomorrow. We have witnessed many brand names 
that  had  disappeared  because  they  have  not  changed  and  have  not  been  sensitive  to  the 
ever changing operating environment surrounding their businesses. The message is simple, 
if we do not change, do not transform ourselves and we remain static, we will be left behind 
and eventually perished. And the rapidly changing economic and operating environment shall 
ensure this eventuality if we remain static. 
Despite  the  many  structural  changes  over  the  last  3  decades,  one  principle  will  always 
remain,  TRUST.  The  Malaysian  insurance  and  takaful  industry  can  make  a  difference  by 
building a strong brand in trust and a firm conviction that the industry’s existence is to serve 
for the betterment of society. A policyholder buys a policy predicated on one sole reason, the 
trust he places on the industry’s ability to protect his financial interest. Building trust is not an 
option,  it  is  a  cardinal  rule.  Tonight,  I  would  like  to  share  with  you  seven  points  which  I 
believe would increase the level of trust in the industry. 
Continue to strengthen capacity to fulfil objectives 
The industry today has achieved many milestones as a result of capacity building measures 
undertaken ever since the Bank took over as the regulator for the industry. The capacity of 
the industry has improved significantly. However, many issues still plague the industry today. 
Issues  such  as fraud, theft,  lingering  claims  in  court  and  delay  in  settlement  of  claims  are 
some issues we need to tackled. If these issues are left unresolved, the image of the industry 
will be severely dented. 
In charting the way forward, two imperatives in capacity building are worth thinking. One, we 
need  a  pool  of  high-calibre  leaders  who  are  equipped  with  the  right  skills  to  resolve 
challenges and sustain the momentum of the industry’s progress. Also critical is the creation 
of  an  efficient  system  of  succession  planning  to  groom  future  leaders  that  will  take  the 
corporation and the industry to the next level of progress. 
Two, is for leaders to be supported by a team of dedicated and diverse talents. The leaders 
of tomorrow would most likely face challenges that are much more challenging than what we 
had faced before. They need to be flexible and adaptable to the new operating environment, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  new business regulation and able to communicate well. The issue confronting the industry 
however is in attracting the right talents who are committed to make insurance and takaful a 
career of choice. Talent is a scarce commodity. The industry needs to be competitive in its 
remuneration package. The salary package at the entry level must be attractive enough to 
get the right talent. The financial services sector is not the only competitor for the insurance 
and takaful industry but other sectors within the economy as well. 
While  the  financial  aspects  are  important,  we  should  inspire  our  young  recruits  on  the 
underlying values of the industry and capitalise on the noble objective of providing protection 
and managing risk for our people. Takaful for example, is built upon the spirit of brotherhood, 
solidarity and mutual assistance which provides for mutual financial aid and assistance to the 
participants. Drawing talent that shares the same values will ensure commitment and support 
talent retention in the industry. When the general public interact with the industry, with highly 
motivated staff, it will sow confidence and consequently trust. 
Refrain from making false promises, make clear the terms and conditions up front 
In  building  trust,  a  huge  responsibility  lies  now  on  intermediaries  playing  their  role,  as 
intermediaries’  behaviour  mirrors  the  image  of  the  insurance  and  takaful  industry.  Many 
consumers are not well  versed  with insurance and takaful terminology and  will rely on the 
advice rendered and the full disclosure of the policy terms and conditions. This low degree of 
familiarity with insurance and takaful terms makes it even more crucial for the full disclosure 
of the terms and conditions governing a policy. 
An important consideration is the role of intermediaries being the ‘first point of contact’ with 
the public. Intermediaries create an impression, powerful enough to influence a customer’s 
decision whether or not to engage in an insurance contract. It is of utmost importance, that 
the company and its intermediaries must be honest in providing full and sufficient disclosure 
on the terms and conditions to their customers, especially at the initial stage. Intermediaries 
especially,  must  refrain  from  disclosing  only  favourable  terms  that  would  inappropriately 
influence  a  customer’s  decision  to  purchase  insurance.  Providing  untruthful  information  to 
influence purchase is totally unacceptable and trust would immediately dissipate when claims 
are not honoured and the customer felt victimised. More damaging is when the impact to the 
customer is permanent. 
The  level  of  trust  on  the  insurance  and  takaful  industry  is  demonstrated  by  the  Accenture 
Global Consumer Behaviour Study which found that only 40% of respondents surveyed trust 
the insurance industry. This places insurance in the lowest rank amongst 13 other business 
sectors.  The  implication  and  imperative  is  clear.  The  growth  of  this  industry  is  very  much 
depends on its ability to successfully honour the commitment made to its customers. 
In  this  regards,  the  Bank  acknowledges  the  importance  of  effective  disclosure  to  facilitate 
informed  decision  by  financial  consumers.  Consumers require  essential  information  on  the 
main features and risks of financial products offered prior to entering into financial contracts. 
In 2014, a study was undertaken to assess product disclosure by financial service providers 
against  the  Bank’s  policy  standards  on  product  disclosure.  The  survey  found  that  while 
financial  consumers  are  given  key  information  for  consumers  to  make  informed  decisions, 
the  method  of  presentation  was  observed  in  lengthy  narratives,  excessive  information  or 
technical or legal jargon that is difficult to comprehend. The study also revealed bias towards 
highlighting the benefits of a product in explanation given by sales agents, while risks and 
costs were not adequately explained. 
The  Bank  is  concerned  with  these  findings  as  they  undermined  informed  decision  and 
judgements by consumers. We shall act on this findings. Insights drawn from the study will 
serve  as  input  to  the  Bank’s  comprehensive  planned  review  of  the  mandatory  disclosure 
regime, next year. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  The  Bank  will  also  work  with  key  stakeholders  including  industry’s  representatives  to 
undertake  targeted  financial  education  strategies  to  elevate  public  awareness  on  the 
importance  of  reading  and  understanding  product  disclosure  materials  and  financial 
agreements. 
Offer customised solutions that meet the needs of consumers 
It  is  no  great  secret  that  truly  great  businesses  have  one  thing  in  common;  they  cultivate 
customer trust, every step of the way. Cultivating trust requires a systematic process, first, 
traditional  distribution  models  of  products  and  services  must  adapt  with  targeted  solutions 
that meet individual needs and risk appetites. 
Second, marketing strategies must adopt a paradigm shift from product-push to an advisory 
model and provide better service orientation. Third, the industry must reflect to ask if it has 
done enough for its customers to meet their needs and demands. 
On  many  occasions,  the  industry  has  been  reminded  that  in  transitioning  into  the  new 
landscape, it can no longer afford to rely solely on traditional business models and delivery 
channels. Instead, the industry must continuously evolve to meet the needs and preferences 
of its consumers which are rapidly changing. 
It must proactively and strategically position itself to offer products via diverse and innovative 
delivery channels to reach out to different segments of the population with varying levels of 
financial knowledge. 
In this regard, under the LIFE Framework, the Bank envisions the market share of regular 
premiums/  contribution  products  sold/  marketed  via  non-agency  channels  to  exceed  30%. 
Currently the ratio is 14%, and this statistic provides compelling evidence that the industry 
must double its effort to reach the target of 30%. Similarly, for us to expand the penetration 
rate to reach 75% by 2020, the industry must add and expand the reach of its non-agency 
channels. 
Throughout the world today, financial inclusion has been identified as an important area of 
focus  to  achieve  a  more  balanced  and  sustainable  economic  growth.  Societies  that  are 
adequately empowered and supported by suitable financial tools can assist in helping them 
cope  during 
that 
microinsurance customers can be as valuable as a company’s any other customers. This is 
where the industry can play a major role to develop suitable microinsurance/ takaful products 
that would enhance the social safety net of this underserved segment enabling them to get 
back on their feet and become financially independent even after experiencing an adverse 
event. 
Yet many in the industry appears uninterested in microinsurance/ takaful for reason that it is 
a  loss  making  venture  and  uneconomical  to  pursue.  This  perception  is  not  true.  In  this 
competitive landscape, it would be detrimental for players to be short-sighted and to dismiss 
this  class  of  business  as  unworthy. With the  right  business model, microinsurance/ takaful 
could  become  commercially  viable,  profitable  and  sustainable.  Based  on  Microfinance 
Information  Exchange  Market  Data  (2009)  by  CGAP,  the  data  for  microfinance  providers; 
profit margin 8.43%, return on assets 1.5% and return on equity 7.27%. 
Microfinance  or  microbusiness  will  be  profitable  if  the  pricing  is  right,  the  portfolio  size 
appropriate and strong risk management practices are put in place. 
On its part, the Bank will issue a microinsurance/ takaful regulatory framework to facilitate the 
provision of commercially sustainable micro products whilst offering protection to consumers. 
We have held dialogues on this, which I hope would lead to a positive outcome in furthering 
microinsurance/  takaful  as  a  significant  business  venture  going  forward.  It  is  timely  for 
industry  players  to  review  relevant  methods  as  well  as  approaches  in  repositioning  their 
value propositions to attract this segment of the population. A first major step forward that 
temporary  period  of  emergencies.  Empirical  evidence  showed 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  could be taken is to collaboratively launch nationwide awareness campaigns to promote the 
benefits  of  microinsurance/  takaful  to  the  public.  The  Bank  stands  ready  to  provide 
appropriate avenues of support in rolling out this agenda. 
Evolve in tandem with customer’s preferences and assist customers in the decision-
making process 
Industry  players  that  can  offer  guidance  to  their  customers  will  set  the  building  blocks  for 
developing  long-term  relationships.  This  is  especially  true  in  life  insurance,  where  policies 
bought  represent  a  long-term  commitment.  The  industry  needs  to  quickly  comprehend 
changing  customers’  preferences  and  shoulder the  responsibility  of  inculcating  responsible 
consumer  behaviour  by  expanding  and  deepening  the  scope  of  customers’  education  and 
awareness.  Through  greater  understanding  of  the  respective  responsibilities,  disputes  and 
potential conflicts could be minimised. 
Balancing profitability with serving the needs of customers for long-term 
sustainability 
Industry players that focus on short-term gains will not achieve long-term sustainability. The 
traditional view that the sole purpose of business is to make money the more the better is no 
longer a tenable view today. 
Institutional  logic  now  dictates  that  companies  are  more  than  instruments  for  generating 
money; the value that a company creates should be measured not just in terms of short-term 
profits but also in terms of how it sustains the conditions that allow it to flourish over time. 
What  this  means  is  that  industry  players  today  should  not  be  fixated  solely  on  generating 
profits but rather investing in relationships with their customers. If the industry can meet the 
needs of its customers, then that relationship will sustain the insurance company or takaful 
operator even during distressing periods. 
Regularly benchmark against the best to measure your performance 
Benchmarking  exercises  have  proven  to  drive  performance  improvement  by  facilitating 
comparison and performance measurement amongst industry players. It is a yard stick that 
measures  how  your  company  faired  in  delivering  its  mandates  to  its  shareholders  and 
customers.  The  Bank  has  been  conducting  an  industry-wide  benchmarking  exercise  since 
2001, in line with recommendations of the Financial Sector Master Plan to drive performance 
improvement. I believe the industry has benefitted from this initiative to improve the standard 
of services provided to its customers. 
Going forward however, it is timely and economically sensible for the industry to collaborate 
and assume this role to develop its own range of indicators. If we were to strive for quality, 
the  benchmarking  should  be  against  the  world’s  best,  and  not  confined  to  our  domestic 
market alone. 
The benchmarking could cover a wider range of indicators including financial and operating 
statistics,  distribution  channels  as  well  as  customer  service  indices  that  will  benefit  every 
member company. In many countries, it is the industry associations that undertake this role. 
In this regard, I call upon the associations present here tonight to give this matter a serious 
thought. 
Collaborate and cooperate with others as synergy drives efficiency for the ultimate 
benefit of customers 
Synergy  creates  new  value  and  has  a  multiplier  effect  on  outcomes  that  would  not  be 
possible, individually. Studies have shown that even the best individual efforts cannot stack 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  up  against  today’s  complex  and  interconnected  problems.  The  challenges  of  market 
liberalisation will require players to achieve more despite limitations in individual resources. 
But having to do more with less, simply means having to do it together. The industry through 
pooling  of  capacity,  expertise  and  resources  can  addressed,  perennial  issues  faced  by 
individual  companies,  collectively.  Heightening  collaboration  is  no  longer  a  choice  but  a 
necessity to achieve the industry’s common goal in a more competitive market environment. 
One way in which the industry can collaborate, is in the area of digitalization. Digitalization is 
a  costly  exercise  and  global  survey  findings  forecasted  an  average  growth  in  annualized 
spending  on  Big  Data  Analytics  of  approximately  25%.  Therefore,  it  makes  sense  for  the 
industry to collaborate and share resources in this endeavour. Drawing from the industry’s 
effort to develop the Fraud Intelligence System is a very good step. I envisage seeing more 
collaborative digital propositions from the industry in the near future. 
The industry must be committed to the expectation set by the Government for the nation to 
achieve  a  penetration  rate  of  75%  by  2020. The  current  penetration  rate  of  56%  indicates 
concerted and urgent actions are required. We have less than 5 years and every member of 
the industry must do its part. In meeting up to this challenge, there must be collaboration with 
synergistic  partners,  even  with 
the  overwhelming 
requirement for all of us in the industry today is TRUST. 
On behalf of the Bank, it gives me great pleasure to congratulate the distinguished partners 
and individuals of today’s awards. 
Thank you and have a pleasant evening. 
the  non-traditional  partners.  But 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
