  Yves Mersch: Three challenges for the banking sector 
Speech by Mr Yves Mersch, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
at  the  European  Financial  Forum  dinner,  2015  Cumberland  Lodge  Financial  Services 
Summit, Cumberland Lodge, Windsor, 12 November 2015. 
 Thank you very much for inviting me to speak to you this evening. 
I have been asked to give a “central bankers’ view” on the various issues being discussed at 
this conference, so let me lay out upfront the perspective I will be coming from. While I am 
indifferent  to  how  structural  changes  affect  individual  financial  institutions,  I  have  a  strong 
interest in how they affect the financial sector – and in particular, in a bank-based economy 
like the euro area, how they affect the ability of banks to finance the real economy. We need 
to  make  sure  that  in  an  environment  of  structural  change  we  still  have  strong  and  sound 
banks. 
At present, euro area banks continue to struggle with low profitability driven by both cyclical 
and  structural  factors.  On  the  cyclical  side,  the  low  nominal  growth  and  low  interest  rate 
environment  makes  traditional  banking  activities  such  as  retail  lending  using  maturity 
transformation less lucrative. On the structural side, banks’ return on  equity remains below 
their  cost  of  equity,  which  points  to  a  need  for  further  balance  sheet  adjustment.  Non-
performing loans (NPLs) in particular remain an important obstacle for banks to provide new 
credit to the real economy. 
These challenges need to be addressed both by raising growth potential and by a concerted 
effort to complete the clean-up of bank balance sheets. Yet as important as these issues are, 
they are largely legacies of the recent crisis. What I would like to concentrate on – as you are 
discussing at this conference – are the forward-looking challenges to the banking sector, and 
how they will affect banks given the already difficult operating environment. 
I would like to focus on three that I see as particularly relevant: the payments challenge, the 
markets challenge, and the regulatory challenge. 
1. The payments challenge 
One of the key challenges facing banks is the impact of disruptive new technologies on their 
retail payments business – the so-called “rise of the FinTech”. 
Such competition from non-banks in retail payments services is of course not new. Western 
Union  and  Moneygram,  for  example,  are  well-established  non-bank  providers.  But  what  is 
different now is that various  factors  are coinciding which look  set to  fundamentally change 
the  landscape  of  the  retail  payments  market,  and  in  ways  that  threaten  banks’  dominant 
market position. 
First, regulation is opening up market access. With the revised Payment Services Directive 
(PSD2),  the  list  of  activities  that  payment  institutions  can  carry  out  is  being  expanded  to 
include  the  initiation  of  payments.  They  can  also  provide  account  information  for  accounts 
held  at  other  payment  service  providers.  This  will  inevitably  –  and  deliberately  –  weaken 
banks’ market power. 
Second, consumer preferences are changing rapidly. Retail customers now expect to be able 
to integrate e-commerce, social media and retail payments. They also expect to be able to 
switch seamlessly across digital platforms. These are not areas of strength for many banks: 
given  their  heavier  compliance  obligations,  banks  have  traditionally  invested  more  in  the 
security and resilience of their systems rather than optimising the user experience. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Third,  payments  technology  is  evolving  at  an  unprecedented  speed.  Contactless  cards, 
online  payments,  mobile  payments,  are  all  becoming  more  prevalent.  Keeping  pace  with 
those technologies will require major investment from banks, and they have to contend with 
the fact that their new competitors – for example PayPal and Apple – already have an edge 
in digital technology. 
The initial  effect of this disruption in the payments may well be to reduce the  role  of cash 
payments, which will not fundamentally affect banks. But in my view banks should not take 
this  challenge  lightly.  According  to  estimates  by  Deloitte,  retail  payments  will  generate 
around  €128  billion  in  revenues  for  banks  in  2015,  or  around  a  quarter  of  total  European 
retail  banking  revenues.1  With  profits  already  depressed  on  lending  activities,  banks  can 
scarcely afford to start seeing margins being squeezed and market share lost in other areas. 
So banks would be well-advised, to my mind, to face this challenge head on. Whether via 
joint ventures or higher investment, they need to keep up with technological change if they 
are to have a long-term business model. Banks accounted, however, for around 20% of the 
€10 billion euro total investment in FinTech in 2014, and collaborations between banks and 
non-banks  a  further  20%.  Non-banks  accounted  for  the  remaining  60%  –  a  clear  gap  to 
close.2 
But  should  policymakers  also  take  an  interest  in  how  this  disruptive  process  unfolds?  Or 
should  they  just  stand  back  and  let  the  market  work?  I  would  offer  a  somewhat  nuanced 
view. 
In principle, I would always prefer as little interference as possible in the creative destruction 
process.  History  shows  us  that  new  entrants  have  brought  many  benefits  to  the  retail 
payments  market.  For  example,  merchants  were  the  initial  drivers  of  the  introduction  of 
payment  cards  in  the  US  in  the  1930s  and,  just  a  couple  of  years  ago,  it  was  a  mobile 
network  operator  in  Kenya  that  succeeded  in  making mobile  payments  widespread  in  that 
country. PSD2 was introduced precisely because there is no good reason for the regulatory 
framework to protect the rents of banks. 
But  policymakers  also  need  to  monitor  carefully  the  system-wide  impact  of  these 
technologies. Innovation should not come at a cost to consumer protection. We do not want 
a  situation  where  unregulated  non-banks  create  pressure  for  a  race-to-the-bottom  among 
more regulated banks, which might be detrimental consumer security. Nor do we want banks 
that must comply with higher consumer protection standards to be disadvantaged. So going 
forward, policymakers must ensure that the regulatory landscape is fair: neither stifling new 
operators, nor harming establishing ones. 
I say this as a central banker not only because one of the ECB’s statutory tasks is to ensure 
the  smooth  operation  of  payment  systems.  I  say  it  because,  ultimately,  trust  in  payments 
means trust in money as a reliable medium of exchange. For a sound currency, consumers 
must have 100% confidence that their money can be exchanged safely. 
2. The markets challenge 
Non-banks  are  not  only  increasingly  entering  the  retail  payments  market  in  the  euro  area, 
however;  they  are  also  entering  the  lending  business.  This  brings  me  to  the  second 
challenge for euro area banks: the markets challenge. 
For some years now, we have been witnessing a trend towards more capital market-based 
financing in the euro area, driven by both deleveraging among banks and the very low cost of 
market  finance.  Looking  forward,  the  Capital  Markets  Union  (CMU)  project  promises  to 
                                              
1   Deloitte (2015), “Payments disrupted: the emerging challenge for European retail banks”. 
2  
Ibid. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  further deepen market finance in Europe by, among other things, making it easier for young 
firms to access risk capital and smaller firms to issue bonds, as well as deepening markets 
for high quality securitisation. 
So what will this mean for European banks? 
In  the  long  run,  deeper  capital  markets  may  lead  to  more  competition  in  the  provision  of 
financial services and hence weaken banks’ market power. For example, research looking at 
the  pre-crisis  period  suggests  that  where  banks  face  limited  competition  in  their  domestic 
markets, they tend to charge higher margins for lending to SMEs, and that effect increases in 
financial systems which are more bank-based  3 That would change if small firms had more 
options to diversify, for instance through efficient private placement markets or further growth 
in crowdfunding. 
There  are  nevertheless  good  reasons  why  banks  are  the  primary  lender  to  SMEs  in most 
national  markets  –  they  have  the  client  relationships,  information  database  and  domestic 
networks which are necessary for that type of lending – so banks are unlikely to be displaced 
by non-banks for quite some time. The challenge posed by CMU is therefore not, at least in 
the  medium-term,  about  surviving.  It is  rather  about  thriving.  CMU  presents  banks  with  an 
opportunity  to  recover  profitability  and  to  find  a  niche  within  the  emerging  market  for  new 
financial products in Europe. 
Because in the euro area we have a universal banking model, more disintermediated finance 
will have to involve banks as the primary market makers. With CMU on the horizon, there is 
now  a  window  for  banks  to  specialise  in  specific  products,  become  market  leaders  and 
bolster their sources on non-interest income. In particular, the development of securitisation 
markets offers significant possibilities for banks. There is clear demand for a conduit between 
non-bank  investors  looking  for  SME  exposure  and  small  firms  looking  for  new  sources  of 
financing. 
From my viewpoint as a central banker, I hope that banks indeed seize on this opportunity, 
because  I  think  it  would  ultimately  lead  to  a  more  robust  banking  sector  as  a  whole.  For 
example, European securitisation markets would improve risk-sharing among banks: one can 
imagine a world where small, local banks originate loans while larger, global banks securitise 
and  market  them.  And  a  true  CMU  would  also  mean  convergence  of  some  parts  of 
insolvency law and deepening of markets for distressed debt, which would help banks work 
through NPLs more quickly in future and hence increase the resilience of the banking sector 
to shocks. 
Moreover,  if  bank  finance  declines  in  importance  over  the  longer-term,  that  might  also 
encourage some much needed consolidation in the banking sector, which would in my view 
be  beneficial  for  the  real  economy. We  see  at  the  moment  that  overcapacity  hinders  the 
recovery  of  bank  profitability,  as  weaker  banks  distort  competition  and  make  it  difficult  for 
other banks to re-price loans.4 
Whether all this materialises, however, hinges crucially on how far-reaching the CMU project 
really  is.  The  Commission’s  Action  Plan  for  CMU  has  put  forward  many  areas  for  further 
work,  but  each  will  take  years  to  implement.  What  type  of  CMU  will  ultimately  emerge 
therefore remains to be seen. I am sure Commissioner Hill will give us more guidance on this 
tomorrow. 
                                              
3   Ryan, R., O’Toole, C. and McCann, F. (2014), “Does bank market power affect SME financing constraints?”, 
Journal of Banking and Finance. 
4   ECB (2015), Financial Stability Review, May 2015. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  3. The regulatory challenge 
As I said, however, CMU is for the longer-term. For the medium-term, SME financing in the 
euro  area  will  still  mainly  come  from  banks.  So  we  need  to  make  sure  that  there  are  no 
unnecessary  obstacles  to  that  process.  And  this  brings  me  to  the  third  challenge  facing 
banks – the regulatory challenge. 
The  regulatory  agenda  since  the  crisis  has  no  doubt  been  essential.  Banks  had  too  little 
capital,  too  much  short-term  funding,  too  high  leverage,  and  created  too  great  a  cost  for 
society  when  they  failed.  The  reforms  that  have  been  introduced  so  far  have  increased 
resilience  and, in extremis, made banks less costly to resolve. And there is no reason why 
this should, in principle, diminish the ability of banks to serve the real  economy  – research 
suggests, for example, that higher bank capital has no negative impact on lending. 5 
But as new regulation accumulates, we know that it can also come with costs as well. In the 
economics jargon, policymakers always have to be watchful that, in attempting to internalise 
externalities,  they  do  not  inadvertently  create  new  externalities.  The  possible  risks  can  be 
summarised under the headings of complexity, clarity and consistency. 
As regulations have built up since 2009, they have tended to introduce more complexity, and 
with that comes an inevitable cost in terms of compliance. For example, a study from a few 
years ago estimated that to comply with Basel III for a midsize European bank would require 
up to 200 full-time jobs.6 
That  is  not  per  se  a  problem,  but  one  has  to  look  at  it  in  the  context  of  the  current 
environment  facing  banks.  If  banks  are  simultaneously  aiming  to  cut  costs  to  restore 
profitability,  while  raising  the  resources  they  dedicate  to  compliance,  there  could  be  a 
consequence  elsewhere: for instance, IT resources may be diverted  away from innovation. 
That  would  hinder  the  process  of  technological  adaptation  that  is  key  for  their  long-term 
viability. So I would argue that regulators should be mindful of the burden they are placing on 
banks and the potential unintended consequences. 
If banks are to adapt effectively to the new regulatory environment, they also need clarity on 
what it will look like. The risk of a prolonged period of regulatory reform – and remember the 
current phase has been ongoing since 2009 – is that it creates a moving target, which in turn 
prevents the industry from settling into sustainable new business models. 
To  give  just  one  example,  some  banks  responded  to  the  crisis  by  switching  to  a  vision  of 
retail deposit-funded subsidiaries, which was also supported by the initial wave of regulation, 
for  example  the  Net  Stable  Funding  Ratio.  Now,  with  the  introduction  of  the  Total  Loss 
Absorbing Capital rules, they may be forced to reconsider those business models as they will 
need  to  issue  more  unsecured  long-term  debt.  Let  me  be  clear:  I  am  not making  a  value 
judgement  about  these  regulations.  What  I  am  saying  is  that,  if  we  want  banks  to  adapt 
successfully to the post-crisis world, we need to give them sufficient visibility about the future. 
Finally,  regulation  needs  to  be  mutually  consistent.  In  particular,  if  we  want  banks  to  be 
bigger  players  in  a  more  market-based  financing  mix,  we  need  to  ensure  that  regulation 
supports  that  transition  and  does  not  unduly  impact  banks’  ability  to  transact  in  capital 
markets. We know that one side effect of the reform agenda so far has been banks retreating 
from, or scaling down, certain market making activities. 
                                              
5   See for example Buch, C., and Esteben, P. (2014), “Do better capitalized banks lend less? Long-run panel 
evidence from Germany”, International Finance 17:1. 
6   Härle, P., Lüders, E., Pepanides, T., Pfetsch, S., Poppensieker, T. and Stegemann, U. (2010), “Basel III and 
European banking: Its impact, how banks might respond, and the challenges of implementation”, McKinsey 
Working Papers on Risk, Number 26. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  This  is  a  particular  issue  for  less  liquid  markets,  such  as  ABS,  which  depend  on  market 
makers  that  can  absorb  temporary  supply-demand  imbalances.  It  is  also  one  reason  why 
part  of  the  CMU  Action  Plan  is  a  call  for  evidence  on  the  cumulative  impact  of  financial 
services  reforms.  Going  forward,  we  should  be  careful  to  ensure  that  new  regulations,  for 
instance aimed at separating the banking and trading arms of universal banks, do not have 
negative consequences for market-making activities that are not justified by significant risks. 
Likewise, we should be mindful about the fallouts of an ill-designed financial transaction law. 
Conclusion 
Let me draw to a close. 
The euro area banking sector is facing challenges on all sides: from new technologies, from 
new market players, from new rules of the game. Those challenges, insofar as they lead to 
competition  and  innovation,  are  healthy.  They  are  how  a  well-functioning market  economy 
works. 
But we must also recognise that, in the euro area, we need sound banks. A weak banking 
sector means a weak economy. So I entreat banks to respond to the challenges of the new 
environment and reinvigorate their business models. And I entreat policymakers to create a 
fair, clear and consistent level playing field where that can happen. 
Thank you for your attention. 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
