   Graeme Wheeler: Some reflections on the world of central banking 
Speech by Mr Graeme Wheeler, Governor of the Reserve Bank of New Zealand, to the Institute 
of Finance Professionals NZ, Auckland, 14 October 2015. 
 Introduction 
1. 
I  recently  read  Andrew  Graham-Dixon’s  excellent  biography  on  Caravaggio,  the  early 
17th century Italian painter whose bold realism, deep sense of humanity and stunning use of 
light, transformed the art world. As now deceased Australian art critic Robert Hughes said, 
“there was art before him and art after him, and they were not the same.” 
Caravaggio lived a dramatic and tumultuous life. Graham Dixon described it as “the darkest 
and  most  dangerous  life  of  any  of  the  great  painters”. While  we  could  debate  the  desired 
temperament of central bankers, the world in which they have operated monetary policy over 
the past 8 years has also been dramatic and turbulent. 
Today, I will describe a little of that world – particularly that faced by central bankers in small 
open  economies.  It’s  a  world  of  complex  global  economic  and  financial  linkages  and 
interdependencies,  and  many  unknowns:  a  world  that  requires  constant  reflection  on  new 
information,  and  where  judgement  in  managing  and  balancing  risks  under  considerable 
uncertainty plays a critical role. 
It’s also a world where people have strong views on monetary policy. That’s understandable 
because monetary policy affects peoples’ lives. It can affect the level of activity and distribution 
of income in the economy in the short term, the returns to savers and investors, the inflation 
expectations of wage and price setters, the price of real and financial assets, and the degree 
of  financial  risk  taking.  That’s  why  central  banks  endeavour  to  be  explicit  about  their 
frameworks  and  judgements  in  their  monetary  policy  statements  and  on-the-record 
presentations. 
In discussing the world that central banker’s face in small open economies, I will offer some 
thoughts on: the international economy; the constraints and uncertainties around monetary 
policy judgements; and the recent application of monetary policy in New Zealand. 
The global economy 
2. 
This year the global economy has hit another weak patch. Concerns have intensified in recent 
months following weaker production and trade data for China, Latin America and East Asia, 
and greater financial volatility – including sizeable equity market adjustments in some financial 
centres, and large portfolio outflows from emerging markets. 
The global economy appears to be growing at around 3 percent – slower than its average over 
the past three decades and the weakest growth since 2009. This weakness comes despite 
several supportive factors including: the unprecedented monetary stimulus; the positive effect 
of low commodity prices on spending power; and cheaper and more sophisticated information 
technology. For example: 
• 
the  world  has  never  seen  cheaper  financing.  Policy  rates  are  close  to  zero  in 
advanced  economies  that  collectively  generate  2/3rds  of  world  output,  and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
     quantitative easing by major central banks in advanced economies has totaled around 
USD7 trillion in recent years.1  
due mainly to the weakening in Chinese demand (but also to strong supply in many 
markets), prices of a wide range of commodities have been falling since early-2014.2 
While this slows growth in the developing world (which is the main global source of 
commodities) falling commodity prices are generally positive for growth in developed 
countries. 
the decline in the cost of information technology over the past three decades possibly 
represents  the  largest  continuous  set  of  factor  cost  reductions  the  world  has 
experienced.  Not  only  is  the  marginal  cost  of  storing,  processing  and  transmitting 
information essentially zero, the creative destruction of information technology has 
generated new products and consumer markets, and enabled further efficiencies to 
be squeezed out of global supply chains. 
Despite  these factors,  and  the  ease  with  which  capital  can flow  across  borders,  economic 
growth  rates  even  in  the  advanced  commodity  importing  countries  remain  below  potential 
growth rates eight years after the onset of the Global Financial Crisis (GFC). 
Many reasons have been advanced for the disappointing global recovery. Some observers 
emphasise the depth of the GFC and its impact in repricing every asset across the globe, the 
scale  of  the  household  and  corporate  deleveraging  that  was  unleashed  and  its  prolonged 
impact on economic risk taking. Others link the weak recovery to the slowdown in global trade, 
which has been a major catalyst for global growth in recent decades, and to the impact of 
protectionism and the maturing of global supply chains. 
There are also debates about future economic prospects, including whether these might look 
increasingly like the recent past or even worse. Some consider that the global economy may 
be in danger of entering a period of secular stagnation characterised by excess desired global 
savings relative to investment and weak global demand.3 Others question whether rates of 
innovation and technological progress are slowing and whether productivity gains from the ICT 
revolution have been largely realised.4  
The inflation picture also, is complicated. In the vast majority of the 30 or so economies (mainly 
advanced economies) whose central banks pursue inflation targeting, headline and underlying 
inflation  have  averaged  below  specified  goals  over  the  past  few  years.  There  are  several 
reasons for this: levels of excess capacity in factor and product markets remain high in many 
economies; wage outcomes have been subdued, even in countries with low unemployment; 
surveys  show  that  inflation  expectations  have  declined;  commodity  prices  have  fallen 
substantially  over  the  past  18  months;  and  the  internet  and  other  technologies  may  be 
changing the tradables content of traditional non-tradable goods and services. 
Turning to some regional perspectives, the greatest concern at this point lies around the growth 
outlook  for  China.  Over  the  past  35  years,  China  has  been  the  world’s  most  successful 
economy, increasing its share of world output from below 3 percent to 15 percent currently. 
Although  China’s  economy  is  just  over  60  percent  of  that  of  the  United  States  (at  current 
exchange rates) it has a much greater impact on commodity markets and global trade volumes. 
                                                
1  This  includes  the  19  euro-area  economies,  USA,  Japan,  UK,  Canada,  Switzerland,  Sweden,  Demark  and 
Norway. In 13 European countries 2 year sovereign bond rates are still negative. 
2  The continuous commodity index is currently about 28 percent below its peak in April 2014. 
3  Larry Summers blog: On Secular Stagnation: A response to Bernanke, April 1, 2015. 
4  Robert  Gordon:  Is  US  Economic  Growth  over?  Fostering  Innovation  Confronts  the  Six  Headwinds,  NBER 
working paper no.18315, August 2012. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   China is now the number 1 or 2 trading partner for over 100 countries and its imports of non-
oil commodities are around 2 ½ times higher than those of the US. 
Recent indicators suggest that challenges in China’s construction and manufacturing sectors 
continue to be a concern, particularly as much of the investment has been financed through 
extensive borrowing, much of it in the rapidly expanding shadow banking sector. China’s debt 
burden has increased at an unprecedented rate – from 130 percent of GDP in 2008 to around 
200  percent  currently.  But  financial  markets  have  also  been  unsettled  by  other  factors, 
including the types of policy measures introduced as the Shanghai index began declining, the 
magnitude of recent capital outflows, and the questions raised by the decision to allow the 
RMB to depreciate by 3.5% over two days in August. 
Although  the  Chinese  Authorities  have  indicated  they  want  a  stable  RMB,  private  capital 
outflows continue to be large. Any substantial depreciation in the RMB would have serious 
implications for the world economy: it would risk triggering exchange rate adjustment among 
competitor economies – particularly in Asia, and would spread deflationary forces across the 
globe. 
Although its recovery has been slower than previous economic expansions, the US is the main 
bright spot in the global economy. But even here there are significant puzzles around the labour 
market and investment climate. Why, for example, has recent US labour productivity growth 
been so slow, and what explains the substantial wage moderation and weakness in business 
investment at this stage of recovery? On the policy side, there is uncertainty as to when and 
how  fast  the  process  of  raising  interest  rates  might  take  place,  and  its  possible  impact  on 
international  growth  and  asset  prices  –  especially  at  a  time  when  the  Bank  of  Japan  and 
European Central Bank are considering expanding their quantitative easing programs. 
These are some of the considerations that shape the world of central bankers. It’s a world of 
complex  linkages,  of  instantaneous  information,  massive  daily  cross-border  portfolio  flows, 
unprecedented  monetary  accommodation  and,  in  some  instances,  sharp  swings  in  market 
liquidity and asset prices. 
It’s also a world in which high expectations have been placed on central banks to use all of the 
scope  within  their mandate to  stimulate growth  in  demand  and counter the  risk  of  inflation 
remaining below desired goals for extended periods. In seeking to do so, central bankers have 
often  had  to  work  without  the  support  of  fiscal  policy,  or  the  structural  adjustment  reforms 
needed to raise potential output growth. 
Monetary policy in a small open economy 
3. 
Central  bankers  also  operate  in  a  world  where  there  is  widespread  overestimation  and 
misunderstanding of what monetary policy can deliver. I will elaborate on three areas that may 
contribute to this. These concern the scope of monetary policy; the dynamics – notably in terms 
of  transaction  volumes,  driving  forces  and  time  horizons  –  of  financial  markets  and  their 
interaction with monetary policy; and the degree of precision of the links between policy actions 
and outcomes. 
Scope of influence 
i) 
Flexible inflation targeting here and overseas has been successful over the last 25 years in 
reducing inflation to low and stable levels – the best contribution monetary policy can make to 
an economy’s long-run growth. Over the shorter term, monetary policy stabilises inflation by 
countering fluctuations in demand growth and employment away from their longer-run trends.5 
With inflation expectations stabilised at low levels, and the associated gain in policy credibility, 
                                                
5  G Wheeler, Reflections on 25 years of Inflation Targeting, International Journal of Central Banking, September 
2015. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   the ability of monetary policy to help counter short-run fluctuations in output and employment 
has increased. 
Monetary  policy  is,  however,  relatively  powerless  to  influence the  decisions  that  determine 
long-run economic performance and distributional outcomes. For example, over the long run, 
monetary policy can do little to generate higher spending by households and firms. Even in the 
shorter term, monetary policy’s influence may be low in an environment where debt levels are 
high and where there is considerable uncertainty about economic prospects. 
Monetary  policy  can  influence  risk-taking  in  asset  markets,  but  this  does  not  necessarily 
translate into risk taking in long term real assets – requiring the investment and entrepreneurial 
decisions  that  underpin  productivity  growth  and  hence  long-run  improvements  in  living 
standards. Monetary policy also can’t prevent international developments from affecting our 
economy, including through commodity prices and the exchange rate. In this regard, there is 
little that monetary policy can do to persistently lower an exchange rate, whether through the 
choice of exchange rate regime or direct policy actions.6  
Similarly,  the  Reserve  Bank  is  unable to  influence  long  term real  interest  rates. These  are 
affected by a range of factors, including global savings and investment flows, risk premia and 
expectations for economic growth and inflation. Monetary policy can only influence short term 
interest rates and, over the medium term, actual and expected rates of inflation. 
Market and policy dynamics: volumes and time horizons 
ii) 
Working over a medium-term horizon, monetary policy operates on the basis of limited and 
sometimes imprecise information around the economic outlook, and uses a relatively narrow 
platform of policy instruments. Monetary policy generally affects inflation outcomes with a 12 
to 18 month lag, reflecting the pace at which changes in interest rates and the exchange rate 
typically spread to risk-taking and spending in the economy. This means that central banks are 
constantly trying to interpret the outlook for inflationary pressures, growth and financial stability 
12 – 18 months ahead.7  
Financial markets, which respond almost instantly to policy signals and expectations about risk 
and returns across the world, operate with a more immediate focus. Moreover, the magnitude 
of their transaction flows can swamp the balance sheet strength of any central bank. 
For example, the BIS reported that the NZ dollar was the 10th most traded currency in 2013 
with  daily  foreign  exchange  turnover  of  USD  105  billion,  equivalent  to  over  55  percent  of 
GDP.8, 9 The Reserve Bank’s foreign exchange reserves are approximately USD 6.5 billion. 
Investors compete aggressively against benchmarks that trigger financial rewards. Dominant 
institutional investors often place similar bets, and share similar benchmarks and pricing and 
risk  management  platforms.  At  times,  they  exhibit  herd-like  behaviour  that  can  lead  to 
amplification of cycles and mispricing of risk – especially in a low interest environment. Rather 
than requiring higher risk premia from increasingly risky borrowers , investors often continue 
                                                
6  McDermott,  J  (2013)  “Understanding  the  New  Zealand  exchange  rate”.  Speech  to  Federated  Farmers, 
Wellington. 
7  The full effect of monetary policy may not be felt for 18 to 24 months. 
8  BIS Triennial Central Bank Survey: Foreign Exchange Turnover in April 2013 (September 2013). 
9  BIS 2014–2015 Annual Report, page 85 reports that daily global financial exchange turnover totalled USD5.3 
trillion in 2013, equivalent on an annual basis to 25 times global GDP. Total central bank foreign exchange 
reserves are currently around USD11.6 trillion. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   financing at declining spreads, fearful of missing out on the returns captured by those who 
preceded them.10  
The combination of massive financial assets under management (totalling USD75 trillion in 
2013), extraordinary advances in computing power, instantaneous information and reduced 
capital controls mean that financial markets have become deeply integrated around the globe. 
This has led to an increasingly rapid global transmission of economic and financial shocks and 
policy actions, and to increased global synchronisation of business cycles.11  
Precision 
iii) 
Monetary policy involves many challenges and judgements. Mechanistic approaches to setting 
monetary policy don’t work, and since monetary policy affects inflation with a 12–18 month lag, 
by the time one is certain as to the correct policy adjustment, it may already be too late to be 
effective. 
At a technical level, setting monetary policy involves estimating output levels and forecasting 
how they might evolve relative to the level of potential output. This “output gap”, together with 
inflation expectations, are seen as the main drivers of inflation pressure in the economy. The 
degree of monetary policy stimulus is assessed by comparing the current and projected policy 
interest rate (in our case the OCR) against the neutral interest rate.12 A major challenge is that 
potential output, the output gap and the level of neutral interest rates are not observable; all 
have to be estimated through economic modelling. 
Fortunately, economic management has come a long way since Paish described it in the 1960s 
as like driving a car with a brake and accelerator and only being able to look through the back 
window. The new-Keynesian based models and applied general equilibrium models used in 
central banks today are a significant advance and capable of producing complex economic 
simulations within minutes as to how the economy, and the path of inflation in particular, might 
respond to domestic and foreign-sourced disturbances, including changes to monetary policy. 
Despite their impressive structure, however, such models are inevitably a highly stylised and 
simplified  representation  of  an  economy,  and  the  complex  linkages  between  the  financial 
sector and the real economy are often not well represented. In essence, no economic model 
can capture the full complexity of economic behaviour or fully reflect key relationships, inter-
dependencies, and driving forces in the economy. While adding judgement to the model and 
adjusting the model outputs can help, the simulations or scenarios produced by such models 
are still highly conditional on the model properties and a range of “exogenous assumptions”. 
In many respects, their value lies more in raising questions rather than delivering clear-cut 
answers.13 
Central  bankers  try  to  acknowledge  these  uncertainties  and  the  associated  imprecision  of 
policy through the nuances and conditional language that characterise their forward guidance 
and other policy statements. In publishing economic forecasts they make it clear – including 
                                                
10  We have seen this many times. For example: in the lead up to the Argentinian debt default of 2002 Argentina 
came to represent nearly one-quarter of the Emerging Market Bond Index. Rather than requiring higher risk 
premiums from an increasingly leveraged borrower, investors benchmarked to the Emerging Market Bond Index 
felt obliged to buy at the going price. 
11  Graham J (2014)“N Sync: How do countries’ economies move together? RBNZ Analytical Note 2014/04. 
12  Potential  output  refers  to  the  sustainable  long  term  growth  path  of  the  economy  when  resources  are  fully 
employed and price stability is achieved. The output gap reflects the difference between the level of output in 
the economy and potential output and, as such, indicates the degree of excess capacity or capacity constraints 
in the economy and the implications for inflationary pressures. We regard the neutral interest rate as the policy 
rate consistent with the economy growing at its potential in the medium term and having inflation expectations 
matching the price stability objective. 
13  McDermott, J (2013) “the role of forecasting in monetary policy”. Speech to FINSIA, Wellington, 15 March. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
   through devices such as alternative scenarios, forecast ranges, and fan charts – that various 
economic outcomes are possible around a central projection. 
Reflections on recent monetary policy in New Zealand 
4. 
Two important changes were introduced into the September 2012 Policy Targets Agreement 
(PTA). 
Firstly, the PTA requires the Bank to focus on keeping future average CPI inflation near the 2 
percent midpoint of the target range. Secondly, it includes a stronger focus on financial stability, 
by requiring the Bank to monitor asset prices and have regard to the soundness and efficiency 
of the financial system in setting monetary policy. 
Including the reference to the midpoint in a medium-term context was aimed at lowering and 
stabilising inflation expectations close to 2 percent. This was important because for much of 
the period since 2000, annual CPI inflation has been in the top half of the 1–3 percent band, 
and measures of inflation expectations tended to average around 2.5 percent or higher. Recent 
data are positive on this front. As discussed in our September Monetary Policy Statement, 
survey measures of inflation expectations have fallen and are now consistent with inflation 
settling at 2 percent in the medium term. 
The PTA’s stronger focus on financial stability and the monitoring of asset prices requires the 
Bank  to  have  regard  to  the  potential  impact  of  its  monetary  policy  decisions  on  financial 
imbalances  in the  economy. We have  used macro-prudential  policy  instruments  and  some 
prudential  management  interventions  to  help  reduce  the  risks  to  the  financial  system  and 
broader economy associated with a potential correction in Auckland house prices. Although 
financial  stability  considerations  are  secondary  to  the  price  stability  objective  in  the  PTA, 
housing market considerations do influence our thinking on the OCR. 
Our economy has been affected by several major shocks and adjustments in recent years. 
These include: the Canterbury earthquakes and subsequent rebuild activity; the 2013 drought; 
the terms of trade hitting a 40 year high and the subsequent 70 percent decline in dairy prices 
and early signs of a recovery in recent weeks; the 60 percent decline in oil prices; the related 
large swings in the real exchange rate; net migration and labour force participation reaching 
historically high levels; and annual house price inflation in Auckland reaching 25 percent, with 
house price to income ratios that are double those in the rest of New Zealand. All this has 
taken  place  in  the  context  of  unprecedented  global  monetary  accommodation  and,  more 
recently, a significant slowdown in China and other emerging market economies. 
The PTA explicitly recognises (as has been the case), that annual headline inflation may fall 
outside the target band because of exceptional movements in commodity prices. The medium-
term focus of policy means that the Bank does not try to immediately correct deviations of 
inflation from its target range, but aims to do so steadily over time. 
Strong  net  migration  flows  have  contributed  to  higher  house  price  inflation,  especially  in 
Auckland, which attracts over half of the net migrant flow. Net migration however has had a 
smaller impact on broader inflationary pressures than in past cycles. One reason is the boost 
it provides to the labour force. In the two years to June 2015, the labour force expanded by 6.1 
percent,  enabling  strong  employment  growth  of  6.7  percent  to  be  absorbed  with  only  a 
moderate increase in wage costs. Moderate wage inflation, spare capacity and the decline in 
inflation expectations towards 2 percent have been important factors behind the subdued rate 
of non-tradables inflation. Structural elements linked to falling technology costs and the impact 
of on-line retailing may also have played a role. 
As  new  economic  information  became  available  we  began  scaling  back  our  interest  rate 
projections in the June 2014 MPS and in subsequent MPS’s. We commented more extensively 
on the level of the exchange rate, and cut the OCR three times in the period from June to 
September 2015. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   Recent economic indicators have been more encouraging. Some further easing in the OCR 
seems likely but this will continue to depend on the emerging flow of economic data. At the 
same time however, we remain conscious of the impact that low interest rates can have on 
housing  demand  and  its  potential  to  feed  into  higher  price  inflation.  It  is  important  also  to 
consider whether borrowing costs are constraining investment, and the need to have sufficient 
capacity to cut interest rates if the global economy slows significantly. 
Concluding comment 
5. 
Salle 77 in the Louvre is dominated by Thѐodore Gѐricault’s Raft of the Medusa, painted in 
1819. Gѐricault drew inspiration from Caravaggio. It is a brilliant painting of the forlorn and 
exhausted sailors of the French Frigate, Mѐduse, desperately clinging to life on a makeshift 
raft in stormy seas.14 Without wishing to draw any comparison between the occupants and 
central  bankers,  the  wild  seas  are  symptomatic  of  the  world  central  bankers  are  trying  to 
navigate. 
Central bankers’ goal of trying to smooth output gaps around the path of potential output hasn’t 
changed.  But  they  are  tasked  with  doing  so  while  the  global  economy  is  in  a  difficult 
configuration  with  growth  slowing  in  the  developing  world,  unprecedented  monetary 
accommodation, and prospects of tighter monetary conditions in the US and further easings in 
the  euro-area  and  Japan.  Little  wonder  that  central  bankers  closely  dissect  new  data  and 
information, and cautiously feel their way with their policy responses. 
                                                
14  The French Royal Naval frigate, Mѐduse, sank off the coast of Senegal in 1816. Of the original 150 people on 
the raft, only 15 survived. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
