  Glenn Stevens: The path to prosperity 
Address  by  Mr  Glenn  Stevens,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Australia,  at  the  2015 
Economic  and  Social  Outlook  Conference,  organized  by  The  Melbourne  Institute  and  The 
Australian, Melbourne, 5 November 2015. 
I thank Emily Perry for assistance in compiling these remarks. 
 Thank you for the opportunity to take part in this conference. 
The previous occasion on which I spoke at this event was six years ago (to the day, as it 
happens) in 2009. That conference carried the title “The Road to Recovery”. The background 
was that we had experienced a downturn in the economy at the end of 2008, at a time when 
the  global  economy  went  into  a  serious  recession.  For  some  months  thereafter  public 
discussion about the economy contained a good deal of fretting and debate over whether the 
word “recession” should be used to describe conditions in Australia. I certainly used the term 
myself. 
But by November 2009, it was pretty clear that the recession had been short and shallow, 
and that we were in fact already on the road to recovery. The issue then was managing the 
next phase – ensuring that the road to recovery joined the path to prosperity. 
At that stage, of course, what has been referred to as “mining boom mark II” still lay ahead. 
The terms of trade had fallen by close to 20 per cent from their 2008 peak, but had stabilised. 
They  would  rise  by  40  per  cent  over  the  ensuing  two  years.  Resources  sector  capital 
spending  declined  over  2009  but  would  more  than  double  over  the  next  several  years, 
reaching the highest share of GDP for at least 150 years. These were much bigger increases 
than we expected at the time. 
An unusually long and strong search for yield in global capital markets, driven by ultra-easy 
monetary  policy  in  the  major  jurisdictions,  was  just  beginning.  By  and  large  this  continues 
today, perhaps more so than we would all have hoped in 2009. The European crisis, which 
would  challenge  the  very  foundations  of  the  European  project,  was,  in  late  2009,  still  to 
come. 
So there were some surprises in store over the ensuing six years. 
Nonetheless,  some  of the  features  of that  next  phase  and  the  issues  in  managing  it  were 
reasonably apparent. 
It was clear that the remarkable growth of China was a powerful force and that Australia was 
becoming  much  more  exposed  to  that  growth  –  which  was  a  good  thing,  but  not  without 
some risks. 
It was clear that there would need to be a focus on structural reform. 
It was clear that improving housing supply for a growing population and infrastructure for a 
growing economy generally would be a key theme. 
It  was  clear  that  there  would  need  to  be  a  significant  effort  at  restoring  the  state  of  the 
budget, so that fiscal expansion would again be possible in the face of a future shock, as it 
was in 2008 and 2009. 
All these things were said at the time.1 
                                                
1  See  Stevens  G  (2009)  “The  Road  to  Prosperity”,  Address  to  the  2009  Economic  and  Social  Outlook 
Conference Dinner (The Melbourne Institute and The Australian), Melbourne, 5 November. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Where are we, then, six years on? 
The world economy, despite various threats, has not had a relapse into recession. Even with 
something of a slowing this year, global growth is still proceeding at a moderate pace. 
That  said,  this  growth  has  taken  extraordinary  policy  settings  to  achieve  and  many 
policymakers  and  observers  find  the  outcomes  disappointing.  Most  countries  around  the 
world would like some more growth. But they can’t all get it by just exporting to others and 
focusing their own demand inwards. And, for a variety of reasons, policymakers are finding 
the  effectiveness  of  policies  aimed  at  boosting  domestic  demand  more  limited  than  they 
might have hoped. In some cases the efforts that have been made to foster growth have not 
been without a degree of risk. 
For our part in Australia, we have managed the biggest terms of trade event for more than a 
century  with,  so  far,  some  success.  History  has  many  examples  of  such  booms  that, 
ultimately, were not successfully managed and which ended badly. It’s easy to see how that 
happens.  A  gift  of  higher  national  income  comes  our  way  as  a  result  of  the  discovery  of 
natural resources or a rise in demand for them. The higher income permeates through the 
economy and before long even industries and regions not directly exposed to that shock are 
feeling  good.  Human  nature  being  what  it  is,  we  tend  to  assume  that  the  good  times  will 
continue  and  we  borrow  and  spend  accordingly.  Credit  growth  speeds  up,  leverage 
increases, usually inflation increases. And then the terms of trade turn down, at which point 
the whole process goes into reverse – and a serious downturn ensues. 
The current episode is not yet over. But from what we can observe thus far, we can say two 
things. First, we did not see the same excesses on the upswing as we did in other similar 
episodes.2  This  has  to  put  us  in  a  better  position  to  manage  the  inevitable  down  phase. 
Second, in the down phase we are still managing to grow. We are probably roughly halfway 
through  the  decline  in  resources  sector  capital  spending  now;  the  headwinds  from  that 
source are about as intense now as they are likely to get. We are still growing. It would be 
good if the growth was a bit stronger, but nonetheless over the past year the non-mining side 
of  the  economy  has  generated  respectable  growth  in  employment.  The  ‘rebalancing’  is 
occurring. It isn’t as seamless as it would be in an ideal world, but we don’t live in such a 
world. 
Monetary policy is contributing to that rebalancing, consistent with its mandate, with a very 
accommodative stance. It seems likely that an accommodative stance will be appropriate for 
some time yet. Were a change to monetary policy to be required in the near term, it would 
almost  certainly  be  an  easing,  not  a  tightening.  The  rate  of  CPI  inflation  is  clearly  no 
impediment to easing. The housing market may be calming, lessening risks from that source, 
though by how much and how persistently we cannot yet know. 
This is perhaps an opportune moment to offer some observations about the recent change in 
mortgage interest rates on the part of the major, and some smaller, banks and in particular 
the question  of  whether  the  Reserve  Bank  should  respond  to  it  with  a  decline  in  the  cash 
rate. 
On  some  other  occasions,  the  Reserve  Bank  has  moved  the  cash  rate  by  more  than 
otherwise  to  take  account  of  changes  in  the  relationship  between  the  cash  rate  and  other 
interest rates. One such occasion was in May 2012, when the Reserve Bank Board wished 
to  ensure  that  the  economy  received  a  worthwhile  stimulus  from  a  policy  easing  after  a 
period  in  which  lending  rates  had  tended  to  increase  even  while  the  cash  rate  had  been 
steady.  The  Board  wanted  to  make  sure  that  financial  conditions  would  move  to  a  clearly 
easier  position  than  they  had  been  when  the  cash  rate  had  previously  been  lowered,  five 
                                                
2 
Indeed,  Rees  and  Kulish  (2015  RDP)  suggest  that  households  behaved  as  if  much  of  the  shock  was 
temporary. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  months earlier. So on that occasion the Board decided on a larger than normal reduction in 
the cash rate. 
The question that is relevant for the Reserve Bank Board at present is, first and foremost, 
whether the recent changes in mortgage rates result in an effective set of financial conditions 
that is “too tight” for the economy. 
In addressing that question, it’s worth noting that over the course of 2014 and 2015, effective 
rates on most loans tended to decline by more than the cash rate, reflecting both declining 
funding  costs  and  increased  competition  to  lend.  For  fixed  rate  mortgages  and  many 
business  loan  rates  the  fall  was  quite  marked.  The  average  rate  on  outstanding  business 
loans, for example, fell by over 90 basis points during a period in which the cash rate fell by 
50 basis points. Even for floating rate mortgages, rates had fallen a bit more than the cash 
rate. 
The actions of those banks that have lifted mortgage rates over recent weeks reverse a little 
under half of this year’s decline for floating rate mortgages for owner-occupiers and have no 
effect, at this stage, on the 15 per cent of loans with fixed rates. For investors in housing, 
these actions and those a month or two earlier reverse the effects of this year’s monetary 
policy  easing  but,  of  course,  this  was  the  lending  that  had  been  growing  most  quickly. 
Business loan rates have not risen. 
Measuring across the total loan book, the recent actions are the equivalent of roughly half of 
one 25 basis point monetary policy change. They take back perhaps a quarter of the extent 
of interest rate easing seen since the start of this year, and a smaller proportion of the total 
easing in lending costs seen over the past two years. For mortgages, this increase is from 
the  lowest  rates  that  any  current  borrower  will  have  ever  seen.  As  it  is,  there  are  still  a 
number of mortgage products with rates not much above 4 per cent, even a few advertising a 
“3” before the decimal point. 
We also note that a significant proportion of owner occupier households is ahead of schedule 
on  mortgage  repayments  –  in  large  part  because  these  households  did  not  lower  their 
payments as interest rates fell. Most of these households are unlikely to need to part with 
extra  cash  each  month  as  a  result  of  the  recent  interest  rate  changes.  (Equally,  many  of 
these households were probably not boosting spending as interest rates fell, instead allowing 
their loan principal to fall faster.) 
As  for  the  general  environment,  according  to  business  surveys  conditions  outside  mining 
have  been  slowly  improving,  not  deteriorating.  So  it  is  not  as  though  the  increases  in 
mortgage  rates  are  compounding  the  effects  of  a  serious  deterioration  in  economic 
conditions overall. 
Could the “shock” value of the rises in mortgage rates itself lead to a significant change in 
that trend, gentle as it is, of improvement? While such an outcome is perhaps conceivable, 
given the starting point and all the above considerations, it seems to me a bit of a leap to 
draw that conclusion. 
At  this  point,  then,  my  preliminary  assessment  is  that  the  macroeconomic  effect  of  these 
actions  in  themselves  may  not  be  large.  It  is  one  part  of  a  much  bigger  and  evolving 
landscape.  Nonetheless,  the  Reserve  Bank  Board  will  keep  this  matter,  and  that  broader 
landscape, under careful review. 
Let  me  be  clear  that  in  making  these  comments  I  am  not  offering  an  endorsement  of  the 
banks’  actions.  Nor  should  an  assumption  that  shareholder  returns  must  not  decline  as  a 
result of the effects of supervisory measures, or any other factor, simply be accepted without 
question.  The  “right”  rate  of  return  for  bank  shareholders  is,  as  others  have  observed,  an 
open question. It is not a constant of the universe. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  Returning then to the general theme of “where are we, six years on?”, my next observation is 
that many of the points that were being made at that time remain as relevant today as they 
were then. 
The  Australian  economy’s  exposure  to  China  has  increased,  as  was  understood  then.  So 
China’s  prospects  matter  more.  The  current  rate  of  growth  of  the  Chinese  economy  is 
uncertain,  as  is  its  future  growth  rate.  Chinese  policymakers  are  attempting  a  profound 
transition in the growth model while dealing with some legacy issues (such as a substantial 
debt build-up) arising from the previous model. It is likely that the marginal steel intensity of 
China’s  growth  will  be  lower  in  future  than  in  the  past.  Some  suggest  that  Chinese  steel 
consumption,  which  has  fallen  this  year,  may  continue  to  do  so.  At  the  same  time,  the 
marginal propensity of the Chinese people to consume services is rising noticeably. So the 
challenge for Australian resource producers to be the most efficient suppliers in a world of 
slower growth in demand for resources will co-exist with greater opportunities for other firms 
to offer value added in services. 
The  challenges  of  adjusting  the  responsiveness  of  our  economy  and  developing  its 
infrastructure, noted six years ago, are still relevant. To say this is not at all a suggestion that 
nothing  has  been  done  in  the  interim,  but  the  importance  of  productivity  performance  for 
growth  in  living  standards  has  become  progressively  clearer  as  the  terms  of  trade  have 
fallen.  The  effects  of  population  ageing,  moreover,  while  slow  moving,  are  now  occurring. 
There is perhaps more of an edge in the productivity discussion just lately, as there should 
be. 
On infrastructure, there are some encouraging developments and a degree of expectation is 
building. Without wanting to dampen the enthusiasm in any way, I simply repeat that the key 
issue is not funding. The key issues are: governance, appropriate risk sharing and pricing. 
The need for medium-term budget repair also remains. Here also progress has been made, 
and the budget deficit at present still compares favourably with what we see in many other 
countries. But my sense is that a fair bit of the necessary national conversation about how 
we pay for all the things we have voted for lies ahead. This doesn’t imply a need for radical 
immediate  action,  but  I  suspect  it  does  mean  an  unusually  long  period  of  tight  budget 
discipline on recurrent spending is likely to be required. 
Perhaps the main message is that the nature of the path to prosperity doesn’t seem much 
different  today  from  what  it  was  six  years  ago.  Macroeconomic  policies  can  provide  a 
measure  of  counter-cyclical  stabilisation,  but they  can’t  serve  as  a  magic  bullet  to  achieve 
sustained growth in living standards. And with the terms of trade-driven improvements now 
behind us – and at least partly reversing – productivity is the main game. 
Gains  in  productivity  come  in  part  from  improvements  to  the  way  we  do  the  things  we 
currently do, in part from stopping doing things we are not very good at and doing more of 
things we are good at. It’s understandable that this is often seen as a threatening notion and 
it  is  certainly  disruptive  when  adjustment  has  to  happen  in  a  short  period.  It  is  unrealistic, 
though, to think the pressure to adjust will simply go away. 
But equally importantly, gains will come from doing completely new things – the provision of 
new  products  to  meet  people’s  changing  desires  and  needs.  These  will  also,  in  time,  be 
sources of major employment opportunities. The answer to the question “where will the jobs 
come from?” is usually: from lots of places we haven’t thought of yet. 
Many of the jobs in the economy today are in activities that few predicted 25 years ago. Few 
would  have  foreseen  the  vast  growth  in  employment  in  a  range  of  industries  that  provide 
services  to  both  households  and  businesses.  For  example,  employment  associated  with 
computer system design and related services has quadrupled as a share of total employment 
over the past 25 years. Few would have anticipated the rapid rise in employment related to 
social  media,  cloud  computing  and  the  creation  of  apps  or  other  services  related  to 
environmental sustainability, to take just a few examples. It will also surely be the case in the 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  future  that  jobs  will  come  from  unexpected  places  and  new  occupations  will  continue  to 
emerge. 
The  questions  then  are  whether  Australian  businesses  and  their  workforces  have,  or  can 
acquire, the necessary capabilities to offer those services and perform those jobs; whether 
the  incentives  they  face  to  do  so  are  adequate;  whether  the  public  policy  framework 
appropriately encourages risk-taking and entrepreneurship; and so on. 
No doubt various aspects of “reform” are needed to ensure the answers to such questions 
are in the affirmative. As on other occasions when “reform” has been discussed of late, my 
suggestion  would  be  that  such  reforms  are  most  likely  to  succeed  –  that  is,  to  be 
implemented in a durable fashion – when the conversation is framed within a narrative about 
growth. Hopefully your deliberations today will contribute to that narrative. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
