Mario Draghi: Interview in Kathimerini 
Interview  with  Mr  Mario  Draghi,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  in  Kathimerini, 
conducted by Alexis Papahelas, published on 11 October 2015. 
 How soon can the capital controls be lifted in your view? 
The decision to impose capital controls, as well as the one to lift them, lies with the government 
of Greece. It is quite clear that its decision to put them in place was the result of a series of 
developments that saw the Greek banking system move into some very difficult terrain, with 
massive deposit outflows. Savers and depositors had lost their confidence in banks at that 
time. The bank holiday and the capital controls then decided upon by the Greek government 
were the only way to stabilise the banking system in the short run and, thus, to protect both 
depositors and borrowers. By the same token, the Greek government will decide to lift capital 
controls when it is convinced that confidence has returned. 
As you know, there has been a lot of heated debate in Greece because, at some point, 
the  government  accused  the  ECB  of  imposing  the  capital  controls  as  some  sort  of 
punishment for the policies it was implementing. What would be your response to that? 
We face varying criticisms in different countries. Some have said that we  were too lenient 
towards the Greek banking sector; others, that we were too harsh. One could say that this is 
the price we have to pay for our independence. But the truth is that the ECB is bound by the 
Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, which prohibits monetary financing. There 
was no special treatment in favour of ‒ or discrimination against ‒ Greece. We have always 
made  it  clear  that  emergency  liquidity  assistance  (ELA)  could  be  neither  unlimited  nor 
unconditional. It could only be given to solvent banks and against sufficient collateral. As the 
quality  of  the  collateral  posted  against  ELA  deteriorated  and  deposit  withdrawals  kept 
increasing, these limits became relevant. In this context, the capital controls were simply a 
measure taken by the Greek government in response to the huge deposit outflows caused by 
a lack of confidence. The focus now needs to be on the future and on normalising the situation 
in the best and quickest way possible. 
Let me ask you a question here, because we know that at some point there was a bit of 
tension between our prime minister and yourself, especially in that famous meeting in 
Brussels. Is there still some tension in the air? 
Let me be clear: the ECB is not driven by political considerations. It is the central bank of the 
19 countries of the euro area, including Greece. Furthermore, the ECB cannot breach Article 
123 of the Treaty, which prohibits monetary financing. May I also remind you that, at the time 
in question, the prospects for the Greek economy were quickly deteriorating. Since then, many 
things have taken a turn for the better in a very short period of time, and we have to give credit 
to the Greek prime minister, to the Greek government and really to the Greek people for that. 
As you know, we have an important challenge ahead of us, namely the recapitalisation 
of the banks. One thing remains unclear to us and that is whether this is tied to the 
completion of the review. 
The  Eurogroup  statement  of  14  August  is  clear  about  the  timeline  and  conditions  for  the 
recapitalisation of the banks. A first tranche of EUR 10 billion for possible bank recapitalisation 
and resolution needs has already been made available. A second tranche of up to an additional 
EUR 15 billion can be made available after the first review and no later than 15 November, 
subject  to  the  completion  of  the  planned  Asset  Quality  Review  and  stress  test  and  the 
implementation of the financial sector deliverables of the review. 
Are you optimistic that the private sector and private funding will be able to participate 
in the recapitalisation, given what still overshadows Greece? 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
1 
Private investors have participated in the last two recapitalisation rounds of the Greek banks. 
Whether this will also be the case in the upcoming exercise depends on the results of the 
comprehensive assessment and on the terms of the recapitalisation. We will soon have a better 
picture of banks’ capital needs and of how private sector participation can be accommodated 
in the recapitalisation process. Obviously, the participation of private sector agents would be 
desirable from the point of view of minimising the use of public funds here. Private investors 
will certainly be more willing to commit funds to the Greek banking sector if they can be assured 
of successful programme implementation. Rapid progress towards the conclusion of the first 
review  will  contribute  to  this  and  is  therefore  in  everyone’s  interest.  Consequently,  it  is 
important that the government does its part by implementing the measures required for the 
first review. Together with the other institutions, we are making every effort to support the 
government in these efforts and to ensure a timely conclusion of the first review. 
Greek  banks  currently  seem  to  be  operating  like  “zombies”.  Do  you  think  this  will 
change after the recapitalisation? 
The key aim of the recapitalisation is to enable these banks to function normally and to be in a 
position to support the economic recovery in Greece by providing credit and other financial 
services.  Robust  capital  and  liquidity  positions  are  necessary  conditions  for  achieving  this 
objective, which is why the process of bank recapitalisation and its smooth implementation are 
so important. Given that the upcoming recapitalisation will involve significant amounts of public 
money,  it  is critical  that banks  are  controlled  by highly  professional  boards  complying  with 
state-of-the-art  governance  standards.  This  will  also  ensure  that  the  state  funds  used  for 
recapitalising banks can be recouped via privatisation. Having said this, further measures are 
needed for banks to remain sustainable in the longer term. In particular, banks will have to 
intensify their efforts to resolve the high levels of bad or so-called non-performing loans and 
the relevant authorities will need to remove the remaining obstacles hampering progress in 
this area. Naturally, some other conditions are also important, for example, the lifting of capital 
controls and the country’s renewed access to international financial markets. We are talking 
about a series of positive steps, including structural reforms, which are required for Greece to 
resume a path of sustainable growth and higher employment. 
Is a bail-in of depositors completely off the table? 
The  ECB  insisted  that  a  bail-in  of  depositors  should  be  excluded,  as  it  deemed  any  such 
measure  to  be  counterproductive  for  the  economic  recovery  and  harmful  for  the  Greek 
economy. It  would  have  had  a  very  negative  impact  on the  private  sector. The  Eurogroup 
accepted our viewpoint. It is essential that the Greek authorities move ahead swiftly with the 
implementation of the agreed financial sector measures so that the recapitalisation exercise 
can still be finalised this year. Its completion will be an important step in the effort to restore 
depositor and market confidence in Greek banks. 
The prime minister, and also some ministers, have talked of trying to renegotiate part 
of the programme. Is there any scope for this or is this a move that could backfire? 
The  memorandum,  which  was  supported  by  the  Greek  parliament,  was  agreed  with  the 
authorities in August. I believe it is in the interest of everyone that the focus should now be on 
quickly implementing the measures that were jointly agreed, in line with the set timeline. In 
other words, the key pillars and objectives of the programme must not be put into doubt. It is 
thus significant that the Greek prime minister said to the parliament last week that he intends 
to implement the bail-out agreement with no delays and to conclude the review successfully. 
The Greek government should show that it has taken ownership of the various programme 
deliverables and is determined to achieve them. 
With the benefit of hindsight, how close were we to a “Grexit”? Is this scenario now off 
the table for good? 
You  know,  I  have  been  asked  this  question  so  many  times,  in  press  conferences,  in  the 
Eurogroup and in the European Council. My answer has invariably been that the ECB has 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
always acted on the assumption that the current members of the European Monetary Union 
will stay members, Greece being one of them. It is not for the ECB to decide which country 
can be a member of the euro area. The ECB has acted and will continue to act on that basis. 
Is it completely off the table though? 
As far as the ECB is concerned, it was never on the table. I think we have demonstrated that 
consistently in the past, no matter what others have said or were said to have been saying. 
Is debt relief important for Greece and, if so, when should it come? 
Well, I believe that two elements will be important in the coming months. The first is the one 
that  I  have  just  mentioned:  strong  ownership  of  the  programme  and  determination  in  its 
implementation. The second one is debt sustainability. We have expressed concerns about 
current debt sustainability. In our view, there will have to be an element of debt relief. However, 
debt relief would not be credible if it is not accompanied by the first element. It is crucial that 
the government, as well as the people, identify with the objectives of the programme, which 
are to bring back growth, fiscal and financial stability and social fairness to the Greek economy. 
For the government to present itself as being forced to do something by external powers would 
be self-defeating, as the people of Greece who are supposed to make some of the short-term 
sacrifices will then ask their government “Why?” ‒ “Why should we do this, if you yourself are 
not convinced?” Incidentally, this has been a long-standing challenge regarding programmes 
that  have  been  designed  and  negotiated  with  international  institutions.  So,  I  would  like  to 
reiterate that ownership is important. Ownership and compliance will give credibility to debt 
relief, especially given the economic developments of the last ten to 12 months. 
Wouldn’t it have made sense to have had this kind of debt relief at the beginning of the 
programme or when the primary surplus was achieved? 
There are two answers to this. First ‒ and I have been asked this question in respect of other 
programme countries that have faced similar situations in the past ‒ it is very difficult to look 
at a reality that existed four, five or six years ago with today’s eyes. At the time in question, 
circumstances were very different: for example, there was no crisis management framework, 
there was no banking union and the ECB shields were not in place. Second, until a year ago, 
the rate of growth of the Greek economy was such that debt sustainability was not completely 
out of the question. Since then, things have changed; some for the better and some for the 
worse – including the policy slippages and the resulting deterioration in the country’s economic 
outlook. 
How can Greece return to growth? Can we compare Greece with Ireland? 
Greece will return to a growth path if it undertakes all of the structural reforms that have been 
discussed. I think that is the key point. When we speak of structural reforms, we are referring 
to a change in the structure of the economy that will make it more  competitive. And more 
competitive does not necessarily mean just in terms of exports. It means that people who want 
to open up a new business should be free to do so, and without any problems. It means much 
greater competition in the product and services markets. It means perhaps a more flexible, 
more open and more competitive labour market. In a sense, that is the message from countries 
like Spain and Ireland. Both countries have shown that, with the right reforms, it is possible for 
the economy to bounce back rapidly. So the bottom line is: yes, it is doable. 
So, do you think that Greece could return to growth in 2016? 
Remember that, in 2014, growth was positive and that, in the first half of 2015, the Greek 
economy showed strong resilience to worsening business sentiment. This was partly a result 
of robust growth in the tourism sector and partly because of one-off factors. For 2015 as a 
whole, the outlook is less favourable and more uncertain. But I am quite confident that, if there 
is  strong  commitment  to  the  programme,  which  aims  at  ensuring  economic  growth,  fiscal 
sustainability and financial stability while safeguarding social fairness, there is a good chance 
that this could happen. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Some people think that this programme is not sustainable because there is an element 
of overtaxation of the private sector. Are you worried about that ‒ that people will not 
be able to pay their taxes again? 
Achieving  a  sustainable,  strong  recovery  requires  fiscal  sustainability,  in  a  growth-friendly 
manner.  This  should  come  through  reductions  in  unproductive  government  spending  and 
through shifting the tax burden away from labour to taxes which are less detrimental to growth, 
such as those on consumption or property. That is what both the theory and evidence suggest. 
Indeed,  the  fiscal  consolidation  strategy  foreseen  in  the  third  programme  relies  heavily  on 
measures which are less detrimental to growth, such as a reform of the country’s valued added 
tax  system  and  a  reduction  in  military  spending  and  subsidies.  An  important  issue  is  how 
Greece will cope with curbing tax evasion. In this regard, property taxes (if designed not to be 
regressive, for example, they exclude low-income housing) are more equitable, also because 
they are more difficult to evade. In contrast, taxes on labour should be reduced. This is where 
incentives should be allowed to play freely. In other words, people should be able to find jobs 
and entrepreneurs should be able to hire people. Well-designed taxes can actually support 
employment,  particularly  youth  employment.  This  would,  in  turn,  have  a  positive  effect  on 
confidence and therefore on consumption and investment. 
The Governor of the Bank of Greece has been the target of many political attacks in the 
last few months. Were you worried about the independence of the Bank of Greece at 
any point? 
Well,  we  have  had  similar  situations  in  other  parts  of  the  euro  area.  As  a  member  of  the 
Eurosystem,  the  Bank  of  Greece  must  be  independent  from  any  political  influence  and 
pressure, and its actions should not be guided by political considerations. In this regard, Yannis 
Stournaras  has  managed  to  protect  the  authority,  the  independence  and  the  status  of  his 
institution amid very challenging conditions. My  understanding is that there is now smooth 
cooperation between the Greek authorities and the Bank of Greece on several issues of mutual 
interest. 
Did you feel at any point that, as regards Greece, the political leaders handed you a hot 
potato? 
No. However, what the whole experience shows is that our Union is still imperfect and needs 
to become a “more perfect union”, to borrow a phrase from the constitutional tradition in the 
United States. A union where the central bank is called upon by certain politicians to decide 
on the membership of certain states cannot be right. The central bank should just do the work 
of a central bank, i.e. maintain price stability over the medium term, and should not be called 
upon to take such decisions. That is why we have to move towards greater political integration. 
Certainly, we have been criticised for making allegedly political decisions. Those on one side 
say that we should have cut ELA to the Greek banking sector much earlier – not only frozen, 
but cut it, and cut it to zero ‒ and those on the other side say that we should have extended 
ELA further, unconditionally, even if that would be a violation of the Treaty. All in all, given 
these extreme criticisms, I think we have acted in an independent and balanced way. 
Do you think any mistakes were made in terms of how Greece was handled during the 
last few years? 
Well, I can only speak for the ECB and, obviously, I am a biased observer. The very nature of 
any crisis is that you are working under intense pressure to come up with a solution. What I 
can say with confidence is that the ECB has always acted within its mandate and outside of 
politics. 
And what’s your main message for the Greek government right now? It is a very critical 
moment ‒ we have just had an election and the review lies ahead. 
My message is one of hope and determination. Greece has been through a very rough period 
in which the economic and living conditions of the Greek people have worsened considerably. 
The cost for the country, the economy and society alike, has been high. But recently, with 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
enormous determination, the Greek people and the Greek government have re-established 
political  and  economic  stability.  My  message  is:  build  on  this  and  do  not  let  a  sense  of 
desperation take over again. Fight to maintain the stability that you have rebuilt at great cost, 
and very soon you will see the benefits. That is the message I want to send and, frankly, the 
message that I would listen to, if I were in that situation. 
Let me ask you now about non-Greek issues. There is also discussion, as you know, 
about the debt crisis and at some point there was a real fear that it was going to hit 
Spain, Italy and France. Does that still worry you, or do you think that it is completely 
off the table and, if so, why? 
Over the past few years, several euro area countries have taken important steps to improve 
the sustainability of public finances and the resilience of their economies to adverse shocks. 
Market sentiment has normalised, also in response to the strong resolve shown by euro area 
governments to put the euro project on a more solid foundation. Looking ahead, however, it is 
important that, at the national level, countries continue to pursue sound economic and fiscal 
policies, and that, at the supranational level, integration continues to make progress. 
Are you satisfied with the results of quantitative easing (QE), or do you think that you 
overestimated its impact? 
We are satisfied with QE, as it has met and even surpassed our initial expectations. Both the 
financial markets and the banking sector are giving indications that QE is working. Actually, 
this  was  first  seen  in  the  financial  markets.  Interest  rates  at  all  maturities  went  down  to 
historically low levels. QE has had a favourable impact on the cost and availability of credit for 
firms and households. The volume of credit is now expanding, and what is interesting is that it 
is also expanding in the so-called stressed countries. The overall cost of lending by banks to 
the private sector has decreased by something like 80 basis points since we announced the 
measures,  and  by  much  more  for  the  “stressed  countries”.  The  spreads  between  large 
enterprises and small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) lending costs have also gone 
down, which is an important element. 
Finally, let me add that, in some of our regular surveys (e.g. the bank lending survey), banks’ 
responses indicate that lending is positive and that the macro risk and the lack of liquidity which 
were previously deterring lending are no longer a prime concern. Also, in other surveys, fewer 
and fewer SMEs report that credit has been a limiting factor for their business. The number 
has substantially diminished and now, for the first time since 2009, those SMEs that signal an 
improvement in the availability of bank loans outnumber those that see a deterioration, and by 
a wide margin. In most countries, we are currently seeing the return of growth and higher 
employment. This recovery is primarily led by consumption, supported by the lower oil prices 
and by our monetary policy. 
There seems to be a “theological debate” regarding austerity and a fear of inflation, as 
you know. What’s your position on this? 
If we look at any measure of inflation, we see that it takes quite an effort to raise inflation 
expectations and actual inflation to the levels that are consistent with our objective of “below, 
but close to 2%” in the medium term. In March, when we started purchasing assets at a pace 
of EUR 60 billion per month, we were forecasting that inflation would be back to 1.8% by 2017. 
Now, largely because of the lower oil prices, but also because the global growth outlook has 
weakened, these projections have been revised downwards to 1.7% by 2017. Therefore, it 
presently appears that it will take somewhat longer than previously anticipated for inflation to 
come back to, and stabilise around, levels that we consider sufficiently close to 2%. 
And, finally, let me ask you about the refugee crisis. In your opinion, what will be its 
impact on Europe? 
The human tragedy of this crisis demands that we all participate actively in responding to it. 
The sheer scale of what is happening will change Europe forever. Indifference or hostility to 
change are not options. Our elected leaders are already working on a common response. As 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
we have seen repeatedly over the financial crisis, agreement on major issues of significance 
can take time and patience, and is sometimes difficult to achieve in an acute situation. The 
generous  response  by  some  citizens  in  some  countries,  such  as  Germany,  could  be  an 
example  for  others.  As  Europeans,  we  should  ‒  and  I  think  we  will  ‒  be  able  to  find  the 
necessary resources to deal with this challenge together. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
