   Lesetja Kganyago: South Africa’s robust macroeconomic framework 
Address by Mr Lesetja Kganyago, Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at the New 
York Investment Conference, New York City, 5 October 2015. 
 South Africa has sailed a considerable distance over the past two decades. Perhaps the most 
critical macroeconomic markers over that distance were the efforts made in the late 1990s to 
establish fiscal credibility, the adoption of an inflation-targeting monetary framework, and the 
adjustment to a market-determined exchange rate. My good friend and colleague, the Minister 
of Finance, Nhlanhla Nene will address the first. 
All  three  of  these  fundamental  macroeconomic  policy  achievements  are  essential  to 
understanding  where  we  are  now.  And  they  are  critical  to  thinking  through  why  our  policy 
stance and institutions will continue to support the economy through the adjustment needed in 
the face of major global forces beyond our control. 
I would like to discuss the latter two achievements – monetary policy and currency flexibility – 
for these are central to the remit of the South African Reserve Bank but also because they are 
essential to keeping our particular ship afloat in present times. 
For South Africa, the policy adjustment in response to the Asian, Argentinian and Russian 
crises of 1998–2001 marked a clear break from the past. We effectively gave up on the idea 
that a good way to support the economy was to closely manage the currency in an effort to hit 
multiple goals. Perhaps the most difficult part of this shift in thinking was the recognition that 
efforts to manage the currency really did impose major costs on the domestic economy. It was 
the acceptance of the Mundell trinity in the context of an ever more volatile global financial 
environment and awareness of massive built-up liabilities. 
The outcome of this new thinking was the construction of a system which is sensitive to the 
dangers while welcoming the opportunities of global capital mobility. I believe they make us 
more resilient in the face of shocks, dramatically lowering the chances of a crisis. Moreover, 
they complement the diversity of the South African economy; currency adjustment in response 
to bad weather facilitates the moderation of imbalances in a way that encourages economic 
growth. It is not the growth we saw prior to the crisis – pumped up by high commodity prices, 
too rapid credit extension and excessive consumption. It is more patient growth, harder won, 
built on productivity growth and a greater focus on non-traditional (commodity) exports. And 
while a range of other emerging markets has adopted similar approaches to these common 
problems, the quality and credibility of our approach sets us apart. 
In the wake of the Asian crisis 
In developing robust macroeconomic structures, the crucial adaptation for South Africa was 
the  shift  to  floating  exchange  rates.  When  we  embarked  on  the  era  of  policy  reform  and 
economic renewal in the 1990s, you could argue that the choices were difficult. You couldn’t 
fix exchange rates, but unfixing them could be disastrous. As Paul Krugman wrote at the time, 
and I quote: 
Nobody who looks at the terrible experiences of Mexico in 1995 or Thailand in 1997 
can remain a cheerful advocate of exchange-rate flexibility. It seems that there is 
a double standard on these things: when a Western country lets its currency drop, 
the  market  in  effect  says  “Good,  that’s  over”  and  money  flows  in.  But  when  a 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   Mexico or a Thailand does the same, the market in effect says “Oh my God, they 
have no credibility” and launches a massive speculative attack.1 
One of the accomplishments of emerging-market macroeconomic policy after 1998 has been 
burying that double standard. Emerging markets can build their own credibility, and this was 
best seen by the steady rise in capital flows into these countries through the 2000s and the 
expansion of investment analyst capacity to understand them better. 
For South Africa, the period of integration with the world economy in the 1990s coincided with 
a steady fall in the price of major commodity exports. The rand was overvalued and needed to 
adjust  downwards.  It  trended  steadily  weaker  over  the  following  decade,  with  periods  of 
overshooting in 1996 and 1998. The South African Reserve Bank attempted to support the 
currency and failed. In the process, a large net open forward position in US dollars was created. 
This  liability  carried  the  potential  for  severe  economic  outcomes  in  the  event  of  ongoing 
depreciation and meant that it had to go, but preferably as part of a new monetary framework. 
Inflation targeting, with its clearer policy anchor, implied dismantling the system of currency 
support and giving up on managing the exchange rate at all. 
The initial test of the new framework was the sharp fall in the rand in 2001, in which intervention 
was  avoided.  The  currency  reached  what  remains  an  all-time  low,  in  real  terms,  but  then 
rebounded. Critical to this was the recognition that the rand’s fall was part of a Dornbusch 
overshooting dynamic and that forecasts for inflation showed it moderating in the wake of the 
depreciation. This built credibility of the new monetary policy framework. 
Over the following decade, the rand shifted its trajectory away from trend depreciation. Capital 
flows into South Africa, which had been quite weak and uneven through the 1990s, became 
much  stronger  and  steadier.  Large  capital  flows  meant  large  current-account  deficits,  of 
course, but these were appropriate for a country with investment needs in excess of domestic 
savings. 
The boom of the 2000s era came to an end with the global crash of 2009. The rand depreciated 
dramatically but then, over the next two years, recovered strongly. It was helped by stimulus 
in  China,  which  boosted  commodity  prices,  as well  as  by quantitative  easing  in the  United 
States, which encouraged capital flows into emerging markets. These forces, however, could 
not be permanent. Our terms of trade peaked in 2011 and have since fallen by 8 per cent. 
Meanwhile, world monetary conditions began to tighten, starting with the “taper tantrum” of 
May 2013. In line with these developments, the rand followed a downward trend for about four 
years. As before, our policy was not to intervene. 
Maintaining a flexible exchange rate provides the economy with a number of benefits. One is 
the insulation from price shocks. In South Africa, as with many commodity exporters, terms of 
trade  have  deteriorated.  But  the  impact  is  cushioned  because  production  costs  are 
denominated in rands whereas export prices are denominated in dollars. Our dollar-price index 
for South Africa’s commodities is down 41,0 per cent since 2011. The rand-price index has 
actually increased slightly, by 4,8 per cent. 
And the advantages are not limited to commodities. Rand depreciation makes the tradeables 
sector more competitive, creating the right import and export incentives – which are especially 
important in the context of substantial current-account deficits. In the context of a struggling 
global economy, it is not very surprising that our own current-account adjustment has been 
slow, but we do expect it to be better than previously elevated levels. 
A flexible exchange rate also insulates the economy from some shocks. If you don’t need to 
target  a  fast-moving  variable  like  an  exchange  rate,  then  policy  doesn’t  need  to  react  and 
transmit the shocks that hit the currency on to the real, domestic economy. As an illustration, 
                                                
1   Paul Krugman, Latin America’s swan song (http://web.mit.edu/krugman/www/swansong.html). 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   let me remind you that the rand has depreciated by 16 per cent against the dollar so far this 
year. We have raised our policy rate by 100 basis points over an 18-month period. In 1998, 
before the adoption of inflation targeting, the rand also depreciated by 16 per cent and we 
hiked  rates  by  690  basis  points  in  a  period  of  six  months.  Lower  pass-through  from  the 
depreciation to inflation has also helped to moderate potential policy responses. 
Of course, floating exchange rates are dangerous if domestic borrowers have run up large, 
unhedged foreign-currency debts. Where this is the case, the monetary authority may end up 
facing only bad choices. One is to use foreign currency to prop up the domestic currency to 
protect the economy, but this has clear limits and typically fails. The alternative is to step back 
and let sectors of the economy adjust on their own to the new currency level, implying much 
higher financing costs. The clear differentiator for South Africa against many other emerging 
markets is that this particular policy dilemma doesn’t feature in our decision-making process. 
Renouncing the “forward book” and allowing the “fear of floating” to wear off over time has 
limited  the  extent  of  foreign-currency  borrowing,  encouraging  the  development  of  our  own 
capital markets and reducing a major risk for non-resident investors in rand assets.2 
When a country adopts a floating exchange rate, the reasons for holding foreign reserves also 
change. The goal is no longer managing the value of the currency. Instead, reserves serve to 
bolster the national balance sheet, reassuring investors that the country has access to safe, 
liquid resources even in extreme situations. The use of reserves is therefore very different. The 
reserves provide insurance, a guarantee that markets will be able to price exchange rates. The 
fact that emerging markets have accumulated many more substantial reserves than they held, 
for instance, in the 1990s or early 2000s, suggests that markets will be able to function in more 
orderly ways, and that large, long-term investors will feel comfortable trading in those markets. 
Monetary policy 
The exchange-rate policy fits within the broader policy of inflation targeting. Inflation targeting 
provided us with a policy goal more realistic than the previous eclectic approach to policy, 
because we could hit it. That goal was also more meaningful for citizens, because we could 
focus on protecting the buying power of regular consumers in domestic markets – as opposed 
to, say, trying to hold down the costs of holidays in New York. These approaches to policy 
have served us and others well for more than a decade. But just because we replaced a bad 
policy with another that returned better results doesn’t mean that monetary policymaking has 
become  easy  or  obvious.  This  is  a  challenging  period.  It  is  worth  discussing  our  policy 
response. 
The  most  straightforward  decisions  for  an  inflation-targeting  central  bank  are  those  when 
inflationary pressures are coming from the demand side. In these circumstances, monetary 
policy  acts  to  hold growth  closer to  its  potential level. The  primary  mechanism  is  clear:  by 
raising the costs of borrowing and rewarding saving (which is deferred consumption), central 
banks moderate the level of economic activity, returning it to a non-inflationary level. 
However, South Africa has rarely enjoyed such straightforward conditions. Instead, inflationary 
pressures from the supply side have dominated. The standard accusation levelled at inflation-
targeting monetary policy which responds to these shocks is that it is procyclical and therefore 
wrong. 
But  I  think  that  this  charge  misses  the  subtlety  of  the  inflation-targeting  response,  with  its 
emphasis on flexibility and the primacy of second-round effects. Take the current period as an 
illustration. 
                                                
2   Guillermo  Calvo  and  Carmen  Reinhart,  Fear  of  floating  (http://www.nber.org/papers/w7993.pdf),  November 
2000. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   inflation,  particularly 
the  currently  observed 
In recent years, emerging markets have been buffeted by two kinds of shocks. The first was 
falling commodity prices, caused in particular, if not exclusively, by slowing and shifting growth 
patterns  in  the  Chinese  economy.  The  second  was  portfolio  shifts,  occasioned  mainly  by 
changes  in  US  monetary  policy.  Both  of  these  shocks  have  caused  emerging-market 
currencies  to  depreciate.  In  South  Africa,  that  depreciation  has  been  marked.  Since  2011, 
when our terms of trade peaked, the rand has fallen against the dollar and on a trade-weighted 
basis. This has been a persistent source of inflationary pressure in the South African economy. 
Literature emphasises the importance of the origin of a shock. A terms-of-trade shock is likely 
to reduce net exports and thus aggregate demand. This lowers the output gap – offsetting the 
depreciation with some disinflation. By contrast, a sustained portfolio shock has little effect on 
aggregate demand and provides no offset to the inflationary consequences of the currency’s 
fall.3 
Central banks are supposed to respond to currency depreciations caused by portfolio shocks 
but not necessarily terms-of-trade shocks. However, as the Governor of the Central Bank of 
Chile,  Rodrigo  Vergara, recently  reminded  us,  output gaps  do  not  appear  to  explain  much 
about 
in  emerging  markets.4  Currency 
depreciation, by contrast, is a clearer source of inflationary pressure. 
So what are emerging-market central banks to do? 
Our  answer  is  to  go  after  the  so-called  second-round  effects,  ensuring  that  inflation 
corresponds to the target over the medium term. First-round effects, either directly through the 
higher cost of imported goods or indirectly through those costs feeding into other goods and 
services, are relatively hard to control. Under flexible inflation targeting, we have some leeway 
to look through these shocks. But when wages and inflation expectations shift away from the 
inflation target, we are required to act. We are also inclined to do so pre-emptively, before 
expectations  stray  from  the  target,  potentially  requiring  greater  efforts  to  be  shifted  back 
downwards. 
Our tools for addressing these forces are our communications strategy and the policy rate. 
These instruments affect inflation in several ways. By convincing price and wage setters of our 
commitment to the target, we prevent them from assuming higher levels of inflation in the future 
and  from  creating  a  self-fulfilling  prophecy.  Higher  rates  which  lower  the  output  gap  put 
downward pressure on inflation. It is also possible that higher rates will appreciate the currency, 
although, as I have said, this is not a policy goal. 
The extent of any policy response is proportional to the challenge. In South Africa, we have 
adjusted the repo rate by a cumulative 100 basis points since January 2014. In real terms, it 
remains close to zero, as it has since the crisis – a very low level from a historical perspective, 
and also quite accommodative relative to other countries. The adjustment has been smooth, 
without large increases or abrupt changes of direction. During this period, headline inflation 
has made temporary departures from the target range, but core has remained within the target 
range. Longer-term inflation expectations have stayed close to the top of the target, and we 
watch them very closely for signs of breaking away. If longer-term expectations were clustered 
at  the  midpoint  of  the  target  range,  we  could  look  beyond  near-term  volatility.  But  a  small 
margin of safety has made this more difficult. 
                                                
3   Christopher  Ragan,  “The  exchange  rate  and  Canadian  inflation  targeting”,  Bank  of  Canada  Working 
(http://people.mcgill.ca/files/christopher.ragan/ER-FinalBankofCanadaWP.pdf),  November 
Paper  2005–34 
2005. 
4   Rodrigo Vergara, Inflation dynamics in LATAM: a comparison with global trends and implications for monetary 
(https://www.kansascityfed.org/~/media/files/publicat/sympos/2015/econsymposium-vergara-
policy 
remarks.pdf?la=en), August 2015. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   We expect our gradual tightening cycle to accomplish our primary mandate: controlling inflation 
as defined by our inflation target while showing due concern for growth. 
Debt dynamics 
Minister Nene has already spoken about the fiscal aspects of macroeconomic policy. I now 
turn to aggregate debt dynamics and in particular private-sector debt. 
In the years before the Great Recession, South Africa’s debt-to-GDP ratio declined markedly 
due to robust growth and booming revenue collection. Yet, despite the space created for fiscal 
stimulus and accommodative macroeconomic policy settings – and very high commodity prices 
– growth persistently disappointed, and has slowed steadily since 2011. 
As the Bank for International Settlements and other observers have argued, emerging-market 
debt is a worrying fault line in the world economy.5 This is partly the old foreign-currency story, 
in  which  a  stronger  dollar  and  tighter  monetary  policy  in  the  US  render  debt  burdens 
unsustainable. It is also a debt-accumulation story, in which growth is accomplished through 
greater  leverage.  The  concern  is  that,  as  the  boom  ends,  it  will  become  obvious  that 
productivity growth has been stagnant and the returns on investment will be too low to service 
the debt incurred – widespread attempts to deleverage will then further weaken aggregate 
demand, setting off a vicious cycle. This dynamic can be exacerbated by the coincident slump 
in commodity prices. In the press, this scenario – of financial and commodity cycles moving in 
opposite directions simultaneously – is typically introduced with Warren Buffett’s axiom that 
you only discover who’s been swimming naked when the tide goes out. 
I am happy to tell you that South Africa is wearing a swimming suit. In fact, the peak of our 
financial cycle came before the Great Recession. This is something we have in common with 
advanced  economies  –  although  our  overall  debt  levels  are  closer  to  emerging-market 
averages. Since the crisis, private-sector borrowing appetites have been broadly muted. 
Households have deleveraged gradually, reducing debt relative to incomes. When it comes to 
firms, as the International Monetary Fund has recently noted, South Africa is one of a few 
emerging markets where corporate debt stocks have declined since 2007.6 One lesson from 
this is that South Africa does not have a burgeoning private-sector debt problem which could 
soon be revealed as an important vulnerability. Another lesson is that episodes of rapid debt 
accumulation, even when they do not end in crisis, commonly give way to extended periods of 
weak growth. From a private-sector perspective, this is not a useful depiction of South African 
conditions, even if it is accurate for other emerging markets. 
In short, there is little impeding corporate borrowing from a balance-sheet view in the South 
African  economy,  and  households  have  made  decent  progress  in  reducing  their  own  debt 
levels. This is likely to continue in a moderate way over the next year. 
In the short run, there is a strong case for countries with macroeconomic space to use it in a 
countercyclical way, restoring growth. Many emerging markets have done this. Unfortunately, 
growth in emerging markets has also been slowing for five years, ever since the post-crisis 
rebound in 2011. 
Permanent stimulus is not countercyclical. One of my greatest concerns is that we let the fear 
of  slow  growth  scare  us  into  a  deeply  uncomfortable  macroeconomic  position  in  which 
monetary policy accepts stagflation. 
                                                
5   See, 
the 
instance, 
for 
(http://www.bis.org/publ/qtrpdf/r_qt1412.pdf), December 2014, pp. 20–21. 
International Monetary Fund, World Economic Outlook, “Chapter 3: corporate leverage in emerging markets: a 
concern?” (http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/gfsr/2015/02/pdf/c3.pdf), September 2015. 
6  
Bank 
for 
International 
Settlements 
quarterly 
review 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
   In South Africa, our inflation target is 3–6 per cent. We do not want to let that become a policy 
of 6 per cent plus whatever shocks appear. Inflation higher than that of our trading partners 
affects  our  competitiveness.  It  erodes  incomes,  especially  those  of  the  more  vulnerable 
members of society. Over the medium term, extra inflation does nothing for growth.7 These are 
important lessons, too easily overlooked when the focus is on the latest data and the short run. 
Concluding thoughts 
In the past, emerging-market crises tended to centre on currency crises. Prominent examples 
include the Tequila Crisis of 1994, when Mexico devalued the peso, and the Asian crisis of 
1997/98. Given these experiences, it is not difficult to imagine the Fed tightening, generating 
further volatility and creating expectations of more emerging-market crises.8 
But emerging markets are in better shape than they used to be, in particular because they 
have flexible exchange rates. South Africa, perhaps more than other emerging markets, has 
developed a robust track record of enabling the currency to carry the brunt of the adjustment 
to global volatility. Importantly, the low level of foreign-currency liabilities helps to reduce the 
risk of a sudden sharp crisis and cannot act as a complicating factor in policy decisions. 
Currency adjustment helps the market to find its balance again but also, importantly, works in 
the direction of the unwinding of macroeconomic imbalances. In other words, in the current 
conditions  of  weakening  commodity  prices,  currency  adjustment  works  in  line  with 
fundamentals. This helps the real economy to find its own balance and rebound. Relative to 
other emerging economies, let alone the developed markets, our private and public debt levels 
remain low, a clear advantage as the global economic recovery strengthens further in coming 
years. 
In South Africa, our task is to maintain our robust macroeconomic architecture, work through 
the structural reforms necessary for raising potential growth, and ensure that we remain at the 
forefront of emerging markets. Our macroeconomic policy framework remains sensitive to the 
challenges of global policy normalisation and flexible enough to take advantage of the few 
opportunities underlying the difficult global conditions of our times. 
Thank you. 
                                                
7   As 
discussed 
in 
go? 
(http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/2015/840.aspx), 18 September 2015; see also 
Robert Shiller, Why do people dislike inflation? (http://www.nber.org/chapters/c8881.pdf), 1997. 
Haldane, 
Andrew 
How 
you 
can 
low 
8   See, for instance, Nelson D. Schwartz, “Watching the Fed, and remembering the Tequila Crisis”, New York 
Times  (http://www.nytimes.com/2015/09/19/business/economy/if-rates-rise-global-markets-fear-effects-of-any-
aftershocks.html?_r=0), 18 September 2015. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
