   Sabine Lautenschläger: Highlights of European Statistics by the ESCB – 
present and future 
Speech  by  Ms  Sabine  Lautenschläger,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  European 
Central  Bank,  at  the  ECB  conference  held  for  World  Statistics  Day  2015  under  the  theme 
“Better data. Better lives”, Frankfurt am Main, 20 October 2015. 
 Introduction 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
It is a great pleasure to welcome you on behalf of the Executive Board of the ECB and also 
personally to our conference to honour the second World Statistics Day. I am very flattered to 
see that the conference has attracted distinguished participants from all parts of the world. 
Welcome and be assured that your effort to come here today has not been in vain because 
from what I understand you have a very interesting day lined up ahead of you. 
Back in 2010, the United Nations General Assembly designated 20 October 2010 as the first 
World  Statistics  Day,  to  which  the  ECB  already  contributed.  More  recently,  the  General 
Assembly has decided to celebrate the second World Statistics Day on 20 October 2015. We 
are excited to be hosting the second World Statistics Day with its theme of “Better data. Better 
lives”. 
Today’s  conference  takes  stock  of  the  economic  and  financial  statistics  produced  by  the 
European System of Central Banks (ESCB), composed of the ECB and the national central 
banks of the European Union member states. Throughout the conference you will be able to 
get an idea of the richness of our statistics and to learn more about the recent enhancements 
made to our statistical basis in response to new demands that resulted from the financial crisis. 
You will not only receive examples of the wide range of statistics the ESCB produces to support 
all central banking functions, in particular monetary and macro-prudential policies, but also 
about the links between the micro and macro dimensions of statistics. In addition, there will be 
a session about the efforts in disseminating these statistics to the general public. Particular 
thanks go to our colleagues from the national central banks for their contributions to today’s 
conference. Without their invaluable contributions we would clearly not be where we are today 
in terms of scope, breadth and frequency of the statistics available to the whole ESCB, the 
markets and the public at large. 
We are also honoured that the conference is addressed by Mr Min Zhu, Deputy Managing 
Director  of  the  International  Monetary  Fund,  and  Mr  Stefan  Schweinfest,  Director  of  the 
Statistics Division of the United Nations, via video link later today. 
Importance of statistics for evidence-based policy making 
But let me begin by putting the theme of our 2015 World Statistics Day “Better data. Better 
lives”  into  context.  Official  statistics  help  decision-makers,  since  improved  data  sources, 
sound statistical methods, new technologies and strengthened statistical systems enable more 
informed and thus better decisions to be made, which should eventually result in better lives 
for all of us. 
How does this general theme “Better data. Better lives” apply to ESCB statistics? 
The importance of having good statistics to support the conduct of monetary policy in the euro 
area has been acknowledged from the start. The first President of the European Monetary 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   Institute, Baron Alexandre Lamfalussy, rightly stated: “Nothing is more important for monetary 
policy than good statistics.”1 
Baron Lamfalussy also recognised that the crucial importance of statistics is not limited to them 
providing a basis for decision-making, but extends to communications with market players, 
economic institutions and the general public; in his words: “When monetary policy measures 
cannot be justified and explained through statistical data, the measures will not be understood, 
and the executing institutions will lose credibility.” 
And credibility, as we all know, is one of the most treasured assets of a central bank. 
The ECB as a user of statistics 
At  the  ECB,  the  use  of  statistics  for  our  analysis  and  communication  is  pervasive.  The 
introductory statements of the ECB President at the press conferences following Governing 
Council meetings or the ECB Economic Bulletin are cases in point and reflect how extensively 
we rely on statistics. 
Our “quantitative definition” of price stability is based on the Harmonised Index of Consumer 
Prices  (HICP) for the  euro  area. Our  “economic analysis”  is  supported  by  a  wide  range of 
economic and financial statistics, for example, national accounts’ main aggregates, balance of 
payments  statistics,  government  finance  statistics,  short-term  business  and  labour  market 
indicators, effective exchange rates, financial market statistics and the financial balance sheets 
by  sector. The  “monetary  analysis” focuses  on money  and  liquidity  considerations  and the 
statistics supporting it include, for example, the detailed consolidated balance sheet of the euro 
area banks, in particular the monetary aggregates and counterparts, the balance sheet of euro 
area investment funds, securities issues statistics and the financial balance sheets of the non-
financial  sectors.  Many  of  these  European  statistics  are  compiled  by  the  ECB  in  close 
cooperation with the national central banks. They are published for the benefit of the financial 
markets and the public at large. 
Moreover, the ECB closely monitors macroeconomic and institutional developments that pose 
potential risks to financial stability. The ECB relies on macro-prudential indicators, for example 
with respect to profitability, asset quality and capital adequacy data of the banking sector, and 
on credit developments and competitive conditions for the financial corporations sector. 
Finally, as a banking supervisor, I can assure you that supervisors rely on data for all aspects 
of their daily work. Equipped with accurate supervisory data, they create risk profiles, analyse 
banks’ liquidity and, ultimately, assess banks’ risk management via benchmarking. 
The ESCB as a producer of statistics 
Do I need to convince you at this stage of the importance that the ECB attaches to sound, 
informative and rich statistics? Not anymore, I hope! I can assure you that without the statistics 
that I have just mentioned, we would not be able to take any informed decision in any of our 
main functions. 
The ECB, or better, the ESCB, is not only a heavy consumer of statistics but also a producer 
of statistics. Official European economic and financial statistics are produced in the European 
Union by two separate pillars that work in close cooperation. One pillar is the ESCB, a system 
enshrined in the Treaty. The other is the European Statistical System, a partnership comprising 
the  European  Commission  (Eurostat),  national  statistical  institutes  and  other  national 
                                                
1  Alexandre  Lamfalussy  in  the  foreword  of  the  publication  “Statistical  Needs  of  the  Monetary  Union”  (1996  – 
European Monetary Institute). 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   authorities that  produce statistics  at the  national  level.  The  two  pillars  have  separate  legal 
frameworks and governance structures but nevertheless cooperate closely. 
According to its statute, the ECB, assisted by the national central banks, collects the statistics 
necessary to undertake the ESCB’s tasks. The national central banks collect data not only 
from banks but from all financial corporations. They also collect statistical information from 
other reporting agents and sources in their respective countries, e.g. for balance of payments 
statistics. To secure the quality of ESCB statistics, national central banks and the ECB conduct 
quality  assurance  processes  in  conformity  with  the  statistical  principles  of  impartiality, 
objectivity,  professional 
independence,  cost-effectiveness,  statistical  confidentiality, 
minimisation of the reporting burden and high output reliability. These statistical principles are 
reflected in the ESCB’s public commitment on European statistics. 
The European Statistical System produces other European statistics, such as the Harmonised 
Index of Consumer Prices (HICP) or gross domestic product, population and social conditions 
statistics,  regional  statistics,  agricultural  and  fishery  statistics,  environmental  statistics, 
industry,  transport  and  energy  statistics,  all  of  which  are  necessary  to  support  the  various 
policies of the European Union. 
Any successful cooperation in the area of European economic and financial statistics therefore 
encompasses  the  national  central  banks  and  the  national  statistical  institutes.  Such 
cooperation has been successfully pursued for more than two decades in the Committee on 
Monetary,  Financial  and  Balance  of  Payments  Statistics  (CMFB),  which  has  delivered 
remarkable results and built up its reputation. The CMFB’s achievements include the euro area 
accounts by sector, the work on pension schemes, revision policies and seasonal and working 
day adjustments. Moreover, the advice of the CMFB to Eurostat on complex statistical issues 
related  to  the  Excessive  Deficit  Procedure  has  received  a  lot  of  attention  in  the  past  two 
decades. 
This close cooperation between the ESCB and the European Statistical System is at the heart 
of the leading role that European statistics play in international statistical initiatives, such as 
the G20 Data Gaps Initiative and the IMF Special Data Dissemination Standard Plus initiative, 
in which seven out of the first eight adherents were EU Member States. 
New demands emerging from the crisis 
While the development of European economic and financial statistics by the ESCB was already 
impressive  before  the  financial  crisis  occurred,  the  ECB’s  functions  have  been  expanded 
during the crisis and this has led to new challenges and a remarkable development of ESCB 
statistics. 
More specifically, ESCB statistics had to respond to three main challenges: (i) From 2008, 
the monetary policy of the euro area had to be conducted during turbulent times and new data 
needs emerged for monitoring often unconventional policy measures and mitigating systemic 
risks. (ii) In addition to its primary function of maintaining price stability, the ECB had to focus 
more on financial stability and it received a mandate to support the statistical needs of the 
European Systemic Risk Board (ESRB). (iii) Finally, the ECB became responsible for banking 
supervision on 4 November 2014 and, as a result, the statistics departments of the central 
banks have yet another partner to serve. 
One of the most important challenges arising from the financial crisis has been the dramatic 
increase in the need for very timely, granular data. Starting with the crisis, aggregated data 
became less representative on their own and did not suffice to reveal the whole story. The 
same aggregated statistics can be the result of different underlying situations and the risks of 
having only truncated information sets available for decision-making are huge, as the case of 
Lehman Brothers showed us. Hence, ever since the crisis set in, national data or data at a 
more granular level have received increased attention compared with euro area aggregates. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   The response of the ESCB statistical function 
So, how did the ESCB statistical function address these challenges? The response has been 
organised through the following five lines of action, as my colleagues will explain to you in 
more detail later today: 
Firstly, since the beginning of the crisis the ESCB has enriched several datasets in order to 
close the most urgent gaps within monetary and financial statistics. Here, I refer to statistics 
on MFI balance sheet items, bank interest rates, investment funds, insurance corporations, 
loan  securitisation  by  banks  and  the  activities  of  securitisation  vehicles  as  well  as  the 
forthcoming money market statistical reporting. 
Secondly, the ESCB has since 2009 been preparing the compilation of balance of payments 
statistics and sector accounts including financial accounts in line with the latest international 
statistical standards and has also been publishing the results since the fourth quarter of 2014. 
Thirdly, the ECB has been collecting, in addition to security-by-security data on issuances, 
information on holdings in recent years. Securities holdings represent a field where exposures 
are  often  concentrated  and  a  lack  of  sufficiently  comprehensive,  consistent  and  granular 
information has been identified. The aim of developing a detailed dataset on securities holdings 
is to combine large concentrated holdings in the euro area with information on the individual 
issuers across the world, as contained in the Centralised Securities Database. 
Fourthly, the efforts that have been made to collect more granular data from banks and other 
agents take into account the reporting burden. The idea is that granular data are stepwise only 
reported once and are used for several purposes. The reporting burden on the reporting agents 
is  thereby  reduced,  saving  resources  and  costs.  Timely  granular  data  are  also  key  to 
addressing in a smooth and effective manner ever-changing user needs, and also to reducing 
the need for costly ad hoc data requests. In any case, all data collections by the ESCB are 
subject to a prior, strict merits-and-costs procedure in order to minimise the reporting burden, 
subject to statistical needs. 
Fifthly, innovative data dissemination tools have recently been developed to make the ESCB 
statistics available through multiple and user-friendly channels. 
Looking forward 
Over  the  coming  years,  priority  will  continue  to  be  given  to  enhancing  the  completeness, 
geographical  coverage,  quality  and  timeliness  of  European  statistics  by  the  ESCB  and  to 
reconcile and – potentially – even integrate the statistical information collected for monetary 
policy and financial stability purposes with what was until now the rather separate world of 
supervisory information. Further granular data on securities statistics, issues and holdings are 
prominent examples. Similarly, granular data on credit claims are needed. 
The Analytical Credit Dataset (AnaCredit) is an example of an endeavour where the experience 
gained in the wake of the recent financial crisis is helping. The future datasets will serve many 
different  central  banking  purposes  –  monetary  policy  conduct  and  operation,  research, 
financial  stability  and  macro–prudential  policy  or  risk management. While  AnaCredit’s  data 
content  may  also  support  supervisory  functions,  the  initiative  was  launched  prior  to  the 
establishment of the Single Supervisory Mechanism in 2011 and further work has started on 
addressing more specific supervisory data needs, and the related appropriate legal basis. For 
now, however, this project does not include any specific supervisory requirements. These will 
only be added at a later stage, and only if endorsed by the ECB’s decision-making bodies and 
after close consultations with the main stakeholders. 
AnaCredit  will  make  it  possible  to  carry  out  analysis  which  cannot  be  carried  out  with  the 
aggregate statistics currently available. To give you some examples on the expected use, 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
        it will provide detailed quantitative information on firms’ access to credit as well as 
credit supply constraints, especially for SMEs (current information is qualitative, only 
available via surveys); 
more  comparable  information  across  countries  will  become  available  on  the 
breakdown of the lending granted by credit institutions by sector of economic activity, 
size of firms, geographic allocation, type of instrument, maturity, etc.; 
a more accurate analysis of credit risks, and their potential build-up into systemic risks 
in the financial sector, will be released on financial institutions’ exposures to various 
economic segments or (cross-border) counterparties; 
the calibration of macro-prudential policies – based on, e.g., counter-cyclical capital 
buffers – may also greatly benefit from AnaCredit; 
similarly,  aggregating  all  exposures  of  banks  to a given  borrower,  which  are  often 
located  in  different  jurisdictions,  will  provide  a  meaningful  picture  of  the  debt 
sustainability of this borrower and, hence, of risks borne by its creditors. 
Given the complexity arising from the granularity and the expected large volumes, the search 
for  the  right  balance  between  data  needs  and  reporting  burden  is  particularly  challenging. 
Therefore, the project will be implemented step-by-step, to allow a smooth implementation for 
both  participating  central  banks  and  reporting  agents.  The  first  stage  of  AnaCredit  will  be 
dedicated  to  granular  information  on  loans  granted  by  credit  institutions  to  non-financial 
corporations  and  other  legal  entities,  only.  Loans  to  natural  persons  (housing  loans  to 
households and loans to “sole proprietors”, e.g. doctors or lawyers) are to be included at a 
later stage, which is likely to be beyond 2020, the launch of which still needs to be decided 
upon by the Governing Council. 
In any case, data confidentiality protection will be fully ensured, in accordance with applicable 
national and European legal frameworks. 
The ECB is well aware that collecting more detailed data to close information gaps requires 
significant efforts by all parties involved. It is the key statistical trade-off we are faced with: the 
one existing between statistical information and reporting burden. We fully understand that 
banks are in the business of banking and not statistical reporting. However, given their key role 
within the monetary and financial system, banks have to provide relevant information and they 
will greatly benefit from good monetary and other policies as well as information returns. 
Concluding remarks 
Ladies and gentlemen, allow me to conclude. 
Credible statistics lie at the heart of the ECB’s policy-making. My intention today has been to 
provide you with highlights on the richness of the statistics produced by the ESCB and on the 
effort  that  statisticians  at  the  ESCB  have  put  in  when  responding  to  the  new  demands  of 
monetary, macro-prudential and now also micro-prudential policy-makers in recent years. 
The recent financial crisis has increased uncertainty and we need more detailed and globally 
comparable statistics. We must invest in closing gaps, mainly by complementing aggregated 
statistics with more granular data and in enhancing the comparability of statistics at the global 
level by applying the agreed international statistical standards. Only in this way can we attempt 
to achieve more informed decision-making by policy-makers, thereby fulfilling today’s general 
theme, namely “Better data. Better lives”. This is the key message I would like you to take 
away today from this World Statistics Day 2015 celebrated by the ECB. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
