   Claudia Buch: The Deutsche Bundesbank’s Financial Stability Review 
2015 
Speech by Prof Claudia Buch, Deputy President of the Deutsche Bundesbank, at the press 
conference  to  unveil  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank’s  Financial  Stability  Review,  Frankfurt  am 
Main, 25 November 2015. 
 Ladies and gentlemen 
I would like to warmly welcome you to the unveiling of the tenth Financial Stability Review of 
the Deutsche Bundesbank. It is almost ten years ago to the day that current governor of the 
Reserve  Bank  of India  and  then  professor  at the  University  of  Chicago,  Raghuram  Rajan, 
asked the following question: has financial development made the world riskier? A cornerstone 
theory addressed in his speech delivered at the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City’s annual 
Economic  Policy  Symposium  in  Jackson  Hole  was  that  low  monetary  policy  interest  rates 
incentivise excessive risk-taking. 
The situation today is quite similar to 2005. Interest rates are low, which is squeezing banks’ 
and  insurers’  earnings,  and  investors  are  on  the  hunt  for  higher  returns.  But  fundamental 
framework  conditions  have  shifted  as  well.  Notably,  better  possibilities  exist  today  for 
regulators to tackle systemic risk. 
What factors influence financial stability? 
1. 
For  in  recent  years,  microprudential  supervision  and  regulation  have  been  increasingly 
complemented  by  a  macroprudential  perspective  so  as  to  encompass  the  stability  of  the 
financial system as a whole. The extent to which individual institutions are high-risk and their 
compliance with regulatory capital buffer requirements form the foundation of microprudential 
supervision,  which  is  designed  to  safeguard  the  stability  of  individual  institutions.  But 
safeguarding “financial stability” goes beyond this. It involves ensuring that the financial system 
is able to perform its key macroeconomic functions at all times – particularly in periods of crisis 
and upheaval. 
The European financial system has overcome two such periods of stress in the past year: First, 
the heightened uncertainty over the summer surrounding Greece’s future in the euro area and, 
second,  concerns  surrounding  the  deceleration  of  growth  in  China  and  in  other  emerging 
market economies. Despite a number of significant and sometimes abrupt price movements, 
it can be said that the financial markets have, to date, proved themselves resilient to such 
events, not least thanks to strengthened regulation. 
At the same time, monitoring systemic risk is an ongoing task. We do this by focusing on two 
questions. 
First,  can the failure  of a market  participant  (or a  group  of market  participants) 
compromise the functional viability of the entire financial system? Are individual 
market  participants  very  large  –  that  is  to  say,  too  big  to  fail  –  or  too  closely 
interlinked with other market actors, meaning they are too connected to fail. 
Second, can many smaller market participants collectively engender systemic risk 
given  that  they  are  exposed  to  similar  risks  –  are  they  too  many  to  fail?  For 
instance, a sharp hike in interest rates could weigh on multiple credit institutions at 
the same time. 
The objective of macroprudential oversight and regulation is to identify and contain such risks 
and misguided incentives. This can only be achieved by ensuring sufficient resilience in the 
financial system as a whole. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   Key statements of the Financial Stability Review 2015 
2. 
Against this backdrop, allow me to summarise the current situation in the German financial 
sector by outlining the key statements made in our report. 
1. 
Low interest rates pose risks to financial stability as they squeeze banks’ and insurers’ 
earnings. Institutions could then assume greater risks without having sufficient capital 
buffers to be able to cushion the impact of these risks. 
Dangers are also associated with an abrupt sharp hike in interest rates. Banks that, 
for  instance,  had  granted  long-term,  low-yielding  loans  would  then  have  higher 
funding costs. 
The business volume in Germany’s shadow banking sector has grown. We see no 
evidence of heightened risks at this time, however. 
Macroprudential instruments are gradually being put in place. These instruments are 
intended  to  curb  scale  effects  and  procyclical  effects.  Instruments  that  can  be 
employed to mitigate risks arising from mortgage lending are under development. 
The European capital markets union will be an important complement to the banking 
union. Better developed and integrated equity markets, in particular, could play a role 
in improving the way in which risks are shared. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
Low interest rates and financial stability 
3. 
The current low interest rates are a global phenomenon. They reflect the low real economic 
growth and expansionary monetary policy stance observed around the world. Consequently, 
attention is currently focused on monetary policy decisions and their impact on interest rates. 
However, an expansionary monetary policy can also cause significant risks to financial stability 
to build up. Empirical studies have shown that monetary policy has an impact on the price of 
shares, bonds and real estate. The longer interest rates stay low, the more incentive market 
participants have to take greater risks. However, it can end up being a problem if misguided 
incentives cause risk premiums to drop to an excessively low level. 
We  have  to  meet  these  challenges  in  order  to  avoid  a  medium-term  trade-off  between 
monetary policy and financial stability. Such a conflict would give rise to the danger that, given 
the build-up of risks to financial stability, monetary policymakers would put off the appropriate 
normalisation measures for far too long – the precise effect of which would be to cause further 
risks to accumulate. 
Risks in the German financial system 
4. 
To answer the question of where systemic risks can arise in the German financial system, it is 
useful to take a look at interconnections within the system. Within the German financial system, 
the most pronounced interlinkages are between banks. My fellow Executive Board member 
Andreas Dombret will therefore give you a more detailed account of the situation in the German 
banking sector shortly. 
However,  it  is  not  only  banks  but  also  insurers  that  play  a  crucial  role  in  households’ 
investment. Banks and insurers perform different functions in the financial system. Insurers 
obtain the majority of their funding through long-term premium payments. Banks derive their 
funding from short-term deposits and the interbank market, in particular. 
At present, low interest rates are squeezing banks’ and insurers’ earnings. Persistently low 
interest rates would jeopardise the resilience of many insurers. The Life Insurance Reform Act, 
which came into force in August 2014, helped bolster their resilience. Low interest rates lead 
to high valuation reserves, but these are only paid out to a limited extent to policyholders whose 
policies  are  now  lapsing,  meaning  that  the  reserves  are  retained  for  the  remaining 
policyholders. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  to  cushion 
 
Added to this, dividend payments by insurers to owners are restricted. This, too, strengthens 
their equity and resilience. Profit transfers on the basis of intragroup profit transfer agreements 
are not affected by this restriction, however. Some life insurers did not actually conclude a 
profit transfer agreement with their parent company until 2014 with an eye to being able to 
distribute profits in spite of this restriction. In individual cases, this undermines the original 
objective of the moratorium on dividend payments. 
The  chart  shows  how  many  insurers  would  hold  insufficient  own  funds  based  on  various 
assumptions regarding future interest rate movements. In the baseline scenario, it is assumed 
that excess returns on insurers’ bonds revert to their historical mean and that yields on Federal 
bonds,  or  Bunds,  increase  in  line  with  market  participants’  current  expectations.  Only  one 
insurer would be at risk in such a scenario. However, many life insurers would have insufficient 
own funds if Bund yields persisted at their current levels or if their excess returns were to 
additionally fall back to their all-time low. 
What the scenario analysis also tells us is that there is time for the enterprises to make the 
adjustments  needed 
implement 
countermeasures. Additionally, the introduction of the new Solvency II regime next year will 
improve  the  disclosure  of  risks.  While  there  is  a  16-year  transition  period  prior  to  full 
implementation of Solvency II, firms should not waste any time in setting aside adequate own 
funds against their risks. However, Solvency II tends to make insurers’ capital requirements 
more procyclical. The risks this can cause will need to be monitored closely, since a solvency 
balance sheet focusing largely on market values as per Solvency II can produce a more volatile 
picture of insurers’ resilience. This can have repercussions for insurers’ investment policy. If, 
say, insurers attempt to increase their solvency ratio during crises, such endeavours can lead 
to fire sales, which might further accelerate the fall in asset prices. 
Even what currently appears to be a rather unlikely scenario – that of interest rates climbing 
sharply within a short space of time – can pose a real threat to the stability of life insurers. This 
is because the regulations in Germany leave them with no option but to offer fixed surrender 
values  for  products  paying  guaranteed  returns.  Since  life  insurers  invest  the  bulk  of  their 
customers’  premiums  in  fixed-income  securities,  the  market  value  of  their  investment  is 
sensitive  to  interest  rates,  while  surrender  values  are  not.  Thus,  if  interest  rates  were  to 
suddenly climb sharply higher, that might be a rational reason for customers to lapse their 
policies. In a worst-case scenario, that might spark an upsurge in policy lapses. Surrender 
values  that  move  in  line  with  the  market  value  of  insurers’  assets  might  be  one  way  of 
eliminating this risk caused by regulation. For new policies, that would be possible without 
interfering in property rights. 
interest  effects  and 
the  negative 
to 
Significance of the shadow banking sector 
5. 
Improvements in the regulation of banks and insurers might act as incentives for agents to 
switch to unregulated territory. That is why action has been taken in recent years to improve 
surveillance over what are known as shadow banks. But that term is a little misleading because 
there’s nothing  “shadowy” about shadow banking entities. Just like banks in the traditional 
sense,  they  are  part  of  the  financial  system  and  provide  important  services  –  funding 
investment and helping investors to diversify risk more effectively. But just like the traditional 
banking system, shadow banks can also be a source of risk. Areas of the shadow banking 
sector  which  had  contributed to the financial  crisis  are  currently  dwindling  in  importance  – 
securitisation, to name but one. That holds true not only for Germany but worldwide, too. 
But at the same time, there are other areas of the shadow banking sector which are coming to 
the fore. Mutual funds are just one example. This shows that shadow banks are not operating 
in a “regulatory vacuum” because mutual funds are subject to the Capital Investment Code 
(Kapitalanlagegesetzbuch). Valuation effects are one of the key factors driving up the volume 
of assets managed by these funds. Inflows of capital prompted by changes in the regulatory 
setting in other areas and portfolio reallocations tend to be less significant. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   
Just like any other intermediaries, shadow banking entities can be systemically important on 
account of their size, interconnectedness or a co-movement of risks. The key metrics do not 
currently indicate an increase in risk. First, maturity and liquidity transformation in the mutual 
fund sector are stable for the most part. Second, leverage through the use of debt tends to be 
on the low side. Fund investments by insurers and pension funds are geared more to the long 
term, bringing a degree of stability to the mutual fund sector. Third, concentration levels within 
the sector are mounting, however. This means that the size of some individual mutual funds 
could make them systemically important. It is not least for that reason that we will continue to 
keep a close eye on the shadow banking sector and potential risks in the future. 
Macroprudential instruments 
6. 
Financial sector regulation has been improved since the financial crisis. One of the main thrusts 
of these new regulatory packages was to introduce instruments that curb the risk caused by 
the size and concentration of institutions – that is to say, instruments which tackle the too-big-
to-fail problem head on. 
The Recovery and Resolution Act for banks came into force in Germany at the 
beginning of this year. 
Starting  in  January  2016,  systemically  important  banks  will  need  to  build  up 
additional capital buffers. 
As from 2019, global systemically important banks will have to maintain sufficient 
total loss-absorbing capacity, or TLAC, in the form of debt and equity capital, which 
can be tapped in a resolution or recovery event. 
All these measures are designed to reduce the likelihood of larger institutions running into 
difficulties and to facilitate the recovery or resolution of a failing institution without the need for 
taxpayer support. 
But smaller institutions, too, can be a source of risk if they are too interconnected and exposed 
to similar risks. The countercyclical capital buffer (CCB) will be added to the macroprudential 
toolkit in January 2016 in an effort to combat procyclical risk. Banks will be forced to step up 
their provisioning in times of excessive credit growth, thus bringing capital adequacy levels 
across  the  entire  banking  system  into  line  with  economic  activity.  In  the  current  situation, 
however, there is no need to ask institutions to set aside more capital because there are no 
signs of excessively rapid lending growth. 
Financial crises are often triggered by excesses in real estate markets. Up to now, Germany 
has not had any macroprudential instruments which directly address the lending relationship 
between the creditor and the borrower. This deficit prompted the German Financial Stability 
Committee, in June 2015, to recommend the Federal Government to create legal foundations 
for  a set  of  new  macroprudential  instruments  regulating  housing  loans.  These  instruments 
include a cap on the credit volume relative to the property value (loan-to-value, or LTV, ratio) 
and a cap on the borrower’s debt servicing capacity relative to their income (debt-service-to-
income, or DSTI, ratio). Our work on these instruments does not necessarily mean that they 
will  be  activated  in  the  near  future.  We  do,  however,  need  to  be  capable  of  nipping  any 
unwelcome developments in the bud. 
The European capital markets union 
7. 
Before I bring my remarks to a close, I would like to take a look beyond the realm of banking 
regulation.  The  banking  union  was  without  doubt  a  huge  step  forward  in  curbing  risk  and 
making it more manageable. But in a monetary union, financial stability hinges on other factors 
as well – the functioning of the European capital markets and the way in which they facilitate 
the distribution of risk. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   
At the current juncture, cross-border capital flows in Europe are largely made up of debt capital 
– bank loans, mostly. This is a source of risk. Debt capital flows are more prone to a sudden 
reversal than other capital movements. What is more, debt capital does not cushion enterprises 
against risk – except when they become insolvent. Equity capital, by contrast, absorbs losses 
and can make businesses more resilient, ultimately strengthening financial stability. 
The planned capital markets union can help to dismantle barriers that are currently distorting 
businesses’ funding structures and the capital flows in the European Union. It can improve the 
conditions for a more efficient distribution of capital and risk alike. Stronger growth and deeper 
integration across the markets for equity capital could be the key to sharing risk more efficiently 
and, in turn, bolstering the resilience of the financial system. That “double dividend” – more 
growth, and a more stable financial system – is something the capital markets union promises 
to deliver. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
