  Yves Mersch: Challenges of retail payments innovation 
Speech by Mr Yves Mersch, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
at  the  Belgian  Financial  Forum,  organised  by  the  National  Bank  of  Belgium,  Brussels, 
26 October 2015. 
 Introduction 
I am sure that almost all of you in this room today have a smartphone in your pocket. With 
the smartphone, you feel as if you have the world at your fingertips: you can call or message 
anyone across the globe, access up-to-the-minute information and news on the internet, and 
stay entertained by downloading music, films or books. You can do all this at any time of day, 
wherever  you  are.  This  is  the  smartphone’s  great  innovation:  making  communication, 
information and entertainment available 24/7, on the spot, around the globe. 
I am also sure that all of you have a wallet in your pocket, containing banknotes, coins and 
some credit or debit cards. You use these to pay for things, but there are limitations. What if 
there were none? What if you could pay anyone, anytime, wherever you are? Be it with cash, 
by card, online or with your smartphone? And what if all these payments were instant? 
In a nutshell, this is what I will talk about today: how we can make this happen. We already 
have  the  euro,  making  it  possible  for  you  to  pay  with  the  same  banknotes  and  coins 
throughout the euro area. Now we want to make cashless payments as easy, fast, and far 
reaching as smartphone services. Users – be they consumers, retailers or businesses – do 
not  see  why  payments  cannot  be  instant  and  boundless  like  e-mails,  text  messages  or 
WhatsApp. 
What  are  the  challenges  of  innovation  in  cashless  payments?  How  do  public  authorities 
contribute to the process? Who is involved in the market, and how can a level playing field be 
ensured?  How  should  innovative  payment  services  be  designed?  These  are  some  of  the 
questions I will address. 
To  give  you  a  broad  roadmap,  in  the  first  part  of  my  speech  I  will  talk  about  the  key 
institutions  involved  in  bringing  innovation  to  the  payments  arena. The  Eurosystem,  which 
comprises the European Central Bank and the national central banks of the euro area, plays 
a key role, as does the European Commission and the European Retail Payments Board. 
The  second  part  of  my  speech  will  address  the  supply  side  of  the  market,  i.e.  the  retail 
payments service providers. Here, we are seeing new payment service providers – i.e. non-
banks  –  emerging  alongside  the  traditional  providers  –  i.e.  banks.  These  new  payment 
service  providers  have  the  potential  to  play  an  important  role  in  the  payments  market, 
contributing to a wider choice of products and services and increased competition. 
The third part of my speech will address the payment services that are ripe for innovation. 
One of the central building blocks of payments innovation is instant payments, i.e. electronic 
payment solutions that are available 24/7, every day of the year, resulting in the immediate or 
close to immediate interbank clearing of the transaction and in the immediate crediting of the 
payee’s account with confirmation to the payer. 
At present, we associate the word “instant” with instant movie streaming, instant messaging 
and Instagram. There is still a gap between the instant nature of these services on the one 
hand and the non-instant nature of the payments for these services on the other. What is 
“normal” for messages, movie streaming and Instagram is not normal for euro payments – 
yet. I hope that by the end of my speech, you will see how we can get there. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Part 1: The key institutions involved in payments innovation 
Let us return to the wallet in your pocket, containing, most likely, some euro banknotes. This 
is the most tangible result of one of the roles of the Eurosystem in payments, namely that of 
an issuer of currency. Since the introduction of euro banknotes and coins in 2002, the single 
currency has enabled everybody in the euro area to make cash payments across the euro 
area countries from a single wallet. 
In the payments industry, we use the term “retail payments” to mean all payments made by 
private  persons,  companies,  etc.,  for  example  to  buy  goods  and  services  or  to  transfer 
money. For cashless retail payments, the Eurosystem has strongly supported the creation of 
SEPA, the Single Euro Payments Area, i.e. a single market for retail payments in euro across 
Europe.  SEPA  was  initiated  by  the  European  banking  industry  as  a  reaction  to  the 
Eurosystem’s call for more efficiency in cross-border retail payments1 and to the introduction 
of  the  cross-border  payments  regulation,  which  eliminated  the  differences  in  charges  for 
cross-border  and  national  payments  in  euro. Those  of  you  who  were  involved  in  the  work 
towards  SEPA  know  that  harmonising  the  retail  payments  market for  euro  credit  transfers 
and direct debits was a huge task. More than a year has now passed since full migration to 
SEPA  and  we  can  conclude  that  Europe  has  achieved  a  Single  Euro  Payments  Area  for 
credit transfers and direct debits in euro. 
Introducing  innovative  services  without  re-introducing  fragmentation  in  the  market  is  also 
going to be a huge task. On the one hand, we have to be aware that the innovation of retail 
payments  services  has  a  global  perspective.  Innovation  in  the  United  States,  such  as  the 
payment services launched by international giants Google, Apple, Facebook and Amazon, 
makes its way over to Europe. In Asia, in China, the companies Alibaba and Tencent, via 
their payment arms Alipay and Tenpay, are expanding their platforms for online shopping, 
and their internet communication platforms, into complete ecosystems for digital payments 
and financial services. 
On  the  other  hand,  we  are  seeing  that  innovative  retail  payment  solutions  are  often 
developed based on local or regional regimes. For example, mobile payment initiatives are 
often launched by individual banks, individual mobile operators, individual card schemes or 
partnerships between different entities. Where do we position ourselves between these two 
opposite ends of the innovation movement? 
From the perspective of the Eurosystem, our unique responsibilities in the payments domain 
relate to the smooth functioning of payment systems for the euro. Hence, our main focus in 
retail payments innovation is on pan-European retail payment solutions in euro. We support 
innovation in retail payments because it can increase the efficiency of the market, thereby 
promoting economic growth and overall social welfare. We are neutral as to the providers of 
such  services,  be  they  market  incumbents  or  new  players,  provided  that  they  fulfil  the 
applicable regulatory requirements. 
Central banks serve three principal roles in relation to market infrastructure and payments: 
these  are  the  roles  of  operator,  overseer  and  catalyst.  The  Eurosystem  is  the  operator  of 
TARGET2,  the  large-value  payment  system  for  the  euro;  of  the  correspondent  central 
banking  model,  which  allows  the  cross-border  transfer  of  collateral  in  Eurosystem  credit 
operations; and of TARGET2-Securities, which is a service for the integrated settlement of 
securities transactions in central bank money. As the owner and operator of these systems, 
the Eurosystem has immediate and powerful tools to ensure their safety and efficiency. 
Safety  and  efficiency  are  also  the  main  drivers  for  the  oversight  of  payment  systems  and 
payment  instruments.  The  Eurosystem  monitors  both  existing  and  planned  systems, 
assesses them against a set of objectives and, where necessary, fosters change. To give an 
                                                
1   “Improving cross-border retail payment services – The Eurosystem’s view”, September 1999. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
example, the Eurosystem, as part of its involvement in international standard setting, for 
example  through  the  Committee  on  Payments  and  Market  Infrastructures,  is  working 
together with the industry to strengthen financial market infrastructure’s resilience against 
cyber-attacks. Work  is also  underway  to  enhance the  security  of retail  payments  within 
the EU. For instance, the European Banking Authority and the European Central Bank are 
closely cooperating in the preparation of regulatory technical standards for retail payments 
services. 
In  its  role  as  catalyst,  the  Eurosystem  is  active  in  helping  the  industry  to  find  safe  and 
effective  payment,  clearing  and  settlement  solutions  for  the  euro  area.  I  have  already 
mentioned the Eurosystem’s contribution to the creation of the SEPA. Another example is its 
involvement  in  the  work  towards  removing  barriers  to  cross-border  securities  clearing  and 
settlement in Europe. 
The Eurosystem, the European Commission and the European Retail Payments Board have 
distinct  mandates  and  responsibilities,  but  they  are  also  connected  to  each  other.  The 
European Central Bank has been in regular contact with the European Commission about 
their  endeavour  to  harmonise  the  legal  framework  underlying  payments,  i.e.  the  Payment 
Services  Directive,  which  we  refer  to  as  PSD  1  &  2,  the  E-Money  Directive,  the  SEPA 
Regulation,  the  Directive  on  Payment  Accounts  and  the  Interchange  Fee  Regulation.  This 
strong cooperation between both institutions has enabled us to get where we are now with 
the Single Euro Payments Area. 
This brings me to the project currently underway at the European Commission with the aim 
of creating a Capital Markets Union, or CMU. CMU has the potential to complement banking 
union and strengthen Economic and Monetary Union by improving cross-border risk-sharing 
and making the financial system more resilient. CMU will also be key to supporting European 
growth  by  diversifying  sources  of  funding  and  increasing  companies’  access  to  financing. 
While the improved access to capital for small and medium-sized enterprises foreseen by the 
vision for Capital Markets Union is currently very much in the limelight, we should not forget 
that SMEs could also benefit substantially from more innovative retail payments services. Let 
me give you some examples here. 
First, now that SEPA is up and running, SMEs are able to use one single account for euro 
payments throughout the EU. 
Second, the experiences of other markets – particularly the United Kingdom, where instant 
payments  have  been  available  since  2008  –  show  that  SMEs  greatly  benefit  from  faster 
payment  execution.  Receiving  and  making  credit  transfers  instantly  can  free  up  cash  flow 
and ease working capital needs. 
Third,  electronic  invoicing  has  long  been  on  the  agenda  of  European  policy-makers.  By 
replacing  paper  invoices  with  electronic  ones  and  creating  a  seamless  link  between  the 
invoicing process and the payment process, resources may be freed up and used for other 
purposes. 
Fourth, as many SMEs are small merchants accepting hundreds or thousands of payments 
every  day  from  consumers,  at  physical  points  of  sale  or  online,  they  may  benefit  from 
progress  in  contactless  payments  where  a  payment  can  be  made  by  simply  holding  the 
mobile device or card above a merchant’s terminal. 
Last  but  not  least, the  technical  standardisation  of  payment  cards may  contribute to  more 
competitive card acquiring, i.e. the processing of card payments on behalf of the merchant. 
In the longer term, this may lead to significantly lower costs for handling card terminals and 
accepting cards, especially for small merchants. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  
 
The points I just made illustrate that, despite all the effort that has gone into the integration of 
the  euro  retail  payments  market  in  Europe,  we  are  not  there  yet.  Only  last  month,  the 
European  Commission  published  a  roadmap  for  an  upcoming  Green  Paper  on  Financial 
Services and Insurance.2 The main purpose of this initiative is to investigate obstacles and 
gaps in previous legislation that prevent the supply side from providing services across the 
Single  Market  and the  demand  side from  enjoying  the  benefits  of  the  Single  Market. With 
regard to innovation, the European Commission roadmap recognises that the current trend of 
digitalisation  in  retail  payment  services  –  i.e.  the  development  of  new  models  and 
approaches through technology and the internet – provides a particular opportunity to further 
integrate markets and solve a number of pending issues in the retail payments sector. 
The European Central Bank very much welcomes this initiative as it should complement the 
efforts of the Eurosystem and the Euro Retail Payments Board to further develop open, fair 
and competitive retail payments in the EU. 
The Euro Retail Payments Board, or ERPB, is the third body working towards innovation in 
payments,  alongside  the  Eurosystem  and  the  European  Commission.  The  ERPB  was 
created by the European Central Bank in 2013 as a strategic body that formulates guidance 
and  a  common  starting  point  for  the  development  of  an  integrated,  innovative  and 
competitive  market  for  retail  payments  in  euro  in  the  European  Union.  It  also  provides 
recommendations  on  work  priorities,  including  standardisation  needs.  The  ERPB  is 
composed  of  high-level  representatives  from  both  the  supply  and  demand  side.  On  the 
supply side, there are representatives of the banking community, payment institutions and e-
money  institutions.  On the  demand  side,  there are  representatives  of  consumers, retailers 
with  physical  premises,  internet  retailers,  businesses/corporates,  small  and  medium-sized 
enterprises  and  national  public  administrations.  Representatives  of  national  central  banks 
participate in the board’s work on a rotating basis and the European Commission participates 
as an observer. 
The  activities  of  the  ERPB  are  very  much  linked  to  the  challenges  and  priorities  for 
innovation  in  retail  payments.  I  will  talk  about  some  of  these  issues,  in  particular  instant 
payments, in more detail in the third part of my speech. Next, however, I would like to talk 
about the new payment service providers that have been emerging in the market. 
New payment service providers 
The  wallet  in  your  pocket  containing  euro  banknotes  and  coins  and  some  debit  or  credit 
cards  tells  you  something  about  payment  service  providers.  The  cards  you  have  may  be 
issued by a bank – if you have for example Visa or Mastercard – but they may also be issued 
by  a  card  scheme  –  if  you  have  for  example  Amex  or  Diners.  Card  schemes  and  money 
transfer  service  providers  such  as  Western  Union  or  Moneygram  are  examples  of 
established non-bank payment service providers. These are new market entrants, different to 
the traditional banks, and history shows us that new entrants have long been a part of the 
retail payments market. For example, merchants were the initial drivers of the introduction of 
payment  cards  in  the  US  in  the  1930s,  and,  just  a  couple  of  years  ago,  it  was  a  mobile 
network  operator  in  Kenya  that  succeeded  in making mobile  payments widespread  in  that 
country. 
In Europe, it is expected that non-banks will have a stronger role in payment markets in the 
years to come. This will contribute to a wider choice of products and increased competition. 
One category of non-bank payment service providers is that of payment institutions. Payment 
institutions came into being as a result of the enactment of the Payment Services Directive, 
                                                
2   http://ec.europa.eu/smart-
regulation/roadmaps/docs/2015_fisma_031_other_outside_cwp_green_paper_retail_en.pdf. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
or  PSD1.  Among  other  things,  payment  institutions  can  execute  payment  transactions  for 
you. With the revised Payment Services Directive, or PSD2, the list of activities that payment 
institutions can carry out is being expanded to include the initiation of payments, i.e. they can 
initiate a payment on your behalf. They can also provide account information for accounts 
held at other payment service providers. 
Actually, payment initiation services provided by third parties have existed in the market 
for  some  time  now.  They  have  been  emerging  in  parallel  with  e-commerce,  i.e.  online 
shopping,  offering  an  alternative  to  established  payment  instruments  and  services  that 
were  –  understandably  –  neither  conceived  nor  wholly  suitable  for  the  e-commerce 
environment.  In  particular,  these  third  parties  have  been  serving  as  an  alternative  way  to 
carry  out  card-not-present  payments,  i.e.  card  payments  via  the  phone,  internet  or  other 
channels where the cardholder cannot physically present the card to the payee. 
This  is  how  it  works.  When  you  make  a  payment  online,  instead  of  having  to  input  the 
payment details into the online banking tool provided by your bank, typing in the amount, the 
recipient’s  account  details,  etc.,  you  access  your  online  banking  tool  via  the  third  party 
service  provider,  which  provides  the  transaction-related  data  for  you.  Simultaneously,  the 
e-commerce merchant, or online retailer, receives an automatic payment notification that the 
payment has been completed successfully. 
While  in  some  European  countries,  for  example  in  the  Netherlands,  banks  began  offering 
these  payment  initiation  services,  in  other  countries,  such  as  Germany,  new  providers 
entered the market. Legally, these third party service providers have been operating in a grey 
zone. At the same time, their emergence demonstrates that an actual market need was not 
being covered sufficiently by the traditional market. 
The rationale behind the regulatory formalisation of payment initiation service providers and 
account information service providers with Payment Services Directive 2 has many aspects. 
On  the  one  hand,  it  is  meant  to  increase  competition  in  the  market.  It  should  remove 
obstacles that have been hindering non-banks from entering the payments service market. In 
particular, banks will not be allowed to reject access of third party service providers to the 
accounts that they hold. 
More indirectly, the provisions in PSD2 may also push banks to innovate in order not to be 
forsaken by customers in favour of non-bank payment service providers. Last but not least, 
the  directive  may  also  stimulate  new  business  models  and  forms  of  cooperation  between 
banks and non-banks. 
The need for a level playing field on which to compete goes both ways. All entities providing 
retail payment services to end-users within the EU should be licensed and supervised. The 
licensing of third party service providers needs to be proportionate, as is currently the case 
for banks, for e-money institutions and for payment institutions. 
An important follow-up work to PSD2, which was adopted by the  European Parliament on 
8 October and is expected to be formally adopted by the EU Council of Ministers in the near 
future,  is  the  drawing  up  of  so-called  regulatory  technical  standards.  This  includes,  in 
particular,  the  requirements  for  strong  customer  authentication3  and  for  secure  and  open 
communication  standards  between  third  party  service  providers  and  account  servicing 
entities. As I mentioned in the first part of my speech, the European Central Bank and the 
European Banking Authority are closely cooperating in this area under the remit of SecuRe 
Pay.  It  has  to  be  said,  however,  that  the  timeframe  for  developing  regulatory  technical 
                                                
3   Strong customer authentication is a procedure based on the use of two or more of the following elements: 
(i) something only the user knows, e.g. a static password, code, personal identification number; (ii) something 
only the user possesses, e.g. a token, smart card, mobile phone; (iii) something the user is, e.g. biometric 
characteristic, such as a fingerprint. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  
 
standards  is  challenging.  At  the  same  time,  both  the  third  party  payment  initiation  service 
providers  and  the  account  servicing  banks  will  have  to  adapt  their  systems  to  the  new 
regulatory requirements. 
It  is  encouraging  to  see  that  the  market  is  pro-active  in  taking  up  the  requirements  of 
Payment Services Directive 2. For instance, some existing retail payment processors see a 
role  for  themselves  in  facilitating  payment  initiation  services,  thereby  assisting  banks  and 
third-party  service  providers  in  supplying  them  to  end-users  and  making  them  a  more 
valuable  service  proposal.  Some  banks  are  changing  their  strategies  to  become  active  as 
third  party  service  providers  or  even  to  set  up  special  purpose  subsidiaries.  These 
subsidiaries  will  provide  their  parent  bank’s  services  bundled  with  the  services  offered  by 
competing banks, making the increased competition really work for the benefit of payment 
service users – be it consumers or merchants. 
it 
is 
in 
that 
the  comment 
the  digital  era, 
illustrates  my  point.  This 
Instant payments 
And now let us return to instant payments, and to the wallet in your pocket. If you went for a 
coffee  before  this  meeting  and  paid  for  the  coffee  with  coins  or  banknotes,  you  made  an 
instant payment – in cash. If you paid for the coffee with a card, it may take some time before 
the  merchant  actually  receives  the  money  in  its  account  and  before  you  receive  the 
confirmation of the payment in your account statement. 
Intuitively,  the  idea  behind  instant  payments  is  that  cashless  payments  become  as 
instantaneous  as  cash  payments,  meaning  that  funds  are  immediately  available  to  the 
payment  recipient.  Some  may  say  that  there  is  no  real  need  for  instant  payments,  that  a 
payment guarantee is sufficient in e-commerce. But we have to be aware that we are not 
only  dealing  with  customer  needs  but  also  with  customer  expectations.  At  the  European 
Central Bank, we receive quite frequently requests and comments from European citizens 
and companies regarding retail payments, and one comment that appears time and again 
perfectly 
is 
incomprehensible  why  e-payments  should  take  longer  than  e-mails.  People  expect  instant 
payments  to  be  as  self-evident  as  other  services  delivered  via  the  internet,  e.g.  instant 
messages, movie streaming or Instagram. Nobody would accept an e-mail being delivered 
with the same time lag of a letter sent by surface mail. Why then does an electronic payment 
still take a full day at least? 
In  the  following,  I  will  discuss  the  three  layers  that  are  required  for  us  to  achieve  instant 
payments: the scheme layer, the clearing layer and the settlement layer. 
The scheme layer refers to a set of rules and technical standards that have to be followed by 
payment service providers. It can be understood as a common instruction manual on how to 
move funds from one account to another. 
You  may  ask  why  we  need  a  common  scheme  for  instant  payments.  After  all,  innovative 
payment  services  based  on  instant  payments  are  already  being  implemented  by  some 
national  communities  in  Europe.  However,  even  if  they  are  often  based  on  the  same 
technical standards, these services lack common rules and the harmonised implementation 
of  standards  and  are  therefore  not  easily  interoperable.  This  means  that,  for  example,  a 
service deployed in Germany cannot be easily used in France. What we want is for electronic 
payment means to work for you wherever you are, whether you are paying by card, online, or 
using your smartphone. 
With  the  creation  of  SEPA,  we  have  made  huge  efforts  to  integrate  the  European  retail 
payments market. Why should we not take advantage of the harmonisation and integration 
already achieved with the SEPA project in working towards instant payments? I believe that 
payment service users do not want to be swamped by dozens of different solutions, having to 
subscribe  to  different  platforms  depending  on  what  they  want  to  do.  What  they  want  is  a 
solution that gives them a wide reach, and this can only be achieved by having a common 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
scheme. If you allow me to take one more analogy from the mobile phone sphere, it is quite 
obvious that users expect to be able to reach any person anywhere with a phone. Nobody 
would accept having to subscribe to a Spanish mobile operator just to be able to phone a 
friend in Spain. 
The European Retail Payments Board mandated the payments industry to design a scheme 
for  instant  payment  services  by  November  2015.  The  European  Payments  Council,  which 
represents payment service providers, is working on a proposal for the design of a common 
scheme  based  on  the  SEPA  credit  transfer.  This  proposal  is  to  be  delivered  in  the  next 
meeting of the European Retail Payments Board in November 2015. 
A common scheme for instant payments should harmonise how payment service providers 
interact with their users and with other payment service providers. 
This  leads  us  to  the  second  layer:  the  clearing  layer,  i.e.  the  process  of  transmitting, 
reconciling and, possibly, confirming payment orders prior to settlement. Here, we have to 
consider  that,  typically,  retail  payments  are  processed  and  cleared  in  batches.  Payment 
service  providers  collect  payments  and  process  them  one  or  several  times  a  day  through 
clearing  and  settlement  infrastructures.  After  receiving  the  funds  from  the  payers’  banks, 
payment  service  providers  credit  the  funds  to  the  payees’  accounts.  In  this  non-instant 
payments mode, payment service providers incur no credit risk when processing payments. 
They  also  have  sufficient  time  to  comply  with  checks  under  Anti-Money  Laundering 
regulations and regulations combating the financing of terrorism. 
As  for  the  third  layer  –  the  settlement  layer  –  in  instant  payments  mode,  unless  instant 
settlement occurs, payment service providers may have to provide funds to payees before 
they receive the money from the payer, thus incurring credit risk. This credit risk would need 
to be covered – for instance by prefunding or collateralisation arrangements. In any case, it 
may  be  necessary  to  enhance  the  methods  for  screening  transactions  as  required  by  the 
applicable law on anti-money laundering and on combating the financing of terrorism. 
In  Europe,  a  fundamental  question  that  has  to  be  tackled  is  what  kind  of  clearing  and 
settlement  infrastructure  provides  a  viable  solution  for  pan-European  instant  payments 
throughout the Single Euro Payments Area. Do we need one or more central infrastructures 
for instant payments in euro? Who will build, manage and operate them? Are links between 
infrastructures a possible way forward? Could interoperability work, i.e. the establishment of 
technical  and  business  procedures  that  enable  the  clearing  and/or  settlement  of  instant 
payments between scheme participants from different infrastructures across SEPA? These 
are some of the issues that will have to be addressed. 
What is encouraging is that there are several initiatives underway addressing the clearing of 
instant payments. What I think is important from the central bank catalyst perspective is that 
there will be euro area wide reachability and a fair level of harmonisation. Non-interoperable 
island solutions are not the way forward. 
The development of pan-European instant payment services is also an integral part of what 
we call the Eurosystem’s “vision 2020”. Overall, our vision 2020 encompasses three central 
areas: first, it aims to explore the synergies between TARGET2 and TARGET2-Securities, 
with the ultimate goal of achieving a consolidated Eurosystem market infrastructure for large-
value  payments  and  securities  settlement.  Second,  it  aims  to  increase  the  level  of 
harmonisation  of  the  Eurosystem’s  collateralisation  techniques  and  procedures,  and  to 
consider  whether  a  common  Eurosystem  collateral  management  system  would  be  useful. 
Third,  it  will  assess  new  service  opportunities  arising  from  bringing  TARGET2  and 
TARGET2-Securities closer together. In particular, it will consider the benefits of enhancing 
TARGET2  services  in  the  field  of  instant  payments,  at  least  in  the  settlement  layer. 
Furthermore, it will review how the Eurosystem could foster the emergence of a competitive 
and open clearing solution for instant payments. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  
 
In the discussion on innovation in retail payments, instant payments are  what  everyone is 
talking  about.  Payment  service  providers  will  build  their  service  offers  around  instant 
payments, for example when you use their services to shop online or to pay a friend via your 
mobile phone. This will foster competition between providers, benefitting the end user. 
Of  course,  when  instant  payments  become  a  reality,  this  does  not  mean  that  other  non-
instant payments will die out. We have seen that, besides e-mails, online news services and 
Instagram,  there  are  still  letters  sent  via  postal  services,  people  reading  newspapers,  and 
photos put into albums. However, instant payments will be the “new normal”. 
As a result of digitalisation, payments  – and in particular card-not-present payments – are 
becoming  part  of  increasingly  long  and  complex  value  chains.  Users  expect  these  value 
chains to seamlessly integrate e-commerce, social media and retail payments. The downside 
of the gain in convenience may be that users forget about the risks. People often complain 
about  tedious  authentication  procedures,  about  having  to  memorise  passwords  and  PINs, 
about having to generate transaction-specific codes, etc. They would rather payments were 
quicker and easier. But there is a trade-off between convenience and risk. And of course, 
people also complain if, as a result of this risk, they are subject to fraud or breaches of data 
confidentiality. 
In order to maintain confidence in payments and trust in the currency, the Eurosystem has to 
make  sure  that  the  right  balance  is  struck  between  convenience  and  security.  The 
digitalisation  of  retail  payments  services  means  that  security  requirements  need  to  be 
adapted and enhanced. However, innovation brought by digitalisation should not be seen as 
the  enemy  of  security.  On  the  contrary,  it  can  actually  enhance  security,  as  has  been 
demonstrated by the introduction of the technical standard EMV4 for cards. In the design of 
security features, authorities and payment service providers are well-advised to bear in mind 
the users’ need for convenience and the proportionality of the security requirements. If the 
security  features  related  to  a  payment  service  are  perceived  as  being  too  cumbersome, 
users will seek ways to circumvent them – or reject the service. 
Conclusion 
To conclude, allow me to summarise the three main messages that I would like you to take 
home from my speech today. 
First, I hope that I managed to explain that for the Eurosystem, the main focus as regards 
retail payments innovation is on pan-European retail payment solutions in euro. We should 
take advantage of the harmonisation and integration already achieved with the SEPA project 
in working towards innovative payment solutions, be they instant payments, mobile payments 
or  other  payment-related  services.  This  does  not  mean  that  we  should  ignore  global 
developments  or  prevent  local  or  regional  initiatives  from  emerging.  I  would  like  to 
emphasise,  however,  that  we  should  avoid  the  development  of  non-interoperable  silo 
solutions.  Rather,  the  harmonisation  of  standards  and  business  rules,  pan-European 
reachability, interoperability and a harmonised legal framework are the foundations on which 
innovative payment solutions should be based. 
Second, I would like to underline that the market for innovative retail payment services needs 
to be based on a level playing field. Hurdles preventing new service providers from entering 
the market must be avoided. The Eurosystem welcomes innovation and new market faces. 
At the same time, all entities providing payment services to end users should be licensed and 
supervised.  As  for  banks,  e-money  institutions  and  payment  institutions,  licensing  of  new 
payment service providers should be proportionate and risk based. 
                                                
4   A  technical  standard  for  cards  and  for  payment  terminals  and  automated  teller  machines  (ATMs)  that  can 
accept them. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
Third, while it is clear that users will go for innovative payment services that are convenient 
and inexpensive, they also take it for granted that the regulatory authorities ensure the safety 
and efficiency of the products and services. In the end, what is true in other walks of life is 
true for retail payments innovation, too – i.e. we have to get the balance right. 
Last but not least, as instant payments will be the basis for many innovative services offered 
by  payment  service  providers,  I  expect  that,  by  the  end  of  this  year,  the  course  for  the 
development  and  adoption  of  instant  payments  in  Europe  will  be  set. I thank  you  for  your 
time. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
