  Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Navigating thru the waters of change... and 
butterflies 
Speech by Mr Amando M Tetangco, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the 
central bank of the Philippines), at the 2015 Annual Joint General Membership Meeting of 
ACI, FMAP, IHAP, MART, NASBI and TOAP, Manila, 29 September 2015. 
 I  hope  you  share  my  view  that  meeting  the  six  industry  associations  in  a  single  general 
membership  meeting  such  as  this  one  is  not  only  efficient  but  it  is  also  hopefully  more 
effective  in  developing:  1)  a  holistic  view  of  events  and  developments  –  both  here  and 
abroad – and 2) a clearer common understanding of BSP policies. In the end, meetings like 
this should help us more expeditiously attain our shared goal of sustaining the strength and 
responsiveness of our financial market. 
Your officers had asked me to share my views on the impact on emerging markets and the 
Philippine policy framework of the recent developments in China. This topic choice is quite 
focused. While your interest in China is understandable, I think you will concur that it is also 
difficult to isolate this from other developments in the global market. In any case – let me try 
to zero in on two things about China – its growth prospects and the recent devaluation of the 
Yuan. 
Chinese growth: 
First, growth. Some have argued that the slowdown in the Chinese economy is neither recent 
nor a surprise. China’s GDP growth has been decelerating over the past 5 years, from 10.6% 
in 2010 to 7.4% in 2014. This is projected by the IMF to decline to 6.8% in 2015 and 6.3% in 
2016.  Yet,  the  IMF’s  August  2015  Article  IV  report1  in  fact  states  that  China  is  moving 
towards a new normal of slower yet safer and more sustainable growth. 
There is also the case being made about base effects to explain the slowing growth rates.2 
Since China passed Japan in 2009 in terms of economic size, China has expanded by the 
equivalent  of  “1  ¼  Japans  to  its  output”.  The  bigger  base  then  will  require  substantially 
increased  economic  activity  if  the  growth  rate  is  to  be  maintained.  But  even  if  the  GDP 
growth rate is closer to 5% in 2015 – a significant drop from currently reported rates – the 
increase in output “will add almost one and a half Thailands to China’s economy this year”. 
These arguments simply remind us that China is already a large economy whose economic 
engine  happens  to  be  traditionally  stronger  than  most.  Simulations  therefore  of  a  “hard 
landing” are important to track. Euromonitor International reports that ten jurisdictions most at 
risk  from  a  hard  landing  in  China  include  HK,  Taiwan,  large  economies  like  South  Korea, 
India  and  Japan,  as  well  as  the  4  biggest  ASEAN  economies  (Indonesia,  Malaysia, 
Singapore and Thailand) plus Vietnam. 
What  does  this  mean  for  the  Philippines?  China  is  an  important  trading  partner  and  has 
been, in fact, the third major export market of the Philippines since 2011, with an average 
share of about 12 percent from 2010 to 2014. Based on NSO data, in 2014, our exports to 
China reached US$8.5 billion or 13.6 percent of our total merchandise exports. 
                                                
1  
IMF. (August 2015). People’s Republic of China Staff Report for the 2015 Article IV Consultation. IMF Country 
Report No. 15/234, Washington, U.S.: International Monetary Fund. 
2   The  following  follows  the  points  raised  in  “China  economy: Weakened  but still  growing”  by  Joe  McDonald, 
Associated Press. September 23, 2015. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
While the Philippines is not among those listed in the Euromonitor International study, it is 
significant to note that almost all those countries listed are important trading partners of the 
Philippines.  The  simulated  impact  is  a  decrease  in  GDP  growth.  And  the  results  are  not 
trivial,  ranging  from  just  under  two  percentage  points  (Japan  and  Indonesia)  to  above 
3.5 percentage points (Vietnam, Taiwan and HK which is nearly at 4.5 percentage points). 
So, while the impact on our GDP may not be strong and direct, the “second-round” effect 
through the “other” trading partners bears watching. 
What about the effect on domestic inflation? Slow Chinese growth could lead to lower global 
demand for commodities, including oil, which could in turn be a positive for reducing overall 
domestic inflation pressures. That said, where the chips will fall, so to speak, on the balance 
of global inflation will really be determined by country-specific dynamics. 
There  are  other  areas wherein  our  economy  may  be  adversely  impacted.  And  let  me  just 
highlight two for now – tourism and remittances. For the moment, our assessment is that the 
negative impact on tourism is expected to be moderate, while on remittances, it should only 
be negligible.3 
Fortunately, a hard landing scenario for the Chinese economy appears to be a low probability 
scenario for now but, I want to emphasize, this development is worth monitoring. 
The Yuan devaluation: 
Let’s now look at currency movements. Media reports that August 11 saw the largest single 
day move in 20 years for the Yuan. The same media reports point to the slowing economy 
and a sharp drop in exports as the factors underlying the move. 
There are other analysts, however, who say the action was really more political. They believe 
the expected currency movements are actually too small to materially impact exports. They 
say, Chinese actions were really meant to accelerate the acceptance of the Yuan into the 
SDR. They point to the fact that the IMF has been calling for Chinese authorities to move to a 
more market-based financial system and monetary policy framework. 
Regardless of the motivation, the decision to devalue has already had its effect on markets 
and jurisdictions. The impact on Chinese exports will be known in due course but the effect 
on the export of others is already taking shape. Commodity prices have decreased on fears 
of a slowing China which happens to be a significant importer of commodities. 
Either coincidentally or as a result of the Yuan devaluation, we know that equity indices have 
seen  a  significant  decline.  Currencies  could  not  be  far  behind  and  in  the  region  the 
Vietnamese Dong, the Indonesian Rupiah and the Malaysian Ringgit have weakened. 
How has the movement in the Yuan translated to our domestic markets? Since August 11, 
the peso has lost almost 2% (1.8 %) in value, and the Phisix has fallen almost 10 % (9.97%). 
These are not small numbers, but they are also not the largest moves among the markets in 
the region. Should we take comfort in that? 
Full effect? 
What I have described over the last ten minutes or so is not news. You follow the markets 
closely. What is certain, however, is that despite all that we have already seen and know, the 
                                                
3   On tourism, China provided the fourth largest number of visitors in the country from January to July 2015, 
equivalent  to  about  8.3  percent  of  the  total  visitors.  China  was  also  the  third  biggest  contributor  of  visitor 
earnings in July 2015 (Ph. 1.3B). 
On  remittances,  OF  remittances  from  China  (Mainland  only)  amounted  to  US$10.1  million,  or  about 
0.1 percent of the total OF remittances, from January to July 2015. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
full  effect  of  China’s  slowdown  and  the  weakening  of  the  Yuan  will  likely  remain  to  be 
unknown  in  advance.  In  the  overall  scheme  of  things,  the  linkages  are  difficult  to  assess 
because  they  involve  expectations,  a  lot  of  rebalancing  of  financial  portfolios  as  well  as 
round-after-round of auxiliary consequences that are not known ex-ante. 
This  reminds  me  of  how  “chaos  theory”  is  often  described.  As  everyone  here  is  aware, 
CHAOS THEORY is the study of nonlinear relationships where events that appear logically 
random are actually linked. 
It is said, a butterfly flapping its wings in the Amazon will affect the time of formation, exact 
location, and path of a hurricane several weeks later in North America. This “butterfly effect” 
is formalized in various fields like risk management, that’s why this audience knows it, right? 
It underpins the very framework of Financial Stability used by the BSP  but, in its simplest 
form, it is more commonly referred to today as “contagion”. 
What this means for the Philippines 
Ladies and gentlemen, it is clear that there is already some impact on EMEs, including the 
Philippines. And the possible consequences of a hard landing could be significant to many 
jurisdictions. There are layers of nonlinear and changing linkages that make the prediction of 
full effects an impossible task. But it is precisely an evolving situation such as that in China 
which should provide us a good platform to think about the possible issues that prudential 
policy may consider. 
The Philippines does not have the market impact of Greece or the presence of either China 
or the United States. But that does not mean that we will lie idle as market conditions are 
clearly  shifting.  We  have  our  own  butterflies  to  consider,  not  because  we  want  to  create 
hurricanes elsewhere but rather because we want to mitigate the contagion impact upon us 
and within our market. 
For  monetary  policy,  this  has  meant  keeping  a  close  eye  on  inflation  and  allowing  the 
exchange  rate  to  remain  broadly  market-determined.  You  are  quite  familiar  with  our 
approach  to  keeping  economic  prices  stable  and  the  factors  that  we  consider  in  policy 
formulation. You therefore also know that we put a premium on communicating our policy 
actions. 
In this regard, I am pleased to share with you that last week the Monetary Board approved 
the  adoption  of  an  interest  rate  corridor  (IRC)  system  for  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy. 
Many of you have been asking about this since I first mentioned that BSP is considering a 
shift to IRC. I believe you’ve heard bits and pieces of it, here and there. So, just to be sure 
we are on the same page, let me spend the next few minutes on this important shift in how 
we will conduct open market operations. 
Let me begin by clarifying our objectives. In the most basic of terms, we are adopting the IRC 
to: 1) improve the signalling effect of the BSP policy rate, and 2) to create a means for better 
market  price  discovery.  Having  more  market-based  policy  instruments  under  the  IRC  can 
also  be  expected  to  reduce  reliance  on  blunt  policy  tools  like  the  reserve  requirement  for 
sterilization. In the end, the IRC should strengthen the transmission of monetary policy. 
How will this work? The IRC is a system for steering money market rates towards the central 
bank (CB) target/policy rate. It consists of a rate at which the central bank will lend reserves 
to commercial banks (CB lending rate) and a rate at which it will take deposits from them (CB 
deposit  rate).  Typically,  the  lending  rate  will  be  above,  and  the  deposit  rate  below,  the 
target/policy rate, forming a corridor around it. 
We also intend to use a common tool of central banks for liquidity management. This is the 
Term  Deposit  Auction  Facility  (TDF).  TDF  is  suitable  for  shorter  maturities  and  is  not 
supported by tradable securities. Auction results of the TDF could provide indicative short-
term benchmark for the money market and will be invaluable in price discovery in the market. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  
 
By mopping up the “structural liquidity” from the system through the TDF and also through 
the standing deposit facility which is the SDA, we hope to see market rates moving not only 
within limited latitude but also inching towards the BSP’s policy rate (which is the RRP). This 
will increase the potency of the BSP’s policy rate in guiding market rates given the dynamics 
of inflation and monetary conditions in the economy. 
BSP staff have been carefully studying the operational elements of IRC, and it is the Board’s 
considered judgement that our current benign inflation environment, historic low interest rate 
levels,  steady  aggregate  demand,  and  ample  liquidity  give  us  the  room  to  make  these 
operational adjustments at this time. 
As I have described, the IRC will be a sustantial change from how we currently do OMO but 
you  will  continue  to  transact  OMO  with  our  Treasury  Department.  The  BSP  will  conduct 
consultations  and  briefings  with  you  and  other  stakeholders  (possibly  starting  next  month) 
before we commence conducting OMO using the IRC system in the second quarter of 2016. 
In  our  pursuit  of  financial  stability,  we  will  continue  to  actively  assess  evolving  market 
conditions while performing stress tests and network analysis. We have an uncompromising 
policy focus on mitigating the build-up of what we refer to internally as “C2L2” (C-L-2) or the 
risks of contagion, concentration, leverage and liquidity. 
We put ourselves to be thought leaders in global and regional initiatives. This includes work 
on financial inclusion, financial literacy, and consumer protection as well as the integration of 
the regional financial market, including the requisite capacity building initiatives. We support 
the principles espoused by global and regional reforms but we do so in the form that is best 
suited for our requirements. 
We  continue  to  actively  engage  other  government  agencies  through  the  Financial  Sector 
Forum  and 
interagency 
collaboration, for example, with DA/DAR and HLURB for Agri-Agra and housing issues, while 
openly  collaborating  with  private  sector  entities  such  as  the  six  organizations  represented 
tonight. 
the  Financial  Stability  Coordination  Council,  and  pursue 
Final thoughts 
It is clear that we all desire to be stronger in this increasingly interconnected yet fluid world. 
In  doing  so,  however,  we  need  to  go  beyond  the  confines  of  trade  blotters,  budgets,  and 
bottom lines because financial markets “draw” a much more intricate picture on a canvas that 
is much larger than one’s balance sheet. For certain, how things “hang on balance” is not a 
trivial  quest  because  there  are  many  stakeholders  and  because  financial  risks  evolve, 
comingle and recast themselves in a dynamic form. 
You have heard me say, year after year, at your General Assembly that the overall picture is 
not simply the sum of each market player’s position. There are material risks that knowingly 
or unknowingly fall in between desks or may look benign on everyone’s balance sheet. But 
when these risks fester, they eventually materialize as systemic difficulties. 
In  this  light,  I  want  to  assure  you  that  regulatory  interventions  do  not  simply  serve  the 
purpose  of  making  the  days  of  market  players  challenging.  Contrary  to  rumors,  the  BSP 
takes pains in crafting an enabling environment because we are able to see the intricacies of 
the picture that may not be apparent to each stakeholder and their balance sheet. That said, 
we  also  encourage  innovation  by  product  providers  as  a  strategic means  of furthering the 
interests of the general public and the financial consumer. Indeed, prudential policy is always 
dictated by higher-order objectives. 
In your more focused request, you asked me what the impact is on us of the slowdown of the 
Chinese economy. My reply – So far, it’s been on the whole, benign. We’ve so far managed 
well but we are not immune should Chinese growth slow more steeply and financial market 
volatilities intensify further. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
I encourage the organizations here therefore to work as a community and create a thriving 
market that is premised on governance, transparency and risk management. 
I encourage you to join us in the pursuit of communal objectives (such as financial system 
stability and consumer protection). I encourage you to be fully aware that in the hunt for what 
matters to you, you invariably affect others, and those ripples could someday come back to 
haunt you. I encourage you to be driven by “enlightened” self-interest. Ladies and gentlemen, 
when  you are guided by these higher-order objectives you  would have a better chance of 
covering any “blind spots”. 
We  may  not  be  the  butterfly  that  defines  the  next  hurricane  but  I  would  like  us  to  be  a 
butterfly that can chart its own flight. 
Thank you and good evening. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
