   Lesetja Kganyago: The global economy and South Africa’s challenges 
Address  by  Mr  Lesetja  Kganyago,  Governor  of  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank,  at  the 
Conference of the Industrial Development Corporation (IDC), Sandton, 19 October 2015. 
 Good morning and thank you for the opportunity to address you at this important milestone in 
the history of the Industrial Development Corporation. 
South Africa’s industrial development was initially shaped by mining, but linkages to the rest of 
the economy spurred the growth of the manufacturing sector. Today, industrial development is 
still seen as central for economic growth and employment creation in the country. However, 
South Africa’s manufacturing sector is currently facing significant short-term as well as longer-
term challenges. Fifteen years ago, the sector accounted for about 18 per cent of GDP, but 
today its share is 12,5 per cent, with the finance, real estate and business services sector now 
the single largest sector at almost 20 per cent. 
Since the global financial crisis in particular, South Africa’s global competitiveness has been 
deteriorating,  as  reflected  in  the  country’s  declining  share  of  world  trade.  Longer-term 
constraints  to  industrial  development  include  the  pace  of  global  technological  change,  the 
changing  nature  of  global  value  chains,  the  lack  of  appropriate  skills,  logistics  and 
infrastructural deficiencies as well as rising input costs, to name but a few. These issues will be 
discussed in some depth by the panels during the course of the day. 
My address this morning will attempt to set the scene by focusing on the current global and 
domestic contexts as well as the challenges that these pose to future industrial development. 
No  discussion  about  competitiveness  is  complete  without  reference  to  the  exchange  rate, 
which is often too easily seen as either the cause of or the potential panacea for South Africa’s 
competitiveness woes. Given its volatile behaviour, the exchange rate is an important focus of 
monetary policy, and I will make some comments on this issue as well. 
The global economic outlook 
Allow me to begin with the outlook for the global economy that has not fully recovered from the 
global financial crisis. 
While emerging-market economies recovered relatively quickly from the crisis, recovery in the 
advanced economies has been hesitant at best. In the past four years or so, we have seen a 
familiar  pattern:  one  of  optimism  at  the  beginning  of  the  year  that  the  global  economy  will 
improve,  only  for  these  hopes  to  be  disappointed  quite  early  on  in  the  year.  More  recently, 
however, there have been convincing signs that some of the advanced economies are well on 
the road to recovery, particularly the United States and the United Kingdom. But even in these 
economies forecasts have been scaled down somewhat, particularly after the very weak first 
quarter in the US. Nevertheless, growth next year is expected to be in line with, or to exceed, 
estimated potential output growth. Labour-market developments in both economies have been 
favourable, with the unemployment rate falling to 5,1 per cent in the US. Nevertheless, there is 
still  uncertainty  about  whether  these  trends  will  result  in  an  increase  in  labour-market 
participation,  which  would  cause  the  unemployment  rate  to  increase.  And  while  these 
economies are improving, it is unlikely that their recovery will be sufficient to take the rest of 
the world along with it, as the US is no longer the locomotive of global growth that it used to be. 
This positive prognosis is not generalised to all the advanced economies, with the euro area in 
particular still facing significant challenges. While there have been signs of a more sustained 
recovery  in  the  region  recently  –  particularly  in  countries  such  as  Ireland,  Italy  and  Spain  – 
growth in the German economy has disappointed. The Greek debt crisis seems to have been 
averted for now, but the general view is that any re-emergence of the crisis is unlikely to have 
a  systemic  impact.  The  slow  pace  of  recovery  in  the  region  is  expected  to  result  in  a 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   continuation, or even an expansion, of the monetary stimulus from the European Central Bank. 
The outlook for Japan also remains quite uncertain. The favourable first-quarter outcome was 
followed  by  a  contraction  in  the  second  quarter,  and  the  economy  remains  dependent  on 
monetary policy support as it battles to get out of its deflationary trap on a sustainable basis. 
While  recovery  in  the  advanced  economies  remains  patchy  but  positive  overall,  the  lack  of 
synchronisation in the global recovery is even more pronounced when we look at the outlook 
for the emerging-market economies. The post-crisis view that emerging markets would replace 
the  advanced  economies  as  the  epicentre  of  global  growth  has  been  shaken,  despite  their 
important initial role in leading the global recovery. Central to the risks to the outlook has been 
the slowdown in China, where growth rates have declined persistently in recent years as the 
economy rebalances away from investment-led growth to a more consumption-led focus. The 
implications for much of the emerging market and the developing world have been profound, 
but given the increasingly  important role of emerging markets in global economic prospects, 
the risk of spillbacks to advanced-economy growth prospects has been significant as well. 
There  are  conflicting  views  as  to  the  extent  of  the  slowdown,  the  ability  of  the  Chinese 
authorities  to  counteract  it,  and  the  impact  on  emerging  markets  of  a  rebalancing  of  the 
Chinese  economy.  Despite  these  concerns,  the  latest  IMF  growth  forecast  for  China,  as 
published in the October World Economic Outlook, is unchanged since the April forecast, with 
growth of 6,8 per cent forecast for this year (compared with a forecast of 7,3 per cent in April 
last year) and 6,3 per cent for 2016. This follows growth of 7,7 per cent and 7,3 per cent in 
2013 and 2014 respectively. A number of other forecasters are, however, not as optimistic. 
To some extent, this slowdown is to be expected, as the previous stellar rates of growth were 
unsustainable,  particularly  as  the  Chinese  economy  grows  off  a  larger  base.  Furthermore, 
previous growth was predominantly driven by unsustainably high investment ratios in excess of 
40  per  cent  of  GDP.  Previously,  the  government  policy  response  to  the  slowdown  was  to 
stimulate investment in the industrial sector and infrastructure. Given the new focus, there is 
uncertainty about the nature and efficacy of possible policy responses to the current slowdown. 
Furthermore, if the authorities do manage to engineer a soft landing and persist with a more 
consumption-led path, there is a great deal of uncertainty as to what the implications of a more 
services sector-oriented economy would be for emerging markets and commodity prices. 
To date, while the measured growth slowdown appears to have been moderate, the impact on 
other  economies  has  been  quite  strong.  The main  impact for  South  Africa  and  a  number of 
other economies (not only emerging markets) has been on commodity prices. This is not new; 
this  trend  began  in  2011  already,  but  accelerated  around  the  middle  of  this  year.  Since  the 
beginning  of  2012, for  example,  platinum  prices  have  almost  halved  and  iron-ore  prices  are 
down  by  about  25  per  cent.  The  IMF  estimates  that  the  weak  commodity  price  outlook  will 
subtract  about  1  percentage  point  annually  from  the  average  growth  rates  of  commodity-
exporting  countries  from  2015  to  2017,  and  in  energy-exporting  economies  the  impact  is 
expected to be more than double this amount. These developments are reflected in the recent 
economic performance of Brazil and Russia, both of which are experiencing recessions, India 
being  the  only  one  of  our  BRICS  partners  with  a  strong  growth  outlook.  Although  African 
economies have been experiencing relatively strong growth, some downside revision has been 
seen in response to commodity-price developments. 
Apart from commodity prices, another global factor impacting on South Africa is the prospect of 
monetary policy tightening by the US Federal Reserve, which has had a significant impact on 
capital  flows  to  emerging  markets.  The  recovery  in  the  US  has  prompted  expectations  of  a 
tightening  of  monetary  policy,  and  this  process  effectively  began  with  the  phasing  out  of 
quantitative  easing  during  2013.  The  focus  then  became  the  timing  and  extent  of  policy 
interest-rate  increases,  but  successive  growth  disappointments,  very  low  inflation  and 
uncertain  labour-market  developments  delayed  the  expected  commencement.  The  ever-
changing views on the timing of the so-called ‘lift-off’ have contributed to the uncertainty and 
volatility  in  emerging-market  exchange  rates,  with  every  data  point  overly  scrutinised.  For 
example, the weak US retail data, released last week following worse-than-expected payrolls 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   data, resulted in a sharp weakening of the dollar as expectations of an interest-rate increase 
were moved out. 
That  the  Fed  will  tighten  is  inevitable.  The  question  is  one  of  timing.  But  the  associated 
uncertainty has affected the financial conditions in many emerging markets, particularly those 
with  current-account  deficits.  Furthermore,  the  start  of  interest-rate  normalisation  will  not  do 
away with uncertainty completely, as the focus will then move to the next meeting. While the 
Fed has signalled its intent to follow a very moderate path of interest-rate increases, the so-
called  ‘dots’,  which  represent  the  expectations  of  FOMC  members  of  future  interest-rate 
moves, have changed significantly from meeting to meeting, reflecting uncertainty even among 
policymakers. 
Emerging  markets  have  therefore  been  facing  a  double  negative  in  terms  of  capital  flows: 
capital  which  had  previously  been  chasing  relatively  higher  yields  and  higher  growth  in 
emerging markets is now reversing, with the prospect of interest-rate increases in the US. In 
addition, the lower growth associated with the slowdown in China and declining terms of trade 
have also contributed to a reversal of capital flows towards the advanced economies. But at 
the  same  time,  concern  about  the  slowing  global  economy  and  its  possible  spillbacks  to 
advanced economies has also weighed on the Fed’s decision making. 
Do 
in  emerging  markets?  Some 
commentators point to parallels with the Asian crisis in 1998/99. The outlook is challenging, but 
I would not characterise it as a crisis. Emerging markets in general are better equipped today 
to  meet  the  challenges  posed  by  terms-of-trade  deterioration  and  capital-flow  reversals. 
Macroeconomic frameworks are far more robust, and exchange rates are more flexible to act 
as  a  shock  absorber  to  these  changes.  That  is  not  to  say  that  it  will  be  without  pain. 
Unfortunately, capital flows which could help to cushion the adjustment to deteriorating terms 
of trade are drying up precisely when most needed. Some adjustment will have to take place, 
and the exchange rate is an important part of this process.  
Furthermore, there are differences between emerging markets which will determine how they 
are  affected  by  these  developments.  For  example,  countries  with  sizeable  current-account 
deficits will have a different reaction to capital-flow reversals than those with surpluses. And 
while non-commodity exporters will benefit from lower commodity prices, particularly emerging 
markets  in  Asia,  these  economies  are  already  experiencing  a  decline  in  their  manufactured 
exports to China. 
these  developments  point 
impending  crisis 
to  an 
The domestic economic outlook 
These  developments  provide  a  challenging  backdrop  for  the  South  African  economy  going 
forward.  Apart from the impact  of  lower  commodity  prices,  the  continued  slow  growth  in  the 
euro area and further risks from a slowdown in Africa constrain the growth in our manufactured 
exports. In addition, the persistent current-account deficit needs to be financed at a time when 
capital flows to emerging markets are declining. 
South  Africa’s  growth  outlook  is  extremely  fragile.  Following  the  disappointing  quarter-on-
quarter GDP growth outcome of 1,3 per cent in the first quarter of this year, growth surprised 
on the downside when a contraction of 1,3 per cent was recorded. Of concern was the fact that 
it  was  broad-based  across  sectors,  with  only  the  finance,  real  estate  and  business  services 
sector showing reasonable performance, recording growth of 2,7 per cent. 
At the heart of this low growth is the weak growth trend in gross fixed capital formation. This is 
particularly true of the private sector, and reflects in part the persistently low levels of business 
confidence.  Total  gross  fixed  capital  formation  contracted  by  0,4  per  cent  in  2014,  with  the 
private sector contracting by 3,4 per cent and public corporations increasing by a mere 1,6 per 
cent. In the second quarter of this year, private-sector growth was barely positive at 0,1 per 
cent,  the  same  as  that  of  public  corporations.  The  main  area  where  there  has  been  some 
growth in private-sector investment in recent years has been with respect to renewable energy. 
While  this  is  a  welcome  development,  we  need  more  broad-based  investment.  The  weak 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   public-sector  investment  growth  reflects  the  slow  pace  of  infrastructure  expenditure  growth, 
which is central to any industrial development strategy. 
One of the main constraints to investment is of course the uncertainty of electricity supply. This 
has  both  short-  and  long-term  impacts.  Load-shedding  affects  output  immediately,  and  is 
reflected in the weaker current GDP growth outcomes. But of greater concern is the longer-
term  impact  that  electricity  supply  constraints  have  on  potential  output  growth,  as  forward-
looking  investment  plans  are  delayed  or  even  shelved  because  of the  lack  of guarantees of 
electricity  supply.  This  constraint  has  contributed  to  the  decline  in  our  estimate  of  potential 
output growth to 1,8 per cent. Clearly, if we want a vibrant and expanding industrial sector, we 
need  to  have  investment  as  well  as  an  adequate  and  reliable  supply  of  electricity. 
Unfortunately we cannot solve this overnight. 
The production-based sectors of the economy have been particularly weak, and face a difficult 
outlook. The agricultural sector is beset by drought, which resulted in a contraction of around 
17 per cent in the first two quarters of this year. The mining sector contracted at an annualised 
rate of 6,8 per cent in the second quarter, and monthly production data indicate that the third 
quarter  is  also  likely  to  disappoint.  The  manufacturing  sector  has  also  experienced  two 
consecutive quarters of contraction, of 2,4 per cent and 6,3 per cent, and the outlook is also 
constrained although a further contraction is not expected in the third quarter. 
The Bank’s forecast for growth has recently been revised down by half a percentage point in 
each year of the forecast period, to 1,5 per cent in 2015 and to 1,6 per cent and 2,1 per cent in 
the subsequent two years. This weak outlook is consistent with the Bank’s leading indicator of 
economic activity, which has exhibited a more pronounced downward trend in recent months. 
Apart  from  the  continued  electricity  supply  issues,  growth  is  expected  to  be  constrained  by 
weak  private-sector  investment  and  subdued  growth  in  household  consumption  expenditure 
amid low levels of both business and consumer confidence. 
Competitiveness and the exchange rate 
One of the main themes of today’s discussions is that of competitiveness. Competitiveness has 
a  number  of  different  dimensions,  one  of  which  is  the  exchange  rate,  and  it  is  perhaps 
appropriate for me to say a few words about this, as the exchange rate is of course also of 
importance from a monetary policy perspective. 
Between  2009  and  2011,  the  rand  experienced  a  strong  recovery  from  the  global  financial 
crisis  in  the  wake  of  strong  commodity-price  increases  and  inflows  of  capital  seeking  higher 
yields. This created stress for parts of the manufacturing sector, in terms of both exports and 
import competition. Not surprisingly, the Bank came under pressure from parts of this sector to 
weaken  the  exchange  rate.  However,  since  2011  the  rand  has  followed  a  relatively  volatile 
depreciating  trend,  driven  by  various  factors,  including  the  terms-of-trade  deterioration, 
idiosyncratic  domestic  factors,  bouts  of  global  risk  aversion  (related  in  particular  to  the 
eurozone crisis) and, more recently, the partial reversal of capital flows in anticipation of higher 
interest rates in the advanced economies. 
However,  the  response  of  both  the  manufacturing  sector  and  exports  to  the  weakening 
exchange  rate  has  been  disappointing,  although  in  recent  months  we  have  seen  tentative 
signs  of  current-account  adjustment,  both  through  higher  export  volumes  and  through  lower 
import volumes. The current-account-to-GDP ratio has been declining steadily for the past four 
quarters and measured 3,1 per cent in the second quarter of this year, from a peak of 6,2 per 
cent in the second quarter of last year. In the second quarter of this year, the trade account 
recorded  its  first  surplus  since  the  final  quarter  of  2011.  Despite  these  more  favourable 
developments, we expect the current-account deficit to average in excess of 4 per cent of GDP 
this year and the next. 
There are a number of reasons why we would expect a slow current-account response. First, 
from a competitiveness perspective, it is the real exchange rate that is of relevance: that is, the 
nominal  exchange  rate  adjusted  for  inflation  differentials  (although  there  are  debates  as  to 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   what the appropriate deflator should be). Because our inflation has generally been higher than 
that  of  our  trading  partners,  the  real  depreciation  has  been  lower  than  that  of  the  nominal 
effective exchange rate. Since July 2011, the nominal effective exchange rate has depreciated 
by almost 40 per cent, compared to a real depreciation of around 20 per cent. We also need to 
bear  in  mind  that  the  real  exchange  rate  is  a  very  broad  macroeconomic  measure,  but 
companies and sectors have different import intensities and different cost structures, so firm- 
or sector-specific real exchange rates may differ markedly. 
Second,  the  global  environment  is  important.  Slow  growth  in  our  major  trading  partners  will 
dampen our export potential as income elasticities are higher than price elasticities. As outlined 
earlier, our major trading partners are experiencing subdued or declining growth, consequently 
constraining demand for our manufactured exports. 
Third, intermediate goods (including fuel) and capital goods account for about 80 per cent of 
imports, and these are often tied to capital investment projects. This imparts a degree of rigidity 
to import volumes. Too often in the past was current-account compression achieved through 
declining investment expenditure, with adverse implications for employment and growth. 
Fourth, there are lags in adjustment, and manufacturers will want to be certain that the more 
competitive position will be sustained. 
Fifth, strikes and labour disputes have periodically affected exports adversely, as was the case 
in the platinum sector in 2014. 
Sixth,  for  commodity  exporters,  the  exchange  rate  acts  as  a  cushion  for  lower  commodity 
prices but it does not necessarily provide an impetus to higher export volumes. 
Seventh,  there  is  the  possibility  that  the  increased  role  of  global  value  chains  may  have 
weakened the relationship between the exchange rate and trade in intermediate products used 
as  inputs  into  other  economies’  exports.  This  issue  is  discussed  in  depth  in  the  latest  IMF 
World  Economic  Outlook.  Although  the  main  finding  is  that  the  bulk  of  global  trade  is  still 
conventional trade, this issue may be relevant in a number of sectors. This may be of particular 
relevance to the motor industry in South Africa. 
Finally,  we  also  need  to  look  carefully  at  some  of  our  own  domestic  policies  that  have  the 
potential to undermine our exports or to counter the favourable impact of depreciation. 
So how does the Bank view the exchange rate, and should we try to intervene in the interest of 
competitiveness?  Monetary  policy  is  concerned  about  the  exchange  rate  because  of  its 
potential  impact  on  inflation.  As  we  have  outlined  in  our  monetary  policy  statements,  the 
exchange rate remains one of the main risks to the inflation outlook despite the fact that the 
pass-through has been relatively muted compared with previous episodes of rand weakness. 
However, this does not mean that we try to act against rand weakness. Rather, our reaction to 
exchange-rate  changes  is  focused  on  the  potential  inflationary  impact  of  exchange-rate 
depreciation in conjunction with a range of other variables that may be concurrently affecting 
inflation, both positively and negatively. 
Similarly, we do not try to explicitly lean against rand strength, although we did take advantage 
of  such  conditions  in  2009–2011  to  continue  with  our  policy  of  accumulating  international 
reserves. However, the view that we prefer a strong rand to a weak rand is not well-founded. 
Ideally, what we would like to see is an appropriately valued stable exchange rate, one that is 
not a significant issue for inflation. However, that is in an ideal world. In reality, the exchange 
rate is buffeted by a number of fundamentals which require adjusting to; in South Africa’s case, 
these fundamentals include commodity-price changes and capital flows. 
Over time, we have learned the hard way that trying to ‘lean against the wind’ in the face of 
markedly  changing  fundamentals  can  be  both  futile  and  expensive,  and  any  success  in  this 
respect  is  likely  to  be  short-lived  at  best.  That  is  not  to  say  that  we  will  never  get  involved, 
particularly  in  the  event  of  liquidity  drying  up  in  the  market.  That  said,  let  me  be  clear:  no 
amount of central bank intervention, no matter how well intentioned, can prevent an exchange-
rate adjustment from aligning with fundamentals. The best contribution that the Bank can make 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
   to competitiveness is to ensure that inflation is contained to the extent possible during periods 
of rand weakness to ensure that the depreciation is real. It is then up to the relevant sectors to 
take advantage of the increase in competitiveness. 
Conclusion 
In conclusion, the domestic economy is facing a challenging future. While the global economy 
is  a  constraint,  it  is  important  that  we  do  not  focus  on  that  only  and  ignore  the  very  real 
domestic  impediments  to  growth  as  well  as  the  opportunities.  It  is  too  easy  to  sit  back  and 
bemoan  the  fact  that  we  are  hostage  to  global  developments.  There  are  things  that  can  be 
done, many of which are clearly spelled out in the National Development Plan. We often hear 
about a focus on infrastructure, but we always seem to under-deliver in this respect. If South 
Africa  wants  to  develop  its  industrial  sector,  it  needs  to  improve  its  infrastructure  apart from 
electricity. There also needs to be policy coherence and less regulatory uncertainty. 
If  we  are  to  succeed  in  reducing  unemployment,  we  must  have  a  growing,  competitive 
economy.  Competitiveness  is  not  simply  about  the  exchange  rate;  it  is  a  multidimensional 
concept. These  dimensions  include  the quality  of goods  and  services  produced,  reliability  of 
delivery,  reliable  and  appropriate  infrastructure,  appropriate  technologies,  appropriate  and 
sufficient  skills,  the  ease  of  doing  business,  and  the  minimisation  of  red  tape.  Our  financial 
sector  is  regarded  as  one  of  the  most  efficient  in  the  world,  and  we  have  a  sound  legal 
framework. We need to build on these strengths, but we have to be proactive if we don’t want 
to fall further behind. 
These are some of the issues that will be discussed during the course of the day, and I look 
forward to the deliberations. 
Thank you. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
