   Vítor Constâncio: Monetary policy and the euro area problem 
Speech by Mr Vítor Constâncio, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, at the 18th Euro 
Finance Week, Frankfurt am Main, 16 November 2015. 
 Summary 
The  speech  points  that  the  euro  area  problem  is  part  of  a  predicament  shared  by  other 
advanced economies: decades of declining economic and productivity growth rates, prolonged 
periods of low inflation and an untamed financial sector fuelling asset price booms. Policies 
adopted by the ECB are thus responding to the present situation of low inflation and tepid 
recovery.  Namely,  the  low  level  of  policy rates  is  associated with  the  declining  real rate of 
equilibrium. The worsening of the international economic situation and the low inflation will lead 
the ECB to reassess its policy stance in December. To face the challenges confronting the 
euro  area,  it  is  recognised  that  monetary  policy  cannot  address  all  the  problems  and  that 
structural reforms and fiscal policy should help to overcome them. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I am honoured by Mr Maleki’s invitation to speak at the Opening Conference of the 18th Euro 
Finance Week. 
In my remarks today I would like to characterise the current economic situation in the euro 
area. Furthermore, I will address the roles that monetary policy, supply-side reforms and fiscal 
policies have played – and can play in the future – in shaping this situation. 
The current economic situation in the euro area 
The euro area challenges are part of a predicament shared by other advanced economies: 
decades of declining economic and productivity growth rates, prolonged periods of low inflation 
and an untamed financial sector fuelling asset price booms. This constitutes a very challenging 
situation that cannot be solved by one policy area alone, be it monetary policy or any other. 
Furthermore,  issues  in  the  euro  area  are  more  acute  than  in  the  case  of  other  advanced 
economies. 
Since 2008, the euro area has experienced a deep recession, a quickly interrupted recovery, 
another long, mild recession, and finally a slow recovery. Euro area GDP per capita at the end 
of this year is expected to be 1.6 percent below what it was seven years ago, at the end of 
2008. Notably, growth outcomes in several member states have been much worse than this 
disappointing  average.  At  the  end  of  2015,  GDP  per  capita  in  Italy  is  projected  to  be 
10.1 percent lower than seven years before; 4.2 percent lower in Spain; 3.4 percent lower in 
the Netherlands and 8.5 percent lower in Finland.1 At the aggregate level, the euro area output 
is now 20 percent below the level it would have achieved had the trend growth in the previous 
15 years continued after 2007. Admitting that the economy would grow from now on at that 
same trend, the accumulated loss of output until 2030, properly discounted, would represent 
more than three times the whole output of 2008. The crisis left a permanent economic loss 
with broad scars in our societies. 
This is evident when looking at unemployment data. The unemployment rate in the euro area, 
as a whole, stood at 7.5 percent on the eve of the financial crisis, in 2007. Unemployment 
increased steadily in subsequent years, reaching about 12 percent of the labour force in 2013, 
                                                
1  The source of the data on GDP per capita is AMECO, the annual macroeconomic database of the European 
Commission’s Directorate General for Economic and Financial Affairs. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   
and has since come down only slowly, by one percentage point, to 11 percent. Disaggregated 
by countries, the range of unemployment rates goes from 4.5 to 25 percent. If we were to add 
the number of part-time workers preferring to hold a full-time job and of those discouraged to 
look for a job, (figures also published by Eurostat), the real situation would be undoubtedly 
grimmer. In spite of recent increases, total employment is still 3.3 million people below the pre-
crisis period. High unemployment is destabilizing our continent and challenging our social and 
political systems. 
In the environment of weak economic activity, the euro area has been experiencing downward 
pressures  on  inflation.  As  you  know,  the Governing  Council  has  defined  the  price  stability 
objective of the ECB as a year-on-year rate of growth of the Harmonised Index of Consumer 
Prices (HICP) for the euro area of “below, but close to, 2 percent.” The annual rate of inflation 
measured in terms of the HICP has decreased year after year, since 2011. Inflation ran at 0.4 
percent in 2014 and is forecast to be 0.1 percent in 2015. As I will discuss, the Governing 
Council has undertaken a number of measures to prevent inflation from falling further and to 
make sure that inflation returns to the level consistent with price stability over the medium-
term. In part as a result of these measures, the latest ECB staff projection sees the annual rate 
of inflation increasing to 1.1 percent next year and to 1.7 percent in 2017, though, again, these 
forecasts  are  subject  to  revision,  in  particular  due  to  the  recent  adverse  news  about  the 
external environment of the euro area. All member states have been experiencing downward 
pressures on inflation. Inflation ran at 0.8 percent last year in Germany, and is forecast to be 
only 0.2 percent this year. The analogous numbers for Italy, to take another example, are only 
somewhat lower, 0.2 percent and 0.1 percent respectively. 
The  low  inflation  rates reflect  a  continued  sluggish  recovery  in  the  aftermath  of the  global 
financial  crisis.  Numerous  reasons  can  be  considered  as  root  causes  for  this  dismal 
performance. Next to recent declines in oil prices, the combination of low inflation and low 
growth essentially points to a lack of demand holding back the recovery. 
A  question  frequently  posed  regards  the  reasons  for  the  ECB’s  Governing  Council  not  to 
accept the low increase in prices which, at first glance, appear beneficial to people. There are 
several reasons why excessively low inflation generates relevant risks for the economy and 
thus to everyone. First, with monetary policy rates at their lower bound, lower inflation rates 
imply  higher  real  interest  rates;  in  particular,  the  real  interest  rate  may  end  up  above  the 
equilibrium  value  needed  to  match  savings  and  investment  at  the  full  employment  level. 
Second, very low inflation may lead to an un-anchoring of inflation expectations. This would 
imply  second-round  effects  on  price  and  wage  setting  protracting  the  subdued  price 
developments  into  the  future.  Third,  low  inflation  increases  the  debt  burden  of  borrowers, 
obstructing the needed balance sheet adjustment of highly indebted households, firms and 
governments. Fourth, should a generalised deflation pressure prevail, nominal rigidities in the 
economy,  and  particularly  in  labour  markets,  could  inhibit  the  needed  relative  price 
adjustments. Finally, empirical studies show that there is a positive measurement bias in the 
measurement  of  price  developments,  which  implies  that  a  zero  inflation  rate  would  mask 
actually declining prices. 
For all these reasons the ECB has decided a quantitative objective with an inflation rate for the 
euro area of below but close to 2 percent. This objective guarantees an appropriate buffer to 
counter the above-mentioned drawbacks of very low inflation or even deflationary tendencies. 
[1] 
The monetary policy measures adopted by the ECB 
In order to bring inflation rates closer to the stated objective of price stability over the medium-
term, and in order to support the aggregate recovery, our monetary policy continues pursuing 
its accommodative stance. Our main policy rates will stay low for a prolonged period of time, 
in line with our forward guidance. The asset purchase programme will keep our balance sheet 
expanding until we see a sustained adjustment in the path of inflation. When the global financial 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   
crisis intensified in September 2008, the interest rate on the ECB’s main refinancing operations 
for banks stood at 4.25 percent. By May 2009, the ECB had reduced this rate to 1 percent, 
while simultaneously cutting the rate on the deposit facility to 25 basis points. The significant 
decline of inflation since the later part of 2013 led us to further reduce interest rates during last 
year and the interest rate on the main refinancing operations currently stands at 5 basis points, 
whereas the interest rate on the deposit facility is –20 basis points. 
Why did the Governing Council reduce the policy rates to such low levels? Policy rates are 
defined in nominal terms, they have a component related to inflation and another associated 
to real economic growth. Monetary policy searches for a neutral rate that steers the economy 
to stable inflation around its target and consequentially, the market for goods and services in 
equilibrium at full employment. The interest rate in real terms, i.e., adjusted by inflation, is 
precisely the rate at which the economy’s growth rate is equal to the potential growth rate so 
that  no  demand  pressure  makes  the  inflation  rate  inconsistent  with  price  stability  in  the 
medium-term. Recent estimates for the U.S. indicate that such real rate can now be in negative 
territory and the same should apply to other advanced economies.2 
The point that monetary policy cannot affect the equilibrium real rate is important. In addition 
to the propensity to save, the equilibrium rate depends on the growth rate of potential output. 
If potential output grows slowly, the equilibrium rate will be low, and therefore the real rate 
necessary to achieve price stability will also be low, independently of what the central bank 
does. Unfortunately, the growth rate of potential output in the advanced economies appears to 
have decreased in the recent years. Labour productivity, defined as output per employee, grew 
at  the  same  average  annual  rate  of  1.7  percent  in  the  euro  area  and  in  the  U.S.  for  two 
decades, from 1981 to 2000. From 2001 to 2008, the average annual growth rate of labour 
productivity in the U.S. was lower, at 1.5 percent, and since 2008 it has been only 1.1 percent. 
The slowdown in growth of labour productivity in the euro area has been far more pronounced: 
the average annual growth rate of labour productivity dropped to 0.5 percent from 2001 to 2008 
and stands at 0.2 percent since then. 
Demographic factors also matter for the equilibrium real rate. In an ageing society in which a 
large fraction of the population is saving for retirement, the propensity to save tends to be high 
and therefore, the rate of return on savings will be low, independently of monetary policy. In 
this context, it is important to realize that the working-age population of the European Union 
and the working-age population of the euro area has been falling since 2012, and this decline 
is expected to continue.3 Note that the central bank cannot affect the equilibrium real rate. The 
equilibrium real rate depends on features such as the households’ propensity to save, and the 
central bank cannot influence this. The ECB did not lead to this environment with underlying 
negative real equilibrium rates. 
The ECB responded to the decline of the real equilibrium rate by reducing the policy rates, and 
consequently the real rates declined throughout the economy. Had the policy rates been cut 
less aggressively, real income and inflation would have been even lower today. Now think 
about the implications for retirement saving by an average household, had the ECB reduced 
rates less aggressively. The real interest rate would have been higher, but the household’s 
income would have been lower. Therefore, the amount that the household would have saved 
for retirement would probably have been smaller – not larger – than with the current, low ECB 
policy rates. 
The other point related to savers is that any economic reasoning related to income must be 
done in real terms. This implies for instance, that in 2007 deposit interest rates in Germany 
                                                
2  See J. Williams and T. Laubach (2014), “Measuring the real natural interest rate redux” Federal Reserve Bank 
of San Francisco Working Paper No. 2015–16, October. 
3  The data on working-age population come from the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development 
and refer to the EA-17 and the EU-27. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   
where little more than 2percent but inflation was higher and so real deposits were negative, 
i.e., depositors were losing purchasing power. In fact, the Bundesbank wrote in 2014, “As it 
happens, negative real interest rates have been the norm, rather than the exception, over 
recent decades”.4 Recently, deposits have been around zero but the latest inflation rate is at 
0.2  percent  while  real  interest  rates  are  even  slightly  above  their  levels  of  2014.  Nominal 
interest rates can only increase when our policies become successful in the medium-term and 
inflation is closer to our official target. 
In addition to pursuing interest rate policy, the ECB has adopted a number of non-standard 
monetary policy measures since 2008, including a large scale asset purchase programme, 
targeting  an  improvement  in  financial  conditions.  The  goal  of  our  current  monetary  policy 
stance  is  to  incentivise  economic  risk-taking,  in  the  form  of  better  financing  conditions  for 
households and firms. We are, of course, very much aware that side effects are also present, 
in  particular  in  the  form  of  excessive  asset  valuations  or  excessive  risk-taking  by  market 
participants. 
We are following these developments very closely, notably in relation to risks posed by asset 
valuations and the search for yield phenomenon. Our assessment at present, monitoring a 
range of asset markets, is that there are no signs of generalised overvaluations in the euro 
area. At the same time, the banking sector is more resilient, with higher capital ratios, and 
financial stability conditions are currently fulfilled in spite of the existent risks. 
The  external  environment  of  the  euro  area  has  deteriorated  since  the  asset  purchase 
programme began. In particular, concerns about growth prospects in emerging markets and 
unfavourable developments in financial and commodity markets have signalled downside risks 
to  the  outlook  for  growth  and  inflation,  relative  to  the  latest  ECB  staff  projection  from 
September. Headline inflation is again at zero and core inflation has not consolidated a more 
positive  development,  which  points  to  the  need  to  reassess  our  policy  stance  in  order  to 
achieve our goals by 2017. Eurosystem staff is currently analysing the impact of the recent 
external events on the euro area, in particular on the speed of adjustment of the inflation rate 
to levels consistent with price stability. The next Eurosystem staff forecast, due in December, 
will  help  the  Governing  Council  re-examine  whether  the  current  degree  of  monetary 
accommodation remains appropriate. Further monetary policy options are available should the 
Council determine that changes to the current policy stance are required. 
The role of other economic policies 
Allow me now to turn to the role of other economic policies. The transmission mechanism from 
monetary policy decisions to inflation involves the real economy. With a negative output gap 
there  is  a  “divine  coincidence”  between  the  objective  of  normalising  inflation  and  that  of 
expanding aggregate demand to reduce the slack in the economy and put pressure on prices. 
Accordingly, the accommodative monetary policy stance of the ECB has supported and will 
continue to support real activity. Nevertheless, it has to be acknowledged that monetary policy 
cannot do it alone. Given how weak the economic performance of the euro area has been in 
the recent years, coupled with the limitations of monetary policy in what is called a “liquidity 
trap”, it is critical that supply-side reforms and fiscal policies contribute to improve the euro 
area’s growth prospects. 
Supply-side reforms are vital because the long-term growth rate depends on the productivity 
of labour and capital. Supply-side reforms can increase productivity, thereby lifting the potential 
growth  rate.  Growth  friendly  reforms  include  policy  actions  to  improve  the  business 
environment, to foster competition, to improve public infrastructure and education. Policies that 
reduce structural unemployment and raise the labour force participation rate are also important 
                                                
4  Deutsche Bundesbank (2014) “ Nothing new about negative real interest rates on deposits” Economic Bulletin 
2014–06–30. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   
so that European firms make full use of the amount of labour available. Demographic policies 
can play a role too, so that the supply of labour in Europe can grow, rather than shrink, in the 
future. 
In recent years, much of the reform effort within the euro area appears to have taken place in 
the member states most adversely affected by the global financial crisis and its aftermath. The 
OECD recently assessed structural reform efforts and achievements since 2011. It classified 
Estonia,  Greece,  Ireland,  Portugal  and  Spain  as  the  most  successful  reformers  among  all 
OECD members.5 The Netherlands and Germany have been laggards in the OECD ranking, 
even if starting from comfortable positions. 
While supply-side reforms are desirable, their objective is typically growth in the long-run. As 
such, supply-side reforms normally take time to produce positive effects. Furthermore, in the 
short-run, reforms can dampen aggregate expenditure, when they require costly adjustments 
up front, as has been recognised in the Stability and Growth Pact. For this reason and amid a 
tepid  recovery,  it  is  important for  member  states’  fiscal  policy  to  be  as accommodative  as 
possible. 
Fiscal  policy  and  to  some  extent,  income  policy,  have  room  for  manoeuvre  whenever  an 
economy is running a current account surplus. This is the case for the euro area that currently 
has a surplus of 3percent of GDP and is projected to remain as such the next few years. The 
surplus was only 0.1 percent in 2007 at the peak of the cycle, and will reach USD 365 billion 
this year. This is quite high by historical standards, it is now higher than China´s surplus at 
USD 329 billion. In my view, a pure economic reflection is warranted. This big increase in the 
surplus took  place  while  the  unemployment rate  increased from  7.5  percent to  12  percent 
standing  now  at  11  percent  and  while  employed  population  is  down  by  3.3  million  people 
compared with 2007 figures. In the U.S., employment deserves a higher priority for well-known 
historical  reasons.  Levels  of  employment  have  already  surpassed those  of  2007  while  the 
external current account shows a deficit of USD 460 billion. 
Economically, a surplus means that domestic savings are higher than investment or, seen from 
another angle, that domestic expenditure is lower than what the domestic economy produces. 
From an international perspective, a surplus means that the economy is importing demand 
from other countries that are necessarily running a deficit. As a consequence, it means that 
the economy is absorbing and reducing world demand. What is also important to grasp is that 
this is a macroeconomic phenomenon and that total savings of an economy are not just the 
result  of  individual  preferences  and  behaviour  but  the  end  result  of  a  whole  set  of 
macroeconomic  policies  –  from  tax  and  fiscal  to  monetary  or  income  policy.  The 
macroeconomic policies of one economy affect the savings or expenditure of other countries. 
Trade and finance link all economies in a specific way. Not all economies can have a surplus. 
The relation between savings and investment or expenditure and domestic production is not 
unilaterally determined. 
What  all  these  economic  points  imply  is  that  an  economy  that  has  a  surplus  can  adopt 
macroeconomic policies to increase domestic demand, either by income policy or by using its 
fiscal space to cut taxes or increase expenditure, while still keeping the basic macroeconomic 
equilibrium of not spending more than what it produces. The points I made provide the rationale 
for  the  statement  made  last  year  in  Der  Spiegel  by  the  Bundesbank´s  Chief  Economist, 
welcoming the then “recently agreed pay rises above 3 percent”.6 
The surplus situation also means that, for the euro area as a whole, there is fiscal space to be 
used to help closing the existent output gap resulting from lack of demand. This would put 
upward pressure on prices, speeding up the path towards normalisation. 
                                                
5  OECD: “Structural reforms in Europe: achievements and homework.” April 2015. 
6  See Der Spiegel, 21 July 2014. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
   
It is crucial to note again that this is about macroeconomic policy and not about microeconomic 
efficiency.  It  is  definitely  not  about  asking  our  economies  to  compromise  productivity  and 
competitiveness.  It  is  about  fostering  a  broader  use  in  the  present  of  what  a  productive 
economy can sustain. 
The problem is that there is no common European fiscal policy, which is also not foreseen in 
the Treaty. The overall fiscal stance is not discussed and there is no substantive effort to co-
ordinate  independent  national  fiscal  policies.  Many  economists  have  pointed  out  that  this 
constitutes a significant shortcoming of our monetary union design. Economic governance of 
the monetary union depends only on monetary policy without any concept of a macroeconomic 
policy mix. 
This shortcoming provides the rationale for the proposal in the recent Five Presidents’ Report, 
that points for the creation of “an euro area-wide fiscal stabilisation function” in the longer term. 
On the way to the “longer term”, one could envisage some steps to strengthen the European 
dimension of fiscal policy in the Eurogroup. Another initiative could be to expand the financial 
capacity of the Juncker Plan in order to really help to jump start investment at the level of the 
European Union. This would be consistent with the existent overall fiscal space. 
A last important remark is that a more flexible overall fiscal policy does not require changing 
the existing framework of the Stability and Growth Pact that binds euro area Member States. 
As  recently  emphasised  in  a  document  by  the  European  Commission,7  the  Pact  already 
envisages a certain degree of flexibility in the way its rules should be applied. One example is 
the  notion  of  “structural  budget  balance”  which  Member  States  are  obliged  to  meet.  The 
structural  budget  balance  is,  in  effect,  the  budget  balance  corrected  for  the  effects  of  the 
business  cycle.  The  objective  of  the  correction  is  to  allow  fiscal  policy  to  play  its  role  in 
mitigating possible economic shocks. The scope of flexibility within the Stability and Growth 
Pact should thus be exploited in full. 
Let me conclude. 
The euro area has been experiencing a protracted period of low inflation and weak economic 
activity, with two recessions and a very slow recovery since the latter recession. Monetary 
policy has been and will continue to be accommodative, but monetary policy alone cannot 
respond  to  all  the  existing  challenges.  Recent  developments  only  add  to  the  urgency  of 
addressing economic, social and demographic problems of the euro area. No complacency 
with mass unemployment should be tolerated. 
Outcome legitimacy is, at present, the main source of legitimacy for the European project. The 
euro area must deliver on its promises of stable prosperity, knowing that societies do not live 
in the long-term but in the here and now. The task requires new institutional reforms and a 
sense  of  unity.  As  Helmut  Schmidt  wrote  in  2011,  we  should  “strive  to  ensure  that  the 
historically  unique  European  Union  emerges  unshaken  and  with  self-confidence  from  its 
current period of weakness”.8 
Thank you for your attention. 
                                                 
7  European Commission: “Making the best use of the flexibility within the existing rules of the Stability and Growth 
Pact.” January 2015. 
8  Helmut Schmidt (2011) Speech “ Deutschland in und mit und für Europa”. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
