  
 
Vítor Constâncio: Understanding inflation dynamics and monetary policy 
in a low inflation environment 
Remarks by Mr Vítor Constâncio, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, at the ECB 
Conference  on  “Challenges  for  Macroeconomic  Policy  in  a  Low  Inflation  Environment”, 
Frankfurt am Main, 5 November 2015. 
 This speech is partially based on the speech delivered at the Jackson Hole Economic Policy Symposium 2015. 
Introduction 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
At  the  beginning  of  this  Conference,  I  wish  to  extend  a  warm  welcome  to  all  participants, 
thanking everyone for collaborating with this ECB initiative. In my remarks today I will discuss 
a few issues related to understanding inflation dynamics, focusing on recent developments in 
euro  area  inflation  and  their  implications  for  monetary  policy.  Several  conference  papers 
make  important  contributions  both  to  the  analysis  of  the  causes  and  consequences  of  low 
inflation, and to the design of policy responses. 
Understanding inflation dynamics is especially important today due to the very low inflation 
levels  prevailing  in  many  countries.  Moreover,  there  are  studies  suggesting  that  in  some 
countries  the  relationship  between  slack  in  the  economy  and  inflation  seems  to  have 
weakened recently. 
If confirmed, this weakening of the link between the level of economic activity and inflation 
would have significant consequences for monetary policy. First, it has important implications 
for the sacrifice ratio: if inflation rises as a result of shocks not related to domestic slack, then 
the cost of bringing inflation down in terms of output loss would be higher. Second, if instead 
inflation becomes very low, monetary policy would have to stimulate economic activity more 
strongly and could lack effective instruments to do so, given the zero lower bound (ZLB) on 
nominal  interest  rates.  In  sum,  a  flatter  slope  of  the  Phillips  curve  would  make  controlling 
inflation either more costly or more difficult. 
In this context, a surprising development is the emergence, of a “twin puzzle” after the Great 
Recession: first, “missing disinflation” from 2009 to 2011, and second, “excessive disinflation” 
after 2012, particularly in Europe. 
During  the  Great  Recession,  inflation  in  advanced  countries  did  not  fall  as  much  as  a 
traditional  Phillips  curve  predicted,  given  the  severity  and  length  of  the  recession.  Just  as 
puzzling, more recent global developments point in the opposite direction. Namely, despite 
the  ongoing  recovery,  headline  inflation  rates  in  advanced  economies  remain  well  below 
target. 
The seemingly weakened relationship between inflation and economic slack seems to have 
made interpreting and controlling inflation dynamics more difficult. I will try to convince you 
that if one looks deeper this is not necessarily the case. Ex-post, if we exploit all available 
information,  we  do  have  a  consistent  understanding  of  inflation  developments  after  the 
financial crisis. And we can fruitfully build on this understanding when designing appropriate 
policy responses to the prevailing low inflation environment. 
Prolonged low inflation: some puzzles 
Clearly, for headline inflation commodity, price shocks have played a significant role. But the 
two  highlighted  puzzles  also  apply  to  core  inflation.  Importantly,  the  trend  for  a  weaker 
relationship with economic slack also applies to core inflation. Core inflation reflects mostly 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  domestic factors, as indirect effects from external developments are muted and take time to 
operate.  That  is  why  I  consider  it  more  useful  to  focus  on  core  inflation  dynamics  for  the 
purpose of discussing their consequences for monetary policy. 
There is a vast literature on the first puzzle of the “missing disinflation”, which offers a variety 
of explanations, mostly with a reference to the US. 
Two important aspects in particular are investigated by papers here at this conference. The 
paper  by  Gilchrist,  Schoenle,  Sim,  and  Zakrajsek  (2015)  emphasizes  the  role  of  higher 
mark-ups of liquidity-constrained firms. In particular it shows that facing financial distress in 
the absence of devaluation, firms in financially weak countries have an incentive to raise their 
prices to cope with liquidity shortfalls. 
Another way of solving the “missing disinflation” puzzle is suggested in a paper by Coibion 
and  Gorodnichenko  (2015).  Namely,  these  authors  propose  using  household  expectations 
from  surveys  to  measure  inflation  expectations,  explaining  the  rise  in  household  inflation 
expectations  in  2009  to  2011  by  the  increase  in  oil  prices.  Coibion, Gorodnichenko and 
Kumar  (2015),  will  in  turn,  present  at  this  conference  relevant  work  on  firm  expectations. 
They find  that firms’  average  inflation  expectations  are  systematically  higher than  those of 
professional forecasters and resemble those of households. They conclude that firms devote 
few  resources  to  collecting  and  processing  information  about  inflation.  The  paper  by 
Wiederholt (2015) studies a New Keynesian model of sluggish and heterogeneous inflation 
expectations. It finds that the deflationary spiral in bad states of the world is less severe than 
in the models currently used for policy analysis. 
Many  of  these  approaches,  besides  solving  the  puzzle  a  posteriori,  also  provide  new 
methods  that  promise  to  improve  future  inflation  forecasting.  The  use  of  short-term 
unemployment1  or  household  inflation  expectations  that  are  closer  to  those  of  economic 
agents are two examples of promising developments. 
Drivers of inflation in the euro area 
Let us look at the euro area. We can identify two distinct periods of disinflation in the case of 
HICP  excluding  food  and  energy:  the  first  from  2008  to  2010,  and  the  second,  starting  in 
2012. Searching for the drivers of these episodes, our experts used a Bayesian VAR2 with 
HICP (excluding food and energy), real activity indicators, external and financial variables. 
Each inflation dip had different origins: the first was mainly due to external factors (the fall in 
foreign  demand,  energy  and  food  prices),  while  the  second  was  predominantly  driven  by 
domestic sources in an environment of weak demand. 
The fact remains that forecasters were not able to anticipate the disinflation of 2012. Not just 
the ECB but also the IMF, the Survey of Professional Forecasters, Consensus Economics, 
Euro Zone Barometer, OECD and the European Commission, all have systematically over-
predicted both headline and core inflation at all horizons, especially since the second quarter 
of 2012. This is particularly surprising because forecasters did take into account the fall in 
economic activity in most euro area countries after 2011, which generated a significant gap 
between actual and potential output. 
                                                
1  See in particular Ball and Mazumder (2014), who use a parsimonious Phillips curve for core US inflation, with 
only long-term inflation expectations (reduced in practice to a constant) and short-term unemployment. They 
get a good fit for 2000–14 and even for a long period that starts as early as 1985 (the beginning of the Great 
Moderation). 
2  The methodology is similar to Jarociński and Smets (2008), “House prices and the Stance of Monetary Policy”, 
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review, July/August, 90(4), pp. 339–65. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Yet, policy makers need more than just good inflation forecasts: we also need to understand 
the inflation process in order to better assess the role of monetary policy. We must also be 
able to explain our reasoning to the public, as the management of inflation expectations has 
become an important monetary policy channel. 
Let me provide you some evidence on inflation expectations in the euro area. 
Recent evolution of inflation expectations in the euro area 
Since 2005, there has been a broad degree of co-movement between survey-based (ECB 
Survey  of  Professional  Forecasters,  (ECB  SPF))  and  market-based  measures  of  inflation 
expectations,  although  the  latter  have  tended  to  fluctuate  more  widely.  Both  survey-based 
and market-based longer-term inflation expectations moved down, in 2009 and 2010, before 
they both increased again in 2011 and 2012, only to subsequently decline more substantially 
in 2013 and 2014, with a partial rebound so far in 2015. The scale of movements in market-
based measures however, has been significantly larger than those from surveys – the ratio of 
the two scalings is four-to-one [4:1]. 
Focusing on the recent period, although both survey-based and market-based measures of 
inflation expectations declined over the period early-2013 to early-2015, and both have since 
rebounded  somewhat,  there  have  been  significant  differences  in  the  magnitude  of 
movements and in the changes in the slope of the inflation expectations curve. The market-
based  curve  has  tended  to  move  by  more  both  at  the  short-  and  long-end,  whereas  the 
survey-based curve has moved by less, particularly at the longer-end of the curve. 
Considering  first  the  shorter-end  of  the  curve,  the  one-year  forward  in  one  year  (i.e.,  two 
years  ahead)  market-based  measure  declined  by  1.1  p.p.  between  January  2013  and 
January 2015 and rebounded by 0.6 p.p. by July 2015. In contrast, the same measure from 
the ECB SPF declined by 0.6 p.p. and has rebounded by 0.3 p.p. over the same periods. 
Considering  longer-term  horizons,  the  one-year  forward  rate  in  four  years  (i.e.  five  years 
ahead)  market-based  measure  declined  by  0.7  p.p.  between  January  2013  and  January 
2015 and rebounded by 0.3 p.p. by July 2015. In contrast, the same measure from the ECB 
SPF declined by 0.21 p.p. and has rebounded by 0.09 p.p. over the same period. 
The fall of market-based inflation expectations is also confirmed by options data. The daily 
option implied probability distributions of future inflation at different horizons from inflations 
caps  and  floors  between  2009  and  2015  show  that  since  mid-2014,  the  negative  gap 
between expected inflation and the two percent reference level are statistically significant up 
to a seven-year horizon. 
The SPF offers, not only a measure of inflation expectations, but also additional information 
on  their  drivers.  A  more  direct  analysis  of  the  factors  underlying  longer-term  inflation 
expectations is possible on the basis of the results of a special questionnaire sent to SPF 
respondents in 2013. 
When asked what the main factors that drove their longer-term inflation expectations were, 
the  largest  number  of  respondents  (81%)  indicated  that  the  ECB’s  price  stability  objective 
was the most significant factor. Six further main factors were also given, namely (in declining 
order of importance) trends in actual inflation (54%), financial market indicators (43%), trends 
in wage growth (38%), forecasts in other surveys (38%), trends in money and credit (38%) 
and  fiscal  indicators  (19%).  Other  factors  mentioned  included  economic  activity  and  ‘gap’ 
measures (output and unemployment). 
The evolution of the four main variable factors (actual inflation, market expectations, wage 
growth and other surveys) is broadly consistent with the actual movements in the SPF’s five-
year-ahead  inflation  expectations.  In  particular,  the  four  broad  movements,  namely  (i) the 
upswing  in  longer-term  inflation  expectations  between  2005  and  2008,  (ii) the  decline 
between  2009  and  2010,  (iii) the  subsequent  rebound  in  2011–12;  and  (iv) the  fall  since 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  2013,  appear  to  be  in  line  with  the  factors  cited  by  SPF  respondents.  Most  recently,  the 
analysis suggests that the decline in longer-term SPF expectations may reflect developments 
in actual HICP inflation, market-based measures of inflation expectations and wage growth. 
A model-based analysis of the determinants of long-term market-based inflation expectations 
shows that the main determinants of the five-year implied forward inflation linked swap rate 
five years ahead (5y5y ILSR) are real GDP and monetary policy. Real GDP is estimated to 
provide an overall positive contribution of about +20bps. Monetary policy is proxied by the 
Eonia 1y1y rate (that gauges the market sentiment about future ECB policy interest rates) 
and the size of the Eurosystem balance sheet’s assets. The latter reflects not only the Asset 
Purchase  Programme  (APP)  but  also  all  the  other  non-conventional  monetary  policy 
measures undertaken by the Eurosystem since the inception of the global financial crisis in 
August 2007. 
In conclusion, recent evolutions of both survey-based and market-based measures tend to 
raise some concerns of a de-anchoring of long-term inflation expectations in euro area. 
The Phillips curve as a vehicle to discuss inflation dynamics 
The current attention to the relationship between inflation and economic slack has led to an 
intense debate on the stability of the Phillips curve and its power to explain the twin puzzle. 
An important consideration is that economic slack is a multidimensional concept that is not 
directly  observable  and  choices  must  be  made  on  how  to  estimate  or  measure  it.  The 
outcome  is  highly  sensitive  to  the  assumptions  used  for  the  decomposition  of  economic 
activity into trend and cycle. Usual measures of slack can vary substantially across methods 
and variables included, although they tend to agree on the timing of peaks and troughs. 
The fact that economic activity is multidimensional suggests that there might be advantages 
in using multivariate dynamic models to estimate it. For instance, ECB staff uses a dynamic 
factor  model  that  performs  a  trend/cycle  decomposition  of  real  activity  and  core  inflation.3 
The model  uses  a  single factor  to capture  common  cyclical  fluctuations  and  estimates  the 
output gap as the deviation of output from its trend. Different modelling assumptions, such as 
different sets of real activity indicators and different specifications of the trend components of 
the  variables,  lead  to  different  estimates  of  the  output  gap.  These  differences  are 
economically  very  relevant,  with  some  models  estimating  an  output  gap  that  was  close  to 
zero in 2014 on average, and others estimating remaining slack of as much as –6%. 
One way to discriminate among different estimates of the output gap is to check their ability 
to forecast inflation. It turns out that the variants associated with a continuation of positive 
trend  growth,  implying  a  wider  output  gap,  are  the  ones  that  produce  better  inflation 
forecasts. The best variant from this perspective implies that the output gap was as large as 
–6% in 2014. 
Taking  into  account  uncertainty  over  how  to  measure  slack  and  inflation  expectations,  the 
Phillips curve is alive and well in the euro area. The dynamic factor model just discussed is 
not the only one that can explain the recent excessive disinflation. ECB staff has conducted a 
specification  search  with  a  hybrid  New  Keynesian  Phillips  Curve  (NKPC),  using  different 
measures  of  slack  and  of  inflation  expectations,  and  also  including  import  prices  as  a 
measure  of  external  shocks.  Several  specifications  are  indeed  able  to  track  the  recent 
disinflation quite well. 
A  related  consideration  is  that  the  coefficients  of  the  Phillips  curve  may  not  be  stable.  In 
particular, the slope of the Phillips curve might have changed over the period when we were 
                                                
3  Jarocinski M. and Lenza, M., “Inflation forecasts in a Bayesian dynamic factor model of the euro area”, ECB 
Working Paper forthcoming. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  over-predicting inflation. For the euro area, the evidence from several new papers points to a 
relative steepening recently, following the previous flattening, (see e.g. Oinonen and Paloviita 
(2014),  Riggi  and  Venditti  (2015)  and  Foroni  and  Porqueddu (2015)). This  development  is 
especially marked in those countries which experienced deeper and longer recessions and 
made greater efforts to reform their product and labour markets. 
Estimating the same specifications of Phillips curves over two samples, one stopping at 2012 
Q1 (when we started systematically over-predicting inflation) and the other covering the full 
sample ending in 2014 Q4, one finds evidence of an increase in the slope estimate. Indeed, 
regime-switching  estimates,  accounting for  parameter  change  due  to  state-dependency  on 
various measures of the business cycle can help to explain the “excessive” disinflation since 
2012. 
How much time variation is there in the slope of the Phillips curve, and in which direction? 
Let us take an agnostic view on the origins of the time-variation and estimate a hybrid NKPC 
for the euro area with time-varying parameters, similar to that in Blanchard et al. (2015). Over 
the sample period running from 1999 Q1 to 2015 Q2, the slope of headline inflation had a 
general  tendency  to  decrease  until  2011,  after  which  it  rebounded.  For  core  inflation  the 
upward shift started earlier. 
Similar results have been obtained also using the structural New Area Wide Model (NAWM). 
In the NAWM framework, the Phillips curve relates current inflation to expected future and 
realised past inflation, and to a marginal cost term capturing the pricing behaviour of firms. 
The slope coefficient is a function of several structural parameters controlling nominal and 
real rigidities. 
Based on a rolling window estimation of the Phillips curve of the NAWM, there is evidence of 
an  initial  decline  in  the  slope  of  the  Phillips  curve  before  the  crisis,  followed  by  a  certain 
degree of steepening in the more recent period. Overall, the findings based on our structural 
model  are  consistent  with  the  estimates  from  our  time-varying  parameters  time  series 
models. 
Possible policy responses 
Let me now turn to discussing possible policy responses to low inflation in an environment of 
low nominal interest rates. This topic is investigated by several papers at the conference. 
Forward guidance 
Since June 2013, the ECB has been providing forward guidance on the future path of the 
monetary policy interest rates, conditional on the outlook for price stability. In early 2014, the 
Governing Council “firmly reiterated” its forward guidance, explaining that “this expectation is 
based on an overall subdued outlook for inflation extending into the medium term”, among 
other  factors.  Hence,  forward  guidance  can  be  included  in  the  bundle  of  possible 
unconventional policy responses to a prolonged period of low inflation. 
In essence, forward guidance works through an expectations’ channel: expected future short-
term interest rates are a key element in the determination of long term interest rates, which in 
turn are essential drivers of saving, consumption and investment decisions. 
As  such,  forward  guidance  can  serve  two  main  purposes.  First,  it  can  provide  greater 
monetary  policy  accommodation  when  the  policy  rate  reaches  the  ZLB,  by  providing 
assurance that the central bank will keep the policy rate at low levels for some time, and for a 
longer period than the public initially expected. Second, it may prevent market volatility from 
interfering with and hampering the transmission of monetary policy decisions. Hence, once 
the  policy  rate  has  reached  the  ZLB,  the  introduction  of  forward  guidance  and  the 
commitment to keep the short-term interest rate at the lower bound for a prolonged period of 
time would transform the ZLB from a constraint into a deliberate monetary policy strategy. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  An assessment of the macroeconomic implications of announcing a path of the policy rates 
can  be  obtained  using  structural  DSGE  models,  which  assign  a  crucial  role  to  the  agents’ 
expectations  about  future  developments  of  the  main  macroeconomic  variables.  In  this 
respect,  the  paper  by  Wiederholt  (2015),  argues  that  forward  guidance  is  less  powerful 
when  agents  have  dispersed  information.  Coenen  and Warne  (2014),  using the  New  Area 
Wide Model (NAWM) developed at the ECB, show that with nominal interest rates at the ZLB 
forward guidance can mitigate the downside risks to price stability. 
Yet other papers, such as the one by McKay, Nakamura and Steinsson (2015) presented 
at this conference are less sanguine about the power of forward guidance. When households 
face borrowing constraints, they cannot take advantage of future changes in interest rates. 
Moreover, even unconstrained households may increase precautionary savings in the face of 
uninsurable income risk, further tempering the effects of a reduction in long-term rates. 
Unconventional monetary policy measures 
In recent years, central banks in the advanced economies have enacted various rounds of 
“Quantitative  easing”  (QE)  policies,  aimed  at  supporting  economic  activity  –  and,  as  a 
consequence, inflation dynamics – when short-term monetary policy rates have reached the 
ZLB. 
In  general  terms,  QE  policies  consist  of  asset  purchases  by  the  central  bank  and  are 
expected  to  affect  economic  activity  and  inflation  through  a  variety  of  channels.  The 
increased demand for government bonds directly reduce their yield, driving investors towards 
alternative  financial  instruments  and  therefore  generating  spill-over  effects  to  a  broader 
range of assets. The latter would trigger a portfolio rebalancing effect, which would expand 
the private sector’s spending capacity. More specifically, aggregate demand is expected to 
increase, reflecting the positive intertemporal substitution effect of lower interest rates onto 
households’ and firms’ consumption and investment decisions. 
Moreover,  an  increase  in  the  prices  of  financial  and  real  assets  would  also  have  an 
expansionary effect on aggregate demand by directly increasing the wealth of holders. The 
banks’ cost of funding is also expected to fall, contributing to easing credit supply conditions. 
Finally,  lower  yields  in  domestic  currency-denominated  assets  are  expected  to  trigger  a 
depreciation of the domestic currency, which would provide support to exports and increase 
imported  inflation. The  latter  effect,  together  with  the  expansion  in  aggregate  demand  and 
the augmented public’s confidence in the central bank’s ability to attain its objectives, should 
have a positive impact on inflation expectations. 
The  prolonged  period  of  low  inflation  rates  observed  in  the  euro  area  since  2014  has 
prompted a number of unconventional monetary policy measures by the ECB. During 2014, 
two  targeted  longer-term  refinancing  operations  (TLTROs)  and  an  asset-backed  securities 
(ABS) purchase programme were started. In January 2015 the ECB announced the launch of 
the  APP,  encompassing  the  existing  programmes  for  ABS  and  covered  bonds,  as  well  as 
purchases in the secondary market of euro-denominated investment-grade securities issued 
by  euro-area  governments,  agencies  and  European  institutions.  These  unconventional 
monetary policy measures were introduced after the ECB policy rates had been repeatedly 
lowered. 
The recent introduction of the APP has successfully improved financial and credit conditions 
in the euro area and contributed to supporting the normalisation of price stability, as well as 
the ongoing economic recovery. 
Our new non-standard measures have resulted in higher equity and bond prices, improved 
lending  conditions,  and  also  a  recovery  in  inflation  expectations.  Since  June  2014  the 
transmission  of  policy  rates  to  lending  rates  has  improved  considerably,  with  declines  in 
lending  rates  becoming  more  pronounced  as  well  as  more  widely  distributed  across  euro 
area countries. Moreover, our quarterly bank lending survey confirms the improvements in 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  broader  credit  conditions  since  the  introduction  of  our  new  non-standard  measures.  The 
survey, addressed to the senior loan officers of a representative sample of euro area banks, 
provides  information  on  financing  conditions  in  euro  area  credit  markets  and  on  banks’ 
lending  policies.  Banks  have  consistently  eased  their  credit  standards  for  loans  to  non-
financial corporations over the past year. The easing of credit standards stems, notably, from 
the lower cost of funds and balance sheet constraints, as well as from greater competition 
among banks. Both developments were clearly objectives of our measures, in particular of 
the TLTROs. Easier access to credit has been coupled with a consistent increase in firms’ 
demand for loans. The general level of interest rates, according to the survey respondents, is 
contributing most to the recovery in loan demand. 
Concerning inflation expectations, the declining trend I mentioned above has been reversed 
since January 2015. Both market-based and survey-based measures of longer-term inflation 
expectations have recovered from their lows. 
The effects of the recent introduction of the APP on euro area economic activity and inflation 
can also be analysed through the lens of some structural DSGE models, like a variant of the 
model  developed  by  Gertler  and  Karadi  (2013).  In  this  class  of  models,  simulation  results 
show  that  the  APP  should  provide  support  to  euro-area  GDP  growth  over  a  three-year 
horizon, while the inflation rate should increase significantly in the same period (see Burlon 
et al. 2015, and Cova, Pagano and Pisani 2015). 
Structural reforms 
Among  the  possible  policy  measures  to  be  implemented  in  a  low  inflation  environment, 
structural reforms in product and labour markets have been repeatedly advocated. While the 
long-run macroeconomic benefits of structural reforms are documented in the literature, their 
short-run macroeconomic effects are less clear during a recession associated with a financial 
crisis.  Specifically,  reforms  could  allow  for  an  earlier  exit  from  the  ZLB  if  their  short-term 
effects on inflation and economic activity are positive, or they could increase the duration of 
ZLB if their effects are negative. 
Structural  reforms  in  the  product  and  labour  market  have  a  positive  effect  on  permanent 
income,  associated  to  the  permanent  expansion  in  aggregate  supply.  This  increase  in 
permanent income generates a positive wealth effect that favours a permanent increase in 
aggregate  demand.  However,  when  the  economy  is  at  the  ZLB,  a  negative  channel  also 
appears: since nominal interest rates cannot be reduced, any fall in inflation translates into 
an increase of the real interest rate, generating contractionary effects. In particular, prices will 
fall  if  the  initial  surge  in  aggregate  demand  generated  by  the  reforms  is  smaller  than  the 
expansion  in  aggregate  supply.  Eggertsson,  Ferrero  and  Raffo  (2014)  show  that,  in  the 
absence of physical capital accumulation, the fall in inflation and the lack of leeway to make 
further interest rate cuts render this type of reform contractionary in the short run, through an 
increase in the real interest rate. When the former demand effect prevails on the increase in 
aggregate  supply,  the  reforms  have  expansionary  short-term  effects.  In  particular,  Gerali, 
Notarpietro and Pisani (2015) show that reforms simultaneously implemented in the  whole 
euro area can favour an earlier exit from the ZLB if they generate sufficiently large short-run 
inflationary  effects  through  an  increase  in  physical  capital  accumulation.  The  conference 
paper by Arce, Hurtado and Thomas (2015) develops a two-region model of the euro area 
with deleveraging, showing that a reform in a peripheral region which increases future output 
has always short-term expansionary effects on the domestic economy. However, depending 
on the presence of the ZLB, the reform may generate positive or negative spillovers on the 
core region. 
Conclusions 
Let  me  conclude.  Inflation  dynamics  since  the  Great  Recession  have  shown  signs  of 
instability that have led to a sequence of systematic forecasting errors. The two puzzles of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  “missing disinflation” and “excessive disinflation” triggered a surge of new research around 
the Phillips curve and its possible demise, which seems to have been prematurely foretold. 
The  Phillips  curve  seems  to  survive  the  recent  reassessment  and  is  still  a  valid  tool  of 
analysis in the euro area, meaning that a sustained recovery in inflation is conditional upon 
the increase in real activity and inflation expectations. 
Even if policy interest rates reach their effective lower bound, monetary policy does not run 
out of ammunition. In particular central banks can use forward guidance and unconventional 
monetary policy measures in the form of “quantitative easing” in order to stimulate economic 
activity  and  bring  inflation  closer  to  the  target.  Such  policies,  however,  cannot  be  a 
replacement for proper structural reform to the extent that it is needed. 
The  euro  area  and  other  advanced  economies  continue  to  face  a  complex  challenge  to 
overcome the legacy effects of the Great Recession. In our case, the challenge of too low 
inflation has been particularly acute but the use of a vast array of policy measures gives us 
hope that we achieve our medium-term objective of inflation close to 2%. The contribution of 
academic  research  has  been  relevant  for  the  design  of  our  policies.  This  conference  is  a 
good example of such contributions and I therefore wish you a very productive discussion. 
References 
Akerlof, G.A., W.T. Dickens, and G.L. Perry, (1996), “The Macroeconomics of Low Inflation”, 
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Vol. 27(1), 1–76. 
Ball,  L.  and  N.G.  Mankiw,  (1994),  “Asymmetric  Price  Adjustment  and  Economic 
Fluctuations”, Economic Journal, Vol. 104(423), 247–261. 
Ball,  L.,  N.G.  Mankiw,  and  D.  Romer,  (1988),  “The  New  Keynesian  Economics  and  the 
Output-Inflation Trade-off”, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Vol. 19(1), 1–82. 
Ball, L. and S. Mazumder, (2011), “Inflation Dynamics and the Great Recession”, Brookings 
Papers on Economic Activity, Vol. 42, 337–405. 
Ball, L. and S. Mazumder, (2014), “A Phillips Curve with Anchored Expectations And Short-
Term Unemployment”, NBER Working Paper No. 20715. 
Banco de España (2015) “Variation in the Cyclical Sensitivity of Spanish Inflation: an Initial 
Approximation”, Economic Bulletin July-August 2013. 
Banco de España (2015), Annual Report. 
Bernanke, B. (2010), “The Economic Outlook and Monetary Policy”, Speech at the Federal 
Reserve Bank of Kansas City Economic Symposium, Jackson Hole, Wyoming. 
Blanchard, O., E. Cerutti and L. Summers, (2015), “Inflation and Activity: Two Explorations, 
and  Their  Monetary  Policy  Implications”,  presented  at  the  2015  ECB  Forum  on  Central 
Banking. 
Christiano,  L.J.,  M.S.  Eichenbaum,  and  M.  Trabandt,  (2014),  “Understanding  the  Great 
Recession”, NBER Working Paper No. 20040. 
Ciccarelli,  M.  and  B.  Mojon,  (2010),  “Global  Inflation”,  The  Review  of  Economics  and 
Statistics, Vol. 92(3), 524–535. 
Clark, P., D. Laxton, and D. Rose, (1996), “Asymmetry in the U.S. Output-Inflation Nexus: 
Issues and Evidence”, IMF Staff Studies, Vol. 46. 
Coibion,  O.  and  Y.  Gorodnichenko,  (2015),  “Is  the  Phillips  Curve  Alive  and Well  after  All? 
Inflation  Expectations  and 
the  Missing  Disinflation”,  American  Economic  Journal: 
Macroeconomics, Vol. 7(1): 197–232. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Coibion,  O.,  Y.  Gorodnichenko,  and  S.  Kumar,  (2015),  “How  Do  Firms  Form  Their 
Expectations? New Survey Evidence”, NBER Working Paper No. 21092. 
Conti, A., S. Neri, and A. Nobili, (2015), “Why is Inflation So Low in the Euro Area?”, Temi di 
discussione  (Economic  Working  Papers)  1019,  Bank  of  Italy,  Economic  Research  and 
International Relations Area. 
Daly,  M.  C.,  and  B.  Hobijn,  (2014), “Downward  Nominal Wage  Rigidities  Bend  the  Phillips 
Curve”, Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, Vol. 46(S2), 51–93. 
Del Negro, M., M.P. Giannoni, and F. Schorfheide, (2015), “Inflation in the Great Recession 
and New Keynesian Models”, American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 2015, Vol. 7(1): 
168–196. 
Eisner, R. (1997), “A New View of the NAIRU”, in: Improving the Global Economy: Keynesian 
and  the  Growth  in  Output  and  Employment,  edited  by  P.  Davidson  and  Jan  A.  Kregel; 
Cheltenham, UK; Lyme, NH, US: E. Elgar. 
Ferroni, F. and B. Mojon, (2014), “Domestic and Global Inflation”, mimeo. 
Fisher,  T.C.G.  (1989),  “Efficiency  Wages:  A  Literature  Survey”,  Bank  of  Canada  Working 
Paper No. 89–5. 
Foroni,  C.  and  Porqueddu,  M.  (2015),  “Inflation  Dynamics  in  the  Euro  Area:  the  Role  of 
Inflation Expectations and Nonlinearities in the Phillips Curve”, mimeo. 
Gilchrist, S., R. Schoenle, J. Sim, and E. Zakrajsek, (2015), “Inflation Dynamics During the 
Financial Crisis,” Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2015–012, Washington: Board 
of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. 
Gürkaynak,  R.S.,  B.  Kisacikoglu  and  B.  Rossi,  (2013),  “Do  DSGE  Models  Forecast  More 
Accurately Out-of-Sample than VAR Models?”, CEPR Discussion Paper July 2013. 
Gordon,  R.J.  (2007),  “Phillips  Curve  Specification  and  the  Decline  in  U.S.  Output  and 
Inflation Volatility”, presented at Symposium on The Phillips Curve and the Natural Rate of 
Unemployment, Institut für Welwirtschaft Kiel, Germany. 
Gordon, R.J. (2013), “The Phillips Curve is Alive and Well: Inflation and the NAIRU During 
the Slow Recovery”, NBER Working Paper No. 19390. 
Iakova,  D.  (2007),  “Flattening  of  the  Phillips  Curve:  Implications  for  Monetary  Policy”,  IMF 
Working Paper No. 07/76. 
IMF  (2006),  “How  Has  Globalization  Changed  Inflation?”,  World  Economic  Outlook, 
Washington, D.C.: IMF, April, 97–134. 
IMF  (2013),  “The  Dog  That  Didn’t  Bark:  Has  Inflation  Been  Muzzled  or  Was  It  Just 
Sleeping?”, World Economic Outlook Chapter 3, IMF. 
Jarocinski,  M.  and  M.  Lenza,  (2015),  “Output  gap  and  Inflation  Forecast  in  a  Bayesian 
Dynamic Factor Model of the Euro Area”, forthcoming ECB Working Paper. 
King, R. and M.W. Watson, (2012), “Inflation and unit labour costs”, Journal of Money, Credit 
and Banking, 44(s2), 11–149. 
Krueger, A., J. Cramer, and D.Cho, (2014), “Are the Long-Term Unemployed on the Margins 
of the Labor Market?”, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Vol. 48(1), 229–280. 
Macklem, T. (1997), “Capacity Constraints, Price Adjustment, and Monetary Policy”, Bank of 
Canada Review (Spring): 39–56. 
Mavroeidis,  S.,  M.  Plagborg-Møller  and  J.  Stock,  (2014),  “Empirical  Evidence  on  Inflation 
Expectations in the New Keynesian Phillips Curve”, Journal of Economic Literature, March 
2014, 52(1), 124–188. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
  Medel, C., M. Pedersen and P. Pincheira, (2014), “The Elusive Predictive Ability of Global 
Inflation”, Banco Central de Chile Working Paper No.725. 
Murphy, R. (2014), “Explaining Inflation in the Aftermath of the Great Recession”, Journal of 
Macroeconomics, Vol. 40, 228–244. 
Oinonen, S. and M. Paloviita, (2014), “Updating the Euro Area Phillips curve: the Slope has 
Increased”, Bank of Finland Research Discussion Papers 31/2014. 
Riggi, M. and S. Santoro (2015), “On the Slope and Persistence of the Italian Phillips Curve”, 
International Journal of Central Banking, Vol. 11(2), 157–197. 
Riggi,  M.  and  F.  Venditti  (2015),  “Failing  to  Forecast  Low  Inflation  and  Phillips  Curve 
Instability: a Euro-area Perspective”, Journal of International Finance, Vol. 18(1), 47–68. 
Roberts,  J.M.  (2006),  “Monetary  Policy  and  Inflation  Dynamics”,  International  Journal  of 
Central Banking, Vol. 2(3), 193–230. 
Stella, A. and J.H. Stock, (2012), “A State-Dependent Model for Inflation Forecasting”, Board 
of  Governors  of  the  Federal  Reserve  System  International  Finance  Discussion  Papers 
No. 1062, November. 
Stiglitz, J. (1986), “Theories of Wage Rigidity, In Keynes’ Economic Legacy: Contemporary 
Economic Theories”, edited by J. L. Butkiewicz, K. J. Koford, and J. B. Miller, 153–222. New 
York: Praeger. 
Stock, J.H. and M.W. Watson, (2010), “Modeling Inflation After the Crisis”, NBER Working 
Paper No. 16488. 
Wiederholt,  M.  (2015),  “Empirical  Properties  of  Inflation  Expectations  and  the  Zero  Lower 
Bound”, mimeo, Goethe University Frankfurt. 
Williams, J.C. (2010), “Sailing into Headwinds: the Uncertain Outlook for the U.S. Economy”, 
Speech 85, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco. 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
