  Thomas Jordan: The Swiss National Bank’s monetary policy decision 
and assessment of the economic situation 
Introductory remarks by Mr Thomas Jordan, Chairman of the Governing Board of the Swiss 
National  Bank,  at  the  Media  News  Conference  of  the  Swiss  National  Bank,  Berne, 
10 December 2015. 
 Ladies and gentlemen 
It is a pleasure for me to welcome you to the Swiss National Bank’s (SNB) news conference. 
I will begin by explaining our monetary policy decision and presenting our assessment of the 
economic situation. Fritz Zurbrügg will then speak about current developments in the area of 
financial  stability.  After  that,  Andréa  Maechler  will  review  the  situation  on  the  financial 
markets. Finally, we will – as usual – be pleased to take your questions. 
Monetary policy decision 
Let me begin with the inflation forecast and our monetary policy decision. 
Overall, the new conditional inflation forecast differs little from that of September. It indicates 
slightly higher inflation in the short term, and that inflation had already bottomed out in the 
third quarter. Owing to a slight deterioration in the outlook for the global economy, medium-
term inflation is somewhat lower than predicted in September. For the current year, inflation 
is forecast at –1.1%, a 0.1 percentage point rise on last quarter. For 2016, we still anticipate 
an inflation rate of –0.5%, and for 2017, the forecast is now at 0.3% instead of 0.4%. The 
conditional  inflation  forecast  is  based  on  the  assumption  that  the  three-month  Libor  will 
remain at –0.75% over the entire forecast horizon. 
Despite  depreciating  somewhat  in  recent  months,  the  Swiss  franc  is  still  significantly 
overvalued.  Furthermore,  inflation  prospects  have  largely  remained  the  same.  We  have 
therefore  decided  to  maintain  our  expansionary  monetary  policy.  The  target  range  for  the 
three-month  Libor  is  unchanged  at  between  –1.25%  and  –0.25%,  and  interest  on  sight 
deposits at the SNB remains at –0.75%. The interest rate differential with other currencies, 
even following the European Central Bank’s (ECB) mild interest rate cut, is thus still markedly 
higher than at the beginning of the year. The negative interest rate makes the Swiss franc 
less attractive, and continues to help weaken the currency. The SNB also remains active in 
the foreign exchange market in order to influence the exchange rate situation, as necessary. 
The negative interest rate and our willingness to intervene in the foreign exchange market 
are intended to ease pressure on the Swiss franc. Our monetary policy thus helps to stabilise 
price developments and support economic activity. 
Global economic outlook 
As our inflation forecast is heavily influenced by economic developments abroad, let me now 
present our assessment of the global economy. 
Global  economic growth  was  weaker than  expected  in  the  third quarter  of  2015. This  was 
mainly due to subdued manufacturing activity around the globe and sluggish world trade. 
The Chinese economy is currently undergoing structural change, and growth in the country’s 
industrial output has therefore slowed considerably since the beginning of the year. This has 
curbed  manufacturing  activity  worldwide  and  weighed  on  commodity  prices.  Global 
investment activity in the third quarter has thus been hesitant. This has especially impacted 
economies with strong global trade links as well as commodity-exporting countries. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  In  contrast  to  manufacturing,  the  services  sector  performed  well  in  most  countries  due  to 
robust domestic demand. Particularly in the US and Europe, private household consumption 
has regained momentum. Contributing factors were the decline in energy prices and a further 
improvement in the labour market. 
The  SNB  has  revised  its  short-term  growth  forecast  for  the  global  economy  slightly 
downwards,  but  the  outlook  for  the  medium  term  remains  unchanged.  On  the  whole,  the 
moderate recovery in the advanced economies looks set to continue, on the back of highly 
expansionary  monetary  policy  and  low  energy  prices.  Increases  in  public  spending  should 
also stimulate demand. In this environment, inflation is likely to pick up again. 
Our  overall  assessment  of  global  economic  prospects  is  cautiously  optimistic.  We 
nevertheless see significant risks. The structural change underway in China could continue 
to hold back global manufacturing and investment activity. Equally, structural weaknesses in 
Europe have yet to be addressed. Current concerns about public safety could also weigh on 
economic developments. 
Swiss economic outlook 
The slower pace of global economic growth was also felt in Switzerland, with the first official 
GDP estimate indicating stagnation in the third quarter. Economic performance thus came in 
below expectations. 
This was mainly due to a slump in value added in trade and the financial sector. Growth in 
manufacturing  was  positive,  but  varied  greatly  from  one  sector  to  another.  Aside  from  the 
strong  Swiss  franc,  sluggish  global  manufacturing  activity  was  also  undoubtedly  a  factor. 
Demand for Swiss intermediate goods and equipment was particularly lacklustre. 
On  closer  examination,  however, 
the  economic  situation  appears  somewhat  more 
favourable.  There  are  three  reasons  for  this.  First,  growth  was  materially  inhibited  by  an 
unusually sharp dip in energy output over the summer months, which had nothing to do with 
the  economic  cycle.  The  second  reason  concerns  final  demand,  namely,  that  both  private 
and public consumption as well as exports were up on the half of the year. And third, a range 
of other indicators leads to a somewhat more positive assessment of the economy. 
Nevertheless, capacity utilisation remains unsatisfactory, and demand for labour muted, with 
the seasonally adjusted unemployment rate having edged up from 3.3% to 3.4% since the 
last monetary policy assessment. 
As many companies have had to reduce prices considerably, margins remain a major source 
of concern. Recent months have seen numerous measures aimed at cutting production costs 
and increasing efficiency. According to the latest survey conducted by the SNB delegates for 
regional economic relations, these measures are now beginning to take effect. Furthermore, 
rallying demand is likely to help ease pressure on margins in the coming months. 
We continue to expect a slow improvement of the economy. Our forecast for real growth in 
2015 is unchanged at just under 1%. The global economy is likely to gather pace gradually 
over  the  course  of  2016,  and  this  should  strengthen foreign  demand for  Swiss  goods  and 
services. Domestic demand is also likely to remain robust. For 2016 as a whole, we expect 
growth of approximately 1.5%. 
Interest rates, exchange rates and inflation expectations 
I  will  now  review  changes  in  monetary  conditions  and  inflation  expectations  since  the 
beginning of the year. 
When we discontinued the minimum exchange rate in January, the monetary policies of the 
major currency areas were set to diverge, and we were aware that this would have significant 
consequences for international monetary relations. This is exactly what came to pass, and is 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  clearly  reflected  in  the  exchange  rate  path  of  the  Swiss  franc  against  various  currencies. 
While the Swiss franc/US dollar exchange rate is now virtually the same as it was at the end 
of 2014, the Swiss franc has appreciated 10% against the euro since the beginning of the 
year.  The  export-weighted  Swiss  franc  exchange  rate  is  about  8%  higher  than  it  was  in 
January, having gained approximately 20% at times in the interim. 
In January, concurrently with the discontinuation of the minimum exchange rate, we lowered 
the  interest  rate  on  sight  deposits  to  –0.75%.  The  interest  rate  differential  with  other 
currencies,  which  had  narrowed  considerably  due  to  declining  interest  rates  abroad,  again 
expanded significantly following this decision. Even after the ECB’s mild interest rate cut, the 
Swiss franc/euro interest rate differential remains significantly wider than at the beginning of 
the year. This has helped to weaken the Swiss franc, pulling it back from the highs recorded 
shortly after the discontinuation of the minimum exchange rate. 
Short-term inflation expectations declined substantially immediately after the discontinuation 
of  the  minimum  exchange  rate.  Since  then,  they  have  stabilised.  Surveys  indicate  that 
companies  expect  positive  inflation  rates  over  a  horizon  of  two  years  and  more.  Despite 
weak  inflation  in  recent  years,  inflation  expectations  six  to  ten  years  into  the  future  have 
barely  changed.  Companies  evidently  believe  that  the  negative  inflation  we  are  currently 
experiencing  will  be  temporary.  As  you  can  see  from  our  inflation  forecast,  our  forecast 
models confirm this assumption. 
Monetary policy outlook 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  let  me  summarise  my  key  points.  The  depreciation  of  the  euro 
against other major currencies confirms that the discontinuation of the minimum exchange 
rate was a necessary step. Diverging monetary policy stances in the major currency areas 
present small open economies like Switzerland, in particular, with huge challenges as they 
typically  trigger  substantial  exchange  rate  fluctuations  and  hamper  economic  growth. 
Switzerland’s economy is thus going through a difficult phase. 
Our monetary policy, which is currently geared towards this challenging set of circumstances, 
consists of two key elements: the negative interest rate and the SNB’s willingness to take an 
active  role  in  the  foreign  exchange  market.  Both  of  these  elements  are  intended  to  make 
Swiss franc investments less attractive, thereby supporting economic activity. 
Swiss sovereign money initiative (Vollgeldinitiative) 
In  conclusion,  let  me  say  a  few  words  about  the  recently  submitted  sovereign  money 
initiative. This popular initiative aims to fundamentally remodel Switzerland’s monetary policy 
and  banking  system.  The  initiative  aims  to  remove  the  banks’  money  creation  powers. 
Instead,  all  new  money  would  be  created  by  the  SNB  and  distributed  directly  to  the 
Confederation or the citizens. Under the new system, proponents want any income that the 
SNB  derives  from  note-issuance  to  be  distributed  to  the  public.  Moreover,  they  claim  that 
such a system would enhance financial stability. 
The  sovereign  money  initiative  would  entail  a  radical  overhaul  of  Switzerland’s  financial 
system, creating a regime that does not exist in any other country today. The introduction of 
sovereign  money  would  be  a  risky  experiment.  We  must  therefore  carefully  analyse  the 
impact  of  the  proposed  constitutional  change  on  the  structure  and  implementation  of 
monetary policy. Equally, we must take a comprehensive look at its implications for financial 
stability, the exchange rate and the economic cycle. 
We will comment further on the sovereign money initiative in due course. 
Ladies and gentlemen, thank you for your attention. It is now my pleasure to give the floor to 
Fritz Zurbrügg, who will present our financial stability assessment. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
