European Central Bank: Press conference - introductory statement 
Introductory  statement  by  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  and 
Mr Lucas Papademos, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, Frankfurt, 4 March 2004. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, welcome again to our monthly press conference. The Vice-President and I will 
now report on the outcome of today’s meeting of the Governing Council of the ECB. 
Overall,  the  Governing  Council  confirmed  its  previous  assessment  of  a  favourable  outlook  for  price 
stability  in  the  euro  area  over  the  medium  term.  Against  this  background,  we  concluded  that  the 
current stance of monetary policy remains appropriate. The key ECB interest rates have therefore 
been left unchanged at their low levels. Our monetary policy stance provides support to the economic 
recovery in the euro area. We will continue to monitor carefully all developments that could affect our 
assessment of risks to price stability over the medium term. 
Let me now turn to the details of our economic analysis. According to Eurostat, in the fourth quarter 
of 2003 real GDP in the euro area grew by 0.3% quarter on quarter, following growth of 0.4% in the 
third quarter. These data confirm that a gradual recovery in economic activity in the euro area took 
place in the second half of 2003. More recent indicators point to moderate economic growth also in 
early 2004. While growth has been relatively modest so far, both external and domestic factors give 
reason to expect a strengthening of the recovery through 2004 and beyond. 
On the external side, all recent indications confirm that global economic growth in 2004 will be robust 
and  broadly  based  across  different  regions  of  the  world.  Overall,  euro  area  exports  should  grow 
significantly this year and next. 
On  the  domestic  side,  the  conditions  for  a  recovery  in  private  demand  are  in  place.  Over  recent 
months  there  have  been  signs  of  a  stabilisation  in  investment.  According  to  Eurostat,  fixed  capital 
investment grew again in the last quarter of 2003, after recording three successive quarter-on-quarter 
declines.  Corporate  earnings  have  generally  improved  in  the  euro  area,  following  a  protracted 
restructuring of corporate balance sheets over the last few years. The financing conditions faced by 
corporations  in  the  euro  area  are  very  favourable  at  present.  All  of  these  factors  should  support  a 
further recovery in investment. 
There are also reasons to expect a gradual increase in consumption growth during this year, following 
the  subdued  developments  of  last  year.  In  the  short  term,  growth  in  real  disposable  income  is 
supported by lower import prices and tax cuts, while later on the gradual improvement in labour market 
conditions should become an additional factor supporting income growth and confidence. The financial 
situation  of  households  in  the  euro  area  is  sound,  not  least  in  comparison  with  a  number  of  other 
industrial economies, and there is no financial impediment to a pick-up in private consumption. 
For all these reasons, our main scenario of a continued gradual recovery in the course of 2004 and 
2005 remains  valid.  This view  is shared  by  available  forecasts  and  projections,  and  is  also  broadly 
reflected in financial market developments. 
We continue to see the risks to this scenario as broadly balanced. However, there are uncertainties 
related to euro area private consumption and the persistent imbalances in some regions of the world 
and their potential repercussions on the sustainability of global economic growth. 
Turning to price developments, according to the Eurostat flash estimate, the annual HICP inflation rate 
declined to 1.6% in February 2004, from 1.9% in January. This fall was mainly due to base effects 
stemming from energy prices, as a sharp increase in oil prices which occurred in early 2003 dropped 
out of the calculation of the annual rate in February 2004. Over the coming months, volatility in annual 
inflation rates is likely to be observed, mainly due to further base effects from energy prices as well as 
to  increases  in  indirect  taxes.  Related  to  this,  annual  inflation  rates  are  likely  to  edge  up  again 
temporarily in the second quarter of 2004. 
Looking  beyond  short-term  fluctuations  in  the  most  volatile  components  of  the  HICP,  we  expect 
inflation to remain in line with price stability. At the current juncture, we see little upward pressure on 
inflation. Given the anticipated gradual nature of the recovery in economic activity and the high level of 
unemployment in the euro area, wage developments should remain moderate. 
BIS Review 15/2004 
 1
While  our  assessment  is  in  line  with  available  forecasts  and  projections,  we  are  aware  of  the 
conditional  nature  of  such  exercises.  We  will  therefore  continue  to  monitor  all  indicators  closely. 
Inflation expectations, in particular, deserve close attention. 
Turning  to  the  monetary  analysis,  M3  growth  has  moderated  over  recent  months.  However,  it 
appears  that  the  reallocation  of  economic  agents’  portfolios  into  longer-term  assets  is  proceeding 
rather  cautiously.  In  this  respect,  the  generally  low  level  of  interest  rates  continues  to  support  the 
demand  for  liquid  assets.  The  low  level  of  interest  rates  also  supports  the  growth  of  loans  to  the 
private sector. 
The high liquidity in the euro area needs to be assessed with caution. Its effects on inflation over the 
medium term will greatly depend on the extent and pace of the future reversal of past portfolio shifts 
and  on  the  future  strength  of  economic  growth.  Should  excess  liquidity  persist,  it  could  lead  to 
inflationary pressures over the medium term. 
To sum up, the economic analysis continues to indicate that the main scenario for price developments 
in the coming years is in line with price stability. Cross-checking with the monetary analysis does not 
alter this picture for the time being. 
With regard to fiscal policies, we noted the progress in fiscal consolidation envisaged in countries’ 
stability  programmes.  Nonetheless,  there  continues  to  be  reason  for  concern.  In  some  countries, 
contrary  to  their  commitments,  adjustment  efforts  are  insufficient  to  mitigate  the  risk  of  excessive 
deficits. Moreover, several countries do not plan to attain sound budgetary positions by the end of their 
respective programme horizons, despite favourable growth prospects. This would risk a repetition of 
the  policy  errors  of  the  last  economic  upswing,  when  insufficient  consolidation  efforts  and  tax  cuts 
without adequate expenditure restraint laid the foundations for the recent fiscal difficulties. 
All  countries  would  benefit  from  the  strengthening  of  the  sustainability  of  their  public  finances, 
especially  in  the  expected  upward  phase  of  the  cycle,  by  eliminating  imbalances  over  the  coming 
years  and  avoiding  or  correcting  as  soon  as  possible  excessive  deficits.  Moreover,  the  determined 
implementation  of  comprehensive  structural  reforms,  on  both  the  expenditure side  and  the  revenue 
side,  will  bring  additional  medium-term  rewards  in  the  form  of  higher  growth  and  more  sustainable 
public  finances.  Such  consolidation  and  reform  strategies  are  needed  to  secure  a  sound 
macroeconomic environment in the euro area. 
The euro area also requires further structural reforms in financial, product and labour markets. 
The Lisbon Strategy provides the appropriate blueprint for progress. We welcome that the forthcoming 
spring meeting of the European Council is set to give renewed impetus to the Lisbon agenda, speed 
up the pace of reforms, and strengthen the effectiveness of the decision-making process. Structural 
reforms will have enormous benefits for the citizens of the euro area. These reforms are crucial for 
sustained  non-inflationary  growth  and  employment,  and  they  are  therefore  also  important  for 
maintaining social cohesion in the long run. 
Confidence  among  European  citizens  in  the  future  is  vital  for  a  stronger  economic  recovery  and 
sustained growth. The Governing Council recognises that the still low level of consumer confidence is 
related  to  prevailing  uncertainties,  including  the  debate  about  the  appropriate  path  for  structural 
reforms  in  many  countries  of  the  euro  area.  It  is  also  partly  linked  to  the  continued  perception  by 
European citizens of higher inflation than measured by official indices. 
The Governing Council notes that inflation is now back at a level consistent with price stability. The 
European public can rest assured about our determination to preserve the purchasing power of our 
money  in  the  years  to  come  and  thus  make  our  contribution  to  enhance  confidence  in  the  future. 
Stable prices, together with further progress in the implementation of necessary structural reforms, are 
the  key  to  stronger  confidence,  and  they  create  the  conditions  for  increased  consumption  and 
investment and thus for growth and job creation. 
We are now at your disposal for questions. 
2 
 BIS Review 15/2004
