Su Ning: China’s economic development and the current macroeconomic 
policy 
Speech  by  Mr  Su  Ning,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  People’s  Bank  of  China,  at  the  Conference  of 
Montreal, Canada, 9 June 2004. 
 Honorable Mr. Chairman, ladies and gentlemen, 
It is a great pleasure to come to the beautiful city of Montreal to participate in the conference to learn 
successful  experience  of  other  countries  in  economic  development.  I  would  also  like  to  take  this 
opportunity to share with you about the economic and social progress we have achieved over the past 
two decades as well as the current economic situation and monetary policy in China. 
Reasons of China’s rapid economic development in a quarter of a century 
I.  
Since the beginning of 1970s, China has entered a historical period of economic reform, opening up 
and modernization. Within a timeframe of 25 years, the Chinese economy has consistently maintained 
its rapid growth momentum. During such a period, China’s annual GDP growth rate was averaged at 
9.4 percent, the income and living standard of urban and rural residents continuously improved, and 
foreign trade volume expanded by 16 percent each year. Utilized foreign direct investment reached 
USD676.9  billion  and  the  official  foreign  exchange  reserves  increased  from  USD19.4  billion  to 
USD403.3 billion. China now is the 7th largest economy in the world, with its overall economic strength 
markedly improved. Per capita GDP was quadrupled in 20 years up to the end of last century and is 
expected to be further doubled by 2010. 
There  are  several  reasons  for  the  eye-catching  achievements  in  terms  of  social  and  economic 
development in China. 
First, steadfast in pressing ahead with the socialist market economic system reform. We have carried 
out  restructuring  of  the  public  ownership  system  and  instead  established  an  economic  system 
featuring  the  public  ownership  as  the  mainstay  and  co-existence  of  various  economic  sectors. 
Non-state  sectors  have  experienced  rapid  development  and  constituted  an  important  force  in 
supporting  economic  growth  and  job  creation  in  China.  In  the  meantime,  we  have  proceeded  with 
reform  of  the  rationing  system  seen  in  distribution  and  allocation  of  resources,  property,  income, 
production  and  sales  under  the  planned  economy,  and  come  to  have  established  an  economic 
structure in which the market could play its fundamental role in resource allocation. Various markets 
including  the  capital  market,  technology  market,  real  estate  market  and  labor  market  have  all 
mushroomed from nowhere to bring about a marked improvement of the marketization of the Chinese 
economy.  The  preliminary  establishment  of  the  socialist  market  economic  system  has  laid  a  solid 
institutional foundation for China’s rapid economic development.  
Second,  steadfast  in  advancing  economic  opening  up  to  integrate  into  the  world  economic 
development. We have ended China’s isolation from the world economic development and opened the 
Chinese economy to the outside world at different levels on a broad scale. Efforts have been made to 
take  full  advantage  of  both  the  internal  and  external  resources  and  markets  to  effect  China’s 
competitive  advantage  in  the  global  economy.  On  November  11,  2001,  China  joined  the  WTO, 
marking an important step forward for China’s economic opening up and reform. In 2003, China’s total 
goods trade volume amounted to USD851.2 billion, ranking the 4th place in the world. Inflow of FDI 
totaled  USD53.5  billion,  topping  all  the  developing  nations.  Rapid  growth  of  trade  and  continuous 
increase  of  FDI  have  not  only  contributed  to  the  expansion  of  export  and  job  creation,  but  also 
substantially increased the import of much needed scarce resources and equipments. Furthermore, 
the inflow of advanced technology and management skills has helped to boost China’s technology and 
competitiveness, providing additional support to economic reform. 
Third,  we  have  always  been  conscious  of  striking  a  balance  between  reform,  development  and 
stability. China is a big developing country with a population of 1.4 billion and large disparities in terms 
of  regional  economic  development.  It  is  by  no  means  an  easy  job  to  press  ahead  with  economic 
reform and modernization and make everyone live a comfortable life in such a country. One important 
piece of our experiences is that adequate attention must be paid to handle the relationship between 
BIS Review 40/2004 
 1
reform,  development  and  stability.  In  our  view,  stability,  namely  the  social,  political  and  economic 
stability constitutes the prerequisite to ensure steady progress of economic reform and development. 
Since reform will more or less affect the interests of almost all the parties in the society, it is important 
to make the reform endurable to the individuals, enterprises and all other social sectors. Under the 
leadership of the Chinese Communist Party and taking into consideration of the Chinese situation, we 
have  embarked  on  a  path  of  reform  gradualism  to  build  a  socialist  market  economic  system  with 
Chinese characteristics. That is to say, we will on the one hand stick to the mandate of socialist market 
economic reform, while on the other hand give full consideration to the endurance of all walks of life, 
and strive to make the reform benefit most of the people in the society. In practice, sweeping reforms 
are usually introduced when favorable conditions arise, and the pace of reform will be slowed down if 
conflicts intensify. All in all, in the process of economic and social development, we have always made 
the  harmony  between  the  strength  of  reform,  the  speed  of  development  and  the  endurance  of  the 
general public a top priority, and targeted a persistent improvement of the people’s living standard as 
the lock-point for handling relationship among the three factors. Such a consensus has contributed to 
the mutually re-enforcement of reform, development and social stability.  
Despite the outstanding achievements mentioned above, we should remain clear about the fact that 
China is still a developing country with large population. Though large in absolute size, China’s GDP 
measured  by  per  capita  is  still  very  low,  with  the  2003  figure  just  exceeding  USD1000.  Myriads  of 
problems, including slow growth of the farmers’ income, pressures on employment and social security 
system,  regional  development  disparity,  widening  gap  of  income  distribution  and  degradation  of 
environment etc., remain to be conquered on our way moving forward. Since these problems emerge 
in the process of development, they must only be addressed in the process of development. 
Current economic situation and monetary policy in China 
II. 
For  the  time  being,  the  Chinese  economy  has  broadly  performed  well.  Thanks  to  efforts  of  several 
years, we have overcome the deflationary effects developed since the end of the Asian financial crisis 
and brought the economy back to the fast track. China’s GDP grew by 9.1 percent in 2003, a total of 
12.99 million jobs were created, CPI rose by 1.2 percent and trade volume expanded by 37.1 percent. 
The  fast  economic  growth  momentum  shows  no  signs  of  abating  this  year  as  GDP  grew  by 
9.8 percent in the first quarter, household income, business profits and fiscal revenues all witnessed 
large increase and foreign trade continued to grow strongly. However, in the process of accelerated 
economic  development,  some  new  problems  such  as  over-investment  and  low-level  duplicated 
constructions in certain sectors and regions as well as increasing bottlenecks seen in the supply of 
energy,  transport  and  raw  materials  have  also  emerged.  In  the  year  of  2003,  investment  growth 
registered 26.7 percent, with the investment in steel, cement and aluminum sectors doubled. Entering 
2004,  the  Chinese  economy  continued  to  be  plagued  with  over-investment  in  certain  sectors  and 
regions despite the overall health of its operation. Fixed asset investment in the first quarter grew by 
43  percent  over  the  same  period  of  last  year,  and  investment  in  the  steel,  cement  and  aluminum 
sectors  continued  to  grow  rapidly.  Over-investment  has  put  strains  on  the  supply  of  energy  and 
transport and boosted excessive growth of money and credit. In the first quarter of 2004, broad money 
M2 grew by 19.1 percent, and new loans issued by the financial institutions surged by 20.7 percent 
over  the  corresponding  period  of  last  year,  all  beating  the  projected  macro-control  targets.  In  the 
meantime,  the  price  level,  in  particular  the  prices  of  production  materials  and  raw  materials, 
experienced  fast  rise.  The  price  of  industrial  production  materials  rose  by  3.6  percent  in  2003  and 
continued to grow by 4.8 percent in the first quarter of this year. 
The Chinese  government has  attached  great  importance  to  resolving  the  emerging  problems  in  the 
economic operations, and is taking comprehensive measures to bring them under control. In line with 
the  decisions  made  by  the  State  Council,  the  People’s  Bank  of  China  has  consistently  improved 
financial  management  and  applied  various  monetary  policy  instruments  to  adjust  the  monetary  and 
credit aggregates and their structures, so as to prevent inflation and ups and downs of the economy. 
Measures taken by the People’s Bank of China include: 
• 
Strengthening open market operations to fully sterilize liquidity increase resulted from foreign 
exchange purchase in the market; 
Preventing  excessive  growth  of  money  and  credit  through  raising  the  requirement  reserve 
ratio  further  by  0.5  percentage  points  from  7  percent  to  7.5  percent  based  on  the 
1 percentage  point  hike  in  2003;  this  action  froze  usable  fund  of  the  financial  institutions 
totaling RMB110 billion yuan; 
BIS Review 40/2004
 2 
    Establishing positive incentives to introduce differentiated required reserve ratios for different 
financial institutions. The required reserve ratio applied to a financial institution will be linked 
to its performance indicators such like capital adequacy ratio and asset quality. The lower 
the capital adequacy ratio of a financial institution and the higher its NPL (Non-Performing 
Loan)  ratio,  a  higher  required  reserve  ratio  will  be  charged.  The  differentiated  required 
reserve  ratio  system  is  a  special  institutional  arrangement  based  on  the  current  financial 
system in China and will benefit monetary policy transmission; 
Floating central bank lending rates. Interest rates of central bank loans at various tranches 
were  increased  by  0.63  percentage  points  and  the  rediscount  rate  was  also  raised  by 
0.27 percentage points; 
Increasing  window-guidance  on  loan  extension  for  commercial  banks.  Risks  have  been 
warned for commercial banks and efforts were made to promote loan structure improvement 
and  the  establishment  of  loan  restriction  mechanism  consistent  with  risk  control  capability 
and capital adequacy in the commercial banks. 
While controlling credit fund flowing to low-level duplicated constructions and over-investment sectors, 
the  People’s  Bank  of  China  has  encouraged  and  guided  the  commercial  banks  to  increase  credit 
support  to  the  agriculture  sector,  small  and  medium-sized  enterprises,  consumer  demand  and  job 
creation.  In  the  meantime,  constructions  of  corporate  and  individual  credit  information  registration 
systems were strengthened and legislation related to promoting consumer credit was further improved. 
Moreover,  administrative  rules  on  small-amount  guarantee  loans  for  unemployed  workers  was 
enhanced and loan approval procedures were simplified to encourage banks to increase loan support 
to  those  qualified  labor-intensive  small  businesses  in  which  certain  proportion  of  job  vacancies  are 
filled by laid-off workers.  
Rapid growth of the Chinese economy and the following austerity measures taken by the government 
recently  has  aroused  wide  concerns  of  the  international  community.  Some  people  are  worried  the 
Chinese economy may lose control and head for persistent overheating while others are concerned 
about the destabilizing effects a hard brake on the Chinese economy may bring to the world economy 
still on the course of recovery. Here, I would like to assure our friends that the Chinese government 
remains  crystal-clear  about  the  current  economic  situation  and  is  taking  timely,  prudent  and 
appropriate measures to address the problems. Some measures have already started to take effects, 
and we are fully confident that existing problems in the current process of economic development will 
be resolved and the good growth momentum will be maintained without ups and downs. 
Sequenced gradual reform of the RMB exchange rate regime 
III.  
Like the overall economic reform, China’s foreign exchange rate system reform is also a gradual and 
sequenced  process.  Before  economic  opening  up,  management  of  foreign  exchange  earnings  and 
expenses  was  centralized  and  RMB  exchange  rate  was  decided  and  adjusted  solely  by  the 
government. After 1979, enterprises were allowed to retain foreign exchange earnings and a foreign 
exchange  swap  market  was  established  to  form  dual  exchange  rates  in  China,  namely  the  official 
exchange rate and the swap market exchange rate. With foreign exchange system reform introduced 
in 1994, foreign exchange purchase and sale was required to be effected through the banking system 
and a nation-wide inter-bank foreign exchange market was thus put into place, leading to the formation 
of the so-called managed floating foreign exchange rate system based on market supply and demand 
of foreign exchange. Such a system has since remained unchanged. 
The  RMB  exchange  rate  has  been  allowed  to  fluctuate  since  1994.  During  1994-1997,  the  RMB 
appreciated from 8.7 yuan per US dollar to 8.3 yuan per US dollar. After the breakout of the Asian 
financial  crisis,  responding  to  the  appeal  of  the  neighboring  countries  and  international  institutions, 
China  significantly  narrowed  the  floating  band  of  the  RMB  exchange  rate  and  undertook  not  to 
devaluate the RMB, thus contributing importantly to the regional economic and financial stability. What 
China pursued at that time was a managed floating exchange rate within a significantly narrowed band 
instead of a fixed exchange rate. 
During the past year, there have been much debates and discussions on the RMB exchange rate, with 
substantial  different  views  from  some  of  the  world’s  famous  economists.  Some  said  that  the  RMB 
should be revaluated, while some believed that the RMB exchange rate should be kept stable. I would 
like to emphasize two points. First, with active participation in the global economic activities and close 
BIS Review 40/2004 
 3
integration  into  the  world  economy,  China  has  provided  more  and  more  low-cost  and  high-quality 
products to the international markets. This has not been achieved by the adjustment of RMB exchange 
rate. Instead, it has been benefited from China’s huge labor force with low cost and improving skills. 
Also, the problems of trade deficit and unemployment in some countries cannot be resolved by the 
revaluation of RMB. Chinese government does not seek to maintain trade surplus, but hopes to keep a 
balanced  current  account.  Export  expansion  will  inevitably  result  in  the  increase  of  import,  thus 
creating  opportunities  for  other  countries  to  increase  their  export.  Trade  partners  should  not  blame 
each other for the adverse impact of others’ products on their domestic industries. Instead, they should 
actively participate in the international division of labor and fully exploit their comparative advantages. 
Second, a stable and growing Chinese economy will benefit the stability and development of the world 
economy. Last year, with rapid growth of export, China’s import also expanded rapidly. Import growth 
was 39.9 percent for the whole year. In particular, import from EU, United States and Canada grew by 
37.7 percent, 24.3 percent and 20.6 percent respectively. Import growth accelerated to 42.4 percent in 
the first four months of this year, 10.5 percentage points higher than the growth of export, resulting in a 
trade deficit of over USD10 billion. Import from EU, United States and Canada in the first four months 
grew  by  33.7  percent,  41.5  percent  and  60.1  percent  respectively.  The  growth  of  the  Chinese 
economy has contributed importantly to the recent world economic recovery. Any improper change in 
the  RMB  exchange  rate  policy  may  create  new  uncertainties  to  the  world  economic  development. 
Therefore, we should be extremely cautious.  
Recently,  some  foreign  friends  have  showed  their  concerns  about  the  potential  overheating  of  the 
Chinese economy due to the expansion of money supply as a result of the rapid increase of foreign 
exchange. I would like to reassure these friends by recalling our experience during the Asian financial 
crisis.  At  that  time,  China  successfully  maintained  steady  economic  growth  while  keeping  the  RMB 
exchange rate basically stable. Today, we are confident that we will be able to prevent great ups and 
downs in the national economy while keeping the external value of our currency basically stable.  
China’s  exchange  rate  reform  is  still  underway.  In  light  of  the  China’s  current  stage  of  economic 
development,  performance  of  the  economy  and  developments  in  international  payments,  we  will 
further examine and improve the mechanism for determining the RMB exchange rate and keep the 
RMB exchange rate basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level. 
In pursuing the exchange rate reform, due consideration will be given to China’s current economic and 
social  development,  the  government’s  macroeconomic  management  capability  and  the  progress 
achieved  in  various  economic  reforms  and  financial  reforms  including  the  improvement  of  financial 
supervision capacity. The reform of the RMB exchange rate cannot be carried out in isolation. Instead, 
it should be pursued in tandem with other reforms. Several preconditions need to be met before the 
RMB exchange rate can be freely floated. First, trade, particularly service trade, has been substantially 
liberalized. Second, progress has been achieved in the liberalization of capital account to adapt to a 
more flexible exchange rate system. Third, major breakthroughs have been made in the reform of the 
state  commercial  banks  with  substantial  improvement  in  their  competitiveness  and  resilience  to 
shocks.  
At  present,  balance  between  supply  and  demand  in  the  foreign  exchange  market  will  mainly  be 
achieved  through  relaxing  the  restrictions  on  the  surrender  and  purchase  of  foreign  exchange  by 
enterprises and individuals. Major measures include: reforming the administration of foreign exchange 
accounts  for  current  account  transactions  and  allowing  the  enterprises  to  have  greater  flexibility  in 
retaining  foreign  exchange;  reforming  the  management  of  surrender  and  purchase  of  foreign 
exchange for non-trade transactions by multinational corporations, allowing qualified multinationals in 
Beijing, Shanghai and Shenzhen to directly make certain foreign exchange payment or to purchase 
foreign  exchange  with  RMB  to  make  the  payment;  reforming  the  policy  governing  the  purchase  of 
foreign exchange by individuals to meet the their reasonable demand for foreign exchange to make 
current  account  payment;  actively  promoting  financial  innovation  to  create  more  opportunities  for 
foreign  exchange  investment  (China Development  Bank has  issued  financial bonds  denominated  in 
US dollar in the inter-bank market); introducing pilot reform program of foreign exchange management 
for overseas investment to gradually expand the channels for capital outflows.  
We are confident that, with the steady advancement of the reforms, a RMB exchange rate system that 
is  suitable  to  China’s  specific  conditions  and  accurately  reflects  market  development  will  be 
established, and the monetary policy will be playing an increasingly important role in macroeconomic 
management.  
4 
 BIS Review 40/2004
Canada is an important trade partner of China. The trade volume between China and Canada for the 
first  time  exceeded  USD10  billion  in  2003,  representing  a  growth  rate  of  26.2  percent  over  the 
previous  year,  and  the  direct  investment  in  China  from  Canada  reached  USD563  million.  Financial 
cooperation between China and Canada has also been actively promoted. Two Canadian commercial 
banks have established four branches in China and the other four have set up representative offices. 
There are great potentials for trade, investment and financial cooperation between our two countries. 
We look forward to closer financial and economic cooperation with Canada.  
Thank you.  
BIS Review 40/2004 
 5
