Charles Chukwuma Soludo: Consolidating the Nigerian banking industry to 
meet the development challenges of the 21st century 
Address by Mr Charles Chukwuma Soludo, Governor of the Central Bank of Nigeria, at the Special 
Meeting of the Bankers’ Committee, Abuja, 6 July 2004. 
 Introduction 
I am delighted, as part of this first meeting of the Bankers Committee under my chairmanship, to share 
some  thoughts  with  you  on  a  major  policy  shift  regarding  the  banking  industry.  Given  the  potential 
implications of the policy shift for the ownership and operations of the banking industry, we thought it 
was important to have this special meeting (with Chairpersons of Boards of Banks also in attendance). 
As you are aware, I assumed duties as the Governor of the Central Bank barely one month ago and 
we are still working out the fine details of the New Agenda for Repositioning the CBN and the Financial 
System for the 21st Century. Our goal is to consolidate and build upon the achievements of the sector 
especially in the last 10 years and to take the system to greater heights. Let me use this opportunity to 
invite all of you to send us any proposals or ideas that you might have in respect of how best the CBN 
can continue to serve the financial system and the Nigerian economy better in the years ahead. I will 
share  the  strategic  agenda  with  you  and  the  generality  of  Nigerians  in  due  course,  especially  in 
respect  of  the  agenda  for  ensuring  exchange  rate  and  price  stability,  managing  interest  rate  for 
stability and development, macroeconomic coordination, vigorous pursuit of the developmental roles of 
the Central Bank, improvement of the payments system, financial sector diversification and regulatory 
reforms, and strategies for integrating Nigeria’s financial system into the African regional and global 
financial system. For today, I concentrate on the theme of banking sector consolidation. 
Before I proceed, let me once more pay tribute to the Committee for its many achievements over the 
years.  In  particular,  I  wish  to  once  more  commend  my  predecessor,  Chief  (Dr.)  J.  Sanusi  for  the 
sterling  achievements  over  the  past  five  years.  I  also  commend  your  contributions  to  our  national 
economy - both in your individual capacities and in the context of your banks. I look forward to the 
continued cooperation of the Committee. As time goes on, we may need to reappraise the frequency 
of the meetings of the Committee. May be, beginning 2005 we could restrict the general meetings to 
say,  three  times  a  year  (that  is,  every  four  months)  while  the  sub-committees  could  meet  more 
frequently. I would appreciate your thoughts on these suggestions. 
Let me return to the theme of my speech - consolidation and strengthening of banks! Strengthening 
and consolidating the banking system will constitute the first phase of the reforms designed to ensure 
a diversified, strong and reliable banking sector which will ensure the safety of depositors money, play 
active developmental roles in the Nigerian economy, and be competent and competitive players in the 
African regional and global financial system. The goal of the reforms is to help you become stronger 
players, and in a manner that will ensure longevity and hence higher returns to your shareholders over 
time and greater impacts on the Nigerian economy. We strongly believe that the ultimate beneficiaries 
of this policy shift would be the Nigerian economy - the ordinary men and women who can put their 
deposits  in  the  banks  and  have  a  restful  sleep;  the  entrepreneurial  Nigerians  who  can  now  have 
stronger financial system to finance their businesses; and Nigerian economy which will benefit from 
internationally  connected  and  competitive  banks  that  would  also  mobilize  international  capital  for 
Nigerian development. This measure is about the Nigerian people. It is about meeting their NEEDS. It 
is  about  positioning  Nigeria  and  Nigerians  to  become  competitive  players  in  the  21st  century.  The 
second  phase  will  address  the  issues  of  diversification,  including  programmes  to  encourage  the 
emergence of regional and unit/specialized banks. 
Case for mergers and acquisitions as instrument for banking soundness 
Before  I  go  further,  let  me  share  some  thoughts  on  why  mergers  and  acquisitions  should  be  taken 
seriously as an instrument for enhancing banking efficiency, size, and developmental roles. 
BIS Review 43/2004 
 1
All  over  the  world  and  given  the  internationalization  of  finance,  size  has  become  an  important 
ingredient for success in the globalizing world. In the world of finance, no country can afford to operate 
in  isolation.  The  last  few  years  have  witnessed  the  creation  of  the  world’s  banking  group  through 
mergers and acquisitions. The trend has been influenced by factors such as prospects of cost-savings 
due  to  economies  of  scale  as  well  as more  efficient  allocation  of  resources;  enhanced  efficiency  in 
resource allocation; and risk reduction arising from improved management. 
Mergers and acquisitions especially in the banking industry is now a global phenomenon. In the United 
States  of  America,  there  had  been  over  7,000  cases  of  bank  mergers  since  1980,  while  the  same 
trend occurred in the United Kingdom and other European countries. Specifically, in the period 1997-
1998, 203 bank mergers and acquisitions took place in the Euro area. Cross-country mergers are also 
taking hold. In 1998 a merger in France resulted in a new bank with a capital base of US$ 688 billion, 
while  the  merger  of  two  banks  in  Germany  in  the  same  year  created  the  second  largest  bank  in 
Germany with a capital base of US$ 541 billion. In many emerging markets, including Argentina, Brazil 
and Korea, consolidation has also become prominent, as banks strive to become more competitive 
and  resilient  to  shocks  as  well  as  reposition  their  operations  to  cope  with  the  challenges  of  the 
increasingly  globalized  banking  systems.  In  Korea,  for  example,  the  system  was  left  with  only 
8 commercial banks with about 4,500 branches after consolidation. 
As I stand before you today, I can visualize the Nigerian and world economy in the year 2025 and 
2050. What I see is a world economy with no more than 10-20 mega-banks all over the world. I see 
national and cross-national mergers and acquisitions taking place in massive scales. It will not be a 
world  for  marginal  or  fringe  players.  Countries  that  fail  to  proactively  position  themselves  today  will 
wake  up  then  to  continue  to  complain  of  marginalization.  I  can  see  Asia  consolidating.  I  see 
consolidation in Europe, America, and South America. Consolidation is taking place in South Africa 
such  that  one  bank  in  South  Africa  -  Amalgamated  Banks  of  South  Africa  (ABSA)  has  asset  base 
larger than all of Nigerian commercial banks put together. Malaysia has recently gone through its first 
round  of  consolidation  whereby  about  80  banks  shrunk  to  about  12  within  one  year.  In  Malaysia, 
banks were required to raise their capital base from about $70 million to $526 million in one year. In 
Singapore  (with  about  three  million  people),  banks  have  now  consolidated  to  about  six  and  further 
moving down to three - with the second largest bank having a capital base of about US$ 67 billion. 
Where is Nigeria - Africa’s most populous country and potentially its largest economy? In Nigeria, we 
have  89  banks  with  many  banks  having  capital  base  of  less  than  US$ 10 million,  and  about 
3,300 branches. Compare this to 8 banks in South Korea with about 4,500 branches or the one bank 
in South Africa with larger assets than all our 89 banks. The truth is that the Nigerian banking system 
remains very marginal relative to its potentials and in comparison to other countries - even in Africa. 
We have a duty to be proactive, and to strategically position Nigerian banks to be active players and 
not  spectators  in  the  emerging  world.  The  inability  of  the  Nigerian  banking  system  to  voluntarily 
embark  on  consolidation  in  line  with  the  global  trend  has  necessitated  the  need  to  consider  the 
adoption  of  appropriate  legal  and  supervisory  frameworks  as  well  as  a  comprehensive  incentive 
package  to  facilitate  mergers  and  acquisition  in  the  industry  as  a  crisis  resolution  option  and  to 
promote the soundness, stability and enhanced efficiency of the system. 
Context: where are we coming from and where are we now? 
The  Nigerian  banking  system  has  undergone  remarkable  changes  over  the  years,  in  terms  of  the 
number  of  institutions,  ownership  structure,  as  well  as  depth  and  breadth  of  operations.  These 
changes  have  been  influenced  largely  by  challenges  posed  by  deregulation  of  the  financial  sector, 
globalization  of  operations,  technological  innovations  and  adoption  of  supervisory  and  prudential 
requirements that conform to international standards. 
As  at  end-June,  2004,  there  were  89  deposit  money  banks  operating  in  the  country,  comprising 
institutions of various sizes and degrees of soundness. Structurally, the sector is highly concentrated, 
as  the  ten  largest  banks  account  for  about  50  percent  of  the  industry’s  total  assets/liabilities.  Most 
banks in Nigeria have a capitalization of less than $10 million. Even the largest bank in Nigeria has a 
capital base of about US$ 240 million compared to US$ 526 million for the smallest bank in Malaysia. 
The  small  size  of  most  of  our  banks,  each  with  expensive  headquarters,  separate  investment  in 
software and hardware, heavy fixed costs and operating expenses, and with bunching of branches in 
few commercial centres - lead to very high average cost for the industry. This in turn has implications 
for  the  cost  of  intermediation,  the  spread  between  deposit  and  lending  rates,  and  puts  undue 
pressures on banks to engage in sharp practices as means of survival. I am sure many of you would 
2 
 BIS Review 43/2004
agree with me that some of our banks are not engaged in strict banking business in terms of savings 
intermediation  -  they  are  traders  -  trading  in  foreign  exchange,  in  government  treasury  bills,  and 
sometimes  in  direct  importation  of  goods  through  phony  companies.  This  is  not  healthy  for  the 
economy. 
Think about this caricature of what could happen under this system. A group of people get a banking 
license, use their connections to garner some billions of Naira in deposits from one or two parastatals, 
and use the deposits to trade in Government treasury bills, foreign exchange and open letters of credit 
for  importers.  Such  a  bank  can  declare  billions  of  Naira  in  profit.  It  sounds  like  a  fiction  but  this 
describes  the  situation  with  many  banks  in  the  system.  With  many  of  such  banks,  depositors  with 
balances of less than N50,000 or N100,000 are not welcome. Today, we have more than N400 billion 
as  currency  outside  of  the  banking  system.  There  are  many  reasons  for  this,  including  the  large 
informal  economy,  but  obviously  a  key  reason  is  the  perverse  incentive  to  look  mostly  to  high 
net-worth agents for deposits - government agencies, blue chip companies and rich individuals. Again, 
this is neither sustainable nor healthy for the economy. 
The latest assessment shows that while the overall health of the Nigerian banking system could be 
described  as  generally  satisfactory,  the  state  of  some  banks  is  less  cheering.  Specifically,  as  at 
end-March,  2004,  the  CBN’s  ratings  of  all  the  banks,  classified  62  as  sound/satisfactory,  14  as 
marginal and 11 as unsound, while 2 of the banks did not render any returns during the period. The 
weaknesses of some of the ailing banks are manifested by their overdrawn positions with the CBN, 
high  incidence  of  nonperforming  loans,  capital  deficiencies,  weak  management  and  poor  corporate 
governance. These shortcomings have, in recent years, led to the revocation of the licenses of two 
banks and the suspension of three others from clearing house activities, prior to the commencement of 
the new settlement system. 
A  further  analysis  of  the  returns  of  the  marginal  and  unsound  banks  reveals  that  they  account  for 
19.2 percent  of  total  assets  of  the  banking  system,  17.2  percent  of  total  deposit  liabilities  while  the 
industry  non  performing  assets  account  for  19.5  percent.  Although  these  ratios,  except  that  for 
deposits, were below the trigger points for declaring the system as distressed, they are nevertheless of 
major supervisory concern. 
The fundamental problems of the banks, particularly those classified as unsound, have been identified 
to include: persistent illiquidity, poor assets quality and unprofitable operations. 
For clarity, we can summarize the major problems of many Nigerian banks as follows: 
(a) 
weak corporate governance, evidenced by high turnover in the Board and management staff, 
inaccurate  reporting  and  non-compliance  with  regulatory  requirements,  falling  ethics  and 
de-marketing of other banks in the industry; 
late  or  non-publication  of  annual  accounts  that  obviates  the  impact  of  market  discipline  in 
ensuring banking soundness; 
gross insider abuses, resulting in huge non-performing insider related credits; 
insolvency, as evidenced by negative capital adequacy ratios and shareholders’ funds that 
had been completely eroded by operating losses; 
weak  capital  base,  even  for  those  banks  that  have  met  the  minimum  capital  requirement, 
which currently stands at N1.0 billion or US$ 7.53 million for existing banks and N2.0 billion 
or  US$ 15.06 million 
the  RM 2.0 billion  or 
US$ 526.4 million in Malaysia. 
(f) 
Over-dependency on public sector deposits, and neglect of small and medium class savers. 
One  of  the  recent  developments  in  the  banking  system,  which  is  of  great  concern  to  the  monetary 
authorities  is  the  significant  dependence  of  many  Nigerian  banks  on  government  deposits,  with  the 
three tiers of government and parastatals accounting for over 20 percent of total deposit liabilities of 
deposit money banks. Although the distribution among banks is not uniform, there are some banks 
whose dependency ratios are in excess of 50 percent. The implications are that the resource base of 
such banks is weak and volatile, rendering their operations highly vulnerable to swings in government 
revenue, arising from the uncertainties of the international oil market. 
In  recent  times,  many  banks  appear  to  have  abandoned  their  essential  intermediation  role  of 
mobilizing  savings  and  inculcating  banking  habit  at  the  household  and  micro  enterprise  levels.  The 
apathy of banks towards small savers, particularly at the grass-root level, has not only compounded 
for  new  banks,  and  compared  with 
(c) 
(d) 
(e) 
(b) 
BIS Review 43/2004 
 3
the problems of low domestic savings and high bank lending rates in the country, it has also reduced 
access  to  relatively  cheap  and  stable  funds  that  could  provide  a  reliable  source  of  credit  to  the 
productive  sectors  at  affordable  rates  of  interest.  The  current  structure  of  the  banking  system  has 
promoted tendencies towards a rather sticky behaviour of deposit rates, particularly at the retail level, 
such  that,  while  banks’  lending  rates  remain  high  and  positive  in  real  terms,  most  deposit  rates, 
especially those on savings, are low and negative. In addition, savings mobilization at the grass-root 
level has been discouraged by the unrealistic requirements, by many banks, for opening accounts with 
them. 
The  summary  from  the  foregoing  is  that  the  Nigerian  banking  system  faces  enormous  challenges 
which if not addressed urgently could snowball into a crisis in the near future. We don’t have to wait for 
the crisis to explode before we act. 
Our vision of a sound and reliable banking structure for the 21st century 
The Nigerian banking system today is fragile and marginal. Our vision is a banking system that is part 
of  the  global  change,  and  which  is  strong,  competitive  and  reliable.  It  is  a  banking  system  which 
depositors  can  trust,  and  investors  can  rely  upon.  Evolving  such  a  banking  system  is  a  collective 
responsibility of all agents in the Nigerian economy. Everyone has a role to play. 
On the part of banks, the challenges are enormous. We recognize that banks and their owners are 
primarily  in  business  to  make  profit,  and  we  are  conscious  of  the  need  not  to  jeopardize  this  key 
driving  motivation  for  innovation  and  entrepreneurship.  However,  we  all  know  that  banking  system 
occupies  a  unique  position  in  every  economy  and  that  is  why  it  often  attracts  more  than  a  casual 
regulatory  attention.  Our  industry  in  the  21st  century  must  have  a  moral  face  and  live  up  to  some 
modicum  of  social  responsibility.  Capitalism  must  have  a  social  face  and  a  human  soul  to  be 
sustainable. This is the lesson of world history. It is in this context that we view with serious concern 
the  spate  of  frauds,  ethical  misconduct,  falsification  of  returns  by  the  banks  to  the  Central  Bank, 
unprofessional use of female staff in some banks in the name of ‘marketing’, etc. Collectively we can 
stop these misconducts and give the system a new face. 
Banks  are  also  expected  to  imbibe  best-practice  corporate  governance,  improve  on  self-regulation, 
enhance the capital base, institute IT-driven culture, and seek to be competitive in today’s globalizing 
world.  Diversification  of  the  productive  base  of  the  economy  remains  a  fundamental  challenge  of 
economic management, and banks will increasingly be challenged to become more innovative in their 
intermediation function, and especially to increase financing to the productive sectors. 
The  regulatory  authorities,  on  their  part,  would  further  streamline  the  regulatory  framework  and 
strengthen the supervisory capacity to ensure a sound and efficient system. It is not enough to have a 
vision, we must act now. Accordingly, let me share with you some of the preliminary thoughts on the 
major  elements  of  the  reforms  by  the  CBN  in  this  first  phase  of  the  banking  sector  reforms.  We 
welcome your comments and suggestions before we finalize them. Some of the key elements might 
include: 
(i) 
Requirement  that  the  minimum  capitalization  for  banks  should  be  N25  billion  with  full 
compliance  before  end-December  2005  (that  is,  18  months  notice  rather  than  12  months 
normally given in many countries). 
• 
Only  the  banks  that  meet  the  requirement  can  hold  public  sector  deposits,  and 
participate in the DAS auction by end 2005. 
Publish the names of banks that qualify by 31 December 2005. 
• 
Phased withdrawal of public sector funds from banks, starting in July 2004. 
Consolidation of banking institutions through mergers and acquisitions. 
Adoption  of  a  risk  focused,  and  rule-based  regulatory  framework.  We  will  always 
pre-announce the rules of the game and stick to them. Arbitrariness will be reduced to the 
barest minimum. More often, operators who run foul of the rules plead for ‘political solution’. 
Those  who  petition  for  ‘political  solutions’  to  otherwise  strictly  economic  and  financial 
problems should understand the damages that such arbitrariness can do to the system, and 
the wrong signals and moral hazard that it creates. Once we start with one ‘political solution’, 
there is no end to it and the system would suffer. In the interest of preserving the integrity of 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
4 
 BIS Review 43/2004
(v) 
(vi) 
(vii) 
(viii) 
(ix) 
(x) 
(xi) 
(xii) 
(xiii) 
the system, transparency and probity, we will insist on the rules and regulatory framework, in 
the interest of Nigeria and Nigerians. 
Adoption  of  zero  tolerance  in  the  regulatory  framework;  especially  in  the  area  of 
data/information rendition/reporting. All returns by banks must now be signed by the MDs of 
the banks. The so-called ‘re-engineering’ or manipulation of accounts especially in hiding of 
information  under  ‘other  assets/liabilities’  and  off-balance  sheets  will  henceforth  attract 
serious sanctions. 
The  automation  process  for  rendition  of  returns  by  banks  and  other  financial  institutions 
through  the  electronic  Financial  Analysis  and  Surveillance  System  (e-FASS)  will  be 
completed expeditiously. 
Establishment  of  a  hotline,  confidential  internet  address  (Governor@cenbank.org)  for  all 
Nigerians  wishing  to  share  any  confidential  information  with  the  Governor  of  the  Central 
Bank on the operations of any bank or the financial system. Only the Governor has access to 
this address. 
Strict enforcement of the contingency planning framework for systemic banking distress; 
Work  towards  the  establishment  of  an  Assets  Management  Company  as  an  important 
element of distress resolution; 
Promotion of the enforcement of dormant laws, especially those relating to the issuance of 
dud cheques, and the law relating to the vicarious liabilities of the Board members of banks 
in cases of failings by the bank. A situation where a bank collapses due to negligence and 
mismanagement  and  the  bank  directors  move  about  in  their  limousines  while  the  poor 
depositors languish in pains is unjust and unfair. There is a law which makes the Directors 
and management liable, and we will henceforth enforce them. 
Revision  and  updating  of  relevant  laws,  and  drafting  of  new  ones  relating  to  the  effective 
operations of the banking system. 
Closer  collaboration  with  the  Economic  and  Financial  Crimes  Commission  (EFCC)  in  the 
establishment of the Financial Intelligence Unit (FIU), and the enforcement of the anti-money 
laundering and other economic crime measures. Greater transparency and accountability will 
be the hallmark of the system. 
Rehabilitation and effective management of the Mint to meet the security printing needs of 
Nigeria,  including  the  banking  system  which  constitutes  over  90  percent  of  the  Mint’s 
business. In due course, you will not need to print your cheques abroad. 
The other reforms will be included in the Banking Sector and Monetary Policy Reform Agenda which 
we are working on. I will be glad to receive your reactions and suggestions for the refinements and 
implementation of the above agenda. 
The Central Bank will collaborate with other institutions - the NDIC, SEC, NSE, the fiscal authorities, 
National  Assembly  and  the  Bankers  committee  to  work  out  the  structure  of  incentives  and 
legal/regulatory  frameworks  to  facilitate  the  rapid  consolidation  of  the  system.  We  would  set  up  a 
Technical  Committee,  including  international  and  national  consultants  to  provide  free  consultancy 
services to banks intending to merge or that are involved in acquisitions. The gamut of incentives and 
guidelines would be out within one month. We welcome your suggestions on the way forward. Banks 
that merge and meet the minimum capital base by March 2005 will be rewarded. 
I am aware of the fact that this measure may not be very popular with some owners and managers of 
banks. I understand our cultural environment, and the mindset whereby many people prefer to own 
“100 percent of barely nothing” by way of family businesses rather than “1 percent of something”. For 
many also, it will be a very difficult challenge to deal with the possibility that they are not ‘chairmen’, 
‘Directors’,  or  MDs  of  banks  especially  as  these  have  become  important  status  symbols.  Even  the 
threat  of  losing  ‘control’  can  be  an  issue  with  many  people.  I  only  hope  that  these  personal 
considerations can be submerged in the interest of the national economy and the banking industry. In 
a few years time, we will all realize that the Nigerian economy and bank shareholders are better for it. 
BIS Review 43/2004 
 5
Conclusion 
In  conclusion,  let  me  reiterate  that  the  sole  objective  of  these  changes  is  to  move  the  Nigerian 
economy  forward,  and  to  proactively  position  the  banking  system  to  become  sound  and  reliable 
catalysts of development. Realizing this objective is a daunting task and would require all hands to be 
on deck. The CBN will remain focused in reducing the risk of systemic banking crisis, and promoting 
general economic and financial sector development. We shall continue to enlist the co-operation and 
partnership  of  the  Bankers’  Committee  in  accomplishing  this  objective.  I  look  forward  to  a  cordial 
working relationship with all of you and I thank you for your kind attention. 
6 
 BIS Review 43/2004
