Philipp M Hildebrand: Switzerland - the challenges of being and remaining a 
leading financial centre 
Speech by Dr Philipp M Hildebrand, Member of the Governing Board of the Swiss National Bank, at 
the  Financial  Management  Association  (FMA),  European  Conference  Zurich,  University  of  Zurich, 
Zurich, 3 June 2004. 
 I am pleased to be here this evening to reflect on Switzerland: the challenges of being and remaining 
a  leading  financial  center.  Moreover,  I  am  honored  to  share  this  platform  with  Peter  Wuffli,  Walter 
Kielholz and Bruno Gehrig. The Financial Management Association should be commended; you have 
assembled three outstanding leaders and representatives of the Swiss financial industry. I very much 
look forward to their comments.  
When  I  think  about  the  Swiss  financial  industry,  two  closely  linked  thoughts  come  to  mind:  first, 
Switzerland’s  status  as  one  of  the  world’s  leading  financial  centers  and  second,  the  important 
contribution  of  the  financial  sector  to  the  overall  vigor  and  resilience  of  the  Swiss  economy.  Going 
forward, the key challenge for the Swiss financial industry will be to maintain its leading global status in 
a  world  of  fierce  competition.  Because  of  the  financial  sector’s  critical  contribution  to  the  overall 
economic well-being of the Swiss people, meeting this challenge is important not only to the financial 
sector but to all Swiss citizens who are concerned about the long-term vitality of their economy. 
Many  of  you  are  familiar  with  the  relevant  figures:  roughly  10  percent  of  Switzerland’s  real  GDP 
derives from the financial sector. If one adds the insurance sector, that number is closer to 14 percent. 
That percentage has increased significantly since 1990 from a total of 10% of GDP or less than 7% for 
the  banking  sector  only.  Importantly,  this  does  not  take  into  account  the  many  economic  activities 
which  are  directly  linked  and  in  many  cases  dependent  on  a  vibrant  financial  sector.  In  terms  of 
employment, the financial and insurance sectors together employ approximately 185’000 people or 6% 
of  total  Swiss  employment.  The  total  federal  and  local  tax  contribution  of  the  Swiss  banking  sector 
amounts  to  an  estimated  CHF 13 billion  or  13%  of  total  tax  revenues.  A  mere  perfunctory 
consideration of these figures should suffice to underline the importance of defending and maintaining 
Switzerland’s status as a leading global financial center. 
In  a  1974  study,  Charles  Kindleberger  traced  the  history  of  financial  centers  in  Western  countries. 
What is striking about Professor Kindleberger’s historical findings is that nothing should ever be taken 
for granted. Not unlike tides, cities and countries as international financial centers rise and fall. For the 
most  part,  this  rise  and  fall  seems  to  reflect  dynamic  criteria  such  as  transportation  infrastructure, 
political  stability  and  regulatory  patterns.1  Since  the  1970s,  the  competition  amongst  international 
financial  centers  has  of  course  become  genuinely  global  with  diverse  places  such  as  Luxembourg, 
Singapore, Hong Kong, Dubai and, most recently, Shanghai joining the race. 
Switzerland has good reasons to be confident about its ability to defend its status. Most importantly, it 
sets out from a position of strength. Particularly in the area of wealth management which comprises 
over  half  of  the  total  added  value  of  the  banks,  Switzerland  is  clearly  one  of  the  world’s  leading 
provider of services. The value of total assets managed in customer accounts in domestic banks as of 
the end of the year 2003 amounts to CHF 3’300 billion, of which nearly 60% is held by foreigners. 
According to various estimates, this corresponds to approximately one third of the world’s total private 
wealth managed abroad.  
Much  has  been  said  and  written  about  the  various  strengths  of  the  Swiss  financial  center  which 
account  for  the  dominant  global  position  in  wealth  management.  Political,  economic  and  monetary 
stability, know-how, traditional high quality of services provided, guaranteed protection of privacy and 
strict  conditions  ensuring  the  prevention  of  abuse  are  all  key  ingredients  to  Switzerland’s  past  and 
future  success.  In  the  current  global  market  place,  some  of  these  strengths  represent  structural 
competitive advantages. The Swiss authorities and the Swiss financial sector representatives rightly 
                                                      
1   Charles P Kindleberger (1974): “The Formation of Financial Centers: a Study in Comparative Economic History”, Princeton 
Studies in International Finance, No 36, Princeton: Princeton University, November. 
BIS Review 34/2004 
 1
fund  of 
funds  structures.  These  pooled  assets,  coupled  with 
make  great  efforts  to  defend  these  structural  competitive  advantages  as  much  as  other  sovereign 
countries defend theirs.  
Nonetheless, in a fierce global competitive environment, defense is a necessary but not a sufficient 
condition for sustained success. The offensive component of a comprehensive Swiss strategy must be 
an  unequivocal  commitment  from  politicians,  regulators  and  financial  sector  representatives  to 
competition  and  free  markets.  Such  a  commitment  will  foster  innovation  which  will  ensure  the 
long-term  viability  of  Switzerland  as  a  leading  global  financial  center.  A  commitment  to  competition 
includes a firm commitment to an effective regulatory system based on transparency, proportionality, 
predictability and an uncompromising fight against abuse. Such a regulatory framework does not stand 
in  opposition  to  a  commitment  to  free  markets.  To  the  contrary,  it  strengthens  free  markets  by 
upholding the integrity of markets. Regulatory authorities must not loose sight of the primary aim of 
regulation: to uphold the integrity of markets and not to impede the functioning of markets.  
Let me conclude my brief formal comments with a specific example of how innovation in the face of 
global competitive pressures can foster the viability of the Swiss financial center. 
In  recent  years,  hedge  funds  have  become  an  important  segment  of  the  global  asset  management 
industry.  Recent  figures  indicate  that  total  assets  invested  in  hedge  funds  are  approaching  the 
USD 1’000  billion  mark.  In  comparison,  the  total  size  of  the  open-end  mutual  funds  industry  in  the 
United States is USD 7’500 billion. According to industry figures, the annual growth rate of the hedge 
fund industry appears to have accelerated to a level in excess of 15% in recent years. These figures 
suggest that investors increasingly look for largely unconstrained investment activities with a focus on 
absolute return. In addition, there has been an important shift from the traditional high net worth clients 
investing in individual hedge funds to funds being invested in hedge funds via diversified pools and 
formal 
liberalizing  regulatory 
developments have opened up hedge funds to a more diverse universe of investors, including a wide 
range of institutional and retail investors.  
Currently,  the  total  size  of  funds  invested  in  hedge  funds  via  pooled  structures  is  estimated  to  be 
approximately USD 300 billion or nearly a third of the underlying hedge fund industry. Remarkably, 
annual  growth  rate  estimates  of  the  pooled  funds  suggest  that  their  expansion  has  proceeded  at  a 
more rapid pace than the underlying hedge fund industry. This implies that a significant portion of new 
assets flowing into hedge funds does so via collective asset management pools.  
In a competitive environment, the Swiss financial sector has succeeded in leveraging its position as 
one  of  the  world’s  leading  asset  manager  to  secure  an  dominant  position  amongst  collective  asset 
management  pool  operators  in  the  hedge  fund  industry.  Though  many  of  the  early  formal  funds  of 
funds were registered under Luxembourg, Cayman Island or Bermuda law, Swiss financial firms today 
manage  a  significant  part  of  the  world’s  alternative  asset  management  pools.  With  the  growing 
importance  of  this  industry  in  recent  years,  Swiss  regulators  are  easing  regulatory  restrictions  to 
facilitate not only investment control of these asset pools by Swiss financial institutions but also the 
legal registrations of formal fund of funds vehicles under Swiss law. Moreover, Swiss financial firms 
have  become  leaders  in  financial  engineering  to  structure  underlying  hedge  fund  asset  pools 
according to differing client demands.  
The example of managed asset pools in the hedge fund industry illustrates that Swiss financial firms 
are  competitive  and  capable  to  respond  to  market  demands,  particularly  in  the  area  of  asset 
management.  In  the  future,  Swiss  financial  firms  will  have  to  rise  to  new  challenges  to  secure  the 
position of Switzerland as a leading global financial center. One such opportunity might be to provide a 
wide range of trust-related services to its global wealth management clients. 
Regulators have an important and difficult role to play. Their primary responsibility is to safeguard the 
integrity of Switzerland as a financial center, thus bolstering its global standing. At the same time, they 
must not become an obstacle to innovation by impeding competitive Swiss financial firms to respond 
to rapidly evolving market developments in a vibrant global financial industry. 
2 
 BIS Review 34/2004
