Otmar Issing: The euro and the Lisbon agenda 
Speech  by  Mr  Otmar  Issing,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  ECB,  at  the  32nd  Economics 
Conference of the Austrian National Bank, 28 May 2004. 
 Introduction 
1. 
When  the  European  Council  agreed  on  the  so-called  Lisbon  agenda  in  March  2000  the  EU  had 
witnessed a period with high real growth rates. “The Union is experiencing its best macro-economic 
outlook  for  a  generation”,  the  Council  concluded  at  the  time.  Against  this  background,  the  Lisbon 
European Council set itself its well-known strategic goal1 to be reached by 2010 and defined a broad 
agenda  for  structural  reforms  in  labour,  product  and  financial  markets.  Four  years  later,  real  GDP 
growth  has  dropped  to  significantly  lower  levels.  So  far,  many  structural  reforms  have  been  found 
difficult to implement and the Lisbon agenda’s mid-term goals for 2005 are unlikely to be reached.  
In the following, I would first like to draw attention to the economic benefits of structural reforms and 
highlight  where  deficiencies  in  their  implementation  have  become  particularly  obvious.  I  will  then 
concentrate  on  two  aspects  regarding  the  Lisbon  agenda,  which  I  consider  as  being  of  particular 
interest from the viewpoint of the single monetary policy. First, I would like to focus on the ways in 
which  structural  reforms  change  the  economic  environment  in  which  the  single  monetary  policy  is 
conducted.  Second,  I  would  like  to  highlight  how  in  turn  monetary  policy  can  support  the  Lisbon 
process. Third and finally, I will argue that exploiting the euro area’s growth potential with the help of 
structural  reforms  will  contribute  to  global  economic  growth  and  is  thus  indispensable  for  reducing 
existing global economic imbalances. 
Main elements of the Lisbon agenda 
2. 
Let me first briefly explain why the European countries must proceed with structural reform and why 
we  continuously  ask  euro  area  Member  States  to  step  up  their  reform  efforts  in  this  regard. 
Well-designed  structural  reforms  increase  the  mobility  of  production  factors  between  different  uses 
and  improve  their  allocation  in  an  economy  towards  their  most  efficient  use.  In  doing  so,  structural 
reforms  raise  factor  productivity,  open  up  additional  employment  opportunities  and  allow  for  lower 
prices  of  goods  and  services.  Exploiting  the  opportunities  of  such  a  more  efficient  allocation  of 
production  factors  will  eventually  allow  an  economy  to  achieve  a  higher  real  income  and  a  higher 
sustainable long-run growth path.  
In  the  last  decade,  euro  area  countries  have  made  considerable  progress  with  reforms  in  labour, 
product and capital markets, varying, however, considerably across countries. Among the outcomes 
were a higher level of competition in product markets due to, for example, a lower level of state aids 
and regulatory reform in network industries that resulted in substantial price reductions as well as in 
higher  activity.  For  example,  between  2000  and  mid-2003  alone, 
in 
telecommunication  services  as  measured  by  the  HICP  sub-index  for  telecommunications  led  to  a 
cumulated  downward  effect  on  total  HICP  inflation  of  0.33  percentage  point.2  Moreover,  its  positive 
effect  on  real  acticity  supported  the  creation  of  new  jobs.  At  the same  time,  labour  market  reforms 
undertaken during the 1990s seem to have contributed to the strong employment growth and to the 
considerable decline in unemployment in many countries during the cyclical upswing between 1997 
and  2000.  Reform  measures  in  this  field  included,  for  example,  improvements  in  countries’  job 
mediation systems,  a  more  intensive  use  of  part-time  work contracts  as  well as  policies  raising  the 
efficiency of tax and benefit systems.  
With the so-called Lisbon agenda the European Council intends to reinforce these reform efforts. It 
identifies various areas for further reform, summarised under employment, research and innovation, 
the single market, social cohesion as well as sustainable development and the environment. I think we 
the  price  decline 
                                                      
1   Namely,  “to  become  the  most  competitive  and  dynamic  knowledge-based  economy  in  the  world  capable  of  sustainable 
economic growth with more and better jobs and greater social cohesion” by 2010. 
2   See ECB Monthly Bulletin (2003), pp 26. 
BIS Review 33/2004 
 1
all  agree  that  stepping  up  structural  reforms  in  these  areas  is  indispensible  for  improving  the  euro 
area’s unsatisfactory growth potential and its ability to create employment, even more so after the EU 
has been enlarged to countries that have substantially lower labour costs.  
The euro area’s insufficient flexibility is manifested in the high rate of unemployment, which amounted 
to  8.8%  in  2003.  This  reveals  shortcomings  in  the  implementation  of  structural  refoms  that  would 
improve  the  use  of  the  euro  area’s  productive  forces  and  increase  their  flexibility  in  response  to 
economic  shocks.  It  is  thus  crucial  that  the  Lisbon  agenda’s  impetus  is  maintained,  which  must 
manifest itself in increased efforts to reach the agenda’s 2010 targets. There is, however, still a long 
way  to  go.  For  example,  raising  the  euro  area  overall  employment  rate  to  70%  by  2010  can  be 
expected to require an additional 15.3 million jobs, although hiding significantly varying challenges for 
different groups in the labour market. Whereas, for example, significant progress has been made to 
raise  female  employment,  employment  growth  for  older  workers  aged  55-64  would  have  to 
substantially exceed its annual average of 1.7% between 1996 and 2002 to achieve the employment 
target for older workers of 50% by 2010.  
Making the Lisbon agenda a success therefore requires particular efforts in the field of labour market 
reform to open up additional employment opportunities. At the same time, further structural reforms 
need to increase the prerequisites for innovation, research and development, particularly by providing 
educational  attainment  levels  adequate  for  labour  market  needs.  Furthermore,  a  continuation  of 
reforms in capital markets, a removal of barriers to competition particularly in the service sector as well 
as further liberalisation in electricity, postal services and transport as envisaged in the Lisbon agenda 
is needed.  
I would like to conclude this part of my speech with three remarks: 
First,  trust  in  the  course  of  structural  reform  as  fostered  by  the  Lisbon  agenda  and  a  better 
understanding  of  the  economic  benefits  structural  reforms  entail  are  conducive  to  raising  consumer 
confidence  and  private  consumption.  It  is  thus  indispensible  to  maintain  trust  in  this  course,  and  to 
keep commitments also in periods with slower growth.  
Second,  numeric  targets  seem  to  me  currently  the  central  measure  to  benchmark  progress  with 
structural reforms. As numeric targets increase necessary pressure for underperforming countries, it 
should be considered to strengthen this instrument. 
Third, as we all know, the implementation of changes in long-grown relationships is always a difficult 
task.  When  asked  for  their  willingness  for  reform  in  general,  a  large  part  of  the  population  would 
probably  signal  a  high  degree  of  approval.  But  as  soon  as  a  concrete  measure  would  harm  the 
personal status-quo, only a minority would agree. The main challenge for the Lisbon agenda’s success 
is  thus  to  persuade  the  people  of  the  long-term  benefits  of  structural  reform  and  to  remove  the 
scepticism  with  respect  to  short-term  costs.  In  this  regard,  also  the  ECB  plays  its  part  in  its 
communication on the benefits of structural reforms.  
The impact of structural reforms on the conduct of monetary policy 
3. 
Let me now turn to the discussion of the implications that the implementation of the Lisbon agenda 
may have for the conduct of monetary policy in the euro area.  
The ECB has always stressed the importance of a swift implementation of structural reform agendas 
across the euro area. This reflects above all the firm belief that structural reforms enhance the welfare 
of the European citizens.  
But  structural  reforms  also  tend  to  facilitate  monetary  policy  and  increase  its  effectiveness.  A  more 
flexible  economic  environment  helps  the  labour  and  product  markets  to  better  adjust  to  economic 
shocks and respond to policy actions more quickly. For example, more flexible labour markets may 
imply  that  negative  supply  shocks  are  absorbed  with  a  smaller  short-term  increase  in  inflationary 
pressures, as second round effects are more subdued. This, in turn, allows monetary policy to react 
less strongly. Such an environment will not only make it easier for monetary policy to maintain price 
stability, but it will also help to keep the volatility of inflation and output lower.  
But there are also challenges for the central bank, arising from the uncertainty related to the changed 
economic  environment  in  which  monetary  policy  operates.  More  precisely,  structural  reforms  may 
change  the  rules  governing  the  dynamic  evolution  of  the  euro  area  economy  and  the  transmission 
2 
 BIS Review 33/2004
mechanism of monetary policy actions in ways that are difficult to identify in the short run. I shall try, 
now, to elaborate on this more in detail.  
Normally, economists think about structural reforms as having positive “supply” effects that allow firms 
to increase their productivity, while at the same time fostering aggregate demand. From the point of 
view of the monetary policymaker who adopts a forward looking strategy, understanding the nature of 
the changes in the supply potential of the economy is crucial for assessing to what extent such shocks 
have  an  impact  on  price  stability.  Moreover,  changes  in  potential  output  growth  can  impact  on  the 
determination of the “equilibrium” real interest rate, as well as on the optimal time path towards such 
equilibrium real rate.  
A first approach is to outline these issues under the simplifying assumption that the potential output 
and the real equilibrium interest rate can be estimated with a high degree of precision. In case the 
positive  supply  shock  leads  only  to  a  one-off  increase  in  the  level  of  potential  output,  but  not  to  a 
permanently  higher  output  growth,3  the  equilibrium  real  rate  would  not  change.  However,  when  the 
shock is permanent4 and leads to higher potential output growth the return on capital will increase and 
the equilibrium real interest rate will follow. This implies that in the long run policy rates need to be 
higher than otherwise. 
Once  the  possibly  new  “equilibrium”  interest  rate  and  potential  output  growth  are  pinned  down,  the 
central  bank  has  to  set  interest  rates  by  taking  into  consideration  a  large  set  of  other  indicators, 
including  the  short-term  interactions  of  aggregate  demand  and  supply.  In  case  of  a  positive  supply 
shock actual and potential output accelerate simultaneously only if demand and supply effects emerge 
at the same time and are of the same magnitude. If this was the case, and other things being equal, 
monetary  policy  would  essentially  need  to  align  short-term  rates  with  the  higher  equilibrium  real 
interest rate which is consistent with the permanently higher potential growth. In a different situation, 
for instance when supply effects dominate in the short-run5 the increase in productivity and potential 
output  levels  brought  about  by  structural  reforms  will  often  tend  to  reduce  short-term  inflationary 
pressures. In this case, the central bank would be in the position of eventually adjusting short-term 
rates more gradually towards the higher “equilibrium” as long as potential GDP temporarily expands 
more rapidly than demand and, consequently, inflationary pressures remain muted.  
Everything just said, however, presumes that concepts like the precise level of the equilibrium interest 
rate,  the  natural  rate  of  unemployment  or  the  potential  output  are  observed  or  estimated  with  a 
sufficient degree of confidence by the central bank. In reality this is not at all the case. Monetary policy 
decisions that have to be  taken in real time and without the benefit of hindsight, will always face a 
particularly high degree of uncertainty when long-run trends in macroeconomic variables change, and 
also  the  fundamental  relations  linking  macroeconomic  variables  change  in  ways  that  could  render 
existing  models  of  the  transmission  mechanism  unreliable.  In  such  a  situation,  monetary  policy 
decision-making calls for great caution and any kind of mechanistic reactions, in particular to indicators 
whose developments are very difficult to interpret, should be avoided.  
It seems plausible that in such an environment of high uncertainty, monetary policy is more efficient by 
assigning a more prominent role to indicators that can be more precisely measured or estimated rather 
than concepts that can only be estimated with a high degree of uncertainty. This is one of the reasons 
why typically, central banks do not rely on “output gap” estimates. Furthermore, when cross-checking 
all the available information, the central bank must carefully take into consideration the possibility of 
structural  breaks  in  historical  relationships  as  well  as  the  signals  sent  by  different  models  in  the 
context  of  various  types  of  approaches.  In  the  end,  when  assessing  the  appropriateness  of  its 
monetary policy stance against the prospects of achieving its medium term objective the central bank 
has to make sure to incorporate all the information embedded in the economic and monetary analysis.  
The  ECB’s  monetary  policy  strategy  was  designed  precisely  with  the  aim  of  ensuring  that  in  the 
assessment  of  risks  to  price  stability  no  relevant  information  would  be  lost  and  that  appropriate 
                                                      
3   For example, through a one-off increase in employment and/or labour productivity due to a more flexible labour market that 
allows workers to be re-allocated more efficiently. 
4   For example through higher trend productivity growth resulting from the increased ability of firms to adopt new production 
technologies in a more flexible economic environment. 
5   Because  consumers  smooth  their  expenditure  or  credit-market  imperfections  constrain  them  to  borrow  against  (higher) 
future expected income. 
BIS Review 33/2004 
 3
attention  would  be  paid  to  different  analytical  perspectives.  Its  two-pillar  approach  is  a  way  of 
conveying to the public the notion of a diversified analysis and of ensuring robust decision-making in 
an environment characterised by high uncertainty.  
This approach also allows the ECB to assess the impact of structural reforms on both the cyclical and 
the  more  long-term  components  of  the  inflation  process  in  the  euro  area.  As  noted  before,  in  case 
reforms  increase  potential  output  growth  in  the  euro  area,  the  ECB  will  take  into  consideration  the 
short-term relative developments in aggregate demand and supply. Furthermore, it will have to assess 
its assumptions for the desirable medium term evolution of monetary aggregates if potential growth 
were to change.  
Let me give you an example that goes back to 2001, when in the context of the well known debate 
about the emergence of a possibly “new economy” the Governing Council decided to assess potential 
changes in trend productivity growth in the euro area and its implications for the reference value for 
monetary  growth.  The  conclusion  in  December  2001  was  that  there  is  no  decisive  evidence  of 
measurable and lasting increases in productivity growth in the euro area that would warrant an upward 
revision  to  trend  potential  growth.6  The  Governing  Council  therefore  opted  in  favour  of  a  rather 
cautious  attitude  and,  with  the  benefit  of  hindsight,  was  correct  to  do  so  -  thus  avoiding  a  possible 
policy mistake. 
Price stability and the Lisbon agenda 
4. 
I would now like to outline what the ECB can contribute to supporting the implementation of the Lisbon 
agenda. In short, it can contribute by maintaining price stability and by helping to safeguard financial 
stability  as  contributions  to  a  stable  macroeconomic  environment.  In  such  a  stable  macroeconomic 
environment, structural reforms will be easier to implement. Let me explain this relationship by looking 
at some aspects of price stability. 
• 
First,  price  stability  preserves  and  bolsters  consumers’  purchasing  power,  thus  supporting 
consumption. 
Second, price stability enhances the efficiency of the market system at allocating resources, 
by making it easier for people to recognise changes in relative prices. 
Third,  price  stability  avoids  additional  menu  costs,  i.e.  production  costs  occurring  when 
printed prices have to be changed. 
Fourth,  price  stability  is  associated  with  lower  uncertainty  and  risk  premia  in  financial 
markets,  facilitating  financial  actions  and  ultimately  implying  lower  medium  and  long-term 
interest rates, fostering investment. 
Fifth,  price  stability  provides  markets  with  an  indispensable  nominal  anchor  for  adjusting 
changes in wages consistently with productivity growth. 
Sixth,  price  stability  prevents  the  considerable  and  arbitrary  redistribution  of  wealth  and 
income that arises in inflationary as well as in deflationary environments. 
     In this regard, price stability is a vital element of fostering sustainable growth as well as of supporting 
employment  and  social  cohesion,  thus  supporting  the  Lisbon  process  in  achieving  its  objectives. 
Moreover,  as  price  stability  helps  to  guide  economic  agents  in  their  decisions  to  move  production 
factors towards more efficient uses it should help structural reforms to exploit their welfare-enhancing 
benefits. As an additional aspect, within an environment of stable prices, a decline in relative prices in 
some sectors resulting from structural reforms would become more visible, supporting acceptance of 
such reforms. Price stability is thus the most important contribution of monetary policy to the Lisbon 
process. 
                                                      
6  
“...  The  Governing  Council  believes  that  the  potential  upward  impact  on  trend  output  growth  from  structural  reforms  and 
technological  innovation  could  be  large.  However,  while  some  progress  has  been  made  in  the  field  of  structural  reform, 
significant further steps - especially in the labour and goods markets - need to be taken in order to achieve a permanent and 
significant increase in potential output growth in the euro area. Against this background, the Governing Council will continue 
to monitor the evidence with regard to developments in productivity growth in the euro area, and the ECB’s monetary policy 
will take such evidence into account as appropriate.”. See ECB Press Release from 6 December 2001. 
4 
 BIS Review 33/2004
Empirical estimations show that even rather low rates of inflation can lead to welfare losses that might 
be larger than usually thought. A study for the US, for example, indicates that a permanent increase in 
the inflation rate from 0% to 4% can lead to permanent output losses ranging from 0.4-1.1%.7 There 
are, however, several arguments that support basing a definition of price stability on positive but low 
inflation  rates.  The  ECB  has  thus  provided  a  quantitative  definition  of  price  stability,  namely  a 
year-on-year increase in the HICP for the euro area as a whole of below 2% to be maintained over the 
medium term. Looking back, over the last five years, despite significant exogenous shocks the ECB’s 
stability-oriented monetary policy following this definition has resulted over the medium term in low and 
stable inflation. And it has ensured that medium and long-run inflation expectations have been well 
anchored. Monetary policy has thus delivered its necessary contribution to a stable macroeconomic 
environment supporting the implementation of structural reforms.  
Perhaps  less  well-known  but  also  important  is  the  ECB’s  and  the  ESCB’s  contribution  to  a  stable 
macroeconomic environment by promoting financial stability. This task is crucial as a well-developed 
and stable financial system improves the efficiency of financing decisions, favours a better allocation 
of investment in and among economies and thus supports economic growth. This was also recognised 
by the Lisbon Council when it called for accelerating the completion of the internal market for financial 
services and to “exploit the potential of the euro” in achieving this aim. The tasks of the ESCB in this 
regard consist of systematically monitoring financial stability conditions in EU and euro area countries. 
This monitoring particularly aims at identifying potential sources of vulnerability in the financial system 
of the euro area and the EU and to assess its resilience to shocks.  
To  sum  up,  maintaining  price  stability  is  a  vital  contribution  to  fostering  non-inflationary  sustainable 
growth  and,  together  with  financial  stability,  supports  a  stable  macroeconomic  environment,  within 
which structural reforms can fully exploit their welfare enhancing effects. Maintaining price stability and 
promoting financial stability is thus the assistance monetary policy can render to the Lisbon agenda’s 
reform efforts. 
Global aspects 
5. 
Increasing the euro area’s insufficient growth potential and its ability to adjust more flexibly to changes 
in economic variables becomes particularly important against the background of globalisation. This is 
even more the case as over the last years the international trade in goods, capital and services has 
witnessed  imbalances.  These  imbalances  are  signalled  by,  for  example,  the  persistent  US  current 
account deficit, which amounts to around 5% of GDP. This is connected with an increase in US net 
liabilities vis-à-vis the rest of the world from 5% in the early 1990s to roughly 23% of GDP at the end of 
2002.  
These imbalances will finally have to be corrected. An adjustment can, however, be brought about in 
several ways: First, the deficit country’s growth rate could decline relative to growth rates in the rest of 
the world. This would, among others, reduce this country’s demand for foreign goods and services, 
potentially  hampering  real  growth  because  of  reduced  exports  elsewhere  in  the  world.  Second,  the 
global  imbalance  could  be  diminished  by  an  acceleration  of  growth  in  the  rest  of  the  world  as  this 
would lead to an increased demand for the deficit country’s exports. The more flexible the adjustment 
to declining global imbalances is, the more orderly the necessary adjustment can be brought about, 
meaning with less and less sudden disruptions in key economic variables.  
One may conjecture that, with its net outflows of goods and capital, part of the adjustment will also fall 
upon the euro area. In the US a view seems to prevail, which one could paraphrase with a previous 
statement by the then US Treasury Secretary Connolly with respect to the US currency: “It may be our 
deficit, but it is your problem”. One characteristic of this “problem” is the large outflow of investment 
capital  from  the  EU  and  the  euro  area  towards  other  regions  in  the  world  and  the  US  market  in 
particular. One reason for the large flow of capital towards US markets in the second half of the 1990s 
were  surely  overly  optimistic  expectations  with  regard  to  the  “new  economy”.  Considering  only 
investment since 1997, rough estimates indicate that EU investors have incurred tremendous losses, 
ranging from EUR 200 billion to EUR 540 billion until mid-2002. However, the large aggregate outflow 
                                                      
7   Dotsey, M and P Ireland (1996): “The welfare costs of inflation in general equilibrium”, Journal of Monetary Economics 45, 
631-55. 
BIS Review 33/2004 
 5
of capital from Europe should be taken as a sign for its insufficient attractiveness for internationally 
mobile capital.  
Having said this, the euro area can support the reduction of global imbalances by a much stronger 
contribution  to  global  growth.  This  requires  that  the  euro  area  exploits  its  growth  potential  and 
becomes  a  more  attractive  place  to  invest.  Again,  this  calls  for  improving  the  functioning  of  labour, 
product and capital markets, as their partly insufficient flexibility has been found to act as impediment 
to investing in several euro area economies. Raising the rate of investment with the help of structural 
reforms is therefore not only a crucial measure to increase the euro area’s ability to adjust to declining 
global imbalances. By allowing them to achieve higher sustainable growth rates structural reforms also 
indirectly contribute to global growth and thus to reducing global imbalances.8  
Conclusion 
6. 
The  Lisbon  agenda  presses  EU  countries  to  make  their  homework  in  the  field  of  structural  reform. 
However, whereas some progress has been made, deficiencies remain, particularly in the labour and 
service markets. Reforms in labour markets have, however, been found hardest to implement and are 
most of the times accompanied by tensions. I hope Olivier Blanchard will be right in the end with his 
assessment that these tensions “are a symptom of change, not of immobility”.9  
The Lisbon agenda has been crucial for raising Europe’s attention to the necessity for further structural 
reforms. Countries now have to implement well-designed policies that remedy the root causes of their 
particular problems in labour, product and financial markets. These structural reforms will improve the 
environment,  in  which  the  stability-oriented  monetary  policy  is  conducted.  In  turn,  this  process  of 
reform can best be implemented within a stable macroeconomic environment in which microeconomic 
policies can fully develop their welfare-enhancing effects. The single monetary policy will continue to 
play its part in this respect by maintaining price stability and by promoting financial stability. 
                                                      
8   See for a further discussion of this topic Issing O “Conditions for an orderly adjustment in the global economy”, European 
Integration, Vol 26, No 1, pp 83-92. 
9 O Blanchard (2004): “The economic future of Europe”, NBER Working Paper ,Series No 10310. 
6 
 BIS Review 33/2004
