Timothy F Geithner: Change and challenges facing the US financial system 
Remarks  by  Mr  Timothy  F  Geithner,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal  Reserve 
Bank  of  New  York,  before  the  New  York  Bankers  Association’s  Annual  Financial  Services  Forum, 
New York, 25 March 2004. 
 It  is  a  pleasure  to  join  you  at  the  New  York  Bankers  Association  Financial  Services  Forum.  The 
institutions  represented  in  this  room,  together  with  the  rest  of  the  New  York  financial  community, 
remain at the center of the U.S. and global financial systems.  
Your  meeting  today  takes  place  against  the  backdrop  of  a  relatively  favorable  national  and  global 
economic outlook. The U.S. financial system is in reasonably strong shape. Financial innovation has 
enabled substantial improvements in the quality of risk management and in the capacity of the system 
to handle shocks. But the benefits of innovation have come with significant challenges to the people 
who run financial institutions and to those responsible for supervision and oversight. How effective we 
are  in  responding  to  these  challenges  will  determine  whether  the  U.S.  financial  system  is  as 
successful in the future as it has been in the past. 
The  consensus  forecast  for  the  U.S.  economy  expects  solid  growth  this  year  and  next,  somewhat 
above  the  upper  bound  of  the  range  of  most  estimates  of  U.S.  potential  growth.  Confidence  in  the 
sustainability of the U.S. expansion, as measured by changes in these forecasts, for example, seems 
to  be  increasing.  The  rate  of  economic  growth  outside  the  United  States  is  also  looking  better. 
Although  there  are  pockets  of  weakness  and  potential  sources  of  vulnerability,  the  overall  rate  of 
global growth has accelerated significantly and looks as if it’s now running at the strongest levels in 
four years. 
The broad measures of U.S. consumer price inflation are very low. Inflation expectations as reflected 
in surveys and in the Treasury inflation-protected securities, although higher than current rates, still 
suggest an outlook of very modest future price increases. Deflation risks worldwide appear to have 
diminished,  and  there  are  some  signs  of  accelerating  price  increases  in  some  economies.  Overall, 
however, despite the sharp increases in energy and commodity prices, the inflation outlook globally 
appears quite benign.  
At  the  core  of  the  U.S.  economic  experience  of  the  past  decade  is  a  significant  and  sustained 
acceleration in productivity growth. This offers the prospect of more rapid growth in income over time, 
both for the United States and for the rest of the world.  
In the economics profession, there is a debate about whether we are in the midst of a secular trend 
characterized by lower GDP volatility and general price stability, which some have called the “great 
moderation.” As important as the question of the extent of this moderation in macroeconomic volatility 
is the debate over its source. It’s undoubtedly the result of a combination of factors, including better 
economic policy, innovation and globalization, plus simple good fortune in the form of smaller shocks. 
But, the relative contribution of these factors is uncertain. 
Despite  the  uncertainty  that  exists  about  the  sources  and  durability  of  this  apparent  moderation  in 
some  types  of  risks,  financial  market  prices  now  reflect  a  very  benign  view  of  economic  and  credit 
fundamentals. Credit spreads generally and risk premia in many asset classes are at levels that are 
very low even in relation to previous periods of relative optimism.  
The U.S. financial system, when judged by many conventional measures, looks reasonably healthy as 
well.  Bank  profitability  is  at  the  highest  levels  we  have  seen,  depending  on  which  measure  you 
choose, in two to three decades. Capital positions for U.S. banks, which have been around 13 percent 
of  assets  over  the  past  two  years,  are  very  strong,  significantly  above  the  regulatory  standards 
required  to  be  considered  well  capitalized.  Asset  quality  also  remains  robust.  Nonperforming  loan 
ratios  are  now  only  1.2  percent  across  the  commercial  banking  industry.  The  financial  markets  are 
pricing  financial  institution  risk  at  very  favorable  levels,  with  bank  equity  prices,  subordinated  debt 
spreads,  and  credit  default  swap  spreads  suggesting  a  high  degree  of  investor  and  counterparty 
confidence in the financial health of the major banks and other financial institutions.  
As these numbers suggest, the U.S. financial system came through the recent recession, the spate of 
corporate  bankruptcies,  the  sharp  adjustment  in  some  asset  prices,  and  the  difficulties  in  some 
BIS Review 18/2004 
 1
the 
these 
factors  stem 
financial  system, 
from  developments  outside 
emerging market economies in reasonably strong financial shape. This apparent resilience, relative to 
past downturns and relative to the experience of other countries, is the result of a number of factors. 
Some  of 
like  better 
macroeconomic policy and better microeconomic or supply-side fundamentals. And some stem from 
changes in the nature of financial intermediation, the structure of the financial system, and the capacity 
of financial institutions to manage risk.  
To  start  with  the  broader  economic  context,  the  strength  and  length  of  the  expansion  of  the  1990s 
helped ensure that U.S. financial institutions entered the latest recession with strong capital positions. 
The fact that the recession was shallower and shorter than the average of the past helped limit the 
scale and scope of losses to financial institutions. The forcefulness of the monetary policy response 
and the large fiscal stimulus provided by the tax cuts and expenditure increases played a significant 
role in limiting the depth of the downturn and in helping to bring about the recovery. It is significant that 
the yield curve has been steeper and stayed steep longer in this latest recession than in the previous 
one.  And,  finally,  the  stronger  microeconomic  fundamentals  of  the  U.S.  economy  -  the  shift  to 
just-in-time  inventory  management,  the  speed  of  innovation  in  the  U.S.  economy,  and  other  factors 
that  seem  to  have  reduced  the  amplitude  of  the  business  cycle  and  improved  the  flexibility  and 
resilience of the U.S. economy in response to shocks - have also contributed to financial stability.  
Changes  in  the  nature  of  financial  intermediation  have  also  played  a  role  in  improving  the  overall 
resilience  and  performance  of  the  U.S.  financial  system  that  was  evident  in  this  latest  period  of 
economic recession and financial stress. Four different types of changes are particularly important.  
• 
Innovation  in  financial  technology  continues  to  expand  the  opportunities  for  financial 
institutions to separate and distribute, and to manage and hedge, different types of risk.  
The  increasingly  greater  role  played  by  the  capital  markets  in  the  financial  intermediation 
process  relative  to  banks  -  both  relative  to  the  past  and  compared  with  most  other  major 
economies - has improved the capacity of our system to handle stress. Loans and securities 
held  by  commercial  banks  today  account  for  less  than  20  percent  of  overall  U.S.  credit 
market debt, roughly two--thirds of their 1975 levels.  
The  increases  in  the  sophistication  of  risk  management  techniques  and  enhancements  to 
risk  management  processes  have  delivered  substantial  improvements  in  how  banks  and 
other financial institutions actually manage risk in practice. Banks, for example, have aligned 
their pricing of credit products much more closely with credit risk.  
The increased scale of cross-border financial intermediation, the growing role of securitized 
financial  instruments  in  those  overall  flows,  and  the  growth  in  the  size  and  breadth  of 
financial institutions with global operations may  also mean that, as shocks are transmitted 
more rapidly, they are diffused more broadly.  
   These are positive developments, and they are likely to be enduring. But they have come with new 
challenges  for  those  of  you  who  manage  financial  institutions  and  for  those  of  us  charged  with 
supervision and market oversight. The overall return on these changes will depend on the skill with 
which we manage the challenges that come with them. Among these challenges are those that relate 
to  the  complexity  of  financial  and  operational  risk  management,  concentration  in  critical  markets, 
internal governance to manage conflicts, the quality of public disclosure, opportunities for regulatory 
and capital arbitrage, and trend amplifying market dynamics in times of stress. 
The  financial  innovations  that  have  made  risk  transfer  and  hedging  possible  have  increased  the 
complexity of risk management, both financial and operational. The seemingly simple structure of a 
loan or bond issue can now involve a complex series of additional transactions that seek to allocate 
risks and responsibilities along specialized lines. This increased number of transactions that need to 
be separately settled and tracked by themselves create new risks that must be managed.  
The economies of scale inherent in certain activities have led to a significant degree of concentration 
in  some  markets.  A  relatively  small  number  of  dealers  account  for  a  very  large  share  of  the 
over-the-counter derivatives business, with higher degrees of concentration in specific markets such 
as interest-rate options. Two institutions dominate the government securities clearing business. The 
growth in the size of government-sponsored mortgage entities creates a high degree of concentration 
in  a  market  with  very  large  systemic  implications.  Concentration  has  benefits,  but  it  necessarily 
increases the vulnerability of the system to an operational or financial disruption in a single institution, 
or  the  decision  by  a  single  institution  to  exit  a  particular  business.  Moreover,  to  the  extent  that  the 
2 
 BIS Review 18/2004
same  set  of  firms  play  dominant  roles  in  multiple  markets,  this  concentration  can  also  give  rise  to 
linkages  between  markets  that  are  not  apparent  in  normal  circumstances  and  that  could  potentially 
affect how the financial system functions in conditions of acute stress. 
Increased  opportunities  for  diversification  offer  the  prospect  -  though  not  the  assurance  -  of  lower 
overall volatility in earnings, but they also bring much more complicated management challenges in 
controlling  conflicts,  reputational  risks,  and  operational  risks.  The  actual  gains  achieved  from 
diversification  depend  on  the  correlation  of  movements  in  different  sources  of  earnings  and  in 
economic growth among different regions as well as the relative volatility of the new business lines into 
which the institution is diversifying. To the extent that diversification achieves lower overall volatility in 
earnings for the major financial institutions, it is clearly good for the stability of the system. But to fully 
exploit  these  potential  gains  requires  careful  attention  to  the  design  of  the  control  and  compliance 
infrastructure,  to  monitoring  and  managing  credit  risk  and  concentration  across  diverse  types  of 
financial activities, and to managing conflicts of interest.  
These are formidable challenges even for the strongest management teams. Trust and reputation are 
valuable competitive assets for financial institutions, and the desire to preserve those assets creates a 
powerful  incentive  for  firms  to  manage  conflicts  and  compliance  with  exceptional  care.  Supervision 
and  regulation,  and  the  enforcement  response  to  management  failures,  should  help  strengthen  the 
incentives  for  a  stronger  compliance  infrastructure,  but  they  cannot  insulate  firms  from  the 
consequences of reputational damage.  
Financial  innovation  has  made  it  possible  for  the  market  to  assign  values  to  a  broader  range  of 
financial activities. And this, combined with improved disclosure, has increased the potential power of 
market discipline. But the increased complexity that comes with innovation also creates challenges for 
investor and counterparty risk assessment. Although the overall quality of disclosure has improved in 
recent years, along with accounting and auditing processes that underpin the integrity of disclosure, 
the  complexity  of  public  financial  reporting  can  make it  very  difficult  to  discern  the  true  picture of  a 
firm’s financial condition and its exposure to risk. 
Financial innovation has also made it possible for risk to migrate to - and for leverage to accumulate 
in - parts of the financial system with less strong, or simply different, supervision, capital requirements, 
or  disclosure  norms.  Risk  today,  on  balance,  seems  to  be  allocated  more  effectively  to  those 
institutions better able to manage and hold it, resulting in reduced risk to banks and to the financial 
system as a whole. However, limitations in the extent of public disclosure over institutions that hold 
large amounts of risk make it hard to develop a comprehensive picture. It is obviously in the interest of 
institutions  that  transfer  credit  risk,  interest  rate  risk,  or  other  risks  to  understand  the  performance 
capabilities  of  those  institutions  from  which  they  are  purchasing  protection.  The  ability  to  arrive  at 
informed independent judgments about counterparty risk, however, can be hindered by the gaps that 
remain in the quality of disclosure. 
The  same  developments  in  financial  technology  that  have  improved  the  sophistication  of  risk 
management and the ability to transfer risk can create positive feedback mechanisms that, for at least 
short periods of time, amplify large moves in asset prices. There have been substantial increases over 
the  past  decade  in  the  capacity  of  the  market,  meaning  the  principal  dealers,  to  handle  very  large 
increases  in  hedging-related  flows.  This  dimension  of  the  financial  infrastructure  is  critical  to  the 
capacity of our markets to absorb and respond to large shocks. Dynamic hedging of options and other 
similar strategies, however, depend on the availability of sufficient liquidity to work effectively. Stressful 
periods, of course, are marked precisely by a material reduction in market liquidity.  
These changes in the nature of finance have several important implications for the supervisors and 
those responsible for market oversight. Financial innovation will, in some ways, always move ahead of 
the evolution in risk management techniques. As supervisors, our challenge is to work to ensure that 
the  sophistication  of  the  supervisory  process  evolves  to  keep  abreast  of  the  pace  of  change  in 
financial innovation. This is a formidable challenge, and we need to continue to work hard at it. The 
revisions to the Basel Capital Accord, which aim to align supervisory assessments of capital adequacy 
more closely with the frontier of risk management techniques, are a good example of these efforts. 
The changes in the structure of finance and the nature of the financial intermediation process reinforce 
the  importance  of  cooperation  between  supervisory  authorities.  The  sources  of  potential  risk  to 
financial stability are not confined to banks. Financial institutions increasingly operate across the legal 
parameters  that  define  the  responsibilities  of  the  individual  supervisory  authorities.  The  economic 
characteristics  of  many  of  the  financial  credit  instruments  provided  by  banks  and  other  financial 
institutions have converged. Our supervisory system is a complex framework in terms of the number of 
BIS Review 18/2004 
 3
the 
framework 
institutional 
that  underpins  well-functioning 
responsible  supervisory  institutions,  differences  in  approaches,  overlaps,  and  gaps.  This  complexity 
makes it even more important that we collectively work to ensure a comprehensive look at sources of 
systemic risk and that we raise the bar on the quality of supervision and market oversight where it is 
necessary. 
Bank  supervisors  have  made  significant  progress  in  improving  how  we  share  and  divide 
responsibilities for supervision of banks and bank holding companies, reduce overlap, and raise the 
overall contribution of the examination process. With the passage of the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act in 
1999, and the increased scope of activities it has allowed financial institutions to engage in across the 
financial  services  industry,  we  have  worked  to  strengthen  cooperation  with  other  regulatory  bodies. 
This will be increasingly important to the effectiveness of the overall supervisory process, as the SEC 
moves toward providing a form of consolidated supervision for the largest securities firms. 
At  the  international  level,  we  have  made  considerable  progress  in  developing  a  network  for 
cooperation  and  information  sharing  among  national  authorities  that  better  matches  the  increased 
integration  of  national  financial  systems.  We  have  worked  to  clarify  the  division  of  labor  among 
supervisors of institutions with supra-national reach, and to cover gaps in the supervisory overlay. We 
have  also  worked  to  identify  and  promote  the  adoption  of  best  practices  and  standards  for  many 
dimensions  of 
financial  markets. 
Strengthening home-host supervisory cooperation and avoiding duplication of supervisory efforts will 
continue to be top priorities for the international supervisory community, especially as we adopt newer 
supervisory approaches, such as Basel II.  
Finally, we need to continue to promote investments in strengthening resilience in critical infrastructure 
in  payments  and  settlement  systems  and  those  institutions  that  play  an  important  role  in  market 
clearance systems. This is a critical part of the supervisory and market oversight process we perform, 
and there is an active public-private effort underway to bring about further improvements in back-up 
facilities and overall resilience. 
The innovations that have transformed finance over the past decade have substantially improved the 
overall  stability  and  resilience  of  the  U.S.  financial  system.  But  these  improvements  are  unlikely  to 
have brought an end to what Charles Kindleberger called “manias and panics” in financial markets. 
They cannot fully insulate the financial system from the effects of large macroeconomic shocks. And 
they will not by themselves preclude the possibility of failure in a major financial institution or a critical 
piece of market infrastructure. For these reasons, it is important that those of you who run financial 
institutions build in a sufficient cushion against adversity.  
Of course, the overall performance of the financial system and the degree of financial stability depends 
on more than just the skill of risk managers and supervisors. The unique strengths of the U.S. financial 
system in allocating capital to where long run returns are highest depend on the overall confidence 
investors have in the fairness and integrity of our financial markets. These strengths depend on our 
openness  to  competition  and  the  opportunities  and  rewards  to  innovation  that  the  regulatory 
environment provides.  
The stability of the financial system also depends significantly on the quality of macroeconomic policy, 
not only in terms of the credibility of monetary policy, but also in the degree of confidence investors 
have  in  U.S.  fiscal  management.  The  current  deterioration  in  the  U.S.  fiscal  position  and  the  acute 
decline in the net national savings rate represent risks to the financial system and the economy as a 
whole. These risks are magnified by the size of the U.S. external imbalance and the unprecedented 
scale of financing requirements it reflects.  
Although  the  present  economic  environment  looks  quite  favorable,  these  broader  macroeconomic 
policy  challenges  make  it  even  more  important  that  we  build  on  the  substantial  progress  we  have 
already  made  in  strengthening  risk  management  and  the  resilience  of  critical  market  infrastructure. 
Our success in meeting these challenges will help ensure that our financial system proves as resilient 
in the future as it has in the recent past. 
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS Review 18/2004
