Nout Wellink: Prospects for the European economy  
Address  by  Dr  Nout  Wellink,  President  of  the  Netherlands  Bank  and  President  of  the  Bank  for 
International  Settlements,  for  the  Canadian  Netherlands  Business  and  Professional  Association 
(CNBPA), Toronto, 27 January 2004. 
 Wellink is optimistic on the prospects for the Dutch and European economy. Structural reforms and 
budgetary discipline should be continued.  
Prospects for the European economy: the only way is up  
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  according  to  your  website,  one  of  the  reasons  to  join  the  Canadian 
Netherlands Business Association is “to celebrate cultural heritage through special events such as Sint 
Nicolaas  and  rijsttafel.”  While  I  fully  appreciate  such  events,  I  suggest  to  focus  tonight  on  the 
prospects for the European economy. After all, given your business interests in the Netherlands, you 
will probably be most interested in the developments in economic prosperity in the Netherlands and in 
Europe at large, although I could certainly recommend a rijsttafel to you, if you do not know this yet. I 
will  first  address  the  growth  perspectives  in  the  Netherlands  and  Europe.  Then,  I  will  discuss  two 
important  preconditions  for  sustained  growth:  the  continuation  of  structural  reforms  and  the 
maintenance of budgetary discipline. 
in 
to 
the US.  This  good  performance  owes  of  course  much 
Growth perspectives in the Netherlands and Europe  
Being  here  in  Toronto,  it  is  tempting  to  compare  Canada  with  the  Netherlands.  Both  are  open 
economies and relatively dependent on economic developments in their big neighbouring country, the 
United States and Germany, respectively. One thing that strikes me is that, whereas after a number of 
booming years the Dutch economic growth performance deteriorated substantially over the last few 
years,  the  Canadian  economy  proved  exceptionally  resilient  in  the  face  of  the  global  downturn, 
including 
the  straightforward 
implementation  of  structural  reforms  and  budgetary  consolidation  since  the  beginning  of  the  early 
nineties. However, a number of other factors have also played a role in sustaining economic growth 
in Canada.  Domestic  investments  and  household  consumption  remained  robust,  the  latter  partly 
caused  by  ongoing  gains  in  real  estate  prices.  Moreover,  export  demand  remained  supportive  to 
growth.  The  absence  of  these  latter  supportive  factors  is  an  important  explanation  for  the  sharp 
downturn that has occurred in the Netherlands.  
Indeed, from the best performing European economy, the Netherlands turned into the worst performer. 
To put the current slump into perspective, let me first go back to the end of the nineties. During the 
period 1994 to 2000, the average annual growth rate of GDP in the Netherlands was 3.5%. This was 
well above the potential growth rate of the Dutch economy and 1 percentage point above the average 
of  the  so-called  eurozone,  the  economy  of  the  12  countries  that  have  adopted  the  euro  as  legal 
tender. The current cyclical downturn thus was - to some extent - to be expected after a prolonged 
period of economic expansion at a speed above potential. It is worthwhile to look into the reasons for 
this over performance, as they might give a clue for the subsequent downturn. Mostly, the seeds for 
downturns are sawn during the upturn.  
The main growth engines during the upturn were, firstly, rapid consumption growth due to among other 
things a booming housing market. Secondly, exports thrived as a result of a substantial improvement 
of  our  international  competitiveness  as  well  as  favourable  global  economic  conditions.  The  robust 
growth subsequently led to a tightening of the labour market, culminating in an unemployment rate of 
only 2.4% in 2001, compared to 8% for the eurozone as a whole. Incidentally, employment figures in 
the Netherlands are as flattered as in other European countries, such as Germany: in our own country 
because of the relatively large number of inactive people as a result of initially generous disablement 
insurance schemes. In Germany , the existence of subsidised jobs cloud the picture. Nevertheless, the 
labour  market  developments  in  the  Netherlands  caused  a  strong  increase  in  unit  labour  costs,  for 
which  we  ultimately  had  to  pay  the  price.  The  eventual  significant  loss  in  price  competitiveness,  in 
combination with the global economic downturn, stalled our exports. Moreover, the disappearance of 
BIS Review 7/2004 
 1
wealth effects due to the stabilization of house prices has taken their toll on households’ disposable 
incomes,  and  as  such  on  consumption.  To  give  an  example  of  the  magnitude  of  these  forces:  the 
annual contribution to GDP growth from housing wealth has turned from an annual 1%-point impulse 
between 1998 and 2000, into a negative contribution of half a percentage point in the past three years. 
Taking these wealth effects stemming from the housing market into account scales down the present 
growth gap between the Netherlands and the eurozone.  
Another possible downward effect on growth in the short term stems from the significant budgetary 
adjustment the Dutch government is implementing. Nevertheless, this adjustment, which is larger than 
in most other eurozone countries, is necessary not only to adhere to the European budget rules but 
also to enhance durable growth recovery. I will come back to the need for budgetary discipline at the 
European level at the end of my speech. 
For the future, I am optimistic. We have passed the turning point in the cycle. For this year, I expect 
growth to be 0.7%, rising further to 2% in 2005. An important driving force is the global recovery, which 
will stimulate our exports, even though we have to regain competitiveness. Nevertheless, the strength 
and sustainability of this recovery will to a large extent depend on the persistence and speed at which 
the  reforms  that  have  already  been  set  in  motion  are  pushed  through.  In  particular,  next  to  the 
substantial  budgetary  consolidation  efforts,  the  continuation  of  wage  moderation  to  foster  price 
competitiveness is essential. The tripartite agreement that was reached last autumn to freeze nominal 
wage rises in the next two years is a positive development in this respect, as it clearly shows that the 
importance of wage moderation is now in the minds of both employers and employees.  
Turning to the economy of the eurozone, it is clear that the slowdown has been less steep but more 
prolonged than in the US. In the US, economic growth deteriorated with 3.5 percentage points from 
2000 to a virtual standstill in 2001, after which it quickly regained speed with a growth rate of 2.5% in 
2002.  In  the  eurozone,  the  slowdown  was  much  more  gradual,  with  a  fall  in  economic  growth  of 
3 percentage points over a period of three years, from 2000 to 2003. This pattern of the slowdown - a 
gradual deceleration of growth, rather than a sharp fall in output - may have meant that the immediate 
pressure on corporations to adjust their balance sheets and labour force was less intense, delaying 
the  adjustment  process.  High  debt  levels  in  comparison  with  those  in  earlier  cycles  may  also  have 
contributed  to  this  relatively  prolonged  downturn.  Nevertheless,  for  this  year,  the  economy  of  the 
eurozone  is  expected  to  grow  with  1.6%  and  with  2.4%  in  2005.  Like  in  the  Netherlands,  this 
turnaround has been mainly driven by rebounding exports due to the recovery of global trade.  
In addition to the strengthening of external demand, domestic expenditures in the eurozone will take 
their part in the recovery. With respect to household spending, both short-term and long-term interest 
rates are at historical lows, which have eased debt servicing costs of households. Of course, the fact 
that  interest  rates  are  so  low,  also  raises  the  risk  of  renewed  increases  in  the  future,  with  possible 
adverse effects on households’ debt profile. Furthermore, although the appreciation of the euro that 
has taken place is not conducive to export growth, it will, all other things being equal, gradually feed 
into a further decrease in inflation which in turn will raise real disposable income of households. In this 
context,  simulations  within  the  Nederlandsche  Bank  show  that  a  permanent  appreciation  of  the 
effective euro exchange rate of 10% will have a short term negative effect on economic growth in the 
eurozone of 0.35%. However, the effect of a 10% euro appreciation turns positive in the longer term, 
cumulating to 0.7% after six years, partly due to an increase in consumption. Corporate investments 
can gain momentum too, due to the pick-up in foreign demand in combination with the limited degree 
of  excess  capacity  in  the  manufacturing  industry.  Also,  corporations  have  improved  their  financial 
position  by  bringing  down  the  share  of  short-term  debt.  Moreover,  low  interest  rates,  low  corporate 
bond  spreads  and  the  recovery  of  the  stock  markets  have  improved  the  financing  conditions  for 
European corporations.  
Being a central banker, it is part of my duty to draw your attention to the downward risks as well, which 
could dampen the pace of the recovery. These risks mainly stem from the persistent and significant 
budgetary and external imbalances in the US economy. But there is no need for undue pessimism with 
regard  to  the  cyclical  upturn  in  Europe.  Whether  this  upturn  will  prove  to  be  sustainable,  however, 
depends, like in the Netherlands, to a significant extent on the continuation of structural reforms and 
the maintenance of budgetary discipline. I will now turn to these two issues. 
2 
 BIS Review 7/2004
Continuing with structural reforms 
In March 2000 in Lisbon, Europe ‘s leaders committed themselves to turn the European economy into 
the most competitive and dynamic knowledge-based economy in the world by 2010. To accomplish 
this,  they  agreed  on  implementing  far-reaching  reforms  of  labour,  product  and  capital  markets,  on 
completing the European Single Market, and on enhancing Europe ‘s innovative capacity. Clearly, this 
structural  reform  agenda,  also  known  in  Europe  as  the  “Lisbon  strategy”,  was  and  still  is  quite  an 
ambitious challenge.  
Nevertheless,  structural  reforms  are  no  end  in  itself.  By  removing  bottlenecks  and  obstacles  in  the 
European economy, these structural reforms enhance the economy’s capacity to generate sustainable 
growth  rates,  with  low  unemployment  and  sound  public  finances.  Let  me  give  an  impression  of  the 
quantitative effects of these reforms. The OECD has recently calculated that continuation with product 
and  labour  market  reforms  would  lead  to  higher  productivity  and  employment  growth,  which  would 
over the medium term boost potential per capita output growth of the eurozone from 1.75% to 2.25% a 
year, the same as the US growth rate.  
Moreover,  reducing  red  tape  and  creating  more  flexible  and  integrated  labour,  product  and  capital 
markets,  promote  cross-border  activities  by,  and  financing  of  European companies.  Looking  ahead, 
the  opportunities  for  businesses  are  likely  to  expand  further.  Recent  research  conducted  for  the 
European Commission shows that a materialization of a fully integrated European financial market will 
eventually  contribute  to  a  reduction  in  the  cost  of  equity  and  bond  finance  of  0.5,  respectively  0.4, 
percentage points. The assumption behind this projection is that trading costs could fall sharply as a 
result of full financial market integration, due to greater depth and higher liquidity of these markets. 
These lower trading costs would allow investors to accept lower returns on corporate equity and bond 
issues,  which  would  translate  into  lower  financing  costs  for  firms.  However,  not  only  European 
corporations, but also corporations from outside the EU gain from the reform process in Europe. The 
existence  of  a  single  system  makes  access  to  the  EU  market  much  easier  for  firms  from  third 
countries, which is for instance reflected in the steep increase of foreign direct investments into the EU 
since the establishment of the Single Market. Finally, structural reforms benefit European consumers, 
by reducing prices and increasing the choice and quality of services. 
So much for the theoretical gains of structural reforms. Allow me some remarks about the progress in 
implementing these reforms. There are clear signs that European governments are increasingly aware 
of  the  need  of  putting  structural  reforms  at  the  top  of  their  policy  agenda.  The Netherlands,  for 
instance, have already implemented three-quarters of the reform measures agreed in Lisbon. In the 
three  largest  European  economies,  Germany, France  and Italy,  together  constituting  almost  70%  of 
the  GDP  of  the  eurozone,  a  wide  ranging  and  impressive  reform  program  has  been  enacted, 
encompassing  reforms  of  labour  markets,  pension  and  health  care  systems.  The  labour  markets 
reforms are aimed at reducing rigidities and improving incentives to work. Germany, for instance, will 
implement  in  the  context  of  its  so-called  Agenda  2010  an  easing  of  its  stringent  job  protection 
legislation and a reduction of the unemployment benefit duration. In another area, that of pension and 
health care, reforms are being implemented that constitute a structural break towards containing the 
financial  consequences  of  an  ageing  population.  To  this  end,  the  Italian  government  proposed,  for 
example, that as of 2008, workers will need 40 years of pension contribution, instead of the current 
35 years, if they want to retire before the statutory retirement age. With the same perspective, France 
has  aligned  the  shorter  contribution  period  for  civil  servants  to  that  of  the  private  sector.  Finally,  in 
order to increase economic dynamism, reform measures such as a relaxation of shop opening hours, 
a simplification of tax law and bookkeeping obligations for small and medium sized enterprises, and a 
reform of the civil service have been initiated in these countries. These measures may sound strange 
or self-evident to you, but they constitute a significant culture change in parts of Europe . 
True, these reforms will not be implemented overnight and their effects will only become tangible after 
a number of years. Moreover, in a number of areas, such as strengthening the innovative capacity of 
the  European  economy,  completing  financial  market  integration  and  integrating  services  markets, 
further  progress  is  still  needed.  To  give  a  few  concrete  examples  in  these  areas,  to  further  a 
knowledge-based economy, the level and effectiveness of spending on research and development in 
Europe, which is currently lagging behind the US and Japan, could be increased. Another important 
challenge  is  to  integrate  the  still  fragmented  system  of  clearing  and  settlement  of  securities 
transactions  in  Europe,  to  foster  an  efficient  operation  of  security  markets.  Also,  legal  and 
administrative barriers should be dismantled further, in order to enable a completely free movement of 
services across Europe , such as in engineering and consultancy. Therefore, the Lisbon target of 2010 
BIS Review 7/2004 
 3
indeed looks very challenging. But there is no doubt that the modernization of the European economy 
has taken off and is moving forward decisively.  
Maintaining budgetary discipline 
I now come to the final part of my speech on the need to maintain budgetary discipline. It is widely 
acknowledged that fiscal discipline contributes to long-term sustainable economic growth, by creating 
a  stable  macro-economic  environment,  which  for  instance  allows  for  undistorted  consumption  and 
investment  decisions.  Also,  budgetary  consolidation,  in  addition  to  the  pension  and  health  care 
reforms  I  mentioned  earlier,  is  important  to  prepare  for  the  financial  consequences  of  the  ageing 
European population, which is expected to reach its peak in the middle of this century. While these two 
arguments apply in fact to any country, the need for fiscal discipline in a monetary union, like the one 
we have in Europe, is even higher. An important reason for this is that the negative side-effects in the 
form of higher interest rates of expansionary budgetary policy in one country, are not entirely borne by 
this  country  alone.  Instead,  these  are  widely  shared  by  all  their  fellow  participants  in  the  monetary 
union. 
To guarantee budgetary discipline and to strengthen mutual trust in each other’s budgetary policy, a 
fiscal  policy  framework  has  been  established  in  Europe.  This  framework  basically  consists  of  two 
rules. The EU Treaty stipulates that Member States should avoid excessive deficits, which are defined 
as deficits above 3% of GDP. The so-called Stability and Growth Pact gives a further refinement of the 
Treaty, by requiring Member States to achieve and maintain a budgetary position of close to balance 
or  in  surplus  in  the  medium  term.  By  abiding  to  this  latter  requirement,  a  country  creates  enough 
budgetary room and flexibility to ensure that public finances can absorb normal economic fluctuations 
without  breaking  the  3%  deficit  limit.  As  such,  this  framework  combines  budgetary  discipline  with 
country-specific flexibility. 
Clearly,  the  budgetary  problems  in  especially  Germany  and  France  over  the  last  few  years are not 
encouraging.  These  problems  culminated  in  the  decision  by  the  Council  of  European  Finance 
Ministers in November last year to deviate, for the time being, from the formal budgetary procedures of 
the Stability Pact for both countries. Instead of adopting the proposals by the European Commission 
under the Stability Pact, the Council made recommendations to Germany and France to correct their 
deficits outside the framework of the Stability Pact. To put these developments into perspective, allow 
me to take you a number of years back in history.  
Between  1991  and  1995,  before  a  monetary  union  in  Europe  was  considered  to  be  a  realistic 
prospect, the average budget deficit of the eurozone was 5% of GDP. The subsequent pressure for 
fiscal discipline emanating from the desire to qualify for Economic and Monetary Union, resulted in an 
average budget deficit of 2.3% of GDP at the end of 1998. After qualification for EMU, governments of 
the participating Member States were obliged to adhere to the central prescription of the Stability Pact, 
namely to reach balanced budgets over the cycle. Due to the gradually deteriorating economic growth, 
the European Finance Ministers decided in 2002 that countries that had not yet reached a balanced 
budget, were given a few years extra to attain this position. However, prolonged economic weakness 
and insufficient budgetary consolidation efforts during the preceding economic upturn, have ultimately 
resulted in some countries not only breaching the Stability Pact requirement, but also the 3% deficit 
limit.  
This clearly  is  a highly  unfortunate and  disappointing  development.  At  the  same  time,  however, we 
should keep in mind that despite these problems, a significant improvement in European budgetary 
discipline has indeed been attained in the course of time. It might in this respect also be illustrative to 
look  at  the  United  States  ,  which  experienced  a  downward  swing  in  their  federal  budget  deficit  of 
6.5 percentage points between 2000 and 2003, although this was partly due to special factors, such 
as the war in Iraq . 
How can we solve these problems, or in any case make sure that they do not arise again in the future? 
In 1992, the EU Treaty that laid down the path towards Economic and Monetary union was signed in 
the  Dutch  city  of  Maastricht.  Although  it  was  clear  that  a  potential  conflict  exists  between  a  single 
monetary  policy  and  decentralised  fiscal  policies,  it  was  also  clear  at  that  time  that  establishing  a 
political  union,  or  in  other  words  an  independent  European  fiscal  authority,  to  supplement  the 
monetary union was a bridge too far. Instead, a rather artificial solution in the form of the Stability Pact 
was created. However, the experiences with implementing the Pact over the last few years have made 
it  very  clear  that  governments  are  reluctant  to  accept  constraints  on  national  sovereignty  through 
4 
 BIS Review 7/2004
limitations  on  budgetary  policy.  This  holds  especially  true  in  times  of  subdued  economic  growth. 
Discussions about fundamentally improving the adherence to the European budgetary rules are in my 
view therefore inextricably linked to discussions about curtailing national budgetary sovereignty, and 
as such to forming a political union. Although I realize that this obviously will be a realistic solution only 
in the long term, we should not hesitate to bring this under discussion.  
To  a  certain  extent,  the  discussion  on  the  appropriate  role  of  national  budgetary  sovereignty  has 
already started. Recently the European Commission decided to challenge the decision by the Council 
of European Finance Ministers in November to deviate from the Stability Pact, by bringing legal action 
before the European Court of Justice. The reason for this decision is not to challenge the substance of 
the decision, as in fact there is no major difference between the budgetary consolidation path under 
the  proposals  by  the  European  Commission  and  under  the  eventual  recommendations  by  the 
European  Council.  Rather,  the  aim  is  to  seek  legal  clarity  regarding  the  fundamental  question  that 
emerged from the Council decision in November, that is whether the European budgetary framework 
ultimately is of a supranational or of an intergovernmental character. 
Of course, a fundamental discussion like this should not distract us from the search to find solutions to 
improve the enforcement of the European budgetary rules in the shorter term. A contribution towards 
such  a  solution  is  to  deny  countries  with  excessive  deficits  their  voting  rights  in  the  Council  of 
European Finance Ministers, when decisions are taken on another country with an excessive deficit. 
This prevents countries from taking their own budgetary problems into consideration, when votes are 
casted on countries that face the same problems. A more far-reaching contribution is to give objective 
and independent institutions, such as the European Commission and the European Court of Justice, a 
much  stronger  role  in  enforcing  the  implementation  of  the  budget  rules.  The  role  of  the  European 
Court of Justice in this case is not to judge the procedural elements as such, but rather to enforce that 
individual countries stick to their budgetary commitments. The Dutch government is actively striving to 
incorporate these changes to the budget rules in the new European Constitution, and I fully support 
their efforts.  
Summing up  
Let me sum up. I am optimistic about the prospects for the European economy. We clearly passed the 
turning  point  in  economic  growth,  both  in  the  Netherlands  as  in  Europe  as  a  whole.  Moreover,  the 
conditions  for  sustainable  growth  recovery  are  favourable.  Firstly,  European  governments  are 
increasingly  living  up  to  their  promise  made  in  Lisbon  to  implement  far-reaching  structural  reforms, 
although it remains to be seen whether the deadline of 2010 will be reached. Secondly, it is clear that 
Europe currently faces budgetary difficulties. This holds not so much for the sheer size of the budget 
deficit as such, although the still more limited flexibility and the more gradual recovery of the European 
economy compared to the US, implies that reducing deficits might take a longer period of time than in 
the  US.  The  main  difficulty,  however,  stems  from  the  deficiencies  in  the  European  institutional 
budgetary framework. To overcome these deficiencies, discussing drastic solutions, most notably the 
eventual establishment of a political union, should not be avoided. From this perspective, the current 
problems, although unpleasant, should in my view be seen as occasional and temporary setbacks on 
the  road  to  an  increasingly  integrated  Europe.  I  am  confident  that  this  integration  process  brings 
benefits to both European citizens as their partners outside Europe. 
BIS Review 7/2004 
 5
