Mervyn King: The institutions of monetary policy 
Lecture by Mr Mervyn King,1 Governor of the Bank of England, at the American Economic Association 
Annual Meeting, San Diego, 4 January 2004. 
The references can be found on the Bank of England’s website (www.bankofengland.co.uk) 
 President, Ladies and Gentlemen, 
To have one central bank governor address you today may be regarded as a misfortune, but to invite 
two looks like carelessness! 
It  is  a  great  honour  to  be  invited  by  this  year’s  President-Elect,  Marty  Feldstein,  to  deliver  the  Ely 
lecture. Marty has been my teacher, mentor, colleague and friend for over thirty years, and I never 
cease  to  be  amazed  by  the  energy  and  imagination  which  he  devotes  to  the  study  of  economic 
problems. 
I  got  to  know  Marty  during  my  time  as  a  Kennedy  Scholar  at  Harvard  in  1971.  The  Kennedy 
Scholarships form one part of Britain’s national memorial to President Kennedy. The other part is an 
acre  of  land,  now  American  territory,  at  Runnymede.  At  the  ceremony  to  open  the  Runnymede 
memorial  in  1965,  Prime  Minister  Harold  Wilson  remarked  about  President  Kennedy  that  “his  eyes 
were  on  the  horizon,  but  his  feet  were  on  the  ground”.  Almost  thirty  years  earlier  Richard  T.  Ely 
published  his  autobiography  entitled  “Ground  under  Our  Feet”.  Whereas  I  found  the  experience  of 
coming  from  Europe  to  the  United  States  intellectually  liberating  and  exhilarating,  a  hundred  years 
earlier Ely found academic freedom by making the reverse journey. As he wrote in his autobiography, 
“When I first went to Germany I seemed to breathe a new and exhilarating atmosphere of freedom … 
[which]  did  not  exist  in  [American  universities]”  (Ely,  1938).  Two  journeys,  separated  by  a  hundred 
years, reveal much about what occurred in Europe and America between them. Upon his return, Ely 
“undertook to draw up a project for the formation of a society to be called ‘The American Economic 
Association’, which should be broad enough to appeal to all the younger economists who, irrespective 
of their personal views, felt the stirring of the new life in economics”. His actions helped the AEA to 
develop into the great institution it is today. 
I have the privilege to work for another great institution, the Bank of England. And, as we celebrate the 
150th anniversary of Ely’s birth, I thought it would be appropriate to choose as the theme of my lecture 
today the role that institutions play in the conduct of monetary policy. In brief, I want to argue that the 
core  of  the  monetary  policy  problem  is  uncertainty  about  future  social  decisions  resulting  from  the 
impossibility  and  the  undesirability  of  committing  our  successors  to  any  given  monetary  policy 
strategy. The impossibility stems from the observation that collective decisions cannot be enforced so 
that it is impossible to commit to future collective decisions; the undesirability reflects the fact that we 
cannot  articulate  all  possible  future  states  of  the  world.  It  is  not  possible  collectively  to  commit  to 
enforce a monetary policy contract with an institution such as a central bank. And, even if we could, 
we would not want to because that would prevent us from exploiting new knowledge about the world. 
In  essence,  I  want  to  argue  that  the  relevant  theoretical  framework  could  be  described  as  “public 
goods meet incomplete contracts”. Institutional design is at the heart of collective decisions in a world 
of incomplete contracts, and, interestingly, discussion of monetary issues in recent years has focussed 
on institutional arrangements.  
I shall illustrate the importance of institutional design for the operation of monetary policy by reference 
to  three  case  studies:  the  collapse  of  exchange  rate  regimes  in  Brazil  and  the  United  Kingdom; 
currency arrangements in Iraq and their reform after the war last year; and the relationship between 
central banks and governments when the zero constraint on nominal interest rates is binding.  
                                                      
1  
I am deeply grateful to James Proudman, Jan Vlieghe and Tony Yates for their research collaboration and for many of the 
ideas in this lecture. They are truly co-authors. I am also grateful to Peter Andrews, Andrew Bailey, John Campbell, Forest 
Capie, Philip Evans, Niall Ferguson, Charles Goodhart, Simon Gray, Oliver Hart, John Moore, Tom Sargent, Lars Svensson, 
Greg  Thwaites  and  Geoffrey  Wood  for  their  helpful  comments.  Kath  Begley  and  Ed  Bolingbrooke  provided  valuable 
research assistance. All errors and omissions are my responsibility. 
BIS Review 5/2004 
 1
Money and monetary policy can be traced back to the dawn of civilisation itself. In contrast, central 
banks are a recent development. The first central bank was the Riksbank in Sweden, set up in 1668.2 
To  celebrate  its  tercentenary  it  endowed  the  Nobel  Prize  in  Economics.  The  Bank  of  England,  the 
oldest continuing central bank, opened for business in 1694. Our tercentenary was a more low-key 
event: we published a book of conference proceedings. By 1900 there were still only 18 countries with 
a  central  bank.  Today  the  number  is  174.  The  Federal  Reserve  has  yet  to  reach  its  centenary.  As 
institutions go, most central banks are youthful. Indeed, the reputation of central banks as wise and 
disciplined institutions, in contrast with the wild excesses of finance ministries, belies their respective 
ages. So the history of monetary policy cannot be equated with the history of central banks. But it is a 
story about institutions. 
Externalities in the theory of money 
I. 
In the history of money, the two key events are the emergence of a medium of exchange and the rise 
of institutions governing its management. Those events raise two basic questions which are central to 
understanding the nature of monetary institutions. First, why did money evolve as a social or public 
rather than a private institution? Second, how can societies reduce the costs of being unable to make 
commitments  about  future  collective  decisions?  The  answers  to  these  two  questions  determine  the 
nature of modern central banks.  
The  two  questions  relate  to  two  different  externalities.  The  first  is  a  network  externality.  Money 
overcomes the constraint of the double coincidence of wants implied by barter exchange, a view set 
out in detail by Carl Menger (1892) and which is modelled explicitly in Nobuhiru Kiyotaki and Randall 
Wright (1989). More recently, the existence of money has been linked to the information structure of 
the economy. Agents have imperfect information about their potential trading partner’s credit history 
which  explains  the  emergence  of  a  private  sector  medium  of  exchange  as  an  alternative  to  an 
extension of credit (Narayana Kocherlakota, 1998). Our willingness to use and hold money is greater 
the more that money is used by other people. There is, therefore, a network effect.  
One can imagine, and indeed Friedrich Hayek (1976) advocated, a system in which anyone is allowed 
to issue money. The private sector may well co-ordinate on using the money of the ‘best’ issuer, and 
that  issuer’s  behaviour  may  be  kept  in  check  by  the  threat  of  entry.  But  competitive  monies  have 
arisen  only  rarely  and  in  situations  where  government  money  is  either  absent  (as,  for  example,  in 
Robert  Radford’s  (1945)  study  of  cigarette  money  in  POW  camps)  or  very  badly  managed  (as  in 
periods  of  hyperinflation).  Despite  the  abolition  of  foreign  exchange  controls,  as  recommended  by 
Hayek, competition among national currencies has not lessened the dominance, within each economy, 
of a single public money. Network externalities make it difficult for competing currencies to emerge.  
The existence of public money generates a second type of externality to do with intertemporal choices. 
The willingness to hold money as either a store of value or a means of payment, or use money as a 
unit in which contracts are denominated, depends upon expectations of the stability of the value of that 
money. If money takes the form of competing private currencies then there is no inherent problem for 
private issuers to maintain the value of their liabilities by backing them appropriately, a commitment 
that  can  be  enforced by  the  legal system.  Alternatively,  where a private  commodity  standard  is  the 
solution to the exchange problem, then there is no ability -and therefore no temptation - to devalue. 
But a public monopoly means that the demand for money today depends upon expectations of our 
collective decisions about the supply of money tomorrow. The key question for a public currency is 
how do we prevent the government - ourselves - abusing its issuing power in the future? Collective 
decisions  today  cannot  bind  future  collective  decisions.  And  when  monetary  policy  is  set  period  by 
period inefficient outcomes result. The key insight of Finn Kydland and Edward Prescott (1977) was 
that the inability to make commitments leads to a failure to internalise the impact of public policies on 
the expectations of the private sector.  
Dynamic inconsistency was used by Kydland and Prescott (1977) and Robert Barro and David Gordon 
(1983a) to demonstrate that rational expectations could lead to an equilibrium in which inflation was 
higher than desired. Ex post it would always seem attractive to create surprise inflation. More recently, 
research by Lars Svensson (1997), Michael Woodford (2003) and others has shown that even when 
                                                      
2   Strictly speaking, it is not clear that the Riksbank was what we would today recognise to be a central bank until considerably 
later. 
2 
  BIS Review 5/2004
there is no inflation bias there can be a “stabilisation bias” from the exercise of discretionary monetary 
policy: one that would lead to a suboptimal combination of output and inflation variability. Those results 
have prompted a large volume of research exploring different ways in which the commitment to price 
stability  could  be  made  credible.  And  central  banks  themselves  have  devoted  no  less  energy  to 
establishing the importance of their credibility.  
Two very different approaches to the time-consistency problem have been discussed in the literature. 
One examines contractual relationships between the public and monetary decision-makers that reduce 
or  eliminate  the  degree  of  inflation  and  stabilization  biases  resulting  from  discretionary  policy. 
Examples  include  formal  adoption  of  monetary  policy  rules,  a  contract  between  government  and 
central  bank  instructing  the  latter  to  target  price  stability,  the  delegation  of  monetary  policy  to  a 
conservative  central  banker,  and  investment  in  a  reputation  by  current  decision-makers.  But  those 
answers  from  the  literature  on  rules  versus  discretion  are  not  really  solutions.  They  only  move  the 
time-consistency issue one step back - the policy rule may be abandoned, the central banker fired, the 
contract reinterpreted or rewritten.3  
The  other  approach  says 
that  real  central  bankers  do  not  and  need  not  worry  about  
time-inconsistency; they “just do it”, (Bennett McCallum, 1995). Central bankers should simply resist 
the temptation to deviate from the time-inconsistent policy, and private agents will eventually come to 
accept that resolve. Attractive as such a solution may appear to central bankers, it fails to answer the 
challenge posed by the game-theoretic result of Kydland and Prescott. And it fails to explain why it is 
that  some  countries  in  some  periods  just  do  it  and  others  do  not.  Central  bankers  who  have  the 
determination  and  strength  of  purpose  to  “take  the  punch  bowl  away  just  when  the  party  is  getting 
going”,  in  McChesney  Martin’s  memorable  phrase,  clearly  have  the  “right  stuff”  -  so  why  don’t  they 
“just do it”? 4 A deeper explanation of how this problem can be overcome requires an analysis of what 
might be called the “technology of collective decisions”. 
Individual agents can make contracts because they believe that the legal system is external to both 
parties  to  the  contract.  But  it  is  difficult  to  write  contracts  that  commit  future  collective  behaviour. 
Collectively, we can either meet our previous commitments or we can ignore them. To take just one 
example:  only  a  few  weeks  ago  ECOFIN,  the  council  of  economic  and  finance  ministers  of  the 
European Union, decided to suspend the excessive deficit procedure - a key feature of the Stability 
and Growth Pact - that had been initiated against France and Germany. Ernst Welteke, the President 
of the Bundesbank, has since raised serious doubts about whether politicians in Europe are willing to 
embrace the collective fiscal discipline, backed up by real sanctions, that is necessary to prevent fiscal 
free-riding inside a monetary union.5  
The role of institutions 
II. 
The technology of collective decisions describes the feasible set of institutional arrangements that can 
be constructed to reduce the costs of the commitment problem. That problem may lead to inefficient 
outcomes - the Coase theorem does not apply to collective decisions.6 It is useful to think about the 
optimal design of monetary institutions using the insights from the theory of incomplete contracts. That 
theory discusses what contracts would look like if certain aspects of the world could not be verified by 
an outside enforcer of the contract. In terms of monetary policy, there are two related though distinct 
aspects  of  the  commitment  problem.  First,  the  inability  to  enforce  commitment,  because  monetary 
arrangements  can  always  be  changed  in  the  absence  of  an  outside  enforcer,  means  that  no  such 
                                                      
3   Torsten  Persson  and  Guido  Tabellini  (1999)  argue  that  if  it  takes  sufficient  time  for  a  government  to  tear  up  contracts 
designed  to  eliminate  the  inflation  bias  (longer  than  the  duration  of  nominal  contracts)  promises  not  to  inflate  can  be 
credible. 
5  
4   Svensson (2002) takes the same view of McCallum (1995) in his comments on Stokey (2002), thus: “…to my knowledge 
neither McCallum nor anyone else has presented a model where ‘just do it’ is an equilibrium outcome.”[p4]. 
“The institutional structure of monetary union forms the basis for public trust in the euro and rests on two pillars: the stability-
oriented monetary constitution enshrined in the Maastricht treaty, and the stability and growth pact. Both pillars are being 
undermined,  leaving  European  monetary  union  in  a  very  grave  predicament”.  (Ernst  Welteke,  The  Times,  4  December 
2003). 
6   Daron Acemoglu (2003) argues that inefficient policies can occur in a democracy because those in political power cannot 
commit to maintaining the policies that are required to achieve efficient outcomes. In other words, the Coase theorem does 
not apply at the level of society as a whole. 
BIS Review 5/2004 
 3
arrangement is sacrosanct for all time. Thomas Jefferson believed that the US Constitution should be 
rewritten every 20 years or so at a new constitutional convention.7 Second, we cannot fully describe 
an optimal monetary arrangement because we do not know all possible states of the world and hence 
the policy rule to which we would like to commit. Those two aspects of the technology of collective 
decisions create a role for institutions.  
But they differ in important ways. If there were only a commitment problem, then we could describe an 
optimal  state-contingent  monetary  policy  reaction  function.  Mechanisms  could  then  be  devised  to 
make it less likely that policy would deviate from this optimal plan - perhaps by writing the optimal rule 
in the form of a constitutional provision which could be overturned only by a substantial majority, or 
financing deficits by issuing index-linked debt. Such mechanisms would make it incentive compatible 
collectively to stick to the optimal plan. None of this would have come as a surprise to the authors of 
the American Constitution. In Federalist Paper No.10 James Madison points out that “our governments 
are too unstable” (p173) and in No. 37 he writes: “the people of this country, enlightened as they are 
with regard to the nature ... of good government, will never be satisfied till some remedy be applied to 
the  vicissitudes  and  uncertainties  which  characterise  the  State  administrations”  (p243).  Outside 
observers agreed. In 1835 Alexis de Tocqueville wrote that, “the authority which public men possess in 
America is so brief and they are so soon commingled with the ever changing population of the country 
that the acts of the community frequently leave fewer traces than events in a private family. .... The 
instability of administration has penetrated into the habits of the people”. 
The  stability  of  institutions  is,  therefore,  one  of  their  greatest  assets.  Barro  and  Gordon  (1983b) 
assumed the existence of an ongoing government or central bank which had an interest in preserving 
a reputation for “good” behaviour. A substantial literature, reviewed by Nancy Stokey (2002), analyses 
the circumstances in which it is attractive for a “good” government to distinguish itself from a “bad” 
government. Stokey shows that if it is not easy to do so, then it may be optimal to impose a monetary 
policy  rule  on  all  governments  in  order  to  reduce  the  damage  done  by  the  prospect  of  a  bad 
government in the future. But how can society convince itself that it can eliminate bad government by 
adopting a policy rule? A really bad government will simply restore discretion to itself. Good and bad 
governments are not independent actors. They reflect the degree of consensus on how to construct 
institutions that will pursue consistent objectives.  
The experience of high and variable inflation itself can be an important force shaping public attitudes 
towards the design of institutions to control it. Differences among cohorts may lead to variations over 
time in the optimal shape of institutions, rather as Jefferson advocated. For example, Robert Shiller 
(1996) reports that 90% of those born before 1940 in Germany agreed with the statement that ‘The 
control of inflation is one of the most important missions of German economic policy’, compared with 
51% of those born from 1950 onwards. Memories of hyperinflation can be vivid: Niall Ferguson cites 
the diary of one Frankfurt resident in 1923: “it was more than disorder that smashed over people, it 
was something like daily explosions… the smallest, the most private, the most personal events always 
had  one  and  the  same  cause;  the  raging  plunge  of  money”  (p154).  So  it  is  not  surprising  that  the 
generation  of  Germans  which  created  the  Bundesbank  saw  it  as  a  crucial  component  of  their  new 
constitution. Countries, or indeed cohorts, which have not experienced hyper-inflation may be more 
willing to adopt monetary arrangements that are less entrenched in constitutional form than the post-
war generation in Germany.  
The second aspect of the technology of collective decisions that creates a role for institutions is our 
ignorance of all possible future states of the world. That means that even if we were able to commit to 
a policy rule, we would choose not to do so. The exercise of some discretion is desirable in order that 
we may learn. The most cogent argument against the adoption of a fixed monetary policy rule is that 
no  rule  is  likely  to  remain  optimal  for  long.  Nor  is  this  just  a  question  of  learning  about  parameter 
values. That would yield an optimal state-contingent procedure for updating the monetary policy rule. It 
is that we are unwilling to commit now never to learn from future experience. So we would not want to 
embed any rule deeply into our decision-making structure, such as giving it the force of law or making 
it  part  of  the  constitution.  Instead,  we  delegate  the  power  of  decision  to  an  institution  that  will 
implement policy period by period exercising “constrained discretion”. The status and purpose of such 
institutions can be embedded into the law or constitution, which may increase the cost of reversing the 
delegated powers, but the optimal policy path should be open to change in response to learning. Since 
                                                      
7   As reported by Gore Vidal (2003). 
4 
  BIS Review 5/2004
we cannot hope to describe ex ante what it is we expect to learn, and since new ideas are unlikely to 
be  uniformly recognised  and  instantly  accepted,  it  may  be  sensible  to  delegate  both  the  immediate 
policy decision and the process of learning to the same institution.8 
An interesting example of seeking flexibility to allow for learning occurred during the writing of the US 
constitution. One draft clause specified that Congress should be allowed to “… emit bills on the credit 
of the United States”. There was a debate on a proposition to strike out the clause. Madison’s notes 
describe George Mason’s position on the subject: “Though he had a mortal hatred to paper money, 
yet, as he could not foresee all emergencies, he was unwilling to tie the hands of the legislature”.9 
Edmund  Randolph  was  of  a  similar  opinion:  “…  notwithstanding  his  antipathy  to  paper  money,  [he] 
could not agree to strike out the words, as he could not foresee all the occasions that might arise.”  
So the ideal is a framework that will implement what we currently believe to be the optimal monetary 
policy  strategy  and  will  deviate  from  that  only  if  collectively  we  change  our  view  about  what  that 
strategy should  be.  Our  ignorance  is  too  pervasive  to  allow  the adoption  of  a rule  for how  learning 
should  occur.  So  if  it  is  sensible  to  delegate  both  policy  decisions  and  the  process  of  learning  to 
institutions  such as  central  banks,  that  in  turn requires  those  institutions  to have  political  legitimacy 
and an acceptance that they will not redistribute income and wealth in favour of some groups rather 
than  others  at  the  expense  of  the  objective  given  to  them.10  Where  such  institutions  are  difficult  to 
create, the ‘external effect’ - as Stokey (2002) called it - of good monetary policy will not be captured. 
And if the result is a monetary policy that is sufficiently bad, it may result in a radical switch to a unit of 
account determined externally, an obvious example of which is dollarisation. 
Monetary institutions, therefore, play two different roles. First, they expand the possibility frontier of the 
technology of collective decisions and can be designed to raise the cost of those decisions deviating 
from  pre-announced  contingent  paths.  Second,  they  are  set  up  explicitly  to  exercise  a  degree  of 
discretion  -  “constrained  discretion”  -  subject  to  the  broad  objective  of  price  stability.  Discretion  is 
inevitable because of the need to learn about the economic environment. Institutions thereby become 
repositories of experience and knowledge which they communicate to society as a whole. 
Case Study I: Exchange rate regimes in Brazil and the UK 
III. 
I  want  to  illustrate  the  importance  of  institutions  and  the  credibility  of  their  stability  by  three  case 
studies.  My  first  example  concerns  the  collapse  of  exchange  rate  regimes  in  Europe  and  Latin 
America. It demonstrates that economic institutions require a broad base of political support if financial 
markets are to believe that those institutions are likely to survive.  
For  a  while  fixed  exchange  rate  regimes  enjoyed  a  degree  of  support  in  both  Europe,  with  the 
Exchange  Rate  Mechanism  (ERM),  and  Latin  America.  But  experience  shows  that,  in  terms  of 
credibility in financial markets, the design of those policy regimes was less important than the fact of 
their having broad political support.  
Brazil in 1998-99 is a case in point. In 1998 Brazil operated a crawling peg exchange rate regime. As 
can be seen from Chart 1, throughout that year markets expected the Real to depreciate as evidenced 
by the fact that the implied forward exchange rate was lower than the spot rate by more than the crawl 
would imply.11 In order to defend the crawling peg, the central bank raised interest rates in September 
1998 from 20% to 40% a year. The implied forward exchange rate promptly fell. Raising interest rates 
actually increased the expectation that the peg would be abandoned, since markets knew that high 
interest rates were likely to prove politically unsustainable. Any government prepared to keep interest 
rates that high was not likely to win re-election. In January 1999 a second speculative attack on the 
peg occurred. And this time the peg was abandoned. Although short-term interest rates were raised 
                                                      
8   Svensson  (2003)  takes  a  view  that  is  related  to  the  argument  here.  In  his  opinion,  commitment  to  ‘targeting  rules’  - 
objectives that the central bank must pursue - are workable, while commitment to ‘instrument rules’ - reaction functions - are 
not, since it is “impossible” that “every conceivable contingency be anticipated” [p439]. 
9   This is cited in David Dewey (1918), page 68. 
10   The costs and benefits of discretion in a world where we cannot describe future possible states of the world are set out in 
Philippe Aghion and Patrick Bolton (2002). 
11   The forward rate was below the spot rate even allowing for the devaluation implied by the crawling peg. 
BIS Review 5/2004 
 5
while  the  peg  was  being  defended,  they  were  soon  lowered  to  more  sustainable  levels.  The 
expectations that had been built into forward exchange rates were proved correct.  
 
Chart 1: Exchange rates and monetary 
policy in Brazil, Jan 1998-Dec 1999
Per cent
Reais/$ 
rate (rhs)
Spot exchange 
50
45
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
Jan-98 May-98 Sep-98
 (rhs)
Implied 
forward 
exchange rate
Overnight 
interest rate
(lhs)
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
Jan-99 May-99 Sep-99
Source: JP Morgan and Banco Central do Brasil
 In  the  literature  on  target  zones  for  exchange  rates,  it  is  assumed  that  raising  interest  rates  is  a 
successful  method  for  supporting  the  exchange  rate  because  of  uncovered  interest  parity.  But  this 
ignores the possibility that raising interest rates to defend a fixed exchange-rate regime will simply call 
into question the durability of the regime itself and raise the probability that the peg or target zone will 
be abandoned. In such circumstances an increase in interest rates may lead to a fall in the exchange 
rate. 
A second example of the same phenomenon is the pressure on sterling during 1992 and its forced 
departure from the Exchange Rate Mechanism on 16 September of that year. Massive speculation on 
that day led to the announcement in the morning of a 2 percentage points rise in interest rates and, 
when that failed to dampen the pressure on sterling, of a further 3 percentage points rise in rates. That 
second announcement, far from bolstering the exchange rate, merely convinced financial markets that 
Britain’s  membership  of  the  ERM  could  no  longer  be  sustained  politically.  The  strong  political 
commitment to joining European monetary union, which was the effective support for other currencies 
in the ERM, was absent in the United Kingdom. 
Following its departure from the ERM, the UK introduced an inflation target regime for monetary policy. 
It succeeded in bringing inflation down to around 2½ percent (see chart 2).  
6 
  BIS Review 5/2004
Chart 2: UK inflation and inflation 
expectations, Oct 1991-Oct 2003
Per cent
7
Implied inflation
from IGs
RPIX inflation rate
(a )
6
5
4
3
2
1
Bank 
independence
Inflation
target
announced
0
Oct-91 Oct-93 Oct-95 Oct-97 Oct-99 Oct-01 Oct-03
(a )Implied average inflation expectations from 5 to 10 years ahead, derived from index-linked
gilts. Source: Bank of England, ONS
 But long-term inflation expectations did not fall as quickly. Only after the announcement in May 1997 
by  the  new  Labour  government  that  the  Bank  of  England  would  be  made  independent  did  inflation 
expectations  fall  quickly  to  the  target  level,  as  can  be  seen  from  chart  2.  That  reform  created  an 
expectation that it would be in the interests of all political parties not to repeal the legislation. For the 
first time since the Second World War, there was a broad-based and credible commitment in the UK to 
stable and low inflation. 
The need for any monetary regime to command sufficient support in order to acquire a reasonable life-
expectancy was given insufficient weight in the discussions that took place at the IMF and elsewhere 
on Brazil and other financial crises of the 1990s. The point is made by Guillermo Calvo and Frederic 
Mishkin (2003) when they write, “the key to macroeconomic success in emerging market countries is 
not primarily their choice of exchange rate regime, but rather the health of the countries’ fundamental 
macroeconomic  institutions,  ...  less  attention  should  be  focused  on  the  general  question  whether  a 
floating  or  a 
institutional  
arrangements” (p5).12 
is  preferable,  and  more  on 
fixed  exchange  rate 
these  deeper 
Case Study 2: Currency reform in Iraq 
IV. 
The importance of expectations about the future of monetary institutions is illustrated by the recent 
monetary history of Iraq. This second case study demonstrates that expectations of future collective 
decisions  can  have  a  major  impact  on  the  value  of  a  currency  quite  independently  of  the  policies 
pursued by the current government. Expectations of monetary decisions within a given policy regime 
may be less significant than expectations of changes in the regime itself. In Iraq, regime change took 
on  a  new  meaning. What  is  particularly  interesting about  Iraq  is  the  link  between  expectations  of a 
change in political regime and movements in currency values. 
Prior to the Gulf War in 1991 the Iraqi currency was the dinar. Following that war Iraq was divided into 
two parts that were politically, militarily and economically separate from each other: southern Iraq was 
under  the  control  of  Saddam  Hussein  and  the  enforcement  of  the  northern  no-fly-zone  meant  that 
northern  Iraq  became  a  de  facto  Kurdish  protectorate.  In  the  South,  Saddam’s  regime  struggled  to 
cope with UN sanctions, and resorted to printing money to finance growing fiscal deficits. Unable to 
import  notes  printed  abroad  because  of  sanctions,  the  regime  printed  low-quality  notes  in  Iraq  that 
                                                      
12   This quote appears on page 5 of the NBER working paper number 9808 (Cambridge, MA) version of their paper. At the time 
of writing, the Journal of Economic Perspectives version, which appears in the list of references, was still forthcoming. 
BIS Review 5/2004 
 7
bore Saddam’s image. In May 1993, the Central Bank of Iraq announced that the 25 dinar note, then 
the highest denomination note in circulation, would be withdrawn and replaced by a new locally printed 
note.  These  were  known  as  ‘Saddam’  or  ‘print’  (because  of  the  offset  litho  print  technology  used) 
dinars. Citizens had three weeks to exchange old for new notes. So many notes were printed that the 
face value of cash in circulation jumped from 22 billion dinars at the end of 1991 to 584 billion only four 
years later. Inflation soared to an average of about 250% a year over the same period. As a result the 
smaller denomination notes became worthless in Southern Iraq.  
In the North, however, matters were rather different. Residents in that part of Iraq had no opportunity 
to exchange their notes. And it was no accident that, because of expropriation of cash in the banks by 
the Saddam regime, the holders of the high denomination notes were disproportionately in the North. 
Of  the  seven  billion  25  dinar  notes  in  circulation  in  Iraq  at  that  time,  about  five  billion  circulated  in 
Kurdish-controlled Iraq. So the Saddam dinar did not circulate in the North, and the old dinar notes 
continued to be used. They were known as the ‘Swiss’ dinar - so-called because although the notes 
had  been  printed  by  the  British  company  De  La  Rue,  the  plates  had  been  manufactured  in 
Switzerland. The Swiss dinar developed a life of its own and in effect became the new currency in the 
North. No Swiss dinar notes were issued after 1989, and since there was no issuing authority there 
was at most a fixed, and probably a declining money stock in the North. As a result the Swiss and 
Saddam dinars developed into two separate currencies. 
For ten years, therefore, Iraq had two currencies: one issued by the official government and the other 
backed  by  no  government  at  all.  The  Swiss  dinar  continued  to  circulate  in  the  North,  even  though 
backed by no formal government, central bank, nor any law of legal tender. For a fiat currency this was 
an unusual situation. Whatever gave the Swiss dinar its value was not the promise of the official Iraqi 
government, or indeed any other government.13 
Although  there  was  little  or  no  trade  between  North  and  South  Iraq,  both  the  Swiss  and  Saddam 
dinars were traded against the dollar. The implied Swiss to Saddam dinar cross-exchange rate from 
1997 onwards is shown in Chart 3.14 
Chart 3: Saddam/Swiss Dinar 
exchange rate, Jul 1997-Oct 2003
Saddam/Swiss Dinars
(log scale)
400
200
100
50
Jul-97
Jul-98
Jul-99
Jul-00
Jul-01
Jul-02
Jul-03
Source: United Nations, Central Bank of Iraq
After 1993 the Swiss dinar deviated from parity and rose to around 300 Saddam dinars to the Swiss 
dinar  by  the  time  Saddam’s  regime  was  deposed  in  2003.  The  appreciation  of  the  Swiss  dinar  is 
                                                      
13   At no stage did the Kurdish groups lay claim to the Swiss dinar as their currency - they had no control over it - as shown by 
the interview given to Gulf News on 30 January 2003 by the Kurdistan Regional Government Prime Minister Barzani who 
said, “We don’t have our own currency”. 
14   Sources for these data include the United Nations (from the oil-for-Food program) and the Central Bank of Iraq.  
 8 
  BIS Review 5/2004
clearly  a  consequence  of  the  evolution  of  the  actual  and  expected  money  supplies  in  the  two 
territories. 
Given  the  monetary  and  fiscal  policies  pursued  by  the  Saddam  regime,  the  rise  of  the  Swiss  dinar 
against  the  Saddam  dinar  is,  perhaps,  understandable.  But  what  is  less  obvious  is  the  path  of  the 
Swiss  dinar  against  the  US  dollar.  Chart  4  shows  the  Swiss  dinar-dollar  exchange  rate  from  1997 
onwards.  
Chart 4: The Swiss Dinar/Dollar 
exchange rate, Jul 1997-Oct 2003
Swiss Dinar/$
Swiss Dinar/$
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
Jul-97
Jul-98
Jul-99
Jul-00
Jul-01
Jul-02
Jul-03
Source: United Nations, Central Bank of Iraq
 After fluctuating in the early 1990s, the Swiss dinar rose sharply against the US dollar from the middle 
of  2002  as  the  prospect of  an  end  to the  Saddam regime  increased.  It  rose  from around  18  to  the 
dollar in May 2002 to about 6 to the dollar by the beginning of May 2003 when the war ended. That 
appreciation  reflected  expectations  about  (i)  the  durability  of  the  political  and  military  separation  of 
Kurdish from Saddam-controlled Iraq and (ii) the likelihood that a new institution would be established 
governing monetary policy in Iraq as a whole that would retrospectively back the value of the Swiss 
dinar.  The  political  complexion  of  Northern  Iraq  led  to  the  assumption  that  the  currency  used  there 
would have value once regime change had occurred.  
In other words, the value of the Swiss dinar had everything to do with politics and nothing to do with 
the  economic  policies  of  the  government  issuing  the  Swiss  dinar  because  no  such  government 
existed. As someone might have said, “it’s the political economy, stupid!”  
Another illustration of this is shown in Chart 5 which plots the Swiss dinar/dollar exchange rate against 
the  values  of  futures  contracts  showing  how  expectations  about  the  political  order  in  Iraq  were 
evolving. 
BIS Review 5/2004 
 9
Chart 5: Exchange rates and regime change 
in Iraq, Sep 2002-Dec 2003
Swiss Dinar/$
Cents
Saddam deposed by
end June 03
Saddam captured by
end Dec 03
b
a
Swiss Dinar/$ (rhs)
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
Sep-02
Dec-02 Mar-03
Jun-03
Sep-03
Source: United Nations, Central Bank of Iraq, Tradesport Exchange Limited
a Value in cents of a contract that paid 100 cents if Saddam is deposed by the end of June 2003, and 0 otherwise
b Value in cents of a contract that paid 100 cents if Saddam was captured by the end of December 2002, and 0 otherwise
 One futures contract paid out 100 cents if Saddam was deposed by the end of June 2003 and nothing 
otherwise. As the chance of Saddam’s regime being deposed (and the price of the future) rose, the 
Swiss dinar appreciated against the dollar. Later there was also a future that paid 100 cents if Saddam 
was captured by the end of December 2003, and nothing otherwise. As the chance of this happening 
(and the price of the future) fell last autumn, the Swiss dinar fell against the dollar. It has just risen 
again.  Again,  expectations  about  the  future  political order  in  Iraq,  which have repercussions  for  the 
likely monetary regime in northern Iraq, influence the value of the Swiss dinar today. 
Much of this was understood by Kurds in the North where the exchange rate of the Swiss dinar to the 
dollar was a matter of both concern and interest. The minutes of a meeting of the Kurdish Regional 
Government on 14 October 2002 state: “KRG Prime Minister Nechirvan Barzani chaired a meeting to 
discuss the ongoing problem of the weak US dollar in the local currency markets. Discussion focussed 
on the … unprecedented 45% decrease in the value of the US dollar against the Iraqi Swiss dinar, 
possible causes of the problem, and effects on the market”. Realising that the effect of a change in 
the exchange rate cannot be understood without an analysis of the causes of the change, the minutes 
continue, in a manner that would do justice to the minutes of any G7 central bank, “It was pointed out 
that the US dollar is currently stable in foreign markets so there must be other explanations for the 
sharp slide in value in Iraqi Kurdistan”.15 In other words, an explanation was needed for a rise in the 
real value of the Swiss dinar. 
Of course, as we now know, the expectation that a future institution guaranteeing the integrity of the 
Kurdish area, and of the value of their currency, turned out to be correct. Coalition forces assumed 
control of the whole territory, and on 7 July 2003 the head of the Coalition Provisional Authority, Paul 
Bremer,  announced  that  a  new  Iraqi  dinar  would  be  printed  and  exchanged  for  the  two  existing 
currencies at a rate that implied that one Swiss dinar was worth 150 Saddam dinars. The exchange 
was  to  take  place  over  the  period  15  October  to  15  January.  It  is  now  virtually  complete.  The  new 
dinars, like the Swiss, were printed by De la Rue in a very short space of time using plants in Britain 
and  several  other  countries,  and  were  flown  into  Iraq  on  22  flights  using  Boeing  747  and  other 
aeroplanes.  The  fact  that  the  populations  of  both  North  and  South  Iraq  have  been  prepared  to 
exchange their old notes for new dinars reflects the confidence which they have in the future of the 
institutions backing the new Iraqi dinar.  
The 150 parity is barely half the rate the Swiss dinar reached at its peak (see Chart 6).  
                                                      
15   The minutes are archived on the KRG web site www.krg.org/news. 
10 
  BIS Review 5/2004
Chart 6: The Saddam/Swiss Dinar 
exchange rate, Jan 2002-Dec 2003
Saddam/Swiss Dinar
350
300
250
200
150
100
50
Announcement of currency 
reform, 7 July
End of war, 1 May
Invasion of Iraq, 20 Mar
0
Jan-02 May-02
Sep-02
Jan-03 May-03 Sep-03
Source: United Nations, Central Bank of Iraq
 But it is above the average rate that prevailed over the past six years, and above the rate that would 
equalise  the  purchasing  power  of  the  two  currencies.  For  example,  around  the  time  when  the  new 
conversion rate was being determined, it was estimated that 128 Saddam dinars to the Swiss would 
equalise the wages of an engineer in the two parts of Iraq, 100 would equate the price of the shoes he 
wore to work, and 133 the price of his suit.16  
From Chart 6, it is clear that the exchange rate hovered above 150 after the parity was announced on 
7 July. There are two reasons for this. First, the 10,000 Saddam dinar note was heavily counterfeited, 
easy  to  do  given  the  primitive  local  technology  used  to  print  them.  The  exchange  rate  of  this  note 
against the dollar is consistently less than the 250 dinar note which, as a smaller denomination note, 
was  less  heavily  counterfeited.  The  Swiss  notes,  printed  using  more  sophisticated  technology,  are 
virtually  free  of  counterfeits.  The  Swiss  notes  traded  at  above  the  parity  because  of  the  risk  that 
holders of the 10,000 note would find that they had a forgery and could not exchange it at the central 
bank. Second, before the capture of Saddam Hussein there was inevitably some uncertainty about the 
prospects of the new regime and the new currency that it issued. 
The circulation of Swiss dinars in Kurdish controlled Iraq during the 1990s was a market solution to the 
problem of devising a medium of exchange in the absence of a government with the power to issue 
currency. Changes in the relative price of Swiss and Saddam dinars show that the value of money 
depends on beliefs about the probability of survival of the institutions that define the state itself. 
Case Study 3: Monetary policy in Japan and the zero bound on interest rates 
V. 
My third case study shows that institutional arrangements need to be consonant with the underlying 
economics,  or  failure  will  result.  Recent  experience  in  Japan  has  led  to  the  rebirth  of  interest  in 
monetary  policy  when  official  interest  rates  are  constrained  by  the  zero  lower  bound.  Official  short-
term interest rates in Japan have been approximately zero since the beginning of 1999. Of particular 
interest in this context is the question of how responsibilities should be divided between the central 
bank, on the one hand, and the finance ministry, on the other.  
Guy  Debelle  and  Stanley  Fischer  (1994)  introduced  the  distinction  between  instrument  and  goal 
independence of central banks. That distinction has become the standard framework within which to 
analyse the optimal constitution of central banks. But such a distinction presumes the existence of a 
                                                      
16   Source: compiled by the Central Bank of Iraq, based on data collected by the United Nations World Food Program. 
BIS Review 5/2004 
 11
policy instrument that is uniquely available to the central bank. That instrument is the level of official 
short-term  interest  rates.  But  when  interest  rates  are  constrained  at  their  lower  bound  of  zero,  the 
position is much less clear. Indeed, I shall argue that in such circumstances both instrument and goal 
independence are impossible. Rather when interest rates are at their zero lower bound, policy relies 
on successful cooperation between central bank and finance ministry.  
I  shall  assume  that,  when  interest  rates  are  zero,  monetary  policy  takes  the  form  of  open  market 
purchases or sales of government securities using central bank money.  
A well-known policy prescription, which has become known as unconventional monetary policy, is that 
the  central  bank should  buy  long-term Government bonds  rather  than  the more  conventional  short-
term bills. The Bank of Japan did indeed follow this prescription. The logic of such a proposal is as 
follows. Long-term bonds are likely to contain a significant premium to compensate investors for their 
lack  of  liquidity  -  the  fact  that,  in  practice,  investors  face  significant  costs  when  switching  between 
bonds  and  goods.  When  the  central  bank  offers  to  buy  illiquid  long-term  bonds,  it  increases  the 
average liquidity of the private sector’s portfolio, replacing less liquid with more liquid securities. The 
private sector will therefore be more willing to hold other illiquid instruments, such as private sector 
bonds and equities. As a result, liquidity premia fall across a broad category of securities, raising their 
market value. That will stimulate spending by firms and consumers.17 Such a policy is preferable to 
conventional open market purchases of short-term bills or bonds because when interest rates are zero 
such  bills  become  perfect  substitutes  for  cash.  Hence  purchases  of  short  bonds  have  no  effect  on 
spending or other real variables.  
It  is  a  short  step  to  show  that  this  argument  implies  an  equivalence  proposition  between 
unconventional quantitative operations, on the one hand, and a combination of neutral conventional 
operations and government debt management, on the other. The purchase of a long-term bond by the 
central bank is equivalent to a combination of two other operations: a purchase of a short-term bill, 
followed  by  an  operation  that  swaps  the  short-term  bill  for  the  long  term  bond.  In  either  case,  the 
central bank balance sheet ends up with an additional liability in cash, and an additional asset in long-
term bonds. The first of these two operations, the purchase of a short-term bill, is neutral in its effect 
as it replaces one private sector asset, a short-term bill, with another, cash, that is a perfect substitute 
for  it.  The  second  is  debt  management,  which  is  normally  seen  as  the  responsibility  of  the  finance 
ministry.  So  when  interest  rates  are  zero  unconventional  quantitative  operations  and  debt 
management are indistinguishable. 
The interplay between monetary policy and debt management may not matter too much when short-
term interest rates are positive because the central bank can control the level of interest rates, even if 
debt management affects the optimal level of rates. But when rates are at their zero bound then the 
central  bank  no  longer  has  instrument  independence.  Indeed,  because  its  actions  can  be  offset  by 
appropriate  sales  or  purchases  in  the  government  debt  market,  it  loses  goal  independence  too.  It 
becomes crucial that fiscal and monetary authorities cooperate. An alternative strategy, equivalent in 
terms of its monetary effects but avoiding the risk to the Bank of Japan’s balance sheet from holding 
large  quantities  of  government  bonds,  would  have  been  for  the  Ministry  of  Finance  to  have  issued 
short-term bills to the BoJ, using the proceeds to purchase and retire long-term government bonds. 
Similar  arguments  apply  to  other  unconventional  monetary  policies,  such  as  purchases  of  foreign 
currency, which conflict with the responsibilities of the fiscal authorities for the ownership of foreign 
exchange reserves.  
A serious problem for the Japanese authorities was that the Bank of Japan was granted independence 
not  long  before  it  became  necessary  for  policy  to  be  coordinated  between  MoF  and  the  BoJ.18 
Inevitably, the desire on both sides to respect the newly-won independence of the central bank came 
into  conflict  with  the  growing  realisation  that  monetary  policy  was  operating  in  a  zero-interest  rate 
environment. The clarity of communication about the objectives of monetary policy diminishes when it 
is no longer possible to identify clear and distinct responsibilities for the two institutions. A desirable 
long-term reform - central bank independence - led to short-term difficulties. 
                                                     
 
17   How large are these effects is an open question. The absence of a compelling general equilibrium theory of liquidity makes 
it  difficult  to  produce  reliable  empirical  estimates.  For  the  purposes  of  the  equivalence  proposition  the  magnitude  of  the 
effect is irrelevant. 
18   The legislation was published in 1997, and took effect in April 1998. 
12 
  BIS Review 5/2004
Conclusions 
VI. 
I  am  conscious  that  I  have  raised  more  questions  than  I  have  answered  -  perhaps  that  is  what 
happens  when  you  become  a  central  banker.  I  hope  I  have  not  copied  my  room-mate  at  Harvard 
whose PhD supervisor wrote, “he chewed more than he had bitten off”.19 But the search for institutions 
that improve our ability to handle the two problems associated with public money - the impossibility 
and undesirability of committing our successors - is never ending, and our knowledge is limited. At the 
very  first  gathering  of  economists  to  create  the  American  Economic  Association,  in  Saratoga  in 
September 1885, Richard Ely showed that he had the makings of a good central banker when he said, 
“We acknowledge our ignorance, and if we claim superiority to others it is largely on the very humble 
ground that we know better what we do not know”. Or, in Hayek’s words, “It is high time we took our 
ignorance more seriously”. 
The  inability  to  bind  future  generations  means  that  institutions  do  not  resemble  an  optimal  time-
invariant  design  chosen  from  behind  the  “veil  of  ignorance”.  They  reflect,  in  Hayek’s  words,  “how 
nations in the darkness stumble upon institutions which are in fact the result of human actions, not the 
implementation of a human plan”.20  
Suitably  designed,  though,  monetary  institutions  can  help  to  reduce  the  inefficiencies  resulting  from 
the time-consistency problem and can incorporate new ideas into a discretionary monetary strategy 
constrained by a mandate that has widespread support in the population as a whole. A central bank 
needs to explain to the population both what it knows and what it does not know. Such a framework of 
“constrained  discretion”  for  central  banks  is  far-removed  from  the  world  of  1930  when  the  Deputy 
Governor of the Bank of England explained to the Macmillan Committee that “it is a dangerous thing to 
start to give reasons”.  
In  1908  Congress  set  up  the  National  Monetary  Commission  to  report  on  “what  changes  are 
necessary  or  desirable  in  the  monetary  system  of  United  States”.  Before  recommending  the 
establishment of the Federal Reserve System - a plan which it described as “essentially an American 
system, scientific in its methods, and democratic in its control” - the Commission produced 22 volumes 
on the monetary and banking systems elsewhere, especially in Europe. Copies of these volumes sit 
proudly  in  the  Governor’s  anteroom  in  the  Bank  of  England.  The  authors  noted  that  “the  important 
place which the Bank of England holds in the financial world is due to the wisdom of the men who 
have controlled its operations and not to any legislative enactments”. But they did not see the Bank of 
England  as  a  model,  and  they  recommended  the  creation  of  an  institution  framed  by  legislation.  It 
would be ninety years before Britain finally learnt the lessons of the National Monetary Commission 
and passed legislation to buttress whatever wisdom the Bank could command. 
Institutions embody accumulated wisdom and experience, and they should not be meddled with lightly. 
From time to time, however, it is necessary to rethink the role of our institutions. The changes made to 
the Bank of England in recent years, including an inflation target and a high degree of transparency, 
have, I believe, improved Britain’s monetary arrangements. Whether either the men and women or the 
current institutional arrangements of the Bank of England will have any more success in influencing 
monetary arrangements in the United States today than in 1908 is a matter I leave to you. 
 
                                                     
19   The supervisor (in English literature) was citing a letter from Mrs Henry Adams to her father, December 1881: “Its not that he 
bites  off  more  than  he  can  chaw  as  T.G.  Appleton  said  of  Nathan,  but  he  chaws  more  than  he  bites  off.”  (Nathan  was 
Appleton’s son). The remark is also sometimes attributed to Mark Twain as a comment on Henry James’ writing. 
20   Hayek (1960), cited by Otmar Issing (2003). 
BIS Review 5/2004 
 13
