Seung Park: Economic and financial developments in East Asia 
Introductory remarks by Dr Seung Park, Governor of the Bank of Korea, at the International Forum on 
Monetary & Financial Cooperation for Asia, Seoul, 20 February 2004. 
 Opening remarks 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
Let  me  first  extend  a  hearty  welcome  to  all  participants  who  have  gathered  from  Australia,  China, 
Japan and Korea to attend the International Forum on Monetary & Financial Cooperation for Asia. I am 
very glad to see here today so many great scholars of money and finance. 
I  would  especially  like  to  express  my  deep  thanks  to  Prof.  Choi,  Woonyoul,  President  of  Korea 
Monetary and Finance Association, and all those involved with arranging this meaningful and timely 
forum  for  having  invited  me  to  address  you  today.  Prof.  Choi  was  one  of  the  Monetary  Policy 
Committee  members  of  the  Bank  of  Korea  until  the  end  of  last  year  and  contributed  greatly  to  the 
Bank’s conduct of monetary policy. Taking this opportunity I thank him again for all his services during 
his terms of office. 
The  finance  associations  of  the  four  countries  taking  part  in  this  forum  have  been  engaged  in  very 
lively  research  activities  and  academic  exchanges  that  have  contributed  mightily  to  financial  sector 
development not only of their own countries but of entire Western Pacific Basin region. 
Your forum is also the focus of attention because discussion will center mainly on a matter of common 
concern throughout East Asia, namely on plans to promote regional cooperation for the growth of the 
financial sector. 
The position of East Asia in the world economy 
Ladies and gentlemen, as you are well aware, East Asia has achieved very high rates of economic 
growth over the last half century, and is now a major pole of the global economy. 
Japan long ago joined the ranks of advanced countries after the post-war reconstruction of economy. 
Korea, for its part, achieved the Miracle of Han River rising phoenix-like from the ashes of the Korean 
War and utter destitution to become a member of what is often called the rich man’s club of the OECD 
in 1996. Since the 1980s, China has also maintained rapid growth averaging around 9% and paved its 
way  as  a  great  new  economic  power.  As  a  result,  East  Asia’s  economic  profile  has  been  greatly 
heightened. Japan, China and Korea now rank the 2nd, the 6th and the 12th country respectively in 
terms of the scale of their economies with the combined GDP of three countries representing 18% of 
that of the world as a whole. 
In the course of its dramatic economic spring forward, East Asia has accumulated immense foreign 
reserves. As of the end of last year, the foreign reserves of Japan, China and Korea amounted in all to 
some 1.2 trillion dollars. The total when those of Taiwan and Hongkong are added in, makes up half of 
the world’s foreign reserves. East Asian reserves have been mainly invested in U.S Treasuries. This 
means that a large proportion of the American fiscal and current account deficits is financed by the 
East Asian countries. 
Fragility of the financial sector in East Asia 
Despite the dramatic growth in the real economy, the East Asian financial sector trails those of the 
U.S  and Europe. 
The  Japanese  financial  industry  was  once  the  world  leader  in  terms  of  scale  of  financial  assets.  It 
proved  unable,  however,  to  adapt  itself  to  liberalization  and  market  openness.  Its  structural  fragility 
was laid bare resulting in the protracted recession of last decade. 
After the foreign currency crisis in 1997, the Korean financial sector turned its back on the old system 
and  achieved  a  rebirth  through  thoroughgoing  structural  reform.  Nevertheless  the  soundness  and 
profit of financial institutions worsened again last year in line with the rise of household insolvencies. 
BIS Review 13/2004 
 1
The troubled status of some credit card companies still remains a big problem, which destabilizes the 
financial market and is one cause of the subdued state of domestic demand. 
In the Chinese financial sector, it is said that there is still much room for improvement in terms of the 
legal  and  institutional  infrastructure.  Notably,  in  the  process  of  rapid  economic  growth,  the  banking 
sector expanded loans to state companies so rapidly that they hold a great stock of non-performing 
loans. This overhang represents a latent threat that could hold back the sustained development of the 
Chinese economy at a later stage. 
Need for financial upgrading and the strengthening of cooperation in East Asia 
Without financial stability and development, it is unreasonable to look for continuous growth of the real 
economy. Examples spring all too readily to mind. 
The Korean economy, after long maintaining its rapid growth pace, was hit by a foreign currency crisis 
and a deep recession at the end of 1997. The accumulated structural fragilities of the financial sector 
were revealed all at once. For its part, Japan endured a long recession for more than 10 years after 
the bubble burst in the early 1990s. 
In  East  Asia,  along  with  the  brisk  growth  of  the  real  economy,  financial  demand  has  also  been 
increasing sharply, in connection with trade, foreign direct and indirect investment, and the operation 
of the foreign reserves. Looking only at trade, the volume between Japan, China and Korea built up 
rapidly  from  96  billion  dollars  in  1990  to  378  billion  dollars  in  2002.  The  regional  financial  demand 
accompanying those trade flows has seen explosive growth. 
Nevertheless,  because  of  the  fragility  of  regional  financial  structures,  U.S  &  European-based 
investment banks meet a large part of the regional financial demand through their advanced financial 
systems and accumulated expertise. 
This  is  why  East  Asian  countries  must  cure  the  fragility  of  their  financial  sectors  and  strengthen 
financial cooperation within the area. Notably East Asian financial markets are relatively narrow so that 
they are easily liable to attacks from large flows of speculative capital. Worse still, with the progress of 
financial  liberalization  and  openness,  financial  unstability  in  one  country  spreads  instantaneously  to 
other associated countries. In the light of this situation, close financial cooperation is more urgent than 
ever. 
Encouragingly several steps have been already taken to strengthen regional financial cooperation. In 
May  2000,  the  members  of  ASEAN+3  opted  for  the  Chiang  Mai  Initiative.  This  is  based  on  the 
provision of bilateral liquidity support through the arrangement of currency swaps between the central 
banks  involved.  The  Bank  of  Korea  has  regular  conferences  on  matters  of  mutual  interest  with  the 
Bank of Japan and the People’s Bank of China. Beside this, it opened a Beijing representative office 
last November with a view to intensifying cooperation. 
These  steps,  I  think,  are  only  just  beginning.  It  is  absolutely  vital  that  we  continue  to  expand  such 
financial cooperation throughout the region. 
Closing remarks 
Given the increasing necessity of financial cooperation among regional countries, Korea, China and 
Japan  have  recognized  the  building  of  an  East  Asian  financial  hub  as  a  core  task  for  economic 
development. There is rivalry among them for it to be built in their own countries. Such competition, 
however,  does  not  mean  the  exclusion  of  others.  Rather  competition  in  good  faith  can  provide 
opportunity for the financial markets of each country to overcome their structural fragility, and develop 
together. In this way it, in fact, promotes mutual cooperation. 
Your conference offers a valuable chance in this respect to expand financial cooperation by widening 
the breath of mutual understanding through the sharing of ideas and opinions among experts. 
My  especial  hope  is  that  we  will  find  a  basis  for  specific  and  practical  initiatives  in  deep  and  wide-
ranging  discussions  about  East  Asian  monetary  integration  and  the  development  of  Asian  bond 
markets, both matters that are the focus of intense debate these days. 
Fruitful outcomes from this conference will be a great boost to financial economists. More practically 
they  will  be  of  immense  help  to  administrative  authorities  like  governments,  central  banks,  and 
2 
 BIS Review 13/2004
financial supervisory institutions and to financial players like banks, insurers and securities companies. 
In this respect I have great anticipations of this conference. 
BIS Review 13/2004 
 3
