Jean-Pierre Roth: 2003 – a year of renewal 
Speech by Mr Jean-Pierre Roth, Chairman of the Governing Board of the Swiss National Bank, at the 
Bank’s Annual General Meeting, Bern, 30 April 2004.  
 2003: a year of renewal  
As I told you a year ago, 2002 was a year of disappointments. But today I am glad to report that in 
2003 the outlook brightened steadily.  
2003 got off to an inauspicious start, however. The prospect of war in Iraq gave rise to uncertainty and 
apprehension,  gravely  undermining  confidence  among  both  households  and  companies.  Then 
investors’ confidence was shaken by a number of financial scandals, triggering a sharp fall in the stock 
markets in the third quarter. Even the rapid military outcome to the conflict in Iraq did not resolve the 
situation. In addition to this, the threat of a SARS epidemic exacerbated the problems already being 
experienced by greatly weakened sectors such as transport and tourism.  
Only in the summer did a measure of calm start to return as the international business cycle gradually 
picked  up.  Not  only  did  economic  growth  in  the  United  States  steadily  gain  momentum,  but  the 
Japanese  economy  experienced  an  almost  unhoped-for  rebound  while  the  emerging  economies  of 
Asia - led by China - cast off their SARS fears and resumed their dynamic growth. This contributed in 
no small part to the upswing in the world economy. Closer to home, the European economies slowly 
emerged from their lethargic state. Switzerland’s neighbours saw an upswing in industrial output and 
exports, although domestic demand in these countries remained - and still remains - sluggish.  
In Switzerland, too, the long-awaited but oft-delayed upswing finally began to make itself felt. The first 
signs of the upturn became apparent in the summer. These were initially in isolated areas but then 
became  increasingly  widespread.  The confidence  indicators  began  rising,  and order  books  swelled. 
The turnaround was facilitated by a marked weakening of the Swiss franc, which was itself triggered 
by a renewed easing of our monetary policy in March. This downward correction in the franc, which 
continued for the rest of the year, came as a welcome respite for Switzerland’s export industry, which 
had been buffeted by the weak global economy and the fall-off in international trade.  
The Swiss franc’s slide against the European currency was gradual, extending over almost a year. Our 
currency’s exchange rate dropped from CHF 1.46 against the euro in March 2003 to CHF 1.55 today, 
thus  depreciating  by  about  6%.  The  franc’s  fall  is  even  greater  in  real  terms  owing  to  the  higher 
inflation rate which prevailed - and still prevails - in the euro zone. Also in real terms, the Swiss franc is 
worth  less  in  euros  than  when  the  single  currency  was  launched  five  years  ago.  This  development 
shows that, as the new European currency has gained in stature, the markets have taken a different 
view of the safe-haven role traditionally played by the franc. It is probably also to the euro’s existence 
that we owe the Swiss franc’s reduced volatility and its rather controlled weakening, whereas the dollar 
experienced  difficulties.  This  is  a  reaction  to  which  we  were  not  accustomed;  moreover,  it  is  good 
news for our economy. While it may be justified by the United States’ huge external deficit, the slide of 
the greenback has nevertheless exerted an asymmetrical impact: it has hit European exporters hard, 
but has not affected Asian currencies that have been kept artificially low by massive intervention. The 
Swiss franc's fall against the single currency has sheltered us somewhat from these upheavals.  
Guarded optimism for 2004  
Our  economic  forecasts  for  the  current  year  are  marked  by  cautious  optimism.  The  recovery  that 
began  in  the  third  quarter  of  2003  is  set  to  continue.  The  production  gap,  which  measures  the 
difference between actual production and its potential level, is expected first to stabilise and then to 
gradually narrow. However, this will take time.  
As usual, the first signs of an economic recovery appeared in the industries geared to exports. Next, 
capital goods investment began to pick up, driven by the high rate of depreciation in new technologies; 
there is therefore significant pent-up demand. To a large extent, these investments feed on imports, so 
BIS Review 25/2004 
 1
that the immediate impact on our economy is limited. Moreover, as investment is also gaining steam 
among our neighbours, our own capital goods industry, with its strong export bias, has improved.  
While consumer spending has held up well in the past two years, it is expected to gain momentum as 
the economic environment brightens. Consumption will thus continue to support growth, though it will 
probably cede pride of place to more cyclical components such as capital expenditure and exports. It 
will benefit, in particular, from the gradual improvement that will be seen on the labour market. At this 
stage of the economic cycle, of course, we must first expect gains in productivity, which means that 
unemployment will only decline slowly. Nevertheless, here too, the medium-term outlook is now good.  
The scenario for a recovery that I have presented is, needless to say, full of imponderables. The risks 
are everywhere. They may take the shape of an uptrend or a downtrend. We can thus not rule out the 
possibility  that  the  international  economy  will  show  more  robust  growth  than  anticipated.  A  swift 
build-up of inventories, for example, would appreciably accelerate the cycle. But the downside risks 
could  also  be  triggered  at  any  time  by  new  political  disorders.  Given  the  significant  internal  and 
external imbalances throughout the world, such unrest could fuel greater volatility on the currency and 
equity  markets.  The  strength  of  the  recovery  is  also  uncertain.  In  the  United  States,  the  economic 
recovery, which has been driven largely by tax breaks, is not yet firmly in place; households, labouring 
under a heavy debt burden, may be frightened by the slow pace of job growth. Should confidence be 
lost, a renewed fall in the dollar or a correction in the prices of financial assets would deliver another 
blow to the global economy. The situation in some emerging economies is likewise precarious. Lastly, 
we  must  bear  in  mind  the  difficulties  currently  being  encountered  by  some  of  our  neighbours, 
difficulties that could weaken or even delay the start of the upswing on our continent.  
Monetary policy  
In the unstable environment we are still experiencing, our monetary policy must remain expansionary. 
We know that our interest rates, currently at an historically very low level, will have to be increased if 
we  wish  to  maintain  price  stability  once  the  economic  situation  has  been  confirmed.  The  inflation 
outlook we published last March shows this clearly. However, we believe that it is not yet the moment 
to return to normalisation:  
• 
Admittedly, the Swiss economy is now on a path of modest growth, but it has considerable 
idle  resources  and  competition  on  the  international  markets  is  fierce.  In  the  present 
circumstances, therefore, there is little risk of overheating. 
Growth in money supply is strong, but the preference for liquidity is unusually high against 
the  current  background  of  uncertainty  and  lending  is  showing  only  moderate  expansion. 
Moreover,  monetary  aggregates  have been  somewhat  inflated  by  the  repatriation  of  funds 
which have until now been placed on the Swiss franc euro market. 
Lastly, even if some regions of the country are experiencing a scarcity of housing, there is no 
evidence of a real estate bubble developing such as we saw at the end of the 1980s.  
  The inflation outlook thus remains positive. We are projecting an inflation rate of about 0.5% this year 
and 1% next year. It is unlikely that, in the months ahead, we will again see inflation rates below zero, 
as we did last March. Negative inflation would require a steep fall in the price of oil. The debate over 
deflation, which was so topical barely a year ago, is by and large no longer one of our concerns and 
has disappeared from the discussions among central bankers. Our interest rate cut in March 2003 was 
intended to protect us against such a development. The goal has been achieved.  
The need for reforms  
Events  in  recent  years  have  shown  once  again  that  there  is  no  way  we  can  make  ourselves 
impervious  to  disturbances  emanating  from  the  world’s  markets.  Such  disturbances  will  inevitably 
impact on the development of our economy. This does not mean, however, that we are completely at 
their mercy: for a small country such as Switzerland, the best defence against external shocks is an 
efficient and flexible economy, capable of standing up to competition and adapting swiftly to changes 
in the international environment.  
However,  we  must  also  ensure  that  the  problems  caused  by  our  internal  structures,  which  are 
sometimes not ideally suited to current challenges, do not gain the upper hand. Our economy must be 
2 
 BIS Review 25/2004
able to benefit from favourable domestic conditions that will allow it to develop and flourish. We have 
all witnessed its disappointing performance throughout the 1990s. This situation can only be corrected 
by  the  resolute  implementation  of  structural  reforms  aimed  at  improving  its  long-term  potential  for 
growth.  
The issue is all the more pressing as we are witnessing the gradual ageing of the Swiss population. 
The problems caused by this trend have been identified by and large, and the measures needed have 
been repeatedly analysed. The goal is simple: everything must be done to increase our economy’s 
trend rate of growth in order to ensure better financing of its future needs. The solutions are complex 
because there is no magic potion. On the contrary, there are any number of different steps we can 
take  to  enhance  our  productivity:  they  range  from  promoting  competition  to  repealing  unnecessary 
regulations. Moreover, they have to be backed up by stringent control of public spending and deficits 
in order to ensure the efficient use of our resources and - above all - to avoid passing on a negative 
financial legacy to future generations. The Federal Council has adopted a legislative programme that 
gives priority to economic growth and a restructuring of the federal finances. We hope that Parliament 
will  debate  this  programme  in  a  spirit  of  intergenerational  solidarity,  keeping  in  mind  the  long-term 
interests of our country. Measures to promote growth would certainly be instrumental in ensuring the 
smooth  future  functioning  of  our  economy,  but  they  would  also  allow  us  to  develop  a  climate  of 
confidence  necessary  for  today’s  investment  and  consumption  decisions.  Their  impact  on  the 
economy  would  thus  not  be  negligible.  As  for  monetary  policy,  its  role  in  this  area  can  only  be  to 
provide price stability, an essential factor for confidence and macroeconomic efficiency.  
Dawn of a new era  
Ladies and gentlemen, as the President of the Bank Council indicated earlier on, the National Bank is 
at an historic turning point today. As of tomorrow, our institution will be governed by new legislation. 
The new National Bank Act will enter into force in less than 24 hours. Our operational framework, our 
range of instruments, our organisation and our duty of notification will all be affected.  
Likewise, our mandate will be - perhaps not modified - but at least made more explicit. Article 5 of the 
new Act stipulates that “The National Bank shall pursue a monetary policy serving the interests of the 
country  as  a  whole.  It  shall  ensure  price  stability.  In  so  doing,  it  shall  take  due  account  of  the 
development of the economy”.  
The objective of price stability is not new. In fact, the National Bank has always been guided by this 
goal in its activities. The desire to guarantee the purchasing power of our currency underpinned the 
link  established  in  the  past  between  the  franc  and  gold,  and  it  was  this  same  concern  that  led 
Switzerland,  in  1973,  to  abandon  the  fixed  exchange  rates  of  the  post-war  period,  which  were 
undermined by widespread lack of discipline. The objective of price stability is now inscribed in law, 
which reinforces its legitimacy. Our monetary system is thus now as clearly defined as it used to be 
under the gold standard.  
We define price stability as an annual rate of inflation of less than 2%. We were able to maintain such 
stability in the course of the past year, and I am pleased to note that this objective has been reached 
in each of the past ten years - an unparalleled achievement internationally. It is a modest, but highly 
important,  contribution  to  the  prosperity  of  our  country.  Our  history  has  shown  that  inflation  -  or 
deflation - can have damaging effects that often cause suffering to the most vulnerable members of 
our society.  
One of Switzerland’s traditional values is this concern for price stability. It is a significant achievement 
that the National Bank will endeavour to preserve in the years to come.  
The  new  Act  also  stipulates  that  we  must  take  due  account  of  the  development  of  the  economy  in 
setting any course of action. There can be no doubt that monetary policy has short-term repercussions 
on  economic  activity.  A  tighter  monetary  policy  designed  to  combat  a  flare-up  of  inflation  tends  to 
cause business activity to slow down. Such a slowdown may be necessary, for instance to reduce the 
likelihood of overheating, but it has painful side effects on various sectors of the economy. In pursuing 
price stability, we must be careful not to lose sight of the costs, and must use tact and discretion. The 
obligation to take account of the economy is now inscribed in law, but in reality this is nothing new: we 
have  always  made  the  state  of  economic  activity  in  Switzerland  one  of  our  prime  concerns.  Our 
massive interest rate cuts in recent years while the economy was in the doldrums is ample proof of 
this stance.  
BIS Review 25/2004 
 3
Having to take account of the economy also means that we cannot be dogmatic in our pursuit of price 
stability, which must be seen as a medium-term goal. As a small, open economy, we are constantly 
exposed to external shocks. As our inflation rate tends to be more volatile than that of large countries 
or economic zones, temporary movements beyond the bounds of price stability cannot be ruled out. 
Trying  to  keep  too  tight  a  lid  on  prices  would  have  adverse  effects  on  the  economy  and  would  be 
counterproductive.  It  is  just  as  obvious,  though,  that  monetary  policy  has  its  limits.  While  it  can 
contribute  to  the  development  of  the  economy  by  providing  a  stable,  transparent  and  efficient 
monetary framework, we must not expect that it will be able to increase its long-term potential, or that 
it  will  succeed  in  energizing  the  economic  machinery  and  forcing  it  to  perform  beyond  its  technical 
capacity.  
The  new  legislation  now  requires  us  to  give  an  account  of  the  management  of  our  mandate  to 
Parliament  and  the  Federal  Council.  This  obligation  towards  Parliament  is  new.  It  is  the  logical 
counterweight  of  our  independence,  an  independence  which  has  been  guaranteed  by  the  federal 
Constitution since 2000. We are free to choose - within the limits of the law - the means necessary to 
carry out our mandate; on the other hand, though, the country is entitled to expect us to be able to 
justify our actions.  
Lastly, the new Act grants us greater freedom in the choice of instruments to manage our monetary 
reserves.  As  you  know,  the  National  Bank  has  considerable  monetary  reserves.  These  reserves, 
which are a national asset, are essential for pursuing an independent monetary policy by reinforcing 
confidence in our currency. They are thus instrumental in ensuring its stability. It is crucial, however, 
that these reserves be managed effectively and with due regard to liquidity and security requirements.  
Over the next few weeks, we will define to what extent we wish to take advantage of the investment 
possibilities offered by the new Act. We will present our plans on this matter at our press conference 
on June 17.  
Conclusion  
The Swiss economy has enjoyed a high degree of monetary stability for some years now, and this 
advantageous situation should last for a number of years to come. While the international environment 
in which we operate has improved, it remains unstable. We cannot rule out fresh setbacks. However, 
we can count on the significant adaptability of our companies and look to the future with confidence.  
Nevertheless, our high standard of living in international terms should not lull us into complacency. In 
recent decades, we have seen our position among the leaders of the most highly developed countries 
eroded. Corrective measures are necessary. Let’s be clear: the main threat to our prosperity does not 
come from abroad, where the “made in Switzerland” label is still a success when it is associated with 
quality. The threat comes from within Switzerland. Take, for instance, our excessive predilection for 
regulations - often an invisible barrier to the free play of competitive forces - and our hesitation to fully 
accept an international environment that is more competitive and innovative than it was 20 years ago. 
The guiding principle for our structural reforms should be: more competition and fewer regulations. We 
have to have the courage to take this path in order to durably enhance our economic growth. This is 
essential to the balanced development of our economy and to the confidence that each of us feels in 
the future.  
It is with this wish that I conclude my remarks. Thank you for your attention and for the interest you 
show in the National Bank and its activities. 
4 
 BIS Review 25/2004
