Kishori J Udeshi: Implementation of Basel II - an Indian perspective 
Address  by  Ms  Kishori  J  Udeshi,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the  World 
Bank/IMF/US Federal Reserve Board 4th Annual International Seminar on Policy Challenges for the 
Financial Sector: Basel II, Washington DC, 2 June 2004. 
 Yesterday  we  had  very  absorbing  discussions  on  macro  issues,  regulatory  perspectives  and  risk 
management  challenges  relating  to  Basel  II.  We  are  now  not  debating  whether  to  go  forward  with 
Basel II but how to implement Basel II. In fact, understanding Basel II concepts is one step away from 
agreeing to it in principle. Implementing Basel II is another long step away from understanding it. Let 
me briefly detail some implementation issues with specific reference to India.  
Features of Indian financial system  
A feature, somewhat unique to the Indian financial system is the diversity of its composition. We have 
the  dominance  of  Government  ownership coupled with significant  private shareholding  in  the  public 
sector  banks  which  in  turn  continue  to  have  a  dominant  share  in  the  total  banking  system.  These 
public sector banks are listed on the stock exchange and their performance is reflected in their P/E 
ratios. The private sector banks especially the new ones are world class. We also have cooperative 
banks, whose numbers are large and pose a challenge because of the multiplicity of regulatory and 
supervisory  authorities.  There  are  also  Regional  Rural  Banks  with  links  to  their  parent  commercial 
banks. Foreign bank branches operate profitably in India and by and large the regulatory standards for 
all  these  banks  are  uniform.  The  process  of  providing  financial  services  is  changing  rapidly  from 
traditional  banking  to  a  one  stop  shop  of  varied  financial  services  and  the  old  institutional 
demarcations are getting increasingly blurred.  
Approach to prudential norms: a review  
The  Reserve  Bank’s  approach  to  the  institution  of  prudential  norms  has  been  one  of  gradual 
convergence with international standards and best practices with suitable country specific adaptations. 
Our  aim  has  been  to  reach  global  best  standards  in  a  deliberately  phased  manner  through  a 
consultative  process  evolved  within  the  country.  This  has  also  been  the  guiding  principle  in  the 
approach to the New Basel Accord e.g. while the minimum capital adequacy requirement under the 
Basel standard is 8% in India, we have stipulated and achieved a minimum capital of 9%. On the other 
hand, banks in India are still in the process of implementing capital charge for market risk prescribed in 
the Basel document although since 1998 we have in place several surrogates such as an Investment 
Fluctuation  Reserve  of  5%  of  the  investment  portfolio,  both  in  the  AFS  and  HFT  categories  plus  a 
2.5% risk weight on the entire investment portfolio - whereas Basel norms take into account only the 
trading portfolio. 
RBI’s involvement in Basel II 
RBI’s association with the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision dates back to 1997 as India was 
among the 16 non-member countries that were consulted in the drafting of the Basel Core Principles. 
Reserve  Bank  of  India  became  a  member  of  the  Core  Principles  Liaison  Group  in  1998  and 
subsequently became a member of the Core Principles Working Group on Capital. Within the CPWG, 
RBI has been actively participating in the deliberations on the Accord and had the privilege to lead a 
group  of  6  major  non  G - 10  supervisors  which  presented  a  proposal  on  a  simplified  approach  for 
Basel II to the Committee. 
The Basel Committee on Banking Supervision is yet to issue the final Basel II document. The Reserve 
Bank’s comments on the 3rd consultative document on the New Capital Accord on the basis of the 
quantitative impact studies (QIS 3) undertaken in co-ordination with select banks has brought out the 
need for more simplicity and greater flexibility on account of the different levels of preparedness of the 
banking system in India.  
BIS Review 35/2004 
 1
Policy approach 
In  general,  keeping  in  view  the  RBI’s  goal  to  have  consistency  and  harmony  with  international 
standards and our approach to adopt the pace as may be appropriate in the context of our country 
specific needs, the RBI had in April 2003 itself accepted in principle to adopt the new capital accord 
Basel  II.  The  RBI  has  announced,  in  its  Annual  Policy  statement  in  May  2004  that  banks  in  India 
should examine in depth the options available under Basel II and draw a road-map by end December 
2004  for  migration  to  Basel  II  and  review  the  progress  made  thereof  at  quarterly  intervals.  The 
Reserve  Bank  will  be  closely  monitoring  the  progress  made  by  banks  in  this  direction.  Hence,  at  a 
minimum all banks in India, to begin with, will adopt Standardized Approach for credit risk and Basic 
Indicator  Approach  for  operational  risk.  After  adequate  skills  are  developed,  both  in  banks  and  at 
supervisory levels, some banks may be allowed to migrate to IRB Approach. 
Regulatory initiatives  
The regulatory initiatives taken by the Reserve Bank of India include: 
• 
Ensuring  that  the  banks  have  suitable  risk  management  framework  oriented  towards  their 
requirements  dictated  by  the  size  and  complexity  of  business,  risk  philosophy,  market 
perceptions and the expected level of capital. The framework adopted by banks would need 
to be adaptable to changes in business size, market dynamics and introduction of innovative 
products by banks in future. 
Introduction of Risk Based Supervision (RBS) in 23 banks on a pilot basis. 
Encouraging banks to formalize their Capital Adequacy Assessment Programme (CAAP) in 
alignment  with  business  plan  and  performance  budgeting  system.  This,  together  with 
adoption of Risk Based Supervision would aid in factoring the Pillar II requirements under 
Basel II. 
Enhancing  the  area  of  disclosures  (Pillar  III),  so  as  to  have  greater    transparency  of  the 
financial position and risk profile of banks.  
Improving the level of corporate governance standards in banks. 
Building  capacity  for  ensuring  the  regulator’s  ability  for  identifying  and  permitting  eligible 
banks to adopt IRB / Advanced Measurement approaches. 
Challenges envisaged  
Against  the  above  background  and  the  complexities  involved  as  also  the  areas  of  “constructive 
ambiguity”  in  concepts  and  their  application  we  envisage  the  following  regulatory  and  supervisory 
challenges ahead:  
• 
India  has  three  established  rating  agencies  in  which  leading  international  credit  rating 
agencies are stakeholders and also extend technical support. However, the level of rating 
penetration is not very significant as, so far, ratings are restricted to issues and not issuers. 
While Basel II gives some scope to extend the rating of issues to issuers, this would only be 
an approximation and it would be necessary for the system to move to ratings of issuers. 
Encouraging ratings of issuers would be a challenge. 
Basel  II  provides  scope  for  the  supervisor  to  prescribe  higher  than  the  minimum  capital 
levels for banks for, among others, interest rate risk in the banking book and concentration of 
risks  /  risk  exposures.  As  already  stated,  we  in  India  have  initiated  supervisory  capacity 
building to identify slackness and to assess / quantify the extent of additional capital which 
may  be  required  to  be  maintained  by  such  banks.  The  magnitude  of  this  task  to  be 
completed by December 2006, when we in India have as many as 100 banks, is daunting.  
Cross border issues have been dealt with by the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision 
recently. But, in India, foreign banks are statutorily required to maintain local capital and the 
following issues would therefore, require to be resolved by us : 
– 
Whether  the  internal  models  approved  by  their  head  offices  and  home  country 
supervisor adopted by the Indian branches of foreign banks need to be validated 
     2 
 BIS Review 35/2004
   again  by  the  Reserve  Bank  or  whether  the  validation  by  the  home  country 
supervisor would be considered adequate? 
Whether the data history maintained and used by the bank should be distinct for 
the Indian branches compared to the global data maintained and used by the head 
office? 
Whether capital for operational risk should be maintained separately for the Indian 
branches in India or whether it may be maintained abroad at head office? 
Whether  these  banks  can  be  mandated  to  maintain  capital  as  per  SA  /  BIA 
approaches in India irrespective of the approaches adopted by the head office? 
   Basel II could actually imply that the minimum requirements could become pro-cyclical. No 
doubt prudent risk management policies and Pillars II and III would help in overall stability. 
We  feel  that  it  would  be  preferable  to  have  consistent  prudential  norms  in  good  and  bad 
times rather than calibrate prudential norms to counter pro-cyclicality.  
The  existence  of  large  and  complex  financial  conglomerates  could  potentially  pose  a 
systemic risk and it would be necessary to put in place supervisory policies to address this. 
In the event of some banks adopting IRB Approach, while other banks adopt Standardised 
Approach, the following profiles may emerge:  
– 
Banks adopting IRB Approach will be much more risk sensitive than the banks on 
Standardised  Approach,  since  even  a  small  change  in  degree  of  risk  might 
translate into a large impact on additional capital requirement for the IRB banks. 
Hence IRB banks could avoid assuming high risk exposures. Since banks adopting 
Standardised Approach are not equally risk sensitive and since the relative capital 
requirement  would  be  less  for  the  same  exposure,  the  banks  on  Standardised 
Approach could be inclined to assume exposures to high risk clients, which were 
not financed by IRB banks. As a result, high risk assets could flow towards banks 
on Standardised Approach which need to maintain lower capital on these assets 
than  the  banks  on  IRB  Approach.Similarly,  low  risk  assets  would  tend  to  get 
concentrated with IRB banks which need to maintain lower capital on these assets 
than the Standardised Approach banks. 
Hence, system as a whole may maintain lower capital than warranted. 
Due  to  concentration  of  higher  risks,  Standardised  Approach  banks  can  become 
vulnerable at times of economic downturns.  
 These issues would need to be addressed satisfactorily. 
Conclusion 
In conclusion, I would say that keeping in view the cost of compliance for both banks and supervisors, 
the regulatory challenge would be to migrate to Basel II in a non-disruptive manner. We would like to 
continue the process of interaction with other countries to learn from their experiences through various 
international  fora.  I  may  mention  that  India  is  one  of  the  early  countries  which  subjected  itself 
voluntarily to the FSAP of the IMF and our system was assessed to be in high compliance with the 
relevant principles. With the gradual and purposeful implementation of the banking sector reforms over 
the  past  decade,  the  Indian  banking  system  has  shown  significant  improvement  on  various 
parameters, has become robust and displayed ample resilience to shocks in the economy. There is 
therefore, ample evidence of the capacity of the Indian banking system to migrate smoothly to Basel II.  
BIS Review 35/2004 
 3
