Lars Nyberg: How do conflicts of interest in universal banking emerge and 
what are the arguments for a separation of commercial and investment 
banking?  
Speech by Mr Lars Nyberg, Deputy Governor of Sveriges Riksbank, at a seminar organised by the 
Swedish  Bankers’  Association,  the  Swedish  Securities  Dealers  Association  and  Finansinspektionen 
(the Swedish financial supervisory authority), Stockholm, 26 August 2004. 
 I would like to begin by thanking the Swedish Bankers’ Association, the Swedish Securities Dealers 
Association  and  Finansinspektionen  (the  Swedish  financial  supervisory  authority)  for  taking  the 
initiative to organise this seminar. Over the past year, in particular, we have seen the importance of 
open and thorough discussion of conflicts of interest in the financial sector. I hope that this seminar will 
contribute to an even deeper analysis of the problems we face. 
The present discussion has arisen in the wake of a number of international corporate scandals. It is 
perhaps sufficient to mention names such as Enron, WorldCom and Skandia to indicate how much 
trouble can be caused by conflicts of interest. 
In Sweden there are two conflicts of interest in particular that have received attention, although there 
are  many  other,  possibly  equally  serious  ones.  The  first  is  that  many  sellers  of  various  financial 
services offered by banks and insurance companies have traditionally been presented as investment 
advisors rather than salespeople. The risk of a conflict of interest lies in the fact that their suggestions 
for investment have been designed more to promote the seller’s or the company’s interests rather than 
to fulfil the needs of the investor. The second example comes from the life insurance sector. When the 
life insurance part of a company buys services from the property and liability insurance part, there may 
be incentives to deviate from correct internal pricing, especially when one part of the company is a 
mutual company and the other is a profit-making company. Another problem in an insurance company 
is how a surplus - or a deficit - should be distributed between different groups of insured parties. The 
question  is  whether,  for  instance,  those  receiving  pensions  now  should  share  the  burden  of  the 
insurance companies’ poorer income, or whether they have had the level of their pension payments 
guaranteed. 
However, today we have gathered to discuss conflicts of interest in banks, and I have promised to talk 
about  the  classical  conflict  between  commercial  banking  and  investment  banking.  The  conflict  lies 
within the universal bank’s double role as lender and investment adviser. If a bank’s borrowers suffer 
deterioration in their financial prospects, the bank can reduce its credit risk by helping with new share 
issues, etc. This conflict of interest has been discussed in the United States for several decades now, 
but  in  Sweden  it  has  scarcely  been  mentioned.  There  is  reason  to  ask  why  the  differences  are  so 
great, and I shall return to this point.  
Another example, which has recently led to new legislation in the United States, is the role of analysts 
in investment banking. An analyst has the task of providing investors with advice, but if the bank is 
more interested in gaining business for its corporate finance activities than safeguarding the investor’s 
interests,  the  analyst’s  assessment  may  be  influenced  by  this.  Here  there  should  traditionally  be  a 
“Chinese wall”, but this has in some cases been fairly low and probably eroded considerably over time.  
Before I go on to more bank-specific issues, I would like to say a few words about conflicts of interest 
in general, and how these can be handled - to the extent that they should be handled. I shall then 
move  on  to  more  specific  conflicts  of  interest  between  different  types  of  banking  operations, 
particularly  given  the  developments  in  the  United  States.  Finally,  I  shall  draw  some  conclusions 
concerning Sweden. 
The fact that different people have different interests is quite natural. A buyer and a seller usually have 
different  interests  in  a  business  transaction.  A  difference  of  interest  is  actually  one  of  the  most 
important  driving  forces  in  a  market  economy.  A  difference  of  interest  only  becomes  a  conflict  of 
interest when one person or organisation has to take into account several different interests and can 
promote  one  at  the  cost of  another.  Conflicts of  interest  are  thus  based  on  an  agency relationship. 
BIS Review 47/2004 
 1
These conflicts exist in almost all businesses. Employees shall usually work in the best interests of the 
company, but can in some contexts have interests of their own that are in conflict with the company’s 
best.  Divisional  managers  within  a  corporate  group  may  have  an  interest  in  promoting  their  own 
division  rather  than  the  group  as  a  whole.  Company  management  does  not  always  have  the  same 
aims as the shareholders. Many of these conflicts of interest are common and quite natural elements 
of real life, and rarely cause problems. It is important to bear this in mind when discussing methods of 
dealing with them. 
This does not mean that conflicts of interest in financial operations are irrelevant, quite the reverse. 
The relevant question here, however, is which conflicts of interest are real problems and which are 
not.  
The conflicts without problems are those where there is little incentive to improperly favour one interest 
over another. For instance, most employees are usually loyal to their employer - otherwise they risk 
losing  their  jobs.  A  company  that  does  not  take  into  account  the  interests  of  its  employees  and  its 
customers risks gaining a bad reputation and losing its competitiveness.  
Other conflicts of interest are more problematic. When an agent has a considerable incentive to favour 
one party at the cost of another, there could be scope for some form of regulations. Many companies 
also have ethical guidelines and rules for dealing with the cases where there is most incentive to take 
other  interests  into  account.  The  discussion  on  corporate  governance  is  one  example  of  how  the 
market is trying to find solutions to various conflicts of interest. It is not usually necessary to have any 
regulation by the authorities in this area. Usually it is sufficient to have contracts between the parties or 
to create norm-based standards within the sector.  
However, there is a further dimension to the conflicts of interest that concerns the interests of society. 
Promoting one party at the cost of another usually entails a redistribution of economic resources. This 
may  be  morally  dubious  without  always  involving  large  costs  to  society.  There  is  a  bigger  problem 
when conflicts of interest hide or distort information. This leads to real economy decisions being made 
on the basis of inferior or incorrect information. The recent scandals are serious because the people 
who  were  supposed  to  provide  investors  with  reliable  information  had  incentive  to  conceal  this 
information in order to promote their own interests, or those of their company. 
It is the role of the financial sector as distributor of information in the economy that makes financial 
conflicts of interest particularly interesting. People in the financial sector are responsible for assessing 
which companies are robust and which are therefore granted access to growth capital. If conflicts of 
interest within the financial companies disturb this control function, it may lead to substantial costs to 
society.  
Which measures need to be taken to ensure that conflicts of interest do not lead to financial agents 
concealing, distorting or incorrectly using information? There are some different potential solutions. I 
have  already  observed  that  the  market  itself  is  often  capable  of  solving  the  problems.  This  can  be 
achieved, for instance, by customers making demands for information on various conflicts of interest. 
However, the collection and distribution of information is not free. And as information contains a strain 
of  public  goods,  there  is  a  risk  that  the  market  solution  will  generate  too  little  information.  It  may 
therefore be necessary in certain contexts to have regulations stipulating that information on conflicts 
of  interest  must  be  made  public.  Regulations  concerning  greater  insight  into  various  persons’ 
incentives may limit the effects of different conflicts of interest. It would help outsiders to assess the 
quality of the information provided. A more drastic solution would be to require that activities exposed 
to conflicts of interest should be managed by different companies, or even different groups. The Glass 
Steagall Act in the United States, for instance, required that investment banks and commercial banks 
must be legally separated.  
However,  there  are  clear  disadvantages  with  forcing  a  separation  of  different  activities  through 
legislation.  All  regulation  also  entails  costs  -  both  explicit  and  implicit  costs.  It  is  important  from 
society’s point of view that these costs do not exceed the usefulness of the regulation. One cost of 
separating  various  activities  is  that  it  makes  it  difficult,  or  impossible,  for  financial  intermediaries  to 
benefit from synergies and economies of scale.  
A  clear  example  of  this  is  contained  in  the  conflict  between  traditional  commercial  banking  and 
investment banking, which is my subject today. A bank that lends money to a company normally gains 
access during the credit application process to special information about the company - information 
that is not publicly available. The bank makes an investment in the information on the company and 
therefore  usually  has  an  information  advantage  in  relation  to  other  banks  and  outside  parties.  This 
2 
 BIS Review 47/2004
investment can also mean that the bank can offer the company investment banking services in a more 
efficient manner. The fact that a company seeking funding in the capital market has access to bank 
credit  is  often  regarded  by  the  market  as  a  positive  signal.  It  means  that  a  professional  agent  has 
analysed the company and found it creditworthy, i.e. been willing to risk his or her own capital in it. The 
information about the credit functions is a quality signal or a certification.  
At the same time, opportunities arise to make use of conflicts of interest when a bank functions as 
both credit-granting institution and adviser or guarantor in new issues. If the prospects for a company 
that has loans with the bank deteriorate, it may be in the interests of the bank to reduce some of its 
credit risk by aiding the company with a new share issue. In this way, the bank can pass on some of 
the  credit  risk  to  the  shareholders.  From  society’s  point  of  view,  there  must  be  a  balance  between 
potential efficiency gains and risks of exploitation in conflicts of interest. Whether or not legislation is 
required  depends  on  the  seriousness  of  the  conflict  of  interest  and  the  size  of  the  incentives  to 
promote one’s own interests.  
Examples in the United States 
The clash between utilising economies of scale and limiting the damaging effect of conflicts of interest 
goes back a long way, particularly in the United States. Following the stock market turbulence in 1929, 
there  was  intensive  discussion  of  these  conflicts  of  interest.  Now  they  have  come  into  focus  once 
again, following a new stock market crisis. It appears as though fewer people care about the conflicts 
of interest when earnings are high.  
The US 1930s example began back in the mid-1920s, when stock market prices soared. Many people 
who bought shares during this period were convinced that this long upturn meant a new epoch with 
permanently higher earnings on shares. The insight that prices could not continue to rise at the same 
rate spread gradually and the stock market fell heavily in autumn 1929. The fall continued for several 
years. After three years, the value was down to 15 per cent of the previous figure. Many investors felt 
that they had been deceived by the banks who had sold them shares and bonds. In several cases it 
was the new universal banks that had been most active in mediating securities. These universal banks 
combined  traditional  bank  lending  with  various  forms  of  investment  banking  activities.  By  using 
economies of scale from these different areas, they were able to offer competitive prices - but also to 
exploit various conflicts of interest.  
When  prices  fell,  the  banks  were  accused  of  having  contributed  to  issues  of  securities  of  dubious 
quality and of having painted an overly bright picture of the companies’ future in their prospectuses. 
The  commercial  banks  were  also  accused  of  having  converted  loans  lacking  creditworthiness  into 
shares, by contributing to new issues, where shares were sold to an uninformed public. In addition, it 
was  claimed  that  certain  company  management  had  lined  their  own,  and  their  families’,  pockets  in 
various ways. 
Although it was difficult to prove that the banks had knowingly and systematically misled the general 
public, it was revealed that prominent figures in various banks had earned large sums at the cost of 
their customers, and in some cases at the cost of the banks. This contributed to the introduction of the 
Glass  Steagall  Act  in  the  United  States  in  1933.  The  Act  required  complete  legal  separation  of 
commercial banks and investment banks. A commercial bank could not be included in the same group 
as a bank that mainly conducted operations in the securities markets.  
However,  during  the  1960s  and  the  1980s  the  regulations  in  the  United  States  were  gradually 
loosened up. Commercial banks were given increasing opportunities to conduct investment banking 
activities, albeit on a limited scale. During the 1990s, a debate arose in the United States as to how far 
these exceptions could be made and whether the universal bank was to be or not to be. A number of 
scientific studies showed that in the trade-off that existed between benefiting from economies of scale 
within different types of banking activities and increasing the risks of exploiting conflicts of interest, the 
benefits  of  economies  of  scale  weighed  heaviest.  For  instance,  it  was  shown  that  the  shares  and 
corporate bonds issued between January 1927 and September 1929 gave lower earnings if they were 
issued  by  a  commercial  bank  than  if  they  were  issued  by  an  investment  bank.  This  indicated  that 
investors required a lower risk premium if a commercial bank managed the issue than if an investment 
bank  was  responsible.  The  investors  appear  to  have  trusted  commercial  banks  more,  and  fear  of 
exploitation of the conflicts of interest does not appear to have dominated. The investors appear to 
have  had  most  confidence  in  the  issue  when  the  commercial  bank  had  outsourced  its  investment 
banking  activities  in  a  separate  company.  This  would  indicate  that  the  investors  were  aware  of  the 
BIS Review 47/2004 
 3
conflicts of interest, but that they considered the commercial banks’ greater capacity for certification 
outweighed  these.  In  1999  these  regulations  were  completely  removed  by  the  introduction  of  the 
Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act. 
After the fall in share prices we have seen over the past four years, the focus of the general debate 
has once again landed on the conflicts of interest that exist between the different areas of a bank’s 
operations. The repealing of all parts of the Glass Steagall Act is now being questioned, and there 
have once again been demands for different types of regulation.  
What bearing does this have on Sweden? 
The question is what we in Sweden can learn from the American example. In my opinion, it shows that 
there  are  potentially  dangerous  conflicts  of  interest  between  traditional  commercial  banking  and 
investment banking. The question is whether we need to do anything about this in Sweden. Can these 
conflicts  be  handled  by  means  of  the  markets,  by  sector  norms  and  standards,  or  is  some  form  of 
public regulation required? I draw four conclusions here. 
Let  me  take the  most  important  one  first.  I  do  not  believe  that  it is  appropriate  to  use regulation  to 
forbid dealings between traditional commercial banks and investment banks. Nor do I believe that it is 
necessary at present to introduce regulation that would force different legal entities to be formed for 
investment banks and traditional commercial banks. They should be able to remain departments in the 
same legal entity. There are two arguments in favour of this. The first argument against regulating to 
separate  banking  activities  is  that  it  could  limit  the  positive  economies  of  scale  and  synergies.  The 
second  argument  is  that  there  is  no  evidence  that  conflicts  of  interest  between  the  parts  of  our 
Swedish banks conducting investment banking activities and the traditional lending activities have led 
to abuse.  
One can, of course, speculate as to why abuse of this type of conflict of interest does not occur in 
Sweden in the same way as in the United States. I have no clear answer to that. However, there are a 
couple of institutional differences. Share issues in Sweden have rarely been guaranteed or syndicated 
in the same way as they are in the United States. The role of the Swedish investment banks in share 
issues has therefore often been less comprehensive than that of their US counterparts. This may have 
limited the problem.  
Another  institutional  difference  is  that  the  bank  market  is  more  concentrated  in  Sweden.  This  may 
make the banks more anxious of their credibility than US banks are. If a Swedish bank were to pass 
on its own credit risks to investors in a share issue, there is a greater risk that this would seriously 
damage  the  bank’s  credibility.  The  number  of  large  Swedish  investors  is  fairly  small  and  it  would 
quickly  become  known  if  anyone  felt  they  had  been  cheated.  The  incentives  to  exploit  a  conflict  of 
interest have quite simply been much lower here than in the United States. This does not necessarily 
mean  that  Swedish  bankers  are  more  honest  than  American  ones,  just  that  the  advantages  of 
exploiting conflicts of interest are less and the costs are greater. 
My second conclusion is that it is important that all significant conflicts of interest should be discussed 
openly and publicly. There are justifiable claims for reliable information on borrowers and issuers, but 
the same applies to information on the measures taken by the banks to avoid exploiting conflicts of 
interest. I believe that there are relevant market solutions in most cases, as long as the conflicts of 
interest are clear.  
Thirdly,  I  would  like  to  encourage  the  Swedish  banks  to  carefully  follow  international  developments 
within the field of compliance - i.e. the routines to ensure that internal and external rules are adhered 
to.  In  many  cases  the  requirements  have  become  much  more  stringent  in  recent  years,  and  it  is 
important to thoroughly assess developments in other countries. For instance, the Chinese wall has 
been  repaired  in  the  United  States,  and  is  now  higher  than  ever.  This  has  been  achieved  through 
legislation. It remains to be seen whether the Swedish banks can solve these problems themselves.  
Fourthly, I believe that the supervisory authorities play an important role with regard to identifying and 
overseeing  potential  conflicts  of  interest.  Our  Finansinspektion  has  begun  to  do  this  to  a  greater 
extent, not only with regard to banks but for the financial sector as a whole. Although the market itself 
can  manage  most  of  the  conflicts  of  interest,  it  may  take  some  time  before  a  common  practice  is 
established. Experience also shows that good practice and good ethics can be eroded rather quickly 
in certain market situations. This is where the supervisory authority can help to develop and maintain 
confidence  
4 
 BIS Review 47/2004
