Jean-Claude Trichet: Testimony before the Committee on Economic and 
Monetary Affairs of the European Parliament 
Introductory statement by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, Brussels, 
22 September 2004. 
 Je vous remercie, Madame la Présidente, de votre accueil. Ceci étant ma première audition devant 
votre  commission  dans  sa  nouvelle  composition,  permettez-moi  de  souligner  que  je  partage 
entièrement  votre  désir  de  continuer  les  relations  étroites  et  fructueuses  que  nos  institutions  ont 
développées  au  cours  des  dernières  années.  Je  me  réjouis  à  la  perspective  de  poursuivre  notre 
dialogue  dans  cet  esprit  franc  et  coopératif,  sachant  combien  cela  est  essentiel  pour  le  bon 
fonctionnement de l’Union Economique et Monétaire. 
Ich  möchte  diese  Gelegenheit  auch  nutzen,  um  der  langjährigen  Vorsitzenden  dieses  Ausschusses 
und  seines  Vorgängergremiums,  des  Unterausschusses  für  Währungsfragen,  Frau  Randzio-Plath, 
nochmals  herzlich  für  die  ausgezeichnete  Zusammenarbeit  während  der  vergangenen  Jahre  zu 
danken. 
Madam Chairman, honourable Committee Members, in my testimony today I will provide you with the 
ECB’s assessment of current economic and monetary developments. I will then address a number of 
other issues of topical importance, namely fiscal policy, the implementation of structural reforms and, 
finally, issues related to euro banknotes. 
Economic and monetary developments 
At the time of my last appearance before this Committee in April, I foresaw that annual inflation rates 
would edge up temporarily to above 2%, mainly on account of oil price developments and increases in 
indirect taxes. At the same time, I stated that we expected the economic recovery which had started in 
the second half of 2003 to continue, albeit at a gradual pace. In this light, I assessed that the outlook 
for  price  developments  over  the  medium  term  remained  consistent  with  price  stability.  Against  this 
background, the Governing Council had left the key ECB interest rates unchanged at their historically 
low level of 2.0% since June 2003. 
The data that have become available over the past few months in fact confirm the outlook I gave in 
April. They indicate that the economic recovery in the euro area has maintained its momentum. In the 
second quarter of 2004, real GDP grew at a rate of 0.5% relative to the previous quarter, after 0.6% in 
the first quarter. The conditions for a continuation of the economic recovery remain in place. On the 
external side, global demand remains robust, notwithstanding temporary fluctuations, contributing to 
euro area export growth. On the domestic side, higher corporate profitability and favourable financing 
conditions should support business investment. In particular, the level of interest rates is very low by 
historical standards, in both nominal and real terms. Private consumption should also be sustained by 
growth in real disposable income and, with some time lag, by an improvement in the labour market. 
Against this background, we expect the present gradual recovery to continue in the coming quarters 
and to become more broadly based, leading to a somewhat stronger upswing in the course of 2005. 
This picture is consistent with the most recent ECB/Eurosystem staff economic projections which, as 
you  may  be  aware,  are  now  published  on  a  quarterly  basis.  The  last  projections,  published  on 
2 September,  envisage  that  euro  area  real  GDP  growth  will  recover  from  0.5%  in  2003  to  between 
1.6% and 2.2% on average in 2004, and will be slightly higher, between 1.8% and 2.8%, in 2005. I 
should add that forecasts from international organisations and other sources convey a broadly similar 
picture. 
While this outlook for economic activity is surrounded by some uncertainty, overall the risks appear to 
be broadly balanced. On the upside, the momentum of the recovery, which was stronger in the first 
half  of  2004  than  was  anticipated  earlier  in  the  year,  may  imply  a  positive  stimulus  in  the  coming 
quarters.  On  the  downside,  there  are  still  concerns  about  continuing  economic  imbalances  in  other 
parts of the world which could affect the sustainability of the economic recovery, at both the global and 
euro  area  levels.  In  addition,  if  oil  prices  were  to  reach  higher  levels  than  currently  expected  by 
markets, this could dampen somewhat both foreign and domestic demand, even if the recent rise in oil 
BIS Review 52/2004 
 1
prices cannot, by any mean, be compared with the historical first and second oil shocks of the 70s and 
the beginning of the 80s. 
Regarding the outlook for inflation, recent oil price developments, together with increases in indirect 
taxes, have pushed inflation rates in the euro area to levels somewhat higher than 2% over recent 
months.  Nonetheless,  there  is  little  evidence  as  yet  of  stronger  underlying  inflationary  pressures 
building  up  domestically.  In  particular,  wage  developments  should  remain  moderate.  Against  this 
background, the ECB staff projections put average annual HICP inflation at between 2.1% and 2.3% 
for 2004 and between 1.3% and 2.3% for 2005. These projections are broadly consistent with other 
recently released forecasts. However, several upward risks to the outlook for inflation exist. Concerns 
relate  in  particular  to  oil  price  developments,  which  pose  a  potential  risk  of  second-round  effects 
emerging in wage and price-setting. Further risks relate to the future evolution of indirect taxes and 
administered prices. 
Cross-checking the economic analysis with the monetary analysis also supports the case for strong 
vigilance with regard to the materialisation of risks to price stability. The prevailing low level of interest 
rates is fuelling monetary and credit growth. While M3 growth has been moderating since the summer 
of  2003  as  a  result  of  a  normalisation  of  portfolio  allocation  behaviour  (following  the  easing  of  the 
exceptional  economic  and  financial  uncertainty  which  had  prevailed  previously),  it  remains  resilient 
and  is  increasingly  driven  by  developments  in  its  most  liquid  components.  Given  the  strength  of 
M3 growth over the past few years, there remains substantially more liquidity in the euro area than is 
needed to finance non-inflationary growth. As a consequence, inflationary risks could rise. In addition, 
high excess liquidity and strong credit growth could become a source of strong asset price increases. 
Overall, while the prospects for price developments remain in line with price stability over the medium 
term,  upside  risks  to  price  stability  have  emerged.  The  Governing  Council  will  remain  vigilant  with 
regard  to  all  developments  which  could  imply  risks  to  price  stability  over  the  medium  term.  The 
markets  and  the  general  public  should  rest  assured  that  price  stability  will  be  maintained  over  the 
medium term. 
As  regards  fiscal  policy,  the  latest  budgetary  notifications  provide  a  mixed  picture  of  public  finance 
developments. The euro area deficit is expected to increase slightly. While some countries maintain 
sound budgetary positions, a significant proportion of the euro area countries are expected to have 
deficits  near  or  above  3%  of  GDP.  A  majority  of  these  countries  are  likely  to  miss  the  original 
budgetary  targets  set  in  their  stability  programmes.  Euro  area  public  debt  is  projected  to  increase 
further. With a few exceptions, public debt will remain largely unchanged or increase in countries with 
larger fiscal imbalances. 
Although the period of significant further increases in public deficits seems to be coming to an end, 
important challenges for the consolidation of public finances are to be faced. Member States should 
use the improvement in the macroeconomic environment for renewed consolidation so as to comply 
with their commitments under the Stability and Growth Pact. Clearly, this would add credibility to the 
European  fiscal  framework  and  create  confidence  in  the  sustainability  of  public  finances,  thereby 
reinforcing  confidence  in  the  overall  economic  outlook.  As  recently  stated  by  the  ECOFIN  Council, 
budgetary  policies  need  to  set  the  right  priorities  towards  structural  reform,  innovation  and 
competitiveness  in  support  of  the  Lisbon  agenda  to  promote  economic  growth  and  employment 
creation. Fiscal consolidations should be designed to form an integral part of such a comprehensive 
reform strategy. 
As regards the European fiscal framework, the Governing Council is convinced that, whilst substantial 
improvements in the implementation of the Stability and Growth Pact are welcome, there is no need 
for changes to the text of the Treaty and of the Pact itself, namely the regulations concerned. The Pact 
is a very important and pertinent framework for dealing with countries’ fiscal developments on a level 
playing-field,  particularly  within  the  single  currency  area.  At  the  same  time,  we  consider  that 
improvements could be introduced in its implementation. There seems to be some common ground on 
elements to improve the implementation of the preventive arm, and the need for a stronger focus on 
public debt and sustainability. As regards the corrective arm of the Pact, the ECB’s main message is 
that the nominal anchor of the framework, namely the 3% deficit-to-GDP reference value should not be 
undermined. Therefore, proposals that would allow for a loosening of the excessive deficit procedure, 
such  as  suggestions  put  forward  with  regard  to  the  definition  of  exceptional  circumstances  and  the 
time  frame  for  the  correction  of  excessive  deficits,  and  proposals  to  introduce  country-specific 
elements are not contributing to the solidity and soundness of EMU in our view. 
2 
 BIS Review 52/2004
A  sound  monetary  policy  and  a  stable  macroeconomic  framework  are  necessary  for  sustainable 
economic growth in the euro area. But this alone is not sufficient. The implementation of well-designed 
structural reforms in labour, product and capital markets is of the utmost importance for the euro area 
at the current juncture. The economic recovery would be stronger and more sustained if ambitious, 
well-designed  structural  reforms  were 
the  microeconomic 
fundamentals  of  the  euro  area  and  its  resilience  to  adverse  domestic  and  global  economic 
developments. In this respect, a convincing commitment to the implementation of structural reforms 
and a successful communication of their economic benefits to the general public is crucial for raising 
consumer confidence and, ultimately, growth and employment. We are aware of the fact that structural 
reforms  normally  take  time  to  show  up  in  improved  economic  outcomes,  which  often  makes  it 
politically  difficult  to  implement  such  reforms.  Against  this  background  we  very  much  welcome  the 
positive  steps  undertaken  over  recent  months by  several  governments and Parliaments  in  the  euro 
area and we strongly encourage them to continue and intensify these efforts. 
implemented 
improve 
to  be 
that 
Issues related to euro banknotes 
Let me now highlight a few issues related to the experience with euro banknotes during the first couple 
of years. Since the introduction of the euro banknotes and coins on 1 January 2002, circulation has 
steadily  increased.  Indeed,  by  end-August  2004  some  9  billion  banknotes  with  a  value  of 
EUR 460 billion were in circulation, an increase of 10% in terms of volume and 18% in terms of value 
compared with circulation one year earlier. 
As regards the quality of banknotes, the Eurosystem closely monitors the banknotes in circulation and 
takes the appropriate measures to refresh the cash cycle, when needed. At the same time, the ECB is 
currently examining ways to enhance the durability of banknotes. 
Moreover, to avoid shortages of certain denominations within the euro area which may occur in the 
event of strong cross-border flows of banknotes, the Eurosystem has set up a cross-euro area stock 
management scheme. This system greatly enhances efficiency in the use of banknote stocks, since 
shortages in one country can be compensated for by excess stocks in another country. 
Turning to the issue of combating counterfeiting, the rate of counterfeiting has been relatively stable 
during the past 12 months, with around 50,000 to 55,000 counterfeit banknotes per month withdrawn 
from  circulation.  Assessing  this  number  against  the  number  of  genuine  banknotes  in  circulation 
(approximately  9  billion),  the  population  of  the  euro  area  countries  (more  than  300  million)  and  the 
number of cash transactions involving banknotes (estimated to be approximately 120 billion per year), 
the  initial  years  of  experience  with  euro  banknotes  have  proven  that  European  citizens  can  remain 
confident in the security of their money. That being said, to improve even more the efficiency of the 
fight against counterfeiting, the Eurosystem has recently issued updated communication material on 
the security features, which should help cash users to spot counterfeits. However, there is no room for 
any complacency. 
Cooperation in this domain is constantly being improved. In this context, a steering group comprising 
representatives from the ECB, the Commission and Europol was established to ensure the exchange 
of information and the coordination of activities in the field of combating counterfeiting at the EU level. 
At  the  same  time,  the  international  dimension  of  combating  counterfeiting  has  gained  increased 
importance.  To  take  account  of  this  development,  the  ECB  concluded  a  bilateral  agreement  with 
Interpol  -  as  was  already  done  with  Europol  -  which  focuses  in  particular  on  the  exchange  of 
information and assistance in training and education exercises. Moreover, the ECB cooperates at the 
technical level with central banks or law enforcement authorities in key countries outside the euro area 
where euro banknotes are circulating. In addition, bilateral cooperation agreements on combating euro 
counterfeiting have recently been concluded with the Bulgarian National Bank and the National Bank 
of Ukraine. 
I am now ready to answer your questions. 
BIS Review 52/2004 
 3
