Timothy F Geithner: The changing face of risk management 
Remarks  by  Mr  Timothy  F  Geithner,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal  Reserve 
Bank of New York, before the Institute of International Bankers, New York, 9 June 2004 
 It is a pleasure to join you today for this meeting of the Institute of International Bankers. The financial 
institutions you represent play a major role in our financial system. The IIB has played an important 
part in shaping financial policy in the United States, by reminding us with force and persistence of the 
impact  of  our  actions  on  the  standards  of  fairness  and  equality  of  opportunity  that  we  strive  to 
maintain. 
The U.S. financial system has a number of features that help to make it attractive to participants from 
all around the world. 
The  structure  of  our  financial  system  is  characterized  by  a  diversity  of  channels  for  financial 
intermediation, with a relatively larger role for the capital markets and a smaller role for banks, than is 
true  in  most  other  major  economies.  And  we  have  preserved,  despite  substantial  consolidation,  a 
system  that  comfortably  accommodates  the  largest  globally-active  financial  institutions  side  by  side 
with a competitive and diverse array of regional and community banking organizations. 
We  are  very  open  to  the  presence  of  foreign  financial  institutions,  and  perhaps  as  important,  have 
traditionally been very open to attracting non-U.S. financial talent to work in our markets. While the 
number of foreign banking organizations operating in the US has contracted over the last decade, the 
overall  importance  has  grown.  Foreign  banking  organizations  now  account  for  45  percent  of  total 
banking assets in the United States, up from around 40 percent a decade ago, and they account for a 
substantial share of total securities underwriting in this market. 
Our  framework  for  supervision  and  regulation  is  supportive  of  innovation.  Much  of  the  most 
transforming  innovations  in  finance  started  in  our  markets  or  were  adopted  more  quickly  and  more 
broadly here than in many other financial systems. The U.S. system, relative to the model in many 
other  countries,  has  involved  a  continuous,  risk-focused  process  of  supervision  and  a  strong 
enforcement  mechanism  working  alongside  the  supervisory  community.  In  addition,  we  have 
traditionally  assigned  a  more  important  role  to  market  discipline,  importantly  through  a  strong 
disclosure regime, in reinforcing the supervisory regime, than has been the case in other markets. 
Our  system  is  successful  in  matching  capital  with  ideas,  in  allocating  savings  to  where  returns  are 
highest,  in  creating  opportunities  for  households  to  better  withstand  the  costs  of  change  and 
dislocation that are inevitable offshoot of an open and dynamic market economy, and in spreading risk 
to where it can be best absorbed. The high degree of competition and flexibility that characterize our 
approach helps drive the pace of innovation, both in new forms of financial instruments and in new 
ways to manage risks. 
No financial system, of course, is without vulnerability. And we face a number of important challenges 
in making sure our system is as strong as it can to be. But the substantial competition from a diverse 
set of financial institutions, including a strong presence by foreign financial institutions, is an integral 
part  of  what  makes  our  financial  system  work  well.  Our  system  would  not  be  as  efficient  or  as 
innovative,  and  our  financial  institutions  would  not  be  as  strong,  if  we  were  less  open  or  less 
committed to giving all institutions similar national treatment and equality of opportunity. 
I thought I would give you a brief overview of the some of the key challenges we face as supervisors 
and those that confront the risk management community. 
The  fundamentals  of  the  present  U.S.  expansion  seem  relatively  strong,  with  confidence  in  its 
sustainability increasing. As the balance of risks to the outlook have evolved, and the financial markets 
have built in expectations of a move to less accommodative financial conditions, this is a good time to 
assess how well the U.S. financial system is positioned to deal with this transition, and to withstand the 
effects of future stress, if that were to materialize. 
From our perspective, the U.S. financial system is in reasonably strong shape. Risk adjusted capital 
ratios are strong, and earnings have been robust. Non-performing loan ratios are very low - at about 
one percent on average across the banking industry. The financial markets are pricing risk in exposure 
to financial institutions at what are still relatively low levels. 
BIS Review 36/2004 
 1
Securitization and the rapid growth in credit risk transfer instruments have enabled risk to be spread 
more  broadly.  Risk  management  practices  have  improved  in  sophistication  and  rigor.  Firms  have 
made substantial investments in improving the strength and resilience of their technology and systems 
infrastructure.  Payments  and  settlements  systems  have  stronger  safeguards  in  place.  The  overall 
capacity of the system to handle large hedging volume has increased substantially. 
Despite  the  fact  that  we  have  experienced  a  sustained  period  of  accommodative  monetary  and 
financial conditions, net credit growth to the private sector has been moderate. The overall financial 
position of the corporate sector is strong. New household borrowing has grown rapidly, but the broad 
measures of the ratio of debt service to income remain at a level of roughly 13 percent, and estimates 
suggest that only a quarter of total household debt is exposed to rising interest rates in the near term. 
Net  credit  growth  to  emerging  markets  has  been  moderate  relative  to  past  periods.  Growth  in 
commercial  bank  assets  has  picked  up  a  bit  in  recent  quarters,  but  remains  significantly  below  the 
pace of the second half of the 1990s. 
As the financial markets have built in expectations of a gradual rise in the fed funds rate over the next 
two  years,  financial  institutions  have  had  some  time  to  position  themselves  for  an  environment  of 
higher  interest  rates  and  volatility.  There  have  been  adjustments  in  credit  spreads  and  other  risk 
assets,  which  in  some  areas  had  fallen  to  historically  low  levels,  but  these  reversals  have  been 
tempered  by  what  it  still  overall  a  favorable  view  of  corporate  credit  fundamentals.  And  it  is  worth 
drawing  attention  to  the  fact  that  the  average  duration  of  the  mortgage  market  has  increased 
significantly over the last nine months to the point where the amount of hedging pressure on interest 
rates related to extension risk is likely to be contained even as interest rates rise. 
The  fact  that  these  adjustments  have  begun  ahead  of  any  change  in  monetary  policy  probably  will 
help diminish the strains in the financial system that might otherwise be expected to accompany this 
type  of  transition.  Even  so,  risk  managers  need  to  be  attentive  to,  and  react  appropriately  to,  the 
pressures  that  could  emerge  following  this  extended  period  of  low  interest  rates  and  a  steep  yield 
curve. 
The agenda for the supervisory community remains dominated by the following broad priorities: 
• 
We  are  moving  ahead  with  Basle  II  to  bring  a  more  sophisticated  assessment  of  capital 
adequacy and risk management techniques to the supervisory framework. 
Our ongoing supervisory examinations continue to concentrate on strengthening the internal 
management and control infrastructure across the various dimensions of risk management 
and compliance. 
We  are  supporting  the  important  efforts  underway  to  better  align  U.S.  and  international 
accounting standards and to improve the quality and integrity of public disclosure. 
We are working to encourage firms to proceed with their investments in greater resilience 
and geographic range called for in the Interagency Paper on Sound Practices to Strengthen 
the Resilience of the U.S. Financial System. 
We  continue  to  encourage  efforts  to  strengthen  all  aspects  of  our  national  payments  and 
settlement systems. 
And we are engaged across a number of fronts internationally to provide a more integrated 
framework  of  supervision  that  better  matches  the  integration  of  national  financial  systems 
and the increased global reach of the largest financial institutions. 
     As  part  of  our  supervisory  process  we  monitor  closely  the  evolution  in  risk  management  practice 
across  a  broad  array  of  financial  institutions.  Through  horizontal  reviews  that  focus  on  specific 
dimensions  of  risk  management,  we  have  a  reasonably  good  sense  of  where  the  frontier  in  risk 
management practices is across the industry, and understand where the gap between this frontier and 
average  practice  is  the  greatest.  The  size  of  this  gap  in  practice can  increase  in  market  conditions 
where competitive pressures and a search for return works to erode discipline. 
I thought it might be useful to highlight some of the areas where leading practice is farthest ahead of 
typical  practice.  Leading  practice  does  not  imply  that  there  is  a  definitely  superior  model  that  we 
expect  all  firms  to  converge  to  over  time.  In  most  of  these  areas,  there  is  some  diversity  in  what 
defines  the  frontier  of  excellence.  We  recognize  this,  even  as  we  encourage  firms  to  put  in  place 
stronger and more sophisticated systems more commensurate with the complexity of the risks they 
are taking. 
2 
 BIS Review 36/2004
      financial 
institutions  have  well-developed  systems 
Comprehensive  aggregation  of  credit  exposure:  The  most  sophisticated  among  large 
diversified 
for  aggregating  credit 
exposure, with a common methodology and results available relatively quickly, across the full 
range  of  transactions  and  business  lines  they  engage  in  with  a  single  entity  or  groups  of 
entities with correlated risks. 
Stress  testing  and  scenario  analysis:  Firms  at  the  leading  edge  have  moved  well  beyond 
reliance  on  “value-at-risk”  complemented  by  stress  tests  of  discrete  shocks.  They  employ 
stress tests built around more exacting, forward-looking scenarios integrating large moves in 
a  number  of  variables,  more  tailored  to  the  risk  profile  of  the  firm  and  current  market 
conditions, and the reactions of other market participants and counterparties. 
Counterparty credit risk management: The most sophisticated firms use much more careful 
and  sophisticated  approaches  for  measuring  potential  future  exposure,  and  they  analyze 
how exposures may respond in conditions of significant market stress. With respect to hedge 
fund exposure in particular, the leading firms employ comprehensive evaluation of the risk 
profile of the hedge fund to set credit thresholds and terms and a more disciplined approach 
to setting sufficiently high levels of initial margin. 
Measuring  and  managing  interest  rate  risk:  Leading  institutions  assess  their  exposure  to 
interest  rate  risk  in  a  comprehensive  manner  across  the  firm’s  business  lines.  The  most 
advanced  approaches  are  able  to  assess  the  impact  of  rate,  spread  and  implied  volatility 
movements under multiple scenarios in both normal and stressed market conditions. These 
institutions also strive to achieve a balance between shorter term earnings impacts, and the 
longer-term preservation of economic value. 
Liquidity  risk:  Similar  evolution  has  occurred  in  liquidity  management  with  leading  practice 
now subjecting dynamic cash flow projections to a range of adverse scenarios relevant to the 
risk profile of the firm (such as a sustained loss of access to funding or a significant ratings 
downgrade or a systemic disruption to market liquidity) to assess the impact on funding. 
Compliance  risk  management:  Many  firms  are  working  to  enhance  their  overall  corporate 
compliance  management  processes,  and  the  supervisors  expect  that  firms  will  employ 
strong risk management practices with appropriate levels of testing. In response to the more 
exacting  requirements  of  the  Bank  Secrecy  and  Patriot  Acts  and  anti-money  laundering 
controls, leading firms have now moved beyond manual systems with very limited capacity to 
look at patterns of transactions over time and across businesses and countries, and have put 
in  place  automated  systems  for  monitoring  transactions  with  more  sophisticated  filters  for 
identifying suspicious patterns of behavior. The quality of internal compliance controls in the 
leading  firms  has  advanced  in  other  areas  as  well,  with  higher  level  oversight  of  an 
independent compliance function with more rigorous policies to address conflicts of interest 
involving hedge funds and proprietary trading and the flow of confidential information across 
the firm. 
These are examples of leading practice, and they are not at this point standard operating procedure 
across the range of institutions where they should be. Systematically assessing the evolving frontier of 
leading risk management practice is a useful way to ensure that we continue to build on the significant 
improvements  in  the  overall  stability  and  resilience  of  the  U.S.  financial  system  that  have  been 
achieved over the past two decades. This is important to do on a continuing basis to strengthen the 
shock absorbers in the financial system. It is important to do even when, or perhaps particularly when 
the overall economic environment looks quite favorable, as it does today. 
We look forward to working with the foreign banking community to continue to identify ways in which 
risk management practices can be strengthened. It is in our mutual interest to insure that the practices 
employed broadly by the industry continue to move towards the frontier of risk management practices.  
Thank you. 
BIS Review 36/2004 
 3
