Mervyn King: The New Inflation Target 
Speech by Mr Mervyn King, Governor of the Bank of England, at the annual Birmingham Forward/CBI 
business luncheon, Birmingham, 20 January 2004. 
 I have always wanted to perform at Villa Park. Now is my chance. Economists at Villa Park are not as 
unusual a sight as you might think. It is not well known that John Maynard Keynes also came to Villa 
Park. In September 1913 Keynes was visiting Birmingham and decided to see the match of the day 
between the two top teams in the country - Aston Villa and Blackburn Rovers. On the following day, 
Keynes wrote to Duncan Grant1: 
“There has been some amusement here, but mixed up with a good deal of boredom. Birmingham has 
a  very  definite  character.  I  went  yesterday  with  40,000  other  people  to  one  of  the  peak  football 
matches. The scene was very much as I imagine the Coliseum. The ground is built on the same model 
- an immense oval rising all round tier above tier in about 50 rows so far as I could count. The crowd 
maintained a dull roar nearly all the time, rising into a frenzy of excitement and rage when the slightest 
thing  happened.  The  match  was  between  the  two  principal  “league”  teams  of  England.  The  local 
people  were  beaten  by  a  team  from  Lancashire,  who  had,  so  I  was  told,  ‘the  best  right  wing  in 
England, and the most expensive’”. 
Sadly, as Keynes recorded, Aston Villa lost 3-1 and finished that season as runners-up to Blackburn. It 
is unclear whether Keynes ever again visited a football ground, and there must be a real possibility 
that, for him, Villa Park was the sum total of his football experience. 
In later years some of Keynes’s disciples forgot not only his connection with Villa Park but also his 
view that price stability was a necessary condition for a successful economy. Tomorrow is the 80th 
anniversary of the death of Lenin, and it was to Lenin that Keynes attributed the remark: “The best way 
to  destroy  the  capitalist  system  was  to  debauch  the  currency.  By  a  continuing  process  of  inflation, 
governments  can  confiscate,  secretly  and  unobserved,  an  important  part  of  the  wealth  of  their 
citizens”. After doing their best to test this proposition, successive British governments have committed 
themselves to stable and low inflation. And for the past decade, inflation has ceased to be a dominant 
consideration in the economic decisions of families and businesses. 
That has been achieved by aiming at a symmetrical inflation target. Crucial to the success of such a 
policy is the ability to anchor inflation expectations on the target. For this to be the case, the target 
must  be  clear  and  well  understood.  From  May  1997  the  target  was  2½%  for  RPIX  inflation.  But  in 
December the Chancellor gave the Monetary Policy Committee a new target for inflation. It is 2% as 
measured  by  the  Consumer  Prices  Index  or  CPI,  formerly  known  as  the  Harmonised  Index  of 
Consumer Prices. 
What  is  this  new  inflation  measure,  and  how  will  it  affect  monetary  policy?  On  the  RPIX  measure, 
inflation was at or above target for the whole of last year. In contrast, the CPI measure of inflation was 
below  2%  throughout  the  same  period.  Indeed,  CPI  inflation  has  been  below  2%  for  all  bar  three 
months since May 1997, and it is almost six years since it was last above 2%. How can it be possible 
for inflation to move from above to below target - just like that? To answer that question, we need to 
examine how inflation is calculated. 
Inflation is measured as the increase in the price of a particular basket of goods and services over the 
previous twelve months. So there are as many measures of inflation as there are baskets. Since no 
two people in this room spend their income on exactly the same items, in principle each of you could 
construct  your  own  measure  of  inflation.  The  Office  for  National  Statistics  calculates  an  average 
inflation measure by weighting together the inflation rates of over 650 different goods and services, 
using as weights the estimated expenditure on each item for a representative household. But where 
                                                      
1   Unpublished  writings  of  J.M.Keynes,  copyright  of  the  Provost  and  Scholars  of  King’s  College,  Cambridge  to  whom  I  am 
grateful  for  permission  to  publish  this  extract.  A  reference  to  the  letter  appeared  in  Skidelsky,  R.  John  Maynard  Keynes 
Volume 1: Hopes Betrayed, 1883-1920, Macmillan, London, 1983, page 280. The official attendance on 13 September was 
38,575;  the  Villa  scorer  was  the  incomparable  Clem  Stephenson,  who  may  have  lacked  pace  but  whose  passes  were, 
according  to  contemporary  observers,  “as  sweet  as  stolen  kisses”;  and  the  ‘most  expensive’  right  winger  for  Blackburn 
Rovers was John “Jocky” Simpson who cost Blackburn a record fee of £1,850 when he was transferred from Falkirk in 1911. 
BIS Review 5/2004 
 1
do those prices come from? Each month - on “Index Day” (either the second or third Tuesday of the 
month) - around 300 “price collectors” visit a wide range of retail outlets and record the prices charged 
for 130,000 different items, ranging from small loaves of brown bread to large lawnmowers. Each of 
these different items will have changed in price by a different amount. A key difference between the 
CPI and RPIX is how these 130,000 price changes are averaged to give a measure of overall inflation. 
RPIX inflation is, for most goods, an arithmetic average of the inflation rates for each item. In contrast, 
CPI inflation is measured as the increase in the geometric average (the average of the logarithms) of 
the different prices. That reduces the weight given to those retail outlets where prices are rising the 
fastest, and allows the overall measure of inflation to take into account the way families are changing 
their shopping habits away from outlets where prices have been rising relatively rapidly, like traditional 
high  street  stores,  towards  those  where  they  have  been  rising  relatively  slowly,  like  newer  more 
heavily discounted stores. For that reason, the formula used to calculate CPI inflation is superior to the 
formula used in RPIX. Arcane though it may sound, the “formula” effect reduces estimated inflation in 
Britain by about half a percentage point a year. 
In  this  respect,  the  difference  between  RPIX  and  CPI  inflation  as  a  measure  of  the  economic 
temperature  of  the  economy  is  rather  like  the  difference  between  Fahrenheit  and  Centigrade  as  a 
measure  of  physical  temperature.  In  both  cases  moving  from  one  measure  to  another changes  the 
number without there having been any change in the temperature itself. Because the temperature - 
whether  physical  or  economic  -  is  independent  of  the  particular  measure,  then  the  implications  for 
decisions which depend on temperature - whether of farmers deciding on when to harvest their crops 
and then how to price them or the Monetary Policy Committee deciding on when to change interest 
rates - are unaffected by the measure used, provided the conversion is calculated correctly. Hence the 
switch to a new CPI target has in itself no implications for monetary policy. But just as changing from 
Fahrenheit to Centigrade has not proved easy for those who had become used to the old measure, so 
it will take time for us all to adjust to the new inflation measure. 
Unfortunately,  there  is  an  additional  complication.  Unlike  the  translation  between  Fahrenheit  and 
Centigrade, the difference between RPIX and CPI inflation does vary with the economic temperature. 
That  is  because  the  “formula”  effect  is  not  the  only  difference  between  the  two  measures.  RPIX 
includes both house prices and Council Tax. Those items are omitted from the basket of goods and 
services used to construct the CPI. So when house prices are rising faster than prices in general, as 
has been the case in recent years, RPIX exceeds CPI inflation by more than the half a percentage 
point represented by the “formula” effect. Over the past 15 years, when data have been collected on 
both measures, RPIX has exceeded CPI inflation by about three quarters of a percentage point. It is 
possible to argue, therefore, that moving from a target of 2.5% for RPIX inflation to one of 2% for CPI 
inflation represents a small increase in the long-run effective target. But no reasonable person could 
describe a symmetric target of 2% as inconsistent with price stability, defined as a state of affairs in 
which inflation does not materially affect economic decisions by families and businesses. 
Of greater significance than the average difference between the two measures in the long run is the 
observation that the gap between them varies over time, often quite widely, in line with changes in the 
temperature  of  the  economy  in  general  and  house  prices  in  particular.  At  present  the  difference 
between the two measures is unusually large. It peaked at 1.7 percentage points in June, since when 
it  has  narrowed  to  1.3  percentage  points,  but  remains  well  above  the  0.5%  change  in  the  inflation 
target.  So  the  change  in  target  gives  the  impression  that  inflation  has  moved  from  above  to  below 
target. Does this mean that monetary policy in the coming months will need to be looser under the new 
target  than  it  was  with  the  old  target?  The  answer  is  no.  The  large  difference  between  the  two 
measures  of  inflation  at  present  can  mostly  be  explained  by  house  price  inflation.  It  is  unlikely  that 
house prices will continue to rise at their recent pace for much longer. We have already seen some 
slowing since the peak in 2002, and the Monetary Policy Committee judges that a reasonable central 
view is that house price inflation is likely to subside over the next two years or so. The gap between 
RPIX and CPI inflation is, therefore, likely to narrow to around half a percentage point over that period. 
So the change in the target is unlikely to have any material impact on the decisions of the Monetary 
Policy Committee in the near future. And our decision to leave interest rates unchanged in January 
reflected that view. Although house prices do not enter the CPI directly, the Committee will continue to 
monitor the housing market as carefully as before in order to assess the implications for the inflation 
outlook  resulting  from  changes  in  the  balance  between  nominal  demand  and  supply  and  in  the 
exchange rate.  
Equally, economic decisions made by businesses and individuals over the next year or so should be 
unaffected  by  the  change  in  the  target.  If  the  degree  of  underlying  inflationary  pressure  remains 
2 
  BIS Review 5/2004
unchanged, and there is no difference in the stance of monetary policy, then the rates of increase of 
wages, earnings and prices that are consistent with the new target are no different from those which 
were  compatible  with  the  old  target.  In  other  words,  wage  bargaining  should  be  unaffected  by  the 
switch in inflation target - as should price setting by firms. Of course, the new target will make clearer 
how much of an increase in money earnings represents a real rise in living standards - a pay increase 
of 2½% that was described as a “cost of living” rise under RPIX will now be shown by the CPI as a 
½%  increase  in  real  pay,  even  though  no  individual  price  has  changed.  The  MPC  will  still  need  to 
monitor carefully developments in the labour market in case they signal a change in costs that might 
threaten the target in future. 
In Jane Austen’s Emma, the awful Mrs Elton, wife of the parson, dismisses the newlyarrived family in 
the  village  with  the  words:  “They  came  from  Birmingham.  …  One  has  not  great  hopes  from 
Birmingham.  I  always  say  there  is  something  direful  in  the  sound”  But  Birmingham  -  and  the 
manufacturing  industries  with  which  it  has  always  been  so  closely  associated  -  have  changed. 
Nowhere  symbolises  this  metamorphosis  better  than  Villa  Park.  Since  Keynes’  visit,  Villa  Park  has 
changed from a nineteenth century Coliseum into a magnificent twenty-first century stadium, focussing 
on quality rather than sheer numbers. Manufacturing industry has also shifted its focus from traditional 
products valued by weight to high value-added products. But the case for price stability, which Keynes 
made so forcefully, is unchanged, as is the commitment of the Monetary Policy Committee to meet the 
inflation target - new or old. 
BIS Review 5/2004 
 3
