European Central Bank: Press conference - introductory statement 
Introductory  statement  by  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  and 
Mr Lucas Papademos, Vice President of the European Central Bank, Frankfurt, 3 June 2004. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, the Vice-President and I will now report on the outcome of today’s meeting of 
the Governing Council of the ECB. 
However,  I  should  first  like  to  inform  you  about  some  decisions  we  have  taken  regarding  the 
publication of staff macroeconomic projections.  
As you are aware, twice a year Eurosystem staff, that is, staff of the ECB and the euro area national 
central banks, jointly produce a set of macroeconomic projections. These serve as one of the inputs 
into  the  deliberations  of  the  Governing  Council.  Subsequently,  the  projections  are  published  in  the 
June and December issues of the Monthly Bulletin. As you also know, in the interim period, that is, for 
March  and  September,  ECB  staff  produce  what  is  basically  an  update  of  the  Eurosystem  staff 
projections. These projections also serve as input into the meetings of the Governing Council, but so 
far have not been published.  
The  positive  experience  and  familiarity  gained  over  the  past  few  years  with  the  publication  of 
macroeconomic projections have given us the confidence to go a step further by also publishing the 
interim ECB staff projections. Therefore, in the spirit of transparency and accountability, the ECB staff 
projections will also be published from September 2004 onwards.  
In all cases, that is, four times a year, the projections will be published in the appropriate form in the 
Monthly  Bulletin.  In  addition,  as  a  further  step  towards  providing  relevant  information  in  a  timely 
manner, we will from today onwards provide you with an advance copy of the Monthly Bulletin section 
covering the projections. This advance copy will be made available shortly after the end of this press 
conference,  both  in  hard  copy  and  on  the  ECB’s  website.  The  same  procedure  will  be  applied  in 
September and every three months thereafter.  
The fact that we have decided to publish the interim ECB staff projections in future does not change 
their  role  as  one  of  the  inputs  into  our  deliberations.  The  Governing  Council  continues  to  base  its 
monetary  policy  decisions on  a comprehensive  economic analysis,  which  is cross-checked with  the 
monetary analysis. 
Let me now turn to today’s monetary policy discussion.  
In summary, we noted that the economic recovery has strengthened over recent months. At the same 
time, we have also witnessed stronger inflationary pressures over the short term. Nevertheless, we are 
still of the view that the medium-term outlook remains in line with price stability. Accordingly, we left 
the  key  ECB  interest  rates  unchanged.  The  low  level  of  interest  rates  continues  to  support  the 
economic recovery. We will remain vigilant with regard to all developments which could affect the risks 
to price stability over the medium term. 
I shall now explain our assessment in more detail. 
In the context of our economic analysis, the latest data releases confirm that the economic recovery 
in the euro area is under way. According to Eurostat, real GDP grew by 0.6% quarter on quarter in the 
first quarter of this year, and quarterly real GDP growth for the fourth quarter of last year was revised 
upwards from 0.3% to 0.4%. The more pronounced pace of real GDP growth mainly reflected both 
stronger private consumption and buoyant exports. Latest survey data still provide mixed signals with 
regard to the underlying strength of the recovery but remain fully consistent with ongoing growth in the 
current quarter.  
Looking  ahead,  the  conditions  for  a  continuation  of  the  recovery  remain  in  place.  Economic  growth 
outside the euro area continues to be strong and should promote export growth. On the domestic side, 
investment  should  benefit  from  the  positive  global  environment  as  well  as  from  the  favourable 
financing  conditions.  Improvements  in  corporate  efficiency  and  higher  profits  are  also  supporting 
business  investment.  Moreover,  private  consumption  should  gradually  recover  from  the  stagnation 
witnessed during most of 2003, broadly in line with growth in real disposable income which, with the 
usual lag, should be further underpinned by an increase in employment growth later on.  
BIS Review 35/2004 
 1
Accordingly, we expect an ongoing recovery in euro area economic growth over the coming quarters, 
leading  to  a  broader  and  stronger  upswing  in  the  course  of  next  year.  This  is  also  reflected  in  the 
Eurosystem staff projections, which envisage euro area real GDP growth of between 1.4% and 2.0% 
on average in 2004, rising to between 1.7% and 2.7% in 2005. Available forecasts from international 
and private organisations convey a broadly similar picture. 
With regard to this scenario, there are risks and uncertainties in both directions. On the one hand, the 
current  rather  robust  pace  of  economic  growth  outside  the  euro  area,  the  recent  development  in 
private  consumption  as  well  as  some  survey  data  imply  a  potential  for  stronger  growth  dynamics, 
particularly in the short term. On the other hand, high oil prices could pose a downside risk. Over a 
longer horizon, concerns also remain about the persistence of global imbalances. 
Concerning  prices,  recent  oil  price  developments  have  created  considerable  upward  pressure  on 
consumer  prices.  According  to  Eurostat’s  flash  estimate,  annual  HICP  inflation  was  2.5%  in  May, 
partly due to base effects, after standing at 2.0% in April. Markets expect oil prices to decline gradually 
from recent peaks. If they were to remain at their recent high levels, it is to be expected that inflation 
rates would continue to be higher than previously anticipated and stay above 2% for longer than just a 
few months ahead. When assessing price trends over the medium term, however, the outlook remains 
favourable. In particular, overall import price developments should remain moderate and inflationary 
pressure  from  wages  and  unit  labour  costs  should  be  contained.  Both  factors  should  help  to  bring 
annual rates of consumer price inflation back to below 2% in 2005. 
These views are in line with the Eurosystem staff projections, which put average annual HICP inflation 
at  between  1.9%  and  2.3%  in  2004  and  between  1.1%  and  2.3%  in  2005.  They  are  also  broadly 
consistent with recently released forecasts by international and private organisations. These forecasts 
and projections are subject to a number of risks and uncertainties. Concerns relate in particular to oil 
price developments. Moreover, there is insufficient knowledge today about future changes in indirect 
taxes and administered prices; information on these items typically becomes available only towards 
the  end  of  the  year.  Against  this  background,  the  potential  risk  for  second-round  effects  via  wages 
needs to be monitored closely. Finally, there has been an increase in measures of long-term inflation 
expectations derived from financial market indicators. While these indicators should be interpreted with 
caution, the recent upward trend calls for particular vigilance. 
Moving  on  to  the  monetary  analysis,  we  have  seen  increasing  evidence  of  a  normalisation  of  the 
portfolio  behaviour  of  private  investors.  As  a  consequence,  annual  M3  growth  has  fallen  quite 
significantly over recent quarters. Still, the low level of interest rates continues to fuel monetary growth 
and  the  amount  of  excess  liquidity  remains  high  in  the  euro  area.  In  an  economic  upswing,  the 
persistence of excess liquidity could lead to inflationary pressures over the medium term. 
To  sum  up,  the  economic  analysis  indicates  that  the  main  scenario  for  the  outlook  for  price 
developments over the medium term remains in line with price stability. However, short-term pressures 
on  inflation  have  increased  recently  and  some  upside  risks  need  to  be  taken  into  account. 
Cross-checking  with  the monetary  analysis also  supports  the  case  for  vigilance with regard  to  the 
materialisation of risks to price stability. 
Given the signs that the economic recovery will continue, it is particularly important that fiscal policies 
and structural reforms play their part in improving the economic fundamentals of the euro area. It is 
regretful that recent fiscal developments have not been helpful in this respect. A growing number of 
countries are reporting significant imbalances and fiscal consolidation efforts fall disappointingly short 
of commitments. In order to strengthen confidence in a sustainable upswing, it is now essential that 
clarity  about  the  future  course  of  consolidation  of  fiscal  policies  is  re-established  in  all  countries 
concerned. This requires credible measures with an emphasis on structural expenditure reform so that 
imbalances  are  redressed,  tax/benefit  systems  become  more  growth-friendly  and  social  security 
systems  are  put  on  a  sound  financial  footing.  These  measures,  together  with  a  revived  momentum 
towards effectively implementing structural reforms in labour and product markets, would provide very 
valuable support to the current economic upswing.  
We are now at your disposal for questions. 
2 
 BIS Review 35/2004
