Zhou Xiaochuan: Anti-money laundering in China - the status quo and 
prospects 
Speech by Mr Zhou Xiaochuan, Governor of the People’s Bank of China, at the first meeting of the 
Ministerial Joint Conference on AML, Beijing, 27 August 2004. 
 Approved  by  the  State  Council,  the  People’s  Bank  of  China  (PBC),  as  the  leading  ministry  in  the 
Ministerial Joint Conference on Anti-money Laundering (AML), invites today the member ministries to 
review the current AML situation, to draw up the plan for the AML work in the next stage, to determine 
the working procedure for the Ministerial Joint Conference on Anti-money Laundering (AML) and the 
responsibilities of the relevant ministries. 
The significance of AML  
I.  
Money laundering is the practice of legitimizing the illegally obtained gains and proceeds through a 
series of transactions, transfers or conversions in order to evade legal punishments. Money laundering 
helps criminals to evade legal punishments as well as puts a premium to the spawning of new crimes, 
distorts normal economic and financial orders, damages credibility of financial institutions and corrupts 
public morality. With the deepening integration of China’s economy into the world economy and new 
changes in social conflicts, strengthening AML is of great significance. 
First, sound AML work is an objective necessity for safeguarding China’s national interests and the 
fundamental interests of the masses. AML involves efforts in the diplomatic, economic, judiciary and 
security  fields  etc.  The  performance  of  AML  is  closely  related  to  the  public  image  of  China’s 
government  both  at  home  and  abroad,  to  the  economic  stability  and  to  the  social  justice.  A  sound 
practice in AML also constitutes the concrete measure for safeguarding the order of China’s socialist 
market  economy  and  the  fundamental  interests  of  the  masses  and  for  practicing  the  important 
thoughts  of  “Three  Represents”.  The  work  stands  for  an  important  move  for  honoring  the 
Commitments  of  the  Chinese  government  to  the  outside  world  and  for  creating  the  image  of  a 
responsible big country with respect to AML. It is also a necessary step for speeding up the opening of 
the financial industry and promoting the internationalization of the Chinese banks. Therefore, we shall, 
from  the  vantage  point  of  “stressing  political  awareness”  and  based  on  the  significance  of 
safeguarding China’s economic and financial security, sharpen the awareness of the importance and 
urgency of AML, establish effective AML system, and bring AML onto the track of standardization and 
institutional arrangement. 
Second, AML is a necessity for relentlessly cracking down on economic crimes. At the start of reform 
and opening, Mr. Deng Xiaoping pointed out that, fighting economic crime “is a long-term continuous 
struggle,”  is  a  protracted  task  calling  for  perseverance  in  the  course  of  China’s  modernization 
construction. With the deepening of marketization of China’s economy, such crimes as smuggling, tax 
evasion, tax rebate cheating, financial frauds, market manipulation and insider trading are on the rise. 
The above crimes are catalyst to corruption like embezzlement and bribery taking, severely damaging 
the health of national economy and corroding social and public morality. A sound practice in AML will 
enable an effective monitoring of abnormal and suspicious fund movement, generate opportunities for 
controlling  the  transfer  and  hiding  of  the  illegally  obtained  gains  and  provide  effective  means  for 
recovering illegal funds transferred abroad, so as to fight economic crimes effectively. 
Third,  carrying  out  AML  is  a  necessity  for  forestalling  other  grave  criminal  crimes.  With  China’s 
opening wider to the outside, international narcotics crimes and organized crimes with the nature of 
underworld  have  picked  up.  In  some  part  of  the  regions,  there  emerged  the  symptoms  of  terrorist 
crimes by a small handful of extremists and separatists, creating grave social problems. Experience at 
home and abroad suggests, the severe crimes are  not possible without enormous financial support 
and  therefore  often  entail  frequent  money  laundering.  Cracking  down  on  money  laundering  and 
spotting and cutting off the funding chains on which crime organizations rely, will forcefully weaken, 
break  up  and  disintegrate  the  criminal  activities,  strictly  forestall  them  from  spreading  and  realize 
ultimately  the  targets  of  combating  crimes,  protecting  the  fundamental  interests  of  the  masses  and 
safeguarding social stability. 
BIS Review 50/2004 
 1
Fourth,  a  sound  practice  in  AML  is  also  a  necessity  for  safeguarding  the  credibility  of  financial 
institutions  and  the  financial  stability.  Money  laundering  is  basically  divided  into  three  steps, 
placement,  covering  up  and  integration.  First,  placement,  i.e.  placing  unlawful  proceeds  into  the 
economic system, mainly the financial institutions. Second, covering up, i.e. covering the origin and 
blurring  the  nature  of  illegal  funds  through  complex  transactions.  Third,  integration,  i.e.  using 
“laundered” funds legally. The above features indicate that financial institutions, as the carrier of funds 
activities, are objectively prone to become the channels for money laundering. Involvement of financial 
institutions in money laundering, will not only damage the reputation of the financial institutions, but 
also bring about formidable legal and operational risks. AML is of important and realistic significance 
for  safeguarding  the  reputation  of  financial  institutions,  forestalling  financial  risks,  safeguarding  the 
stability of the financial system. 
International AML situation  
II.  
After  the  mid-20th  century,  governments  around  the  world  were  confronted  with  the  grave  situation 
where the flooding of narcotics became a scourge, and they conducted in-depth examination on the 
legal  policies  of  preventing  narcotics-related  crimes.  In  1970,  the  United  States  passed  the  Bank 
Secrecy Act (BSA). BSA reformed on the traditional bank secrecy system, built up the AML foundation 
in the US and instituted the AML working system led by one government department and participated 
by  various  others.  Meanwhile,  AML  was  paid  much  attention  by  the  majority  of  Western  developed 
economies  and  emerging  economies.  During  1980s-1990s,  these  countries  and  regions  have 
successively enacted  AML  laws.  Switzerland,  famous  for  its strict  bank secrecy  arrangements,  also 
accepts the international AML practices under international pressure. Starting from July 1 this year, for 
those  who  transfer  money  above  a  certain  amount  through  anonymous  accounts  with  banks  of 
Switzerland, the banks should make known their true identity. 
Faced with ever-raging money laundering, such international organizations as the Security Council of 
the  UN  have  responded  actively  as  well.  In  1988,  the  UN  passed  the  United  Nations  Convention 
against  Illicit  Traffic  in  Narcotic  Drugs  and  Psychotropic  Substances,  which  criminalizes  money 
laundering related to narcotics. The Convention is the first international convention against crimes of 
money  laundering  in  the  world.  Since  1990s,  the  international  community  has  paid  ever  closer 
attention  to  money  laundering.  In  1990,  the  European  Council  passed  Convention  on  Laundering, 
Search, Seizure and Confiscation of Proceeds from Crime. In April 1995, the UN particularly drafted 
guidelines  on  preventing  money  laundering  activities,  for  reference  of  all  countries  in  the  course  of 
AML  legislation.  In December  1999,  the UN General  Assembly  passed  International Convention  for 
the  Suppression  of  the  Financing  of  Terrorism.  In  November  2000,  the  UN  General  Assembly  also 
passed  Convention  against  Transnational  Organized  Crime,  calling  for  all  parties  to  institute  AML 
program. In October 2003, the UN General Assembly further passed Convention against Corruption, 
stipulating stricter requirements for AML programs of the parties. Such international organizations as 
the International Monetary Fund, the World Bank and the Basle Committee on Banking Supervision 
have also developed an array of principles and guides. 
Because  of  the  transnational  nature  of  money  laundering,  the  G-7  Summit  in  Paris  decided  in  July 
1989 to establish the Financial Action Task Force (FATF), in a bid to examine the cooperative results 
with respect to combating money laundering through banks and the financial system, to improve laws 
and  rules  in  AML  and  measures,  and  to  strengthen  preventive  AML  measures  through  multi-lateral 
judiciary assistance. In February 1990, the FATF set out a set of Forty Recommendations on Money 
Laundering  (“Forty  Recommendations”).  First,  each  country  should  criminalize  money  laundering  of 
funds  used  in  severe  crimes.  Second,  governments  of  all  countries  should  strengthen  financial 
supervision  by  urging  financial  institutions  to  develop  and  implement  feasible  internal  AML  control 
system and to fulfill the obligation of customer identification, record-keeping of customer information 
and  transactions  and  detection  and  reporting  of  suspicious  financial  activities.  Third,  governments 
should  establish  Financial Intelligence Unit  (FIU)  responsible  for  monitoring  unusual  and  suspicious 
transactions of funds, so as to achieve coordination and cooperation between appropriate ministries. 
Fourth,  countries  should  exchange  intelligence  on  money  laundering  and  conduct  international 
cooperation in AML investigation, search and freezing of illegal funds and extradition of suspects. The 
Forty Recommendations by the FATF has become the most important guiding document in the current 
international AML sphere, promoting AML legislation in all countries and regions and development of 
the international AML system. 
2 
 BIS Review 50/2004
After  9/11  terrorist  attack,  anti-terrorism  is  combined  with  AML.  Combating  terrorist  financing  has 
become  an  important  field  of  AML.  AML  and  combating  terrorist  financing  have  become  important 
issues  of  some  international  organizations  and  forums,  occupying  a  significant  niche  in  current 
international relation. After 9/11 terrorist attack, the US congress wasted no time in passing the USA 
PATRIOT  Act,  strengthening  in  an  all-round  way  the  rules  for  combating  terrorist  financing.  The 
legislature  of  all  countries  and  regions  reacted  to  the  movement  quickly  as  well.  Besides  some 
international conventions  passed  by  the  UN with  respect  to  combating  terrorist  financing, the  FATF 
drafted specifically 8 more recommendations for combating terrorist financing in October 2001. The 
developed countries in Europe and America have rendered AML and combating terrorist financing a 
focus of their foreign affairs, and have taken resolute measures to that effect. 
III.  
The status quo of AML in China 
AML legislation 
1.  
China’s  criminal  legislation  with  respect  to  AML  almost  synchronized  with  the  international  efforts. 
After  the  United  Nations  Convention  against  Illicit  Traffic  in  Narcotic  Drugs  and  Psychotropic 
Substances went into effect in 1988, China’s National People’s Congress promulgated the Decision on 
Ban of Narcotics, predicating “the crime of disguising and concealing the nature and source of funds 
for narcotics”. The Criminal Law was amended in 1997 with a specific article predicating the crime of 
money laundering. After 9/11 terrorist attack, the highest legislative body stipulated in the Amendment 
to the Criminal Law in December 2001 that terrorist crime be an upstream crime of money laundering. 
China has progressively promulgated an array of administrative and financial rules and regulations to 
legalize  the  arrangement  of  authentic  names  for  individual  deposits  accounts,  the  management 
system on banking accounts and the regulations for management on large-value cash. In March 2003, 
the PBC promulgated Rules for Anti-money Laundering by Financial Institutions, Administrative Rules 
for the Reporting of Large-value and Suspicious RMB Payment Transactions and Administrative Rules 
for  the  Reporting  by  Financial  Institutions  of  Large-Value  and  Suspicious  Foreign  Exchange 
Transactions.  The  rules  put  forward  clearly  the  AML  supervisory  requirements  for  the  banking 
institutions, and set up the basic framework for China’s system of AML reporting and AML information 
monitoring. The Law of the People’s Bank of China amended at end-2003 stipulated that the central 
bank is responsible for “guiding and planning AML work of the financial industry and monitoring of fund 
movement with respect to AML”.  
The criminalization of money laundering and the formation of the basic system of AML in the financial 
industry symbolize the preliminary establishment of the system of AML laws and rules. 
Implementation of AML work 
2.  
To  carry  out  its  duties  on  AML,  the  PBC  set  up,  with  the  approval  of  the  State  Council,  the  AML 
Bureau in September 2003, further established the China AML Monitoring and Analysis Center in April 
2004 responsible for accepting and analyzing AML intelligence. In order to strengthen the coordination 
within  the  financial  industry,  the  PBC  convened  a  Symposium  of  AML  for  financial  regulatory 
authorities  in  April  2004,  and  formed  a  coordinating  mechanism  for  AML  led  by  the  PBC  and 
participated  by  China  Banking  Regulatory  Commission  (CBRC),  China  Securities  Regulatory 
Commission (CSRC), China Insurance Regulatory Commission (CIRC) and the State Administration of 
Foreign  Exchange  (SAFE).  In  May  2004,  the  Ministerial  Joint  Conference  on  AML  was,  with  the 
approval  of  the  State  Council,  re-organized  and  enlarged  from  the  original  16  members  to  23  with 
scope of AML supervision widened. Thus, the coordinating mechanism at the national level and in the 
financial industry has formed preliminarily and begun its operation, and China’s AML system has taken 
its initial shape. 
Since the implementation of the three Rules in March 2003, the Head Office of the PBC has altogether 
received  3,061  reports  of  suspicious  RMB  payment  transactions  through  screening  by  its  branches 
while  the  SAFE  has  received  170,500  reports  of  suspicious  foreign  currency  payment  transactions 
with an amount of USD9.720 billion. After cross-examination, suspect cases of money laundering have 
been referred to the public security departments for investigation. The Ministry of Public Security, the 
PBC and the SAFE have also joined in cracking down on underground money centers. Since 2002, in 
operations  of  combating  underground money centers, 73 cases have  been  solved,  57  underground 
money  centers  and  96  underground  banking  outlets  destroyed,  240  suspects  detained  or  arrested, 
BIS Review 50/2004 
 3
illegal funds and assets equivalent to more than RMB80 million yuan confiscated. The total amount 
involved in the cases was as high as several billion yuan, effectively holding in check the momentum 
of  money  laundering  through  underground  money  centers.  At  present,  there  are  still  some  pending 
cases of money laundering referred by the PBC and the SAFE to the public security departments for 
investigation. 
Meanwhile, we shall realize clear-minded the difficulties and protraction of AML work. Due to late start 
of  AML  and  faced  with  the  complex  situation,  the  current  AML  in  China  is  still  falling  short  of  the 
requirements and changes of the situation. The deficiencies of AML are mainly as follows. AML laws 
and  regulations  are  far  from  perfect,  leaving  quite  a  gap  from  the  perspective  of  the  international 
practices  and  AML  requirements.  The  awareness  of the  importance  of  AML  by  financial  institutions 
has  yet  to  be  sharpened.  The  AML  internal  control  system  and  the  reporting  system  of  suspicious 
funds transactions have yet to be strengthened and improved. AML in non-financial industries has yet 
to  be  reinforced  either.  With  the  changes  of  the  economic  environment,  the  means  of  money 
laundering has become ever more sophisticated and specialized, there has already emerged money 
laundering via the internet. 
International AML cooperation 
3. 
The  Chinese  government  has  all  along  attached  importance  to  international  AML  cooperation.  At 
present,  China  has  signed  and  approved  the  United  Nations  Convention  against  Illicit  Traffic  in 
Narcotic  Drugs  and  Psychotropic  Substances  and  the  UN  Convention  against  Transnational 
Organized  Crime,  and  has  signed  the  UN  International  Convention  for  the  Suppression  of  the 
Financing of Terrorism and the UN Convention against Corruption. 
The  Chinese  government  has  been  advocating  the  expansion  of  representation  by  developing 
countries  in  international  AML  organizations.  With  the  approval  of  the  State  Council,  the  PBC  has 
formally written to the FATF in April this year and applied for a membership in the FATF. Meanwhile, 
China  has  contacted  the  preparatory  committee  of  the  Euro-Asia  Group  on  AML  and  Combating 
Terrorist  Financing  (EAG)  through  various  channels.  The  PBC  and  the  Ministry  of  Public  Security 
participated in the preparatory meeting of the EAG on AML held in Russia in June 2004. China will 
make efforts to become the initiating member of “the EAG”.  
Making full use of international resources in beefing up in staff training constitutes an important part of 
the international AML cooperation of China. In recent years, the PBC, the Ministry of Public Security 
and the SAFE, in collaboration with the international organizations like the UN, the World Bank, the 
IMF and the FATF, have held a series of seminars and training sessions. In the first half of 2004, the 
PBC,  jointly  with  related  agencies  and  international  institutions,  organized  four  AML  seminars  and 
training sessions, providing technical support for AML work in China. 
Prospects for AML in China 
IV.  
Generally speaking, the situation of AML is good. The relevant AML policies and measures have taken 
effect. The coordination and working mechanisms at various levels have been brought onto the right 
track.  And  with  the  deepening  of  AML  work,  the  effects  will  unfold  further.  As  AML  is  an  important 
while  arduous  task  that  influences  the  overall  society,  all  members  of  the  joint  conference  shall 
collaborate with concerted efforts in doing well the following work. 
Continuing to reinforce the coordinating mechanism of AML 
1. 
Efforts shall be made to continue to carry out directives by the Central Committee of the CPC and the 
State  Council  on  combating  corruption,  advocating  honest  and  clean  government  and  fighting 
economic crimes. In order to effectively fend off and crack down on crimes of money laundering, to 
safeguard  the  national  economic  and  financial  security  and  normal  economic  order,  the  Ministerial 
Joint Conference on AML will, under the leadership of the State Council, be responsible for guiding the 
national AML work, drawing up the important national AML principles and policies and the policies and 
measures  for  international  AML  cooperation,  and  coordinating  all  departments  and  mobilizing 
resources of the whole society to carry out AML work. As the leading ministry of the joint conference, 
the  PBC  will  commit  to  strengthening  research  on  AML  policies  and  measures,  improving 
management  on  AML,  reinforcing  supervision  on  AML  of  financial  institutions,  beefing  up  funds 
monitoring  and  analyses  for  AML  purposes.  The  PBC  will,  together  with  relevant  government 
4 
 BIS Review 50/2004
departments, develop AML guidelines for such high-risk sectors as banking, securities and insurance, 
spur financial institutions and other entities with high risk of money laundering to improve their internal 
AML policies and procedures. The PBC will make efforts to detect clues of crimes in money laundering 
and timely transfer them to public security and other departments for criminal investigation. The PBC 
will  collaborate  with  authorities  of  public  security,  state  security,  commerce,  customs,  industrial  and 
commercial  administration  and  taxation  in  investigating,  through  AML  monitoring  system,  cases  of 
unlawful practices and crimes. 
Improving and strengthening AML legal system 
2.  
The AML Law has been included in the legislation plan of the Tenth Standing Committee of the NPC. 
In  March  2004,  the  Budgetary  Committee  of  the  Standing  Committee  of  the  NPC  convened  the 
inauguration meeting for the drafting group of the AML Law. The leading and working groups for AML 
Law drafting have been established with the leadership of the NPC and the participation of 18 units 
like  the  Supreme  Court,  the  Supreme  Procuratorate,  the  Ministry  of  Public  Security,  the  Ministry  of 
Finance and the PBC. As planned, the draft AML law will be presented to the Standing Committee of 
the NPC for deliberation in early 2005.  
The drafting of the AML law will further define China’s AML work mechanism, the relevant authorities 
for AML and the responsibilities of relevant departments, and will stipulate the AML responsibilities of 
financial institutions and other sectors with high risk of money laundering, so as to immensely improve 
the AML work in China. 
Establishing and improving the supervisory system for AML in the financial industry 
3.  
The PBC will continue, in collaboration with the CBRC, the CSRC, the CIRC and the SAFE and other 
supervisory  authorities,  improve  and  newly  developed  AML  guidelines  for  all  financial  business, 
implement  in  real  earnest  the  information  collection  and  analyses  on  as  well  as  detection  and 
monitoring  of  suspicious  large-value  funds,  encouraging  financial  institutions  to  build  and  improve 
internal  AML  procedures  by  fulfilling  conscientiously  the  AML  responsibilities  in  verifying  customer 
identity, reporting of suspicious large-value funds and record-keeping of transactions, so as to forestall 
financial risks and safeguard stability of the financial industry. 
Further strengthening international AML cooperation 
4.  
Strengthening international cooperation in the field of AML is necessitated by the developments of the 
current  international  situation,  China’s  active  participation  in  the  international  economic  cooperation 
and  the  proceeding  of  AML  in  China.  In  the  recent  periods,  we  shall  not  only  make  efforts  to  join 
international  AML  organizations  but  also  establish  bilateral  cooperation  with  major  countries  and 
regions in the areas of AML. We shall, within the multilateral and bilateral framework, carry out AML 
intelligence  exchange  and  training  cooperation,  and  provide  assistance  in  the  investigation  and 
seizure of assets and extradition of suspects. By strengthening international AML cooperation, we will 
forcefully crack down on and hold in check the momentum of transferring overseas illegal assets by 
the criminal suspects, and will prevent the stripping of state-owned assets. We will provide assistance 
to foreign law enforcement authorities on the basis of mutual benefits. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, despite some achievements attained in China’s AML work, we are still facing 
very  arduous  tasks.  We  shall,  from  the  vantage  point  of  practicing  the  important  thought  of  “Three 
Represents” and fully implementing the guidelines laid by the Sixteenth Congress of the CPC, sharpen 
our awareness of the importance and urgency of AML work, and strengthen our sense of responsibility 
in this mission. We shall, under the leadership of the State Council, bring into full play the role of the 
Ministerial  Joint  Conference  on  AML,  and  proceed  in  a  practical,  forward-looking  and  pioneering 
manner to open a new chapter for China’s AML work.  
Thank you! 
BIS Review 50/2004 
 5
