Kishori J Udeshi: Issues in bank regulation and supervision  
Speech  by  Ms  Kishori  J  Udeshi,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  a  seminar  on 
Global Banking: Paradigm Shift, organised by the Federation of Indian Chamber of Commerce and 
Industries, Bangalore, 16 September 2004. 
 FICCI  has been  in  the  forefront  of  creating  a  platform  for healthy  debate  and  discussion  leading  to 
responsible actions. I would like to thank FICCI for inviting me to speak at this Forum especially as 
there  are  several  high  level  functionaries  who  have  travelled  great  distances  to  be  with  us  on  this 
occasion.  It  is  a  wonderful  opportunity  and  I  would  certainly  use  it  to  explore  a  few  issues  at  the 
frontiers of regulation and supervision. Some of these are unsettled issues and the raising of issues is 
essentially with  a  view  to encouraging debate  as  it  is  only  through  debate and  dissent  that we can 
aspire to achieve meaningful progress. I would, therefore, stress that the raising of unsettled issues at 
the frontiers should not be perceived as a statement of an official stance of the Reserve Bank of India. 
While  much  of  the  issues  are  raised  from  an  Indian  perspective,  I  would  also  like  to  glean  some 
thoughts from experience abroad.  
In  recent  years  the  blurring  of  the  distinction  between  financial  intermediaries  under  the  combined 
effect of domestic and cross-border integration, innovations in instruments and processes, advances 
in  technology  and  the  massive  volumes  of  capital  intermediated  by  the  financial  system  has 
necessitated a pro-active strengthening of the regulatory and supervisory framework.  
The  financial  landscape  is  increasingly  witnessing  entry  of  some  of  the  bigger  banks  into  other 
financial  segments  like  merchant  banking,  insurance,  etc.,  which  has  made  them  financial 
conglomerates. Emergence of several new players with diversified presence across major segments 
and possibility of some of the non-banking institutions in the financial sector acquiring large enough 
proportions to have systemic impact make it imperative for supervision to be spread across various 
segments  of  the  financial  sector.  Banks  have  grown  organically  beyond  the  national  frontiers  and 
spread across the globe. With liberalisation in trade in services, banks are also able to render banking 
services  across  territories  even  without  the  need  for  physical  presence  in  those  territories.  These 
aspects add other dimensions to the challenges of regulation and supervision of the banking system.  
Recent measures by RBI  
I would now turn to some of the issues on which the RBI has taken action in the recent period. As part 
of a move towards greater deregulation, banks fulfilling certain minimum criteria regarding CRAR and 
net NPAs have been given the discretion to pay dividend without the prior approval of the RBI. In view 
of  the  ongoing  shift  towards  financing  borrowers  based  on  estimated  cash  flows  rather  than  on 
collateral and in recognition of the availability of financial assistance through credit substitutes, viz., 
commercial paper, bonds and debentures, the restriction on unsecured exposures was withdrawn and 
banks’  boards  are  allowed  to  formulate  their  own  policies  on  unsecured  exposures.  Banks  are  not 
required to obtain prior approval of the Reserve Bank for engaging in insurance agency business or 
referral  arrangement  without  any  risk  participation,  subject  to  their  complying  with  the  prescribed 
conditions.  Banks  intending  to  set  up  insurance  joint  ventures  with  equity  contribution  on  a  risk 
participation  basis  or  making  investments  in  insurance  companies  for  providing  infrastructure  and 
services support, however, still require prior approval of the RBI.  
Various  issues  which  received  regulatory  attention  during  the  recent  period  include  ownership  and 
governance  in  banks,  further  progress  towards  international  best  practices  in  prudential  norms  with 
country-specific  adaptation,  greater  deregulation  and  rationalisation  of  banking  policies,  compliance 
with Know Your Customer (KYC) norms, strengthening the financial system for global integration in the 
light of the ongoing liberalisation of the capital account, greater inter-regulatory co-ordination and the 
drive  for  improving  the  quality  of  public  services  rendered  by  banks.  In  the  evolution  and 
implementation of policy, a consultative approach continues to be followed through formal institutional 
structures  such  as  the  Board  for  Financial  Supervision,  the  newly-formed  Standing  Committee  on 
Financial  Regulation,  the  Technical  Committee  on  Money  and  Government  Securities  Markets  and 
also through specific working groups and committees as well as formal and informal consultations with 
the regulated entities, external experts and professionals. 
BIS Review 50/2004 
 1
Transparency and disclosure 
Transparency  has  been  the  watchword  in  our  endeavour  to  promote  best  practices.  Moreover, 
transparency is crucial to a well functioning financial system. The RBI recognises the need to align 
standards adopted by the Indian banking system with global standards. The Reserve Bank has issued 
detailed guidelines relating to several Accounting Standards. Banks are required to ensure that there 
are no qualifications by the auditors in their financial statements for non-compliance with any of the 
accounting  standards.  We  recognise  that  the  banking  sector  will  need  to  adjust  to  more  exacting 
valuation rules. Again, rules on disclosure will need to be exacting, including disclosure on penalties or 
adverse  action  by  the  supervisory  authority.  The  financial  sector  has  to  recognise  that  exacting 
standards  of  disclosure  are  necessary  to  strengthen  the  financial  sector  and  there  is  a  world-wide 
move to such disclosures.  
In recognition of the importance of dissemination of credit information, the RBI requires banks/DFIs to 
obtain the consent of all their borrowers - not only defaulters - for dissemination of credit information to 
enable  Credit  Information  Bureau  of  India  Ltd.,  to  compile  and  disseminate  comprehensive  credit 
information. 
Preserving the integrity of the banking system 
Prevention of frauds and implementation of anti money laundering (AML) measures are two important 
aspects of the efforts being made to prevent criminal misuse of the financial system which threaten the 
stability of financial transactions worldwide. 
Supervisory initiatives 
Keeping  in  view  the  emerging  scenario  under  the  Basel  II  accord  and  the  need  to  use  supervisory 
resources  more productively,  a  beginning  towards  risk-based supervision (RBS)  of  banks has  been 
made. On the basis of experience gained this will be extended to the entire banking system and will 
become an essential aspect of Pillar 2 compliance. 
Risk management systems 
I would now like to flag a few issues - some of which are purely exploratory and are raised for debate 
rather than as a statement of the official stance. As you are all aware, we are positioned at a crucial 
juncture because the current phase will be the time when risk management skills of financial entities 
will be put to test.  
The  liquidity  overhang  in  the  system  coupled  with  the  past  downward  movement  of  interest  rates 
seems to have spurred a sense of complacency oblivious of the downside risks of an adverse interest 
rate movement. It is also apprehended that this attitude has led some banks to dilute their approach to 
credit risk. The building of the risk elements into the pricing of the credit facilities is reportedly taking a 
backseat in the pursuit of asset expansion. This may leave banks in a situation where some of the 
players are not only less prepared to face the reversal of interest rate movement, but are also left with 
a badly priced portfolio in relation to the credit quality. I would like this aspect to be appreciated not so 
much as a note of alarm but as a voice of prudence. Credit growth should be carefully calibrated with 
risk  measurement  and  should  not  be  merely  seen  as  deployment  of  funds  at  marginal  costs  in  the 
background  of  sluggish  growth.  Banks  should  look  ahead  at  the  expansion  of  credit  portfolio  in  a 
healthy  way,  particularly  in  the  background  of  higher  industrial  growth,  new  plans  of  corporate 
expansion  and  higher  levels  of  infrastructure  financing.  Coupled  with  this  are  the  regulatory 
requirements of management of market risks, which are becoming increasingly relevant. As we are all 
well aware, the adverse effects of risk exposures do not impact independently but tend to snowball 
into an avalanche. 
These  are  perhaps  the  times  when  market  players  begin  looking  for  some  concessions  in  the 
prudential  norms,  regulatory  forbearance  and  dilution  of  accounting  principles.  So  what  would  one 
make of such a situation?  
• 
• 
That the most ill prepared players make the loudest noises or 
The weakest ones make the first noise? 
2 
 BIS Review 50/2004
What is the lesson to be learnt from this? Is it not time for banks to adopt integrated risk management 
systems  whereby  they  effectively  address  all  relevant  risks  in  an  ongoing  and  comprehensive 
manner? Should banks not think in terms of having a Chief Risk Officer who oversees all risks - credit, 
liquidity, operational and market risks?  
Moreover, while banks may have adopted risk management systems for their various portfolios, very 
few,  if  any,  have  developed  risk  models  suited  to  their  operations.  It  occurs  to  me  that  India  is  the 
cradle of IT professionals who are doing wonders and are providing efficient solutions to their clients 
across the world. It is also a matter of pride that some Indians are at the helm of the affairs at some of 
the  large  global  banks.  In  these  circumstances,  it  is  surprising  that  the  banks  in  India  are  lagging 
behind in tapping the IT potential of the country and putting them to productive use for developing / 
applying risk models. As compared with the potential available in this country, the extent of application 
of  the  talents  in  banks  is  relatively  low,  especially  when  the  benefits  to  be  derived  from  them  are 
tremendous.  
A  concurrent  question  that  emerges  is  whether  banks  should  think  in  terms  of  disclosing  to  the 
investors at large their risk management policies indicating also their risk containment practices and 
strategy pursued by the bank, on the same lines of statements made by Chairmen of large corporates. 
At  present,  such  disclosures  cannot  be  made  mandatory  considering  the  level  of  maturity  of  the 
financial sector and the levels of assimilation of information by the stake holders and the public.  
Banks confident  of  pursuing  a well defined strategy  taking  into  account  their clear strengths should 
articulate their philosophy of running their banks in their annual reports. Encouraging banks to do so 
should certainly help in improving the perception of the concerned banks in the eyes of the public and 
the market. It should, however, be a well thought out step, considering that the bank’s major asset is 
the  trust  reposed  by  the  public  at  large  and  nothing  should  be  done  to  undermine  that  level  of 
confidence. 
We  have recently  issued guidelines  to  banks  for  maintenance  of  capital  charge  for  market  risks.  In 
addition, banks  will  also be  required  to  draw  up  their strategies  for  meeting  the  capital requirement 
arising out of implementation of Basel 2. Banks have been until now tapping the traditional instruments 
eligible for capital status, namely equity shares and subordinated debt instruments. The present legal 
framework does not allow all banks to raise capital through issue of preference shares. There are also 
certain restrictions on the maximum tenure of preference shares. This not only gives rise to an uneven 
playing  field  but  also  raises  issues  pertaining  to  the  eligibility  of  redeemable  preference  shares  for 
capital  status,  especially  with  regard  to  inclusion  under  Tier  I  or  Tier  II.  In  view  of  the  above 
uncertainties this has been a largely untapped source of capital in India. With a view to enabling banks 
to tap this source the Reserve Bank is examining the amendment of the existing legislation. Through 
proper  structuring,  preference  capital  may  be  made  attractive  to  meet  the  needs  of  a  section  of 
investors. We need to explore carefully this option as also the raising of capital through other hybrid 
instruments defined under the Basel guidelines, so as to address the requirements of capital by the 
banking sector in India.  
This  brings  me  to  consolidation  in  the  banking  sector.  As  you  are  aware,  the  First  Narasimham 
Committee had recommended consolidation in the Indian banking sector whereby we would have a 
few internationally active banks, a few national banks and the others would remain regional banks. It 
was also clarified that the mergers should be based on synergies and locational and business specific 
complementarities of the concerned institutions and must obviously make sound commercial sense. 
Mergers of public sector banks should emanate from the managements of banks with the Government 
as the common shareholder playing a supportive role. In this background, the implementation of Basel 
2 could trigger a round of consolidation in the banking sector. 
It  is  difficult  to  foresee  the  precise  pattern  of  consolidation  which  is  likely  to  be  triggered  with  the 
implementation  of  Basel  2  in  India.  As  we  have  seen  in  the  past,  in  any  merger  integrating  the 
manpower and culture of the taken over bank with the manpower and culture of the host bank proves 
to be a great challenge. It is only when integration in these aspects is achieved successfully that the 
merged entities would be able to capitalise on the synergies. Hence, while the consolidation moves 
would be triggered by market forces, it will be necessary to ensure that mergers are successful in all 
respects, including manpower and cultural aspects, which are unique in the Indian context.  
Smaller localised banks might nonetheless still have a relevant role even on a standalone basis if they 
were to redefine their business strategy in favour of conservative growth which can be supported by 
internal accruals and by having an effective control on their risk exposures. This would perhaps be 
possible when they carve out a niche for themselves.   
BIS Review 50/2004 
 3
Self-regulation 
The international experience with reference to banking sector suggests that statutory regulation by the 
banking  regulator  cannot  be  substituted  by  self-regulation.  It  could  at  best  supplement  the  banking 
regulation.  Having  recognised  that  self-regulation  has  its  relevance  even  when  banking  regulator  is 
present we would encourage self-regulation. If self-regulation has to establish itself firmly the first and 
foremost  prerequisite  would  be  establishment  of  sound  principles  of  corporate  governance  in  the 
banking system as a whole. The supplementing factor, which is also enshrined in Pillar 3 of Basel 2, 
namely, transparency and disclosure should also take strong roots in the system. Transparency and 
disclosure  under  Pillar  3  is  expected  to  facilitate  active  role  for  market  discipline.  A  thought  which 
occurs to me is whether Indian markets are equipped to discipline the participants. One opinion is that 
the markets in India lack adequate depth and width which would qualify them as efficient markets.  
The above reaffirms the need for intensifying supervisory/ regulatory efforts, at least in the short term, 
before  self-regulation  and  market  discipline  stabilise  in  the  country.  In  the  interregnum  it  would  be 
useful  for  the  banks  to  take  proactive  measures on  both,  corporate  governance  and  transparency  / 
disclosure aspects.  
Following  the  Ganguly Report,  issues of  governance  in  the banking system  have  come  to the  fore. 
Increasingly exacting standards of Board accountability will need to be introduced and issues relating 
to  penal  action  if  directors  fail  to  properly  discharge  their  duties  need  to  be  addressed.  I  raise  this 
issue  not  to  create  panic  among  directors  or  to  generate  media  headlines  but  to  pose  the  issue  of 
wider and effective powers for bank boards commensurate with increased accountability.  
Ownership issues in banks 
In the recent period there has been considerable debate on the question of ownership of the banking 
system and the issue of restriction on ownership of a bank by a single individual, institution or group. 
In view of the importance of corporate governance in banks, it was considered necessary to lay down 
a comprehensive framework of policy in a transparent manner. Accordingly, we have recently placed 
in public domain a draft paper on ‘A comprehensive policy framework for ownership and governance in 
private  sector  banks’.  The  RBI  has  been  openly  encouraging  a  debate  on  this  issue  and  the  draft 
would be reviewed on the basis of the feedback received from various quarters. In this context, I would 
only  make  two  brief  comments.  First,  the  banking  system  is  central  to  the  country’s  economy 
irrespective  of  whether  banks  are  locally  or  foreign  owned.  Some  countries  like  Australia  feel  that 
banks are so systemically important that foreign controlled banks are precluded. Our stance in India is 
on  the  middle  ground  where  foreign  ownership  of  banks  has  been  permitted  on  certain  conditions. 
Secondly, we must not forget that the cost of bank failures is not limited to rescuing banks or bailing 
out  depositors  but  there  can  be  large  real  economy  costs.  Thus,  a  well  reasoned  approach  of 
regulating ownership of banks is a necessary concomitant of a stable financial system.  
Anti-tying measures  
I would now refer to an issue which is at the frontiers of regulation.  
Banks  and  financial  institutions  are  increasingly  offering  a  broad  measure  of  financial  services  and 
thereby  endeavoring  to  build  customer  loyalty.  In  some  countries  there  are  anti-tying  restrictions  to 
prevent banks from forcing customers to take unwanted products to obtain needed services. These 
issues are interlinked to corporate ethics, a robust internal control culture and transparent disclosures. 
I would submit for debate that sooner or later we in India will need to consider the feasibility of anti-
tying regulations in the financial sector. I would invite attention to an interesting presentation by Ms. 
Susan Schmidt Bies. (BIS Review No. 42).  
Further, with increasing consumer spending the data bases of the banks’ customers are also being 
shared with various product sellers and the cross-selling is acquiring a new dimension of invasion of 
the privacy of the customer. This is an area where banks need to exercise self-regulation.  
Concluding observation  
I  would  end  here  by  saying  that  the  rationale  for  financial  regulation  lies  in  the  economic  costs 
imposed  on  the  society  by  financial  market  failure.  The  adverse  consequences  include  threat  to 
4 
 BIS Review 50/2004
systemic stability, the potential for gridlocks due to adverse selection and moral hazard problems as 
well as undermining the substantial benefits which would otherwise accrue from correction of market 
imperfections, reduced transaction costs and providing people with a financial system they can trust. 
In a rapidly changing economic environment the financial system necessarily has to undergo change, 
however painful it may be.  
BIS Review 50/2004 
 5
