Jean-Claude Trichet: Structural reforms in the euro area 
Lecture by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, on the occasion of the 
receipt  of  the  EFR-Business  Week  Award  2004,  organised  by  Economische  Faculteitsvereniging 
Rotterdam, Rotterdam, 20 April 2004. 
 Introduction 
The conclusions at the recent European council regarding the implementation of the Lisbon agenda in 
EU countries have been both encouraging. While some modest progress has been made in the first 
years, the pace of reform needs to be very significantly stepped up if the targets are to be achieved. 
And  it  is  encouraging  that  the  European  Council  is  therefore  committed  to  a  more  forceful 
implementation. 
The implementation of the Lisbon agenda is all the more pressing as some countries have shown how 
an ambitious reform agenda can bear the expected fruits for long-term employment and output growth. 
In  the  Netherlands,  for  instance,  reforms  in  social  security  and  the  development  of  part-time  and 
flex-time  employment  have  contributed  to  a  substantial  increase  of  the  employment  rate  and  the 
integration of an increasing number of women in the labour market. 
Several countries have now started to implement reform agendas. This has led observers to conclude 
that European countries are likely to get back on a more dynamic track over the medium run. While 
these advancements should be acknowledged, there are still important areas of economic reforms that 
have been barely touched upon but that are of vivid importance shall the euro area find again a more 
vigorous economic growth path. 
Part  of  the  problems  in  introducing  and  carrying  these  structural  reforms  may  lie  with  the  lack  of 
communication of the importance of an ambitious reform agenda. In particular, the introduction of the 
euro  has  constituted  a  major  change  for  euro  area  economies  and  can  rightly  be  considered  a 
structural reform itself that should trigger further changes and a more forceful removal of rigidities on 
labour and product markets. 
Structural reforms in the euro area 
Importance of structural reforms for output and employment growth 
Let  me,  first  of  all,  stress  again  the  importance  structural  reforms  have  for  output  and  employment 
growth.  While  the  objective  of  higher  potential  growth  rates  and  the  importance  of  the  intermediate 
targets, namely productivity growth and employment creation are by and large consensual view, there 
still remains some misunderstanding as to how these objectives can be reached. 
As the ECB has stressed, what is needed for these objectives to be achieved are economic reforms 
that ensure that capital, labour and product market rigidities will be substantially lowered. Structural 
reforms in capital, labour and product markets and in social security systems are needed to allow an 
allocation of capital and human resources which would be much closer to the optimum, enhancing the 
euro area’s growth potential and facilitating the adjustment to economic shocks. 
The reform priorities in the euro area’s capital, labour and product markets are overarching and very 
broad.  In  many  cases  they  need  to  be  translated  into  concrete  policy  measures  at  the  European 
and/or the national level. 
Structural reforms, on the one hand, are playing an important role in the determination of long term 
potential  growth  of  the  euro  area,  which  is  mainly  determined  by  the  efficiency  of  microeconomic 
relations.  A  high  rate  of  innovation  and  technological  diffusion  in  all  parts  of  the  economy  supports 
long-term growth without fuelling into inflationary pressures. 
Moreover,  a  flexible  economy  increases  the  speed  of  adjustment  of  the  euro  area  to  permanent 
shocks  and  its  resilience  to  temporary  ones.  While  a  rigid  economy  has  the  tendency  to  react  to 
external influences only with a substantial lag, and more so with respect to negative shocks than to 
BIS Review 23/2004 
 1
positive ones, a more flexible economy reacts more rapidly and with less costs - such as an increase 
in unemployment or loss of output growth. 
Finally,  one  should  not  forget  that  the  development  of  employment  is  to  a  substantial  amount 
determined by the competitive conditions on labour and product markets: an increased competition on 
these markets decreases the pricing power for firms and the rents they are able to earn, and lowers 
pressure  on  wage  increases.  This  is  particularly  important  for  employment  growth  in  the  services 
sectors, which are less exposed to international competition. In this area, structural reforms can yield 
further  reduction  in  price  pressures  and  at  the  same  time  create  conditions  for  moderate  wage 
developments that could enhance more pronounced employment creation. 
The structural environment for monetary policy 
Structural  reforms  can  therefore  help  to  improve  the  environment  in  which  monetary  policy  is 
conducted, by increasing the potential output and productivity growth at low inflation rates. However, 
they can also contribute more directly to support a stability-oriented monetary policy by affecting the 
mechanism through which monetary policy decisions are transmitted to prices. 
On the one hand, structural characteristics of labour and product markets will have an impact on the 
wage-price dynamics through the effects they may have on the price- and wage-setting behaviour of 
firms and trade unions. With imperfectly competitive product and labour markets, firms and employees 
can  affect  -  at  least  partially  -  the  price  and  wage  dynamics  on  a  local  scale,  resulting  in  stronger 
inflationary  pressure  and  structurally  grounded  inflation  dynamics  that  have  to  be  met  with  more 
restrictive monetary policy. 
On the other hand, the transmission mechanism of monetary policy can be impaired by overly rigid 
economies,  preventing  monetary  policy  decisions  to  be  properly  reflected  in  price  developments.  In 
particular, structural rigidities may imply that monetary policy decisions affect prices and inflation rates 
only with a substantial lag. Consequently, policies have to be longer in place in rigid economies than in 
more flexible ones in order to ensure price stability. This not only lengthens the reaction time but will 
also increase the sacrifice ratio. 
Where does the euro area stand today? 
Since  the  introduction  of  the  Single  Market  in  1992,  euro  area  and  EU  countries  have  undertaken 
important reforms regarding the functioning of the capital, labour and product markets. Nevertheless, 
substantial impediments remain to be removed in order to guarantee more flexibility on these markets. 
I  would  like  to  stress  that  these  reforms  should  not  only  aim  at  an  increasing  flexibility  on  markets 
within each country but also across countries where substantial obstacles hamper a more pronounced 
integration of EU countries. 
Regarding  the  labour  markets,  the  ECB  repeatedly  pointed  to  the  speed  of  reforms  that  has  to  be 
substantially  increased,  shall  the  current  imbalances  -  such  as  high  unemployment  and  low 
employment rates - be resolved. In order to prevent a further persistence of these imbalances these 
reforms should receive high priority. 
The reform agenda regarding labour markets should comprise a large array of rigidities that dampen 
both labour demand and supply and reduces the equilibrium growth rate of employment. Here, should 
be  mentioned  the  overly  burdensome  tax  and  social  security  systems  that  still  characterises  many 
euro area countries. On the one hand, these systems substantially lower incentives for labour supply, 
in  particular  from  low-wage  earners.  On  the  other  hand,  they  substantially  add  to  gross  wages 
employers  have  to  pay,  reducing  consequently  their  labour  demand.  Demographic  change  adds, 
moreover,  further  stress  to  the  existing  systems  by  increasingly  putting  the  financial  burden  on  a 
diminishing number of people in the labour market. Some EU countries have started to tackle these 
problems and all must be done to encourage them and others to pursue their efforts in this domain. 
Rigidities  on  the  labour  market  also  arise  through  overly  burdensome  employment  protection 
legislation and the centralisation of wage bargaining systems in some euro area countries that further 
hinder  a  flexible  reaction  of  the  labour  market  to  shocks.  In  addition,  the  wide-spread  use  of 
undifferentiated minimum wages and the administrative extension of wage agreements do not allow an 
appropriate differentiation to account for regional asymmetries. 
In addition to labour market reforms, a further flexibilisation and integration of capital markets across 
EU  countries  can  also  give  a  substantial  contribution  to  strengthening  the  productive  capacity  of 
2 
 BIS Review 23/2004
European  economies.  Moreover,  a  deeply  integrated  euro  area-wide  capital  market  would  help  to 
insure against country-specific shocks. In addition, reducing market entry barriers and regulation and a 
sound corporate governance framework improves the availability of venture capital, which constitutes 
the backbone of highly innovative enterprises, and would overall reduce capital costs and strengthen 
investment. 
Let me also mention that, despite much progress in this area, additional effort should be undertaken to 
reduce  and  eliminate  still  existing  entry  barriers  and  market  regulations  on  product  markets.  While 
substantial progress has been made, notably in some of the very important network industries such as 
telecommunications,  but  recently  also  on  the  electricity  market  where  some  countries  already 
benefited  from  substantial  price  decreases,  some  areas  are  still  characterised  by  dominant  market 
incumbents,  public  ownership  and  market  entry  regulation.  Moreover,  still  persisting  state-aid  for 
particular sectors or on an ad-hoc basis do not create the necessary environment for dynamic product 
markets with rapid firm entry and exit that is vital for sustained productivity and output growth. 
These efforts to push through a further product market reform agenda should be complemented by 
investments in the technological capabilities of euro area countries. In particular in comparison with 
the US, it becomes clear that the euro area countries display a substantial gap in the introduction and 
use of ICT. There is an urgent need to reduce the gap that has opened up in this area. 
Finally,  more  energy  has  to  be  invested  in  order  to  reduce  the  stubbornly  high  impediments  for 
cross-country  trade,  in  particular  in  the  services  sectors,  which  are  very  important  for  employment 
creation. Here, we are still far from the Single Market ideal, which would allow resources to flow freely 
from one country to another. This requires a further reduction in bureaucratic obstacles and - where 
necessary – the harmonisation of regulations across countries. 
The creation of the euro as a structural reform 
Integration of the Single Market and EMU as a catalyst of further reforms 
These impediments and obstacles notwithstanding, the introduction of the euro has been a structural 
reform by itself that is likely to contribute to further economic integration of the economies belonging to 
the Economic and Monetary Union and to foster the continuous development of the Single Market. For 
instance, countries with the same currency tend to trade more with each other than they would with 
countries with different currencies. By increasing price transparency, reducing transaction costs and 
fostering competition, the euro acts as a powerful catalyst to the economic integration process in the 
euro area. Consequently, trade of goods and services among euro area countries will continue to grow 
at  a  sustained  rate,  thereby  contributing  to  increased  competitive  pressure on  product  markets  that 
would  otherwise  only  have  been  achieved  through  reforms  on  the  level  of  each  individual  member 
country. 
This  further  integration  will  put  pressure  on  euro  area  member  countries  to  provide  the  most 
appropriate framework for employment and enterprise creation and the development of the productive 
forces  and  therefore  to  adjust  also  their  labour  and  capital  markets  to  the  new  reality  of  the  single 
currency.  
In  this  context  fiscal  policy  can  make  an  important  contribution.  First,  it  can  contribute  to 
macroeconomic  stability  by  providing  economic  agents  with  expectations  of  a  predictable  economic 
environment. This reduces uncertainty and promotes longer-term decision-making, notably investment 
decisions, and economic growth. Furthermore, it is important to keep in mind that fiscal policy can also 
promote  growth  and  employment  via  appropriate  adjustments  of  the  level  and  composition  of 
government  taxes  and  expenditures.  Reducing  inefficient  public  spending  can  for  example  help  to 
finance  tax  cuts  or  be  redirected  towards  productivity-enhancing  physical  and  human  capital 
accumulation. 
Changes in the monetary policy regime and changes in price and wage setting 
The creation of a single currency and the introduction of the euro not only raises pressure to speed up 
the  structural  reform  process  but  will  also  change  profoundly  the  behaviour  of  the  euro  area 
economies and in particular the way prices and wages are set.  
BIS Review 23/2004 
 3
I have already mentioned the increasing integration and growing intra-euro area trade resulting from 
the  introduction  of  the  euro.  In  addition,  the  commitment  of  the  ECB  to  price  stability  creates  the 
conditions  for  low  inflation  across  the  euro  area.  Both  will  increase  competition  among  European 
producers, limiting their pricing power and helping to keep inflationary pressures confined. Additionally, 
with increasing competitive pressure and reduced scope for pricing power, enterprises are led to look 
for alternative ways to increase their resilience and to enhance their competitiveness. This will provide 
an additional boost for productivity growth and raising potential output growth. 
Similarly, the introduction of the euro has an important impact on the dynamics of wages, helping to 
keep them in line with productivity developments. On the one hand, increased competitive pressure 
among European firms reduces any rents they may have been able to earn in the past and increases 
their labour demand elasticity. This will tend to increase real wage flexibility. On the other hand, the 
low-inflation  commitment  of  the  ECB  provides  a  stable  anchor  for  low  inflation  expectations  and  a 
lower  inflationary  bias  on  the  side  of  labour.  Moreover,  the  absence  of  specific  monetary  policy 
reaction  with  respect  to  country-specific  shocks  will  tend  to  reduce  the  contractual  length  for  wage 
accords, helping to reduce nominal and real wage inertia. 
Overall, therefore, the introduction of the euro in supporting efforts to increase the flexibility of product 
and  labour  markets  and  to  make  prices  and  wages  reflect  more  rapidly  a  change  in  the  economic 
environment of the euro area. This should improve incentives to invest in new technologies to boost 
productivity  and  output  growth  and  to  speed  up  the  transformation  of  the  euro  area  towards  a 
“dynamic, knowledge-based economy”. 
The way forward 
The Lisbon agenda 
In  order  to  proceed  with  the  necessary  structural  reforms  in  the  euro  area,  the  Lisbon  agenda 
continues to provide an important benchmark against which to measure progress with reforms. The 
Lisbon agenda has been put together in order to formulate a strategic goal for the European Union, 
bringing together the different strands of reform policies on product, labour and capital markets that 
are  already  undertaken  for  some  time.  Moreover,  in  order  to  facilitate  monitoring  of  progress  with 
reforms, quantitative goals have been fixed to measure progress in particular on the labour market in 
achieving for instance a higher employment rate or increasing labour market participation of women. 
The  goal  that  has  been  fixed  at  the  time  -  to  become  the  most  competitive  and  dynamic 
knowledge-based economy by 2010 - seems increasingly difficult to reach. In addition to efforts that 
have  to  be  undertaken  on  the  individual  country  level,  it  seems  to  me  necessary  to  strengthen  the 
European  framework  through  which  reforms  are  monitored  and  accompanied  in  order  to  improve 
incentives for more rapid transposition of reforms. Let me first briefly summarise the main points of the 
Lisbon agenda before turning to the question of how the benchmarking and monitoring process could 
be  strengthened.  In  particular,  the  Lisbon  agenda  stresses  the  following  reforms  necessary  for  an 
increased flexibility on product, labour and capital markets: 
• 
A further integration of capital markets should be pursued. Here, the implementation of the 
Action Plan for Financial Services by the end of 2005 will help to improve access for venture 
capital by reducing intra-EU barriers to capital transfers. This implies to integrate the market 
for  government  bonds,  to  harmonise  accounting  standards  and  to  enhance  co-operation 
between financial services regulators in different EU countries.  
On product markets, the Lisbon agenda stresses a further strengthening of the competition 
intensity,  and  in  particular  a  further  opening  of  electricity  and  gas  markets  across  EU 
countries.  Let  us  observe  that  in  order  to  measure  the  speed  at  which  EU  directives  are 
transposed  into  national  law,  a  transposition  rate  has  been  defined  at  set  at  98.5%  of 
existing  directives,  which  euro  area  countries  have  great  difficulty  to  meet.  Moreover,  the 
Lisbon agenda stresses the importance of a supportive environment for innovative activity, 
including  closer  ties  between  universities  and  firms  and  a  strengthening  of  the  education 
systems in EU countries. 
Regarding the reforms on labour markets, the Lisbon agenda points to an increasing use of 
flexible arrangements for labour contracts, such as the increased use of part- and flex-time 
work, as well as to improvements in the wage bargaining process to better take into account 
  4 
 BIS Review 23/2004
regional  and  firm-level  disparities.  Moreover,  the  agenda  proposes  changes  in  the 
institutional framework to improve the functioning of both active and passive labour market 
policies. Once introduced, these reforms should help EU countries to reach the target of an 
employment rate of 70% that has been fixed by the agenda. 
Strengthening of European monitoring structures 
This leads me to my last point: How to improve the framework on the European level to better monitor 
and  implement  much  needed  structural  reforms.  As  has  been  stressed  at  the  recent  European 
Council, monitoring and implementation of the Lisbon agenda are the key to proceed with structural 
reforms in the EU. 
In particular, two approaches that have been used in the past and that could be further developed to 
provide powerful tools in this area. One concerns the process of benchmarking to be used as a tool to 
determine best practices across the euro area - and eventually industrialised countries more generally. 
The other regards the existing European structures of monitoring and peer pressure to proceed with 
structural reforms in the EU. 
After  two  decades  of  structural  reforms  across  developed  economies,  much  experience  has  been 
gained as to what policies have performed well compared to the status quo. Some of this experience 
has  been  used  to  form  important  reform  agendas  both  on  the  EU  level  and  the  level  of  individual 
countries. I have just mentioned two of the most important ones: the Single Market Initiative and the 
Lisbon  agenda.  In  particular,  recent  propositions  by  the  ECOFIN  council  regarding  benchmarking 
Member States’ performances in terms of progress towards the Lisbon goals and a specific mid-term 
review of the Lisbon strategy would be very welcome to complement existing efforts in this area.  
But  there  are  other  experiences -  also  outside  the  euro  area -  that  could be  fruitfully  reviewed  and 
used  to  inform  our  views  on  particular  issues.  For  instance,  the  recent  corporate  governance 
problems,  both  in  the  US  and  the  euro  area,  show  that  there  is  still  much  to  be  learned  for  further 
structural reforms in this area. Moreover, policy makers and international organisations have started to 
analyse more thoroughly different aspects of structural reforms to stress their importance for improved 
macroeconomic  performance.  This  expertise  should  be  funnelled  more  directly  into  our  definition  of 
benchmarks and be used more actively to inform our communication practices. 
Nevertheless, communication alone will not be sufficient to move on with reforms. It will also require to 
strengthen  the  European  framework  through  which  these  reforms  are  monitored.  Currently,  this 
framework  relies  largely  on  a  peer  pressure  mechanism,  mainly  depending  on  good  will  of 
governments in individual EU countries. In light of the current stance of structural reforms in the EU, 
this does not seem to be sufficiently powerful and more active measures to push forward with reforms 
- similar to the Single Market Initiative - should be sought. In particular, the ECB welcomes the call 
made by the recent European Council to build national Reform Partnerships, involving social partners, 
civil society and the public authorities in order to improve the implementation of necessary reforms. 
In this process, the ECB will continue to monitor and analyse structural reforms and provide additional 
insights.  This  takes  place  in  co-operation  between  ECB  and  NCBs  and  a  continuous  exchange  of 
views with other international organisations such as the European Commission, the OECD or the IMF. 
Conclusion 
To conclude I would like to stress more particularly five points. 
First,  on  the  economic  underpinnings,  the  main  strategic  goal  of  the  euro  area  as  well  as  of  the 
European Union as a whole should be to increase substantially our growth potential. This is crucial 
and calls upon increasing very significantly in particular our rate of employment, our labour productivity 
progress and our technological and scientific basis. 
Second, as regards methodology, it is clear that we have to work out an appropriate concept for the 
actual, precise, to the point implementation of the reforms. The Lisbon agenda is excellent in terms of 
diagnosis.  It  has  however  not  been  associated  with  a  with  a  powerful  implementation,  which  is 
absolutely indispensable. 
Third, as regards prioritization of structural reforms, I would personally particularly mention four points 
which  seem  to  me  of  utmost  importance  in  the  euro  area:  Youth  unemployment  which  is  attaining 
unacceptable levels in some economies; unsatisfactory functioning of the Single Market in the service 
BIS Review 23/2004 
 5
sector; insufficient labour productivity progress in the economy as a whole; and, lastly, consequences 
to be drawn from ageing in the management of the social protection schemes. 
Fourth,  as  regards  public  opinion,  I  trust  that  we  have  all  to  exert  maximum  efforts  to  improve 
explanations,  pedagogy,  communication  with  the  public  at  large.  We  are  living  in  very  vivid  and 
exemplary national democracies and in a European Union where the ultimate judge is the people. We 
have to convince our public opinion at large that each individual would be better off - with more growth 
and more jobs - if we could deliver the reforms of the Lisbon agenda. The ECB will do all what it can to 
help improving pedagogy in this respect. 
And five, I confirm here that we, in the Governing Council of the ECB, know that structural reforms are 
not easy to work out, that it needs much courage and determination from Governments, Parliaments 
and  social  partners.  We  will  back  in  the  future  as  we  have  in  the  past  this  courage  and  this 
determination. 
6 
 BIS Review 23/2004
