Axel A Weber: Independence, continuity and safeguarding monetary stability 
Speech by Professor Axel A Weber, President of the Deutsche Bundesbank, at his inauguration as 
Bundesbank President, Frankfurt am Main, 12 May 2004. 
 Mr Eichel 
Mr Trichet 
Ladies and gentlemen 
On 30 April the Federal Finance Minister presented me with my certificate of appointment as the ninth 
President of the Deutsche Bundesbank. I would like to thank you, Mr Eichel, for the recognition and 
trust which the federal government has bestowed on me in making this appointment. 
I would like to thank you, Mr Trichet, for the kind reception at the European System of Central Banks 
and the Governing Council of the ECB. As an academic, I have observed the monetary policy of the 
Eurosystem from a theoretical standpoint from the outset. As a result, the opportunity of being able to 
participate in the practical side of monetary policy in the Governing Council of the ECB has a particular 
appeal for me. 
I would like to thank you, Mr Palsbröker, and the 14,500 Bundesbank employees whom you represent 
for the warm welcome to the Deutsche Bundesbank. 
And I would like to thank my colleagues on the Executive Board for my successful initiation and the 
friendly  working  atmosphere.  Our  working  relationship  got  off  to  a  constructive  and  very  promising 
start last week. 
As an institution, the Deutsche Bundesbank, with whose future I am now entrusted, has gone through 
an extremely difficult phase during the past few weeks. It has stood in the limelight as never before, 
and it has been criticised to an extent and with an intensity that it had never previously known. After 
Mr [Ernst] Welteke had decided to stand down from office for the time being, Dr [Jürgen] Stark in his 
capacity as Vice-President of the Bundesbank took over as acting President. 
Dr  Stark,  I  would  like  to  extend  a  very  special  word  of  thanks  to  you  for  your  stewardship  of  the 
Bundesbank during these three difficult weeks. It is thanks to you personally that the loss of reputation 
sustained by the Bundesbank was held in check. 
Independence 
1. 
The special circumstances in which the change of office took place again reminded the general public 
that the independence of central banks is enshrined in law and for good reasons. This reminder may 
not have come in the right manner, but it certainly came at the right time. From an anti-inflationary 
stance, guaranteeing the independence of the national central banks has also proved problematical 
during the current negotiations on the EU constitution. 
The  Bundesbank’s  role  as  guardian  of  the  currency  requires  it  not  only  to  point  out  the  danger  of 
weakening the foundations of a stable euro through the backdoor in the European Convention’s draft 
Constitution  but  also  to  insist  on  a  remedy.  Specific  proposals  for  the  drafting  of  this,  which  take 
account of our concerns, were passed on to the Irish presidency by the ECB in mid-April. Now it is up 
to the politicians. They must not jeopardise the institutional foundations of a stable common currency. 
Continuity ... 
2. 
Ladies and gentlemen 
With  the  introduction  of  monetary  union,  monetary  policy  autonomy  was  deliberately  abandoned  in 
favour  of  European  unity.  However,  the  ESCB  has  been  devised  in  such  a  way  that  the  national 
central  banks  continue  to  provide  extensive  central  bank  services  for  the  European  economies  - 
granting  loans  within  the  framework  of  monetary  policy,  supplying  the  economy  with  cash  and 
providing payment channels. In addition, the Bundesbank is highly respected within the Eurosystem. It 
BIS Review 29/2004 
 1
contributes  expertise  and  experience  to  the  ESCB  and  plays  an  active  role  in  forging  a  stable  and 
strong monetary union. 
... at the Deutsche Bundesbank as an institution 
2.1 
The  Bundesbank’s  strategic  reorientation  towards  “Europe”  began  long  before  the  introduction  of 
monetary union in 1999. It was followed by an organisational reorientation once the legislature had 
concentrated the running of the Bundesbank in the hands of the new Executive Board in May 2002. 
The Executive Board did not waste any time in deciding on the future organisational structure as well 
as  on  the  staffing  requirements  and  timetable  for  implementing  the  plan.  The  reorganisation  was 
rounded off by devising strategies for cash handling and the branch network.  
On this point I would like to carry on with the work of my predecessor and proceed with the structural 
reform as laid down. The planned changes are necessary, they are feasible and they are within the 
limits of what those directly concerned may be expected to bear. After we have achieved our goal in 
2007, we will have to consider whether further changes are necessary.  
With this reorganisation the Bundesbank has no need to fear either a comparison with other public 
institutions or with other central banks in the Eurosystem. Owing to differences in the definition of their 
respective national tasks, however, comparing the national central banks in the Eurosystem has to be 
done with care. The downsizing and reorientation  of the Bundesbank that have been advocated so 
frequently in the past few weeks are already in full swing; the Bundesbank is by no means behind the 
curve in this respect.  
Throughout the world questions concerning financial system stability are becoming more important for 
central banks. A stable and efficient financial system is absolutely essential if the central banks are to 
fulfil  their  stability  mandate.  In  the  past  few  years  the  Bundesbank  has expanded  its analytical  and 
research capacity for identifying potential risks to financial stability and will extend this field further in 
future. We will include the results both of the analysis of current risks to the financial system and the 
research into the underlying relationships in the international debate on financial system stability and 
developments in the international financial architecture at the G-10 meetings.  
... in monetary policy 
2.2 
The primary objective of a central bank is and will remain safeguarding monetary stability. Since the 
start of monetary union just over five years ago the Eurosystem has built up a good reputation and has 
gained  the  confidence  of  experts  and  the  public  alike.  The  euro  is  a  stable  and  internationally 
respected currency.  
According to the provisional estimate by Eurostat for the Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices, the 
price level in the euro area was 2.0% higher in April year on year compared with 1.7% in March. This 
is consistent with the ECB’s target of keeping price inflation to less than but close to 2% in the medium 
term.  
To achieve its monetary policy targets the Governing Council of the ECB applies its proven monetary 
policy strategy, which was slightly revised last year. The overall evaluation of the risks to price stability 
consists  of  two  pillars  which  ensure  that  the  primary  purpose  of  the  monetary  analysis  is  to 
countercheck that the short-term and medium-term assessments arising from the economic analysis 
will also be applicable in the long term.  
The economic analysis suggests that the gradual recovery which began in the euro area this spring 
will  continue.  While  export  demand  continues  to  have  an  expansionary  impact,  domestic  demand 
remains subdued, especially in the case of private consumption.  
The monetary analysis indicates that there is a persistently large liquidity overhang in the euro area. 
This is mainly the result of previous portfolio shifts. In view of the lack of consumer confidence, I do not 
see  any  danger  of  this  excess  liquidity  leading  in  the  near  future  to  increased  price  pressure  as  a 
result of a sudden surge in demand.  
The  very  low  level  of  key  interest  rates,  the  ample  liquidity  supply  and  the  favourable  financing 
conditions are providing plenty of scope for economic recovery. The present monetary conditions are 
therefore to be seen as appropriate.  
2 
 BIS Review 29/2004
... in fiscal policy 
2.3 
The rate of economic growth in Germany is slightly below that of the euro area in general. Most of the 
current forecasts are more or less consistent with the expectations on which the federal government 
based  its  budget  plans.  At  approximately  1.5%,  the  expected  real  growth  rate  for  Germany  is  only 
slightly below the estimated rate of potential growth.  
The fiscal policy situation in Germany has rarely been as strained as it is now. In the current year the 
government deficit will exceed the ceiling set by the Maastricht Treaty for the third time in succession. 
The current budget deficit would be much smaller if the government had been more conservative in 
estimating  its  revenue  and  had  pursued  its  expenditure  consolidation  targets  with  greater 
determination. Some of its consolidation plans failed because government and opposition could not 
reach a consensus. In the interests of our country I appeal to those bearing political responsibility to 
agree  on  the  cornerstones  of  a  sustainable  consolidation  strategy  with  the  utmost  speed.  This  was 
achieved in the case of the health system reform, and I can only hope that it will also be achieved in 
the case of fiscal policy.  
Germany’s fiscal and economic policy makers must face the challenge of quickly reducing the large 
deficits, improving the statutory framework for macroeconomic growth through permanent reforms and 
preparing the social security systems to meet future burdens. 
The most acute fiscal policy problem is how to bring the large government deficit below the 3% ceiling 
in  2005.  The  greatest  scope  for  consolidation  lies  in  the  excessive  government  consumption 
expenditure. Switching expenditure from consumption to investment is also essential if provision is to 
be made for the future and the obligation of drawing up a budget that conforms to the constitution is to 
be met. 
Mr Eichel, I would like to offer you and the federal government my explicit support in your efforts to 
adhere to the consolidation course by taking determined steps in that direction. The EU’s Stability and 
Growth Pact should serve as regulatory guide here. The commitment made to EU partners to reduce 
the structural deficit by 0.5 percentage point a year must not be put in question any longer.  
The pact is one of the two pillars of the ESCB, the other being the monetary constitution enshrined in 
the Maastricht Treaty. The purpose of the pact is to guarantee sound public finances in the EU on a 
sustainable  basis.  This  is  not  being  achieved  by  the  pact  at  the  moment.  However,  no  conceptual 
changes to the pact are necessary; instead, all member states need to have the will to comply with the 
agreed rules.  
That would not only avoid overtaxing future generations; it would also make a major contribution to 
achieving  faster  growth  and  more  employment.  After  all,  public  confidence  in  the  future  can  be 
strengthened only by a fiscal policy that is predictable and based on government finances which are 
sustainable in the long term. By contrast, a lack of confidence in the future gives rise to uncertainty, 
encourages greater precautionary saving and reduces the propensity to consume.  
If  the  emerging  upturn  is  to  be  sustained,  we  need  fiscal  policy  consolidation  together  with  clear 
economic policy guidelines and ambitious structural reforms. By contrast, an anti-cyclical fiscal policy 
would work, at best, only in the short term and, as a rule, would have little quantitative effect. In the 
long term the ensuing increase in debt would impede dynamic economic growth. 
The upshot is that we must restore the confidence of the German public and our European partners in 
the sustainability of German fiscal policy. This would also make it easier for monetary policy makers to 
guarantee sustained price stability and low interest rates in the euro area.  
... in the gold reserves 
2.4 
Ladies and gentlemen 
That part of the Bundesbank’s reserve assets that is held in gold has frequently been the object of 
desire. And so in the present difficult budgetary situation there is no lack of suggestions on how this 
asset could be used.  
The Bundesbank decides on gold sales in accordance with the gold agreement it concluded with the 
other G-10 central banks. The use to which the valuation gains realised from possible gold sales is put 
is decided by Parliament within the framework of the statutory regulations governing the use of the 
Bundesbank’s profit.  
BIS Review 29/2004 
 3
It is only the realised valuation gain that can be distributed. The precise amount depends on the gold 
price and the dollar exchange rate at the time of the sales; if the sales option now included in the new 
gold agreement of the G-10 central banks were to be exercised in full, a sum of no more than several 
billion euro would accrue within five years given the present market situation. By way of comparison, 
we might consider that the federal budget for 2004 amounts to €257.3 billion, €29.3 billion of which is 
financed by means of net new loans.  
Consequently,  sound  fiscal  planning  disregards  any  sizeable  financing  potential  from  the  gold 
reserves or any significant relief for the federal budget. Mr Eichel, I am pleased that you yourself made 
this fact clear at our first joint press conference in Berlin two weeks ago.  
3. 
3. 
Conclusion 
Ladies and gentlemen 
I think my work during the eight years that lie ahead of me will focus on four main elements. 
1. 
2. 
Safeguarding stability 
Continuing  the  work  of  the  past  few  years  and  so  further  enhancing  the  image  of  the 
Bundesbank by making informed contributions to the major themes of monetary union and 
actively participating in the further development of that union 
Using  my  independence  to  enrich  the  economic  and  fiscal  policy  debate  in  Germany, 
especially on how to achieve a steeper growth path, and, last but not least, 
Bringing the internal reform of the Bundesbank to a successful conclusion  
4. 
I received no shortage of premature praise on my appointment as Bundesbank President. That has 
both  a  good  side  and  a  bad  side.  It  is  good  because  the  advance  expressions  of  confidence  are 
making my work much easier at the moment. It is bad because there is no doubt that not all of the high 
expectations can be fulfilled.  
To  enable  me  to  rise  to  the  high  expectations  that  have  been  made  on  me  personally  and  on  the 
Deutsche Bundesbank as an institution I would like to ask you all for your support, and that includes 
support of a quite critical nature. If I can count on that support, I can take up office full of confidence.  
4 
 BIS Review 29/2004
