Villy Bergström: Monetary policy and economic stability  
Speech by Mr Villy Bergström, Deputy Governor of Sveriges Riksbank, at a conference organised by 
the real-estate market magazine “Fastighetsvärlden”, Stockholm 12 May 2004. 
 Thank you for the invitation to participate in Fastighetsdagen 2004 here at Grand Hotel. The property 
sector is an interest rate-sensitive component of the economy, and it is therefore interesting for me in 
my capacity as a member of the Riksbank’s Executive Board to come here and speak with you and 
discuss how the Riksbank views the current economic situation. 
The current economic situation 
In conjunction with the publication of the year’s first Inflation Report on 1 April the Riksbank cut its key 
interest  rate,  the  repo  rate,  by  a  half  percentage  point.  The  reason  was  that  the  Executive  Board 
judged that inflation would be below the target of 2 per cent inflation over the next two years. In the 
past year inflation has been low, averaging 1.3 per cent. This is attributable to a large extent to an 
adjustment of energy prices to more normal levels. But recently the drop in inflation has been sharper 
than expected and the Riksbank has gradually changed its view of inflationary pressures. Among other 
things this has been due to unexpectedly low import prices. The labour market has also been weaker 
than  forecast  and  productivity  has  increased  faster,  resulting  in  lower  domestic  wage  and  price 
pressures. 
Inflationary  pressures  are  also  expected  to  be  low  in  the  period  ahead  despite  the  fact  that  the 
international economic upswing appears to have taken firm root in more or less all regions except the 
euro  area.  The  international  upswing  is  bolstering  the  Swedish  recovery  and  during  the  next  three 
years the Riksbank expects growth to average just over 2 ½ per cent a year. The relatively strong rate 
of growth means that the economy will approach full resource utilisation in spring 2006, according to 
our forecasts in the Inflation Report. 
At the monetary policy meeting on 31 March a majority of the Riksbank’ Executive Board decided to 
lower the key interest rate by a half percentage point. My assessment of the situation was somewhat 
different, which led me to enter a reservation. In my opinion there were three principal reasons to limit 
the  rate  cut  to  0.25  percentage  points.  Firstly,  the  general  economic  upswing  in  both  Sweden  and 
abroad will result in mounting inflationary pressures. Secondly, the expansionary economic policy in 
several  parts  of  the  world  gives  reason  for  caution.  Asset  prices,  the  willingness  to  take  risks,  and 
commodity prices have risen steeply in the past year. The third reason was that property prices risk 
rising further and with that households’ indebtedness. In my opinion, encouraging a further increase in 
indebtedness through a rate cut of 0.5 percentage points could lead to problems once rates rise. 
A mild economic downturn 
There are many indications now that the Swedish and international economies have embarked on a 
stable  upswing.  This  means  that  the  recent  economic  downturn  has  been  mild  in  an  historical 
perspective. In 2001 the Swedish economy grew by 0.9 per cent, and in 2002 by 2.1 per cent. Last 
year  the  recovery  was  derailed  slightly  and  the  economy  grew  by  1.6  per  cent.  During  these  three 
years production fell in only one quarter. For a downturn the rate of growth from 2001 to 2003 was 
high. This was also reflected in the labour market, where employment held up throughout the period 
2001 to 2003. 
Macroeconomic changes 
The mild economic slowdown is likely a result of institutional changes that have helped increase the 
stability of the economy. Unlike the situation at the beginning of the 1990s the government finances 
are sound and monetary policy is transparent and predictable. This does not only apply to Sweden but 
BIS Review 28/2004 
 1
also to large parts of the rest of the world. Stability has become a guiding principle in the economic 
policies  of  OECD  countries,  among  others,  and  has  entailed  an  increased  focus  on  healthy 
government finances and stable prices.1 The process has been helped by the absence of external cost 
shocks during the 1990s and beginning of the current decade such as the oil crises during the 1970s 
and 1980s. 
Monetary  policy  has  also  benefited  from  a  better  government  finance  situation  now  compared  with 
10-20 years ago when there was a trend rise in debt ratios, i.e. government debt as a percentage of 
GDP, in the majority of OECD countries. Healthier government finances are contributing to stronger 
macroeconomic performance. Lower borrowing requirements in the public sector contribute firstly to 
lower  real  interest  rates,  which  stimulate  investment  and  growth.  Secondly,  stable  government 
finances  boost  the  credibility  of  monetary  policy.  During  periods  of  large  deficits  and  burgeoning 
government debt there is always a risk from a lender’s point of view that the government will attempt to 
reduce  the  real  burden  of  the  debt  by  eroding  its  real  value  through  increased  inflation.  The  high 
interest rate levels that Sweden experienced in the wake of the crisis years 1991-93, when nominal 
long-term rates stood at 12 per cent, was a result of high risk premiums on Swedish bonds owing to 
lenders’  concerns  after  a  period  in  which  the  government  debt  had  risen  dramatically.  Thirdly, 
balanced  government  finances  allow  automatic  stabilisers  to  have  their  full  effect.  This  means  that 
demand  can  be  sustained  in  the  economy  thanks  to  unemployment  benefit  and  other  factors  when 
economic activity slows if the government finances are in such shape that there is sufficient economic 
leeway to finance the automatic stabilisers. 
Generally speaking a more stable climate benefits the economy in many ways. Lower inflation brings 
with  it  lower  volatility  in  inflation.  In  this  way  uncertainty  diminishes  and  therefore  also  the  risk 
premiums in the fixed income market, thus leading to improved efficiency in the economy. Economists 
also  say  that  the  price  mechanism  works  better  when  inflation  is  low.  This  means  that  changes  in 
relative prices become more evident the more stable the general price level is. 
There  has  also  been  a  marked  stiffening  of  competition  as  many  markets  in  a  large  number  of 
countries have been deregulated or re-regulated with the express purpose of lowering barriers to entry 
and increasing price competition. 
Another contributory factor is the rise in productivity that increasingly appears to be a reverse in the 
trend.  In  the  US  and  a  number  of  European  countries,  including  Sweden,  labour  productivity  has 
increased  considerably  faster  since  the  middle  of  the  1990s.  In  Sweden  productivity  growth  in  the 
business sector averaged 2.7 per cent during the period 1995-2001. It has risen further since then, 
although cyclical effects have presumably something to do with this. We will have better information 
regarding the durability of the rise in productivity when the business cycle matures and employment 
picks up. 
It is worth noting that low inflation in the world economy has not come at the cost of higher volatility in 
the real economy. Instead GDP growth has also stabilised during the 1990s and current decade, as 
indicated by the recent, mild downturn. 
Prices of commercial property are following the economic cycle 
Lower inflation and lower volatility in the inflation level has not led, however, to lower volatility in the 
prices  in  asset  markets.  As  we  all  know,  developments  in  the  equity  market  have  been  unusually 
dramatic since 1995, with a steep rise up until spring 2000 and then three years of price declines. In 
the property market price developments have been somewhat more orderly, and less dramatic than 
they were at the end of the 1980s and beginning of the 1990s. 
When  the  Riksbank  discusses  developments  in  the  property  market,  which  is  mainly  done  in  the 
Bank’s Financial Stability Reports that are published twice a year, we usually divide it into two parts: 
the  commercial  property  market  and  the  housing  market.  Commercial  property  is  defined  as  such 
property that is leased for commercial purposes, e.g. office premises, shops and industrial premises. 
Developments in the prices of commercial property, especially those of office premises, have tracked 
the economic cycle relatively well in recent years. Developments in the prices of commercial property 
                                                      
1   See, for instance, OECD working paper No 353: Macroeconomic policy and economic performance, 2003. 
2 
 BIS Review 28/2004
are  largely  determined  by  rent  developments,  which  in  turn  depend  on  the  demand  situation.  The 
weak  economic  situation  in  recent  years  has  contributed  to  dampening  demand  for  mainly  office 
premises. This is evident partly in the number of vacancies, which continue to rise, with the exception 
of the Stockholm region. The subdued demand has entailed declining office rents for new leases. This 
has  led  to  price  falls  in  the  office  market.  Since  2000  real  prices  have  dropped  by  35  per  cent  in 
Stockholm and by 21 and 11 per cent, respectively, in Gothenburg and Malmö. However, since the 
beginning of the year, both the rate of increase in the number of vacancies and the decline in office 
rents has moderated; as a result prices have stopped falling and have stabilised in the metropolitan 
regions. 
Future  developments  in  prices  and  rents  depend  on  economic  developments  in  general,  and 
developments  in  office-intensive  sectors  in  particular.  The  low  number  of  new  offices,  coupled  with 
expectations  of  higher  employment  in  the  metropolitan  regions  in  2004,  is  likely  to  contribute  to  a 
reduction  in  the  number  of  vacancies  in  the  office  market  in  the  long  run.  Given  the  Riksbank’s 
assessment  that  the  Swedish  economy  will  recover in  2004  and a  positive  outlook  for  the Swedish 
business sector, with improved earnings and a lower or unchanged risk of bankruptcy, conditions are 
in place for a stabilisation of prices and rent levels for commercial property during the year. 
It is likely, however, that price increases may not materialise until further into the economic upswing. 
The slowdown in recent years affected to a large extent office-intensive sectors, and many premises 
are vacant today as a result. Consequently there is a surplus of office space at present. Moreover, 
firms today appear to be adapting their costs to more strained financial conditions, which has resulted 
partly in less office space per employee. 
A bubble in the housing market? 
Developments  in  the  housing  market  have  been  markedly  different  than  those  in  the  rest  of  the 
property market. Housing prices have risen by almost 60 per cent since 1992. During the same period 
the general price level has increased by around 20 per cent. The sharp rise in prices has continued 
despite  the  economic  slowdown  in  recent  years.  This  is  a  new  experience  that  distinguishes  the 
situation from previous business cycles. 
A  significant  driving  force  behind  these  price  developments  is  the  lower  interest  rate  level.  Lower 
interest rates mean that households and firms can finance more expensive properties, all other things 
being equal. The low-inflation economy that has been established in Sweden since the crisis at the 
beginning of the 1990s has therefore also brought with it higher debt ratios among households. Debt 
as a proportion of disposable income has risen on average from 90 per cent in the mid-1990s mitten to 
around  120  per  cent  at  the  end  of  last  year.2  In  spite  of  this,  households’  interest  ratio,  i.e.  the 
proportion of disposable income that is used to make interest payments, has fallen from 7 per cent to 
below 5 per cent. In comparison, the ratio during the crisis years was up to 11 per cent. 
A relevant question for the Riksbank is whether there is a risk that the recent years’ increases in the 
prices of houses and notably tenant-owned apartments have been excessive and that consequently 
there are risks of a downward price correction. Our assessment so far is that the price increases can 
be  explained  by  fundamental  factors.  Low  interest  rates,  increased  disposable  income  and  a  low 
supply of new housing coupled with high demand have pushed up prices. The number of new housing 
starts, which was 70 000 per year around 1990, today stands at 21 000. This is a recovery, however, 
compared  with  the  mid-1990s  when  volumes  were  as  low  as  11  000.  The  background  to  this 
considerable decline compared with 15 years ago is regulatory changes rather than cyclical factors. 
Reduced  interest  subsidies,  as  well  as  deregulation  and  simplification  of  the  government  support 
system  aimed  at  making  the  system  more  demand-driven,  have  resulted  in  consumers  bearing  a 
larger part of the costs of both the capital and production. 
So the price developments do not appear to be an expectations-driven “bubble”, i.e. a price situation 
brought about by private persons and households buying housing as investments with the primary aim 
of making a capital gain. That appears to be the situation in other countries, however, where it has 
become increasingly common to buy housing with a view to subsequently sub-letting it. Examples of 
                                                      
2   Financial Stability Report 2003:2, Figure 2:20. 
BIS Review 28/2004 
 3
this are the UK and Australia, two countries that have tightened monetary policy during the past half 
year, referring explicitly to price developments in the property markets. 
Monetary policy and asset prices 
I would like to round off with some reflections on an interesting discussion that has been going on for 
some  time  among  researchers.  The  discussion  is  about  whether  central  banks  should  attempt  to 
influence  asset  prices.  The  generally  low  level  of  interest  rates in  many  countries,  and  in  particular 
historically low key interest rates, have together with the stock market bubble during the second half of 
the  1990s  helped  to  raise  a  discussion  about  monetary  policy  and  asset  prices.3  At  present,  low 
inflationary pressures coupled with low interest rates have resulted in large volumes of liquidity in the 
world  economy.  There  is  quite  simply  a  lot  of  money  in  circulation.  This  money  has  to  be  invested 
somewhere, and the major beneficiaries have been the world’s asset markets such as equity and bond 
markets as well as property markets. In combination with improved corporate earnings and increasing 
confidence that the economic upswing has taken root, this has led to steep rises in these markets in 
the past year, notably in equity markets. 
The discussion is about whether central banks can and should attempt to stabilise asset prices, which 
are not included in the CPI. The advantage of such an approach, given that the central banks should 
succeed,  would  be  stabler  real  developments  thanks  to  the  fact  that  household  consumption  and 
business investment would be stabler if bubbles in the equity and property markets could be avoided. 
As  stability  is  an  important  objective  for  all  central  banks  it  is  an  attractive  idea  to  try  to  limit  the 
emergence of prices in these markets that deviate substantially from those warranted by fundamental 
economic factors. 
As in so many other situations the problem is that this is easier said than done. Firstly, the central 
banks  have  to  identify  when  a  bubble  arises.  In  other  words  they  have  to  be  able  to  distinguish 
between  what  is  warranted  by  fundamentals  and  what  represents  unreasonable  expectations  of 
continued price increases. 
Secondly,  once  a  bubble has  been  identified,  the  central  banks have  to  be  able  to  “burst”  it.  Asset 
markets  are  indeed  sensitive  to  the  interest  rate  situation,  but  it  is  possible  that  it  would  take  such 
large rate adjustments from the central banks to neutralise a bubble that the negative effects on the 
rest of the economy would be far too high. For example the force of the most recent equity market 
bubble gives the impression that monetary policy would have to have been tightened considerably in 
order to slow the increase of almost 150 per cent that was seen on the Stockholm exchange between 
1998 and March 2000. 
Few central banks today say that they counter bubbles actively. But the very fact that there is such a 
discussion is an interesting and healthy sign. 
Thank you. 
                                                     
 
3   For example, there are a number of papers from the Centre for Economic Policy Research in London, (CEPR) that raise the 
issue. These include Monetary Policy Rules, Asset Prices and Exchange Rates (Discussion Paper 4114, November 2003), 
Boom-Busts in Asset Prices, Economic Instability and Monetary Policy, Discussion Paper 3398, May 2002, and Financial 
Asset Prices and Monetary Policy: Theory and Evidence, Discussion Paper 1751, November 1997. 
4 
 BIS Review 28/2004
