Jean-Claude Trichet: The challenges for the European economy in 2004 
Speech  by  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  a  conference 
organised by Foro de la Nueva Economia and The Wall Street Journal, Madrid, 29 January 2004. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Thank you very much for this invitation. It is a great pleasure to be here in Madrid at the invitation of 
Foro de la Nueva Economia and the Wall Street Journal. I have been asked to address two issues. 
First, the state of the euro area economy, and second, enlargement and its impact on the European 
economy.  I  think  these  issues  are  well  chosen,  given  that  they  are  currently  ranking  high  on  the 
agenda of economic policy making. I choose to subsume them under the heading “Challenges for the 
European  Economy  in  2004”,  to  indicate  that  these  issues  not  only  require  diagnosis  but  also 
implementation.  
The state of the euro area economy 
Past and future 
Central bankers should be looking forward, and that is what I will do in a second. But let me start with 
what lies behind us - I think this is important to put the current state of the economy into perspective 
and to fully acknowledge the challenges ahead. By mid-2003, a succession of adverse shocks had 
held down economic activity in the euro area for almost three consecutive years. These shocks were 
related to the bursting of the ICT bubble and the fall in equity prices, to the surge in oil prices and the 
sharp deceleration in global trade, to concerns about corporate governance and yet a further fall in 
equity prices. And, importantly, they were also related to geopolitical factors such as the September 11 
terrorist attacks and its consequences. The continued high uncertainty that was inevitably associated 
with this succession of shocks left clear marks on business and consumer confidence. 
Now it appears that the geopolitical and economic tensions are receding, and that a recovery is under 
way.  Euro  area  real  GDP  picked  up  in  the  second  half  of  last  year,  and  the  latest  information  on 
production  and  confidence  is  consistent  with  an  ongoing  recovery  in  economic  activity.  Barring 
adverse shocks, the growth momentum of the euro area economy should strengthen in the course of 
2004.  We  have  of  course  to  remain  prudent  and  cautious  as  regards  forecasting.  However,  if 
unanimity  amongst  forecasters  means  something,  then  the  chances  for  a  continued  recovery  are 
good:  all  available  forecasts  from  both  official  and  private  sources  imply  a  strengthening  in  growth. 
This expectation is also in line with developments in financial markets. 
I would like to stress also that a number of conditions necessary for a recovery in domestic demand 
are in place. In the course of the past years, firms have made considerable progress in adjusting their 
balance  sheets  and  enhancing  profitability.  Moreover,  interest  rates  are  low  by  historical  standards 
and  financing  conditions  are  favourable.  Demand  continuing  to  develop  positively,  remaining 
deleveraging efforts of the corporate sector are unlikely to withhold an upturn in investment. A positive 
sign  in  this  respect  is  that  exports  and  imports  of  capital  goods  between  euro  area  countries  have 
recently picked up.  
When all relevant factors are taken together, there are reasons to be cautiously optimistic about the 
growth outlook: currently available forecasts imply that in the course of the year real GDP could reach 
rates of growth in line with those of potential output.  
What about the outlook for prices? Inflation proved to be somewhat stickier in the second half of last 
year than we previously expected. This had mainly to do with some adverse developments in food and 
oil  prices.  Moreover,  towards  the  end  of  last  year  it  became  clear  that  governments  would  raise  a 
number of indirect taxes and administered prices. As a result, the short-term outlook for inflation had 
become less benign. But taking together all pertinent elements we expect that HICP inflation comes 
back progressively to levels which would be in line with our definition of price stability : less than 2 %, 
close to 2 %. 
BIS Review 7/2004 
 1
The prospect for 2004 of growth improving progressively up to potential and inflation being in line with 
price  stability  looks  good.  Let  me  hasten  to  add  that  there  is  no  reason  at  all  for  economic  policy 
makers  to  be  complacent  in  any  respect.  A  number  of  uncertainties  are  still  present  in  the  overall 
outlook for sustainable growth, related in particular to structural impediments in some regions and lack 
of savings in other regions of the world. Also, a no-shock assumption is certainly the most sensible 
starting  point  for  a  central  projection,  but  experience  says  that  shocks  can  always  happen.  The 
challenge associated with the economic outlook thus implies much more than a cyclical recovery back 
to potential growth. What is also needed are efforts to make the euro area economy more resilient to 
shocks and to augment its long term growth potential. 
The case for structural reforms 
Some observers have raised concerns that potential output growth in the euro area has declined over 
the past years. Only a few years ago the same observers propagated the idea of a “new economy” 
and higher potential output growth. Empirical estimates of potential output growth - by construction - 
typically move somewhat over the economic cycle and this should not be confused with changes in the 
sustainable rate of growth. With the benefit of hindsight we were right to have been relatively cautious 
when  the  new  economy  paradigm  was  discussed  at  the  time.  Instead  we  advocated  the  idea  that 
whatever the benefits of ICT, they would be best reaped over time by making clear progress in the 
removal  of  structural  rigidities.  Given  that  demographics  in  the  euro  area  are  less  dynamic  than  in 
other economies, including the US, we need even more improvements in terms of higher productivity 
growth, rising labour force participation and declining structural unemployment. The case for decisive 
structural reforms is pressing. 
This is not to say that there was no reform progress in Europe in the past years, just that it is far from 
being achieved. Unless Member States step up their efforts they will not be able to achieve the Lisbon 
targets, according to which the European Union, by 2010, should become “the most competitive and 
dynamic knowledge-based economy in the world”. For the time being, however, it seems that the US 
economy has not only benefited more strongly from the growth opportunities offered by ICT, but has 
also shown a better adjustment capacity during the past downturn. Let me give you some examples of 
where I think further progress is needed in Europe to enhance growth and economic resilience. 
Most  EU  countries  have  undertaken  initiatives  for  labour  market  reforms  in  recent  years,  but  more 
progress is needed in attracting people into the labour market. The target employment rate of 70% of 
the working age population set in the Lisbon agenda is still far off: we were still at the level of 62 % in 
2002.  Some  countries  have  started  to  reform  their  social  security  systems.  Unemployment  benefit 
systems have been streamlined, but in a number of cases, together with high marginal tax rates, they 
continue to provide a disincentive to take up work. Larger contractual flexibility, such as for part-time 
jobs, helped to expand employment in certain segments of the labour market. But further reforms are 
needed  that  allow  wages  to  reflect  more  strongly  regional  and  sectorial  productivity  differences.  In 
addition, the skill requirements posed by a knowledge-based economy imply that governments should 
intensify their efforts to improve education and training systems. 
EU  countries  made  a  lot  of  progress  in  product  market  reforms  during  the  1990s  and  this  is  an 
encouragement  to  do  more.  The  share  of  EU  Internal  Market  legislation  not  yet  transposed  into 
national laws is still too high. Progress on this front is extremely important as market entry barriers in 
the  form  of  national  regulations  continue  to  hamper  competition.  Especially  in  the  services  sector  - 
where most new jobs are created - excessive regulation persists. In addition, the Lisbon target that 
R&D investment should reach 3% of GDP, with two-thirds financed privately, is still far off. 
The  Lisbon  reform  agenda  set  in  2000  was  both  absolutely  necessary  and  very  ambitious  taking 
account  of  the  starting  point,  and  it  was  clear  that  implementing  effectively  the  necessary  reforms 
would be a real challenge. Public support needs to be gained in particular from those that profit from 
protection, subsidies or social security systems - which in modern welfare states can be many. And 
this challenge has probably increased during the economic downturn of the past years. On the other 
hand, the fiscal pressures associated with the downturn were probably a trigger for governments to 
step up reform efforts. Indeed, many European countries are currently at a crossroad, faced with the 
option of either profoundly reforming their social security systems or putting their sustainability at risk. 
In this context, let me stress that structural reforms lead to lower deficits. Sound fiscal policies imply a 
strong emphasis on structural expenditure reform. Public expenditure needs to be diverted away from 
improductive areas and poorly managed transfer systems, towards uses that enhance productivity and 
the  accumulation  of  physical  and  human  capital.  There  is  a  close  relationship  between  structural 
2 
 BIS Review 7/2004
reforms  and  sound  fiscal  policies.  Together,  they  enhance  confidence  and  improve  the  economic 
situation on a lasting basis. In this sense, the rules laid down in the Stability and Growth Pact are an 
indispensable element in promoting policies aimed at strengthening economic prospects in the euro 
area.  2004  will  be  a  crucial  year  for  preserving  and  enhancing  the  credibility  of  the  institutional 
framework. 
As  regards  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  most  recent  events,  I  would  only  say  that  the  Governing 
Council shared the concerns of the Commission on the ECOFIN Council conclusions of 25 November 
2003 and made it public. The Commission is the guardian of the Treaty and the Governing Council of 
the ECB respects the recent Commission’s decision to seek legal clarity. 
I already said publicly that the Governing Council does not see a need for changes in the Treaty, and 
the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  in  its  current  form  is  appropriate  in  its  view.  That  being  said,  the 
Governing Council is in agreement with the Commission that the implementation of the Stability and 
Growth Pact could be further improved, in particular as regards the analysis of structural balances and 
strengthening the incentives for sound fiscal policies in good times. Clarity and enforceability of the 
fiscal framework should also be enhanced. 
What is the role of monetary policy in all this? Ensuring price stability, as well as confidence in the 
euro  is  our  contribution  to  sustainable  growth,  in  particular  through  historically  low  medium  and 
long-term  market  rates.  This  contribution  is  naturally  more  efficient  in  an  environment  where 
governments,  parliaments  and  social  partners  make  their  respective  contributions  to  enhancing 
confidence and potential output growth. In this respect, there are strong complementarities between 
sound policies in the different policy areas. By delivering the necessary structural reforms, I believe 
that governments and social partners could set in motion a virtuous circle of increasing confidence, 
favourable growth prospects and success in the reform process.  
The ensuing “culture of stability and confidence” would be the best advertisement for countries about 
to join the European Union. This brings me to the second issue. 
Enlargement and its impact on the European economy 
In  2004  the  European  Union  faces  the  challenge  of  enlargement:  its  largest  expansion  ever.  Ten 
countries in Central and Eastern Europe and in the Mediterranean will join the EU on 1st May 2004. 
These countries together, with 75 million people, comprise a population of about one fifth of that in the 
present EU. The economic weight of the new Member States, however, will be lower. Their total GDP 
represents, at market exchange rates, around 5% of that of the current EU. The task at hand for the 
new Member States is to advance real convergence, while locking in inflation at low levels, preserving 
the soundness of the financial sector and making determined efforts towards fiscal consolidation are 
all of the utmost importance. Overall, the progress made so far in acceding countries is encouraging.  
The impact on the European economy  
Assessing the impact of EU enlargement on the European economy is a complex question. Despite 
the considerable complexity surrounding this issue, one thing that is clear is that EU enlargement will 
provide new opportunities to trade and investment flows. Many of these effects are visible because of 
the high degree of economic integration already reached between the present Member States and the 
acceding countries. Lower trade costs and an increase in competition associated with the enlargement 
of the Single Market will have a significantly positive impact on growth in the European economy as a 
whole, even if the effects of enlargement will not necessarily be distributed equally across countries, 
regions  and  sectors.  Some  economic  sectors  may  gain  more  than  others  because  of  an  increased 
demand for their products from the new Member States. 
As concerns the growth prospects in the new Member States, it is clear that EU membership will have 
a very positive effect. Full integration in the Single Market and the impact of the EU Structural and 
Cohesion Funds are likely to foster the catching-up process in those countries. It is important to keep 
in  mind,  however,  that  the  Funds  can  only  exert  a  positive  impact  on  the  catching-up  process  if 
countries have a stable macroeconomic environment and institutional and microeconomic structures 
that are conducive to growth. 
Through  which  channels  could  EU  enlargement  affect  the  European  economy?  I  will  focus  on  two. 
First the flows of trade, capital and labour, and second the likely increase in competition. 
BIS Review 7/2004 
 3
Let me start with the flows. The abolition of existing import tariffs and the lowering of trade barriers 
support cross-border trade between the EU and the acceding countries. This process has to a large 
extent already taken place and the acceding countries as a group have become a main trading partner 
of the EU. From the acceding countries’ perspective, the EU has become by far the most important 
trading partner. The so-called Europe Agreements have been an important driver of trade integration 
over the past years. These agreements established a free trade area in many industrial products by 
removing tariffs and quantitative restrictions. 
Enlargement can also affect the European economy via the liberalisation of capital flows in acceding 
countries. Acceding countries liberalised capital movements early in the reform process, anticipating 
the obligations of EU accession. Foreign direct investment constitutes by far the largest share of total 
cumulative  net  private  capital  inflows  to  the  acceding  countries,  reflecting  also  the  role  of  FDI  as  a 
financing source in the privatisation process. The prospects for FDI flows after enlargement are very 
impressive if one considers that private investors are likely to price in a very substantial diminution of 
risks associated with the entry into the European Union.  
The opening up of EU labour markets may also entail a flow of labour from the acceding countries to 
the EU. Whereas most obstacles to trade and capital flows have been abolished, several EU countries 
have  maintained  most  legal  and  administrative  barriers  to  the  immigration  of  labour  from  acceding 
countries. After enlargement, EU countries are allowed to use transitional periods to postpone the free 
movement of labour from acceding countries. In many Member States, this aspect of enlargement has 
been  discussed  widely  and  the  literature  on  this  topic  has  been  growing  strongly.  Many  of  these 
studies seem to suggest that overall migration flows to the EU are likely to be small relative to the size 
of the workforce in the EU, though large uncertainties surround these estimates. 
Coming  to  the  second channel,  enlargement will  lead  to  a widening  of  the  Single  Market and  most 
likely to an increase in competition both for the acceding countries and for the present Member States. 
Taking the experiences with the Single Market as a benchmark, this could reduce price pressures (via 
a decrease in mark-ups) and enhance productivity (by exploiting economies of scale). Together, this 
could contribute to an increase in the sustainable rate of growth in the acceding countries and in the 
present  EU.  The  size  of  this  effect  depends  on  the  implementation  of  the  much-needed  structural 
reforms in both the present and the new Member States.  
Moving towards the euro 
Before I end, let me say some words on the adoption of the euro in the new Member States. The new 
Member States are expected to adopt the single currency at some point in the future. In fact, while not 
yet adopting the euro, they will be committed to striving towards the eventual adoption of the euro. The 
main  aim  of  the  Eurosystem  in  the  process  towards  euro  adoption  is  to  ensure  that  the  monetary 
integration  of  the  new  Member  States  proceeds  in  a  smooth  manner  and  in  line  with  the  Treaty 
provisions. 
The Governing Council of the ECB published a policy position paper on exchange rate issues relating 
to  the  acceding  countries  on  18  December  last  year.  This  document  consolidates  into  a  single 
comprehensive policy text the previous positions of the Eurosystem on the matter.  
As the acceding countries differ greatly in terms of economic structure, exchange rate and monetary 
regimes, and in the degree of nominal and real convergence already achieved, they will need to be 
assessed on a case-by-case basis throughout the process leading to their adoption of the euro. In this 
respect,  no  single  path  towards  ERM II  and  the  adoption  of  the  euro  can  be  identified  or 
recommended.  Various  strategies  may  be  feasible,  provided  they  are  based  on  sound  economic 
reasoning,  conform  to  the  existing  institutional  framework  and  contribute  to  the  high  level  of 
sustainable convergence which is essential when joining the euro.  
The  principle  of  equal  treatment  will  continue  to  apply  throughout  the  entire  process  of  monetary 
integration.  Adopting  the  euro  is  an  irrevocable  decision  and  it  is  of  the  utmost  importance  that 
countries fulfil the convergence criteria not only nominally but also in a sustainable manner before they 
enter  the  euro  area,  as  required  by  the  Maastricht  Treaty.  There  will  be  no  additional  criteria  but 
neither will there be a relaxation of the criteria. 
4 
 BIS Review 7/2004
