Jean-Pierre Roth: Monetary policy and credit markets 
Summary  of  a  speech  by  Mr  Jean-Pierre  Roth,  Chairman  of  the  Governing  Board  of  the  Swiss 
National Bank, at the University of St Gallen, St Gallen, 22 January 2004. 
The complete speech can be found in German on the Swiss National Bank’s website (www.snb.ch). 
 The economic slump of the past two years has affected the credit markets. Corporate loans declined, 
and  on  the  capital  market  redemptions  of  shares  and  bonds  of  private  borrowers  exceeded  new 
issues. In this speech, a few general points concerning credit financing and monetary policy will be 
discussed. 
The  financing  opportunities  and,  concomitantly,  a  borrower’s  expenditure  behaviour  depend  on  the 
value  of  capital  assets  eligible  as  collateral  or,  more  generally,  on  the  borrower’s  balance  sheet 
structure.  Due  to  the  major  significance  of  real  estate  as  security,  the  situation  on  the  real  estate 
market in turn has a considerable bearing on credit conditions. The Swiss National Bank thus keeps a 
careful eye on price development in the real estate market. 
Monetary  policy  influences  the  prices  of  investments  and  thus  impacts  on  the  economy  via  the 
borrowers’ balance sheets. This is not the only channel - and certainly not the most important one - 
through  which  monetary  policy  exerts  an  influence;  it  may,  however,  be  relevant  under  certain 
circumstances.  Since  corporate  balance  sheets  differ  considerably  from  one  enterprise  to  another, 
monetary policy has distributive effects. Small and medium-sized enterprises are mainly affected since 
they  are  often  young  firms  and  have  hardly  diversified  activities  and  a  modest  capital  base. 
Enterprises, however, can mitigate this disadvantage to a certain extent by improving information. 
Bank  balance  sheets  likewise  have  an  influence  on  the  extension  of  credit.  This  applies  mainly  to 
small and medium-sized enterprises, whose sole source of external funding are frequently bank loans. 
Bank regulation should seek to prevent provisions from unnecessarily reinforcing the procyclicality of 
credit extension. In order to help achieve this, the new Basel Capital Accord (Basel II) provides for 
some flexibility. 
BIS Review 6/2004 
 1
