Lars Heikensten: Risk management and financial stability  
Speech by Mr Lars Heikensten, Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank, at the Risk Management Forum, 
Stockholm, 17 February 2004. 
 Why is the Riksbank interested in risk issues? 
Firstly, I should like to thank you for the invitation to come and speak at the Risk Management Forum.  
The Riksbank’s objectives are not limited to price stability; the Sveriges Riksbank Act also requires 
that  we  promote  a  safe  and  efficient  payment  system.  We  therefore  have  a  natural  interest  in 
monitoring risks in the financial sector and that these are handled in a responsible, but also efficient, 
manner. As you know, this has not always been the case. At the end of the 1980s, risks built up in the 
Swedish  banking  system  that  were  much  greater  than  most  people  realised.  The  Riksbank  was  as 
unaware of the situation as others. However, when the crisis was over, we decided that we needed to 
improve  our knowledge  of  the  risks  in the  financial  system  and  to  closely  follow  their  development. 
Later,  we  began  to  publish  a  twice-yearly  report  on  financial  stability,  which  focuses  on  the 
development  of  risks  in  the  financial  system.  We  were  actually  pioneers  in  this  work  and  several 
central banks have since followed our example. 
Naturally,  our  endeavour  has  not  been  to  ensure  that  the  risks  are  as  small  as  possible  in  every 
aspect.  On  the  contrary,  one  of  the  most  important  tasks  with  regard  to  the  financial  system  is  to 
facilitate risk-taking; to manage and redistribute financial risks. Methods for this have developed at an 
incredible  rate  over  the  past  decade.  The  new  possibilities  for  risk  management  have  strongly 
contributed to increasing the efficiency of the financial sector and thereby the economy as a whole. 
However, it is important that the risks are managed carefully and that they are reasonable in relation to 
the capital allocated to cover them. They must therefore be clear and transparent to all involved. In this 
respect, the financial institutions and society as a whole have no fundamentally difference of interests. 
No one wishes to be surprised by risks they knew nothing about. 
The  Riksbank  also  works  on  financial  risk  issues  in  many  international  contexts,  in  the  Basel 
Committee, the IMF and on committees within the EU and ECB. As the financial markets to a large 
degree  operate  across  national  borders,  it  is  often  necessary  to  establish  joint  regulations  and 
principles at international level. Throughout, the important issue is to weigh stability concerns against 
efficiency aspects, to find regulations that make the risks transparent and limit them in relation to the 
available capital.  This should  also be achieved without  excessively  encroaching  upon  the efficiency 
and development of the markets. 
My overall theme today is how the Riksbank views developments in the risk management field from 
the perspective of financial stability and efficiency. However, before I go into this further, I should like 
to  provide  some  background  to  this  by  reminding  you  of  a  time  when  some  risks  were  managed 
inadequately, which led to a serious systemic crisis, namely the  
Swedish banking crisis at the beginning of the 1990s. 
The banking crisis from a risk management perspective 
Taking  a  narrow  view,  one  could  say  that  the  banking  crisis  was  the  result  of  the  institutions  and 
authorities lacking the capacity to assess and manage risks. The banks came from an environment 
that had been strictly-regulated for many decades and where their operations were so firmly controlled 
and  restricted  that  a  cursory  awareness  of  risk  management  sufficed  in day-to-day  operations.  The 
demand for credit was much greater than the supply, which meant that only those with the best credit 
ratings were allowed to borrow. When the regulations were gradually phased out during the 1980s, the 
banks  and  other  financial  institutions  lacked  the  expert  knowledge  and  organisation  necessary  to 
manage  the  new,  increased  risks,  which  were  also  more  difficult  to  assess.  As  this  curb  no  longer 
existed and the banks instead began to compete for market shares, they took on hasty and in many 
cases unhealthy risks. We were not the only country to experience this development. Over the past 
fifteen years, many countries around the world have suffered financial crises for similar reasons; as 
the result of financial deregulation, which has not been combined with the necessary improvements in 
risk management and supervision. 
BIS Review 10/2004 
 1
The  authorities  responsible  for  the  institutions  and  for  financial  stability,  mainly  Finansinspektionen 
(the  Swedish  Financial  Supervisory  Authority)  and  the  Riksbank,  had  not  built  up  sufficient 
competence regarding the financial risks. Nor did the legislation suffice as a basis for the authorities to 
limit imprudent credit-granting. The oversight of the banks and other credit-granting bodies therefore 
became formalistic and fragmentary. We were not always looking in the right places. 
In defence of the banks’ management and the authorities it can be pointed out that risk assessment 
was made difficult for many different reasons. Several important factors counteracted a sound financial 
development,  such  as  the  high  inflation  rate,  misleading  tax  incentives  and  central  government 
subsidies. In addition, there was a lock-in effect in that currency regulation, which was in force until 
1989, had kept our capital inside Sweden and contributed to a form of hothouse effect. The banks did 
not take these factors into account in their risk assessment, or not to a sufficient degree. They then 
suffered  the  consequences  when  the  government  made  some  decisions  that  were  desirable  in 
themselves, but which altered conditions drastically. Inflation was pushed down, the tax system was 
reformed and subsidies were erased. 
Developments in the property market were a central component in the banking crisis, as the banks’ 
credit-granting  meant  they  were  highly  exposed  to  the  property  sector.  Property  prices  rose  at  an 
unreasonable rate, regardless of how one measures them. They left the basis for normal pricing, i.e. 
the net return for the near future and instead reflected pure hopes of what a future buyer of a property 
might be prepared to pay. When the property bubble burst, prices plummeted, in some cases by over 
60 per cent in around 18 months. 
There were several weaknesses in risk management with regard to property loans: 
– 
An incapacity (or unwillingness) to see the price trend as a speculation bubble. Some people 
did  realise  the  dangers,  but  had  trouble  making  themselves  heard  in  the  prevailing 
atmosphere. 
The emphasis on the loan collateral, i.e. the property itself, at the cost of an assessment of 
the borrower’s capacity to repay. 
The fact that no one saw the substantial concentration of risk through exposures that were 
ultimately dependent on property price trends. It has been calculated that more than 60 per 
cent of the banks’ loan losses during the crisis can be attributed to property loans. 
The bank’s “self-delusion”, which consisted of high-risk loans, i.e. loans against collateral of 
low priority, being granted by financial companies that were closely linked to the banks. It 
was among these companies that the financial crisis began. In other words, there was a lack 
of overall group perspective in the risk management. 
   As the rise and later the fall on the property market played such a central role in the banking crisis, it is 
worth  a  special  mention.  However,  it  was  not  the  only  risk  factor  the  banks  should  have  managed 
better. There were also inadequacies with regard to credit granting. Large loans were made to new 
customers,  new  sectors  and  new  geographical  areas.  This  type  of  lending  strategy  is  not  wrong  in 
itself, but it requires that the credit-granter has done his homework and is aware of the possible risks. 
In  some  parts  of  the  banking  world,  they  talk  about  credit-granting  according  to  the  church  tower 
principle, i.e. that loans should be primarily made to customers living and active close by. How this 
principle was applied in connection with investments in Atlanta or Brussels is not easy to see. 
In addition, the banks contributed to their customers building up a comprehensive credit exposure in 
foreign currencies, regardless of whether or not they had matching income in their loan currency. As 
the krona exchange rate was high, some borrowers chose to take out loans in foreign currencies that 
had a lower nominal interest rate. The risks with this strategy became evident after the krona’s rapid 
fall  of  almost  25  per  cent  in  six  months,  calculated  from  when  the  krona  was  allowed  to  float  in 
November 1992. When the banks’ borrowers found that their debt amounts had increased by up to 
25 per cent, calculated in kronor, many of them were unable to meet their obligations and the banks’ 
loan  losses  increased  further.  These  actions  by  the  banks  are  actually  quite  remarkable.  The 
speculation in continued price rises in Sweden was evidently completely contrary to the belief that it 
would be possible to maintain a fixed exchange rate in the long term. 
With hindsight, I can observe that financial risk awareness in many parts of Sweden was low during 
the 1980s. Since then, however, there has been a rapid improvement. 
2 
 BIS Review 10/2004
From regulation to a market-based financial sector 
The 1980s entailed a transfer from a severely regulated and controlled financial sector in Sweden - as 
in  many  other  countries  -  to  a  deregulated  and  market-based  sector.  Deregulation  created  better 
conditions  for  the  financial  sector  to  provide  an  efficient  contribution  to  macroeconomic  growth,  not 
least by freer granting of loans and other forms of financing and by managing and distribution of risks. 
However, to ensure this could be done without the type of problems that led to the banking crisis, the 
banks’ risk management had to be improved. Over the past 30 years, developments have been very 
rapid with regard to measuring and managing certain risks and enabling the end-customer to choose 
risk  level.  The  breakthrough  for  option  assessment  in  the  1970s  and  the  emergence  of  the  swap 
market in the 1980s were followed by the development of credit risk management instruments in the 
1990s, such as securitisation and credit risk derivatives. This is a development which is continuing in 
important areas, such as market risk and credit risk and related markets. The breakthrough in financial 
theories has contributed to this development and made it possible to create instruments for buying and 
selling risks. 
When  writing  history,  we  must  not  forget  IT  developments.  Without  these  it  would  not  have  been 
possible  to  rapidly  calculate  and  update  the  values  of  instruments,  model  parameters  and  risks  in 
individual  cases  or  in  portfolios.  The  emergence  and  development  of  markets  for  risk  management 
instruments and even institutions’ internal risk management would have been delayed. 
The  combination  of  new  financial  instruments  and  markets  has  led  to  better  conditions  for  risk 
distribution,  where  those  who  are  best-equipped  and  most  willing  to  take  on  risks can  do so,  while 
those  who  want  lower  risk  can  reduce  their  exposure.  Sometimes,  risk  distribution  is  seen  as  a 
zero-sum game, but this is incorrect. A financial agent may take on further risk if this covaries with 
other  risks  in  such  a  way  as  to  reduce  the  total  risk  in  the  agent’s  portfolio.  This  example  can  be 
stretched to cover society as a whole, where there were probably people and companies who had not 
achieved the risk portfolio that best reflected their willingness and ability to take on risk, but will now be 
better able to do so with the new instruments and markets. 
My overall assessment is that there is no doubt that this development has contributed to the financial 
system’s capacity to carry out its fundamental tasks, while its resistance to destabilising shocks has 
been  reinforced.  But  has  the  development  of  the  derivative  markets  and  the  often  sophisticated 
derivative instruments really led to better risk management? I believe it has. Derivatives redistribute 
risks 
to  other  risk-takers.  These  risk-takers  may,  of  course,  be  better-equipped  or  more 
poorly-equipped to manage risks than a bank. If the risk is realised, it may lead to large losses in other 
parts of  the  financial  sector,  for  instance,  the  insurance  companies.  However,  if  the  risks  are  really 
diversified to a large number of agents, this should on the whole be positive from a macroeconomic 
perspective. One could say that we will all bear a small part of the gain or loss on our future pensions, 
but  we  hopefully  avoid  financial  and  macroeconomic  costs  from  banking  crises  of  the  type  we 
experienced in Sweden at the beginning of the 1990s. 
Given the significance of risk management for society and for financial stability, it is natural that the 
Riksbank should carefully follow developments in this field. During the era of regulations, we were the 
authority  with  the  task  of  monitoring  that  the  banks  observed  credit  policy  restrictions  in  their 
operations, but we now have a completely different direction. We closely follow - and sometimes even 
try to influence - how risks are managed in the financial sector. Risk management should be governed 
primarily  by  the  needs  of  the  customers,  markets  and  intermediaries.  It  is  only  necessary  for 
authorities  to  intervene  with  regulation  and  other  means  of  control  where  there  is  a  risk  of  market 
failure, i.e. when the interests of the institutions and the markets do not coincide with the interests of 
society as a whole - the lenders’ short-term market-share philosophy at the end of the 1980s is an 
example of this. If means of control are needed, they should be designed as far as possible to lead to 
solutions that are compatible with the normal working of the institutions and markets. 
Some problems 
We can all see that interest in risk management has increased and that considerable resources are 
being  invested  here.  The  interest  applies  to  both  the  production  of  new  financial  instruments,  the 
emergence of new markets and the practical measuring and management of various risks. In addition, 
awareness is being stretched to cover new types of risk that did not previously receive the attention 
they deserved, such as operational risks, interest risks throughout the bank, liquidity risks and legal 
risks.  This  is  essentially  a  positive  development,  but  let  me  nevertheless  conclude  by  pointing  out 
BIS Review 10/2004 
 3
some phenomena and situations, which indicate that the new developments have also brought about 
problems that need to be discussed and hopefully solved. 
The best known example is perhaps the LTCM debacle. The hedge fund suffered a sudden decline in 
value,  which  led  to  a  confidence  crisis  among  customers  and  it  had  to  be  shored  up  with  liquidity 
infusions of many billions of dollars from a group of banks. The Federal Reserve even assessed the 
situation  to  be  a  possible  threat  to  the  overall  stability  of  large  financial  markets.  How  could  this 
happen  with  two  Nobel  prize-winners  responsible  for  the  strategy  and  risk  models,  which  should 
guarantee that they were designed according to the latest research? The weakness lay in the fact that 
these models, like all others, were based on a given probability of history repeating itself. However, in 
autumn 1998, reality in the form of various simultaneous political and financial events took a different 
turn than was usual. It should also be added, for accuracy, that LTCM also suffered because its risk 
strategy was not very transparent. Investors were unable to assess to what extent the fall in value was 
temporary  or  permanent  and  therefore  preferred  to  recall  their  investment.  The  main  conclusion  is 
nevertheless evident. Don’t rely too heavily on historically-based models. 
A further potential problem is that risk models are standardised. The demands from the supervisory 
authorities that the models should meet a number of minimum criteria could lead to the management 
and  assessment  of  the  risks  becoming  more  and  more  similar.  There  is  a  fear  of  a  destabilising 
lemming effect, with all financial agents running in the same direction when new data is received. In 
addition, there are fears that the standardisation leads to certain categories of borrower experiencing 
more difficulty  in  obtaining  loans  in  future.  The  possibility  of  going  to  a  different  bank  to get  a  loan 
could be reduced if all banks apply largely the same credit assessment system. I believe that these 
worries are exaggerated, on the basis of studies made by the Riksbank and others that have indicated 
that different banks tend to assess individual customers differently, even when they use similar risk 
models.  This  could  be  because  they  have  unique  knowledge  of  the  customers,  or  because  their 
present loan portfolio favours accepting a particular customer. Although I am not excessively worried 
on  this  account,  it  is  important  to  ensure  that  international  and  Swedish  regulations  do  not  lead  to 
unnecessary standardisation. 
Operational  risks  have  come  to  the  fore  in  recent  years,  partly  through  a  number  of  events, 
September 11,  of  course,  as  well  as  others  such  as 
IT  and 
telecommunications  breakdowns  and  the  Basel  Committee’s  capital  adequacy  requirements.  The 
development of methods to manage operational risks has not come very far. Attempts are currently 
being made to rectify this. An increasing number of bank managers - both in Sweden and abroad - are 
showing a positive attitude to the focus on operational risk management, as they see these risks as 
potentially large ones. From the Riksbank’s stability perspective, I can only agree - events affecting 
practical operations in the financial system could threaten stability. I therefore consider it important that 
the banks continue to build up their risk analysis and their protection against risks in this field. 
It is possible to view the development in itself as a risk in that it has created new, potent instruments 
and possibilities for speculation. If used incorrectly or carelessly, these instruments could destabilise 
the  financial  system  or  in  other  ways  lead  to  inconvenience.  It  is  therefore  important  that  both  the 
financial agents themselves and the authorities responsible in this field closely follow developments in 
both theoretical and practical work and are prepared to take action if they identify risks to stability. Of 
course, it is another matter in this context - as in others - that the costs of new methods of control must 
be weighed against the risks to be managed. 
Regardless  of  the  fact  that  there  are  now  outstanding  issues  to  be  resolved  to  improve  risk 
management, my overall conclusion is positive. The development underway with regard to identifying, 
measuring and managing risks provides possibilities to improve stability in the banks and other parts 
of the financial sector. We still have some way to go, but the work is proceeding and is presently in an 
intensive phase in both the financial institutions and the authorities concerned. The Riksbank intends 
to continue to play an active role in this work. 
Thank you. 
large-scale  power 
failures, 
4 
 BIS Review 10/2004
