Michael C Bonello: The Central Bank of Malta and financial stability 
Speech by Mr Michael C Bonello, Governor of the Central Bank of Malta, at the conference “Onshore 
Europe”, organised by the Malta Financial Services Authority, St Julians, 13 September 2004. 
 The title chosen for this conference is as significant as it is brief. The two words “Onshore Europe” 
neatly capture Malta’s current reality, that of a financial centre with solid credentials which affords its 
players both the  guarantees and  the opportunities  to  be  offered by  the  Single  European  Market  for 
Financial Services. 
As  we  commemorate  Malta’s  first  ten  years  as  an  international  financial  centre,  it  is  appropriate  to 
record that if we are able to look back with satisfaction at past achievements, it is only because our 
legislators had the political vision to adopt a consensual approach to the task at hand in 1994. This 
involved a radical overhaul of existing laws and the drafting of new ones to lay the foundations of a 
modern  financial  centre  governed  by  the  highest  standards  and  yet  flexible  enough  to  allow  new 
opportunities for growth and development to be seized to the country’s economic advantage. I would, 
therefore, like to pay tribute to all those who saw the project through to a successful conclusion. 
An analysis of Malta’s track record leads to another important conclusion, which is that having in place 
an appropriate legislative and institutional framework is a necessary, but not a sufficient condition for 
success. Recent experience around the world suggests that the potential of a financial centre cannot 
be maximized unless it possesses another essential attribute. That other ingredient is stability and it is 
this aspect that I propose to explore today. 
Ensuring financial stability is a statutory responsibility of the Central Bank of Malta. The Bank is thus 
obliged  to  participate  actively  in  the  maintenance  of  a  stable  and  efficient  financial  system  and  to 
contribute towards its development. This applies not only to the payment and settlement system, of 
which the Bank is the regulator, but to the entire financial system. The Bank has an on-going role to 
play in assessing the robustness of the system. It must draw attention to any problems and ensure 
that these do not in any way impede the functioning of the financial markets as efficient providers of 
capital for companies and households. The Bank’s approach is therefore to consider the general risks 
to the system rather than the situation of individual credit and financial institutions. The latter is the 
task of the Malta Financial Services Authority (MFSA), which has successfully assumed, over the last 
ten years, full responsibility for the supervision of institutions providing financial services. 
Why central banks promote financial stability 
There are several reasons why the maintenance of a healthy financial sector is an essential function of 
central  banks,  and  this  irrespective  of  their  involvement  or  otherwise  in  regulation  and  supervision. 
First,  by  virtue  of  their  role  as  providers  of  liquidity  to  the  banking  system  and  their  involvement  in 
payment  systems,  central  banks  have  a  vested  interest  in  the  quality  of  their  counterparties.  Any 
developments  that  could  affect  the  financial  health  of  their  counterparties  are  of  direct  interest  to  a 
central bank,  not  least  because  the  inability  of  the former  to honour  their commitments  would have 
negative  financial  implications  for  the  central  bank.  Furthermore,  instability  in  the  financial  system 
could  hinder  central  banks  from  successfully  pursuing  their  other  objectives,  particularly  the 
achievement of price stability through monetary policy measures. 
Indeed, monetary policy can only be implemented effectively if the financial system is stable, for only 
then  can  financial  intermediaries  respond  to  changes  in  interest  rates  and  in  liquidity  conditions 
engineered by the central bank, and thus transmit these impulses on to non-financial intermediaries. 
At the same time, by pursuing price stability central banks contribute directly to financial stability, since 
a stable price environment reduces volatility in financial variables and ensures the smooth functioning 
of markets.  
From  a  central  bank  perspective,  it  is  also  evident  that  a  healthy  financial  system  contributes  to 
stability  in  the  exchange  rate  particularly  where,  in  countries  like  Malta,  a  fixed  exchange  regime 
coexists with the absence of capital controls. Thus, in a situation where there are concerns about the 
robustness  of  the  financial  infrastructure,  the  regulatory  framework  or  the  integrity  of  financial 
intermediaries, the external account may be undermined through sizeable outflows of capital. In other 
BIS Review 50/2004 
 1
words,  what  starts  off  as  a  crisis  in  an  individual  institution  could  easily  develop  into  a  balance  of 
payments and currency crisis, which may, in turn, trigger off secondary effects throughout the rest of 
the financial sector, disrupting other sectors of the economy in the process and thus resulting in a full-
blown financial crisis. 
In the case of the Central Bank of Malta, these considerations assume even greater importance given 
the  Maltese  economy’s  small  size,  openness  and  lack  of  natural  resources,  which  make  it  highly 
dependent on foreign markets. The small size of the domestic market, moreover, also has implications 
for  savings  and  investment.  Thus  a  limited  pool  of  savings  is  in  turn  reflected  in  a  low  volume  of 
internally  generated  resources  for  investment  purposes,  making  the  country  highly  dependent  on 
external financing. This dependence is evidenced by the private savings ratio, which is not only low by 
international standards,  at  around  22%  of  GDP,  but  has  also  been  falling  in  recent  years as  public 
sector imbalances have widened to unsustainable proportions.  
The Central Bank of Malta’s approach to financial stability 
Against  this  economic  background,  therefore,  price  and  exchange  rate  stability  assume  particular 
importance  and  the  need  for  a  stable  financial  environment  becomes  all  the  more  crucial.  The 
maintenance of financial stability was accordingly recognized in the legislation setting up the Central 
Bank of Malta in 1968, but it was only pursuant to the 2002 amendments to this legislation that the 
Bank’s responsibility was made more explicit.1 These amendments also recognized the Bank’s role in 
preserving a sound and efficient payment system. 
The  Bank’s  efforts  to  strengthen  its  capacity  in  the  area  of  financial  stability  commenced  before  its 
responsibility for banking regulation and supervision was transferred to the Malta Financial Services 
Authority (MFSA) in January 2002. In fact in 2000, a Financial Stability Office was set up to identify 
and analyse potential systemic threats not only in banks, but also in other parts of the financial system, 
such  as  the  insurance  and  investment  sectors,  the  securities  markets  and  also  selected  large 
corporations in the non-financial sector. 
The Office has since developed a set of financial soundness indicators and a model which detects and 
assesses the impact of different types of risks. It has also introduced shock scenario techniques to 
stress-test  the  resilience  of  the  banking  system.  This  year  the  Bank  has  also  started  to  conduct  a 
bi-annual  financial  stability  review  whereby  developments  abroad  as  well  as  in  the  domestic 
macroeconomic,  regulatory  and  operational  environment  are  assessed  in  one  analytical  framework 
designed to detect potential weaknesses and to devise appropriate remedial measures. 
These  activities  are  supplemented  by  the  work  of  the  Bank’s  Payment  Systems  Office,  which  is 
responsible for the maintenance and oversight of the payment system. This is an important function 
because modern electronic payment systems have the potential to serve as channels of contagion by 
transmitting  the  payment  difficulties  of  one,  or  a  few,  large  financial  intermediaries  to  others  in  the 
system.  
In 2002 a Retail Gross Settlement System based on the Bank for International Settlements’ ten core 
principles2  was  introduced  in  Malta  through  which  inter-bank  domestic  payment  orders  are  now 
transmitted, cleared and settled with greater efficiency than previously. The Bank has also issued a 
number of directives which seek to provide participating banks with an adequate degree of protection 
against legal and systemic risks associated with participation in such systems. Other directives seek to 
ensure that the rights of banks’ clients to adequate information concerning retail payments are upheld 
by  the  intermediaries  rendering  payment  services.  In  this  way,  credibility  in  the  integrity  of  the 
infrastructure used for the settlement of payments is preserved at both wholesale and retail level. 
The  Bank’s  role  in  financial  stability  has  more  recently  been  enhanced  by  membership  of  the 
European System of Central Banks (ESCB) from May 2004. It has started to participate in the ESCB 
                                                      
1   The 1967 Act referred to the Bank’s role in promoting a sound financial structure and to foster an orderly capital market in 
Malta.  Article  4  (2)  of  the  revised  Act  specifically  states  that  it  shall  be  one  of  the  objective  of  the  Bank  to  “ensure  the 
stability of the financial system.” 
2   The  core  principles  recommended  by  the  Committee  on  Payment  and  Securities  Settlement  Systems  of  the  Bank  for 
International Settlements (BIS). 
2 
 BIS Review 50/2004
committee dealing with financial stability, the Banking Supervision Committee, and at the EU level the 
Bank also participates in the Economic and Finance Committee and in its Financial Stability Table. 
the 
financial 
individual 
the  monthly  statistical  reports  submitted  by 
The importance of two-way cooperation with the MFSA 
The  initiatives  I  have  described  have  strengthened  the  Bank’s  ability  to  monitor  and  analyse 
developments in the financial system in a wider context. It is nevertheless becoming increasingly clear 
that  to  carry  out  this  role  effectively,  the  Bank’s  efforts  in  this  area  need  to  be  supported  by  the 
activities of the overall supervisor in the financial field, that is the MFSA.  
It  is,  therefore,  reassuring  to  note  that  good  co-operation  already  exists  between  the  Bank  and  the 
Authority.  More  specifically,  the  Authority’s  focus  on  the  health  of  individual  service  providers 
complements the Bank’s macroprudential analysis of the financial system as a whole and its oversight 
of the payment and settlement systems.  
In undertaking their respective tasks, both these institutions have access to information that may not 
be readily available to the other. Thus, for example, through its involvement with payment systems and 
the daily monitoring of the banks’ foreign exchange exposures, the Central Bank of Malta has daily 
information  on  the  amount  of  liquidity  and  the  extent  of  foreign  exchange  risk  prevalent  in  the 
inter-bank market. Similar information, however, only becomes available to the Authority with a delay, 
through 
intermediaries. 
Furthermore,  the  Bank’s  macro  perspective  assessment  of  financial  developments  may  identify 
general  risks  to  the  system  that  may  not  be  apparent  when  the  prudential  supervision  of  individual 
financial institutions is undertaken. This may occur, for example, if the risk profiles of the institutions in 
question show a high degree of similarity, making the system especially vulnerable to a particular type 
of shock. Supervision at the micro level, therefore, has to be complemented with a macro analysis of 
the  interlinkages  between  different  segments  of  the  domestic  financial  sector  and  its  links  with  the 
payment system, the rest of the economy and its counterparts abroad.  
On the other hand, it is also true that the Bank’s macroprudential analysis may not provide precise 
information on individual institutions, particularly those that may be on the brink of insolvency. Here, 
the  Authority,  through  regular  inspections  of  individual  service  providers  will  have  a  more  in-depth 
knowledge of the health of single intermediaries and market segments, including those which play a 
peripheral role in the monetary policy transmission process and with which the Bank’s relationship is, 
at  least  on  a  one-to-one  basis,  rather  distant.  In  this  sense,  the  Authority  also  contributes  to  the 
soundness  of  the  Bank’s  counterparties.  It  is  also  the  Authority  which  ensures  that  only  sound 
institutions are licensed to enter the Maltese market. Furthermore, confidential supervisory information 
available  to  the  Authority  could  be  useful  to  the  Bank  as  an  input  into  its  overall  analysis  of  the 
financial system, enabling it to respond to liquidity and related constraints that could set off negative 
ripple effects.  
The  potential  for  synergies  between  the  two  institutions  prompted  them  to  sign  two  Memoranda  of 
Understanding in 2002 to provide for enhanced co-operation, including through the establishment of a 
Standing Committee. 
This  cooperation  framework  has  contributed  to  the  general  soundness  and  stability  of  the  financial 
system.  The  profitability  of  our  banks,  for  example,  has  remained  stable  with  an  average  return  on 
assets after tax of 0.8% in 2003, the same level as that recorded by European banks. Furthermore, 
bank  liquidity  and  capitalization  levels  have  both  remained  strong.  Liquid  asset  holdings  as  a 
percentage  of  short-term  liabilities  were  close  to  53%  at  the  end  of  2003,  compared  to  a  minimum 
threshold of 30%. Meanwhile, the banks’ aggregate capital adequacy ratio, defined as the ratio of own 
funds  to  risk-weighted  assets,  currently  stands  at  23%,  compared  to  a  minimum  of  8%.  In  the 
insurance sector and collective investment schemes steady growth continues to be registered.  
This  positive  performance  notwithstanding,  there  remains  scope  for  further  improvement  in  the 
framework  through  which  the  Bank  and  the  Authority  seek  to  safeguard  the  health  of  the  domestic 
financial  system.  It  is  becoming  increasingly  evident,  for  example,  that  a  proper  analysis  of  the 
system’s robustness requires detailed statistics about entities for which data are currently either not 
available or are fragmented. This is particularly the case of the non-bank financial sector, and also of 
the  corporate  and  household  sectors,  although  in  this  latter  area  some  progress  is  being  made 
through the joint efforts of the Bank, the Authority and the National Statistics Office. 
BIS Review 50/2004 
 3
Another aspect warranting particular attention is that of financial crisis management. While the current 
institutional  and  regulatory  framework  has  been  successful  in  keeping  at  bay  any  major  systemic 
disturbance, further progress is required, for example by defining the specific roles and responsibilities 
of  the  Bank,  the  Authority  and  the  Government.  In  this  respect,  the  Joint  Contingency  Plan  for 
systemically important banks drawn-up by the Bank and the Authority already takes into account the 
involvement of the Ministry of Finance with respect to the possible use of public funds and the Bank’s 
lender of last resort function. This framework is currently in the process of being refined further.  
The need for improved cross-border cooperation 
On the other hand, it is a matter of some concern that whereas modalities for crisis management have 
been, or are in the process of being formalised effectively in most jurisdictions, including Malta, the 
way forward for the resolution of crises of a cross-border nature, and requiring the prompt intervention 
of  central  banks  and  supervisors  that  operate  in  different  time  zones  and  with  different  day-to-day 
practices, is not yet clearly defined. 
Some  progress  in  this  respect  has  been  made  at  the  EU  level  through  the  formalisation  of  the 
Memoranda  of  Understanding  of  the  ESCB  on  high-level  principles  of  co-operation  in  crisis 
management situations and between payment systems overseers and banking supervisors. However, 
these agreements, to which the Central Bank of Malta and the MFSA are also a party, do not go far 
enough. The implications of systemic crises whose resolution would, for example, require some form 
of fiscal input and possibly also the contribution of other entities spanning different jurisdictions are not 
yet articulated. This issue will hopefully be addressed during the forthcoming review of the EU Banking 
Codified Directive of March 2000. 
As the two key institutions with financial stability responsibilities, the Bank and the Authority have a 
direct interest in the future evolution of international co-operative arrangements. Such arrangements, 
moreover, will also impact on the way in which the two institutions seek to co-operate with each other 
and with similar authorities based abroad. In particular, the activities and institutions which the Bank 
and the Authority will be expected to monitor will become more complex as the number of financial 
intermediaries  with  a  presence  both  in  Malta  and  in  other  countries,  either  directly  through  the 
establishment of branches or subsidiaries, or indirectly through the provision of cross-border services 
via the internet or otherwise, continues to grow in the light of the incorporation of EU passporting rights 
in Maltese legislation. The coming into effect of Basle II and, at the EU level, CAD III will be significant 
factors in this regard. At the same time, the tendency of companies to seek multiple listings in different 
securities  markets  means  that  interest  rates  and  stock  market  valuations  in  one  country  will 
increasingly mirror those in other countries, even though the underlying economic fundamentals of that 
country might warrant some divergence in such variables.  
Indeed, as has been the experience of other countries, the trend towards consolidation and merger 
activity  in  the  various  segments  of  the  market,  from  banking  and  the  selling  of  insurance  and 
investment  funds  to  the  provision  of  payment  services  and  trading  facilities,  will  lead  to  a  situation 
where  the  institutions  to  be  supervised  will  vastly  exceed  the  financial  resources  and  technical 
expertise available to supervisors and central banks. This will be further accentuated by the current 
trends whereby financial intermediaries outsource activities both on a domestic and cross-border level, 
while the introduction of the European Union Directive on the European Single Company Statute, the 
so called Societas Europea, will present new regulatory and financial stability challenges on a regional 
level. 
The implications of international developments for Malta 
These  observations  are  particularly  relevant  for  Malta.  First,  whereas  the  size  and  complexity  of 
financial  intermediaries,  and  that  of  corporate  entities  to  which  they  are  exposed,  has  grown 
disproportionately  relative  to  the resources available  to  regulators and  liquidity  providers across  the 
globe, this divergence is magnified further in a small jurisdiction such as ours.  
Second,  because  the  characteristics  of  the  Maltese  economy  make  it  vulnerable  to  developments 
abroad, the financial sector is especially exposed to changes in the perceptions of foreign investors 
about  the  sustainability  of  prevailing  economic  policies  and  the  capacity  of  the  financial  sector  to 
absorb external shocks.  
4 
 BIS Review 50/2004
Given the ease with which funds can now move in and out of the country, moreover, and the scope for 
disparity  between  the  size  of  the  economy  and  that  of  foreign  institutional  investors,  the  need  to 
maintain confidence in the domestic financial sector assumes particular importance. This risk is further 
accentuated by the fact that while most sectors of the economy operate in a competitive environment, 
in many sectors business remains concentrated among a small set of market players. The financial 
sector is no exception in this regard.  
Furthermore, while the structure of the domestic financial sector has evolved considerably over time, 
its  level  of  development  still  falls  short  of  that  of  the  more  advanced  EU  Member  States.  Thus,  for 
example, although in the past few years the number of players in the non-bank sector has increased in 
terms of both number and variety, financial intermediation in Malta remains largely bank-based. Within 
the domestic banking sector, moreover, two banks together account for around 90% of total loans and 
deposits.  A  similar  picture  emerges  in  the  capital  market  where  the  degree  of  capitalisation,  the 
number of market participants and the volume of turnover are still relatively low. In 2003, for example, 
the ratio of stock market capitalisation to GDP stood at 37%. While this was higher than in most of the 
other new Member States, it was only around half of the euro area average. Annual turnover was even 
lower, hovering around 4% of GDP and 12% of stock market capitalization. 
Where,  as  in  Malta,  the  performance  of  the  financial  sector  hinges  crucially  on  the  fate  of  a  small 
number of players and where the lack of depth and liquidity in capital markets often causes the market 
value  of  a particular  debt  instrument  to deviate  from underlying  fundamentals,  the  risk  of contagion 
within the system, as well as, from other systems is accentuated.3
This latter aspect might become less relevant as financial services providers in Malta and in the EU 
respond to the introduction of the Financial Services Action Plan and the eventual establishment of a 
single market in financial services. On the positive side, such initiatives provide better income-earning 
and  liquidity  management  opportunities,  improve  the  efficiency  with  which  the  sector  operates  and 
enhance its capacity to weather sector-specific shocks.  
On the other hand, the advent of liberalisation and heightened levels of competition could well spur 
service  providers  domiciled  in  Malta  to  take  on  new  risks  and  venture  into  non-traditional  lines  of 
business. Furthermore, as a result of passporting rights, competition is likely to become more acute. 
The ensuing interdependence between different sectors and countries could well expose the domestic 
system to new vulnerabilities, including possible contagion from systemic shocks. 
This will be especially the case upon Malta’s entry in the euro area as such a move would provide 
further momentum to the pace of financial market integration. Moreover, the eventual linkage of the 
domestic payment system with TARGET will also facilitate the transmission of certain risks, not least 
those of an operational nature.  
Conclusion 
There are clearly several good reasons why sound regulatory and oversight practices remain vital for 
the stability of our financial system and why, therefore, the Central Bank of Malta and the MFSA must 
work  more  effectively  together.  It  is  also  evident,  however,  that  on  their  own  these  two  institutions 
cannot provide full protection against systemic disturbances, and that the modalities for co-operation 
which  are  in  place  locally  need  to  be  strengthened  further  and  extended  to  other  bodies  with 
comparable responsibilities at the international, and particularly at the EU level. 
                                                      
3   ECB. 2002. Financial Sectors in EU Accession Countries. 
BIS Review 50/2004 
 5
